
An Introduction to English Phonology

Edinburgh Textbooks on the English Language
General Editor
Heinz Giegerich, Professor of English Linguistics (University of Edinburgh)
Editorial Board
Laurie Bauer (University of Wellington)
Derek Britton (University of Edinburgh)
Olga Fischer (University of Amsterdam)
Norman Macleod (University of Edinburgh)
Donka Minkova (UCLA)
Katie Wales (University of Leeds)
Anthony Warner (University of York)
    
An Introduction to English Syntax
Jim Miller
An Introduction to English Phonology
April McMahon
An Introduction to English Morphology
Andrew Carstairs-McCarthy

An Introduction to
English Phonology
April McMahon
Edinburgh University Press

© April McMahon, 2002
Edinburgh University Press Ltd
22 George Square, Edinburgh
Typeset in Janson
by Norman Tilley Graphics and
printed and bound in Great Britain
by MPG Books Ltd, Bodmin
A CIP Record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 0 7486 1252 1 (hardback)
ISBN 0 7486 1251 3 (paperback)
The right of April McMahon
to be identiﬁed as author of this work
has been asserted in accordance with
the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
Disclaimer:
Some images in the original version of this book are not 
available for inclusion in the eBook. 

Contents
To colleagues
ix
1
Sounds, spellings and symbols
1
1.1
Phonetics and phonology
1
1.2
Variation
4
1.3
The International Phonetic Alphabet
5
Recommendations for reading
11
2
The phoneme: the same but different
12
2.1
Variation and when to ignore it
12
2.2
Conditioned variation in written language
13
2.3
The phoneme
14
2.4
Some further examples
17
2.5
The reality of the phoneme
19
Exercises
21
Recommendations for reading
22
3
Describing English consonants
23
3.1
What’s inside a phonetic symbol?
23
3.2
Consonant classiﬁcation
23
3.3
The anatomy of a consonant
24
Exercises
34
Recommendations for reading
35
4
Deﬁning distributions: consonant allophones
36
4.1
Phonemes revisited
36
4.2
Making generalisations
36
4.3
Making statements more precise
38
4.4
A more economical feature system
40
4.5
Natural classes
46
4.6
A warning note on phonological rules
47

Exercises
50
Recommendations for reading
51
5
Criteria for contrast: the phoneme system
52
5.1
Minimal pairs and beyond
52
5.2
Phonetic similarity and defective distributions
53
5.3
Free variation
56
5.4
Neutralisation
58
5.5
Phonology and morphology
60
5.6
Rules and constraints
62
5.7
The phoneme system
63
Exercises
65
Recommendations for reading
66
6
Describing vowels
67
6.1
Vowels versus consonants
67
6.2
The anatomy of a vowel
69
6.3
Vowel classiﬁcation
74
Exercises
77
Recommendations for reading
78
7
Vowel phonemes
79
7.1
The same but different again
79
7.2
Establishing vowel contrasts
79
7.3
Vowel features and allophonic rules
85
7.4
Phonetic similarity and defective distribution
87
7.5
Free variation, neutralisation and morphophonemics
88
Exercises
91
Recommendations for reading
91
8
Variation between accents
92
8.1
The importance of accent
92
8.2
Systemic differences
94
8.3
Realisational differences
99
8.4
Distributional differences
101
Exercises
102
Recommendations for reading
103
9
Syllables
104
9.1
Phonology above the segment
104
9.2
The syllable
104
9.3
Constituents of the syllable
105
vi
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

9.4
The grammar of syllables: patterns of acceptability
106
9.5
Justifying the constituents
109
Exercises
115
Recommendations for reading
116
10
The word and above
117
10.1 Phonological units above the syllable
117
10.2 Stress
118
10.3 The foot
124
10.4 Segmental phonology of the phrase and word
128
Exercises
131
Recommendations for reading
132
Discussion of the exercises
133
References
143
Index
145
CONTENTS
vii

This page intentionally left blank

To colleagues
This textbook is designed for use on ten- or twelve-week introductory
courses on English phonology of the sort taught in the ﬁrst year of many
English Language and Linguistics degrees, in British and American
universities. Students on such courses can struggle with phonetics and
phonology; it is sometimes difﬁcult to see past the new symbols and
terminology, and the apparent assumption that we can immediately
become consciously aware of movements of the vocal organs which we
have been making almost automatically for the last eighteen or more
years. This book attempts to show students why we need to know about
phonetics and phonology, if we are interested in language and our
knowledge of it, as well as introducing the main units and concepts we
require to describe speech sounds accurately.
The structure of the book is slightly unusual: most textbooks for
beginning students, even if they focus on English, tend to begin with an
outline of elementary universal phonetics, and introduce phonological
concepts later. I have started the other way round: in a book which is
primarily intended as an introduction to phonology, it seems appro-
priate to begin with one of the major units of phonology, the phoneme.
The idea of phonological contrast is a complex but necessary one, and
students do seem, at least in my experience, to cope well with an intro-
duction of this more abstract idea before they become embroiled in the
details of phonetic consonant and vowel classiﬁcation. When it comes
to presenting those details, I have also chosen to use verbal descriptions
rather than diagrams and pictures in most cases. There are two reasons
for this. First, students need to learn to use their own intuitions, and this
is helped by encouraging them to introspect and think about their own
vocal organs, rather than seeing disembodied pictures of structures
which don’t seem to belong to them at all. Secondly, I know from meet-
ing fellow-sufferers that I am not the only person to ﬁnd supposedly
helpful cartoons and diagrams almost impossible to decipher, and to feel
that the right word can be worth a thousand pictures. If students or
ix

teachers feel the visual centres of their brains are being insufﬁciently
stimulated, many diagrams and photographs are available in the addi-
tional reading recommended at the end of each chapter.
In a textbook of this length, choices are also inevitable: mine are to
concentrate on segmental phonology, with some discussion of stress
and syllables, but a brief mention only of intonation. The theoretical
machinery introduced extends only to segments, features, basic sylla-
biﬁcation and elementary realisation rules: issues of morphophonemics
and rules versus constraints are again mentioned only brieﬂy. My hope
is that a thorough grounding in the basics will help students approach
more abstract theoretical and metatheoretical issues in more advanced
courses with greater understanding of what the theories intend to do
and to achieve, and with more chance of evaluating competing models
realistically.
My warmest thanks for help and advice on this book go to my students
in Shefﬁeld (who were not necessarily aware that I was just as interested
in their attitude to exercises and examples as in their answers), and to
Heinz Giegerich and Andrew Linn (who were all too aware that their
input was required, and have withstood pestering with typical patience).
Particular thanks also to my son Aidan, who, following our recent move
to Yorkshire, replaced // with /υ/ in words, quite consciously
and systematically, during the writing of this book. If a six-year-old can
work this out, ﬁrst-year undergraduates have no excuse.
x
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

1 Sounds, spellings and
symbols
1.1 Phonetics and phonology
Although our species has the scientiﬁc name Homo sapiens, ‘thinking
human’, it has often been suggested that an even more appropriate name
would be Homo loquens, or ‘speaking human’. Many species have sound-
based signalling systems, and can communicate with other members of
the same species on various topics of mutual interest, like approaching
danger or where the next meal is coming from. Most humans (leaving
aside for now native users of sign languages) also use sounds for linguis-
tic signalling; but the structure of the human vocal organs allows a par-
ticularly wide range of sounds to be used, and they are also put together
in an extraordinarily sophisticated way.
There are two subdisciplines in linguistics which deal with sound,
namely phonetics and phonology, and to fulﬁl the aim of this book,
which is to provide an outline of the sounds of various English accents
and how those sounds combine and pattern together, we will need
aspects of both. Phonetics provides objective ways of describing and
analysing the range of sounds humans use in their languages. More
speciﬁcally, articulatory phonetics identiﬁes precisely which speech
organs and muscles are involved in producing the different sounds of the
world’s languages. Those sounds are then transmitted from the speaker
to the hearer, and acoustic and auditory phonetics focus on the physics
of speech as it travels through the air in the form of sound waves, and the
effect those waves have on a hearer’s ears and brain. It follows that
phonetics has strong associations with anatomy, physiology, physics and
neurology.
However, although knowing what sounds we can in principle make
and use is part of understanding what makes us human, each person
grows up learning and speaking only a particular human language or
languages, and each language only makes use of a subset of the full range
of possible, producible and distinguishable sounds. When we turn to the
1

characteristics of the English sound system that make it speciﬁcally
English, and different from French or Welsh or Quechua, we move into
the domain of phonology, which is the language-speciﬁc selection and
organisation of sounds to signal meanings. Phonologists are interested in
the sound patterns of particular languages, and in what speakers and
hearers need to know, and children need to learn, to be speakers of those
languages: in that sense, it is close to psychology.
Our phonological knowledge is not something we can necessarily
access and talk about in detail: we often have intuitions about language
without knowing where they come from, or exactly how to express them.
But the knowledge is certainly there. For instance, speakers of English
will tend to agree that the word snil is a possible but non-existent word,
whereas *fnil is not possible (as the asterisk conventionally shows). In the
usual linguistic terms, snil is an accidental gap in the vocabulary, while
*fnil is a systematic gap, which results from the rules of the English sound
system. However, English speakers are not consciously aware of those
rules, and are highly unlikely to tell a linguist asking about those words
that the absence of *fnil reﬂects the unacceptability of word-initial
consonant sequences, or clusters, with [fn-] in English: the more likely
answer is that snil ‘sounds all right’ (and if you’re lucky, your informant
will produce similar words like sniff or snip to back up her argument), but
that *fnil ‘just sounds wrong’. It is the job of the phonologist to express
generalisations of this sort in precise terms: after all, just because knowl-
edge is not conscious, this does not mean it is unreal, unimportant or not
worth understanding. When you run downstairs, you don’t consciously
think ‘left gluteus maximus, left foot, right arm; right gluteus maximus,
right foot, left arm’ on each pair of steps. In fact, you’re unlikely to make
any conscious decisions at all, below the level of wanting to go down-
stairs in the ﬁrst place; and relatively few people will know the names of
the muscles involved. In fact, becoming consciously aware of the indi-
vidual activities involved is quite likely to disrupt the overall process:
think about what you’re doing, and you ﬁnish the descent nose-ﬁrst. All
of this is very reminiscent of our everyday use of spoken language. We
decide to speak, and what about, but the nuts and bolts of speech pro-
duction are beyond our conscious reach; and thinking deliberately about
what we are saying, and how we are saying it, is likely to cause self-
consciousness and hesitation, interrupting the ﬂow of ﬂuent speech
rather than improving matters. Both language and mobility (crawling,
walking, running downstairs) emerge in developing children by similar
combinations of mental and physical maturation, internal abilities, and
input from the outside world. As we go along, what we have learned
becomes easy, ﬂuent and automatic; we only become dimly aware of
2
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

what complexity lies behind our actions when we realise we have made
a speech error, or see and hear a child struggling to say a word or take
a step. Phonologists, like anatomists and physiologists, aim to help us
understand the nature of that underlying complexity, and to describe
fully and formally what we know in a particular domain, but don’t know
we know.
The relationship between phonetics and phonology is a complex
one, but we might initially approach phonology as narrowed-down
phonetics. Quite small babies, in the babbling phase, produce the whole
range of possible human sounds, including some which they never hear
from parents or siblings: a baby in an English-speaking environment will
spontaneously make consonants which are not found in any European
language, but are to be found closest to home in an African language, say,
or one from the Caucasus. However, that child will then narrow down
her range of sounds from the full human complement to only those
found in the language(s) she is hearing and learning, and will claim,
when later trying to learn at school another language with a different
sound inventory, that she cannot possibly produce unfamiliar sounds
she made perfectly naturally when only a few months old. Or within a
language, subtle mechanical analysis of speech reveals that every utter-
ance of the same word, even by the same speaker, will be a tiny fraction
different from every other; yet hearers who share that language will
effortlessly identify the same word in each case. In this sense, phonetics
supplies an embarrassment of riches, providing much more information
than speakers seem to use or need: all those speakers, and every utter-
ance different! Phonology, on the other hand, involves a reduction to the
essential information, to what speakers and hearers think they are saying
and hearing. The perspective shifts from more units to fewer, from huge
variety to relative invariance, from absolutely concrete to relatively
abstract; like comparing the particular rose I can see from my window,
or roses generally in all their variety (old-fashioned, bushy, briar;
scented or not; red, yellow, shocking pink), to The Rose, an almost ideal
and abstract category to which we can assign the many different actual
variants. A white dog-rose, a huge overblown pink cabbage rose, and a
new, genetically engineered variety can all be roses with no contra-
diction involved. In linguistic terms, it’s not just that I say tomahto and you
say tomayto; it’s that I say tomahto and tomahto and tomahto, and the three
utterances are subtly different, but we both think I said the same thing
three times.
SOUNDS, SPELLINGS AND SYMBOLS
3

1.2 Variation
The discussion so far may suggest a rather straightforward dichotomy:
phonetics is universal, while phonology is language-speciﬁc. But things
are not quite that simple.
First, phonologists also attempt to distinguish those patterns which
are characteristic of a single language and simply reﬂect its history, from
others where a more universal motivation is at issue. In the case of the
absence of *fnil, or more generally the absence of word-initial [fn-]
clusters, we are dealing with a fact of modern English. It is perfectly
possible to produce this combination of sounds; there are words in many
languages, including Norwegian fnise ‘giggle’, fnugg ‘speck’, which begin
with just that cluster; and indeed, it was quite normal in earlier periods
of English – sneeze, for example, has the Old English ancestor fne¯san,
while Old English fnæd meant ‘hem, edge, fringe’; but it is not part of the
inventory of sound combinations which English speakers learn and use
today. The same goes for other initial clusters, such as [kn-]: this again
was common in Old English, as in cna¯wan ‘to know’, and survives into
Modern English spelling, though it is now simply pronounced [n]; again,
[kn-] is also perfectly normal in other languages, including German,
where we ﬁnd Knabe ‘boy’, Knie ‘knee’.
On the other hand, if you say the words intemperate and incoherent to
yourself as naturally as you can, and concentrate on the ﬁrst consonant
written n, you may observe that this signals two different sounds. In
intemperate, the front of your tongue moves up behind your top front
teeth for the n, and stays there for the t; but in incoherent, you are pro-
ducing the sound usually indicated by ing in English spelling, with your
tongue raised much further back in the mouth, since that’s where it’s
going for the following [k] (spelled c). Processes of assimilation like this
involve two sounds close together in a word becoming closer together in
terms of pronunciation, making life easier for the speaker by reducing
vocal tract gymnastics. Assimilation is an everyday occurrence in every
human language; and it is particularly common for nasal sounds, like the
ones spelled n here, to assimilate to following consonants. Explaining
universal tendencies like this one will involve an alliance of phonology
and phonetics: so phonologists are interested in universals too.
However, phonological differences also exist below the level of the
language: frequently, two people think of themselves as speakers of the
same language, but vary in their usage (sometimes you do say tomayto,
while I say tomahto). This is not just an automatic, phonetic matter: in
some cases a single speaker will always use one variant, but in others,
individuals will use different variants on different occasions. It also has
4
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

nothing to do with the physical characteristics of the different speakers,
or the different environments in which they may ﬁnd themselves,
although this was a common belief in the days before linguists adopted
a rigorous scientiﬁc methodology: thus, Thomas Low Nichols, a
nineteenth-century commentator on American English, speculates that
‘I know of no physiological reason why a Yankee should talk through his
nose, unless he got in the habit of shutting his mouth to keep out the
cold fogs and drizzling north-easters of Massachusetts Bay’. There is a
natural tendency for geographically distant accents to become more
different; the same tendency has led the various Romance languages,
such as Italian, Spanish, Romanian and French, to diverge from their
common ancestor, Latin. In addition, speakers often wish, again sub-
consciously, to declare their allegiance to a particular area or social
group by using the language of that group; these accent differences can
be powerful social markers, on which we judge and are judged.
Furthermore, although there are agreed conventions, which form the
basis of the phonology of languages and of accents, those conventions
can be subverted in various ways, just as is the case for other areas of
human behaviour. In short, even phonologically speaking, there is more
than one English – indeed, on one level, there are as many Englishes 
as there are people who say they speak English. Providing an adequate
and accurate phonological description is therefore a challenge: on the
one hand, a single system for English would be too abstract, and would
conceal many meaningful differences between speakers; on the other,
a speaker-by-speaker account would be too detailed, and neglect what
uniﬁes speakers and allows them to recognise one another as using the
same system. In what follows, we will concentrate on a small number
of varieties – Southern Standard British English; Scottish Standard
English; General American, the most frequently encountered broadcast-
ing variety in the United States; and New Zealand English. All of these
are abstractions, and combine together a range of constantly shifting
subvarieties; but they are useful to illustrate the range of variation within
English, and represent groupings recognisable to their speakers, provid-
ing a level of accuracy which a monolithic ‘English’ system could not.
1.3 The International Phonetic Alphabet
So far, the examples given have been rather general ones, or have in-
volved analogies from outside language. Giving more detailed examples
demands a more speciﬁc vocabulary, and a notation system dedicated to
the description of sounds. The English spelling system, although it is the
SOUNDS, SPELLINGS AND SYMBOLS
5

system of transcription we are most used to, is both too restrictive and
too lenient to do the job.
Without a universal transcription system for phonetics and pho-
nology, writing down the unfamiliar sounds of other languages presents
an almost insuperable challenge. Take, for example, a sound which is
used only paralinguistically in English (that is, for some purpose outside
the language system itself), but which is a perfectly ordinary consonant
in other languages, just as [b] in but or [l] in list are in English, namely
the ‘tut-tut’ sound made to signal disapproval. When we see this, we do
not think of a whole word, but of a repeated clicking. This description is
hopelessly inadequate, however, for anyone else trying to recognise the
sound in question, or learn how to make it. Hearing a native speaker use
the ‘tut-tut’ click in a language where it is an ordinary consonant does
not help us understand how the sound is made or how it compares with
others. Likewise, adopting the usual spelling from that language (assum-
ing it is not one of the many without an orthography) might let us write
the ‘tut-tut’ sound down; but this technique would not produce a univer-
sal system for writing sounds of the world’s languages, since linguists
would tend to use their own spelling systems as far as possible, and opt
for representations from the languages they happened to know for other
sounds. There would be little consistency, and generalisation of such a
system would be difﬁcult.
The situation is worse with ‘exotic’ sounds which do not happen to
coincide even with those used paralinguistically in English: groping
towards a description in ordinary English is far too vague to allow accu-
rate reproduction of the sound in question; and indeed, such sounds
tended by early commentators to be regarded as unstable or not quite
proper. John Leighton Wilson, who published a brief description of
the African language Grebo in 1838, had considerable difﬁculties with
sounds which do not have an obvious English spelling, and tended to
resolve this by simply not transcribing them at all. Thus, he notes that
‘There is a consonant sound intermediate between b and p, which
is omitted … with the expectation that it will, in the course of time,
gradually conform to one or the other of the two sounds to which it
seems allied’. Similarly, he observes ‘a few words in the language so
completely nasal that they cannot be properly spelled by any combi-
nation of letters whatever’.
It is for these reasons that the International Phonetic Alphabet was
proposed in 1888; it has been under constant review ever since by the
International Phonetic Association, and the latest revision dates from
1996. It is true that a certain amount of learning is required to become
familiar with the conventions of the IPA and the characteristics of
6
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

sounds underlying the notation: but once you know that ‘tut-tut’ is [], an
alveolar click, it will always be possible to produce the relevant sound
accurately; to write it down unambiguously; and to recognise it in other
languages.
Although a universal system of description and transcription might
be desirable in principle, and even in practice when dealing with un-
familiar languages and sounds, readers of a book both in and on English
might question the necessity of learning the IPA. However, precisely the
same types of problems encountered above also appear in connection
with the phonology of English, and some new ones besides.
First, there is considerable ambiguity in the English spelling system,
and it works in both directions: many sounds to one spelling, and many
spellings to one sound. The former situation results in ‘eye-rhymes’, or
forms which look as if they ought to have the same pronunciation, but
don’t. There are various doggerel poems about this sort of ambiguity
(often written by non-native speakers who have struggled with the
system): one begins by pointing out a set of eye-rhymes – ‘I gather you
already know, Of plough and cough and through and dough’. Those four
words, which we might expect to rhyme on the basis of the spelling, in
fact end in four quite different vowels, and cough has a ﬁnal consonant
too. On the other hand, see, sea, people, amoeba and ﬁend have the same long
[i] vowel, but ﬁve different spellings.
Despite these multiple ambiguities, attempts are regularly made to
indicate pronunciations using the spelling system. None are wholly
successful, for a variety of different reasons. The lack of precision in-
volved can be particularly frustrating for phonologists trying to discover
characteristics of earlier stages of English. John Hart, a well-known
sixteenth-century grammarian, gives many descriptions of the pronun-
ciations of his time, but the lack of a standard transcription system
hampers him when it comes to one of the major mysteries of English
phonology at this period, namely the sound of the vowel spelled a. Hart
mentions this explicitly, and tells us that it is made ‘with wyde opening
of the mouthe, as when a man yawneth’: but does that mean a back vowel,
the sort now found for Southern British English speakers in father, or
a front one, like the father vowel for New Zealanders or Australians?
Similarly, Thomas Low Nichols, discussing mid-nineteenth-century
American English, notes that ‘It is certain that men open their mouths
and broaden their speech as they go West, until on the Mississippi they
will tell you “thar are heaps of bar [bear] over thar, whar I was raised”’.
Here we have two related difﬁculties: the nature of the a vowel, and what
the orthographic r means, if anything. Most British English speakers
(those from Scotland, Northern Ireland and some areas of the West
SOUNDS, SPELLINGS AND SYMBOLS
7

Country excepted) will pronounce [r] only immediately before a vowel:
so a London English speaker would naturally read the quote with [r] at
the end of the ﬁrst thar, bar and whar, but not the second thar, where the
next word begins with a consonant. However, a Scot would produce [r]
in all these words, regardless of the following sound. Which is closer to
what Thomas Low Nichols intended? Orthographic r is still problematic
today: when Michael Bateman, in a newspaper cookery column, writes
that ‘This cook, too, couldn’t pronounce the word. It’s not pah-eller; it’s
pie ey-yar’, he is producing a helpful guide for most English English
speakers, who will understand that his ‘transcription’ of paella indicates
a ﬁnal vowel, since they would not pronounce [r] in this context in
English; but he is quite likely to confuse Scots or Americans, who would
pronounce [r] wherever r appears in English spelling, and may therefore
get the mistaken idea that paella has a ﬁnal [r] in Spanish. In short, the fact
that there are many different Englishes, and that each quite properly has
its own phonological interpretations of the same spelling system (which,
remember, is multiply ambiguous in the ﬁrst place), means we encounter
inevitable difﬁculties in trying to use spelling to give explicit infor-
mation about sounds.
The same problems arise in a slightly different context when writers
try to adapt the spelling system to indicate accent differences:
‘Good ﬂight?’ asked Jessica at Christchurch Airport. I melodram-
atically bowed a depressurization-deaf ear towards her … before
answering that it had been a little gruelling.
‘You are a bit pale. But you’ll still be able to get breakfast at the
hotel … ’
What Jessica actually said was git brikﬁst it the hitil. The Kiwi accent
is a vowel-vice voice, in which the e is squeezed to an i, the a elongated
to an ee. A New Zealander, for example, writes with a pin, and signals
agreement with the word yis.
(Mark Lawson, The Battle for Room Service: 
Journeys to all the safe places, Picador (1994), 22)
Lawson succeeds in showing that a difference exists between New
Zealand and English English, and provides a very rough approximation
of that difference. However, anyone who has listened to New Zealand
speakers will know that their pronunciation of pen is not identical to
Southern British English pin, as Lawson’s notation would suggest; and
readers who have not encountered the variety might arrive at a number
of different interpretations of his comments that New Zealand vowels
are ‘squeezed’ or ‘elongated’. The National Centre for English Cultural
Tradition in Shefﬁeld has produced a list of local phrases, again ren-
8
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

dered in a modiﬁed version of English spelling: it includes intitot (‘Isn’t it
hot?’), eez gooinooam (‘he’s going home’), and lerrus gerrus andzwesht (‘Let’s
get our hands washed’). Sometimes the modiﬁcations are obvious; the
lack of h in intitot suggests that no [h] is pronounced, and the substitution
of r for t in lerrus gerrus signals the common northern English weakening
of [t] to [r] between vowels. But why double rr? The double vowel letters
in gooinooam presumably signal long vowels; but the rr in lerrus certainly
does not mean a long consonant. Such lists are amusing when the reader
knows the variety in question; but reading the list in a respectable imi-
tation of an unfamiliar accent would be rather a hit and miss affair.
The same goes for dialect literature, even when there is an informally
agreed set of emendations to the spelling system, as is perhaps the
case for Scottish English. Tom Leonard’s poem ‘Unrelated Incidents (3)’
begins:
this is thi
six a clock
news thi
man said n
thi reason
a talk wia
BBC accent
iz coz yi
widny wahnt
mi ti talk
aboot thi
trooth wia
voice lik
wanna yoo
scruff.
Again, many of the alterations are entirely transparent for a reader
who is familiar with Scottish English – aboot does sound like a-boot rather
than having the diphthong usually found in Southern British English
about, and widny rather than wouldn’t is both clear and accurate. However,
not everything is so obvious.Trooth is written to match aboot, and the two
words do have the same vowel in Scots – but the former is pronounced
like its English English equivalent, whereas the latter is not; so we might
ask, why alter both? Thi is consistently written for the, and there is indeed
a slight difference in those ﬁnal vowels between the two varieties; but
if we compare Tom Leonard with Mark Lawson, the impression given is
that thi (= the) for a Scot sounds like pin (= pen) for a New Zealander,
which is not the case at all.
SOUNDS, SPELLINGS AND SYMBOLS
9

In some cases of this type, there are attempts to introduce new
symbols into the English spelling system to represent accent differences:
one particularly common device is to use an apostrophe. This has
become a fairly conventional and familiar device; but again, it turns out
to be ambiguous. For instance, take the three phrases I feel ’ot, She was
waitin’, and Give us the bu’er. The ﬁrst is perhaps the most straightforward:
many speakers of non-standard varieties of English consistently drop
their [h]s (and we all do, in pronouns under low stress, for instance, as in
What did he say?, where [h] will be pronounced only in extraordinarily
careful speech). In this case, then, the apostrophe means the standard [h]
is omitted. This might, however, lead us to believe that an apostrophe
always means something is missing, relative to the standard pronuncia-
tion. Informal characterisations might support this hypothesis, since
speakers producing forms like waitin’ and bu’er are frequently described
as ‘dropping their gs’ and ‘dropping their ts’ (or ‘swallowing their ts’)
respectively: an article in The Independent of 28 June 2000 reports that
‘… the entire cast of East Enders … swallow their ts, ps and ks like true
Glasgow speakers when using such words as “sta’ement” and “sea’belt”’.
However, the phonetic facts suggest otherwise. Whereas ’ot simply lacks
an initial consonant, waitin’ does not lack a ﬁnal one: instead, the ﬁnal [ŋ]
of waiting has been replaced by [n] (recall the discussion of incoherent
versus intemperate above). For most speakers, apart from some from the
Midlands and north of England, there was no [g] to drop in the ﬁrst
place, simply one nasal in more formal circumstances, which shifts to
another nasal in informal conversation. In bu’er, we also ﬁnd one con-
sonant, this time [t], being replaced by another, the glottal stop; but this
time, the replacement is only found in English as an alternative for
another sound. It has no independent orthographic representation, and
is strongly associated with informal, non-standard and stigmatised
usage.
If we are to consider these variants objectively, however, we need a
system of notation which will allow us to observe them neutrally, provid-
ing transcriptions of each variety in its own terms: seeing the glottal stop
as IPA [ʔ], which is a perfectly normal consonant in, say, Arabic, rather
than regarding it as an unsymbolisable grunt, or a debased form of
another consonant, may allow us to analyse the facts of accent variation
without seeing every departure from an idealised standard variety as
requiring apology. The linguistic arbitrariness but social grounding
of such judgements is apparent from forms like car park – a standard
Southern British English pronunciation will have no [r] in either word,
and to a Scottish English speaker with both [r]s invariably produced,
there is certainly something missing; but I have not seen this represented
10
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

as ca’ pa’k, or heard southerners accused of ‘swallowing their [r]s’.
For all these cases, what we need is a consistent, agreed system of
transcription, so that we can assess the accent differences we ﬁnd and
compare them with conﬁdence. Of course, no purely phonetic system is
going to help with the meaning of items of vocabulary a reader has not
met before – an IPA transcription will not tell you what a bampot is, or
glaur, or a beagie, if you don’t know. But at least you have the comfort of
knowing how the natives pronounce it.
At the same time, this is an introductory text on English, and not a
handbook of general phonetics, so only those sections of the IPA relevant
to English sounds will be considered, beginning with consonants in
Chapter 3, and moving on to vowels, where most accent variation in
English is concentrated. However, before introducing the IPA in detail,
we must also confront a phonological issue. As we have already seen,
native speakers of a language cannot always be relied upon to hear every
theoretically discernible gradation of sound. In some cases, the IPA
supplies alternative symbols in cases where speakers will be quite sure
they are hearing the same thing; and this is not a universal limitation of
human ears, but rather varies from language to language. To illustrate
this, and to resolve the problem that sometimes speakers think they are
hearing something quite different from what they objectively are hear-
ing, we must introduce the concept of the phoneme.
Recommendations for reading
Comparisons of human and animal language are provided in Aitchison
(1983), and there is relevant discussion in Pinker (1994). Fletcher and
MacWhinney (1994) is a collection of papers on aspects of language
acquisition. Trudgill (2000) provides an accessible introduction to
dialects and why they are important, although it is fairly narrowly
focussed on England. A detailed account of the history and usage of
the IPA is provided in International Phonetic Association (1999), and
further information is available at
http://www.arts.gla.ac.uk/IPA/ipa.html
SOUNDS, SPELLINGS AND SYMBOLS
11

2 The phoneme: the same
but different
2.1 Variation and when to ignore it
Recognising that two objects or concepts are ‘the same but different’
ought to present a major philosophical problem; the phrase itself seems
self-contradictory. However, in practice we categorise elements of our
world in just this way on an everyday basis. A two-year-old can grasp the
fact that his right shoe and left shoe are very similar, but actually belong
on different feet; and as adults, we have no difﬁculty in recognising
that lemons and limes are different but both citrus fruits, or that misery
and happiness are different but both emotions. This sort of hierarchical
classiﬁcation is exactly what is at issue when we turn to the notion of the
phoneme.
Humans excel at ignoring perceptible differences which are not rel-
evant for particular purposes. To illustrate this, take a piece of paper and
write your normal signature six times. There will certainly be minor
differences between them, but you will still easily recognise all those
six signatures as yours, with the minor modiﬁcations only detectable by
uncharacteristically close scrutiny. Perhaps more to the point, someone
else, checking your signature against the one on your credit card, will
also disregard those minor variants, and recognise the general pattern
as identifying you. There are exceptions, of course: some alterations
are obvious, and usually environmentally controlled, so if someone jolts
your elbow, or the paper slips, you apologise and sign again. On the
whole, however, the human mind seems to abstract away from irrelevant,
automatic variation, and to focus on higher-level patterns; though we are
typically unaware of that abstraction, and of the complex processes
underlying it. This relatively high tolerance level is why mechanical
systems constructed to recognise hand-written or spoken language are
still elementary and highly complex, and why they require so much
training from each potential user.
12

2.2 Conditioned variation in written language
Since we are more used to thinking explicitly about written language
than about our speech, one way of approaching this issue of abstraction
is through our conscious knowledge of the rules of writing. When
children learn to write, they have to master the conventions governing
the use of capital and lower-case letters. Children often tend to learn
to write their name before anything else, and this will have an initial
capital; and children are also great generalisers, and indeed over-
generalisers; for instance, ﬁrst words often have a much wider range of
meanings than their adult equivalents. Thus, for a one-year-old, cat may
mean ‘any animal’ (whether real, toy, or picture), tractor ‘any vehicle’,
and Daddy ‘any male adult’; these broad senses are later progressively
narrowed down. It follows that children may at ﬁrst try to write all words
with initial capitals, until they are taught the accepted usage, which in
modern English is for capitals to appear on proper names, I, and the ﬁrst
word in each sentence, and lower-case letters elsewhere, giving the
prescribed patterns in (1).
(1) a. Anna
*annA
Africa
*africA
b. An apple for Anna
c. Give Anna an apple.
Precisely how the capital and lower-case letters are written by an
individual is not relevant, as long as they are recognisable and consis-
tently distinct from other letters – an needs to be distinguished from on,
and An from In, but it does not especially matter whether we ﬁnd a, a or
a for lower-case, and A, A, A or A for capital; it all depends who we copy
when we ﬁrst learn, what our writing instruments and our grip on them
are like, or typographically, which of the burgeoning range of fonts we
fancy.
Again, we seem readily able to perceive that all these subtly different
variants can be grouped into classes. There is a set of lower-case and a
set of capital letters, and the rules governing their distribution relate
to those classes as units, regardless of the particular form produced on a
certain occasion of writing. Moreover, the lower-case and capital sets
together belong to a single, higher-order unit: they are all forms, or real-
isations of ‘the letter a’, an ideal and abstract unit to which we mentally
compare and assign actual written forms. ‘The letter a’ never itself
appears on paper, but it is conceptually real for us as users of the alpha-
bet: this abstract unit is a grapheme, symbolised <a>; triangle brackets
are conventionally used for spellings. The choice of symbol is purely
THE PHONEME
13

conventional: since it is a conceptual unit, and since we do not know
what units look like in the brain, we might as well use an arbitrary sign
like <§>, or <❂>, or give it a name: <a> is Annie Apple in the children’s
Letterland series for beginning readers. However, it is convenient to use
a form that looks like one of the actual realisations, as this will help us to
match up the abstract grapheme with the actual graphs which manifest
it in actual writing.
The rules governing the distribution of <a> and other graphemes
are not, however, absolute natural laws. Learning that proper names and
sentences begin with capitals is appropriate for a child writing modern
English, but not for a child learning German, who would need to learn
instead that all nouns (not just Anna and Afrika but also Apfel ‘apple’)
always begin with a capital letter, as well as all sentences. A similar strong
tendency is observable in earlier stages of English too, and although
literary style is not absolutely consistent in this respect, there are many
more capitals in the work of a poet like John Milton, for instance, than in
written English today; see (2).
(2) Of Mans First Disobedience, and the Fruit
Of that Forbidden Tree, whose mortal taste
Brought Death into the World, and all our woe,
With loss of Eden, till one greater Man
Restore us, and regain the blissful Seat,
Sing Heav’nly Muse …
(Milton, Paradise Lost, Book 1, ﬁrst 6 lines)
2.3 The phoneme
Children do not learn the rules of spoken language by explicit instruc-
tion, but rather by a combination of copying what they hear, and build-
ing up mental generalisations based on their experiences. How much
they are helped in this by some internal structure in the brain dedicated
to language acquisition, which linguists call a Language Acquisition
Device or Language Faculty, is still a matter of debate.
Nonetheless, aspects of spoken language show very strong similarities
to the types of patterns outlined above for writing. Again, some differ-
ences between units matter, because replacing one with another will
cause a different meaning to be conveyed in the language in question:
replace the initial sound [k] in call with [t], and you have tall, an entirely
different English word. Correspondingly, English speakers perceive
[k] and [t] as entirely separate sounds, and ﬁnd them rather easy to
distinguish.
14
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

In other cases, two sounds which phoneticians can equally easily tell
apart will be regarded as the same by native speakers. For instance, say
the phrase kitchen cupboard to yourself, and think about the ﬁrst sounds of
the two words. Despite the difference in spelling (another case where
orthography, as we saw also in the last chapter, is not an entirely reliable
guide to the sounds of a language), native speakers will tend to think of
those initial consonants as the same – both are [k]s. However, if you say
the phrase several times, slowly, and think uncharacteristically carefully
about whether your articulators are doing the same at the beginning of
both words, you will ﬁnd that there is a discernible difference. For the
ﬁrst sound in kitchen, your tongue will be raised towards the roof of your
mouth, further forward than for the beginning of cupboard; and for kitchen,
your lips will be spread apart a little more too, while for cupboard your
mouth will be more open. Unless you are from Australia or New Zealand
(for reasons we shall discover in Chapter 8), this difference is even
clearer from the phrase car keys, this time with the ﬁrst word having the
initial sound produced further back in the mouth, and the second further
forward.
In IPA terms, these can be transcribed as [k], the cupboard sound, and
[c], the kitchen one. However, in English [k] and [c] do not signal differ-
ent meanings as [k] and [t] do in call versus tall; instead, we can always
predict that [k] will appear before one set of vowels, which we call back
vowels, like the [] of cupboard or the [ɑ] a Southern British English
speaker has in car, while [c] appears before front vowels, like the [] of
kitchen or the [i] in Southern British English keys. Typically, speakers
control predictable differences of this type automatically and subcon-
sciously, and sometimes resist any suggestion that the sounds involved,
like [k] and [c] in English, are different at all, requiring uncharacteristi-
cally close and persistent listening to tell the two apart. The difference
between [k] and [c] in English is redundant; in phonological terms, this
means the difference arises automatically in different contexts, but does
not convey any new information.
Returning to our orthographic analogy, recall that every instance of a
hand-written a or A will be different from every other instance, even
produced by the same person. In just the same way, the same speaker
producing the same words (say, multiple repetitions of kitchen cupboard)
will produce minutely different instances of [k] and [c]. However, a
hierarchical organisation of these variants can be made: in terms of
spelling, we can characterise variants as belonging to the lower-case or
capital set, and those in turn as realisations of the abstract grapheme
<a>. The subclasses have a consistent and predictable distribution, with
upper-case at the beginnings of proper nouns and sentences, and lower-
THE PHONEME
15

case everywhere else: we can say that this distribution is rule-governed.
Similarly again, we can classify all the variants we hear as belonging to
either fronter [c] or backer [k], although we are not, at least without a
little phonetic consciousness-raising, aware of that difference in the way
we are with a and A; presumably the fact that we learn writing later, and
with more explicit instruction, accounts for our higher level of aware-
ness here.
In turn, [c] and [k], which native speakers regard as the same, are real-
isations of an abstract unit we call the phoneme (where the ending -eme,
as in grapheme, means ‘some abstract unit’). Phonemes appear between
slash brackets, and are conventionally represented by IPA symbols, in
this case /k/. As with graphemes, we could in principle use an abstract
symbol for this abstract unit, say /§/, or /❂/, or give it a number or a
name: but again, it is convenient and clear to use the same symbol as one
of its realisations. Those realisations, here [k] and [c], are allophones of
the phoneme /k/.
To qualify as allophones of the same phoneme, two (or more) phones,
that is sounds, must meet two criteria. First, their distribution must be
predictable: we must be able to specify where one will turn up, and
where the other; and those sets of contexts must not overlap. If this is
true, the two phones are said to be in complementary distribution.
Second, if one phone is exceptionally substituted for the other in the
same context, that substitution must not correspond to a meaning differ-
ence. Even if you say kitchen cupboard with the [k] ﬁrst and the [c] second
(and that won’t be easy, because you have been doing the opposite as
long as you have been speaking English – it will be even harder than
trying to write at your normal speed while substituting small a for capi-
tal A and vice versa), another English speaker will only notice that there
is something vaguely odd about your speech, if that. She may think you
have an unfamiliar accent; but crucially, she will understand that you
mean ‘kitchen cupboard’, and not something else. This would not be so
where a realisation of one phoneme is replaced by a realisation of
another: if the [k] allophone of /k/ is replaced by the [t] allophone of
/t/, then tall will be understood instead of call.
Finally, just as the orthographic rules can vary between languages and
across time, so no two languages or periods will have exactly the same
phonology. Although in English [k] and [c] are allophones of the same
phoneme, and are regarded as the same sound, in Hungarian they are
different phonemes. We can test for this by looking for minimal pairs:
that is, pairs of words differing in meaning, where the only difference in
sound is that one has one of the two phones at issue where the other has
the other (think of tall and call). In Hungarian, we ﬁnd minimal pairs like
16
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

kuka [kuka] ‘dustbin’ and kutya [kuca] ‘dog’. It follows that [k] and [c]
are not in complementary but in contrastive distribution; that inter-
changing them does make a meaning difference between words; and
hence that [k] and [c] belong to different phonemes, /k/ and /c/ respec-
tively, in Hungarian. Unsurprisingly, speakers of Hungarian ﬁnd the
difference between [k] and [c] glaringly obvious, and would be
extremely surprised to ﬁnd that English speakers typically lump them
together as the same sound.
As for differences between periods of the same language, it is straight-
forward to demonstrate that Modern English [f] and [v] contrast, or are
in complementary distribution, since minimal pairs like fat [f] versus vat
[v], leaf versus leave, or safer versus saver are easy to come by. The
phoneme system of Modern English therefore contains both /f/ and
/v/. However, the situation was very different in Old English, as the
examples in (3) show.
(3) Old English
hla[v]ord <hlaford> ‘lord’
heo[v]on <heofon> ‘heaven’
æ[f]ter <æfter> ‘after’
[f]isc <ﬁsc> ‘ﬁsh’
o[v]er <ofer> ‘over’
heal[f] <healf> ‘half ’
Instead of minimal pairs, we ﬁnd predictable, complementary dis-
tribution, with [v] appearing medially, between vowels, and [f] in other
positions. Consequently, [f] and [v] can be analysed as allophones of one
phoneme, which we might call /f/: Old English speakers would have
regarded [f] and [v] as the same, just as Modern English speakers think
of [k] and [c] as the same sound. Later in the history of English, many
words like very, virtue and veal were borrowed from French, bringing
with them initial [v], which had not previously been found in English.
The distribution of [f] and [v] therefore ceased to be complementary,
since both could appear in word-initial position, creating minimal pairs
like very and ferry, or veal and feel. In consequence, [v] stopped being an
allophone of /f/, and became a phoneme in its own right, producing the
opposition of /f/ (realised as [f]) and /v/ (realised as [v]) we ﬁnd today.
2.4 Some further examples
The notion of the phoneme is a notoriously difﬁcult one to come to
terms with at ﬁrst. This is not altogether surprising: it isn’t every day that
you are told you know a whole range of things you didn’t know you
knew, and moreover that this knowledge seems likely to be structured in
THE PHONEME
17

terms of a set of mental units you didn’t know you had. However, the fact
that phonemes are so central to phonology means it is well worth giving
a few extra examples, to make the concept a little more familiar.
First, let us return to Modern English /t/ and /k/, which we have
already met in tall versus call; in fact, we can add Paul to make a minimal
triplet, adding /p/ to our phoneme system. Now hold a piece of paper
up in front of your mouth by the bottom of the sheet, so the top is free
to ﬂap about, and try saying Paul, tall, call. You will ﬁnd that a little puff
of air is released after the initial /p/, /t/ and /k/, making the paper move
slightly: this is called aspiration, and signalled in IPA transcription by
adding a superscript [h] after the symbol in question. This means that
/p/, /t/ and /k/ have the allophones [ph], [th] and [kh] word-initially; the
aspiration is most noticeable with [ph], since it is articulated with the
lips, nearest to where the air exits.
However, /p/, /t/ and /k/ really do have to be right at the beginning
of the word for these allophones to appear. Try to make yourself aware
of the initial aspiration in pill, till and kill; this time, you will again be
producing [ph] and [th], but the allophone of /k/ will be slightly differ-
ent; the front vowel in kill conditions a fronter, aspirated [ch]. If you add
an initial [s] and do the piece of paper trick again, you will ﬁnd that there
is no discernible movement. After [s], we ﬁnd plain, unaspirated allo-
phones [p], [t] and [c] in spill, still and skill (and unaspirated [k] in scold,
as opposed to [kh] in cold, where /k/ is followed by a back vowel).
It follows that phonemes can have a whole range of allophones.
Illustrating with just one phoneme, Modern English /k/, we have now
identiﬁed word-initial aspirated [kh] in call, cold; fronter, aspirated [ch]
before front vowels, as in kill, kitchen; unaspirated [k] in scold; and un-
aspirated [c] in skill. That deals with the beginnings of words. At the
ends, /k/ is very frequently accompanied by a partial glottal stop; this is
known as glottal reinforcement, and the ﬁnal sound in back is signalled in
IPA terms as [ʔk]. When a following word begins with [	], for instance,
this [ʔk] is sometimes replaced by a glottal stop, as in back garden, where
you may perceive the [ʔ] allophone of /k/ as almost a pause before the
[	]. Glottalisation of this kind is much more common for /t/: as we saw
in the last chapter, glottal stops are increasingly found in non-standard
accents in forms like statement, seatbelt, butter, meaning that the glottal stop
in English can be an allophone of both /k/ and /t/. We return to this
issue of overlap in Chapter 5.
For a ﬁnal example, let us turn to a phoneme we have not considered
before, namely /l/. /l/ has only two main allophones in English, depend-
ing on its position in the word (unless you speak some varieties of Irish
or Welsh English, or Geordie, the variety spoken around Newcastle, in
18
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

which case you have only the ﬁrst realisation described below; con-
versely, some varieties of Scottish English only have the second allo-
phone). If you say lull, or lilt, you will notice that the ﬁrst l in each case
is pronounced with the tip of your tongue up behind your top front
teeth, while the second additionally has the tongue raised further back.
This time the distribution of the allophones does not depend on the
frontness or backness of the adjacent vowel, since lull has a back vowel,
while lilt has a front one, but both have the fronter [l] ﬁrst, and the backer
[
] second. In the case of /l/, what matters (roughly speaking; we will
come up with a better generalisation in Chapter 9) is whether the /l/
precedes or follows the vowel in the word. If /l/ comes ﬁrst, it is pro-
nounced as ‘clear’, fronter [l], as also in clear; and if the vowel comes ﬁrst,
/l/ is realised as ‘dark’, more back [
], as in dull. The two are obviously
in complementary distribution, and hence can both straightforwardly be
assigned to the same phoneme, /l/, in Modern English.
We ﬁnd a different story in Scots Gaelic, however, where minimal
pairs can be found for the clear and dark variants. For instance, the words
baile ‘a town’ and balla ‘a wall’ are pronounced identically, except for the
clear [l] in baile, and the dark [
] in balla. Whereas substituting clear for
dark pronunciations, or vice versa, in English would be picked up by
listeners as slightly, intangibly peculiar, for a Scots Gaelic speaker the
difference is both easily noticeable and meaningful, since a substitution
will simply produce the wrong word. Again, we ﬁnd that differences
which in one language are automatic to the point of inaudibility without
training, are highly salient and have important linguistic consequences
in another.
2.5 The reality of the phoneme
We have already seen that the phoneme system of a speaker’s native
language, and speciﬁcally the difference between pairs of sounds which
contrast and pairs which do not, strongly condition her perceptions: the
early twentieth century American linguist Sapir concludes that ‘What
the native speaker hears is not phonetic elements but phonemes’. How-
ever, the phoneme is a psychologically real unit in other ways too, since
it does not only condition what we hear, but also what we do.
First, alphabetic spelling systems are frequently based on the
phonemes of a language: there are various reported cases of linguists
teaching variants of the IPA to speakers of languages which lacked
orthographies, and providing inventories of symbols which covered all
the phones of the language, but where speakers subsequently made use
of only one symbol per phoneme. In Old English, both [f] and [v], which
THE PHONEME
19

were then in complementary distribution, were spelled <f>, whereas in
Modern English contrastive /f/ and /v/ typically correspond to <f> (or
<ph>) versus <v>. Similarly, in Hungarian /k/ and /c/ are consistently
distinguished as <k> and <ty>. The alphabet has several times been
borrowed by speakers of one language from those of another, and has
been remodelled in some respects to ﬁt the borrowing phoneme system
better. So, the ﬁrst letter of the Semitic alphabet represents the glottal
stop, [ʔ], which is phonemically distinctive in Arabic, for example: but
when this alphabet was borrowed by the Greeks, that ﬁrst letter, Greek
alpha, was taken to represent the vowel which begins the word alpha
itself. Although Greek speakers would commonly produce an initial
glottal stop on a word like alpha (as would English speakers, especially
when saying the word emphatically), they would not observe it or want
to symbolise it, since [ʔ] is not a phoneme of Greek. We should not,
however, as we saw in the last chapter, assume that we can simply read
the phoneme system off the spelling system, since there is not always a
one-to-one correlation. Hence, English does have two orthographic
symbols for /k/, namely <k> and <c>, but these do not systematically
signal two separate allophones: the spelling system simply has a redun-
dant extra symbol here. Furthermore, some phonemes are spelled
consistently, but not with a single graph, so the phonemic difference
between the English nasals /m/, /n/ and /ŋ/ in ram, ran and rang, is
signalled orthographically by <m>, <n> and <ng> (or <nk> in rank).
More importantly, our native phoneme system tends to get in the way
when we try to learn other languages. It is perhaps unsurprising that we
should ﬁnd it difﬁcult at ﬁrst to produce sounds which do not ﬁgure at all
in our ﬁrst language. However, it is just as difﬁcult, and sometimes worse,
to learn sounds which are phonemically contrastive in the language we
are learning, but allophones of a single phoneme in our native system.
For instance, there is no contrast between aspirated [th] and unaspirated
[t] in English; we can predict that the former appears only word-
initially. In Chengtu Chinese, however, /t/ contrasts with /th/, as we ﬁnd
minimal pairs like [tou] ‘a unit of dry measure for grain’ versus [thou] ‘to
tremble’; the same is true in Thai, where [tam] ‘to pound’ contrasts with
[tham] ‘to do’, establishing a phonemic distinction of /t/ and /th/. When
a native English speaker tries to learn Chengtu Chinese, or Thai, she
will ﬁnd this distinction extremely awkward to replicate, despite the fact
that she herself has always used both these sounds. The problem is that,
whereas a totally new and unfamiliar sound simply has to be learned
from scratch, an old sound in a new role requires further processes of
adjustment: our English speaking Thai learner has to suppress her
instinctive and subconscious division of the aspirated and unaspirated
20
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

sounds, and learn to produce both in the same context. In perceptual
terms, it is again easier to hear a completely new sound, which will
initially be extremely easy to perceive because of its very unfamiliarity,
than to learn to distinguish two sounds which have conceptually been
considered as one and the same. Conversely, a Korean speaker, who has
[r] and [l] as allophones of a single phoneme, with [r] produced between
vowels and [l] everywhere else, will make errors in learning English,
ﬁnding minimal pairs like lot and rot highly counter-intuitive, and tend-
ing to produce [l] at the beginning of both, but [r] medially in both lolly
and lorry. A combination of unlearning and learning are needed to get
those patterns right.
In Chapter 4, we shall return to phonemes and allophones, and
develop more precise ways of stating exactly where each allophone
occurs. First, however, we need some more phonetic detail on the con-
sonants of English, and some more technical vocabulary to describe how
they are produced.
Exercises
1. A learner of English as a second language has the following pronun-
ciations (note that [ʃ] is the symbol for the ﬁrst sound in ship, and [ð] for
the ﬁrst sound in the):
that [dat]
dog [dɒg]
head [hεd]
leather [lεðə]
leader [liðə]
sing [ʃŋ]
sat [sat]
loss [lɒs]
ﬁsh [fʃ]
miss [mʃ]
push [pus]
How might you explain these non-native pronunciations? How do you
think this learner would pronounce the bold-faced consonants in Daddy,
either, loathe; ship, pass, dish, usher ?
2. Do the following sounds contrast in English? Find minimal pairs to
support your hypothesis, ideally for initial, medial and ﬁnal position in
the word. Where minimal pairs for all positions do not seem to be avail-
able, write a short statement of where the sound in question can and
cannot be found.
[m n ŋ p b t d k g l r]
3. The Ministry for Education in a certain country whose language has
up to now been unwritten has hired two foreign linguists to produce an
orthography. Linguists A and B have suggested two rather different
systems. Which one is most in line with the phonological structure of the
THE PHONEME
21

language it is designed for? Why do you think the other linguist may
have made different decisions?
Linguist A
Linguist B
pronunciation
meaning
bim
bim
[bim]
‘rug’
bin
bin
[bin]
‘head’
biŋ
bing
[biŋ]
‘wheel’
zag
zak
[zak]
‘parrot’
zib
zip
[zip]
‘ostrich’
azaŋ
azang
[azaŋ]
‘to speak’
obaz
obas
[obas]
‘to throw’
ham
ham
[ham]
‘egg’
mohiz
mohis
[mohis]
‘to eat’
zigah
ziga
[zi	ah]
‘to sing’
gig
gik
[	ik]
‘ant’
gah
ga
[	ah]
‘a song’
nagog
nagok
[na	ok]
‘to sting’
habiz
habis
[habis]
‘to drink’
Recommendations for reading
Further discussion of phoneme analysis can be found in a number of
recent textbooks on English phonology or phonology in general. Carr
(1999), and Davenport and Hannahs (1998), provide brief, approachable
outlines; Giegerich (1992) is written at a slightly higher level, and also
deals with more theoretical shortcomings of the phoneme. Students
interested in writing systems, and in the history of writing, might consult
Sampson (1985) or Coulmas (1988). Issues of language acquisition and
the question of innateness are debated in Pinker (1994).
22
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

3 Describing English
consonants
3.1 What’s inside a phonetic symbol?
So far, we have considered the IPA essentially as an alternative writing
system, which allows us to express a larger range of sounds than the
English spelling system would. However, looking only at those symbols
might suggest that we are dealing with individual, self-contained units
when we consider phonemes and allophones: each is like a locked black
box labelled with an IPA symbol.
In fact, each IPA symbol is shorthand for a whole range of properties,
and those properties explain how the particular segment being symbol-
ised is pronounced; unpacking the black box for each sound reveals not
a jumble, but an internal structure, and understanding that structure
allows us to make comparisons with other sounds. When we know that
[k], for instance, is a voiceless velar plosive, we can start to see what
properties it shares with other sounds which might also be voiceless, or
velar, or plosives; we can also see how it differs from other sounds which
are not voiceless, or velar, or plosives. Furthermore, we shall see what
properties different allophones of the same phoneme share, which might
allow them to be regarded as ‘the same’ by speakers of English: that is, we
can work out what particular phonetic features speakers of English tend
to ignore, and which they are aware of. Since this may be very different
for speakers of other languages, unpacking IPA notation in this way also
allows cross-linguistic comparisons to be made. In this chapter, we shall
therefore consider a very basic set of phonetic features which enable us
to describe the articulation of the consonants of English, and to assess
their differences and similarities.
3.2 Consonant classiﬁcation
A biologist looking at some particular creature wants to know various
things about it, to work out where it should be placed in conventional
23

biological classiﬁcation. Some properties are visible and therefore easy
to work out, such as how many legs it has or whether it has fur, feathers
or scales. In other cases, closer observation will be needed: tooth shape
cannot usually be checked from a distance. Still other properties are
behavioural, and our biologist might need to observe her creature over
a longer period of time to ﬁgure out whether it lays eggs or bears live
young, or what it eats.
The same goes for phonetic classiﬁcation: some properties are straight-
forwardly observable when you look in a mirror, or can be ﬁgured out
easily from feeling what your articulators are doing. Other features are
harder to spot, and need some extra training before you will become
aware of them. Furthermore, we also need to remember that phonemes
are realised as various different allophones, so we must build up a picture
of all the possible environments where that phoneme can occur and what
happens there, to sort out how it behaves.
Biologists today are, of course, working within an agreed classiﬁ-
cation: when they observe a creature with particular physical traits, or
particular behaviours, they can slot it into a framework of herbivores and
carnivores; mammals, insects, birds and reptiles; vertebrates and invert-
ebrates; and so on. Fortunately, phoneticians and phonologists have a
similar, generally agreed framework for sounds. For consonants, we need
to know six things to arrive at a classiﬁcation: in the rest of this chapter,
we shall consider these six sets of properties in turn, and assess which
English phonemes ﬁt into each category. Vowel classiﬁcation involves
rather different features, and we return to this in Chapter 6: we are
beginning with consonants because many of their properties are easier
to ascertain from self-observation, and because the systems of consonant
phonemes in different accents of English vary far less than the vowels.
3.3 The anatomy of a consonant
3.3.1 What is the airstream mechanism?
Speech is audible because the movements of articulators (to be discussed
in subsequent sections) cause the air to vibrate, forming sound waves
which travel to the hearer’s ears, and set up vibrations in her inner ear,
which are then translated into sounds again by the brain. Since sound
waves need air, it follows that articulatory vibrations will only make
sound waves if there is a moving body of air available. Airstreams can be
set in motion, or initiated, in three ways; however, only one is used in
English, and indeed is found in every language of the world.
Essentially, speaking is modiﬁed breathing: it makes use of the
24
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

resources involved in normal respiration, but in a more controlled way.
When we are simply breathing quietly, the phases of breathing in and out
last approximately the same time, and expiration is not under our physi-
cal control; it simply occurs as an automatic consequence of having
breathed in. However, when we are speaking, the phase of breathing out
is signiﬁcantly longer, depending on the length of the utterance we want
to produce. A network of muscles, like the intercostal muscles between
our ribs, come into play to make breathing out smoother, more gradual
and more controlled during speech, providing a regular ﬂow of air which
can then be modiﬁed by the articulators in various ways.
All the sounds of English, both consonants and vowels, are produced
on this pulmonic egressive airstream, where the initiator is the lungs and
the rest of the respiratory system, and the direction of airﬂow is out-
wards: this is overwhelmingly the most common airstream mechanism
in every language of the world. It can generally be taken for granted
that the sounds under discussion below are pulmonic egressive, but you
should remember to give that information in a complete description: so
the labial nasal [m] (which, as we shall see, is produced using the lips –
hence labial, and with airﬂow through the nose – hence nasal), is strictly
a pulmonic egressive labial nasal.
It is possible to produce speech using a pulmonic ingressive airstream.
No language seems to use this airstream regularly for particular sounds,
although it has been reported in various cultures as a means of voice
disguise: if you try to breathe in and speak at the same time, you will ﬁnd
that the pitch of your voice raises signiﬁcantly.
There are two other airstreams which may be involved in speech,
although even in languages where these are used, they will characterise
only a few sounds, interpolated in a stream of pulmonic egressive speech.
The ﬁrst is the glottalic airstream mechanism, initiated by a movement
of the larynx, which is where you can feel your ‘Adam’s apple’ protrud-
ing slightly about half-way up your throat. The larynx can move up or
down, and the glottalic airstream can therefore be either ingressive or
egressive, producing sounds known as implosives and ejectives respect-
ively; none of these occur in English. Finally, the ‘tut-tut’ click sound []
is produced on a velaric airstream, which operates only ingressively.
When you make [] you can feel that the back of your tongue is pressed
against the roof of your mouth, stopping air from moving any further
back; a little air is then drawn into the mouth further forward, and the
closure with the tongue is released to make a click. Neither the glottalic
nor the velaric airstreams provide airﬂow with the volume or control-
lability of the pulmonic system.
DESCRIBING ENGLISH CONSONANTS
25

3.3.2 Voiced or voiceless?
A major division among speech sounds which is relevant for all
languages is the dichotomy of voiced and voiceless. If you put your
ﬁngers on your ‘Adam’s apple’ or ‘voicebox’ (technically the larynx), and
produce a very long [zzzzzzz], you should feel vibration; this shows that
[z] is a voiced sound. On the other hand, if you make a very long [sssssss],
you will not feel the same sort of activity: [s] is a voiceless sound.
Pulmonic egressive air ﬂows through the trachea, or windpipe, and up
into the larynx, which is like a mobile little box suspended at the top of
the trachea, acting to control the airway to and from the lungs, with the
epiglottis above it protecting the lungs by stopping foreign bodies like
food from dropping in. Stretched across the larynx from front to back
are the vocal folds, or vocal cords. These can be pulled back and drawn
apart, in which case they leave a free space, the glottis, through which air
can ﬂow: this is the case for voiceless sounds like [s]. For voiced sounds,
the vocal folds are drawn together, closing off the glottis; however,
the pressure of air ﬂowing from the lungs will cause the folds to part,
and their essentially elastic nature will then force them together again.
Repetitions of this cycle of opening and closing cause vibration, as for
[z]. The number of cycles of opening and closing per second will depend
on the size of the vocal folds, and determines the pitch of the voice:
hence, children’s smaller, shorter vocal folds produce their higher voices.
Although sounds can be voiced in any position in the word, voicing is
most obvious medially, between other voiced sounds: when there is an
adjacent voiceless sound or pause, voicing will not last for so long or be
so strong. Consequently, although English has the minimal pairs tip – dip,
latter – ladder, bit – bid for /t/ versus /d/, [d] is only voiced throughout its
production in ladder, where it is medial and surrounded by voiced
vowels. Word-initially, we are more likely to identify /t/ in tip by its
aspiration, and /d/ in dip by lack of aspiration, than rely on voicing.
Voicelessness and voicing are the two main settings of phonation, or
states of the glottis: for English at least, the only other relevant case, and
again one which is used paralinguistically, is whisper. In whisper pho-
nation, the vocal folds are close together but not closed; the reduced size
of the glottis allows air to pass, but with some turbulence which is heard
as the characteristic hiss of whisper.
3.3.3 Oral or nasal?
The next major issue is where the pulmonic egressive airstream used in
English goes. For most sounds, air passes from the lungs, up through a
26
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

long tube composed of the trachea, or windpipe; the larynx; and the
pharynx, which opens out into the back of the oral cavity. The air passes
the various articulators in the mouth, and exits at the lips; and all these
vocal organs are shown in Figure 3.1. However, for three English sounds,
air passes through the nasal cavity instead.
The key to whether air can ﬂow through the nose is the velum, or soft
palate, which you can identify by curling the tip of your tongue up and
running it back along the roof of your mouth until you feel the hard,
bony palate giving way to something squashier. For oral sounds, the
velum is raised and pushed against the back wall of the pharynx, cutting
off access to the nose. However, for [m], [n] and [ŋ] in ram, ran and rang,
the velum is lowered, so that air moving up from the lungs must ﬂow
through the nose. If you produce a long [s], you will be able to feel that
DESCRIBING ENGLISH CONSONANTS
27
Figure 3.1 The vocal tract
 
 
Image Not Available 
 

air is passing only through your mouth; conversely, if you hum a long
[m], you will notice that air continues to ﬂow through your nose while
your lips are pressed together, with that closure being released only at
the end of the [m]. When someone suffering from a cold tells you ‘I’ve
got a cold id by dose’ instead of ‘I’ve got a cold in my nose’, she is failing
to produce [n] and [m] because soft tissue swelling blocks air access to
the nose and perforce makes all sounds temporarily oral.
Nasal sounds, like [m] and [n], are produced with air only passing
through the nasal cavity for at least part of their production. On the
other hand, nasalised sounds, like the vowel in can, preceding a nasal
consonant, as opposed to the vowel in cat, which precedes an oral one,
are characterised by airﬂow through both nose and mouth simultane-
ously.
3.3.4 What is the manner of articulation?
To produce any consonant, an active articulator, usually located some-
where along the base of the vocal tract, moves towards a passive articu-
lator, somewhere along the top. Where those articulators are, determines
the consonant’s place of articulation, as we shall see in the next section.
How close the active and passive articulators get, determines the manner
of articulation. There are three main manners of articulation, and one
subsidiary case which in a sense is intermediate between the ﬁrst two.
A. STOPS
If the active and passive articulators actually touch, stopping airﬂow
through the oral cavity completely for a brief period, the sound articu-
lated is a stop. If you put your lips together to produce [p] pea, and hold
them in that position, you will feel the build-up of air which is then
released when you move from the stop to the following vowel. Further
back in the vocal tract, [t] tea and [k] key are also stop sounds. More
accurately, all these are plosives, the term for oral stops produced on
a pulmonic egressive airstream, just as clicks are stops produced on a
velaric ingressive airstream, for instance. Plosives may be voiceless, like
[p], [t] and [k], or voiced, like their equivalents [b], [d] and [	].
Since the deﬁnition of a stop involves the complete, transient obstruc-
tion of the oral cavity, it also includes nasal sounds, where airﬂow con-
tinues through the nose. English [m], [n] and [ŋ] are therefore nasal
stops, although they are typically referred to simply as nasals, as there
are no distinctive English nasals involving other manners of articulation.
All these nasals are also voiced.
Finally, some varieties of English also have subtypes of stops known as
28
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

taps or trills. While a plosive is characterised by a complete obstruction
of oral airﬂow, followed generally by release of that airﬂow, a tap is a very
quick, ballistic movement where the active articulator strikes a glancing
blow against the passive one; interruption of the airstream is real, but
extremely brief. Many Scots speakers have a tapped allophone [ɾ] of
the phoneme /r/ between vowels, as in arrow, very; many American
speakers have a similar tap as a realisation of /t/ in butter, water. Trills
are repeated taps, where the active articulator vibrates against the
passive one. Trilled [r] is now rather uncommon for speakers of English,
although attempts at imitating Scots often involve furious rolling of [r]s.
B. FRICATIVES
During the production of a fricative, the active and passive articulators
are brought close together, but not near enough to totally block the oral
cavity. This close approximation of the articulators means the air
coming from the lungs has to squeeze through a narrow gap at high
speed, creating turbulence, or local audible friction, which is heard as
hissing for a voiceless fricative, and buzzing for a voiced one. English [f]
five and [s] size are voiceless fricatives, while [v] ﬁve and [z] size are
voiced.
The subclass of affricates consists of sounds which start as stops and
end up as fricatives; but as we shall see in Chapter 5, they behave as
single, complex sounds rather than sequences. Stops generally involve
quick release of their complete articulatory closure; but if this release is
slow, or delayed, the articulators will pass through a stage of close
approximation appropriate for a fricative. The two relevant sounds for
English are [tʃ], at the beginning and end of church, and its voiced equiv-
alent [d], found at the beginning and end of judge. If you pronounce
these words extremely slowly, you should be able to identify the stop and
fricative phases.
C. APPROXIMANTS
It is relatively easy to recognise a stop or fricative, and to diagnose
the articulators involved, since these are either touching or so close that
their location can be felt. In approximants, on the other hand, the active
and passive articulator never become sufﬁciently close to create audible
friction. Instead, the open approximation of the articulators alters the
shape of the oral cavity, and leads to the production of a particular sound
quality.
There are four approximant consonant phonemes in English: /j/ yes,
/w/ wet, /r/ red (although as we have seen, /r/ may have a tapped allo-
phone for some speakers) and /l/ let. All these approximants are voiced.
DESCRIBING ENGLISH CONSONANTS
29

3.3.5 Is the airﬂow central or lateral?
This parameter is rather a minor one, since it distinguishes only one
phoneme of English from all others. For almost all English consonants,
the airﬂow through the oral cavity is central. Recall that fricatives, like
[s] or [f], are produced with close approximation of the active and
passive articulators; however, if you produce any fricative, you will feel
that your articulators are actually pushed together quite tightly at the
sides of the oral cavity, with the actual close approximation, and hence
the narrow gap for airﬂow, left in the middle. The same is true for all
the approximants except one: if you produce rip and lip, and focus on the
initial consonants, you will notice that while the outgoing air for /r/, as
usual, moves along the centre of the mouth, for /l/ it moves down the
sides. If you ﬁnd this difﬁcult to feel, try making the related voiceless
fricative sound found in Welsh names spelled with <ll>, like Llewellyn;
because this is a fricative and involves close approximation of the articu-
lators, the airﬂow is easier to observe. Alternatively, try making an [l]
ingressively, pulling the air into your mouth instead of breathing it out,
and feel the cold air moving inwards along the sides of your tongue. In
English, both the clear and the dark allophones of /l/, and only these,
have lateral airﬂow, and are known as lateral approximants.
Since the only case where the central versus lateral difference is
distinctive in English involves /r/ and /l/, these should consistently be
described as central and lateral respectively. Although in a particularly
thorough description, all other sounds (except nasals, which have no
oral airﬂow at all) should be explicitly stated to be central, this deﬁnition
will generally be understood rather than stated below, since the other
English sounds do not contrast with lateral sounds of the same place and
manner of articulation, meaning that confusion is highly unlikely.
3.3.6 What is the place of articulation?
As we have seen, the location of the active and passive articulators deter-
mines the place of articulation for a consonant. In English, consonants
are produced at eight places of articulation. Since we have now covered
all the other articulatory parameters required to describe consonants,
introducing and deﬁning these places will allow us to build up a
complete consonant phoneme system for English. In the tables below,
the phoneme or allophone in question is initial in the example word,
unless another part of that word is bold-face.
30
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

A. BILABIAL
For a bilabial sound, the active articulator is the bottom lip, and the
passive articulator is the top lip.
/p/
pie
voiceless bilabial plosive
/b/
by
voiced bilabial plosive
/m/
my
voiced bilabial nasal
There is at least one further English phoneme which to an extent ﬁts
under this heading: this is the approximant /w/ in wet. In producing [w],
the lips are certainly approximated, though not enough to cause friction
or obstruct the airﬂow; but you should be able to feel that the back of
your tongue is also bunched up. This additional articulation takes place
at the velum, so that [w] is not simply a labial sound, but a labial-velar
one. In some accents of English, notably those spoken in Scotland and
New Zealand, this /w/ contrasts with //, the voiceless labial-velar
fricative, which tends to occur in words spelled <wh->. If you have the
same pronunciation for witch and which, or Wales and whales, then you
have only /w/; if these are consistently different for you, then these
minimal pairs establish a contrast of /w/ and //.
/w/
witch
voiced labial-velar approximant
//
which
voiceless labial-velar fricative
B. LABIO-DENTAL
For labio-dental sounds, the active articulator is again the bottom lip, but
this time it moves up to the top front teeth. Note that these sounds
are labio-dental, while /w/ and // are labial-velar, because in the ﬁrst
case, articulation takes place only at a single location, while in the
second, there are two separate, simultaneous articulations.
/f/
fat
voiceless labio-dental fricative
/v/
vat
voiced labio-dental fricative
C. DENTAL
In most English sounds, and most speech sounds in general, the active
articulator is part of the tongue; to avoid confusion, places of articulation
where the tongue is involved are therefore generally called after
the passive articulator. For the two dental fricatives, it follows that the
passive articulator is the top front teeth; the active articulator is the tip
of the tongue. The tongue itself is conventionally divided into the
tip (the very front); the blade (just behind the blade, and lying opposite
the alveolar ridge); the front (just behind the blade, and lying opposite
the hard palate); the back (behind the front, and lying opposite the
DESCRIBING ENGLISH CONSONANTS
31

velum); and the root (right at the base, lying opposite the wall of the
pharynx).
[θ]
thigh
voiceless dental fricative
[ð]
thy
voiced dental fricative
D. ALVEOLAR
Alveolar sounds are produced by the tip or blade of the tongue moving
up towards the alveolar ridge, the bony protrusion you can feel if you
curl your tongue back just behind your top front teeth.
/t/
tie
voiceless alveolar plosive
/d/
die
voiced alveolar plosive
/n/
nigh
voiced alveolar nasal
/s/
sip
voiceless alveolar fricative
/z/
zip
voiced alveolar fricative
/r/
rip
voiced alveolar central approximant
/l/
lip
voiced alveolar lateral approximant
The symbol /r/ is used for the phoneme here and throughout the
book, primarily because it is typographically convenient; but different
realisations of /r/ are found throughout the English-speaking world,
and as we have seen, [r] itself, the voiced alveolar trill, is rather rare. The
tapped realisation, [ɾ], is also alveolar; but another even more common
pronunciation is not. This is the voiced retroﬂex approximant, [ɹ], which
is produced with the tip of the tongue curled back slightly behind the
alveolar ridge; this is the most common realisation of /r/ for speakers of
Southern Standard British English and General American.
E. POSTALVEOLAR
If you move your tongue tip back behind the alveolar ridge, you will feel
the hard palate, which then, moving further back again, becomes the soft
palate, or velum. Postalveolar sounds are produced with the blade of the
tongue as the active articulator, and the adjoining parts of the alveolar
ridge and the hard palate as the passive one. They include two fricatives,
and the affricates introduced in the last section.
/ʃ/
ship
voiceless postalveolar fricative
//
beige
voiced postalveolar fricative
/tʃ/
chunk
voiceless postalveolar affricate
/d/
junk
voiced postalveolar affricate
F. PALATAL
Palatals are produced by the front of the tongue, which moves up
32
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

towards the hard palate. We have so far encountered two palatal sounds:
the approximant /j/ in yes, and the voiceless palatal stop [c] in kitchen.
Recall, however, that [c] is the allophone of /k/ found before certain
vowels; velar [k] appears elsewhere. There is a similar pattern for /g/,
which has as allophones velar [	] in garden and palatal [] give. Since we
are constructing a phoneme system here, these allophones are not
included in the list.
/j/
yes
voiced palatal approximant
G. VELAR
For velar sounds, the active articulator is the back of the tongue, and the
passive articulator is the velum, or soft palate. The labial-velar approxi-
mant and fricative /w/ and // are not included here, as they were
discussed above with the bilabials; however, it should be remembered
that these doubly-articulated sounds strictly belong under both head-
ings. Similarly, although the ‘dark l’ realisation, [
], is also velar, it does
not appear in the list below as it is an allophone of /l/.
There is a further accent difference involving velar sounds: in some
varieties of English, notably Scottish ones, there is a voiceless velar frica-
tive, /x/: this is the sound at the end of Scots loch, which speakers of other
accents typically replace with a [k].
/k/
cot
voiceless velar plosive
/	/
got
voiced velar plosive
/ŋ/
rang
voiced velar nasal
/x/
loch
voiceless velar fricative
H. GLOTTAL
Glottal sounds are in the minority in articulatory terms, since they do
not involve the tongue: instead, the articulators are the vocal folds, which
constitute a place of articulation as well as having a crucial role in
voicing. English has two glottal sounds. The ﬁrst is allophonic, namely
the glottal stop, [ʔ], which appears as an intervocalic realisation of /t/
in many accents, as in butter. The glottal stop is technically voiceless,
though in fact it could hardly be anything else, since when the vocal folds
are pressed together to completely obstruct the airstream, as must be
the case for a stop sound, air cannot simultaneously be passing through
to cause vibration. The second, the voiceless glottal fricative [h], is a
phoneme in its own right.
/h/
high
voiceless glottal fricative
DESCRIBING ENGLISH CONSONANTS
33

Exercises
1. (a) Which of the following words begin with a voiceless fricative?
hang
dogs
cut
ship
chip
foot
zip
sit
(b) Which of the following words begin with a voiced sound?
nap
jug
knock lot
pet
jump
ﬁn
(c) Which of the following words ends with a stop sound?
nap
hang
jug
nudge bet
lamb
lots
(d) Which of the following words ends with an alveolar sound?
pot
sad
boss
lamb
lamp
size
hen
call
(e) Which of the following words contain an approximant consonant?
wash
hall
map
sing
sigh
red
yellow
2. (a) What do the initial consonants of these words have in common?
wash
let
right
yet
wish
rough
(b) What do the ﬁnal consonants of these words have in common?
hop
hot
pass
wish
rough lock
scratch
(c) What do the initial consonants of these words have in common?
ﬁsh
ship
zip
sigh
house view
3. How do the consonants at the end of the words in List A differ from
those at the end of the words in List B?
List A
List B
(a) ham
top
sin
lock
sing
rot
If you say [sŋ	], ignore the ﬁnal [	] for this exercise.
(b) place
lake
lose
beg
half
dot
(c) dogs
rough
hall
cats
ﬁlm
catch
cold
help
34
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

4. Transcribe the words below. Then write as full a description as you
can of all the consonants in each word, in your accent. For instance, in
doze [d] is a pulmonic egressive central voiced alveolar stop; [z] is a
pulmonic egressive central voiced alveolar fricative. Remember to pay
attention to the sounds, and not to the spelling.
psalm jester which climb heavy splint loch bought squelch
Recommendations for reading
Of the textbooks recommended in the last chapter, Davenport and
Hannahs (1998) provides the most accessible and comprehensive intro-
duction to articulatory phonetics, as well as a useful chapter on acoustic
phonetics, which is not dealt with here. Some useful general intro-
ductions to phonetics are Roach (2001), which may be of special help
to non-native speakers; Ball and Rahilly (1999); Catford (1988); and
Ladefoged (1983). The most comprehensive account of our current
understanding of phonetics is Laver (1994). References relating particu-
larly to the IPA were given in Chapter 1.
DESCRIBING ENGLISH CONSONANTS
35

4 Deﬁning distributions:
consonant allophones
4.1 Phonemes revisited
As we saw in Chapter 3, the two major criteria for establishing phonemic
contrast are predictability of occurrence, and invariance of meaning.
That is to say, if we are dealing with two allophones of the same
phoneme, the two must occur in non-overlapping sets of environments.
Furthermore, there cannot be any minimal pairs, where substituting one
of our focus sounds for the other in exactly the same context creates
a difference in meaning. These two criteria establish conclusively that
English [ɹ] and [l] belong to distinct phonemes: there are many minimal
pairs, like rip and lip, rot and lot, marrow and mallow, so clearly the two
phones occur in the same contexts; and substituting one for the other
does create a meaning difference. On the other hand, clear, alveolar
[l] and dark, velar [
] occur in predictably different environments: in
Standard Southern British English, the clear, more front one appears
word-initially or between vowels, as in lip, lot, mallow, and the dark, more
back one word-ﬁnally or before a consonant, as in pill, tall, halt. Since
there are no minimal pairs, and substituting one variant for the other will
not make a meaning difference, [l] and [
] are necessarily allophones of
a single phoneme, /l/.
Equipped with the articulatory descriptions from the last chapter, we
can now progress to a more detailed account of the distribution of allo-
phones. In doing so, we will also discover that certain phonemes form
groups, in that they have similar allophones in similar environments. We
must try to identify what members of such groups have in common, and
what makes certain phonemes work together.
4.2 Making generalisations
In Chapter 2, several examples of allophonic variation were considered.
In one case, we found that /k/ has two variant pronunciations, namely
36

velar [k] in cupboard and palatal [c] in kitchen. Another involved /p/, /t/
and /k/, which have aspirated allophones, with a perceptible release of
air, in pill, till and kill, but unaspirated allophones in spill, still and skill, or
sip, sit and sick.
However, providing a list of words where the relevant allophone
appears is only our starting point. Phonologists are interested in gen-
eralisations about the language they are working on, and indeed in
generalisations about language in general; and generalisations are not
best expressed simply as lists, as these do not reveal the factors which the
forms in the lists have in common. Identifying these factors will help us
to understand why the particular allophone appears in that context and
not elsewhere, and to predict what will happen in other words with a
similar context.
As an example, recall the [c] and [k] allophones of /k/. English speak-
ers (with the exception of New Zealanders and Australians) will have
palatal and velar pronunciations distributed as in (1).
(1) kitchen
[ctʃən]
keys
[ciz]
cupboard
[kbəd]
car
[kɑ]
If you were asked to predict the pronunciation of the initial sounds of
keep, cool, ceilidh (for non-Scots, pronounced exactly as Kayleigh) and koala,
you would not get very far by considering (1) as just two lists of words:
how could you tell whether each of these examples ﬁtted into the [c] list
or the [k] list? The key is to consider what connects the words where
each allophone appears: and the answer is that [c] appears before a front
vowel (more detail on vowels is in Chapter 6), while [k] precedes a back
vowel. It follows that keep and ceilidh will also have [c], since the bold-
faced vowels are front, while cool and koala will have [k], as the bold-
faced vowels are back. Since front vowels are made roughly at the hard
palate, and so is palatal [c], while back vowels are produced at the velum,
as is velar [k], the pairs of vowels and consonants ‘match’. It is extremely
common for sounds to become more similar, or to assimilate to one
another, in this sort of way. As the previous chapter showed, the vocal
organs undergo very complex, coordinated movements during speech,
and anything that simpliﬁes the gymnastics involved while not jeopard-
ising comprehension is understandably very welcome to speakers.
Specifying what the different examples have in common therefore
allows us to understand the results we ﬁnd, and make predictions about
the behaviour of other forms with the same environment. And as we
might expect, /	/, which matches /k/ in every respect except voicing,
behaves in exactly the same way, being palatalised before the same set of
vowels as /k/ in the same varieties.
DEFINING DISTRIBUTIONS
37

In the case of /p/, /t/ and /k/ aspiration, the relevant conditioning
factor is not the shape of an adjacent segment, but rather position in the
word (more accurately, as we shall see in Chapter 9, in the syllable).
What pill, till and kill have in common (along with peel, pass, play, pretty and
many others) is that the /p/, /t/ or /k/ is right at the beginning of the
word. In spill, still, skill, sip, sit and sick, and many others, it is not right at
the beginning of the word; either another consonant precedes it, or it is
word-ﬁnal. We can test this hypothesis by ﬁnding lots of other examples
where /p/, /t/ and /k/ appear word-initially, and checking whether
there is aspiration. So long as we keep ﬁnding aspirated allophones there,
and nowhere else, our generalisation holds. If we ﬁnd counterexamples,
where either aspirated forms appear in other contexts, or word-initial
allophones of /p/, /t/ or /k/ are not aspirated, we have to modify our
generalisation to include them. After a while, when we keep ﬁnding data
that agree with our observation and not ﬁnding data that disagree, we
can feel more conﬁdent that our generalisation is the right one, and
regard our hypothesis as conﬁrmed.
4.3 Making statements more precise
The next question is how we should express these generalisations.
Having established that certain sounds are allophones of the same
phoneme, and that they are in complementary distribution, we might
write a statement like (2) to say what happens to the phoneme or
phonemes in question, and where.
(2) a. /k/ and /	/ become [c] and [] when they are followed by a front
vowel. They are pronounced as [k] and [	] in all other contexts.
b. /p/, /t/ and /k/ become [ph], [th] and [kh] at the very beginning
of a word. In other contexts (i.e. after another consonant or at the
end of a word), they are pronounced as [p], [t] and [k].
These statements express the main generalisation in each case.
However, making a statement in normal English can be unclear and
unwieldy, so phonologists typically use a more formal notation which
helps us to work out exactly what is being said; it is easier that way to
identify what a counterexample would be, and to see what predictions
are being made. The English statement also does not tell us why /p/, /t/
and /k/ are affected, rather than just one or two of them; or why these
three sounds should behave similarly, rather than /p/, /s/ and /r/, for
instance. Similarly, we cannot see what /k/ and /	/ have in common,
or indeed what the resulting allophones have in common, simply by
looking at the phoneme symbols.
38
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

Introducing the articulatory descriptions from Chapter 3 immedi-
ately makes our statements more adequate and more precise, as we can
now express what particular sets of sounds have in common (3).
(3) a. Velar stops become palatal when they are followed by a front
vowel. They are pronounced as velar in all other contexts.
b. Voiceless stops are aspirated at the very beginning of a word.
Elsewhere, they are unaspirated.
We can take this one step further by regarding each of the articulatory
descriptions as a binary feature: that is, a sound is either voiceless or
voiced, and these are opposites; similarly, a sound is either nasal or not
nasal. Instead of voiced and voiceless, or oral and nasal, we can then
write [+voice] and [–voice], and [–nasal] and [+nasal]. This may seem
like introducing needless complexity; but once you are used to the
notation, it is much easier to compare these rather formal statements,
and to see what the important aspects are.
These distinctive features allow each segment to be regarded as a
simultaneously articulated set, or matrix, of binary features, as shown
in (4).
(4)
/p/
/z/
/l/
–voice
+voice
+voice
–nasal
–nasal
–nasal
+labial
–labial
–labial
–alveolar
+alveolar
+alveolar
+stop
–stop
–stop
–fricative
+fricative
–fricative
–approximant
–approximant
+approximant
+central
+central
–central
These features, however, are not entirely satisfactory. They do
describe phonetic characteristics of sounds; but we are trying to pro-
vide a phonological description, not a phonetic one, and one interesting
phonological fact is that features and phonemes fall into classes. For
instance, the matrices in (4) have to include values for all three of the
features [stop], [fricative] and [approximant], despite the fact that any
sound can be only one of these. Together, they provide a classiﬁcation for
manner of articulation; but (4) lists them all as if they were as independ-
ent as [nasal], [voice] and [alveolar]. Similarly, in (4) values are given
for [labial] and [alveolar], and we would have to add [labio-dental],
[dental], [postalveolar], [palatal], [velar] and [glottal] for English alone:
but again, it is simply not possible for a single consonant to be both labio-
dental or velar, for instance, or both alveolar and labial. We are missing
DEFINING DISTRIBUTIONS
39

the generalisation that together, this group of features makes up the
dimension of place of articulation.
One possible way of overcoming this lack of economy in the feature
system is to group sets of features together, and write redundancy rules
to show which values can be predicted. Redundancy rules take the shape
shown in (5).
(5) [+stop]
→
[–fricative, –approximant]
[+fricative]
→
[–stop, –approximant]
[+labial]
→
[–labiodental, –dental, –alveolar, –palatal …]
[+alveolar]
→
[–labial, –labiodental, –dental, –palatal …]
The ﬁrst rule says ‘if a segment is a stop, it cannot also be either a frica-
tive or an approximant’. All these redundancy rules are universal – that
is, they hold for all human languages, and are in a sense statements of
logical possibilities. Particular languages may also rule out combinations
of features which are theoretically possible, and which may occur
routinely in many other languages. Two language-speciﬁc redundancy
rules for English are given in (6): the ﬁrst tells us that English has no
palatal nasal (although Italian and French do), and the second, that
English has only lateral approximants (though Welsh, for instance, has
also a lateral fricative). These redundancy rules cannot be written the
other way around: it would not be accurate to say that non-palatals are
all nasal in English, or that all approximants are lateral.
(6) [+nasal]
→
[–palatal]
[+lateral]
→
[+approximant]
While we should expect to have to state redundancy rules of the sort
in (6), since these express quirks of particular languages, it seems unfor-
tunate that our feature system is not structured so as to factor out the
universal redundancies in (5). However, to produce a better phonologi-
cal feature system, we ﬁrst need to spell out what we want such a system
to achieve.
4.4 A more economical feature system
Some requirements of a phonological feature system are as follows:
• the system should be relatively economical
• it should enlighten us about which combinations of features can go
together universally, and therefore which segments and segment-
types are universally possible. That is, many universal redundancy
rules of the sort in (5) should not have to be written explicitly, as they
will follow from the feature system.
40
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

• it should allow us to group together those segments and segment-
types which characteristically behave similarly in the world’s
languages.
Certain elementary phonetic features can be adopted without further
question into our revised system: for instance, [±oral], [±lateral] and
[±voice] do correspond to binary oppositions, and help us to distinguish
classes of consonants in English and other languages. The main prob-
lems involve place and manner of articulation.
Turning ﬁrst to manner of articulation, we might initially wish any
sensible feature system to distinguish vowels from consonants. This is a
division of which we are all intuitively aware, although that awareness
may owe something to written as well as spoken language. Children
learn early that, in the English alphabet, the vowel letters are <a e i o u>,
though these, alone and in combination, can signal a much larger
number of vowel sounds. When challenged to write a word ‘without
vowels’, English speakers might respond with spy or ﬂy, but not type,
although the <y> in all three cases indicates the vowel [a], while the
<e> in type does not correspond to a vowel in speech (or indeed, to
anything at all). Nonetheless, there is a general awareness that vowels
and consonants form different categories integral to phonology and
phonetics – an assumption central to the organisation of this book, where
the two classes are introduced in different chapters.
This binary opposition between vowels and consonants is not entirely
clear-cut. For instance, vowels are almost always voiced: it is highly
unusual for languages to have phonemically voiceless vowels, and those
that do always have voiced ones too. However, there are also consonants
which are almost always voiced: this is true of nasals, and also of approxi-
mants (like English /j w l r/). We might say that these consonants are
closer to vowels than stops and fricatives, which can be either voiced or
voiceless, and indeed often occur in pairs distinguished only by [+voice]
– think of English /p b/, /t d/, /k g/, /f v/, /s z/.
Similarly, vowels, as we shall see in Chapter 9, form the essential,
central part of syllables: it is possible to have a syllable consisting only of
a vowel, as in I (or eye), a, oh, but consonants appear at syllable margins,
preceding or following vowels, as in sigh, side, at, dough. Nonetheless,
some consonants may become syllabic under certain circumstances.
Nasals and approximants can be syllabic in English: for instance, in the
second syllables of button, bottom, little (and father, for speakers who have
an [ɹ] there), there is no vowel, only a syllabic consonant. You may think
you are producing a vowel, probably partly because there is a vowel
graph in the spelling; but in fact most speakers will move straight from
DEFINING DISTRIBUTIONS
41

one consonant to the next, although the syllabic consonant has its own
phonetic character. In IPA notation, this is signalled by a small vertical
line under the consonant symbol, giving [btn], [bɒtm ], [ltl], [faðɹ]. It is
not possible for oral stops and fricatives to become syllabic in this way:
in lifted, or horses, there must be a vowel before the ﬁnal [d] or [z].
This evidence seems to suggest that, on the one hand, we should
distinguish all consonants from vowels. On the other hand, in many
phonological processes in many different languages, the class of stops
and fricatives behaves differently from the class of vowels, nasals, and
approximant consonants, so that these two categories should be dis-
tinguishable too. Since these classiﬁcations cross-cut one another, it is
clearly not possible to get the right results using a single binary feature,
or indeed using any features proposed so far. For example, although we
could describe the class of nasals, vowels and approximants as [–stop,
–fricative], a negative deﬁnition of this kind does not really explain why
they form a class, or what they have in common.
Many phonologists would use three features, the so-called major class
features, to produce these classiﬁcations. First, we can distinguish
consonants from vowels using the feature [±syllabic]; sounds which are
[+syllabic] form the core, or nucleus, of a syllable, while [–syllabic]
sounds form syllabic margins. Vowels are therefore [+syllabic], and all
consonants [–syllabic], though some consonants (like English /m n l r/)
may have [+syllabic] allophones in certain contexts. Second, the feature
[±consonantal] distinguishes [+consonantal] oral stops, fricatives, nasals
and ‘liquids’ (the cover term for /r/ and /l/ sounds), from [–consonan-
tal] glides (like English /j/, /w/) and vowels. The crucial distinction
here is an articulatory one: in [+consonantal] sounds, the airﬂow is
obstructed in the oral cavity, either being stopped completely, or caus-
ing local audible friction; whereas for [–consonantal] sounds, airﬂow is
continuous and unimpeded (remember that for nasal stops, although
airﬂow continues uninterrupted through the nose, there is a complete
closure in the oral cavity). Finally, [±sonorant] distinguishes nasals,
vowels and all approximants from oral stops and fricatives; the former
set, the sonorants, are characteristically voiced, while the latter, the
obstruents, may be either voiced or voiceless.
As (7) shows, the combination of these three binary features actually
distinguishes four major classes of segments.
(7) All vowels
[+syllabic, –consonantal, +sonorant]
Glides (English /j w/)
[–syllabic, –consonantal, +sonorant]
Liquids and nasals (sonorant
consonants)
[–syllabic, +consonantal, +sonorant]
42
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

Oral stops and fricatives
(obstruent consonants)
[–syllabic, +consonantal, –sonorant]
However, we can produce further, ﬂexible groupings, to reﬂect the fact
that composite categories often behave in the same way phonologically.
For example, vowels, nasals and all approximants are [+sonorant];
vowels and glides alone are [–consonantal]; and we can divide our
earlier, intuitive classes of consonants and vowels using [±syllabic].
The introduction of these major class features resolves some of our
earlier difﬁculties with manner of articulation; but we are still not able
to distinguish stops from affricates or fricatives. To ﬁnish the job of
accounting for manner, we must introduce two further features. The
more important of these is [±continuant], which separates the oral and
nasal stops, which are [–continuant] and have airﬂow stopped in the oral
tract, from all other sounds, which are [+continuant] and have continu-
ous oral airﬂow throughout their production. Second, the affricates /tʃ/
and /d/ (which we have rather been ignoring up to now) can be classi-
ﬁed as a subtype of oral plosive; but the complete articulatory closure,
for these sounds only, is released more gradually than usual, so that the
affricates incorporate a fricative phase. The affricates are generally
described as[+delayedrelease],while other stops are [–delayed release].
Despite these advances in dealing with manner of articulations, there
remain problems with place. Recall that, if all places of articulation are
stated independently, a consonant which is [+alveolar] will also have to
be listed as [–labial], [–dental], [–palatal], [–velar], and so on. To illus-
trate this problem, consider the different phonetic shapes of the preﬁx
un- in (8).
(8) unarmed
[n]
unpleasant
[m]
unfavourable
[]
unthinkable
[n]
unstable
[n]
uncomplicated
[ŋ]
The preﬁx consonant is always nasal, but its place of articulation alters
depending on the following segment. Before a vowel or an alveolar
consonant, like [s], the nasal is alveolar; before a bilabial consonant like
[p], it is bilabial; before a labio-dental like [f], it is labio-dental [];
before a dental, it is dental [n]; and before a velar, in this case [k], it is also
velar. We can write these generalisations as a series of phonological
rules, as in (9). These rules have the same format as the redundancy rules
proposed above; but instead of stating generalisations about necessary
DEFINING DISTRIBUTIONS
43

combinations of features, or excluded combinations, they summarise
processes which take place in the structure of a particular language, in a
certain context.
(9)
+nasal
+alveolar
→
–alveolar
/____ [+labial]
–labial
+labial
–dental
–velar
+nasal
+alveolar
→
–alveolar
/____ [+dental]
–dental
+dental
–labial
–velar
+nasal
+alveolar
→
–alveolar
/____ [+velar]
–velar
+velar
–labial
–dental
… and so on
In these rules, the material furthest left is the input to the process, or
what we start with – nasals with different place features in each case. The
arrow means ‘becomes’, or technically ‘is rewritten as’; and there then
follows a speciﬁcation of the change that takes place. In (9), this always
involves changing the place of articulation. Any feature which is not
explicitly mentioned in the middle section of the statement is taken to
be unchanged; so in the ﬁrst rule, the consonant involved stays [+nasal,
–dental, –velar], but changes its values for [±alveolar] and [±labial].
The rest of the statement following the environment bar / (which can be
paraphrased as ‘in the following environment’) speciﬁes the context
where this particular realisation appears. In (9), the environment always
involves a following sound with a particular place of articulation: the
line signals where the input ﬁts into the sequence.
The problem is that this system of features, with several different
places of articulation each expressed using a different feature, will lead
to gross duplication in the statement of what is, in fact, a rather simple
and straightforward generalisation: /n/ comes to share the place of
articulation of the following consonant. What seems to matter here
is that the place of articulation of the output matches that of the con-
ditioning context. If we were to regard all the place features as sub-
44
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

divisions of a higher-order feature ‘place’, we could state the whole rule
as in (10).
(10)
+nasal
+alveolar
→
[α place]
/____ [α place]
This rule tells us that the place of articulation of the input consonant,
an alveolar nasal, comes to match the place of the following segment,
using a Greek letter variable. If the output and conditioning context
also matched in voicing and nasality, for instance, further Greek letter
variables could be introduced, so that the output and context would
be speciﬁed as [α place, β voice, γ nasal]. A more advanced subpart of
phonology, feature geometry, investigates which features might be char-
acterised as variants of a superordinate feature like ‘place’ in this way.
Although recognising a superordinate ‘place’ feature allows an econ-
omical statement of this particular process, we also need a way of refer-
ring to each individual place of articulation: after all, not all consonants
will always undergo all rules in the same way, and indeed the input of
(10) is still restricted to the alveolar nasal. It seems we must reject
features like [±alveolar], [±velar], and turn again to a more economical,
phonological feature set, which ideally should also help us group
together those places of articulation which typically behave similarly
cross-linguistically.
One generally accepted solution involves the two features [±anterior]
and [±coronal]. [+anterior] sounds are those where the passive articula-
tor is the alveolar ridge or further forward; this includes labial, labio-
dental, dental and alveolar sounds. [–anterior] sounds are produced
further back in the vocal tract; for English, this will include postalveolar,
palatal, velar and glottal sounds (and also, note, the labial-velars /w/ and
//). For [+coronal] sounds, the active articulator is the tip, blade or
front of the tongue, so including dental, alveolar, postalveolar and palatal
consonants in English; conversely, [–coronal] sounds, such as labials,
labio-dentals, labial-velars, velars and glottals, do not involve the front
parts of the tongue. This system is undoubtedly economical, even
though we require one further feature, [±strident], to distinguish frica-
tives like /s/ from /θ/: these will both be [–syllabic, +consonantal,
–sonorant, +anterior, +coronal] in the feature system developed so far.
[+strident] sounds in English are [f v s z ʃ  tʃ d].
Rule (11) applies these features to English [k] and [c]. Note that it
is common practice to exclude features which are not absolutely neces-
sary to distinguish the sound or sounds referred to from others in the
language: thus, although the input /k/ is strictly also [–nasal, –lateral,
–delayed release, –strident], these redundant feature values need not be
DEFINING DISTRIBUTIONS
45

included, as /k/ is already uniquely identiﬁed from the features given.
(11)
–syllabic
+consonantal
–sonorant
–voice
→
[+coronal]
/____ front vowel
–continuant
–anterior
–coronal
Ideally, the explanation for the presence of a certain allophone in a
certain context should be available in the rule itself. In (11), however, /k/
becomes [+coronal] before a front vowel; but the connection between
[coronal] and [front] is obscured by the different descriptions conven-
tionally used for vowels and consonants. We return to vowel features in
Chapters 6 and 7.
4.5 Natural classes
The major class features identify several categories of sounds which
recur cross-linguistically in different phonological rules. Feature nota-
tion can also show why certain sounds behave similarly in similar
contexts, within these larger classes. For instance, English /p/, /t/ and
/k/ aspirate at the beginnings of words. All three may also be glottally
reinforced at the ends of words. All three are unaspirated after /s/; and
no other English phoneme has the same range of allophones, in the same
environments. In feature terms, although /p/, /t/, /k/ differ in place of
articulation, all three are obstruent consonants, and within this class, are
[–voice, –nasal, –continuant]. A group of phonemes which show the
same behaviour in the same contexts, and which share the same features,
constitute a natural class. More formally, a natural class of phonemes can
be identiﬁed using a smaller number of features than any individual
member of that class. As (12) shows, the class of voiceless plosives, /p/,
/t/ and /k/, can be deﬁned uniquely using only three features. If we
subtract one of the plosives, we need more features, since we must then
specify the place of articulation; and the same is true in deﬁning a single
plosive unambiguously.
(12)
/p t k/
/p t/
/p/
–voice
–voice
–voice
–nasal
–nasal
–nasal
–continuant
–continuant
–continuant
+anterior
+anterior
–coronal
46
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

Phonological rules very typically affect natural classes of phonemes.
For example, medial voicing of /f/ to [v] in Old English, discussed
brieﬂy in Chapter 2, did not only affect that labial fricative, but also the
other members of the voiceless fricative class, /s/ and /θ/. If we wrote a
rule for /f/ alone, it would have to exclude the other voiceless fricatives,
so that the input would have to include [+anterior, –coronal]; however,
the more general fricative voicing rule in (13) requires fewer features
to characterise the input, as we would expect when a natural class is
involved.
(13)
+continuant
+consonantal
–voice
→
[+voice]
/
[+voice] ____[+voice]
This rule also neatly captures the connection between the process
and its conditioning context, and therefore shows the motivation for
the development: the fricatives, which are generally voiceless, becomes
voiced between voiced sounds. This will often mean between vowels, as
in heofon and hlaford; but it may also mean between a vowel and a voiced
consonant, as in hæfde. If voicing takes place between voiced sounds,
instead of having to switch off vocal fold vibration for a single segment
and then switch it back on again, the vocal folds can continue vibrating
through the whole sequence. Voicing the fricative in this context is
therefore another example of assimilation, where one sound is inﬂu-
enced by another close to it in the utterance.
4.6 A warning note on phonological rules
Paradoxically, phonological rules are not rules in one of the common,
everyday English meanings of that word; they are not regulations, which
spell out what must happen. Instead, they are formal descriptions of what
does happen, for speakers of a particular variety of a particular language
at a particular time. Some phonological rules may also state what some-
times happens, with the outcome depending on issues outside phonology
and phonetics altogether. For example, if you say hamster slowly and
carefully, it will sound like [hamstə] (or [hamstəɹ], depending on
whether you ‘drop your [r]s’ in this context or not: we return to this issue
in Chapter 8, and to vowels in Chapters 6 and 7, so don’t worry too much
about the vowel symbols for now). If you say the word quickly several
times, you will produce something closer to your normal, casual speech
pronunciation, and it is highly likely that there will be an extra con-
sonant in there, giving [hampstə] (or [hampstəɹ] instead. As the rate of
speech increases, adjacent sounds inﬂuence one another even more than
DEFINING DISTRIBUTIONS
47

usual, because the same complex articulations are taking place in even
less time. Here, the articulators are moving from a voiced nasal stop [m],
to a voiceless alveolar fricative [s], so that almost every possible property
has to change all at once (apart from the source and direction of the
airstream, which all English sounds have in common anyway). In fast
speech, not all these transitions may be perfectly coordinated: the
extraneous [p] appears when the speaker has succeeded in switching off
voicing, and raising the velum to cut off airﬂow through the nose, but has
not yet shifted from stop to fricative, or from labial to alveolar. There is
consequently a brief moment when the features appropriate for [p] are
all in place, before the place and manner of articulation are also altered
to produce the intended [s]. Listing the feature composition of [m], [p]
and [s], as in (14), reveals that [p] shares half the features of each of [m]
and [s], so it is entirely understandable that [p] should arise from this
casual speech process.
(14)
[m]
[p]
[s]
+voice
–voice
–voice
–continuant
–continuant
+continuant
+nasal
–nasal
–nasal
+anterior
+anterior
+anterior
–coronal
–coronal
+coronal
A very similar process arises in words like mince and prince, which can
become homophonous (that is, identical in sound) to mints and prints in
fast speech. Here, the transition is from [n], a voiced alveolar nasal stop,
to [s], a voiceless alveolar oral fricative, and the half-way house is [t],
which this time shares its place of articulation with both neighbours, but
differs from [n] in voicing and nasality, and from [s] in manner of articu-
lation. In both hamster and mince/prince, however, the casual speech
process creating the extra medial plosive is an optional one. This does
not mean that it is consciously controlled by the speaker: but the formal-
ity of the situation, the identity of the person you are talking to, and even
the topic of conversation can determine how likely these casual speech
processes are. In a formal style, for instance asking a question after a
lecture, or having a job interview, you are far more likely to make a care-
ful transition from nasal to fricative in words of this kind, while informal
style, for instance chatting to friends over a drink, is much more con-
ducive to intrusion of the ‘extra’ plosive. These issues of formality and
social context, which are the domain of sociolinguistics, are not directly
within the scope of phonetics and phonology, although they clearly
inﬂuence speakers’ phonetic and phonological behaviour.
48
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

If speakers of English keep pronouncing [hampstə] and [prnts] prince
in sufﬁcient numbers, and in enough contexts, these pronunciations may
become the norm, extending even into formal circumstances, and being
learned as the canonical pronunciation by children (this is exactly what
has already happened in bramble, and the name Dempster). Even now,
children (and occasionally adults too) spell hamster as hampster, showing
that they may believe this to be the ‘correct’ form. Developments from
casual to formal pronunciation are one source of language change, and
mean that phonological rules and systems can vary between languages,
and can change over time. For instance, as we saw earlier, modern
English has a phonemic contrast between /f/ and /v/, but in Old
English, [f] and [v] were allophones of a single phoneme, /f/.
No feature system is perfect; however carefully designed a system is, it
will not in itself explain all the properties of a particular language, which
may sometimes reﬂect quirks and idiosyncrasies which have arisen
during the history of that system. Equally, some developments of one
sound into another are perfectly natural in a particular context, but the
feature system fails to express this transparently because it is so closely
linked to articulation: voiceless sonorants are rare simply because they
are rather difﬁcult to hear, and the best possible features, if they lack an
acoustic aspect, will fail to reﬂect that fact. Just as we are all speakers and
hearers, so sounds have both articulatory and acoustic components:
sometimes one of these is relevant in determining allophonic variation,
sometimes the other – and sometimes both. For instance, it is quite
common cross-linguistically for labial sounds, like [p] or [f], to turn into
velar ones, like [k] or [x], and vice versa: in words like cough, the <gh>
originally signalled a velar fricative, [x], which has historically become
[f]. In articulatory terms, labials and velars have little in common:
indeed, they are produced almost at opposite ends of the vocal tract. We
can at least use [–coronal] for the composite set of labials and velars; but
this would also, counterfactually, include glottals; and in any case, nega-
tive deﬁnitions are of limited usefulness (why should two classes of
consonants work together because both do not involve the front of the
tongue?). However, acoustic analysis reveals a striking similarity in the
proﬁle of energy making up labials and velars, so that the two categories
are heard as more similar than we might expect. In addition, the vowel
in cough is pronounced with rounded lips; if this lip-rounding is carried
on just a little too long, so that it affects the following consonant, the
articulators will also be in a position appropriate for [f]. In this case,
articulatory and acoustic factors have worked together to change the [x]
of earlier English to the [f] we ﬁnd today. Most phonological feature
DEFINING DISTRIBUTIONS
49

systems are based uniquely either on articulatory or on acoustic factors:
either way, we would miss part of the story in a case like this.
However, adopting a feature system of one sort or another is invalu-
able in formalising phonological rules; in sharpening up our thinking
when formulating such rules; in seeing segments like [p] or [s] as short-
hand for a bundle of properties, rather than as mysterious, self-contained
units; and in trying to explain why certain sounds and groups of sounds
behave in the way they do. Despite some limitations, the feature system
outlined above will therefore be used in the rest of this book.
Exercises
1. In Exercise 1 of Chapter 2, you were presented with the following
pronunciations, from a learner of English as a second language.
that [dat]
dog [dɒ	]
head [hεd]
leather [lεðə]
leader [liðə]
sing [ʃŋ]
sat [sat]
loss [lɒs]
ﬁsh [fʃ]
miss [mʃ]
push [pus]
Write rules accounting for the distribution of the allophones of /d/
(= [d] and [ð]), and /s/ (= [s] and [ʃ]), using binary features. Note that
the symbol for a word boundary is #; so if a process takes place at the
beginning of a word, we write / # ____ as the environment, and likewise
/ ____ # for the end.
2. The following data appeared in Exercise 3 of Chapter 2. State the
distribution of the voiced and voiceless allophones of /b/, /z/ and /	/
as economically as possible. How many rules do you need?
pronunciation
meaning
[bim]
‘rug’
[bin]
‘head’
[zak]
‘parrot’
[zip]
‘ostrich’
[azaŋ]
‘to speak’
[obas]
‘to throw’
[mohis]
‘to eat’
[zi	ah]
‘to sing’
[	ik]
‘ant’
[	ah]
‘a song’
[na	ok]
‘to sting’
[habis]
‘to drink’
50
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

3. Produce feature matrices, including all the features introduced in this
chapter, for the following English sounds: /l r p d s θ ŋ d w/.
4. In your matrices for Exercise 3, put brackets round the redundant
features; that is, those which do not have to be included for the segment
to be uniquely identiﬁed. In some cases, you may notice general patterns;
if so, state these as redundancy rules.
5. In each of the following lists, the sounds involved constitute a natural
class for English, except that there is one odd sound. Find the odd one
out in each case, and deﬁne the natural class using features.
(a) [l ɹ b j w]
(b) [p g k ð d b t]
(c) [k n s t l d ɹ z]
6. Sequences of consonants, such as those at the beginning of train, stray,
ﬂy, are known as consonant clusters. In two-consonant clusters which
have [s] as the ﬁrst consonant, what can the second consonant be? Can
these consonants be grouped into a natural class or several natural
classes? In three-consonant clusters which have [s] as the ﬁrst consonant,
what can the second and third consonants be? Can these consonants be
grouped into a natural class or several natural classes?
Recommendations for reading
Giegerich (1992) provides a clear and detailed overview of distinctive
features of the sort introduced here, with special emphasis on English.
Consideration of features and feature theory, and the mechanics of rule-
writing, is also included in most recent general textbooks on phonology,
including Carr (1993), Durand (1990), Katamba (1988), Spencer (1996).
Lass (1984) provides a particularly helpful critique of some elements
of feature theory, including binarity and the emphasis on articulation.
The features used here are ultimately derived from Chomsky and Halle
(1968), although this is not an easy book for beginners, and should be
approached with caution!
DEFINING DISTRIBUTIONS
51

5 Criteria for contrast:
the phoneme system
5.1 Minimal pairs and beyond
The main business of the last chapter was the construction of rules
stating allophonic distributions. These rules in turn were based on the
identiﬁcation of phonemes, for which we relied on the two fundamental
tools of predictability of occurrence and invariance of meaning: if two
sounds occur in non-overlapping, predictable sets of contexts, and if
substituting one for the other does not make a semantic difference, then
those two sounds must necessarily be allophones of a single phoneme.
On the other hand, if those two sounds can occur in the same environ-
ments, producing different words, they belong to different phonemes.
This diagnosis is conﬁrmed by the commutation test, which involves
putting different sounds in a particular context, to see if minimal pairs
result. An example for English consonants is given in (1).
(1) Context:
-at
pat
/p/
bat
/b/
mat
/m/
fat
/f/
vat
/v/
that
/ð/
tat
/t/
sat
/s/
gnat
/n/
rat
/r/
chat
/tʃ/
cat
/k/
hat
/h/
Accidental gaps in the English vocabulary mean that no lexical item
*jat, or *lat, or *dat is available. However, minimal pairs can be found
in slightly different contexts to establish /d/, /l/, /	/ and so on as
52

consonant phonemes of English: hence, we ﬁnd sip zip dip tip lip, or cot dot
shot jot. Considering a range of contexts provides evidence for all the
consonant phonemes of English, which are plotted on a chart in (2): the
voiceless labial-velar and velar fricatives // and /x/ appear in brackets
because they are found only in some varieties of English.
(2)
labio-
post
labial dental dental alveolar alveolar palatal velar glottal
plosive
p b
t d
k 	
nasal
m
n
ŋ
affricate
tʃ d
fricative
()
f v
θ ð
s z
ʃ 
(x)
h
approximant w
l r
j
Minimal pairs and the commutation test alone will generally sufﬁce
to establish the members of a phoneme system: according to Charles
Hockett, a mid-twentieth century American linguist who was very in-
ﬂuential in the development of phoneme theory, ‘Minimal pairs are the
analyst’s delight, and he seeks them whenever there is any hope of ﬁnd-
ing them’. However, there are some circumstances where phonemes
cannot be established by minimal pairs alone, and we need supple-
mentary criteria for phonemicisation, or phonological units above and
beyond the phoneme. In the sections below, we turn to these special
cases, and also to a consideration of the phoneme system itself, and its
relevance and reality for language users.
5.2 Phonetic similarity and defective distributions
5.2.1 Phonetic similarity
In the vast majority of cases, applying our phoneme tests will provide
results in keeping with native speakers’ intuitions about which sounds
belong together; very often, as we have seen, allophones of a single
phoneme will not in fact be distinguishable for a native speaker at all,
without a certain amount of phonetic training. However, there are some
cases where sticking to those tests too rigidly can have quite the oppo-
site consequence.
One of the best-known and most obvious examples of this kind in
English involves [h] and [ŋ]. The minimal pairs in (5.1) show that [h]
contrasts with a number of English consonant phonemes word-initially;
but there is no minimal pair for [ŋ]. Conversely, in word-ﬁnal position,
it is straightforward to ﬁnd contrasts for [ŋ], as in rang, ran, ram, rat, rack,
rag, rap, rash; but there is no equivalent minimal pair for [h]. The gener-
CRITERIA FOR CONTRAST
53

alisation extractable from this is that [h] appears only before a stressed
vowel (or at the beginning of a syllable; see Chapter 9), as in hat, ahead,
apprehensive, vehicular (but not vehicle, where <h> appears in the spelling,
but there is no [h], as the stress here falls on the ﬁrst vowel). On the other
hand, [ŋ] is not permissible syllable-initially: it can appear only at the
end of a syllable, either alone, as in rang, hanger, or before a velar plosive,
either [k] or [	], as in rink, stinker, ﬁnger, stronger.
What this means, in purely technical terms, is that [h] and [ŋ] are in
complementary distribution. One appears only syllable-initially, where
the other never does; and in consequence, there is no possible minimal
pair which will distinguish the two. If we take only predictability of
occurrence and invariance of meaning into account, we will be forced
into setting up a phoneme which we might symbolise as //, which is
realised as [h] in one set of environments, and [ŋ] in another.
It is not going to be easy to convince native speakers of English that
this is the right solution – not because we have to work on bringing
previously subconscious intuitions to the surface, but because those
intuitions suggest strongly that [h] and [ŋ] are entirely separate and
unrelated. There is some evidence in favour of that view, too. First,
although we have seen that the English spelling system is not absolutely
and reliably phonemic, different spellings are never consistently used for
different allophones of a single phoneme, as would be the case for [h]
<h> and [ŋ] <ng> / <nk>. Second, native speakers can easily tell the
two sounds apart, which would not be true, for instance, of clear and dark
variants of /l/, or aspirated and unaspirated allophones of /p/. Since our
core criteria for allophony very generally give the right results, it is prob-
ably unwise to mess about with them much; but we can add a further
condition on determining allophony, which applies both to the ‘normal’
cases and to the situation of [h] and [ŋ].
In brief, this additional criterion for allophony states that all the allo-
phones of a phoneme must be phonetically similar. Using distinctive
features allows this rather vague notion to be quantiﬁed: but there is still
no straightforward equation for determining what counts as phonetically
similar and what does not. However, although we cannot draw a dividing
line which will be universally applicable, for instance requiring that
the allophones of a single phoneme must be different by no more than
three features, we might at least hypothesise that two sounds are highly
unlikely to be allophones of the same phoneme if the number of con-
trasting feature values is higher than the number of shared ones. For [h]
and [ŋ], this produces an unambiguous result: both are consonants, but
there the similarity ends. [h] is a voiceless fricative, while [ŋ] is a voiced
stop; [h] is oral, while [ŋ] is nasal; [h] is glottal, while [ŋ] is velar; [h] is
54
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

an obstruent, while [ŋ] is a sonorant. On almost every parameter which
could distinguish the two, they are in fact distinct. Rather than setting
up a single phoneme with two such bizarrely different realisations,
invoking phonetic similarity allows us to justify regarding /h/ and /ŋ/
as distinct phonemes, despite the lack of minimal pairs.
Phonetic similarity also helps in cases where a single allophone could
theoretically be assigned to more than one possible phoneme, a situation
commonly encountered when members of a natural class of phonemes
undergo the same rule. For instance, we have seen that in Old English,
the voiceless fricatives /f θ s/ were voiced between voiced sounds. It
follows that all the voiceless fricative allophones were in complementary
distribution with all the voiced ones, since [v ð z] could appear only
between voiced sounds, and [f θ s] could appear only elsewhere. Purely
on the grounds of predictability of occurrence and invariance of mean-
ing, there is no guidance on which of these we should assign to which
phoneme: in theory we could set up one phoneme with allophones [f]
and [z], a second with [θ] and [v], and a third with [s] and [ð], if all that
matters is for one allophone to be voiceless and the other to be voiced.
We might also feel that this solution would make Old English speakers
turn in their graves: their intuitions are highly likely to have favoured
grouping the two labial sounds together, the two dentals, and the two
alveolars. Again, this intuitive solution is supported by a requirement of
phonetic similarity, this time involving the assignment of the two most
similar allophones, those sharing a place of articulation, to a single
phoneme in each case. In Modern English, a precisely similar problem
and solution arise with the voiceless stop phonemes and their aspirated
and unaspirated allophones.
5.2.2 Defective distribution
Of course, if /h/ and /ŋ/ were entirely normal phonemes, we would not
have got into the problematic situation of regarding them as potential
realisations of the same phoneme in the ﬁrst place. In the normal case,
we would expect some realisation of every phoneme in a language to
appear in every possible environment: initially, medially, and ﬁnally in
the word, and also before and after other consonants in clusters. There
are, however, two types of exception to this sweeping generalisation.
First, there are the phonotactic constraints of a language, which spell
out which combinations of sounds are possible. In English, as we saw
in the exercises to the last chapter, only rather few three-consonant
clusters are permissible; and the ﬁrst consonant in the sequence must
always be /s/. Nasal stops in English can cluster only with oral stops
CRITERIA FOR CONTRAST
55

sharing the same place of articulation (unless the oral stop marks the past
tense, as in harmed); hence lamp, clamber, plant, land, rink, ﬁnger, but not
*lamk, *lanp, *[laŋt]. Even more speciﬁcally, /v/ and /m/ cannot be
the ﬁrst member of any initial consonant cluster, although both can 
occur alone initially, medially and ﬁnally; and /h/ never clusters at all
(although, again, this was possible in Old English, where there are forms
like hring ‘ring’, hwæl ‘whale’). Phonotactic statements of this kind
restrict the length and composition of possible clusters, on a language-
speciﬁc (and period-speciﬁc) basis.
Secondly, some phonemes have defective distributions: they are not
only restricted in the combinations of consonants they can form, but are
simply absent from some positions in the word. English /h/ and /ŋ/ both
fall into this category, since the former is available only syllable-initially,
and the latter only syllable-ﬁnally. It is because those defective distri-
butions are mutually exclusive that English [h] and [ŋ] are in comple-
mentary distribution.
Phonemes with defective distributions like this are relatively rare.
Sometimes, their defectiveness follows from their historical develop-
ment: [ŋ] is derived historically from a sequence of [nk] or [n	] where
the nasal assimilated to the place of articulation of the following con-
sonant; and since initial clusters of nasal plus stop are not permissible in
earlier English or today, the appropriate context for [ŋ] never arose
word-initially. Similarly, a chain of sound changes leading to the weak-
ening and loss of /h/ before consonants and word-ﬁnally has left it
‘stranded’ only syllable-initially before a vowel; and there is a parallel
story in non-rhotic varieties of English, where /r/ is pronounced before
a vowel, but not before a consonant or a pause, meaning that [ɹ] appears
in red, bread, very, but not in dark, car. Often, defectively distributed
phonemes are relatively new arrivals. For instance, the newest member
of the English consonant system is probably //, which developed in
Middle and Early Modern English from sequences of [zj] in measure,
treasure, and from French loans such as rouge, beige: the [zj] sequence does
not appear word-initially, and although French does allow [] here, as in
jamais ‘never’, no words with that structure have been borrowed into
English, leading to an apparent prohibition on word-initial English []
which is really accidental, and may change in time (as suggested by
recent loans like gîte).
5.3 Free variation
The previous section dealt with an exception to the criterion of
predictability of occurrence: two sounds which are in complementary
56
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

distribution are normally assigned to a single phoneme, but where
this would conﬂict with phonetic similarity (and with native speakers’
intuitions), it is appropriate to set up two distinct phonemes and seek an
alternative explanation for the complementarity, in terms of defective
distributions. In this section, we turn to an exception to the other main
criterion for allophony, invariance of meaning.
When one sound is substituted for another and no meaning difference
arises, we are dealing with two allophones of the same phoneme. An
English speaker who produces a dark [
] in initial position may be
regarded as having an unfamiliar accent, or some sort of minor speech
impediment, but there is little danger that light pronounced with initial
[
] is going to be mistaken for another word entirely.
However, sometimes there is more than one possible pronunciation in
the same word or context; this is known as free variation, and raises two
possible theoretical problems. First, we require complementary distri-
bution to assign two sounds to a single phoneme; and yet a speaker of
Scottish English, for example, may sometimes produce a tapped allo-
phone of /r/ in very, and on other occasions, an approximant. There are
no possible minimal pairs for tapped [ɾ] versus approximant [ɹ], and an
allophonic rule can indeed be written, such that the tap appears inter-
vocalically, as in very, and the approximant word-initially and word-
ﬁnally. Apparent exceptions are sociolinguistically motivated: perhaps
the Scot is talking to an English English speaker, who will typically not
use the tap, and is subconsciously accommodating her speech towards
that of her interlocutor; perhaps she is trying to sound less like a
Scot; perhaps she is in a very formal situation, where more standard
pronunciations are favoured. Clearly, such stylistic variation is not free
in sociolinguistic terms, though it is known as free variation phono-
logically because there is no watertight phonological or phonetic context
determining the appearance of one allophone rather than the other. The
variable appearance of a glottal stop or [t] medially in butter, for instance,
would fall into the same category, and the frequency of occurrence of the
two variants would be subject to explanation in the same sociolinguistic
terms.
The second type of free variation is the converse of the ﬁrst, and
potentially more problematic. Here, instead of ﬁnding two allophones of
a single phoneme in the same context, violating complementary distri-
bution, we see two sounds which on other criteria belong to different
phonemes, failing to make the meaning difference we expect. Sometimes
the difference can be explained in geographical terms: for instance,
Southern British English speakers say tomahto, and North American
speakers typically say tomayto, producing the same lexical item with
CRITERIA FOR CONTRAST
57

consistently different vowels. Those two vowels, [ɑ] and [e] respect-
ively, nonetheless contrast for speakers of both accents, although as we
shall see in more detail in the next three chapters, they appear in differ-
ent sets of words: a Southern British English speaker will have relevant
minimal pairs in psalm and same, or grass and grace, while a General
American speaker will contrast lot with late, or odd with aid. The two
different pronunciations of tomato are therefore simply characteristic of
speakers from different areas.
In other cases, the same speaker uses different phonemes in the same
word on different occasions of utterance. Some speakers consistently
pronounce economic with the [ε] of elephant, and others with the [i] of eat;
but many more produce sometimes one, and sometimes the other. And
yet there are plenty of minimal pairs to establish a contrast between /ε/
in pet, hell or bed, and /i/ in peat, heal or bead, outside that single problem-
atic lexical item. The same is true for either and neither, which some
speakers produce with [i], others with the [a] of high, and still others
with variation between the two. Again, there is no question that /i/ and
/a/ constitute different phonemes, with minimal pairs including he and
high, heed and hide, or steal and stile. This is theoretically problematic: two
sounds which on all other criteria belong to different phonemes are
nonetheless found in the same context without making a meaning
difference, directly contravening invariance of meaning. However, such
examples tend to be few and far between, and involve only single lexical
items; and again, the explanation is typically sociolinguistic. These
pronunciations often develop in different geographical areas, then one
spreads into the territory of the other. One variant may become stigma-
tised, and the other fashionable; but this stylistic variation can disappear
over time, leaving two rather neutral alternatives. In such cases, the
resulting variation can be truly free; but as long as the phonemes
involved can be identiﬁed on the basis of minimal pairs elsewhere, these
can simply be regarded as one-off exceptions. They are parallel to cases
where a speaker stores two words, from the same historical source but
each now appropriate in a different dialect, like the Scot who uses kirk
with fellow Scots, but otherwise church; or indeed, to the use of histori-
cally unrelated synonyms like sofa and settee.
5.4 Neutralisation
This second type of free variation can also be seen as constituting the tip
of a much larger theoretical iceberg. In the [ε]conomic – [i]conomic cases,
two otherwise contrastive sounds are both possible in a single word. The
contrast between two phonemes may also be interrupted more system-
58
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

atically, in a particular phonological context; in this case, rather than the
two phonemes being equally possible alternatives, we ﬁnd some form
intermediate between the two.
One example involves the voiceless and voiced English plosives.
These seem to contrast in all possible positions in the word: minimal
pairs can be found for /t/ and /d/ initially, as in till versus dill; medially,
in matter versus madder; ﬁnally, as in lit versus lid; and in consonant clus-
ters, as in trill, font versus drill, fond – and the same is true for the labial
and velar plosives. However, no contrast is possible in an initial cluster,
after /s/: spill, still and skill are perfectly normal English words, but there
is no *sbill, *sdill or *sgill. This phenomenon is known as neutralisation,
because the otherwise robust and regular contrast between two sets of
phonemes is neutralised, or suspended, in a particular context – in this
case, after /s/.
In fact, matters are slightly more complicated yet. Although the spell-
ing might suggest that the sounds found after /s/ are realisations of the
voiceless stops, we have already seen that, in one crucial respect, they do
not behave as we would expect voiceless stops to behave at the beginning
of a word: that is, they are not aspirated. On the other hand, they do not
behave like realisations of /b d 	/ either, since they are not voiced. That
is to say, the whatever-it-is that appears after /s/ has something in com-
mon with both /p/ and /b/, or /t/ and /d/, or /k/ and /	/, being an oral
plosive of a particular place of articulation. But in another sense, it is
neither one nor the other, since it lacks aspiration, which is the distinc-
tive phonetic characteristic of an initial voiceless stop, and it also lacks
voicing, the main signature of an initial voiced one.
There are two further pieces of evidence, one practical and the other
theoretical, in support of the in-between status of the sounds following
/s/. If a recording is made of spill, still, skill, the [s] is erased, and the
remaining portion is played to native speakers of English, they ﬁnd it
difﬁcult to tell whether the words are pill, till, kill, or bill, dill, gill.
Furthermore, we might argue that a /t/ is a /t/ because it contrasts with
/d/ – phonemes are deﬁned by the other phonemes in the system they
belong to. To take an analogy, again from written English, children
learning to write often have difﬁculty in placing the loop for a <b> right
at the base of the upstroke, and it sometimes appears a little higher than
in adult writing – which is ﬁne, as long as it doesn’t migrate so high as
to be mistaken for a <p>, where the loop is meant to appear at the top.
What matters is maintaining distinctness between the two; and the same
is true in speech, where a realisation of /d/, for instance, can be more or
less voiced in different circumstances, as long as it does not become
confused with realisations of /t/. In a case where the two cannot possibly
CRITERIA FOR CONTRAST
59

contrast, as after /s/ in English, /t/ cannot be deﬁned as it normally is,
precisely because here alone, it does not contrast with /d/. It follows
again that the voiceless, unaspirated sound after /s/ in still cannot be a
normal allophone of /t/.
Phonologists call the unit found in a position of neutralisation an
archiphoneme. The archiphoneme is symbolised by a capital letter, and
is composed of all the properties which the neutralised phonemes have
in common, but not the properties which typically distinguish them, as
shown in (3).
(3)
/T/
+oral
+stop
+alveolar
0 voice
The archiphoneme /T/ is proposed where the normal opposition
between /t/ and /d/ is suspended, so neither /t/ nor /d/ is a possibility.
/T/ is an intermediate form, sharing the feature values common to /t/
and /d/, but with no value possible for voicing, since there is no contrast
of voiced and voiceless in this context. Neutralisation is therefore the
defective distribution of a class of phonemes, involving a particular
phonological context (rather than a single word, as in the either/neither
case).
There are many other cases of neutralisation in English, but for the
time being, we shall consider only one. In many varieties of English, the
normal contrasts between vowels break down before /r/. To take one
example, British English speakers will tend to maintain a three-way
contrast of Mary, merry and marry, whereas many speakers of General
American suspend the usual contrast of /e/, /ε/ and //, as established
by minimal triplets like sail, sell and Sal or pain, pen and pan, in this en-
vironment, making Mary, merry and marry homophones. Although the
vowel found here often sounds like [ε], this cannot be regarded as a
normal realisation of /ε/, since /ε/ is a phoneme which contrasts with
/e/ and //, and that contrast is not possible here. So, we can set up an
archiphoneme /E/ in just those cases before /r/, again signalling that a
contrast otherwise found in all environments fails to manifest itself here.
5.5 Phonology and morphology
The archiphoneme is useful in signalling cases where oppositions are
suspended, but has two problems. First, a representation like /mEri/ is
60
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

three ways ambiguous for a General American speaker, since it could be
Mary, merry or marry: this might in fact be quite appropriate, because the
three sound the same at the phonetic level, but it would be helpful to
have a way of identifying, somewhere in the phonology, just which is
which. Secondly, in some cases that look rather like neutralisation, the
archiphoneme cannot really be invoked. For instance, the English regu-
lar plural ending on nouns is marked by an <s> spelling, which means
more than one thing phonologically: in cats, caps, chiefs, where the ﬁnal
sound of the stem is voiceless, the plural sufﬁx is realised as voiceless [s];
in dogs, heads, pans, hooves, dolls, eyes, where the ﬁnal sound of the stem is
voiced, the plural sufﬁx is also voiced [z]; and ﬁnally, in cases where the
stem ends in a sibilant, namely [s z ʃ  tʃ d], a vowel is inserted for
reasons of ease of articulation, since sequences of two sibilants are not
allowed in English, giving horses, bushes, churches with [əz] (or [z]). This
might, on the face of it, seem to be a purely phonetic matter, involving
assimilation of the plural ending to the last segment of the stem; but
there is more to it than that. If voicing assimilation were necessary in
ﬁnal clusters, forms like hence, face, loss would not be possible words of
English, since they involve ﬁnal sequences of a voiced consonant or
vowel, followed by voiceless [s]. What matters, in the plural cases, is what
that ﬁnal sound is doing: the cases where it is a sufﬁx indicating plural
behave differently from those in which it is part of the stem.
Similarly, singular and plural noun forms like leaf – leaves, hoof – hooves,
knife – knives might initially appear to represent a case of neutralisation,
where the usual contrast between /f/ and /v/ is suspended before /z/
(recall that this <s> is pronounced voiced). However, whatever is going
on here cannot be ascribed straightforwardly to the phonetic context,
since there are also cases, as in (4), where either the singular and plural
both have voiceless fricatives, or both have voiced ones.
(4) chief – chiefs
roof – roofs
hive – hives
stove – stoves
Neutralisation always involves a regular suspension of contrast in a
particular phonetic context. Here, we are dealing with an alternation
between two phonemes, /f/ and /v/, in a particular grammatical context.
Leaf has a ﬁnal /f/, and leaves a medial /v/ – there is no intermediate,
archiphonemic form here. The determining factor is neither phonetic
nor phonological: it is simply a fact about certain English nouns (includ-
ing leaf, hoof, knife, life, wife, but excluding chief, roof, hive, stove) that they
have /f/ in some forms, notably the singular, and /v/ in others, notably
the plural.
Such alternation between phonemes, depending on grammatical facts,
CRITERIA FOR CONTRAST
61

is very common. For instance, before certain sufﬁxes, the shape of the
ﬁnal consonant of a stem may change: hence /k/, /s/ and /ʃ/, otherwise
three distinct phonemes as in kin, sin and shin, occur predictably depend-
ing whether the stem electric stands alone, or has a following sufﬁx.
Similar alternations involve president and other words derived from that,
as shown in (5). English speakers can perfectly well pronounce [k] before
the sound sequence [ti], as in kitty, or [t] before [i], as in pretty or Betty:
the fact that these sounds do not appear in electricity or presidency, where
we ﬁnd [s] instead, reﬂects the function of -ity and -y as sufﬁxes in those
cases.
(5) electri[k]
electri[s]ity
electri[ʃ]ian
presiden[t]
presiden[s]y
presiden[ʃ]ial
5.6 Rules and constraints
Most interactions of phonology with morphology, the part of linguistics
which studies how words are made up of meaningful units, like stems
and sufﬁxes, are beyond the scope of this book, although the overlap
between the two areas, commonly known as morphophonemics, has
been extremely important in the development of phonological theory
over the last ﬁfty years. Indeed, the difference between phonetically
conditioned allophony and neutralisation, which involve only the
phonetics and phonology, and cases where we also need to invoke
morphological issues, is central to one of the most important current
debates in phonology.
In the last chapter, generalisations about the distribution of allo-
phones were stated in terms of rules, the assumption being that children
learn these rules as they learn their native language, and start to see that
forms fall into principled categories and behave according to regular
patterns. Rule-based theories also include constraints – static, universal
or language-speciﬁc statements of possibility in terms of segment shapes
or combinations: these include both the redundancy rules discussed in
Chapter 4, and phonotactic constraints. However, since the mid-1990s,
an alternative approach has developed, as part of the phonological
theory called Optimality Theory. Phonologists working in Optimality
Theory do not write rules; they express all phonological generalisations
using constraints. Instead of saying that a particular underlying or start-
ing form changes into something else in a particular environment, which
is what rules do, constraints set out what must happen, or what cannot
happen, as in the examples in (6), which express regularities we have
already identiﬁed for English.
62
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

(6) : Voiceless stops are aspirated syllable-initially
*s [b d 	]
There are no sequences of [s] plus a voiced stop
In most versions of Optimality Theory, all the constraints are assumed
to be universal and innate: children are born with the constraints already
in place, so all they have to do is work out how important each constraint
is in the structure of the language they are learning, and produce a rank-
ing accordingly. For an English-learning child, the two constraints in (6)
must be quite important, because it is true that voiceless stops are
aspirated at the beginnings of syllables, and there are no sequences of
[s] plus a voiced stop; consequently, English speakers will rank these
two constraints high. However, for children learning a language without
aspiration, or with clusters of [s] plus voiced stop, these constraints will
not match the linguistic facts they hear; they will therefore be ranked
low down in the list, so they have no obvious effect. On the other hand,
a child learning German, say, would have to pay special attention to a
constraint banning voiced stops from the ends of words, since this is a
position of neutralisation in German, permitting only voiceless stops;
but a child learning English will rank that constraint very low, as words
like hand, lob, fog show that this constraint does not affect the structure of
English.
Constraints of this sort seem to work quite well when we are dealing
only with phonetic and phonological factors, and may be appropriate
alternatives to rules in the clearly conditioned types of allophonic vari-
ation we have considered, and for neutralisation. However, they are not
quite so helpful when it comes to the interaction of morphology and
phonology, where alternations are often not clearly universally motiv-
ated, but involve facts about the structure and lexical items of that
speciﬁc language alone. Analysing such cases using Optimality Theory
may require a highly complex system of constraints, as we will have to
accept that all the possible constraints for anything that could ever
happen in any language are already there in every child’s brain at birth.
These issues are likely to lead to further debate in phonology in future
years.
5.7 The phoneme system
The introduction of features reveals phonemes, not as the ultimate,
smallest unit of the phonology, but as cover-symbols for a range of
properties. However, it also permits a higher-level perspective, explor-
ing natural classes, and the motivation for similar patterns of behaviour
in groups of phonemes. These groupings can also be considered at the
level of the phoneme system as a whole.
CRITERIA FOR CONTRAST
63

Just as the phoneme, although an abstract unit, seems to have some
degree of reality for native speakers and to shape their perceptions, so
the phoneme system, at an even higher level of abstraction, also reﬂects
speakers’ intuitions and may shape the development of a language.
For one thing, setting out a phoneme system can be extremely helpful
to a phonologist in deciding which phonemes to propose for particular
groups of allophones, and in checking that her decisions accord with
native speakers’ intuitions. For instance, some phonologists consider
the English velar nasal as a phonemic sequence of /n	/ and /nk/, as it
certainly was historically, even in cases where no [	] or [k] now appears
phonetically: hence, hang would be analysed as /han	/, with the alveolar
nasal having a velar allophone before velar plosives, and the velar plosive
subsequently being deleted after a velar nasal at the ends of syllables.
However, native speakers ﬁnd the three nasals [m], [n] and [ŋ] easy to
distinguish, although they may well not easily perceive cases which are
more clearly allophones of /n/, such as the labiodental nasal [] in unfor-
tunate. Their perception of /ŋ/ as separate from /n/ may be encouraged
by the shape of the stop system in general, where voiced and voiceless
plosives and a distinctive nasal stop go together at the labial
/b p m/ and alveolar /d t n/ places of articulation, with /	 k ŋ/ provid-
ing a parallel set of velars.
Similarly, consider the English affricates, [tʃ] and [d], in church and
judge. These could be phonemicised either as single units (albeit single
units with two phases: recall that affricates have a stop phase, followed by
a brief fricative phase as the stop is gradually released), or as clusters of
consonants. In deciding which option to adopt, phonologists try to estab-
lish how the affricates behave. Do they follow the pattern of single
phonemes in English, or do they act like clusters? In English, initial
clusters of a plosive plus a fricative are extremely rare, and tend to
be restricted to words obviously borrowed from other languages, like
psittacosis or dvandva (a Sanskrit term for a type of compound word).
However, the affricates occur quite freely both initially and ﬁnally
(where such clusters are more common), making them seem less like
clusters, and more like single units. Phonetically, affricates are also typi-
cally shorter than a sequence of stop plus fricative, so that in why choose,
the fricative component in particular is signiﬁcantly shorter than in white
shoes. If the voiceless affricate were aspirated word-initially, or glottally
reinforced word-ﬁnally, there would be additional good reasons for
seeing this as essentially a stop, rather than a sequence.
Phoneme systems often seem to have the shape they do for essentially
phonetic reasons. For instance, if there are too many distinctive sounds
with similar features, they are likely to be misperceived, and may
64
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

gradually merge historically: there is a general tendency for languages to
have a reasonable margin of safety between sounds, so that words can be
kept apart without the sort of effort which is inconsistent with fast,
casual speech. Recall the discussion above of distinguishing <p> and
<b> in writing, where there is a certain amount of tolerance built into
the system concerning the placement of the loop; this would not be
maintained if an intermediate symbol, <T>, was introduced. Similarly,
it is possible to keep the allophones of labial, alveolar and velar stops
distinct, because there is a considerable amount of phonetic space
between them in terms of articulation; in English, palatal allophones of
/k 	/, or dental allophones of /t d/ do not interfere with the realisations
of any other stops. The story would be different if English also had
contrastive palatal and dental stops.
As well as being determined by the need for reasonable margins of
error, so that processes of assimilation, for instance, can take place with-
out encroaching too greatly on the territory of adjacent phonemes,
systems also seem to favour symmetry. Thus, English has pairs of
contrastive voiced and voiceless stops at the labial, alveolar and velar
places of articulation. If gaps arise in systems of this kind, they are very
commonly ﬁlled by change in the language or by borrowing: the Old
Irish stop system had a /b/ but no /p/, and /p/ was borrowed from Latin.
In the case of the English fricatives, when voiced /v ð z/ came to contrast
with pre-existing /f θ s/ in Middle English, there was no voiced counter-
part for either /ʃ/ or /h/: however, // has subsequently been intro-
duced by simpliﬁcation of the [zj] cluster and in loans from French,
while /h/ is increasingly marginal, appearing only syllable-initially;
indeed, in some accents, like Cockney, it is routinely dropped in that
position too, and might be said to be absent from the system altogether.
Looking at phoneme systems may perhaps help phonologists identify
weak spots in the language which are likely targets for later changes, as
well as exemplifying some of the general principles native speakers pay
attention to when learning and using their language.
Exercises
1. Find minimal pairs for the largest number of English consonant
phonemes you can, in initial, medial and ﬁnal positions in the word.
Which list is longest? Note cases where you encounter defective dis-
tributions.
2. The ‘liquid’ consonants, namely /r/ and /l/, devoice in English after
voiceless consonants, giving [ple] play, [tɹe] tray.
CRITERIA FOR CONTRAST
65

(a) Of the allophones [ɹ], [ɹ], [l] and [l], which are in complementary
distribution?
(b) Which pairs of allophones would you assign to which phoneme,
and how would you justify this decision?
(c) Write the allophonic rule determining the distribution of voiced
and devoiced liquids.
3. Choose a nursery rhyme or short poem. Transcribe it (that is, write it
out in IPA notation) as accurately as you can for your own accent, using
V for vowels but giving as much detail on consonant allophones as you
can.
4. In many (especially, but not only, urban) varieties of non-standard
British English, the following pattern of distribution occurs for the
voiceless plosives.
pill
[pl]
spill
[spl]
lip
[lʔ]
till
[tl]
still
[stl]
lit
[lʔ]
kill
[kl]
skill
[skl]
lick
[lʔ]
How can we describe the situation in word-ﬁnal position phonologi-
cally? What symbol(s) might we choose to represent the unit(s) found
here, and why? What would the most appropriate feature speciﬁcation of
the ﬁnal unit of [lʔ] be?
Recommendations for reading
Difﬁculties with the phoneme, and issues of neutralisation and morpho-
phonemics, are discussed in Giegerich (1992), Carr (1993), Durand
(1990), Katamba (1988), Lass (1984) and Spencer (1996). Archangeli
and Langendoen (1997) is the most accessible general introduction
to Optimality Theory; Kager (1999) gives a more detailed account.
Gussenhoven and Jacobs (1998) is a recent textbook on phonology
written from an Optimality Theoretic point of view.
66
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

6 Describing vowels
6.1 Vowels versus consonants
Several examples in the last chapter involved vowels: for instance, we
found that there is free variation for some speakers between [i] and [ε]
in economic, but that these two vowels nonetheless contrast, as shown by
minimal pairs like pet – peat, or hell – heal. We also saw that the usual
contrast of /e/, /ε/ and // is neutralised before /r/ for many General
American speakers, who pronounce Mary, merry and marry homo-
phonously. It follows that the central ideas of phonemic contrast, with
minimal pairs determining the members of the phoneme system, and
rules showing allophonic variation in different contexts, apply equally
to vowels and to consonants; free variation, phonetic similarity and
neutralisation affect both classes of sounds too. A more detailed demon-
stration of these issues for vowels, and the establishment of vowel
phoneme systems for different varieties of English, will be the focus of
Chapters 7 and 8.
However, when we turn to the physical description of actual vowel
sounds, it is not possible simply to reuse the parameters and features
already introduced for consonants. Of course, vowels and consonants are
all speech sounds; and in English at least, they are all produced using the
same pulmonic egressive airstream. In almost all other respects, however,
the features which allow us to classify and understand consonants are
less than helpful in distinguishing between vowels.
In Chapter 3, six articulatory parameters were introduced: knowing
the value for each of these allowed us to describe English consonants
unambiguously, and would extend to further consonants found in other
languages. To describe a consonant in articulatory terms, we needed to
know the airstream mechanism involved; the state of the glottis, deter-
mining whether the sound is voiced or voiceless; the position of the
velum, which either allows or stops airﬂow through the nose, making
the consonant nasal or oral; the manner of articulation, namely stop,
67

affricate, fricative or approximant; whether airﬂow is central or lateral;
and ﬁnally, the place of articulation, and consequently the identity and
position of the active and passive articulators.
Unfortunately, almost none of these helps us in classifying vowels.
All vowels, universally, are produced on a pulmonic egressive airstream,
with central airﬂow: there is no contrast between central and lateral
vowels. It is possible, but rare, for vowels to be voiceless or nasal; in
English, however, all vowel phonemes are voiced and oral, and voiceless
and nasal allophones appear only in very speciﬁc circumstances, as we
shall see later. Vowels are all continuants: that is, airﬂow through the oral
tract is not signiﬁcantly obstructed during their production, so they are
all approximants on the consonant manner classiﬁcation: there are no
stop, fricative or affricate vowels. Finally, although we shall distinguish
between vowels in terms of place of articulation, the range of options
is much more restricted than for consonants, where places from labial
to glottal are distinguished in English alone. All vowels are produced
in a very limited ‘vowel space’ in the centre of the oral tract, roughly
between palatal and velar in consonantal terms; and the place of articu-
lation will also be much more difﬁcult to ascertain from self-observation,
since the tongue never moves close enough to the roof of the mouth in
vowel production to make its position easy to feel.
It follows that an adequate vowel classiﬁcation requires new features
and descriptive parameters which are better designed to capture the
ways in which vowels do vary. This kind of situation, where two classes
of objects or concepts share some essential unity, but need different
descriptors, is not unique to vowels and consonants. For instance, plants
and animals are both categories of living things; they both populate the
world widely, and are mutually necessary in terms of their complemen-
tary roles in gas exchange, for instance. They both require the same basic
nutrients, operate according to the same chemical principles, and have
common structures, including identical cell types. However, there is
just as little point in classifying plants according to whether or not they
are mammals, or have feathers, or are carnivores or herbivores, as there
is in categorising animals as being evergreen or dropping their leaves,
bearing cones or ﬂowers, or producing fruit or not. At that lower classi-
ﬁcatory level, it is simply necessary to recognise the divergence of the
two categories by using different distinguishing features. Equally, vowels
and consonants are both speech sounds, and are both necessary for
language, since they play complementary roles in structuring syllables
and words. Both are formed by modiﬁcations of a moving airstream,
carried out by the actions of the vocal folds and articulatory organs.
However, below this very general, common level, consonants and vowels
68
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

operate as different sets, and to allow us to produce as precise and
insightful a classiﬁcation of each set as possible, they must be described
in different terms.
6.2 The anatomy of a vowel
In classifying vowels, we need not indicate airstream mechanism, since
it will always be pulmonic egressive, and we can generally assume that
vowels are all voiced and oral: allophonic exceptions will be discussed in
Chapter 7. To describe vowels adequately and accurately, we then need
to consider three different parameters, all of which can be seen as modi-
ﬁcations of the place or manner of articulation continua for consonants:
as we shall see, these are height, frontness and rounding. Additionally,
vowels may be long or short (long ones are marked with a following 
below), and monophthongs or diphthongs. The examples in the sections
below will be from Standard Southern British English (sometimes called
RP, or Received Pronunciation), and General American, the most widely
spoken variety of English in the United States, excluding the southern
states, and the eastern seaboard, especially Boston, New England and
New York City. SSBE and GA are generally thought of by English and
American speakers respectively as not having any strong regional mark-
ing, and both are varieties highly likely to be heard in broadcasting, for
instance in reading the television or radio news. Further accents will be
introduced in Chapters 7 and 8.
6.2.1 The front–back dimension
Front vowels are produced with the front of the tongue raised towards
the hard palate (although not raised enough, remember, to obstruct the
airﬂow and cause local friction; vowels are approximants). The vowels in
(1) are front. These could, in principle, equally be described as palatal,
and this might be helpful in making phonological rules transparent:
recall that in Chapter 4, the rule palatalising velar /k 	/ before front
vowels in kitchen, key, give, geese looked rather perplexing as the relation-
ship between palatal and front was not obvious. However, calling front
vowels palatal would be misleading, since frontness covers a larger area
than [palatal], as we shall see below; and it contrasts with completely
different alternatives, namely central and back, rather than labial, alveo-
lar, dental, velar and so on.
DESCRIBING VOWELS
69

(1) Front vowels
SSBE
GA
kit


dress
ε
ε
trap
a

ﬂeece
i
i
face
e
e
Conversely, back vowels have the back of the tongue raised, towards
the soft palate or velum. The vowels in (2) are back.
(2) Back vowels
SSBE
GA
lot
ɒ
ɑ
foot
υ
υ
palm
ɑ
ɑ
thought
ɔ
ɔ
goat
oυ
o
goose
u
u
There is also a class of vowels between front and back: these are known
as central vowels, and involve a raising of the body of the tongue towards
the area where the hard and soft palate join. Central vowels are exemp-
liﬁed in (3). The most common of these in English, [ə], is known as
schwa, and only appears in unstressed syllables.
(3) Central vowels
SSBE
GA
about
ə
ə
nurse

r
strut


6.2.2 The high–low dimension
High vowels have the tongue raised most towards the roof of the mouth;
if the raising was signiﬁcantly greater, then friction would be produced,
making a fricative consonant, not a vowel. The high vowels from the last
section are in (4).
(4) High vowels
SSBE
GA
kit


ﬂeece
i
i
foot
υ
υ
goose
u
u
70
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

Low vowels are those where the tongue is not raised at all, but rather
lowered from its resting position: when you produce a low vowel, you
will be able to feel your mouth opening and your jaw dropping, even if
it is not very easy to ﬁgure out quite what your tongue is doing. Low
vowels are given in (5).
(5) Low vowels
SSBE
GA
trap
a

lot
ɑ
palm
ɑ
ɑ
Again, there is a further class intermediate between high and low,
namely the mid vowels, shown in (6). These can if necessary be further
subclassiﬁed as high mid (like the face and goat vowels) or low mid (like
the dress, thought, strut vowels) depending on whether they are nearer the
high end of the scale, or nearer the low end.
(6) Mid vowels
SSBE
GA
face
e
e
goat
oυ
o
dress
ε
ε
lot
ɒ
thought
ɔ
ɔ
about
ə
ə
nurse

r
strut


6.2.3 Lip position
In the high back [u] vowel of goose, there is tongue raising in the region
of the soft palate; but in addition, the lips are rounded. Vowels in any
of the previous categories may be either rounded, where the lips are
protruded forwards, or unrounded, where the lips may be either in a
neutral position, or sometimes slightly spread (as for a high front vowel,
like [i] ﬂeece). However, it is overwhelmingly more common cross-
linguistically for back vowels to be rounded than for front ones, and for
high vowels to be rounded than low ones; this is borne out in English, as
you can see in (7).
DESCRIBING VOWELS
71

(7) Rounded vowels
SSBE
GA
lot
ɒ
foot
υ
υ
thought
ɔ
ɔ
goat
oυ
o
goose
u
u
6.2.4 Length
Using these three dimensions of frontness, height and rounding, we can
now deﬁne the vowel in ﬂeece as high, front and unrounded; that in goose
as high, back and rounded; and the unstressed vowel of about, schwa,
as mid, central and unrounded. However, our elementary descriptions
would class the kit vowel as high, front and unrounded, and the foot vowel
as high, back and rounded; these labels make them indistinguishable
from the clearly different vowels of ﬂeece and goose respectively. SSBE and
GA speakers very readily perceive the ﬂeece and kit vowels, and the goose
and foot vowels, as different; and there are plenty of minimal pairs to
support a phoneme distinction, as in peat – pit, leap – lip, Luke – look, fool –
full. This distinction is usually made in terms of vowel length: in SSBE
and GA, the vowels in (8) are consistently produced as longer than those
in (9).
(8) Long vowels
SSBE
GA
ﬂeece
i
i
goose
u
u
goat
o
thought
ɔ
ɔ
palm
ɑ
ɑ
lot
ɑ
nurse

r
(9) Short vowels
SSBE
GA
kit


dress
ε
ε
trap
a

lot
ɒ
foot
υ
υ
about
ə
ə
strut


72
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

This is not to say, however, that the only difference between [i] and [],
or [u] and [υ], is one of length: the quantity difference goes along with
a difference in quality. [i] is higher and fronter than []; [u] is higher
and backer than [υ]; and similarly, [ɑ] in palm is lower and backer than
the corresponding short [a] in trap. In general, long vowels in English are
more peripheral, or articulated in a more extreme and deﬁnite way, than
their short counterparts. Some phonologists use a feature [±tense]
rather than length to express this difference, with the long, more periph-
eral vowels being [+tense], and the short, more centralised ones being
[–tense], or lax.
6.2.5 Monophthongs and diphthongs
Most of the vowels we have considered so far have been monophthongs,
in which the quality of the vowel stays fairly consistent from the begin-
ning of its production to the end. However, there are also several
diphthongs in English. Diphthongs change in quality during their
production, and are typically transcribed with one starting point, and a
quite different end point; as might be expected from this description,
diphthongs are typically long vowels. In English, all diphthongs have
the ﬁrst element as longer and more prominent than the second, and are
known as falling diphthongs. Three diphthongs are found very generally
in accents of English, and are shown in (10).
(10) Diphthongs (i)
SSBE
GA
price
a
a
mouth
aυ
aυ
choice
ɔ
ɔ
The long high-mid front and back vowels in face and goat are also
characteristically diphthongal in SSBE and GA, as shown in (11).
(11) Diphthongs (ii)
SSBE 
GA
face
e
e
goat
oυ
o
Finally, SSBE has a third set of diphthongs, which are known as the
centring diphthongs as they all have the mid central vowel schwa as the
second element. These centring diphthongs developed historically
before /r/, which was then lost following vowels in the ancestor of SSBE;
they consequently appear mainly where there is an <r> in the spelling,
although they have now been generalised to some other words, like idea.
DESCRIBING VOWELS
73

GA speakers have a diphthong in idea, but still pronounce the historical
[ɹ] in near, square, force, cure and therefore lack centring diphthongs in
these words (see (12)).
(12) Centring diphthongs
SSBE
GA
near
ə
ir
square
εə
εr
force
ɔə/ɔ
or
cure
υə
υr
6.3 Vowel classiﬁcation
The labels outlined in the previous section are helpful, but may leave
questions unresolved when used in comparisons between different
languages or different accents of the same language. Thus, French [u]
in rouge is very close in quality to English [u] in goose, but not identical;
the French vowel is a little more peripheral, slightly higher and more
back. Similarly, [o] in rose for a GA speaker is slightly lower and more
centralised than ‘the same’ vowel for a speaker of Scottish English.
None of the descriptors introduced so far would allow us to make these
distinctions clear, since in the systems of the languages or accents
concerned, these pairs of vowels would quite appropriately be described
as long, high, back and rounded, or long, high-mid, back and rounded
respectively.
Furthermore, a classiﬁcation of this sort, based essentially on articula-
tion, is arguably less appropriate for vowels than for consonants. In utter-
ing a vowel, the important thing is to produce a particular sort of
auditory impression, so that someone listening understands which vowel
in the system you are aiming at; but it does not especially matter which
articulatory strategies you use to convey that auditory impression. If you
were asked to produce an [u], but not allowed to round your lips, then
with a certain amount of practice you could make at least something
very similar; and yet it would not be a rounded vowel in the articulatory
sense, although you would have modiﬁed the shape of your vocal tract to
make it sound like one. This is not possible with most consonants, where
the auditory impression depends on the particular articulators used, and
how close they get, not just the overall shape of the vocal tract and the
effect that has on a passing airstream. It is true that the whole oral tract
is a continuum, but it is easier to see the places for consonants as deﬁnite
‘stopping off places’ along that continuum, helped by the fact that most
consonants are obstruents, and we can feel what articulators are
involved.
74
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

One possible solution is to abandon an articulatory approach to vowel
classiﬁcation altogether, and turn instead to an analysis of the speech
wave itself: but acoustic phonetics is beyond the scope of this book. In
any case, it is true that most speakers of particular accents or even
languages will produce certain vowels in an articulatorily similar
fashion. For comparative purposes, what we need is an approach which
allows vowel qualities to be expressed as relative rather than absolute
values.
We can achieve this comparative perspective by plotting vowels on a
diagram rather than simply deﬁning them in isolation. The diagram
conventionally used for this purpose is known as the Vowel Quadri-
lateral, and is an idealised representation of the vowel space, roughly
between palatal and velar, where vowels can be produced in the vocal
tract. The left edge corresponds to the palatal area, and hence to front
vowels, and the right edge to the velar area, and back vowels. The top
line extends slightly further than the bottom one because there is physi-
cally more space along the roof of the mouth than along the base. Finally,
the chart is conventionally divided into six sectors, allowing high, high-
mid, low-mid and low vowels to be plotted, as well as front, central and
back ones. There is no way of reading information on rounding directly
from the vowel quadrilateral, so that vowels are typically plotted using
an IPA symbol rather than a dot; it is essential to learn these IPA symbols
to see which refer to rounded, and which to unrounded vowels. The
SSBE and GA monophthongs discussed in Section 6.2 are plotted in
(13); the monophthongs of the two accents are similar enough to include
on a single chart, although the [ɒ] vowel is bracketed, since it occurs in
SSBE but not in GA, where words like lot have low [ɑ] instead.
(13) SSBE and GA monophthongs
Diphthongs are not really well suited to description in terms of the
labels introduced above, since they are essentially trajectories of articu-
lation starting at one point and moving to another; in this respect, they
are parallel to affricate consonants. Saying that [ɔ] in noise, for instance,
DESCRIBING VOWELS
75
i
u
ε
ɔ
(ɒ)

υ
ə



ɑ

is a low-mid back rounded vowel followed by a high front unrounded
vowel would not distinguish it from a sequence of vowels in different
syllables or even different words; but the diphthong in noise is clearly
different from the sequence of independent vowels in law is. Using the
vowel quadrilateral, we can plot the changes in pronunciation involved
in the production of a diphthong using arrows, as in (14). Plotting several
diphthongs in this way can lead to a very messy chart, but it is nonethe-
less helpful in clarifying exactly how a particular diphthong is com-
posed, and what its starting and stopping points are; and the notation
reminds us that a symbolic representation like [ɔ] is actually short-hand
for a gradual articulatory and auditory movement.
(14)
However, plotting vowels on the quadrilateral is only reliable if the
person doing the plotting is quite conﬁdent about the quality she is hear-
ing, and this can be difﬁcult to judge without a good deal of experience,
especially if a non-native accent or language is being described. To
provide a universal frame of reference for such situations, phoneticians
often work with an idealised set of vowels known as the Cardinal Vowels.
For our purposes, we need introduce only the primary cardinals, which
are conventionally numbered 1–8. Cardinal Vowel 1 is produced by
raising and fronting the tongue as much as possible; any further, and a
palatal fricative would result. This vowel is like a very extreme form of
English [i] in ﬂeece. Its opposite, in a sense, is Cardinal Vowel 5, the
lowest, backest vowel that can be produced without turning into a frica-
tive; this is like a lower, backer version of SSBE [ɑ] in palm. Between
these two ﬁxed points, organised equidistantly around the very edges
of the vowel quadrilateral, are the other six primary cardinal vowels, as
shown in (15). Cardinal 8 is like English [u] in goose, but again higher and
backer; similarly, Cardinals 3, 4 and 6 can be compared with the vowels
of English dress, trap and thought, albeit more extreme in articulation.
Finally, Cardinals 2 and 7 are, as we shall see in Chapters 7 and 8, like
the monophthongal pronunciations of a Scottish English speaker in
words like day, go. The steps between Cardinals 1–4 and 5–8 should
76
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

ɔ

be articulatorily and acoustically equidistant, and lip rounding also
increases from Cardinals 6, through 7, to 8.
(15) The Primary Cardinal Vowels
In truth, the only way of learning the Cardinal Vowels properly, and
ensuring that they can act as a ﬁxed set of reference points as they were
designed to do, is to learn them from someone who already knows the
system, and do a considerable amount of practice (various tapes and
videos are available if you wish to do this). For the moment, what matters
is to have an idea of what the Cardinal Vowels are, and what the theor-
etical justiﬁcation for such a system is, in terms of describing the vowels
of an unfamiliar language, or giving a principled account of the differ-
ences between the vowels of English and some other language, or differ-
ent accents of English. We turn to such differences, as well as a more
detailed outline of English vowel phonemes and allophones, in the next
two chapters.
Exercises
1. (a) Which of the following words contains a rounded vowel?
put
seek
hook
grew
grey
hoe
hold
(b) Which of the following words contains a front vowel?
see
seat
met
tap
throw
tape
through
(c) Which of the following words contains a high vowel?
see
seat
steak
throw
list
lost
through
(d) Which of the following words contains a central vowel?
about
put
luck
hit
purse
father 
kept
(e) Which of the following words contains a high back vowel?
put
love
hit
heat
luck
look
food
2. (a) What do the vowels in these words have in common?
bet
hair
rose
post
love
purse
mate
(b) What do the vowels in these words have in common?
see
leap
weird
pit
ﬁend
miss
crypt
DESCRIBING VOWELS
77
i
u
ɔ

ɑ
o
e
ε
1
2
3
4
8
7
6
5

(c) What do the vowels in these words have in common?
height
boy
try
noise
loud
crowd
ﬁne
(d) What do the vowels in these words have in common?
ﬂea
rude
piece
ﬂu
stew
leave
sees
3. Make vowel quadrilateral diagrams for all the diphthongs of SSBE,
showing the position of the ﬁrst and second elements and drawing lines
and arrows connecting them.
4. Give as detailed a description as you can of the vowels in the follow-
ing words:
father  leaving  hear  thoroughly  fast  haste  lookalike  sausage  ooze
Recommendations for reading
The reading recommended in Chapter 3 is equally suitable for this
chapter, although you will wish to concentrate this time on sections
relating to vowels rather than consonants. Sound changes, and their
contribution to the present-day structure of the language, have been
mentioned several times above and in earlier chapters: if you are
interested in language change, you might like to consult Campbell
(1998) or Trask (1996).
78
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

7 Vowel phonemes
7.1 The same but different again
As we saw in the last chapter, most of the features which work well in
classifying and describing consonants are entirely inappropriate for
vowels, while vowels vary in dimensions (such as tongue height) which
are not relevant for consonants. However, when we turn to the criteria
for establishing phonemes, and the exceptions to these reviewed in
Chapters 2 and 5, it turns out that vowels and consonants behave very
similarly indeed. The sections below therefore fulﬁl a dual role of
providing more information about vowels, while allowing some revision
of notions like complementary distribution, allophonic rules, free vari-
ation, neutralisation and phonetic similarity, which were ﬁrst introduced
mainly in connection with consonants.
7.2 Establishing vowel contrasts
7.2.1 Minimal pairs
Minimal pairs and the commutation test are the main tools available
to the phonologist in ascertaining phonemic contrast among both con-
sonants and vowels. A minimal pair list for SSBE vowels appears in (1).
(1) Vowel minimal pairs
bit
//
bet
/ε/
bat
//
but
//
beat
/i/
bait
/e/
Bart
/ɑ/
boat
/oυ/
bought
/ɔ/
79

boot
/u/
bite
/a/
bout
/aυ/
sherbet
/ə/
Bert
//
The list above provides evidence for almost all phonemically con-
trastive vowels of SSBE, with a very small number of exceptions. Since
schwa only appears in unstressed syllables, where most of the other
vowels cannot appear, we must make do with near-minimal comparisons
in this case, contrasting the second, unstressed syllable of sherbet with the
various stressed syllables in (1). The short vowels /υ/ and /ɒ/, and the
centring diphthongs, which were listed as SSBE vowels in the last chap-
ter, do not appear in the selected context /b-t/; but the additional data
in (2) shows that /υ/ and /ɒ/ on the one hand, and the three centring
diphthongs on the other, contrast both with one another and with rep-
resentative members of the list in (1). Phonemic contrast is a transitive
relationship, meaning that if phoneme a contrasts with phoneme b,
and phoneme b contrasts with phoneme c, then phonemes a and c also
contrast: this means that if a contrast can be established between one of
the ‘left-out’ vowels and any vowel in (1), then that vowel can be taken as
contrasting with all the vowels in (1).
(2) pit //
put /υ/
pot /ɒ/
peat /i/
etc.
leer /ə/
lair /εə/
lure /υə/
lore /ɔ/
Sets of minimal pairs like this may work very well for one accent, but
not for another. Some disparities of this sort were discussed in earlier
chapters; for instance, minimal pairs like lock /k/ versus loch /x/, or witch
/w/ versus which // will be relevant for many Scottish speakers in
establishing the voiceless velar and labial-velar fricative phonemes, but
both members of the pairs will have /k/ and /w/ respectively in many
other accents of English. Although this was a rather minor issue for
consonants, it is much more important in discussing vowel phoneme
systems, since as we shall see in Chapter 8, most accent variation in
English involves vowels.
7.2.2 Standard lexical sets
The oppositions established for SSBE in (1) and (2) cannot, then,
be transferred automatically to other accents. For instance, General
American has no centring diphthong phonemes; leer, lair and lure have
the /i/, /e/ and /u/ vowels of beat, bait and boot, followed in each case
80
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

by /r/. GA also lacks the /ɒ/ vowel of SSBE pot; but we cannot assume
that all the words with /ɒ/ in SSBE have a single, different phoneme in
GA. On the contrary, some words, like lot, pot, sock, possible have GA /ɑ/
(as also in palm, father, Bart, far in both accents); but others, including cloth,
cough, cross, long have GA /ɔ/ (as also in thought, sauce, north, war in both
accents).
It follows that lists of minimal pairs are suitable when our goal is the
establishment of a phoneme system for a single accent; but they may
not be the best option when different accents are being compared. An
alternative is to use a system introduced by John Wells (see Recom-
mendations for reading), involving ‘standard lexical sets’, as shown in (3).
The key word for each standard lexical set appears conventionally in
capital letters, and is shorthand for a whole list of other words sharing
the same vowel, although the precise vowel they do share may vary from
accent to accent.
(3) Standard Lexical Sets
SSBE
GA
Set number
Keyword


1

ε
ε
2

a

3

ɒ
ɑ
4



5

υ
υ
6

ɑ

7

ɒ
ɔ
8



9

i
i
10

e
e
11

ɑ
ɑ
12

ɔ
ɔ
13

oυ
o
14

u
u
15

a
a
16

ɔ
ɔ
17

aυ
aυ
18

ə
ir
19

εə
er
20

ɑ
ɑr
21

ɔ
ɔr
22

ɔ
or
23

υə
ur
24

VOWEL PHONEMES
81


i
25
Y
ə
ər
26
ER
ə
ə
27
A
These lexical sets allow comparison between accents to be made much
more straightforwardly: we can now ask which vowel speakers of a par-
ticular accent have in the set, or whether they have the same vowel
in and (as SSBE does) or two different vowels (as GA does).
We could add that many speakers of Northern English will have /υ/ in
as well as , and /a/ in as well as , pinpointing two
of the differences most commonly noted between north and south. The
point of the standard lexical sets is not to show that oppositions exist
in all these contexts: in fact, there may be no accent of English which
contrasts twenty-seven phonemically different vowels in the twenty-
seven lexical sets (or even twenty-four, for the stressed vowels). Instead,
the aim is to allow differences between accents (and sometimes between
speakers of the same accent, perhaps in different generations) to be
pinpointed and discussed.
More detail on accent variation will be given in the next chapter. For
the moment, to illustrate the usefulness of the standard lexical sets, the
vowels of two further accents are given in (4). Standard Scottish English
(or SSE) is the Scottish equivalent of SSBE: a relatively unlocalised,
socially prestigious accent. Many middle-class Scots have SSE as a
native variety; many others use it in formal situations, and it is widely
heard in the media, in education and in the Scottish Parliament. It is to
be contrasted with Scots, sometimes called ‘broad Scots’, a divergent
range of non-standard Scottish dialects which differ from English
Standard English not only in phonetics and phonology, but also in
vocabulary and grammar. The ﬁnal example is New Zealand English, a
relatively recent variety which shares some characteristics with the other
extraterritorial Englishes spoken in Australia and South Africa, but also
has some distinctive characteristics of its own, notably the fact that schwa
appears in stressed position, in the lexical set.
(4) SSE
NZE
Set number
Keyword

ə
1

ε
e
2

a
ε
3

ɒ
ɒ
4



5

u
υ
6

a
a
7

ɒ
ɒ
8

82
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

r

9

i
i
10

e
ε
11

a
a
12

ɒ
ɔ
13

o
əu
14

u
iu
15


a
16

ɔ
ɔ
17

υ
aυ
18

ir
iə
19

er
eə
20

ar
a
21

ɒr
ɔ
22

or
ɔ
23

ur
uə
24

i
i
25
Y
ər
ə
26
ER

ə
27
A
A number of differences between these accents, and between each of
them and SSBE or GA, can be read off these lists. For instance, SSE does
not contrast the and vowels, so that Sam and psalm, which are
minimal pairs for all the other varieties considered so far, are homo-
phonous for Scottish speakers, both having short low front /a/. In NZE,
Sam and psalm do form a minimal pair, but not with low short front /a/
or // versus low long back /ɑ/: instead, in NZE we ﬁnd mid short
front /ε/ as opposed to low long back front /a/. Both the and
vowels in NZE are higher than those of SSBE or GA, while the
long vowels of , , and are very characteristically
diphthongs.
Recall, however, that phonemes are abstract units, and thus could
potentially be symbolised using any IPA, or indeed any other character.
The symbols chosen for particular phonemes in the lists above are not
the only possibilities; they reﬂect a choice made by a particular phonol-
ogist. I have elected to use a symbol for each phoneme, in each accent,
which corresponds to one of the main allophones of that phoneme:
that is, in many cases speakers of the accent in question will actually
pronounce the symbol given in the list, with its normal IPA value. Thus,
NZE speakers will often say [ε] in trap, and [e] in dress, and will typically
have a diphthongal pronounciation of ﬂeece, goose, goat and face. However,
for some phonologists the symbols used in (4) would not be the most
VOWEL PHONEMES
83

obvious choices. This highlights a decision phonologists must make
in establishing a phoneme system. On the one hand, we may wish our
phonemes to be fairly concrete, reﬂecting quite closely what speakers
actually do in at least some of their everyday pronunciations; this is
the choice made here. It follows that there will be signiﬁcant symbol
differences between the vowel systems of different accents. On the other
hand, some phonologists feel it is more important to reﬂect the fact
that English is a single language, and believe that speakers must have
common mental representations to allow them to understand one
another, even if they speak rather different accents. In that case, common
phoneme symbols might be chosen. For instance, instead of using /i/
for in NZE, we would select /i/, stressing that this is the same
phoneme as in SSBE or GA, although there would then have to be an
allophonic rule to say that this phoneme is very typically diphthongised
for most New Zealanders.
The second solution has the advantage that it stresses the common
features speakers of English might share, at least in terms of mental
representations, although they may sound very different in actual con-
versation. It therefore maintains a strong difference between abstract
phonology, and concrete phonetics: the /a/ phoneme in would be
low [a] for SSBE, but low mid [ε] for NZE, while the /ε/ phoneme of
would be high mid [e] for NZE, and low mid [ε] in all the other
accents we have examined, meaning that phonemes potentially have
very different realisations, and the same realisation can belong to differ-
ent phonemes in different accents. At this point, we do not know enough
about how speakers store and process their language mentally to prove
which is the most appropriate solution; but it is worth asking how
speakers would learn a very abstract system, which does not reﬂect the
phonetic qualities they hear around them during language acquisition. If
a New Zealander pronounces the vowel as a diphthong, and hears
NZE or Australian English (which also tends to have a diphthong here)
much more often than British or American accents, why would such a
speaker assume this vowel phoneme should be stored as anything other
than a diphthong? And why should the ‘right’ value for the phoneme
corresponds to what is pronounced in British or American English,
rather than in New Zealand or Australia? The decision between rep-
resentations which are close to phonetic reality, but with considerable
accent variation and potentially rather messy systems, or rather abstract
phonemes, with streamlined and economical systems unifying the
speakers of different varieties, must be confronted whenever we move
away from surface phonetics and into phonology. In this book, I shall
continue to use phoneme symbols which correspond to major allo-
84
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

phones of those phonemes in the accent concerned; but other, more
abstract alternatives can be found in the recommended further reading.
7.3 Vowel features and allophonic rules
Once phonemic contrasts have been established for the accent in
question, and the appropriate representation for each phoneme has been
selected, the realisations of those phonemes must be determined and
rules written to describe allophonic variation. Again, features and rule
notation can be used to formalise these statements. We saw in Chapter 4
that vowels are [+syllabic, –consonantal, +sonorant, +voice, –nasal]. To
distinguish English vowels appropriately, we also require the features
[±high], [±mid] for the dimension of tongue height; [±front], [±back]
for place of articulation; and [±round]. These give the illustrative matrix
in (5).
(5)
[high]
[mid]
[front]
[back]
[round]
[i]
+
–
+
–
–
[e]
+
+
+
–
–
[ε]
–
+
+
–
–
[a]
–
–
+
–
–
[u]
+
–
–
+
+
[o]
+
+
–
+
+
[ɔ]
–
+
–
+
+
[ɑ]
–
–
–
+
–
[ə]
–
+
–
–
–
These features can distinguish four contrastive degrees of vowel
height, and three degrees of frontness, which allows all varieties of
English to be described. However, /i/ and //, and /u/ and /υ/, will
be identical in this matrix. In SSBE and GA, the former in each pair is
typically long, and the latter short; and long vowels are also articulated
more extremely, or more peripherally than corresponding short ones:
the long high front vowel is higher and fronter than the short high front
vowel, while the long high back vowel is higher and backer than its
short counterpart. The question is whether we regard this as primarily a
quality or a quantity difference. If we take quality as primary, we can
regard /i/, /u/, /ɑ/, /ɔ/ as [+tense], or more peripheral, and simply
write a redundancy rule to say that all tense vowels are phonetically
long. On the other hand, we could do the opposite, and take length as
the important factor, so these vowels are long /i/, /u/, /ɑ/ and /ɔ/,
and redundantly also more peripheral.
For most accents of English, we could choose either solution, although
VOWEL PHONEMES
85

most phonologists would select either length or tenseness as relevant
at the phoneme level, with the other simply following automatically, to
minimise redundancy in the system. However, in SSE and Scots dialects,
it matters which we choose. This is because vowels in Scottish accents
(and some related Northern Irish accents) are unique among varieties of
English in one respect: we can predict where vowels are phonetically
long, and where they are phonetically short. Vowels become long before
/r v ð z / and at the end of a word, but they are short everywhere else,
as shown in (6).
(6) The Scottish Vowel Length Rule
/i/
[i]
beat
wreath
leaf
bean
[i]
beer
wreathe
leave
agree
/o/
[o]
boat
close (Adj)
foal
ode
[o]
bow
close (V)
four
owe
//, /ε/ and //, which are short and lax in other accents, do not
lengthen in any circumstances. In SSE and Scots, then, we can deﬁne the
two classes of phonemic vowels as lax (the three which never lengthen)
and tense (the others, which are sometimes long and sometimes short, in
predictably different environments). It is possible to predict length from
[±tense], but not the other way around. The allophonic rule involved
will then state that tense vowels lengthen before /r/, before a voiced
fricative, or before a word boundary (that is, in word-ﬁnal position), to
account for the data in (6).
Other allophonic rules are more general. For instance, in all varieties
of English, vowels become nasalised immediately before nasal con-
sonants; the velum lowers in anticipation of the forthcoming nasal, and
allows air to ﬂow through the nasal as well as the oral cavity during the
production of the vowel. If you produce cat and can, then regardless of
whether your vowel is front or back, there will be a slight difference in
quality due to nasalisation in the second case; you may hear this as a
slight lowering of the pitch. This rule is shown in (7); note that the
symbol V here means ‘any vowel’.
(7)
V
→
[+nasal]
/
____ [+nasal]
Just as for consonants, then, some allophonic rules specifying the
realisations of vowel phonemes are found very generally in English (and
may in fact, as in the case of the nasalisation process in (7), reﬂect uni-
versal phonetic tendencies); others, like the Scottish Vowel Length Rule,
are peculiar to certain accents.
86
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

7.4 Phonetic similarity and defective distribution
Just as we saw for consonants in Chapter 5, phonetic similarity can help
us decide which vowel allophones to assign to which phonemes, and
defective distributions hinder our decision-making. For instance,
schwa in accents other than NZE is conﬁned to unstressed positions, and
therefore does not strictly speaking contrast with most other vowels.
Its defective distribution means it could be regarded as the unstressed
allophone of almost any other vowel phoneme. So, schwa appears in
the unstressed syllables of about, father, fathom, sherbet, pompous; but which
vowel phoneme is involved in each case? Since speakers do not tend to
produce vowels other than schwa in any of these forms, even when
speaking rather carefully, it is difﬁcult to say. We could say that there
is wholesale neutralisation of vowel phonemes in unstressed syllables;
alternatively, because speakers of English can hear the difference
between schwa and other vowels quite reliably, and seem to regard schwa
as a distinct vowel, the best solution might be to accept that schwa is a
phoneme of English in its own right, albeit with a defective distribution.
Again as with consonants, defective distributions often result from
language change. For instance, spelling evidence from Old English in-
dicates that a much wider range of vowels was probably found in
unstressed syllables at that period; these have gradually merged into
schwa during the history of English. Similarly, the centring diphthongs
of SSBE are generally found where there is an <r> in the spelling, and
where other accents, like SSE and GA, have combinations of a vowel
found elsewhere in the system, plus [ɹ]. Historically, all varieties of
English followed the SSE/GA pattern; but accents like SSBE lost [ɹ] in
certain contexts, with a related change in the realisation of vowels
producing the centring diphthongs.
As for phonetic similarity, it will again help to resolve situations where
one allophone could potentially belong to more than one phoneme,
although phonologists (and native speakers) apply this criterion so auto-
matically as to scarcely justify making it an explicit step in phonemic
analysis. In the case of vowel nasalisation before nasals, for instance,
there is a situation of complementary distribution between ALL nasal-
ised allophones on the one hand, since these can appear only adjacent
to a nasal consonant, and ALL oral allophones on the other. It is theor-
etically possible that [u] and [˜], or [ε] and [υ˜], might be assigned to
the same phoneme, if we took only complementary distribution into
account. However, since the members of these vowel pairs differ from
one another with respect to more features than simply [nasal], notably
in terms of frontness; and since there are alternative pairings available,
VOWEL PHONEMES
87

namely [i] and [˜], or [υ] and [υ˜], where nasalisation is the only differ-
ence at issue, these minimally different, more phonetically similar pair-
ings will be used in establishing which two realisations belong to each
phoneme.
7.5 Free variation, neutralisation and morphophonemics
Some examples involving free variation between vowel phonemes were
reviewed in Chapter 5: for instance, economic can be pronounced, for the
same speaker, with the vowel on some occasions and the 
vowel on others, and although this conﬂicts with the requirement that
different phonemes should not be substitutable without causing a
change in meaning to be conveyed, such a marginal case involving only
a single lexical item should not in fact compromise the distinction
between /ε/ and /i/, given the signiﬁcant number of minimal pairs
establishing their contrast.
Free variation also occurs between allophones of a single phoneme.
This again correlates with sociolinguistic rather than linguistic con-
ditioning. For instance, in NZE some speakers produce //, the 
vowel, with lip-rounding, more signiﬁcantly so in informal circum-
stances. Similarly, New Yorkers may produce the and 
vowels as monophthongs in formal situations, but prefer diphthongs in
casual speech; and the quality of the diphthongs varies too, with [i], [υu]
being more common for middle-class speakers, but more central ﬁrst
elements, and hence a greater distance between the two parts of the
diphthongs, for working-class speakers. Some cases of free variation
reﬂect language change in progress: so, in SSBE older speakers may still
produce centring diphthongs in and words, while younger
ones almost invariably smoothe these diphthongs out and produce
monopthongal [ɔ], [ε]. Younger speakers might use the pronunciations
more typical of the older generation when they are talking to older rela-
tives, or in formal circumstances.
Cases of neutralisation tend not to be subject to sociolinguistic in-
ﬂuence in this way, but rather reﬂect a tendency for certain otherwise
contrastive sets or pairs of vowels to fall together with a single realisation
in a particular phonological context. In the last chapter, we saw that the
, and vowels are neutralised for many GA speakers
before /r/, so that merry, marry and Mary become homophonous: in
this context, rather than the usual /ε/, //, /e/ opposition, we might
propose archiphonemic /E/, realised as [ε]. Neutralisations of this sort
are extremely common for English vowels. To take just two further
examples, speakers from the southern states of the USA have a neutral-
88
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

isation of the and vowels before /n/, so that pin and pen are
homophonous; and for many speakers of SSE and Scots, the opposition
between the and vowels is suspended before /r/, so that ﬁr and
fur are both pronounced with [].
However, whereas suspension of contrast takes place in a particular
phonological context, and will affect all lexical items with that context,
in other cases we are dealing with an interaction of morphology and
phonology; here, we cannot invoke neutralisation. For instance, the dis-
cussion of the Scottish Vowel Length Rule above does not quite tell the
full story, since we also ﬁnd alternations of long and short vowels in the
cases in (8).
(8) Short
Long
greed
agreed
brood
brewed
bonus
slowness
typing
tie-pin
From the Scottish Vowel Length Rule examples considered earlier, we
concluded that vowel length is not contrastive in SSE and Scots, since it
was possible to predict that long vowels appear before certain consonants
or at the end of a word, while short ones appear elsewhere. However, the
data in (8) appear, on purely phonological grounds, to constitute mini-
mal pairs for short and long vowels. In fact, what seems to matter is the
structure of the words concerned. The vowels in the ‘Long’ column of
(8) are in a sense word-ﬁnal; they precede the inﬂectional ending [d]
marking past tense; or the sufﬁx -ness; or appear at the end of the ﬁrst
element of a compound, which is a word in its own right, as in tie. This is
not true for the ‘Short’ column, where the words are not separable in this
way. The Scottish Vowel Length Rule must therefore be rewritten to take
account of the morphological structure of words: it operates before /r/
and voiced fricatives, at the end of a word, and also at the end of a
morpheme, or meaningful unit within the word; in the cases in (8), the
affected vowel is at the end of a stem.
In other cases, different vowel phonemes alternate with one another
before particular sufﬁxes, as we found for consonants in Chapter 5 where
the ﬁnal [k] of electric became [s] or [ʃ] before certain sufﬁxes, as in
electricity and electrician. One of the best-known cases in English, and one
which affects all varieties, involves pairs of words like those in (9).
(9) divine – divinity
line – linear
/a/ – //
serene – serenity
supreme – supremacy
/i/ – /ε/
sane – sanity
explain – explanatory
/e/ – //
VOWEL PHONEMES
89

These Vowel Shift alternations (so-called because the patterns reﬂect
the operation of a sound change called the Great Vowel Shift several
hundred years ago) involve pairs of phonemes which very clearly con-
trast in English – the members of the and , and ,
and and pairs of standard lexical sets. Minimal pairs are
common for all of these (take type and tip, peat and pet, lake and lack, for
instance). However, the presence of each member of these pairs can be
predicted in certain contexts only; and native speakers tend to regard the
pairs involved, such as divine and divinity, as related forms of the same
word. This is not neutralisation, because the context involved is not
speciﬁcally phonetic or phonological: it is morphological. That is, what
matters is not the length of the word, or the segment following the vowel
in question, but the presence or absence of one of a particular set of
sufﬁxes. In underived forms (that is, those with no sufﬁx at all) we ﬁnd
the tense or long vowel, here /a/, /i/ or /e/; but in derived forms, with
a sufﬁx like -ity, -ar, -acy, -ation, a corresponding lax or short vowel //,
/ε/ or // appears instead. This alternation is a property of the lexical
item concerned; vowel changes typically appear when certain sufﬁxes
are added, but there are exceptions like obese, with /i/ in the underived
stem, and the same vowel (rather than the /ε/ we might predict) in
obesity, regardless of the presence of the sufﬁx -ity. Opting out in this way
does not seem to be a possibility in cases of neutralisation, but is quite
common in cases of morphophonemics, or the interaction between
phonology and morphology.
To put it another way, not all alternations involving morphology are
completely productive. Some are: this means that every single relevant
word of English obeys the regularity involved (so, all those nouns which
form their plural using a -s sufﬁx will have this pronounced as [s] after
a voiceless ﬁnal sound in the stem, [z] after a voiced one, and [z] after
a sibilant; not only this, but any new nouns which are borrowed into
English from other languages, or just made up, will also follow this
pattern). Others are fairly regular, but not entirely so: this goes for the
Vowel Shift cases above. And yet others are not regular at all, but are
simply properties of individual lexical items which children or second-
language learners have to learn as such. The fact that teach has the past
tense taught is an idiosyncrasy of modern English which has to be
mastered; but although knowing this relationship will help a learner of
English to use teach and taught appropriately, it will not help when it
comes to learning other verbs, because preach does not have the past
tense *praught, and caught does not have the present tense *ceach. Knowing
where we should draw the line between extremely regular cases which
clearly involve exceptionless rules or generalisations, fairly regular ones
90
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

which may be stated as rules with exceptions, and one-off (or several-
off) cases where there is no rule at all but a good deal of rote-learning, is
one of the major challenges of morphophonology. The only comfort
is that native speakers, at least during acquisition and sometimes later
too, ﬁnd it just as much of a challenge, as amply demonstrated by
overgeneralisations like past-tense swang from swing (on the pattern of
swim – swam) or past-tense [trεt] from treat (on the pattern of meet – met).
Exercises
1. Make phonemic transcriptions for the following words, for (a) SSBE,
(b) GA, (c) SSE and (d) NZE.
water grass righteousness holiday pilchard following northeast spoonful
2. Write rules for the following processes:
(a) Front rounded vowels become unrounded before velars
(b) Vowels devoice before voiceless consonants
(c) /i u  υ/ become /e o ε ɒ/ after clusters of two consonants, the
second of which is a nasal
(d) /ɑ ɔ/ become /u/ before palatal consonants or at the beginnings
of words
3. Go back to the nursery rhyme or short poem you transcribed in the
exercises to Chapter 5. Now, instead of using V for all vowels, transcribe
the vowels using the reference accent (from SSBE, GA, SSE and NZE)
with which you are most familiar, or which is closest to your own.
4. Make a list of the standard lexical sets, and write down which vowel
phoneme you have in each of the twenty-seven cases. Which vowel
symbols have you chosen to symbolise each phoneme, and why?
Recommendations for reading
The general phonology textbooks recommended for Chapter 5 are also
relevant here. The standard lexical set approach is set out in detail in
Wells (1983), which also provides a wealth of information on varieties
of English. More detail on the linguistic situation in Scotland and the
varieties spoken there can be found in Jones (1997).
VOWEL PHONEMES
91

8 Variation between accents
8.1 The importance of accent
Every  speaker of English has a particular system of his or her own,
known by linguists as that individual’s idiolect. However, considering
language only at the idiolectal level might produce extremely thorough
and detailed descriptions, but would give rather little insight into why
individuals speak in the way they do. To understand this, we must
identify higher-level groupings, and investigate geographical and social
accents. That is to say, individuals adopt a particular mode of speech (or
more accurately, move along a continuum of modes of speech) depend-
ing on who they want to identify with, who they are talking to, and what
impression they want to make. Not all these ‘decisions’ are conscious,
of course. Small children learn to speak as their immediate family
members do; but quite soon, the peer group at school (even nursery)
becomes at least equally important; and later, older children, then tele-
vision presenters, actors or sporting heroes may become role models,
leading to modiﬁcations in accent. Consequently, age-related differ-
ences appear in all varieties; some will be transient, as a particular TV
show falls out of fashion and the words or pronunciations borrowed from
it disappear; others will become entrenched in young people’s language,
and may persist into adulthood, becoming entirely standard forms for
the next generation.
This ﬂexibility, and the associated facts of variation and gradual
change, mean that phonologists face a Catch-22 situation. On the one
hand, describing idiolects will give seriously limited information, since
it will not reveal the groups an individual belongs to, or the dynamics of
those groups. On the other hand, we must take care that the groups are
not described at too abstract a level. Any description of ‘an accent’ is
necessarily an idealisation, since no two speakers will use precisely the
same system in precisely the same way: our physical idiosyncracies,
different backgrounds, and different preferences and aspirations will see
92

to that. Nonetheless, two speakers of, say, Scottish Standard English,
or New Zealand English, will have a common core of features, which
allows them to be grouped together by speakers of the same accent, by
speakers of other accents, and by phonologists. Not everyone is equally
adept at making these identiﬁcations, of course. Speakers of other
varieties may succeed in placing accents only within a very wide
geographical boundary: thus, a speaker of GA may have difﬁculty in
distinguishing a Scottish from an Irish speaker, while conversely, a Scot
may confuse Americans and Canadians. Within groups, however, much
more subtle distinctions are perceived and have geographical or social
meaning: hence, one speaker of SSE may identify another as coming
from Glasgow rather than Edinburgh, and perhaps even from a particu-
lar area of the city; and may well base assumptions to do with social class
and level of education on those linguistic factors.
Accent is clearly extremely important, as one of the major tools we
use in drawing inferences about our fellow humans, and in projecting
particular images of ourselves. Phonologists should, then, be able to do
as speakers do, in identifying and classifying accents, but with a more
technical rather than emotional classiﬁcation of the differences and
similarities between them. An accent, in phonological terms, is an ideal-
ised system which speakers of that variety share. Although slight differ-
ences in its use may be apparent, both across and within individuals, its
speakers will still share more in common with one another, and with that
idealised accent system, than with speakers of any other idealised accent
system. Standard accents should also be described in just the same way
as non-standard ones, as they provide just the same sort of social and
geographical information about their users: that is, although it is quite
common for speakers of a standard accent, such as SSBE in the south of
England, to claim that they have no accent, other speakers (and phonol-
ogists) know different.
A more detailed appreciation of the cues speakers attend to in differ-
ent accents, and the social judgements they make on that basis, is a matter
for sociolinguistics and dialectology rather than phonology. The main
contribution a phonologist can make is to produce a classiﬁcation of
types of differences between accents, which can then be used in dis-
tinguishing any set of systems; and that is the goal of this chapter. In the
next three sections, then, we shall introduce a three-way classiﬁcation
of accent differences, and illustrate these using examples involving both
consonants and vowels. First, the systems of two accents may contain
different numbers of phonemes, so different phonemic oppositions can
be established for them: these are systemic differences. Second, the same
phonemes may have different allophones: these are realisational differ-
VARIATION BETWEEN ACCENTS
93

ences. Finally, there are distributional differences, whereby the same
lexical item may have different phonemes in two different varieties; or
alternatively, the same phoneme may have a phonological restriction on
its distribution in one variety but not another.
8.2 Systemic differences
The ﬁrst and most obvious difference between accents is the systemic
type, where a phoneme opposition is present in one variety, but absent
in another. Consonantal examples in English are relatively rare. As we
have already seen, some varieties of English, notably SSE, Scots and
NZE, have a contrast between /w/ and //, as evidenced by minimal
pairs like Wales and whales, or witch and which. Similarly, SSE and Scots
have the voiceless velar fricative /x/, which contrasts with /k/ for
instance in loch versus lock, but which is absent from other accents. NZE
speakers will therefore tend to have one more phoneme, and Scots and
SSE speakers two more, than the norm for accents of English.
Conversely, some accents have fewer consonant phonemes than most
accents of English. For instance, in Cockney and various other inner-city
English accents, [h]-dropping is so common, and so unrestricted in
terms of formality of speech, that we might regard /h/ as having dis-
appeared from the system altogether. This is also true for some varieties
of Jamaican English. In many parts of the West Indies, notably the
Bahamas and Bermuda, there is no contrast between /v/ and /w/, with
either [w] or a voiced bilabial fricative [β] being used for both, meaning
that /v/ is absent from the phonemic and phonetic systems. The same
contrast is typically missing in Indian English, but the opposition is
resolved in a rather different direction, with the labio-dental approxi-
mant ["] very frequently being used for the initial sound of wine and vine,
or west and vest. Again, there is only a single phoneme in this case in
Indian English.
The number of accent differences involving vowels, and the extent of
variation in that domain, is very signiﬁcantly greater than in the case of
consonants for systemic, realisational and distributional differences.
This probably reﬂects the fact that the vowel systems of all English
varieties are relatively large, so that a considerable number of vowels
occupy a rather restricted articulatory and perceptual space; in con-
sequence, whenever and wherever one vowel changes, it is highly likely
to start to encroach on the territory of some adjacent vowel. It follows
that a development beginning as a fairly minor change in the pronun-
ciation of a single vowel will readily have a knock-on effect on other
94
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

vowels in the system, so that accent differences in this area rapidly snow-
ball. In addition, as we saw in earlier chapters, the phonetics of vowels is
a very ﬂuid area, with each dimension of vowel classiﬁcation forming a
continuum, so that small shifts in pronunciation are extremely common,
and variation between accents, especially when speakers of those accents
are not in day-to-day communication with each other, develops easily.
Systemic differences in the case of vowel phonemes can be read easily
from lists of Standard Lexical Sets and the systems plotted from these on
vowel quadrilaterals. If for the moment we stick to the four reference
accents introduced in the last chapter, namely SSBE, GA, SSE and NZE,
we can see that SSBE has the largest number of oppositions, with the
others each lacking a certain number of these.
Comparing GA to SSBE, we ﬁnd that GA lacks /ɒ/, so that 
words are produced with /ɑ/, as are words, while has the
/ɔ/ of . In this respect, SSBE is ‘old-fashioned’: it maintains
the ancestral state shared by the two accents. However, in GA realis-
ations of the earlier /ɒ/ have changed their quality and merged, or
become identical with the realisations of either /ɑ/ or /ɔ/. GA also
lacks the centring diphthongs of SSBE, so that , , share
the vowels of , , respectively, but since GA is rhotic, the
former lexical sets also have a realisation of /r/, while the latter do not.
In this case, however, the historical innovation has been in SSBE. At the
time of the initial settlement of British immigrants in North America,
most varieties of English were rhotic, as GA still is; but the ancestor
of SSBE has subsequently become non-rhotic. The loss of /r/ before
a consonant or a pause in SSBE has had various repercussions on the
vowel system, most notably the development of the centring diphthongs.
In systemic terms, NZE lacks only one of the oppositions found in
SSBE, namely that between // and /ə/; in NZE, both and ER
words have schwa. There are more differences in symbols between the
SSBE and NZE lexical set lists in Chapter 7; but these typically reﬂect
realisational, and sometimes distributional, rather than systemic differ-
ences, as we shall see in the next two sections. That is to say, I have
chosen to represent the vowel of NZE as /ε/ and  as /e/,
as /i/ and as /ε/, to highlight the typical realisational
differences between the two accents. However, in phonemic terms, the
and vowel, and the and vowel, still contrast in
NZE just as they do in SSBE. That is, the pairs of vowel phonemes in (1)
are equivalent: they are symbolised differently because they are very
generally pronounced differently (and we could equally well have
chosen the same phonemic symbols in each case, to emphasise this
parity, at the cost of a slightly more abstract system for NZE; see the
VARIATION BETWEEN ACCENTS
95

discussion in Section 7.2.2 above), but the members of the pairs are doing
the same job in the different accents.
(1) SSBE
NZE
ε
e


ε

i
i

e
ε

When we turn to SSE, however, we ﬁnd a considerably reduced
system relative to SSBE. As we might expect, given that SSE is rhotic, it
lacks the centring diphthongs, so that , , share the
vowels of , , , though the former will have a ﬁnal [ɹ]
following the vowel. SSE also typically lacks the /ε/ vowel of ,
with [r] appearing here instead; so the and sets share the
same vowel. Leaving aside vowels before /r/, however, there are three
main oppositions in SSBE which are not part of the SSE system, as
shown in (2).
(2) SSBE
SSE
a
a

ɑ
a

ɒ
ɒ

ɔ
ɒ

υ
u

u
u

Each of these three contrasting pairs of vowel phonemes in SSBE
corresponds to a single phoneme in SSE. While Sam – psalm, cot – caught,
and pull – pool are minimal pairs in SSBE, establishing the oppositions
between /a/ and /ɑ/, /ɒ/ and /ɔ/, and /υ/ and /u/ respectively, for
SSE speakers the members of each pair will be homophonous. There is
no vowel quality difference; and the Scottish Vowel Length Rule, which
makes vowel length predictable for SSE and Scots, means there is no
contrastive vowel quantity either. There is some variation in SSE in this
respect: speakers who have more contact with SSBE, or who identify in
some way with English English, may have some or all of these oppo-
sitions in their speech. If an SSE speaker has only one of these contrasts,
it is highly likely to be /a/ – /ɑ/; if /υ/ and /u/ are contrasted, we can
predict that the /ɒ/ – /ɔ/ and /a/ – /ɑ/ pairs also form part of the
system.
Of course, such systemic differences are not restricted to the refer-
ence accents surveyed above and in Chapter 7. For instance, within
British English, many accents of the north of England and north
96
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

Midlands fail to contrast /υ/ and //, so that put and putt, or book and buck
all have /υ/. In some parts of the western United States, speakers typi-
cally lack the /ɑ/ – /ɔ/ opposition found in GA, and will therefore
have /ɑ/ in both cot and caught. Other varieties of English have an even
more extreme reduction of the vowel system relative to SSBE. These
are typically accents which began life as second language varieties of
English: that is, they were at least initially learned by native speakers
of languages other than English, although they may subsequently have
become ofﬁcial language varieties in particular territories, and be spoken
natively by more recent generations. Inevitably, these varieties have
been inﬂuenced by the native languages of their speakers, showing
that language contact can also be a powerful motivating force in accent
variation.
One case involves Singapore English. Singapore became a British
colony in 1819, and English was introduced to a population of native
speakers of Chinese, Malay, Tamil and a number of other languages.
Increasingly today, children attend English-medium schools, and use
English at home, so that Singapore English is becoming established as a
native variety. Its structure, however, shows signiﬁcant inﬂuence from
other languages, notably Malay and Hokkien, the Chinese ‘dialect’ with
the largest number of speakers in Singapore. As with many accents, there
is a continuum of variation in Singapore English, so that non-native
speakers are likely to have pronunciations more distant from, say, SSBE:
thus, while a native Singapore English speaker will say [mal] ‘mile’, a
second-language speaker who is much more inﬂuenced by his native
language may say [mυ]. Increasingly, younger speakers of Singapore
English are also looking to American rather than British English as a
reference variety, so that further change in the system is likely. The
system presented as Singapore English (SgE) in (3) is characteristic of
native or near-native speakers. Note that SgE has no contrastive differ-
ences of vowel length, and that /ɯ/ is the IPA symbol for a high back
unrounded vowel.
(3) SSBE
SgE
Set number
Keyword

i
1

ε
ε
2

a
ε
3

ɑ
ɔ
4



5

υ
u
6

ɑ
ε
7

ɒ
ɔ
8

VARIATION BETWEEN ACCENTS
97


ɯ
9

i
i
10

e
e
11

ɑ

12

ɔ
ɔ
13

oυ
o
14

u
u
15

a
ai
16

ɔ
ɔi
17

aυ
au
18

ə
iə
19

εə
ε
20

ɑ

21

ɔ
ɔ
22

ɔ
o
23

υə
uə
24


i
25
Y
ə
ə
26
ER
ə
ə
27
A
As (3) shows, many of the vowel oppositions found in SSBE are absent
from SgE; and in the great majority of cases, the main reason for the
changes in SgE is the structure of other languages spoken in Singapore.
(The same contact inﬂuences account for realisational differences
between SgE and other Englishes, which we consider in the next
section.) Looking at the various phoneme mergers in SgE in more detail,
we ﬁnd the patterns in (4).
(4) Lexical sets
Merged SgE vowel
Malay
Hokkien
, , 
ε
e
e
, 
i
i
i
, 
ɔ
ɔ
, 
u
υ, u
u
, , 

no low back vowels
In all these cases, lexical sets which have distinct vowels in SSBE (and
often in other accents too) share a single vowel in SgE; and furthermore,
this vowel tends to correspond to the vowel found in either Hokkien, or
Malay, or both. Thus, instead of /ε/ versus /a/, SgE has only /ε/; both
Hokkien and Malay have only a higher vowel in this area, namely /e/
(and realisationally, SgE /ε/ raises to [e] before plosives and affricates,
as in head, neck, neutralising the opposition between /e/, the monoph-
thong found in words, and /ε/ in , in this context, so that
98
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

bread – braid, red – raid, bed – bade are homophones). The merger of the
, sets follows the pattern for Malay and Hokkien, and the same
is true of //; neither Malay nor Hokkien has any low
back vowels, and the SgE vowel for all these sets is higher and more
central; in SgE this merger means that cart and cut, or charm and chum, are
homophonous. In the cases of /, and /, SgE
follows the Hokkien pattern; Malay has neither /ɒ/ nor /ɔ/, but both
/υ/ and /u/. Whichever local language has exerted most inﬂuence in any
particular instance, it is clear that native language systems have acted
as a ﬁlter or template for non-native learners of Singapore English,
creating the vowel system found today.
8.3 Realisational differences
In the second type of accent difference, part of the system of phonemes
may be the same for two or more accents, but the realisations of that
phoneme or set of phonemes will vary. For instance, in SSBE, SSE and
GA, /l/ has two main allophones, being clear, or alveolar [l] before a
stressed vowel, as in light, clear, but dark, velarised [
] after a stressed
vowel, as in dull, hill. This distribution of allophones is not the only
possibility in English, however. In some accents, /l/ is always realised
as clear; this is true, for instance, of Tyneside English (or ‘Geordie’),
Welsh English, and some South African varieties. On the other hand,
in Australia and New Zealand, /l/ is consistently pronounced dark; and
indeed, realisations may be pharyngeal rather than velar, or in other
words, pronounced with a restriction even further back in the vocal
tract. In London English, there is a further allophone of /l/, namely a
vocalised (or vowel-like) realisation ﬁnally or before a consonant: in sell,
tall, people, help, /l/ is typically realised as a high or high mid back vowel
like [υ] or [o]. For younger speakers, vocalisation is also taking hold in
medial position, in words like million; and the process is also spreading
beyond London, as part of the shift towards so-called ‘Estuary English’,
a mixture of SSBE and London English which is arguably becoming a
new standard for young people, especially in urban centres in the south
of England.
The other English liquid consonant, /r/, also provides plenty of scope
for realisational differences. /r/ is typically an alveolar or slightly retro-
ﬂex approximant for SSBE and GA, but at least in medial position, is
frequently realised as an alveolar tap in SSE (the tap is also a common
realisation in South African English). In some parts of the north of
England, notably in Northumberland and County Durham, a voiced
VARIATION BETWEEN ACCENTS
99

uvular fricative [ʁ] is quite commonly found, although this may be
receding gradually.
In other areas of northern England, this time notably Yorkshire,
Tyneside and Liverpool, [ɹ] appears as an allophone of /t/, typically
between vowels and across a word-boundary, as in not on [nɒɹɒn], lot of
laughs [lɒɹə …], get a job [	εɹə …]. In Merseyside, voiceless stops are very
generally realised as fricatives or affricates in word-ﬁnal position,
so that cake, luck, bike will be [kex], [lυx], [bax]: whereas in Scots and
SSE the appearance of [x] in loch constitutes a systemic difference, as
there are minimal pairs establishing an opposition of /x/ and /k/, in
Liverpool the velar fricative is clearly an allophone of /k/, so that the
accent difference between, say, SSBE and Merseyside English in this
respect is realisational, but not systemic.
Turning to vowels, one particularly salient example involves the
and vowels, which in SSBE, NZE and Australian English
are pronounced consistently as diphthongs. In GA, the vowel is
diphthongal, while the vowel may be a monophthong; and in SSE
and SgE, both are monophthongal, with the predominant allophones
being high-mid [e] and [o] in both accents. The vowel in SSBE is
mid central []; the same phoneme in NZE is very generally rounded,
while in SgE it is typically raised to high-mid back unrounded [%], or
high back unrounded [ɯ] (as we might expect, Hokkien has [%], Malay
has both [%] and [ɯ], but both lack []).
Sometimes, although these realisational differences have no direct
impact on the phoneme system, they do lead to neutralisations of other-
wise consistent contrasts. For instance, we saw in the last section that SgE
speakers raise /ε/ to [e] before plosives and affricates; the monophthon-
gal pronunciation of /e/ as [e] in words, and the lack of any system-
atic vowel-length distinction in SgE means that the contrast of /ε/ and
/e/ is suspended in this context, leading to identical pronunciations
of bread and braid, or wreck and rake. It is also possible for realisational
differences in vowels to lead to allophonic differences in consonants. For
instance, right at the beginning of this book, we identiﬁed an allophonic
difference between velar [k] and palatal [c], with the latter appearing
adjacent to a front vowel. In SSBE, SSE and GA, this will mean that velar
realisations will be produced in cupboard and car, palatals in kitchen
and keys. However, the distribution differs in other varieties of English,
depending on their typical realisations of the and vowels. In
NZE, has a high front diphthong, so that keys will still have [c];
but no fronting will take place in kitchen, since the set in NZE has
central [ə]. On the other hand, in Australian English, has a rather
high, front [i] vowel so that kitchen will certainly attract a palatal [c]; but
100
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

in some varieties at least, the diphthong in keys is central [ə], which will
therefore favour a velar allophone of /k/.
8.4 Distributional differences
Distributional differences fall into two subclasses. First, there are differ-
ences in lexical incidence: certain individual lexical items will simply
have one vowel phoneme in some accents, and another in others. For
example, British English speakers are quick to comment on American
English /aυ/ in route, or /ε/ in lever; Americans ﬁnd British English
/rut/ and /livə(ɹ)/ equally odd. Some Northern English English
speakers have /u/ rather than /υ/ in look and other <oo> words; and
it is fairly well-known in Britain that words containing /ɑ/ vary in
English English, with grass, dance, bath, for instance, having /a/ for many
northern speakers, but /ɑ/ in the south, though both varieties have /ɑ/
in palm. Similarly, in SSE, weasel has /w/, and whelk //; but in Borders
Scots, where these phonemes also contrast, and where indeed most of
the same minimal pairs (like Wales and whales, witch and which) work
equally well, the lexical distribution in these two words is reversed, with
// in weasel and /w/ in whelk.
On the other hand, a difference in the distribution of two phonemes
may depend on the phonological context rather than having to be
learned as an idiosyncracy of individual lexical items. For instance, in
GA there is a very productive restriction on the consonant /j/ when it
occurs before /u/. Whereas in most British English [j] surfaces in muse,
use, fuse, view, duke, tube, new, assume, in GA it appears only in the ﬁrst four
examples, and not in the cases where the /u/ vowel is preceded by an
alveolar consonant. There is also, as we have seen, a very clear division
between rhotic accents of English, where /r/ can occur in all possible
positions in the word (so [ɹ], or the appropriate realisation for the accent
in question, will surface in red, bread, very, beer, beard, beer is), and non-
rhotic ones, where /r/ is permissible only between vowels (and will be
pronounced in red, bread, very, beer is, but not the other cases).
Again, vowels follow the same patterns. For instance, in many varieties
of English, schwa is only available in unstressed positions, in about, father,
letter; in NZE, however, its range is wider, since it appears also in stressed
syllables, in the lexical set. Similarly, in some varieties words like
happy have a tense /i/ vowel in the second, unstressed syllable; this is
true for Tyneside English, SSE, GA and NZE. In SSBE, however, only
lax vowels are permitted in unstressed syllables, so that // appears in
happy instead. Not all these distributional restrictions have to do with
stress; some are the result of other developments in the consonant or
VARIATION BETWEEN ACCENTS
101

vowel systems. For instance, the presence of the centring diphthongs
before historical /r/ in SSBE (and other non-rhotic accents) means that
non-low monophthongs cannot appear in this context. On the other
hand, in rhotic accents like SSE and GA, there are no centring diph-
thongs, and the non-low monophthongs consequently have a broader
range, with the same vowel appearing in and , and
, and .
In deﬁning how accents differ, then, we must consider all three types
of variation: systemic, realisational, and distributional. Although some of
these (notably the systemic type) may seem more important to a phonol-
ogist, since they involve differences in the phoneme system, we must
remember that one of the phonologist’s tasks is to determine what
speakers of a language know, and how their knowledge is structured. It
follows that we must be able to deal with the lower-level realisational
and distributional differences too, since these are often precisely the
points native speakers notice in assessing differences between their own
accent and another variety of English. In any case, all of these types of
variation will work together in distinguishing the phonological systems
of different accents, and as we have seen, variation at one level very
frequently has further implications for other areas of the phonology.
Exercises
1. Plot your vowel system on a vowel quadrilateral. (You may wish to use
one diagram for monophthongs, and one for diphthongs; or even more
than one for diphthongs if you have a system with a large number of
these.)
2. What is your phonemic consonant system? Provide minimal pairs to
establish the contrasts involved. Pay particular attention to whether your
accent is rhotic or non-rhotic, and whether your system includes //
and /x/ or not. Do any of the consonant phonemes of SSBE fail to
contrast in your accent? Why might this be?
3. Set out the differences between your variety, for both vowel and
consonant systems, and (a) SSBE, (b) GA, (c) SSE, (d) NZE, (e) SgE.
In each case, classify the discrepancies as systemic, realisational, or dis-
tributional. If you are a non-native speaker of English, or bilingual in
English and another language, can you identify aspects of your native
language(s) which might be responsible for some of the differences you
have identiﬁed?
102
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

Recommendations for reading
Giegerich (1992) provides phonological analyses of some of the varieties
discussed here; characteristics of an overlapping set of accents are also
discussed in Carr (1999). Much of the data discussed here comes from
Wells (1982), which covers a fairly complete range of varieties of
English, although the Singapore English material is mainly from Tan
(1998). Trudgill (2000) provides more detail on the dialects of England
in particular, and Wolfram and Schilling-Estes (1996) on American
English. More theoretical discussion of dialectology and sociolinguistics
respectively can be found in Chambers and Trudgill (1980) and Hudson
(1995). If you are interested in the history of English, a good intro-
ductory survey is Graddol, Leith and Swann (1996).
VARIATION BETWEEN ACCENTS
103

9 Syllables
9.1 Phonology above the segment
At the end of the last chapter, we returned to the central issue, and the
central task for phonologists, of assessing what speakers know about the
structure of their language. In this book so far, we have concentrated on
this knowledge, and the speech production that reﬂects it, at the level
of the segment and below. That is, we have discussed vowels and con-
sonants, the features of which they are composed and the judgements
speakers make about them. However, as we shall see in this chapter and
the next, speakers’ behaviour and intuitions also indicate the presence of
phonological organisation at a series of higher levels, above the single
segment. Vowels and consonants are not just strung together haphaz-
ardly into long, unstructured strands: instead, they form a series of larger
units with their own internal structure and distribution, governed by
their own rules.
The ﬁrst and smallest of these superordinate units, the syllable, will be
the main focus of this chapter. Recognising and understanding syllables
helps us state some phonological processes (for example involving
English /l/ and the aspiration of voiceless plosives) more accurately and
succinctly. As we shall see in Chapter 10, the syllable and the next unit,
the foot, are also crucial in analysing and determining the position of
stress within each word. Finally, in whole utterances consisting of a
sentence or more, phonological processes may apply between words, and
rhythm and intonation produce the overall melody of longer stretches of
speech.
9.2 The syllable
Speakers certainly have an intuitive notion of how many syllables
each word contains: for instance, speakers of English would generally
agree that meadow, dangerous and antidisestablishmentarianism (allegedly
104

the longest word in the language) have two, three and twelve syllables
respectively. It is less easy for speakers to reﬂect consciously on the in-
ternal structure of syllables, or to decide where one stops and the next
starts; but a wide variety of cross-linguistic studies have helped phonol-
ogists construct a universal template for the syllable, within which
particular languages select certain options. The internal structure of the
syllable, and evidence for its subparts from a range of English phono-
logical processes, will be the topic of this chapter.
9.3 Constituents of the syllable
The universal syllable template accepted by most phonologists is given
in (1). Note that small sigma (σ) is shorthand for ‘syllable’; capital sigma
(Σ), as we shall see later, is used to symbolise the foot.
(1)
The only compulsory part of the syllable, and hence its head, or most
important, deﬁning unit, is the nucleus. This will generally contain a
vowel (and recall that vowels are [+syllabic]): indeed, the syllable I, or
the ﬁrst syllable of about, consist only of a nucleus. If no vowel is avail-
able, certain consonants can become nuclear, and play the part of a
vowel. In English, this is true of /l/, /m/, /n/, and /r/ in rhotic accents:
that is, the sonorant consonants, in natural class terms. Each of the words
bottle, bottom, button, butter has two syllables, and in each case, the second
syllable consists only of nuclear, or syllabic [l], [m ], [n] and [ɹ].
Both the onset and the coda are optional constituents, and each, if
ﬁlled, will contain one or more consonants. In English, be has an onset
but no coda; eat has a coda but no onset; and beat has both. Recognising
the difference between the nucleus, which is primarily the domain of
vowels, and the onset and coda, where we ﬁnd consonants, also casts
some light on the relationship between the high vowels /i u/ and the
glides /j w/. Phonetically, it is very hard to detect any systematic differ-
ence between [i] and [j], or [u] and [w] respectively; however, we can
SYLLABLES
105
onset
rhyme
σ
nucleus
coda

now say that [i] and [u] are [+syllabic], while the glides are [–syllabic],
so that in ye, [j] is in the onset and [i] in the nucleus, and similarly in woo,
[w] is an onset consonant and [u] a nuclear vowel. Clearly, [j] and [i]
are extremely similar phonetically; furthermore, since distinguishing
syllable peaks, or nuclei, from margins allows us to predict where each
will occur, they are in complementary distribution (and the same is true
of [w] and [u]). This makes [j] and [i], and [w] and [u], allophones of
a single phoneme, with their distribution determined by position in the
syllable.
9.4 The grammar of syllables: patterns of acceptability
Patterns of permissibility vary in terms of ﬁlling these constituents of
the syllable. In some languages, like Arabic, every syllable must have an
onset; if a word without an onset in one syllable is borrowed from
another language, for instance, a glottal stop [ʔ] will be inserted to meet
that requirement. Conversely, in Hawaiian, no codas are allowed, so that
coda consonants in loanwords will be deleted, or have an extra, follow-
ing vowel introduced, so the consonant becomes an onset and therefore
legal. However, there do not seem to be any languages which either insist
on codas, or rule out onsets. The universal, basic syllable type is there-
fore CV: all known languages allow this, whether they have other, more
complex syllable types in addition, or not.
9.4.1 Phonotactic constraints
Even languages like English, which allow both onsets and codas, have
restrictions on the permissible contents of those slots: these restrictions
are known as phonotactic constraints. In particular, English allows clus-
ters of two or three consonants in both onsets and codas; some languages
have more complex cluster types, others only CC, and perhaps in the
onset only. Some restrictions on the composition of clusters reﬂect
structural idiosyncracies of English; these include the examples in (2).
(2) In a CCC onset, C1 must be /s/.
/ŋ/ does not appear in onsets.
/v ð z / do not form part of onset clusters.
/t d θ/ plus /l/ do not form permissible onset clusters.
/h/ does not appear in codas.
Coda clusters of nasal plus oral stop are only acceptable if the two
stops share the same place of articulation.
/lg/ is not a permissible coda cluster.
106
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

9.4.2 The Sonority Sequencing Generalisation
However, some other restrictions on possible clusters are not speciﬁc to
English, but rather reﬂect universal prohibitions or requirements. The
most notable phonological principle which comes into play here is
known as the Sonority Sequencing Generalisation, and governs the
shape of both onsets and codas. Sonority is related to the difference
between sonorants (sounds which are typically voiced, like approxi-
mants, nasal stops and vowels) and obstruents (oral stops and fricatives,
which may be either voiced or voiceless). Sonorants are more sonorous;
that is, their acoustic properties give them greater carrying power. If you
stood at the front of a large room and said one sound as clearly as you
could, a listener at the back would be much more likely to be able to
identify a highly sonorous sound like [ɑ] than a sound at the other end
of the sonority range, such as [t].
Our knowledge of acoustic phonetics and other aspects of sound
behaviour can be combined to produce a sonority scale like the one
given in (3). Here, the most sonorous sounds appear at the top, and the
least sonorous at the bottom. Some English examples are given for each
category.
(3) Low vowels
[ɑ ] …
High vowels
[i u] …
Glides
[j w]
Liquids
[l ɹ]
Nasals
[m n ŋ]
Voiced fricatives
[v z] …
Voiceless fricatives
[f s] …
Voiced plosives
[b d 	]
Voiceless plosives
[p t k]
Natural classes of sounds which function together in phonological
processes are often composed of single or adjacent levels on the sonor-
ity hierarchy. For instance, English liquids and nasals can be syllabic, and
these are the closest consonants to the vowel series (with the exception
of the glides; and as we have seen already, we might say that [j w] do have
syllabic counterparts, namely the high vowels).
The general rule expressed by the Sonority Sequencing General-
isation is that syllables should show the sonority curve in (4).
SYLLABLES
107

(4)
The nucleus constitutes the sonority peak of the syllable, with son-
ority decreasing gradually towards the margins. In syllables like trump,
prance, plant, the outermost consonants, at the beginning of the onset and
the end of the coda, are at the bottom end of the sonority scale, while less
marginal consonants, adjacent to the vowel, are also closer to the vowel
in their sonority value. Lack of adherence to the Sonority Sequencing
Generalisation therefore rules out onsets like *[lp], *[jm], *[ɹ	], although
onsets with the same segments in the opposite order are found in play,
muse, grey. Similarly, universal sonority restrictions mean English lacks
*[pm], *[kl], *[mr] codas, although again clusters with the opposite
order, which do show descending sonority, are attested in lamp, silk, harm
(the last in rhotic accents only).
Like many rules, the Sonority Sequencing Generalisation has an
exception, and this involves the behaviour of /s/. The onset clusters
in spray, skew have the sonority proﬁle in (5).
(5)
That is, the marginal consonant [s] has a higher sonority value than
the adjacent voiceless plosive: yet there is no question of drawing a syl-
lable boundary here and recognising two syllables within the same word,
as [s] is not one of the English consonants which can become nuclear, or
syllabic. The same problem arises in codas. We would normally use a
sonority pattern like the one in (6a) to tell us that a syllable division
should be made, giving two syllables in little, but one in lilt. However,
codas with both orders of clusters involving [s] are possible, as in apse
and asp, or axe and ask; and the same sonority pattern in (6b) must be
analysed, contrary to the Sonority Sequencing Generalisation, as corre-
sponding to a single syllable.
108
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY
t
ɹ

m
p
s
p
ɹ
e

s
k
j
u

(6)
These exceptions are at least not random: cross-linguistically, viol-
ations of the Sonority Sequencing Generalisation always seem to involve
coronal consonants (those produced using the tongue tip or blade, and
typically alveolars), and especially/s/. Such consonants seem to behave
exceptionally in a number of ways, and have to be excluded from various
phonological generalisations, though it is not yet quite clear why.
9.5 Justifying the constituents
9.5.1 Syllable-based processes
Recognising the syllable as a phonological unit, and moreover a unit
with the internal structure hypothesised in (1), allows us to write im-
proved versions of some phonological rules introduced in previous
chapters. Sometimes, what determines or conditions a phonological
process or change is simply the nature of an adjacent segment: for
example, we have seen that the nasal of the preﬁx in- assimilates to a
following consonant, and that sounds frequently become voiced between
other voiced segments. However, in other cases it is the position of a
sound within the syllable that dictates its phonetic shape. In turn,
improvements in our statement of phonological rules may help justify or
validate the constituents we have proposed for the syllable.
First, the notion of the syllable in general, and the onset constituent
in particular, helps us to state the environment for aspiration of voiceless
stops more accurately. Our current, rather informal version predicts
aspiration in absolute word-initial position; as we already know, /p t k/
surface as aspirated in pill, till, kill, but not when preceded by /s/ in spill,
still, skill. However, this is not the whole story, since we can also observe
aspiration in repair, return, record, though not in respond, disturb, discard. In
these examples, the voiceless stops are medial, not initial in the word: but
SYLLABLES
109
(a)
l

t

little (two syllables)
(b)
f
ɒ
k
s
fox (one syllable)

in repair, return, record, they are the sole constituents of the onset for
syllable two, and therefore initial in that syllable. As for respond, disturb,
discard, here also /p t k/ are part of the onset, but this time preceded by
/s/; and since a preceding /s/ inhibits aspiration in onsets word-initially,
we should not be surprised that the same pattern is found in onsets word-
medially. In short, aspiration of voiceless stops takes place, not at the
beginning of the word, but at the beginning of the onset.
Similar support can be found for the second major constituent of the
syllable, namely the rhyme. As we have seen already, many varieties of
English have two main allophones of /l/, clear or alveolar [l] and dark,
velarised [
], in complementary distribution. However, stating the
nature of this complementarity is not entirely straightforward. In earlier
chapters, the rule for velarisation of /l/ was informally stated as taking
place after the vowel in a word, giving the correct results for clear versus
hill, for instance. This works well enough when we are only dealing with
word-initial versus word-ﬁnal clusters, but it leaves a grey area in word-
medial position, where we ﬁnd dark [
] in falter, hilltop, but clear [l] in
holy, hilly. Again, this is resolvable if we state the rule in terms of the
syllable: clear [l] appears in onset position, and dark [
] in the coda.
In fact, this process does not only provide evidence for the contrast
between onset and coda position, but for the superordinate rhyme con-
stituent, which consists of the nucleus plus the optional coda. In cases
of consonant syllabiﬁcation, where /l/ (or another sonorant consonant)
comes to play the role of a vowel and therefore occupies the nuclear
position, as in bottle, little, we ﬁnd the dark allophone. /l/-velarisation,
then, takes place in syllable rhymes, as shown in (7).
(7)
9.5.2 Onset Maximalism
Of course, this rule (and similarly the earlier reformulation of aspiration
in syllable terms) will only work appropriately if we are drawing the
boundaries between syllables, and therefore determining what con-
sonants are in the coda of an earlier syllable, and which in the onset of a
later one, in the right way. We have already noted that the Sonority
110
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY
O
N
C
l
i
p
R
σ
σ
σ
O
N
O
N
h
l
y
[oυ]
R
R
O N C O N
σ
σ
R
R
f
a
l
t
er
O
b
N C N
σ
R
o
σ
R
le
tt

Sequencing Generalisation provides one guide to drawing syllable
boundaries; leaving aside the exceptional case of /s/ in clusters, we ﬁnd
that legal syllables exhibit a sonority proﬁle which ascends from the left-
hand margin of the onset, up to a sonority peak in the nucleus, and
subsequently descends to the right-hand margin of the coda, as shown
in (4) above. However, there is another, equally important principle
governing syllable division, namely Onset Maximalism (also known as
Initial Maximalism), which is set out in (8).
(8) Onset Maximalism
Where there is a choice, always assign as many consonants as poss-
ible to the onset, and as few as possible to the coda. However,
remember that every word must also consist of a sequence of well-
formed syllables.
Onset Maximalism tells us that, in a word like leader, the medial /d/
must belong to the second syllable, where it can be located in the onset,
rather than the ﬁrst, where it would have to be assigned to the less
favoured coda. This is a permissible analysis, because both [li] and
[də(ɹ)] are well-formed syllables of English: think of lea, or Lee, and the
ﬁrst syllable of dirty, or Derwent. The same goes for a word like oyster,
where both parts of the medial /st/ cluster belong to the onset of the
second syllable, while the initial diphthong forms a syllable on its own.
There are many monosyllabic words with initial /st/, like stop, start, stitch,
stoop; and if /st/ make a well-formed onset word-initially, then they can
combine to make a well-formed onset word-medially, too.
We can use the same sort of argument to account for the alternation
between dark [
] in hill, but clear [l] in hilly. Since hill has only a single
syllable, and moreover has a vowel occupying the nuclear slot, the /l/
must necessarily be in the coda, and is therefore dark. However, in hilly,
there are two syllables, and Onset Maximalism means /l/ must be in the
onset of the second, where it automatically surfaces as clear. This kind of
alternation, where the form that surfaces depends on its position in the
syllable, is quite common in English and other languages. For instance,
in non-rhotic accents of English, /r/ has two realisations, namely [ɹ] in
onsets, and zero in codas: it surfaces in red, bread, very, but not in car, park.
Again, as with the alternation between clear and dark variants of /l/, we
ﬁnd that the addition of sufﬁxes can change the situation: so for instance,
star has no ﬁnal consonant for non-rhotic speakers, but there is a medial
[ɹ] in starry, where the /r/ constitutes the onset of the second syllable.
It also follows that syllable boundaries will not always coincide with
morpheme boundaries, or boundaries between meaningful units: in
starry, the two morphemes are star, the stem, and -y, the sufﬁx, but the
SYLLABLES
111

syllables are divided as sta.rry (note that a dot signals a syllable bound-
ary). As we shall see in more detail in the next chapter, similar alter-
nations arise across word boundaries in connected speech: thus, although
car has no ﬁnal [ɹ], and the same is true of car keys, where the second word
begins with a consonant, in car engine the second word begins with a
vowel, and the /r/ can be allocated to the onset of that syllable, where it
duly surfaces as [ɹ]. As far as native speakers’ knowledge goes, there are
two ways of analysing this. We could assume that speakers store car
mentally as /kɑr/, and delete the /r/ before a consonant or pause.
Alternatively, the entry in the mental lexicon or dictionary might be
/kɑ/, with [ɹ] being inserted before vowels. Choices of this kind, and
their implications, are vitally important for phonologists; but pursuing
the issue here is beyond the scope of this book.
However, in a word like falter, we cannot straightforwardly assign the
medial /lt/ to the second syllable. The Sonority Sequencing General-
isation would allow the syllable boundary to follow /lt/ (compare fault,
a well-formed monosyllabic word), but Onset Maximalism forces the /t/
at least into the onset of the next syllable. The syllable boundary cannot,
however, precede the /l/ because /lt/ is not a possible word-initial clus-
ter in English, and it consequently cannot be a word-internal, syllable-
initial cluster either. On the other hand, in bottle our immediate reaction
might be to proposed bo.ttle, which ﬁts both the Sonority Sequencing
Generalisation and Onset Maximalism. However, we then face a prob-
lem with the ﬁrst syllable, which would on this analysis consist only
of /bɒ/; and, as we shall see in Chapter 10, a single short vowel cannot
make up the rhyme of a stressed syllable. The ﬁrst syllable clearly needs
a coda; but bott.le is not quite right either, since native speakers, asked to
check syllable boundaries by saying each syllable in the word twice,
typically say bot-bot-tle-tle. The same is true of other words with the same
problematic structure, like syllable in fact, which comes out as syl-syl-la-
la-ble-ble; it may not be coincidental that these are written with double
medial consonants. The usual solution here is to analyse the /t/ of bottle
as ambisyllabic: that is, as belonging simultaneously in both the coda of
the ﬁrst syllable, and the onset of the second. This does not conﬂict with
either the Sonority Sequencing Generalisation or Onset Maximalism,
but also accords with native speakers’ intuitions and the stress patterns
of English.
9.5.3 Literary applications of syllable constituents
Recognising the onset and rhyme does not only allow us to write more
accurate versions of our phonological rules, and to understand alter-
112
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

nations between sounds which arise when we add an afﬁx or combine
words into longer strings, thus creating different syllabiﬁcations. These
two constituents are also integral parts of two rather different literary
traditions. In alliterative poetry, the important constituent is the onset,
which must be identical in several words in a single line (and often, the
more the better). An example from the Scots poetic tradition appears
in (9); this is a short excerpt from the late ﬁfteenth or early sixteenth
century ‘Flyting of Dunbar and Kennedie’. A ﬂyting is essentially a long
string of insults, here hurled by each of the poets named in the title at
the other, in turn. The use of alliteration, which is clear even from the
two lines given, extends throughout the fairly lengthy poem.
(9) Conspiratour, cursit cocatrice, hell caa
(caa = crow)
Turk, trumpour, traitour, tyran intemperate …
It is clear that almost all of the words in the ﬁrst line begin with <c>
/k/, and those in the second with <t> /t/; and in some cases, here
cocatrice, intemperate, the alliterating sound may appear in word-internal
onset positions too. More obviously, or at least more familiarly, the
rhyme of the syllable determines poetic rhyme: for a perfect rhyme, the
nucleus and coda (if any) must be exactly the same, though whether
there is an onset or not, or what it is, does not matter. That is, meet rhymes
with eat, and with beat, and with sweet; but it does not rhyme with might
or mate, where the nucleus is different; or with bee, where there is no coda;
or with leek or beast, where there is a coda, but not one consisting of the
single consonant /t/.
9.5.4 Syllable weight
There is one further aspect of syllable structure which provides evi-
dence for the syllable-internal structure set out above. Here again, as in
the case of poetic rhyme, the nucleus and coda seem to work together,
but the onset does not contribute at all.
In fact, there are two further subdivisions of syllable type, and both
depend on the structure of the rhyme. First, syllables may be closed or
open: a closed syllable has a coda, while in an open syllable, the rhyme
consists of a nucleus alone, as shown in (10). It does not matter, for these
calculations, whether the nucleus and coda are simple, containing a
single element, or branching, containing more than one: a branching
nucleus would have a long vowel or diphthong, while a branching coda
would contain a consonant cluster.
SYLLABLES
113

(10)
Closed
Open
There is a second, related distinction between light and heavy syl-
lables. A light syllable contains only a short vowel in the rhyme, with no
coda, as in the ﬁrst syllable of potato, report, about. Although the ﬁrst two
cases have onsets, and the third does not, all these initial syllables
are still light, because onsets are entirely irrelevant to the calculation of
syllable weight. If a syllable has a complex rhyme, then it is heavy; and
complexity can be achieved in two different ways. First, a heavy syllable
may have a short vowel, but one or more coda consonants, as in bet, best.
Second, it may have a branching nucleus, consisting of a long vowel or
diphthong; such a syllable will be heavy whether it also has a ﬁlled coda,
as in beast, bite, or not, as in bee, by.
As we shall see in detail in the next chapter, syllable weight is a major
factor in determining the position of stress in a word: essentially, no
stressed syllable in English may be light. This means that no lexical
word, or full word of English can consist only of a short vowel alone,
with or without an onset, since such words, including nouns, verbs and
adjectives, must be able to bear stress: thus, we have be, say, loss, but not
*[b], *[sε], *[lɒ]. On the other hand, function words like the indeﬁnite
article a, or the pronunciation [tə] for the preposition to, which are part
of the grammatical structure of sentences and are characteristically
unstressed, can be light. In cases where these do attract stress, they have
special pronunciations [e] and [tu], where the vowel is long, the
nucleus branches, and the syllable is therefore heavy.
There is one set of cases where a conﬂict arises between syllable
weight on the one hand, and the guidelines for the placement of syllable
boundaries on the other: we have already encountered this in the discus-
sion of bottle above. In most cases, these two aspects of syllable structure
work together. For instance, potato, report, about each have a consonant
which could form either the coda of the ﬁrst syllable, or the onset of the
second. Onset Maximalism would force the second analysis, placing the
ﬁrst [t] of potato, the [p] of report, and the [b] of about in onset position;
this is supported by the evidence of aspiration in the ﬁrst two cases. The
114
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY
O
N
C
b
e
t
R
σ
O
N
C
b
ea
t
R
σ
O
N
C
b
ea
st
R
σ
σ
O
N
b
ee
R

ﬁrst syllable of each word is therefore light; and since all three syllables
are unstressed, this is unproblematic. Similarly, in words like penny, follow,
camera, apple, Onset Maximalism would argue for the syllabiﬁcations
pe.nny, fo.llow, ca.me.ra, and a.pple. However, in these cases the initial syl-
lable is stressed, in direct contradiction of the pervasive English rule
which states that no stressed syllable may be light. In these cases, rather
than overruling Onset Maximalism completely, we can regard the prob-
lematic medial consonant as ambisyllabic, or belonging simultaneously
in the coda of the ﬁrst syllable and the onset of the second. It therefore
contributes to the weight of the initial, stressed syllable; but its phonetic
realisation will typically reﬂect the fact that it is also in the onset of the
second syllable. Consequently, as we saw earlier, the /l/ in hilly, follow
appears as clear, as beﬁts an onset consonant, while /r/ in carry is realised
as [ɹ], its usual value in onset position, rather than being unpronounced,
its usual fate in codas.
Exercises
1. Mark the syllable boundaries in the following words. In each case,
what led to your decision in placing the boundary there? You should
consider the contribution of the Sonority Sequencing Generalisation,
Onset Maximalism, and syllable weight.
danger, unstable, anxious, discipline, narrow, beyond, bottle, bottling
2. Draw syllable trees for each of the words from Exercise 1. In each
case, and for each syllable, mark the Onset, Rhyme, Nucleus and Coda;
indicate whether any of these constituents branch; and note any cases of
ambisyllabicity.
3. Make a list of all the two consonant clusters which are ruled out
by the Sonority Sequencing Generalisation in (a) onset and (b) coda
position. For each one, try to think of an apparent exception in word-
medial position, where in fact the ﬁrst consonant of the apparent ‘clus-
ter’ belongs in the coda of syllable one, and the second in the onset of
syllable two. For example, sonority rules out ﬁnal [kn]; an apparent (but
not real) exception would be acknowledge.
4. Make a list of at least ﬁve consonant clusters which are ruled out
either by the Sonority Sequencing Generalisation, or by the phonotactic
rules of English, but for which you can ﬁnd actual exceptions which do
contain these clusters. These may be recent loan words or foreign names.
For example, English does not generally allow /ʃ/ in onset clusters, but
SYLLABLES
115

a number of borrowings from Yiddish, like /ʃtυm/, /ʃtk/, do have these
clusters.
Recommendations for reading
Carr (1999), Giegerich (1992), Hogg and McCully (1987) and Spencer
(1996) all discuss the phonology of the syllable in much more detail than
is possible in this chapter. Information on the syllable from a phonetic
point of view can be found in Catford (1988), Ladefoged (1993) and
Couper-Kuhlen (1986). 
116
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

10 The word and above
10.1 Phonological units above the syllable
Native speakers who are not linguists may be slightly surprised by the
discovery, discussed in the last chapter, that they can count syllables and
determine the boundaries between them. However, they will typically
be much more consciously aware of the word as a linguistic unit, prob-
ably because words are meaningful units; moreover, in a highly literate
society, we are familiar with orthographic words, which conveniently
appear with white space on each side. Individual spoken or written
words can also appear in isolation: three of the four conversational turns
in (1) consist, entirely appropriately and comprehensibly, of single
words.
(1) A: Did you ﬁnd a babysitter?
B: Yes.
A: Who?
B: Denise.
However, words, like other linguistic units, are not entirely straight-
forward and trouble-free for native speakers or for linguists. In particu-
lar, there are cases where it is difﬁcult to determine how many words we
are dealing with. For example, is washing-machine one word or two? Is it
easier or more difﬁcult to decide if we write it as washing machine, with-
out the hyphen? And if we conclude that this is two words, then where
does that leave teapot, where two acceptable independent words seem to
make up one larger one? It seems that compounds like this take some
time to become accepted in the speech community as single words: for a
while, they appear as two written words, though signalling one distinct
concept semantically (thus, a washing-machine washes clothes, not dishes,
for which we have dishwashers, or cars, which go through a carwash). As
they are encountered more commonly, they begin to be written with a
hyphen, which ultimately drops to leave a single orthographic word –
although speakers may think of a compound as a single word before this
117

stage is reached. Conversely, although didn’t, can’t or it’s appear as single
written words, speakers will tend to regard these as sequences of two
words, contracted by the deletion of a vowel, as signalled by the
apostrophe. So, it’s (in It’s Saturday) is a short form of it is, and therefore
in a sense two words, as distinct from its (in The cat ate its dinner), which
is a single word however you look at it.
For phonological purposes, we can simply note these tricky ex-
ceptional cases, and accept that native speakers typically have a good
intuitive idea of what a word is (although this is an issue of considerable
interest to morphologists). What we are interested in are the phono-
logical properties of words; and the most important of these, in English
at least, is stress. As we shall see, although each word has its own charac-
teristic stress pattern when uttered in isolation, words are generally
produced in strings, combining into phrases and whole sentences; and
phonological processes also operate at these higher levels. First, the
position of stress on the isolated word may change when that word forms
part of a larger unit; and secondly, some segmental processes, affecting
vowels or consonants, may also apply between words.
10.2 Stress
10.2.1 The phonetic characteristics of stress
Native speakers of English are intuitively aware that certain syllables in
each word, and one syllable in particular, will be more phonetically
prominent than others. In father, the ﬁrst syllable seems stronger than
the second; in about, it is the other way around; and in syllable, the ﬁrst
syllable stands out from the rest. These more prominent syllables are
stressed; and stress is a culminative property, signalled by a number of
subsidiary phonetic factors, which work together to pick out a stressed
syllable from the unstressed ones which surround it. There are three
important factors which combine to signal stress. First, the vowels of
stressed syllables are produced with higher fundamental frequency; that
is, the vocal folds vibrate more quickly, and this is heard as higher pitch.
Secondly, the duration of stressed syllables is greater, and they are per-
ceived as longer. Thirdly, stressed syllables are produced with greater
intensity, and are thus heard as louder than adjacent unstressed syllables.
In addition, stress has effects on vowel quality, in that vowels often
reduce to schwa under low stress. To take our earlier examples of father,
about, and syllable, the stressed syllables have the full vowels [ɑ], [aυ] and
[] respectively, but the unstressed ones typically have schwa; we do not
say [slbεl], for instance, but [sləbəl] (or [sləbl]).
118
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

The interaction of these phonetic factors produces an effect which is
clearly audible, but crucially relative: that is, we cannot distinguish a
stressed from an unstressed syllable if each is spoken in isolation, but
only by comparing the syllables of a word, or a longer string, to see which
are picked out as more prominent. Indeed, within the word, there can be
more than one level of stress. Some words have only stressed versus
unstressed syllables, as in father, about and syllable. However, in entertain-
ment, the ﬁrst and the third syllables bear some degree of stress. Both
have full vowels [ε] and [e], as opposed to the unstressed second and
fourth syllables with schwa; but the third syllable is more stressed than
the ﬁrst. Phonologists distinguish primary stress (the main stress in the
word, on the third syllable of entertainment) from secondary stress (a
lesser degree of stress elsewhere, here initially). Special IPA diacritic
marks are placed at the beginning of the relevant syllable to show
primary and secondary stress, as in entertainment [εntətenmənt], about
[əbaυt], and father [fɑðə]. The difference between secondary stress and
no stress is clear in a pair like raider [ɹedə(ɹ)], where the second syllable
is unstressed and has schwa, versus radar [ɹedɑ(ɹ)], where both syl-
lables have full vowels and some degree of stress, although in both words
the ﬁrst syllable is more stressed than the second.
10.2.2 Predicting stress placement
The languages of the world fall into two broad classes in terms of stress
position. In ﬁxed-stress languages, primary stress always (or virtually
always) falls on one particular syllable; thus, in Scots Gaelic, main stress
is consistently initial, except in some English loanwords, such as buntata
‘potato’, where stress stays on the syllable it occupies in the source
language (here, the second). Similarly, stress in Swahili consistently falls
on the penultimate syllable of the word. On the other hand, languages
may have free stress, like Russian; here, words which differ semantically
may be identical in terms of phonological segments, and differ only in
the position of stress, as in Russian 
muka ‘torment’ versus mu
ka ‘ﬂour’.
This division into ﬁxed and free-stress languages is relevant to
phonologists because it has a bearing on how children learning the
language, and adults using it, are hypothesised to deal with stress. In a
ﬁxed-stress language, we can assume that children will learn relatively
quickly and easily that stress placement is predictable, and will formu-
late a rule to that effect; if they encounter exceptions to the rule, they
may overgeneralise the regular pattern, and have to unlearn it in just
those cases, so that a child acquiring Scots Gaelic may well produce
buntata temporarily for English-inﬂuenced bun
tata. This is precisely like
THE WORD AND ABOVE
119

the situation with other regular linguistic processes, like the regular
morphological plural rule adding -s to nouns, which children typically
overgeneralise to give oxes, mouses, tooths at an early stage, before learning
the appropriate form of these irregular nouns individually. In free-stress
languages, on the other hand, part of language acquisition involves
learning that the position of stress is not predictable, but instead has to
be memorised as part of the conﬁguration of each individual word, along
with the particular combination of vowels and consonants that make it
up. There are no stress rules: instead, speakers are assumed to have a
mental representation of each word with stress marked on it.
English does not fall fully within either class: it is neither a wholly
ﬁxed-stress, nor a wholly free-stress language. This is in large part a
result of its peculiar history. English inherited from Germanic a system
with ﬁxed stress falling on the ﬁrst syllable of the stem; but it has sub-
sequently been strongly inﬂuenced by Latin, French and other Romance
languages, because of the sheer number of words it has borrowed. It has
therefore ended up with a mixture of the Germanic and Romance stress
systems. On the one hand, there are pairs of words which contrast only
by virtue of the position of stress, such as con
vert, pro
duce (verb) vs.
convert,
produce (noun). This initially makes English look like a free
stress language, like Russian, but turns out to reﬂect the fact that such
stress rules as English has vary depending on the lexical class of the word
they are applying to. On the other hand, there are some general rules, as
in (2), which do allow stress placement to be predicted in many English
words.
(2) a. Noun rule: stress the penultimate syllable if heavy. If the penul-
timate syllable is light, stress the antepenult.
a.
ro.ma
a.
gen.da
di.sci.pline
b. Verb rule: stress the ﬁnal syllable if heavy. If the ﬁnal syllable is
light, stress the penultimate syllable.
o.
bey
u.
surp
a.
tone
ta.lly
hu.rry
These stress rules depend crucially on the weight of the syllable:
recall from the last chapter that a syllable will be heavy if it has a branch-
ing rhyme, composed of either a long vowel or diphthong, with or with-
out a coda, or a short vowel with a coda. A syllable with a short vowel and
no coda will be light. As (2a) shows, English nouns typically have stress
on the penultimate syllable, so long as that syllable is heavy, which it is
in aroma (with a long [o] vowel or a diphthong [oυ] depending on your
accent), and in agenda, where the relevant vowel is short [ε], but followed
by a consonant, [n]; this must be in the coda of syllable two rather than
120
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

the onset of syllable three, since there are no *[nd] initial clusters in
English. However, in discipline the penultimate syllable is light [s]; the
following [pl] consonants can both be in the onset of the third syllable,
since there are initial clusters of this type in play, plant, plastic and so on.
Since [s] has only a short vowel and no coda consonants, it fails to attract
stress by the Noun Rule, and the stress instead falls on the previous,
initial syllable.
A similar pattern can be found for verbs, but with stress falling con-
sistently one syllable further to the right. That is, the Verb Rule prefer-
entially stresses ﬁnal syllables, so long as these are heavy. So, obey (with a
ﬁnal long vowel or diphthong), has ﬁnal stress, as do usurp (having a ﬁnal
syllable [p] for SSBE, with a long vowel and a coda consonant, and
[ɹp] for SSE, for instance, with a short vowel and two coda consonants),
and atone (with a long vowel or diphthong plus a consonant in the coda).
However, both tally and hurry have ﬁnal light syllables, in each case
consisting only of a short vowel in the rhyme. It follows that these cannot
attract stress, which again falls in these cases one syllable further left.
These stress rules are effective in accounting for stress placement in
many English nouns and verbs, and for native speakers’ actions in deter-
mining stress placement on borrowed words, which are very frequently
altered to conform to the English patterns. However, there are still many
exceptions. A noun like spaghetti, for instance, ought by the Noun Rule
to have antepenultimate stress, giving 
spaghetti, since the penultimate
syllable [	ε] is light; but in fact stress falls on the penultimate syllable,
following the original, Italian pattern – in English, the <tt> is of course
pronounced as a single [t], not as two [t]s or a long [t]. Although the
Noun Rule stresses penultimate or antepenultimate syllables, nouns like
machine, police, report, balloon in fact have ﬁnal stress. There are also cases
where the stress could, in principle, appear anywhere: in catamaran, for
instance, the stress pattern is actually 
catamaran, with primary stress on
the ﬁrst syllable and secondary stress on the ﬁnal one, again in contra-
diction of the Noun Rule, which would predict ca
tamaran (as in
De
cameron), with antepenultimate stress as the penult is light. There
is equally no good reason why we should not ﬁnd cata
maran (as in
Alde
baran); while another logical possibility, catama
ran, has a pattern
more commonly found in phrases, such as ﬂash in the
pan, or Desperate
Dan. It seems that the Noun Rule and Verb Rule are misnomers; these
are not really rules, though they do identify discernible tendencies.
Leaving aside the question of predictability, we can certainly describe
the position of stress on particular words accurately and clearly using
tree diagrams. In these diagrams, which form part of a theory called
Metrical Phonology, each syllable is labelled either S or W: and because
THE WORD AND ABOVE
121

stress, as we saw above, is not an absolute but a relative property of
syllables, these labels do not mean ‘Strong’ and ‘Weak’, but ‘Stronger
than an adjacent W’ and ‘Weaker than an adjacent S’, respectively. Some
illustrative trees are shown in (3).
(3)
Trees of this sort allow us to compare different words at a glance and
tell whether their prominence patterns, and thus the position of stress,
are the same or not; from (3), we can see that father and tally share the
same stress pattern, though about has the relative prominence of its two
syllables reversed. This is particularly important for longer words with
more syllables, where prominence patterns are naturally more complex;
so, (3) also shows that discipline and personal have the same stress patterns.
Note that, even in longer words, metrical trees can only branch in a
binary way: that is, each higher S or W node can only branch into two
lower-level constituents, never more. This is straightforward enough for
disyllabic words like father, about and tally; but in discipline, personal, tree
construction involves two steps. Initially, the ﬁrst two nodes are put
together; then the higher-level S node these form is in turn combined
with the leftover W syllable, to form another binary unit. This kind of
pattern can be repeated in even longer words. 
In cases involving both primary and secondary stresses, these trees are
particularly helpful: (4) clearly shows the different patterns for entertain-
ment and catamaran. In particular, the trees allow us easily to identify the
main stress of each word, which will always be on the syllable dominated
by nodes marked S all the way up the tree.
(4)
Finally, metrical trees are useful in displaying the stress patterns of
related words. In English, as in many other languages, stress interacts
122
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY
S
W
W
per
son
al
S
S
W
W
di
sci
pline
S
fa
ther
S
W
a
bout
W
S
ta
lly
S
W
W
S
W
en
ter
tain ment
S
S
W
W
W
S
ca
ta
mar
an
S
W
S

with the morphology, so that the addition of particular sufﬁxes causes
stress to shift. Most sufﬁxes are stress-neutral, and do not affect stress
placement at all: for instance, if we add -ise to
atom, the result is 
atomise;
similarly, adding -ly to
happy or
grumpy produces
happily,
grumpily, with
stress remaining on the ﬁrst syllable. However, there are two other
classes of sufﬁxes which do inﬂuence stress placement. The ﬁrst are
stress-attracting sufﬁxes, which themselves take the main stress in a
morphologically complex word: for example, adding -ette to
kitchen,
or -ese to
mother, produces kitchen
ette, mother
ese. Other sufﬁxes, notably
-ic, -ity and adjective-forming -al, do not become stressed themselves,
but cause the stress on the stem to which they attach to retract one
syllable to the right, so that 
atom, e
lectric and
parent become a
tomic,
elec
tricity and pa
rental. The varying stress patterns of related words like
parent and parental can very straightforwardly be compared using tree
diagrams, as in (5).
(5)
There is one ﬁnal category of word with its own characteristic stress
pattern. In English compounds, which are composed morphologically of
two independent words but signal a single concept, stress is characteris-
tically on the ﬁrst element, distinguishing the compounds 
greenhouse and
blackbird from the phrases a green 
house, a black 
bird. Semantically too,
the difference is obvious: there can be brown blackbirds (female black-
birds are brown), or blue greenhouses, but The green 
house is blue is
semantically ill-formed. In phrases, the adjectives black and green are
directly descriptive of the noun, and have to be interpreted that way; on
the other hand, the meaning of compounds are not determined com-
positionally, by simply adding together the meanings of the component
parts, so that greenhouse signals a particular concept, with no particular
speciﬁcation of colour. Stress is clearly crucial in marking this differ-
ence between compounds and phrases; in noting it, however, we are
already moving beyond the word, and into the domain of even larger
phonological units.
THE WORD AND ABOVE
123
pa
rent
S
W
W
S
W
pa
ren
tal
S

10.3 The foot
So far we have been assuming that syllables group into words, with some
words being composed of only a single syllable. Strictly, however, the
word is not a phonological unit, but a morphological and syntactic one;
and as we shall see in the next section, phonological processes are no
great respecters of word boundaries, operating between words just as
well as within them. The next biggest phonological unit above the syllable
is the foot.
The normally accepted deﬁnition is that each phonological foot starts
with a stressed syllable (though we shall encounter an apparent ex-
ception below), and continues up to, but not including, the next stressed
syllable. This means that cat in a hat consists of two feet, the ﬁrst contain-
ing cat in a, and the second, hat. Although cat ﬂap consists of only two
words (or indeed one, if we agree this is a compound), as opposed to four
in cat in a hat, it also consists of two feet, this time one for each syllable,
since both cat and ﬂap bear some degree of stress. Indeed, because
English is a stress-timed language, allowing approximately the same
amount of time to produce each foot (as opposed to syllable-timed
languages, like French, which devote about the same amount of time to
each syllable regardless of stress), cat in a hat and cat ﬂap will have much
the same phonetic duration. The same goes for the cat sat on the mat, with
rather few unstressed syllables between the stressed ones, and as snug
as a bug in a rug, with a regular pattern of two unstressed syllables to
each stress. This isochrony of feet, whereby feet last for much the same
time regardless of the number of syllables in them, is responsible for the
characteristic rhythm of English.
Like syllables, feet can also be contrasted as stronger and weaker.
Sometimes, there will be more than one foot to the word; for instance,
as we saw earlier, a word like raider, with primary stress on the ﬁrst syl-
lable and no stress on the second, can be opposed to 
radar, with primary
versus secondary stress. It is not possible to capture this distinction using
only syllable-based trees, since both raider and radar have a stronger ﬁrst
syllable and a weaker second syllable. However, these two W nodes are
to be interpreted in two different ways, namely as indicating no stress in
raider, but secondary stress in radar. To clarify the difference, we must
recognise the foot. Raider then has a single foot, while radar has two, the
ﬁrst S and the second W. Recall that small sigma (σ) indicates a syllable,
and capital sigma (Σ), a foot.
124
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

(6)
In other cases, the same number of feet may be spread over more than
one word, so that 
cat ﬂap has two feet, related as S versus W, while cat
in a
hat also has two feet, although here the ﬁrst foot is larger, including
in a as well as cat, and the prominence relationship of W S reﬂects the
fact that cat ﬂap is a compound bearing initial primary stress, while cat in
a hat is a phrase, with main stress towards the end. 
Feet can also be classiﬁed into types, three of which are shown in (7).
The iambic type, structured W S, contradicts the claim above that all
feet begin with a stressed syllable; but in fact, at the connected speech
level, the ﬁrst, unstressed syllable in such cases will typically become
realigned, attaching to the preceding foot. So, in cup of tea, the weak
syllable of will be more closely associated with the preceding stronger
syllable, with which it then forms a trochaic foot, than with the follow-
ing one, as evidenced by the common contraction cuppa for cup of.
(7) Trochee (trochaic foot)
Dactyl (dactylic foot)
THE WORD AND ABOVE
125
rai
σS
Σ
σW
der
ra
dar
σ
σ
ΣS
ΣW
fa
ther
S
W
Σ
fáthe˘r
cáme˘ra˘
S
W
W
ca
me
ra
S
Σ

Iamb (iambic foot)
These foot types are important in scansion, or analysing verse.
For example, the blank verse of Shakespeare’s plays involves iambic
pentameters: each line has ﬁve iambic feet, as shown in the metre of two
lines from The Merchant of Venice (8).
(8) The˘ quálíty´ o˘f mércy˘ ís no˘t stráined
I˘t dróppe˘th ás the˘ géntle˘ ráin fro˘m héaven
To take a less exalted example, (9) shows two lines with rather differ-
ent metrical structure. The ﬁrst consists of two dactyls and a ﬁnal
‘degenerate’ foot composed of a single stressed syllable. Note that a foot
of this kind, like dock here, or any monosyllabic word like bit, cat in
normal conversation, cannot really be labelled as S or W: since stress is
relational, it requires comparison with surrounding feet. The second line
is again made up of iambic feet.
(9) Hícko˘ry˘ dícko˘ry˘ dóck
The˘ móuse ra˘n úp the˘ clóck.
Finally (taking another nursery rhyme, since these often have particu-
larly clear and simple metre), a line like Máry˘, Máry˘ quíte co˘ntráry˘ is
composed of four trochaic feet.
Poetry also provides an excellent illustration of the English prefer-
ence for alternating stress. It does not especially matter whether we have
sequences of SWSWSWSW, or SWWSWWSWWSWW; but what does
matter is avoiding either lapses, where too many unstressed syllables
intervene between stresses, or clashes, where stresses are adjacent, with
no unstressed syllables in between at all. The English process of Iambic
Reversal seems designed precisely to avoid stress clashes of this kind. It
affects combinations of words which would, in isolation, have ﬁnal stress
on the ﬁrst word, and initial stress on the second. For instance, (10) shows
that the citation forms (that is, the formal speech pronunciation of a
word alone, rather than in a phrase) of thirteen and champagne have ﬁnal
stress.
(10) A: How many people turned up?
B: Thir
teen.
126
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY
de
mand
W
S
Σ
de˘mánd

A: What are you drinking?
B: Cham
pagne.
However, when ﬁnal-stressed words like thirteen and champagne form
phrases with initial-stressed ones like players or cocktails, the stress on the
ﬁrst word in each phrase moves to the left, so that in 
thirteen
players and
champagne
cocktails, both words have initial stress. This is clearly related
to the preference of English speakers for eurhythmic alternation of
stronger and weaker syllables, as illustrated in (11).
(11) W
S
S
W
S
W
S
W
thirteen
players
→
thirteen
players
W
S
S
W
S
W
S
W
champagne
cocktails
→
champagne
cocktails
If these words retained their normal stress pattern once embedded
in the phrases, we would ﬁnd clashing sequences of WSSW, as shown
on the left of (11), in violation of eurhythmy; consequently, the promi-
nence pattern of the ﬁrst word is reversed, changing from an iamb to a
trochee – hence the name Iambic Reversal. The result is a sequence of
two trochaic feet, giving SWSW and ideal stress alternation.
It is also possible, however, for the normal stress patterns of words to
be disrupted and rearranged in an altogether less regular and predictable
way, reﬂecting the fact that stress is not only a phonological feature, but
can also be used by speakers to emphasise a particular word or syllable.
If one speaker mishears or fails to hear another, an answer may involve
stressing both syllables in a word, in violation of eurhythmy: so, the
question What did you say? may quite appropriate elicit the response
thir
teen. Similarly, although phrases typically have ﬁnal stress, a speaker
emphasising the ﬁrst word may well produce the pattern a
cat in a 
hat,
rather than a cat in a
hat. This is partly what makes the study of inton-
ation, the prominence patterns of whole utterances, so complicated. It is
true that there is a typical ‘tune’ associated with each utterance type in
English: for instance, questions typically have raised pitch towards the
end of the sentence, while statements have a pitch shift downwards
instead. However, the stress patterns of particular words (which may
themselves be altered for emphasis) interact with these overall tunes in
a highly complex and ﬂuid way. 
Furthermore, speakers can use stress and intonation to signal their
attitude to what they are saying; so that although No spoken with slightly
dropping pitch signals neutral agreement, it may also be produced with
rising pitch to signal surprise, or indeed with rising, falling, and rising
intonation, to show that the speaker is unsure or doubtful. In addition,
THE WORD AND ABOVE
127

intonation is just as subject to change over time, and under sociolinguis-
tic pressures, as any other area of phonology. To take one case in point,
there is currently a growing trend for younger women in the south-east
of England in particular to extend to statements the high rising tune
characteristic of questions, so that She’s going out and She’s going out?
will have the same characteristic intonation pattern for these speakers.
Whatever the source of this innovation (with the inﬂuence of Australian
television soaps like Neighbours being a favourite popular candidate), it
shows that intonation is not static, and that there is no single, necessary
connection between particular patterns and particular utterance types.
These complexities, combined with the fact that the analysis of inton-
ation has its own (highly complex and often variable) technical terms
and conventions, mean that it cannot be pursued further here.
10.4 Segmental phonology of the phrase and word
10.4.1 Phrase-level processes
Although the main focus of this chapter has inevitably been on stress and
prominence, this is not the only phonological characteristic of the word
and phrase levels: segments may also be affected by those adjacent to
them. The bulk of these segmental phonological processes are charac-
teristic of fast and casual speech, and are often referred to as connected
speech processes (CSPs for short). These generally involve either
assimilations (whereby two adjacent sounds become more similar in
quality, as the articulations used to produce them become more similar),
or reductions; both these process types are natural consequences of
talking more quickly and perhaps less carefully. Most CSPs are also
optional, and will tend to be suspended or at least occur less frequently
in more formal situations and in slower speech. To take just two
examples, when two adjacent words have ﬁnal and initial stops, these
typically come to share the same place of articulation, so that sit close will
tend to have medial [kk], and odd message [bm]. Function words like he,
than, you, my also frequently reduce to [], [ðən] (or even [ən]), [jə], [mə]:
all these component processes, notably loss of consonants (in he, than),
shortening of vowels (in he again), and reduction of vowels to schwa (in
than, you, my) as a result of loss of stress, are segmental weakenings. 
Speaking quickly and informally will also tend to cut the duration of
unstressed vowels in full lexical words like nouns, verbs and adjectives,
with a concomitant effect on their quality. In words like deduce, profound,
connect, the ﬁrst syllable in careful speech may contain a full vowel, [i],
[aυ] or [ɒ] respectively; but in faster speech and more relaxed circum-
128
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

stances, these are highly likely to be reduced to schwa. Work by Fry in
1947 reported that nearly 11 per cent of vowel phonemes in English
consisted of /ə/, with its nearest rival, at 8 per cent, being //, the other
vowel frequently found in unstressed syllables. To put this in perspec-
tive, all other vowels in the survey fell below 3 per cent. This indicates
clearly how common unstressed syllables were in 1947; and they are not
likely to have reduced in frequency since. In some cases, however, vowels
do not only reduce in fast speech: they are deleted. A word like connect,
in connected speech, could be pronounced either as [kənεkt] or [knεkt];
and in cases like this one, and potato [ptetoυ], the result actually violates
the phonotactics of English, since *[kn] and *[pt] are not permissible
clusters.
Such processes do not always affect vowels, however: sometimes both
vowels and consonants are elided in fast speech, so that whole syllables
may vanish when we compare the citation forms of words like February,
veterinary with their fast speech equivalents, [fεbɹi], [vεʔnɹi]. Note also
[ʔ] for /t/ in the second example; reduction of a stop to a glottal stop, or
indeed to a fricative, is another example of lenition or weakening. More-
over, phonological reductions and assimilations across word boundaries
typically affect consonants rather than vowels. For example, at the
phrase level, word-ﬁnal /s/ followed by word-initial /j/ often combine
to produce [ʃ], so that race you is often [ɹeʃə], not the citation form [ɹes
ju]. In this case, a very similar process also takes place word-internally,
resulting in medial [ʃ] in racial; but again typically, these word-internal
cases are not so clearly optional, and [ɹesjəl] would tend to be seen as
old-fashioned or an example of a speaker trying too hard to speak
‘correctly’. Another very common process applying between words
is [ɹ]-intrusion in non-rhotic accents of English, where [ɹ] appears
between [ɑ], [ɔ], or [ə] and another following vowel, although there is no
<r> in the spelling and no etymological /r/ in the word concerned. For
instance, the name of a tennis tournament, the Stella Artois event, will
typically in casual speech be pronounced as [ðəstεləɹɑtwɑɹəvεnt], with
intrusive [ɹ] after both cases of <a>; and similarly, we ﬁnd well-known
examples like the idea is [ðiadiəɹz] and law and order [lɔɹənɔdə]. Again,
this process also takes place within words, as in sheep baa[ɹ]ing,
draw[ɹ]ing, magenta[ɹ]ish. This might, on the face of it, seem a rather
unusual fast speech process, since it involves the addition of a segment;
but producing two vowels side-by-side appears to be rather difﬁcult for
speakers, and an intrusive consonant may allow more ﬂuid and less hesi-
tant speech. Many of these processes therefore have a similar rationale,
in making life easier for speakers, and allowing speech tempo to be kept
consistently fast.
THE WORD AND ABOVE
129

10.4.2 Word-internal morphophonological processes
However, there is another class of segmental phonological processes. In
contrast to the connected-speech processes discussed above, these do
not apply across word boundaries, but are rather conﬁned within words,
where they tend to take place in response to the addition of a particular
sufﬁx – generally those sufﬁxes identiﬁed as causing stress retraction in
10.2.2. Forms with these sufﬁxes are also prone to odd and irregular
segmental processes. For instance, when the sufﬁx -ity is added to electric,
the ﬁnal [k] of electric becomes [s] in electricity. The same sufﬁx may also
alter the stem vowel: when -ity is added to divine, sane, serene, the long
stressed vowels of the stems are shortened in divinity, sanity, serenity.
These changes are also unlike CSPs in that it is often hard to see why
they take place where they do: while a fast speech reduction or assimi-
lation is generally a response to speed of speech, and involves ease
of articulation pressures, the word-internal type typically creates an
alternation between two independent phonemes, not directly motivated
by the phonological context (as in the /k/ and /s/ of electric – electricity).
Even where there does seem to be a reduction, as in the shortening of the
stressed vowel in divine to divinity on the addition of the -ity sufﬁx, it
is not obvious why this particular sufﬁx should have this effect; and it
cannot be ascribed to speed of speech, since these morphophonological
processes are obligatory, regardless of speed of speech or sociolinguistic
factors: hence, the citation forms of electricity, divinity will also show these
changes.
Although the afﬁxes which provoke these segmental changes gener-
ally also inﬂuence the position of stress, this is not always the case. For
instance, adding the past tense marker -t or -d to irregular verbs like
keep – kept, sleep – slept, leap – leapt has no effect on stress, but does seem
to cause a categorical shortening of the stem vowel. One of the most
important jobs for phonologists, bearing in mind the focus discussed
throughout this book on what speakers know about their language, and
what they must be assumed to do in order to learn, produce and under-
stand it, is to work out where to draw the line between productive
processes which speakers apply regularly and which they will generalise
to new forms in the language, and fossilised processes which might have
started out as regular phonetic developments, perhaps CSPs, in the
history of the language, but which are now simply associated with in-
dividual words or small groups of words. That is, perfectly natural
phonetic processes may in time become less transparent, and less regu-
lar. In the case of keep – kept, or divine – divinity, we must ask ourselves
whether the processes of vowel shortening, which perhaps were regular
130
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

and phonetically motivated centuries ago, are still part of native
speakers’ active knowledge of English, and still involve those speakers in
actual processes of adding sufﬁxes and shortening vowels; or whether
children must learn that words like keep and divine have related, but
different forms which are stored separately and produced on appropri-
ate syntactic occasions. Since phonology, like all other areas of language,
is consistently undergoing change and development, with new processes
constantly arising and different accents diverging, our only deﬁnite con-
clusion can be that today’s connected-speech processes will present
tomorrow’s phonologists with exactly the same problem.
Exercises
1. Look back at the English stress rules presented in (2). Consider the
adjectives lovely, beautiful, surreal, high-pitched, scarlet, noisy, sensible. On the
basis of these forms, do you think adjectives typically follow the Noun
Rule or the Verb Rule? Is there a single, general pattern for adjectives
at all?
2. Draw metrical S W trees for the following words:
person, personal, personality, elephant, peninsula, disentanglement
In each case, make sure that the syllable which carries main stress is
dominated by S all the way up the tree.
3. Find examples of English words which consist of the following foot
structures:
one iamb
one trochee
one dactyl
one iamb followed by one trochee
one dactyl followed by one trochee
4. Find some examples of poems which contain mainly iambic, trochaic
and dactylic feet. Make a metrical analysis of several lines from each,
using diacritics like cát over a stressed syllable, and o˘f over an unstressed
one, to show what the foot structure is. 
5. Transcribe the following utterances in citation form and as appro-
priate for faster, more casual speech. In each case, say what connected
speech processes you might expect to ﬁnd in the second rendition:
I expect he has gone to meet her
Helen had a banana and a bread cake
THE WORD AND ABOVE
131

Recommendations for reading
Carr (1999), Giegerich (1992), Roach (2001) and Spencer (1996) all
provide further information on the complexities of English stress, while
Couper-Kuhlen (1986), Cruttenden (1986) and Roach (2001) give
detailed descriptions of English intonation and its analysis. A more
theoretical approach to intonation is reported in Ladd (1996). The
difference between phonological processes which interact with the
morphology and those which are closer to the phonetics forms the basis
of Lexical Phonology; Kaisse and Shaw (1995) provide a helpful outline
of this model.
132
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

Discussion of the exercises
Chapter 2
1. Explaining these pronunciations involves two steps: ﬁrst, ﬁgure out
what the relevant environments are; and second, try to work out why the
learner is producing these pronunciations in those environments. In
terms of environments, [d] appears word-initially and word-ﬁnally, and
[ð] medially, between vowels; [ʃ] appears before or after an [] vowel,
and [s] next to other vowels. Since we know the speaker in this case is a
learner of English, our ﬁrst attempt at explanation might involve the
patterns of her native language: we can hypothesise that in that language,
[d] and [ð] are allophones of a single phoneme, and likewise [ʃ] and [s]
are allophones of a single phoneme, with a distribution like the one our
learner imposes on English.
Predicted pronunciations would be: Daddy [dði]; either [ð]; loathe [d];
ship [ʃ]; pass [s]; dish [ʃ]; usher [s].
2. One list of minimal pairs for initial position would be my – nigh – pie
– buy – tie – die – guy – lie – rye. You can add me – key in a slightly differ-
ent context. You should be able to produce similar lists medially and
ﬁnally; what you won’t ﬁnd are cases of initial [ŋ], ﬁnal [h], or for some
speakers at least, ﬁnal [r].
3. The main point here is that some pairs of sounds are in complemen-
tary distribution in this language: notably, voiced and voiceless pairs of
sounds ([g] – [k], [b] – [p], [z] – [s]) do not contrast, since the voiced one
appears initially and medially, and the voiceless one ﬁnally. Linguist A
has noticed this, and uses a single symbol for each pair; Linguist B uses
different graphs. Linguist A also uses a single symbol for [ŋ], which is a
single consonant in this language, and represents [h] with <h> each time
it is pronounced. Linguist B uses <ng> for [ŋ], making it look like two
consonants, and has no symbol for [h] word-ﬁnally. In short, A is using
a system designed for this particular language; B is following English
patterns, and is probably a native speaker of English.
133

Chapter 3
1. (a) hang, ship, foot, sit
(b) nap, jug, knock, lot, jump
(c) nap, hang, jug, bet, lamb
(d) pot, sad, boss, size, hen, call
(e) wash, hall, red, yellow
2. (a) They are all approximant consonants
(b) They are all voiceless
(c) They are all fricatives.
3. (a) A: nasal, and voiced
B: oral, and voiceless
(b) A: fricatives
B: plosives
(c) A: voiced
B: voiceless
4. Note that ALL these consonants are pulmonic and egressive; and all
are central except for [l].
[sɑm]
voiceless alveolar fricative; voiced bilabial nasal stop
[dεstə]
voiced postalveolar affricate; voiceless alveolar
fricative; voiceless alveolar plosive; and for some
speakers, a ﬁnal [r] = voiced alveolar central
approximant
[wtʃ] or [tʃ]
voiced labial-velar approximant, or voiceless labial-
velar fricative; voiceless postalveolar affricate
[klam]
voiceless velar plosive; voiced alveolar lateral
approximant; voiced bilabial nasal stop
[hεv]
voiceless glottal fricative; voiced labio-dental frica-
tive
[splnt]
voiceless alveolar plosive; voiceless bilabial plosive;
voiced alveolar lateral approximant; voiced alveolar
nasal stop; voiceless alveolar plosive
[lɒk] or [lɒx]
voiced alveolar lateral approximant; voiceless velar
plosive, or voiceless velar fricative
[bɔt]
voiced bilabial plosive; voiceless alveolar plosive
[skwεltʃ]
voiceless alveolar plosive; voiceless velar plosive;
voiced labial-velar approximant; voiced alveolar
lateral approximant; voiceless postalveolar affricate.
Chapter 4
1. These rules are written to say that /d/ becomes [ð] between vowels,
and /s/ becomes [ʃ] either before or after []. You may if you wish also
134
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

write a rule to say explicitly where [d] and [s] appear (e.g. [d] occurs
word-initially and word-ﬁnally).
+voice
+consonantal
–sonorant
→
[+continuant] / vowel ____ vowel
+anterior
+coronal
–continuant
–voice
+consonantal
–sonorant
→
[–anterior] /
____ []
+anterior
[] ____
+coronal
+continuant
2. You need a single rule to say that voiced obstruents (you needn’t
specify the place or whether these are continuants, to cover all the
sounds involved) become voiceless at the ends of words:
+voice
+consonantal
→
[–voice] / ____#
–sonorant
3. /l/ is
[–syllabic, +consonantal, +sonorant, +continuant, +voice,
+lateral, –nasal, +anterior, +coronal, –delayed release,
–strident]
/r/ is
[–syllabic, +consonantal, +sonorant, +continuant, +voice,
–lateral, –nasal, +anterior, +coronal, –delayed release,
–strident]
/p/ is
[- syllabic, +consonantal, –sonorant, –continuant, –voice,
–lateral, –nasal, +anterior, –coronal, –delayed release,
–strident]
/d/ is
[–syllabic, +consonantal, –sonorant, –continuant, +voice,
–lateral, –nasal, +anterior, +coronal, –delayed release,
–strident]
/s/ is
[–syllabic, +consonantal, –sonorant, +continuant, –voice,
–lateral, –nasal, +anterior, +coronal, –delayed release,
+strident]
/θ/ is
[–syllabic, +consonantal, –sonorant, +continuant, –voice,
–lateral, –nasal, +anterior, +coronal, –delayed release,
–strident]
DISCUSSION OF THE EXERCISES
135



/ŋ/ is
[–syllabic, +consonantal, +sonorant, –continuant, +voice,
–lateral, +nasal, –anterior, –coronal, –delayed release,
–strident]
/d/ is [–syllabic, +consonantal, –sonorant, –continuant, +voice,
–lateral, –nasal, +anterior, +coronal, +delayed release,
+strident]
/w/ is [–syllabic, –consonantal, +sonorant, +continuant, +voice,
–lateral, –nasal, +anterior, –coronal, –delayed release,
–strident]
4. Redundant features are:
/l/
everything except [+lateral] –/l/ is the only English lateral
/r/
[–syllabic, +continuant, +voice, –nasal, –delayed release,
–strident]
/p/
[–syllabic, –lateral, –nasal, –delayed release, –strident]
/d/
[–syllabic, –lateral, –nasal, –strident]
/s/
[–syllabic, –lateral, –nasal, –delayed release]
/θ/
[–syllabic, –lateral, –nasal, –delayed release]
/ŋ/
everything except [+nasal, –anterior, –coronal]
/d/
everything except [+voice, +delayed release]
/w/
[–syllabic, +continuant, +voice, –nasal, –delayed release,
–strident]
5. (a) the odd one out is [b]; the class is [–syllabic, +sonorant, –nasal]
(b) the odd one out is [ð]; the class is [–nasal, –continuant]
(c) the odd one out is [k]; the class is [+anterior, +coronal, –delayed
release]
6. In two-consonant clusters with [s] as the ﬁrst consonant, the second
may be a voiceless stop; a liquid; a nasal; a glide. The natural classes
are [–voice, –nasal, –continuant] for the voiceless stops, and [–syllabic,
+sonorant] for the others.
In three-consonant clusters with [s] as the ﬁrst consonant, the second
must be a voiceless stop (see above), and the third a liquid or glide
(= [–syllabic, +sonorant, –nasal]).
Chapter 5
1. You should be producing lists like the one in Exercise 2, Chapter 2.
Defective distributions will involve initial [h], ﬁnal [ŋ], and ﬁnal [r] if
you are a speaker of a non-rhotic accent.
2. (a) Using only the criteria of predictability of occurrence and invari-
136
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

ance of meaning, [ɹ] is in complementary distribution with both
[ɹ] and [l], and [l] with both [ɹ] and [l].
(b) The usual decision would be to assign [ɹ] and [ɹ] to /r/, and [l]
and [l] to /l/, on the grounds of phonetic similarity.
(c)
–syllabic
+sonorant
→
[–voice] / [–voice] ____
–nasal
3. There is no single answer here; it depends on the example you choose.
However, there are some analysed models in the chapter.
4. In word-ﬁnal position, the usual three-way contrast of the voiceless
stops is neutralised, and all three are realised by the glottal stop. It would
be appropriate to recognise an archiphoneme here; we could use the
symbol /P/, /T/ or /K/. Since the three voiceless stop phonemes /p/,
/t/ and /k/ are usually distinguished by their place of articulation, the
archiphoneme would be speciﬁed as [–voice, –nasal, –continuant] (the
feature values the voiceless stops share), but would have no value for
[anterior] or [coronal].
Chapter 6
1. (a) put, hook, grew, hoe, hold
(b) see, seat, met, tap, tape
(c) see, seat, list, through
(d) about, luck, purse, father (second syllable)
(e) put, look, food
2. (a) they are all mid vowels
(b) they are all high front vowels
(c) they are all diphthongs
(d) they are all long, high vowels
3. The diagrams here will follow the pattern of (6.15). For /a/, /aυ/, the
arrow will start at low central, and move up to either high front, or high
back. For /e/, /oυ/, the end points are the same, but the start points are
high-mid front and high-mid back respectively. Centring diphthongs
will all end at schwa.
4. father
long low back unrounded; short mid central unrounded
leaving
long high front unrounded; short high front unrounded
hear
centring diphthong; ﬁrst element is short high front
unrounded, second is short mid central unrounded.
Speakers of rhotic varieties will have a long high front
DISCUSSION OF THE EXERCISES
137

unrounded monophthong (plus [r]).
thoroughly
short low-mid central unrounded; short mid central
unrounded; short high front unrounded
fast
long low back unrounded; for northern speakers, front
rather than back
haste
diphthong, with ﬁrst element high-mid front unrounded,
and second element high front unrounded; or high-mid
front unrounded monophthong
lookalike
short high back rounded; short mid central unrounded;
diphthong, with ﬁrst element low central unrounded, and
second element high front unrounded
sausage
short low-mid back rounded; short mid central un-
rounded
ooze
long high back rounded.
Chapter 7
1.
SSBE
GA
SSE
NZE
water
/wɔtə/
/wɔtər/
/wɒtər/
/wɔtə/
grass
/grɑs/
/grs/
/gras/
/gras/
righteousness /ratʃəsnεs/
/ratʃəsnεs/
/rtʃəsnεs/
/ratʃəsnes/
holiday
/hɒlde/
/hɑlde/
/hɒlde/
/hɒlədε/
pilchard
/pltʃd/
/pltʃrd/
/pltʃrd/
/pəltʃd/
following
/fɒloυŋ/
/fɑloυŋ/
/fɒloŋ/
/fɒləuŋ/
northeast
/nɔθist/
/nɔrθist/
/nɒrθist/
/nɔθist/
spoonful
/spunfυl/
/spunfυl/
/spunful/
/spəunfυl/
2. (a)
+syllabic
–syllabic
+front
→
[–round]
/ ____
–anterior
+round
–coronal
(b)
+syllabic
–syllabic
–consonant
→
[–voice]
/ ____
–voice
+sonorant
(c)
+syllabic
–syllabic
+high
→
[+mid]
/ [–syllabic]
+nasal
–mid
(d)
+syllabic
#____
–high
→
+high
/
–syllabic
–mid
+round
____
–anterior
+back
+coronal
138
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY



3. No speciﬁc answers can be given here, since there is too wide a choice
of possible examples. However, consulting the tables (3) and (4) in
Chapter 7 should help.
4. Again, this exercise depends on your accent, so no answers can be
provided. In deciding which symbols to use, you should again consult
tables (3) and (4) in Chapter 7, and may ﬁnd it helpful to talk through
your reasoning with fellow-students who have both similar and different
accents.
Chapter 8
All the exercises in this chapter have a wide range of possible answers,
depending on your particular accent. The advice for Exercise 4, Chapter
7 above may again be helpful in approaching these tasks. Before you
begin, you should be sure you are conﬁdent about the differences
between systemic, realisational and distributional variation.
Chapter 9
1. dan.ger
Onset Maximalism might suggest da.nger, but there are
no *[nd] initial clusters in English.
un.sta.ble
[st] is a permissible initial cluster; *[nst] is not, so the
syllable division must be between [n] and [s]. However,
note that [s] is higher in sonority than [t], so there is a
violation of the Sonority Sequencing Generalisation.
In the third syllable, [l] is the nucleus (or for speakers
who have a schwa vowel in this syllable, the coda).
an[k.ʃ]ious
Final [ŋk] is common in English (thank, sink …), but
not initial *[kʃ].
discipline
On the grounds of Onset Maximalism, the syllabiﬁca-
tion should be di.sci.pline; but then the ﬁrst two syllables
would be light, and the ﬁrst is stressed. There is likely
to be ambisyllabicity between the ﬁrst and second
syllables therefore, giving dis.sci.pline.
nar.row
Another case of ambisyllabicity.
be.yond
Here, the ﬁrst syllable is unstressed and can be light;
the glide [j] can therefore be in the onset of the second
syllable only, prioritising Onset Maximalism.
bot.tle
Another case of ambisyllabicity. It is true that there are
no cases of onset *[tl-] clusters in English; but note that
the syllabic [l] here is in the nucleus rather than the
onset, so that Onset Maximalism can be maintained.
DISCUSSION OF THE EXERCISES
139

bott.ling
Here, the [l] is in the onset, since a vowel follows; and
in this case therefore, the prohibition on onset *[tl]
clusters means the [t] is in the coda of the ﬁrst syllable
only.
2.
3. In this exercise, try to avoid making random lists of consonant
clusters you can think of, and concentrate on narrowing down the possi-
bilities using natural classes. For instance, in onset position, sonority
rules out cases of liquids plus voiceless stops, so although [pl], [pr] are
allowed, there are no initial clusters *[lp], *[rp], *[lt], *[rt], *[lk], *[rk].
Apparent medial exceptions would be wallpaper, warpaint, alter, porter,
alcohol, arcadia. If the order voiceless stop plus liquid is permissible in
onsets, it follows that this order must be ruled out in codas – and indeed,
in English we ﬁnd coda [lp], [lt], [lk], for instance, in pulp, halt, milk,
but not *[pl], *[tl], *[kl], with ascending sonority; apparent medial
exceptions are apply, Atlantic, acclimatise.
4. Again, these are just some indicative examples. English phonotactics
generally forbid sequences of voiceless stop plus voiceless fricative, so
*[ps] in onsets, but nonetheless we have psittacosis, psyche; similarly *[ts],
but tsetse (ﬂy). Likewise, English has no onsets with *[vl], but note the
Russian name Vlad.
140
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY
O N C O N O N C
O N C O N
N C O N O N
N C O N C
σ
σ
R
R
[d en d
ə
σ
σ
σ
R
R
R
u
n s t e
b
l
σ
σ
R
R
a ŋ
k ʃ
ə
s
σ
σ
σ
R
R
R
d

s
p
l 
n]
O N C O N
σ
σ
R
R
[n a
r
oυ
O N C O N C
O N C O N
O N O N C
σ
σ
b
i
j
ɒ
nd
R
R
σ
σ
b
ɒ
t
l
R
R
b
ɒ
t
l

ŋ]
σ
σ
R
R

Chapter 10
1. There is no absolutely clear preference for the noun or the verb
pattern in the adjectives in the list, although most can be interpreted as
following the Noun Rule. Surreal seems to follow the Verb Rule, since it
has ﬁnal stress, which is not characteristic of nouns (leaving e.g. machine,
police aside). However, beautiful, scarlet clearly follow the Noun Rule; both
have heavy ﬁnal syllables, so if following the verb pattern, they should
carry ﬁnal stress. Sensible probably falls into the same category. Lovely and
noisy could follow either pattern, since their ﬁnal syllables are short,
meaning that stress would retract to the penultimate syllable in a verb,
while the penult is the target for noun stress anyway. High-pitched follows
the usual compound pattern, with initial stress. Can you think of other
adjectives which might settle the issue?
2.
3. one iamb – suppose, believe, machine
one trochee – letter, open, answer
one dactyl – cinema, enemy, quality
iamb plus trochee –these would be candidates for stress clashes, since
the iamb has ﬁnal stress, and the trochee, initial stress: the closest we
can get would be compounds like belief system, advance warning.
dactyl plus trochee – phantasmagoric, paediatrician, multiplication
4. The analysis here will depend very much on the poems you choose,
and on how regular the rhythm is in each case. The brief examples
worked out in the text should help; and you might ﬁnd it useful to think
DISCUSSION OF THE EXERCISES
141
S
W
S
W
W
S
W
S
W
W
S
W
W
per son
per son
al
S
S
S
W
W
per son
al
i
ty
S
el
le phant
S
W
S
W
W
W
S
W
W
S
S
pen
in
su
la
S
W
S
dis
en tang
le ment

initially what a rhythm made up of a sequence of each foot type in isola-
tion would sound like.
5. Citation forms (for SSBE – other accents will vary):
[aεkspεkt hi haz gɒn tu mit h]
[hεlən had ə bənɑ:nə and ə bɹεd kek]
Fast speech forms:
[aspεktzgɒntəmitə]
[hεlənadəbnɑnəɹənəbɹεgkek]
Note multiple reduction of vowels to schwa; assimilation of place of
articulation of the ﬁrst stop to the second in the middle of bread cake;
intrusive [r]; reduction of he has to he’s; dropping of [h] in had, her and he.
142
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

References
Aitchison, Jean (1983), The Articulate Mammal, London: Hutchinson.
Archangeli, Diana and D. Terence Langendoen (eds) (1997), Optimality Theory:
An Overview, Oxford: Blackwell.
Ball, Martin and Joan Rahilly (1999), Phonetics: The Science of Speech, London:
Arnold.
Campbell, Lyle (1998), Historical Linguistics, Edinburgh University Press.
Carr, Philip (1993), Phonology, London: Macmillan.
Carr, Philip (1999), English Phonetics and Phonology: An Introduction, Oxford:
Blackwell.
Catford, J. C. (1988), A Practical Course in Phonetics, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Chambers, J. K. and Peter Trudgill (1980), Dialectology, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Chomsky, Noam and Morris Halle (1968), The Sound Pattern of English, New
York: Harper & Row.
Coulmas, Florian (1988), The Writing Systems of the World, Oxford: Blackwell.
Couper-Kuhlen, Elisabeth (1986), An Introduction to English Prosody, London:
Arnold.
Cruttenden, Alan (1986), Intonation, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Davenport, Mike and S. J. Hannahs (1998), Introducing Phonetics and Phonology,
London: Arnold.
Durand, Jacques (1990), Generative and Non-Linear Phonology, London: Longman.
Fletcher, P. and B. MacWhinney (1994), The Handbook of Child Language, Oxford:
Blackwell.
Fry, D. B. (1947), ‘The frequency of occurrence of speech sounds in Southern
English’, Archives néerlandaises de phonétique expérimentale, 20: 103-6.
Giegerich, Heinz J. (1992), English Phonology: An Introduction, Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Graddol, David, Dick Leith and Joan Swann (1996), English: History, Diversity and
Change, London: Routledge.
Gussenhoven, Carlos and Haike Jacobs (1998), Understanding Phonology, London:
Arnold.
Hogg, Richard M. and C. B. McCully (1987), Metrical Phonology: A Coursebook,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
143

Hudson, Richard A. (1995), Sociolinguistics (2nd edn), Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
International Phonetic Association (1999), The Handbook of the International
Phonetic Association, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jones, Charles (ed.) (1997), The Edinburgh History of the Scots Language, Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Kager, René (1999), Optimality Theory, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kaisse, Ellen and Patricia Shaw (1985), ‘On the theory of Lexical Phonology’,
Phonology Yearbook, 2: 1-30.
Katamba, Francis (1988), An Introduction to Phonology, London: Longman.
Ladd, D. Robert (1996), Intonational Phonology, Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Ladefoged, Peter (1993), A Course in Phonetics (3rd edn), New York: Harcourt,
Brace, Jovanovitch.
Lass, Roger (1984), Phonology, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Laver, John (1994), Principle of Phonetics, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Pinker, Steven (1994), The Language Instinct, London: Penguin.
Roach, Peter (2001), English Phonetics and Phonology: A Practical Course (2nd edn),
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sampson, Geoffrey (1985), Writing Systems, London: Hutchinson.
Spencer, Andrew (1996), Phonology, Oxford: Blackwell.
Tan, Ludwig (1998), ‘The vowel system of Singapore English’, Unpublished
M.Phil. essay, Department of Linguistics, University of Cambridge.
Trask, R. L. (1996), Historical Linguistics, London: Arnold.
Trudgill, Peter (2000), The Dialects of England (2nd edn), Oxford: Blackwell.
Wells, J. C. (1982), Accents of English (3 vols), Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Wolfram, Walt and Natalie Schilling-Estes (1996), American English: Dialects and
Variation, Oxford: Blackwell.
144
AN INTRODUCTION TO ENGLISH PHONOLOGY

abstractness, 83–5, 95
accent variation
distributional, 101, 101–2
realisational, 99, 99–101
systemic, 94, 94–9
accents, 7–8, 11, 82, 83, 92–102
standard, 93
accidental gap, 2, 52
acoustics, 49, 75, 107
affricate, 29, 32, 43, 64
airstream mechanism, 24–5
glottalic, 25
pulmonic, 25, 26, 28, 67, 69
velaric, 25, 28
alliteration, 113
allophone, 16, 18, 19, 53, 83
consonant, 36–8
vowel, 85–6
alphabet, 19–20, 41
alternation, 89, 111, 130; see also
morphophonemics
alveolar ridge, 7, 31, 32
ambisyllabicity, 112, 115
American English, 29, 57, 88, 97
General American, 5, 32, 58, 60, 61, 67,
69–74, 80–1, 82, 95
anterior, 45
approximant, 29, 31, 32, 33, 42
Arabic, 10, 20, 106
archiphoneme, 60
articulation
manner of, 28, 28–30, 39, 41–3
place of, 30, 30–3, 39–40, 43–6, 48, 49,
56
articulator, 24, 28–33
active, 28, 29, 31–3, 45
passive, 28, 29, 31–3
aspiration, 18, 20–1, 26, 37, 38, 59–60,
109, 114
assimilation, 4, 37, 47, 61, 65, 128, 129
nasal, 43–5
Australian English, 37, 82, 84, 99, 100
babbling, 3
bilabial, 31
borrowing, 17, 56, 65, 106, 119, 120
branching, 113, 120
canonical form, 49, 126
Cardinal Vowels, 76, 76–7
casual speech, 47–8
casual speech processes see connected
speech processes
central, 30
change, 49, 65, 87
in progress, 88
Chinese, Chengtu, 20
citation form see canonical form
classiﬁcation, 23–4
clear [l], 19
click, 6, 7, 25
cluster see consonant cluster
coda, 105, 120
commutation test, 52, 79
compound, 117, 123
conditioning, 38, 44
connected speech processes, 112, 128,
128–9
consonant, 23–33
cluster, 4, 55–6, 106, 110, 111, 129
syllabic, 41, 41–2
versus vowel, 41–3
consonant system, English, 53, 56
constraints, 62–3, 63
145
Index
Note: entries in bold give the place where the term is deﬁned.

continuant, 43, 68
coronal, 45
dark [&], 19, 33
delayed release, 43
dental, 31
dialect literature, 9
diphthong, 73, 87, 88
centring, 73, 73–4, 80, 95
falling, 73
distribution, 16, 19
complementary, 16, 19, 54, 55, 56, 57,
89, 106, 109
contrastive, 17, 54
defective, 56, 57, 60, 87–8
economy, 40–5
ejective, 25
environment bar, 44
Estuary English, 99
eurhythmy, 127
‘eye-rhymes’, 7
feature, distinctive, 39–50, 54
articulatory versus acoustic, 49–50
binary, 39, 41
major class, 42–3
superordinate, 45
vowel versus consonant, 46, 67–74,
85–6
feature geometry, 45
ﬁxed-stress language, 119
foot, 104, 124, 124–8
dactylic, 125, 125–6
degenerate, 126
iambic, 125, 125–6
trochaic, 125, 125–6, 127
formality, 48, 57
frontness, 69, 69–70
free-stress language, 119
free variation, 56–8, 67, 88
French, 17, 40
fricatives, 29, 30, 31–3, 42–3
fundamental frequency, 118
generalisation, 36–8
Geordie, 18, 99, 101
German, 4, 14
ﬁnal devoicing, 63
glide, 105–6, 107
glottal, 33
glottal reinforcement, 18
glottal stop, 10, 18, 20, 33, 57, 106
glottalisation, 18
glottis, 26
grapheme, 13, 13–14, 16
Great Vowel Shift, 90
Grebo, 6
Greek, 20
Greek letter variables, 45
hard palate, 31, 32–3, 33
Hart, John, 7
Hawaiian, 106
height, 70, 70–1
Hockett, Charles, 52
Hokkien, 97–9, 100
homophony, 48, 60, 67
Hungarian, 16–17, 20
Iambic Reversal, 126–7
idiolect, 92
implosive, 25
Indian English, 94
Initial Maximalism see Onset Maximalism
innateness, 14, 63
input, 44
intercostal muscles, 25
International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA),
5, 6–7, 10–11, 15, 16, 18, 19, 19, 23,
41–2, 75, 83, 97
International Phonetic Association, 6
intonation, 127
intuitions, native speaker, 2, 53, 54, 64,
104, 112, 118
Irish English, 18
isochrony, 124
Italian, 40
Jamaican English, 94
knowledge, phonological, 2
Korean, 21
labial-velar, 31
labio-dental, 31
language acquisition, 3, 13, 14, 62, 84,
119–20
Language Acquisition Device, 14
Language Faculty, 14
146
INDEX

larynx, 25, 26, 27
lateral, 30
Lawson, Mark, 8
length, 72, 72–3, 85–6, 89, 118
Leonard, Tom, 9
lip-rounding, 49, 71, 71–2
liquids, 42, 107
loans see borrowing
lungs, 25
Malay, 97–9, 100
manner of articulation see articulation
margin of safety, 65
matrix, feature, 39
merger, 98
Metrical Phonology, 120–1
Middle English, 56
Milton, John, 14
minimal pairs, 16, 17, 18, 21, 26, 36, 52–3,
57–8, 79, 80, 81, 88, 90, 94
monophthong, 73
morphology, 43, 61, 89, 111, 118, 120, 123,
130
and phonology, 61–2, 89–91
morphophonemics, 62, 90, 130
motivation, 47
nasal, 26, 27, 27–8, 42, 64, 107
nasalisation of vowels, 87–8
native language
interference in second language
learning, 20–1
natural class, 46, 46–7, 55, 107
neutralisation, 58–60, 61, 67, 87, 88–9, 90,
100
New Zealand English, 5, 8, 9, 31, 37,
82–3, 84, 88, 95, 96, 99, 100, 101
Nichols, Thomas Low, 5, 7
Northern English, 96–7, 99–100, 101
Norwegian, 4
nucleus, 42, 105, 106
obstruent, 42, 74
Old English, 4, 17, 19–20, 49, 56, 87
medial voicing, 47, 55
onset, 105, 106, 110
Onset Maximalism, 110, 111, 111–12,
114, 115
opposition, 60
suspension of see neutralisation
Optimality Theory, 62–3
oral cavity, 27, 29
orthography see spelling
output, 45
paralinguistics, 6, 26
pharynx, 27, 32
phonation see voicing
phone, 16
phoneme, 11, 12, 16, 16–21, 31–3, 36, 38,
52–65, 83–4, 94–9
English consonant, 53–65
English vowel, 79–91, 94–9
system, 63–5
phonetic similarity, 53–5, 55, 87
phonetics, 1
and phonology, 3–5
phonology, 1
and phonetics, 3–5
phonotactics, 55, 56, 106, 129
place of articulation see articulation
plosive, 28, 46, 59–60; see also stop
plural, 61
postalveolar, 32
productivity, 90, 90–1, 130
psychological reality, 19–20
realisation, 16, 33, 59
Received Pronunciation (RP) see Standard
Southern British English
reduction, 128, 129
redundancy, 15, 45
respiration, 25
retroﬂex, 32
rhoticity, 98, 102, 129
rhyme (poetic), 113
rhyme (syllable), 105, 110
Romance languages, 5, 120
rounding see lip-rounding
rules, 40, 43
allophonic, 57, 84–5
phonological, 43–6, 69, 107, 109
redundancy, 40, 43
stress, 120–1
versus constraints, 62–3
Russian, 119, 120
Sapir, Edward, 19
schwa, 80, 82, 87, 101, 118, 129
Scots, 33, 86, 89, 94
INDEX
147

Scots Gaelic, 19, 119
Scottish English, 9, 10, 19, 29, 31, 57, 76
Standard, 5, 82–3, 86, 89, 94, 99, 100,
101, 102
Scottish Vowel Length Rule, 86, 89, 96
segment, 23
Singapore English, 97–9, 100
sociolinguistics, 48, 57, 58, 88, 92–3, 128
soft palate see velum
sonorant, 42
sonority, 107
Sonority Sequencing Generalisation, 107,
107–9, 110, 111
sound system, 2
Southern Standard British English, 5, 10,
15, 32, 36, 57–8, 69–74, 79–82, 83,
84, 85, 88, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101,
102
South African English, 82, 99
spelling, 5, 13–14, 15–16, 19–20, 59, 87,
117
English system, 7–10, 41
Standard Lexical Sets, 81, 81–3, 95, 97–8
stop, 28, 28–9, 31–3, 42
nasal, 28
tap, 29
trill, 29
stress, 10, 54, 80, 87, 101, 114, 118,
118–23
compound, 123
main, 122
phrasal, 123
primary, 119, 122, 124
secondary, 119, 122, 124
stress-timing, 124
strident, 45
Swahili, 119
syllable, 38, 41, 54, 80, 104–15, 105, 117,
118
closed, 113
heavy, 114
light, 114
open, 113
syllable-timing, 124
symmetry, 63
systematic gap, 2
tap, 29
tense, 73, 85–6
Thai, 20
tongue, 31–2
back, 31
blade, 31
front, 31
root, 32
tip, 31
trachea, 26
transcription, 6, 10
tree diagrams, 121–2
trill, 29
Tyneside English see Geordie
universals, 4, 40, 63, 106, 107
variation, 4, 5, 8, 92–102; see also accent
varieties, non–standard, 10
velar, 33
velum, 27, 32
vocal cords see vocal folds
vocal folds, 26, 33, 47, 118
vocal tract, 27
voicing, 26, 29, 33
vowel, 41, 57–8, 67–77
English system, 67
versus consonant, 41–3, 57–8
vowel quadrilateral, 75
vowel space, 68
weight, syllable, 114, 120
Welsh, 40
Welsh English, 18, 99
whisper, 26
Wilson, John Leighton, 6
word, 38, 117, 124
boundary, 112, 124
word-ﬁnal, 53
word-initial, 38, 53
written language, 13–14
148
INDEX

