
Analysing Sentences
This highly successful text has long been considered the standard introduction 
to the practical analysis of English sentence structure. It covers key concepts such 
as constituency, category, and functions and utilises tree diagrams throughout 
to help the reader visualise the structure of sentences.
In this fourth edition, Analysing Sentences has been thoroughly revised and now 
features a brand new companion website with additional activities and exercises 
for students and an answer book for the Further Exercises for professors. The 
extra activities on the website give students practice in identifying syntactic phe-
nomena in running text and will help to deepen understanding of this topic.
Accessible and clear, this book is the perfect textbook for readers coming to 
this topic for the first time. Featuring many in-text, end-of-chapter and Further 
Exercises, it is suitable for self-directed study as well as for use as core reading 
on courses.
 Noel Burton-Roberts is Emeritus Professor of English Language and Linguistics 
at Newcastle University, UK.

LEARNING ABOUT LANGUAGE
Series Editors:
Mick Short and the late Geoffrey Leech, Lancaster University
Also in this series:
A History of Early English, First Edition Keith Johnson
An Introduction to Child Language Development, First Edition Susan H. Foster-Cohen
An Introduction to Cognitive Linguistics, Second Edition Friedrich Ungerer and 
Hans-Jorg Schmid
An Introduction to Foreign Language Learning and Teaching, Second Edition 
Keith Johnson
An Introduction to Natural Language Processing Through Prolog, First Edition 
Clive Matthews
An Introduction to Psycholinguistics, Second Edition Danny D. Steinberg 
and Natalia V. Sciarini
An Introduction to Sociolinguistics, Fourth Edition Janet Holmes and Nick Wilson
Analysing Sentences: An Introduction to English Syntax, Fourth Edition 
Noel Burton-Roberts
Exploring the Language of Poems, Plays and Prose, First Edition Mick Short
Grammar and Meaning: A Semantic Approach to English Grammar, First Edition 
Howard Jackson
Meaning in Interaction: An Introduction to Pragmatics, First Edition Jenny A. Thomas
Patterns of Spoken English: An Introduction to English Phonetics, First Edition 
Gerald Knowles
Realms of Meaning: An Introduction to Semantics, First Edition Thomas R. Hofmann
The Earliest English: An Introduction to Old English Language, First Edition 
Chris McCully and Sharon Hilles
The Sounds of Language: An Introduction to Phonetics, First Edition Henry Rogers
Varieties of Modern English: An Introduction, First Edition Diane Davies
Words and Their Meaning, First Edition Howard Jackson

Analysing Sentences
An Introduction to English Syntax
Fourth Edition
NOEL BURTON-ROBERTS

First published 2016
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2016 Noel Burton-Roberts
The right of Noel Burton-Roberts to be identified as author of this work has been asserted by 
him in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form 
or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including 
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission 
in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and 
are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
First edition published by Pearson Education Limited 1986
Third edition published by Pearson Education Limited 2011
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Burton-Roberts, Noel, 1948– author.
  Analysing sentences : an introduction to English syntax / Noel 
  Burton-Roberts. – Fourth Edition.
    Pages cm
  Includes index.
  1. English language–Sentences. 2. English language–Syntax. I. Title.
  PE1375.B87 2016
  428.2--dc23
 
2015032600
ISBN: 978-1-138-94733-7 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-138-94734-4 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-64604-6 (ebk)
Typeset in 10.5/13pt Minion by 35
by Graphicraft Limited, Hong Kong

v
Contents
 
Preface to the fourth edition 
ix
 
Preface to the third edition 
x
 
Preface to the second edition 
xii
 
Preface to the ﬁrst edition 
xv
 
Introduction 
1
 
 
The organisation of the chapters 
4
 
 
How to read this book – the exercises 
4
1 
Sentence structure: constituents 
6
 
Structure 
6
 
Establishing constituents 
10
 
‘Phrase’ and ‘constituent’ 
15
 
Exercises 
19
 
 
Discussion of exercises 
20
 
Further exercises 
23
2 Sentence structure: functions 
24
 
Subject and predicate 
24
 
Noun Phrase and Verb Phrase 
29
 
Dependency and function 
31
 
 
Head 
32
 
 
The modiﬁer~head relation 
32
 
 
The head~complement relation 
35
 
Summary 
37
 
Exercises 
38
 
 
Discussion of exercises 
40
 
Further exercises 
42
3 Sentence structure: categories 
44
 
Nouns 
45
 
Lexical and phrasal categories (noun and Noun Phrase) 
48
 
Adjectives and adverbs 
52
 
Adjective Phrases and Adverb Phrases 
53
 
Prepositions and Prepositional Phrases 
54
 
Co-ordinate Phrases 
55
 
 
Diagrams for in-text exercises 
60
 
Exercises 
60
 
 
Discussion of exercises 
61
 
Further exercises 
63

CONTENTS
vi
4 The basic Verb Phrase 
65
 
A ﬁrst look at verbs 
65
 
The complements of lexical verbs 
66
 
 
Transitive verbs 
68
 
 
Intransitive verbs 
69
 
 
Ditransitive verbs 
70
 
 
Intensive verbs 
72
 
 
Complex transitive verbs 
74
 
 
Prepositional verbs 
76
 
Summary 
77
 
 
Discussion of in-text exercises 
78
 
Exercises 
79
 
 
Discussion of exercises 
80
 
Further exercises 
83
5 Adverbials and other matters 
86
 
Adjunct adverbials (VP adverbials) 
86
 
Levels of Verb Phrase 
87
 
The mobility of adverbials 
91
 
Phrasal verbs 
93
 
Ellipsis 
95
 
Sentence adverbials (S adverbials) 
97
 
 
Discussion of in-text exercises 
100
 
Exercises 
102
 
 
Discussion of exercises 
104
 
Further exercises 
109
6 More on verbs: auxiliary VPs 
111
 
Part I: Lexical and auxiliary verbs 
111
 
Tense and time 
112
 
The contrast between lexical and auxiliary verbs 
114
 
Modal auxiliaries (MOD) 
115
 
The perfect auxiliary – have (PERF) 
116
 
The progressive auxiliary – be (PROG) 
118
 
The passive auxiliary – be (PASS) 
119
 
Where auxiliaries ﬁt in the structure of VP 
121
 
Auxiliary VPs and adverbials 
123
 
Part II: Constructions that depend on auxiliaries 
125
 
Passive sentences 
125
 
Negative sentences and auxiliary do 
128
 
Questions – fronting the tensed auxiliary 
130
 
More on have and be 
132
 
 
Discussion of in-text exercises 
133
 
Exercises for Part I 
135

CONTENTS
vii
 
Exercises for Part II 
135
 
 
Discussion of exercises 
135
 
Further exercises (Part I) 
139
 
Further exercises (Part II) 
140
7 The structure of Noun Phrases 
141
 
Determiners 
142
 
Pre-determiners 
145
 
Pre-modiﬁers in NOM 
146
 
 
Quantifying adjectives 
146
 
 
Participle phrases (PartP) 
147
 
 
Nouns 
148
 
More on the structure of NOM 
149
 
Post-modiﬁers 
150
 
 
Prepositional Phrases 
150
 
 
More on Adjective Phrases 
154
 
Modiﬁcation of pronouns 
155
 
 
Discussion of in-text exercises 
157
 
Exercises 
160
 
 
Discussion of exercises 
161
 
Further exercises 
163
 
Appendix: NOM and the pro-form one 
164
 
 
Answers to appendix exercise 
169
 
 
Further exercise (appendix) 
170
8 Sentences within sentences 
171
 
Complementisers: that and whether 
174
 
The functions of that- and whether-clauses 
176
 
 
Subject – and extraposed subject 
176
 
 
Complement of V within VP 
179
 
 
Complement of A within AP 
181
 
 
Complement of N within NP 
182
 
 
Complement of P within PP 
184
 
Adverbial clauses 
186
 
 
Discussion of in-text exercises 
188
 
Exercises 
191
 
 
Discussion of exercises 
192
 
Further exercises 
194
9 Wh-clauses 
196
 
Wh-questions 
196
 
Subordinate wh-clauses 
202
 
Subordinate wh-interrogative clauses 
202
 
Relative clauses 
204

CONTENTS
viii
 
 
Omission of the wh-phrase 
207
 
 
That again 
207
 
 
Restrictive vs. non-restrictive 
208
 
 
Discussion of in-text exercises 
211
 
Exercises 
216
 
 
Discussion of exercises 
218
 
Further exercises 
220
 
 
Questions and interrogatives 
220
 
 
Relative clauses and other matters 
221
10 Non-ﬁnite clauses 
223
 
Part I: The form of non-ﬁnite clauses 
223
 
The form of non-ﬁnite verbs 
224 
Ia. Bare inﬁnitive verbs 
225
 
 
Ib. To-inﬁnitive verbs 
225
 
 
IIa. Passive participle verbs 
226
 
 
IIb. -ing participle verbs 
227
 
Complementisers and non-ﬁnite clauses 
228
 
 
C1: for and whether 
229
 
 
C2: fronted wh-phrases 
229
 
Part II: The functions of non-ﬁnite clauses 
231
 
Subject and extraposed subject 
232
 
Complement of A in AP 
232
 
Complement of P in PP 
233
 
Adverbial 
234
 
Complement of N in NP 
234
 
Modiﬁer in NP 
235
 
Complement of V 
236
 
 
Discussion of in-text exercises 
243
 
Exercises 
247
 
 
Discussion of exercises 
248
 
Further exercises 
251
11 Languages, sentences and grammars 
253
 
Languages 
253
 
Describing languages 
256 
Describing inﬁnite languages 
258
 
Grammars 
261
 
Grammars and sentence analysis 
264
 
Further reading 
268 
Index 
270

ix
Preface to the fourth edition
In this fourth edition, I have revised the text in ways that I believe make it clearer 
and, in many cases, simpler – and I hope more accessible. Sometimes this has 
meant changing examples, both in the text and in exercises. I’ve also corrected 
mistakes that readers have been kind enough to point out (and here I must 
particularly mention and thank Hazel Kirby and Hadeel Awad). There’s a small 
analytical change in the early chapters: I’ve given up the fiction that determiners 
are modifiers, by using two . . . jokes as my illustration instead of their . . . jokes.
What’s new about this edition is the accompanying website with separate 
sections for students and teachers. The students’ section has Additional Exercises 
(with answers). Several of these take the form of text passages in which the reader 
is asked to identify examples of particular syntactic phenomena. These offer a 
way of engaging with the language other than by drawing phrase markers. The 
teachers’ section consists of the answers to the Further Exercises set at the end of 
each chapter but it also includes some additional  exercises (with answers), some 
of which develop the analysis further.

x
Preface to the third edition
The major substantive change in this edition concerns verbs. I have abandoned 
the ‘Verb Group’. The ‘Vgrp’ was pedagogically convenient but it did not do 
justice to the facts of how auxiliary verbs ﬁgure the structure of VP.
The treatment of auxiliaries is now more standard. Each auxiliary is treated as 
taking a VP complement. This allows me to maintain the idea that complements 
of lexical verbs are their sisters, combining with them to form a (‘basic’) VP. 
This also makes the use of the do so test for VP more consistent than in previous 
editions (it actually works now). And it allows me to acknowledge that adverbials 
can, and very naturally do, occur between auxiliaries and between auxiliary and 
lexical verbs.
Contrary to what I expected, this change has barely increased the complexity 
of the presentation. I have simpliﬁed some examples. I have kept the termin-
ology of the previous editions (including MOD, PERF, PROG, PASS) insofar as 
it is consistent with the new analysis. In fact, Chapter 4 – now called ‘The basic 
Verb Phrase’ – is now simpler and more focused. The reader can concentrate on 
what really matters here – complementation of lexical verbs. True, this means 
there is more to discuss in Chapter 6 – now called ‘More on verbs: auxiliary VPs’ 
– but I’ve divided that chapter into two parts in what seems a fairly natural way. 
This gives teachers the option of spending two weeks on that material.
There are other, smaller, analytical changes:
(i) 
In Chapter 3, now, then, when and here, there, where are now categorised as 
prepositions, abandoning the previous traditional categorisation of them 
as adverbs. This means that PP can consist just of P, as well as P + NP.
(ii) The section ‘Modiﬁcation of pronouns’ in Chapter 7 now maintains a more 
consistent distinction between pronouns and (pre-)determiners. The latter 
remain (pre-)determiners – i.e. they don’t suddenly become pronouns – in 
NPs like those at the back. These are now analysed as having an ellipted head 
(those [E]N at the back).
(iii) The section ‘More on Adjective Phrases’ in Chapter 7 takes greater care 
than before in explaining complementation of adjectives – and why APs 
with complements must post-modify the head within NP.
(iv) In Chapter 8 of the last edition, I categorised after, before, until, and since 
as subordinating conjunctions but I had a Further Exercise inviting the 
reader to wonder if they weren’t in fact prepositions. I now analyse them as 

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
xi
prepositions. Since is special: it is both a preposition (since he became my 
friend) and a subordinating conjunction (since he is my friend).
Other changes are mainly presentational. The presentation has been tightened 
up and it is, I hope, clearer and more user-friendly. There are a few more sum-
maries. Chapter 10 is now divided into two more manageable parts. And there 
are some minor typographical changes:
(i) 
For NPs consisting of names, I’ve introduced ‘name’ as a node. Idiosyncratic 
perhaps but (together with ‘pronoun’ – which replaces ‘PRO’) I think it 
will help students to remember to distinguish these single-word NPs from 
NPs with empty determiner.
(ii) Where I have numbered VPs, the lowest (i.e. ‘basic’) VP is always ‘VP1’.
(iii) ‘Comp’ has given way to ‘C’ – with lower C as ‘C1’ and the higher as ‘C2’.
(iv) I now represent S-bar as S′ and S-double-bar as S″. (For convenience, only 
S (not S′ or S″) is required in abbreviated clausal analyses.)
(v) I use ‘•’ for gaps.
(vi) I now often indicate movements graphically in examples and in phrase 
markers.
When a third edition of Analysing Sentences was planned, the publishers solic-
ited anonymous reviews of the second edition. A surprising number came in, all 
of them detailed. I am extremely grateful to those who responded so construc-
tively. Those responses presented me with a bewildering variety of views about 
what was good or bad about the previous edition. (For example, some thought 
the Verb Group the best thing about the book, but the majority loathed it and 
regarded it as a blot on the landscape.) So I have been selective in following their 
suggestions. A few suggested I present a thorough-going X-bar analysis. I’ve not 
done that, since it would have completely changed the character of the book. If 
X-bar is what’s needed, there are plenty of other texts to supply that need. And I 
have kept Chapter 11 unchanged. It may have a rather dated feel to it but I think 
it still does the job it was designed to do. Nor have I changed its position in the 
book. It is a post-script to what is intended as a practical, descriptive, introductory 
account of English.
For pointing out mistakes and making suggestions for improvement, I am 
grateful to strangers who have e-mailed me, to friends, colleagues, postgraduate 
tutorial assistants who have helped me teach ﬁrst-year syntax at Newcastle and, 
last but not least, the students. One of those tutorial assistants, Laura Bailey, 
cast her eagle eye over the pre-ﬁnal draft to great effect and she has my thanks 
for that.
I have prepared an Answer Book for the Further Exercises. Teaching Staff can 
ask for this by emailing n.burton-roberts@ncl.ac.uk.

xii
Preface to the second edition
When I ﬁrst wrote Analysing Sentences, I had in mind the kind of mixed 
audience that I taught (and still teach) in an introductory course at Newcastle. 
This included ﬁrst-year undergraduates in linguistics and English language 
who would be going on to ﬁnd out more about English syntax, syntactic theory, 
and argumentation in syntactic theory in later years. It also included many 
others who probably would not continue and whose purposes were different 
and quite varied. For these, the book had to provide a self-contained, systematic, 
and coherent introductory picture of English in its own right. They were less 
interested, perhaps, in syntactic theory than in forming a reasonably informed 
impression of the structural range of the language and a grasp of the vocabulary 
and concepts needed to describe it. So the aim was to strike a balance between 
providing both descriptive range and descriptive convenience on the one hand 
while, on the other, offering something of genuine use to someone about to 
embark more seriously on syntactic theory and argumentation.
Many of the changes in this second edition have been made with this balance 
in mind. Occasionally, in the ﬁrst edition, I made decisions which, while peda-
gogically convenient, have come over the years to seem less and less defensible 
or useful in an introduction to syntax. So I have done something about them. 
For teachers familiar with the ﬁrst edition who want an overview of more 
important changes, I have listed them below.
A more general change concerns the exercises. There are more of them and 
there are now ‘Further Exercises’. These come without answers and can be used 
for seminar work. Some are designed (as before) to test comprehension, others 
to give practice in handling new data and to encourage thought. More than in 
the ﬁrst edition, rather than give a phrase-marker in the text, I set the drawing 
of the phrase-marker as an exercise. It is always given in a ‘Discussion’ at the end 
of the chapter. This, I think, makes for more worthwhile and enjoyable reading, 
and it builds conﬁdence. It seems essential the reader be encouraged to do these 
before consulting the Discussion.
One thing that has not changed is the ‘Verb Group’. Much though I feel 
inclined to, I won’t apologise for retaining this! I grant the evidence which 
suggests there is no such thing (and its incompatibility with X-bar). But there 
is less agreement on how verbs in English are to be treated. Some textbooks 
simply avoid the issues, by restricting their coverage of the possibilities I have 
gathered up under ‘Vgrp’. I have kept it because it is convenient: it provides a 

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
xiii
way of covering those possibilities (and introducing needed vocabulary, in a way 
beginners ﬁnd intuitive) without immediately embroiling them in problems, 
lengthy explanations, and excuses. Besides, I have found it useful as an illustrative 
starting point in later courses on argumentation.
The following major changes of detail have been made, not only in aid of 
bringing the analysis a little more into line with common current practice, but 
also in the light of my own experience of teaching the ﬁrst edition. This has made 
me think that I was sometimes a little over-cautious as regards what is teachable 
at this stage. Even so, many of the changes have actually had a simplifying effect.
(i) 
Chapter 2. Governors (ﬁrst edition) are now explicitly referred to as ‘heads’ 
(not as ‘governors’).
(ii) 
Chapter 5. Adjunct adverbials are now, in addition, explicitly referred 
to as ‘VP-adverbials’. This is more helpful, in my view. And, while the 
distinction between the ‘conjunct adverbials’ and ‘disjunct adverbials’ of 
the ﬁrst edition is alluded to, this detail has been played down. Both are 
now explicitly referred to as ‘Sentence-adverbials’ (‘S-adverbials’).
(iii) Chapter 6. What in the ﬁrst edition was called ‘Subject-Auxiliary 
Inversion’ is now more accurately ‘Auxiliary fronting’. More importantly, 
the auxiliary is now fronted to the complementiser position (daughter of 
S-bar, sister of S). This is a major change and involves changes elsewhere 
– see below. It means that ‘S-bar’ is now introduced in Chapter 6 rather 
than Chapter 8. Auxiliary-fronting leaves a gap under AUX.
(iv) Chapter 6. It is more helpful to the student (to remember that passive 
verbs are not intransitive) to have a gap in the object position following 
a passive verb. Some students do this spontaneously, anyway. And it 
provides a better preparation for what is to follow, both in the book and 
elsewhere. So I now insist on a gap in object position.
(v) 
Chapter 7. The term ‘zero article’ has been abandoned in favour of 
‘unﬁlled DET’.
(vi) Chapter 7. The discussion of one in the ﬁrst edition was unsatisfactory. It 
was not used to motivate any distinction, within NP, between complements 
and adjuncts and so never really worked. I have simpliﬁed here by postpon-
ing all mention of one to an Appendix in Chapter 7, where it is associated 
with the distinction between adjuncts (‘NOM-modiﬁers’) and complements 
(‘N-modiﬁers’). The chapter can be read quite independently of that 
appendix, however (in my experience, beginners ﬁnd the distinction 
between adjunct and complement difﬁcult in the context of NP). Tutors can 
decide for themselves whether to insist that the distinction be respected in 
Chapter 7. Other changes (in Chapters 8 and 9) anyway mean that it does 
now eventually emerge, clearly and naturally, when really necessary.

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
xiv
(vii) Chapter 8. I now introduce the complementiser whether (and hence 
subordinate yes/no interrogative clauses) here, along with that.
(viii) Chapter 8. The representation of noun-complement clauses in the ﬁrst 
edition was unsatisfactory. As complements, these are now more simply 
and accurately represented as sisters of N within NOM. See below for a 
consequent change to the structural position of restrictive relative clauses.
(ix) Chapter 9. The order of presentation has changed: the chapter now moves 
from wh-interrogative clauses (main and subordinate) to relative clauses. 
This is convenient if, as I do, one spends two separate weeks on this chapter 
(one on interrogatives, one on relatives). A further minor change from the 
ﬁrst edition is that subject constituent questions are now presented as having 
a fronted auxiliary. (There is a ‘Further Exercise’ on this.)
(x) 
Chapter 9. Since auxiliaries are now fronted to the (S-bar) complementiser 
position (Ch. 6), which cannot be ﬁlled twice over, Wh-expressions are 
now fronted to a higher Comp position (Comp-2). Comp-2 is here deﬁned 
as daughter of S-double bar, sister of S-bar.
(xi) Chapter 9. Since noun complement clauses are now sisters of N (Ch. 8), 
relative clauses are now represented as sisters of NOM. As explained there, 
this distinction between N-modiﬁer (complement clause) and NOM-
modiﬁer (relative clause) parallels that between complement and adjunct 
in the VP. If interested (or required!), the student is now in a position to 
generalise this to all modiﬁers in NP, by turning back to the Appendix in 
Chapter 7.
(xii) Chapter 10 remains largely unchanged (apart from changes consequent on 
those in earlier chapters) though there is slightly more detail and discussion.
In preparing this second edition, I have beneﬁted from the comments and 
advice of many people. They are too numerous to mention and thank individu-
ally here, but I must mention the help of Phil Carr and Siobhan Chapman. The 
students at Newcastle (whose responses have invariably been interesting and 
instructive) have taught me more than they know. I am especially grateful to 
Georgette Ioup, who I met in Morocco in 1983 when I had just started writing 
the ﬁrst edition. Her detailed and insightful comments on it over the last ten 
years have been of great help, not to say indispensable. My wife Tessa has borne 
with grace my probings of her linguistic competence, and Julia, my daughter, has 
made the rewriting much more enjoyable by joining me in vandalising copies 
of the ﬁrst edition, pasting, and stapling.
I would like to dedicate this second edition to my mother and the memory of 
my father.

xv
Preface to the ﬁrst edition
This book grew out of a longish pamphlet used with ﬁrst-year undergraduates 
in the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, which I wrote in 1979. I’d like 
to acknowledge the late Barbara Strang’s encouragement when I wrote that 
pamphlet. Thanks, too, to Geoff Leech and Mick Short (the series editors) for 
their help and encouragement in producing the book as it now stands. Valerie 
Adams, painstakingly and to good effect, went through each chapter as it 
was completed and for this I am very grateful. This book has also beneﬁted 
from comments made by Ewan Klein, Maggie Cooper, Rodney Huddleston, 
Michael Anthony, Phil Carr, Liz Smith, and Lesley Milroy. Herman Moisl’s 
arbitrations between myself and the word processor are gratefully acknowledged. 
I owe a general debt of gratitude to Sir Randolph Quirk, who introduced me to 
the study of the English language in the ﬁrst place. Finally, my thanks to Tessa 
for her support and patience.

This page intentionally left blank

1
Attempting to describe the language you speak is about as difﬁcult as attempting 
to describe yourself as a person. Your language is very much part of you and 
your thinking. You use your language so instinctively that it is difﬁcult to stand 
outside yourself and think of it as something that is independent of you, some-
thing which you know and which can be described. You may even feel inclined 
to say that your language is not something you know, you just speak it, and 
that’s all there is to it. But as the native speaker of a language, there is an impor-
tant sense in which you do know all that there is to know about that language. 
This is not to deny that there are almost certainly words with which you are 
not familiar. Perhaps you don’t know the meaning of the word lagophthalmic. 
If so, your (understandable) ignorance of this is more medical ignorance than 
ignorance about the English language, and is anyway quickly remedied with 
the help of a dictionary. But there is much more to a language than its words. 
There is much more that you do know about your language which cannot so 
conveniently be looked up, and which you were never explicitly taught. And this 
is knowledge of a more fundamental and systematic kind than knowledge of 
the meanings of individual words. The more fundamental such knowledge is, the 
more difﬁcult it is to become consciously aware of it.
We are brought up sharply against our own knowledge of the language 
when, for example, we hear a foreigner make a mistake. You may have had the 
frustrating experience of knowing that something is wrong but not being able to 
say precisely what it is, beyond saying ‘We just don’t say it like that’. The very 
deep-seated character of speakers’ knowledge of their language makes it extremely 
difﬁcult for them to explain what it is they know.
Here are some examples to illustrate the point. As a speaker of English, you 
will agree that [1] and [2] are good English sentences:
 [1] Dick believes himself to be a genius.
 [2] Dick believes he is a genius.
but that there is something wrong with [3] and [4]:
 [3] Dick believes he to be a genius.
 [4] Dick believes himself is a genius.
Introduction

INTRODUCTION
2
It’s interesting that, simply on the basis of assuming you speak English, and 
knowing nothing else about you, I can predict that you will judge [1] and [2] to 
be good and [3] and [4] to be odd, even though these sentences are something 
you may never have considered before.
In attempting to answer the question ‘Is this an example of a good English 
sentence or not?’ we are obliged to go to speakers of the language and ask them 
whether they would accept it as such. (If we ourselves speak the language, then 
we may ask ourselves.) It’s difﬁcult to see how else we could decide what is and 
what is not a sentence of English. Yet, if this is so, our agreement about [1]–[4] 
constitutes a fact about the English language. In a real sense, then, all the facts 
about the language lie inside the heads of its speakers, be they native speakers 
or not.
But can you give an explanation for the oddity of [3] and [4] – beyond saying 
that we just don’t say it like that?
Here’s another example. If the negative of [5] is [6],
 [5] They were jumping on it.
 [6] They weren’t jumping on it.
why isn’t [8] the negative of [7]?
 [7] They tried jumping on it.
 [8] They triedn’t jumping on it.
And another example: Since [9] is a good English sentence, why aren’t [10] 
and [11]?
 [9] Bevis mended his bike in the garage and Max did so in the garden.
[10] Bevis put his bike in the garage and Max did so in the garden.
[11] Bevis went to the circus and Max did so to the zoo.
Finally, compare [12] and [13]:
[12] The fact that I communicated to Mona is irrelevant.
[13] The fact that I communicated with Mona is irrelevant.
Superﬁcially, the only difference might seem to be the different prepositions, 
with and to. So we might expect the difference to be exactly the same as that 
between I went with Max and I went to Max. In fact, though, your understanding 
of the difference between [12] and [13] goes way beyond your understanding of 
the difference between with and to. You can demonstrate this for yourself: try 
replacing the that in each sentence by which. How do you react? Do you agree 
that you can do it with [12] but not [13]? What’s going on here? Why should 
the choice of preposition in one part of a sentence affect the choice of that or 
which in another part? You know it does, but what exactly is it that you know? 

 
INTRODUCTION
3
What exactly is wrong with The fact which I communicated with Mona is irrelevant? 
In a quite literal sense, there is more going on here than meets the eye.
These are just a tiny sample of a large body of facts, mysteries, and puzzles 
offered by the English language. Some of the puzzles have been solved (to our 
present satisfaction, at least). Others remain puzzles, or there’s disagreement as 
to what the most appropriate explanation might be. And, as we ﬁnd out more 
about the language, we can expect to discover further puzzles, and perhaps even 
ﬁnd things puzzling which we thought we had understood.
The aim of this book is to encourage you to stand outside yourself and 
confront just one aspect of your largely unconscious knowledge of English. It 
doesn’t discuss, let alone offer solutions to, all the puzzles known to exist, nor 
even to give very detailed accounts of intricacies like those above. But it will 
introduce you to a method of describing the language, and provide you with a 
vocabulary with which to start thinking about the language in terms of which 
the puzzles can at least be identiﬁed and solutions sought.
The chapters that follow are concerned with English syntax. Syntax is tradi-
tionally the name given to the study of the form, positioning, and grouping, of 
the elements that go to make up sentences. In a word, it is about the structure 
of sentences. In studying a language, there is of course a lot else to talk about 
besides its syntax. For example, we can investigate the form and grouping of the 
elements within words themselves (for example: un-de-cod(e)-able). The sys-
tematic study of word-structure is called morphology (the relevant elements 
are ‘morphemes’). Or we can concentrate on the meaning of sentences and how 
their meaning relates to the meanings of the words they contain. This is called 
semantics. Or we can concentrate on how linguistic expressions are connected 
with the sounds of speech. This is called phonology.
I’ll say nothing about the phonology of English, and very little about 
morphology or semantics. It should become clear, though, just how closely 
the structure (syntax) and the meaning (semantics) of English sentences are 
related.
The book is an introduction to the practical analysis of English sentences 
rather than an introduction to linguistic theory. But since we will be concerned 
with a language and its syntax, some of the concepts, aims, and methods of lin-
guistics are relevant. If you are interested in discovering more about linguistic 
theory, ﬁnding out something of the syntax of a language you know well seems 
an appropriate way to start. Chapter 11 is included with such readers in mind. 
It aims to place the description of English offered in the previous chapters in a 
wider context and raise a few questions about the general aims and principles of 
syntactic analysis.
Finally, a word or two about the description offered here. In a book of this 
length, it hardly needs pointing out that the description is not exhaustive. 
Nevertheless, the range of structures covered is intended to be comprehensive 

INTRODUCTION
4
enough for the book to serve not only as the basis for more exhaustive and 
specialised study but as a self-contained description for non-specialists who 
need a practical, and appliable, system of analysis for the major structures.
Since this last aim is important, I’ve concentrated on presenting a single, 
more or less traditional, analysis of each structure considered, without over-
burdening the reader with too much discussion of how that analysis might 
or might not be justiﬁed in the light of further evidence. This might give the 
misleading impression that there is just one possible analysis and that there is 
universal agreement that it is the one in this book! This is far from being the 
case. But sometimes the evidence that might support an alternative analysis 
is complex and indirect and its discussion would be inappropriate in such an 
introduction. The reader should bear in mind, then, that we are never irrevocably 
committed to a particular analysis but are free to amend it in the light of further 
evidence. Finding that evidence, and deciding between competing analyses on 
the basis of such evidence is, in the end, what ‘doing syntax’ is all about.
■ The organisation of the chapters
Chapters 1, 2, and 3 have a dual purpose: they introduce general ideas relevant 
to the analysis of sentences while simultaneously beginning the analysis itself.
Chapters 4 and 5 complete the general overview of the simple sentence.
Chapters 6 and 7 each go into more detail on certain aspects of the structure 
of simple sentences.
Chapters 8, 9, and 10 deal with different kinds of subordinate clause in the 
complex sentence.
Chapter 11 is a more general discussion of the background to and purpose of 
the kind of analysis presented in Chapters 1 to 10.
■ How to read this book — the exercises
There are several kinds of exercises. The end-of-chapter ‘Exercises’ are followed 
immediately by answer/discussion sections. These should form an important 
part of your reading of each chapter. Most of these are designed to give you 
practice in applying the analyses discussed in the chapter, but some develop the 
discussion further. There are additional exercises like these (with answers) on 
the accompanying website.
In addition, there are end-of-chapter ‘Further Exercises’. These come without 
answers or discussion. If you are using the book as part of a taught course, you 
may be asked to write these up for marking and discussion by your tutor.
Almost certainly, you’re using this book because you know next to nothing 
about English syntax. If you’ve thought about it at all, you’re probably 
wondering whether you can get your head around it. Courage! The book is 

 
INTRODUCTION
5
designed with you in mind. If you read it in the right spirit, you’ll be amazed by 
how much you have achieved by the end. That’s been the experience of the 
many students I’ve taught. To foster ‘the right spirit’, there are lots of small 
exercises within the text of each chapter. These form an integral part of the 
discussion. Try doing them as and when they occur, before reading further. 
As often as not, the discussion that follows depends on your having done the 
exercise. A line has been ruled at the point where it is suggested you stop and do 
it. You’ll need to have pencil and paper to hand. Doing these exercises should 
make your reading of the book more productive and interesting – perhaps even 
enjoyable – than trying (in the wrong spirit) to absorb the material passively.

6
Structure
This book is about English syntax. In other words, it’s about the structure of 
English sentences. structure is central to the study of syntax. But structure is 
a very general concept that applies to any complex thing, whether it’s a bicycle, a 
commercial company, or a carbon molecule. When we say something is complex 
we mean, not that it is complicated (though of course it may be), but that
(a) it’s divisible into parts (its constituents),
(b) there are different kinds of parts (different categories of constituents),
(c) the constituents are arranged in a certain way,
(d) and each constituent has a speciﬁable function in the structure of the thing 
as a whole.
When anything can be analysed in this way, it has structure. And it’s impor-
tant to note that, more often than not, the constituents of a complex thing 
are themselves complex. In other words, the parts themselves consist of parts, 
which may in turn consist of further parts. When this is so we’re dealing with a 
hierarchy of parts and with hierarchical structure.
It’s obvious, for example, that a complex thing like a bicycle isn’t just 
a collection of randomly assembled bits and pieces. Suppose you gathered 
together all the components of a bicycle: metal tubes, hubs, spokes, chain, cable, 
and so on. Try to imagine the range of objects you could construct by ﬁxing 
these components together. Some of these objects might be bicycles, but others 
wouldn’t remotely resemble a bicycle – though they might make interesting 
sculptures. And there would probably be intermediate cases, things we’d prob-
ably want to say were bicycles, if only because they resembled bicycles more 
than anything else.
So, only some of the possible ways of ﬁtting bicycle components together 
produce a bicycle. A bicycle consists not just of its components but – much 
more importantly – in the structure that results from ﬁtting them together 
in a particular way.
1
Sentence structure
Constituents

 
STRUCTURE
7
The same goes for linguistic expressions (sentences and phrases). Suppose 
you have a collection of words, say all the words in an English dictionary. Can 
you imagine all the possible word-sequences you could construct by putting 
these words together? The possibilities are endless. Clearly, not all the word 
sequences would be acceptable expressions of English. And again, some would 
be odder than others. When a sequence of words fails to constitute a good 
expression in English, I’ll describe it as being ungrammatical (or ill-formed) 
and follow the usual convention of marking it with an asterisk (*). For example:
 [1a] *the nevertheless procrastinate in foxtrot
 [1b] *disappears none girls of the students
 [1c] *Max will bought a frying pans.
More subtle examples of ungrammatical sentences were given in the Introduction.
Ultimately, a full syntactic description of any language consists in explaining 
why some strings of words of the language are well-formed expressions and 
others not. Just how this ultimate (and very ambitious) goal might be attempted 
is discussed in Chapter 11. It’s enough to say here that it couldn’t be achieved 
without recognising structure. Just as the concept of structure was required in 
distinguishing between the bicycles and the would-be bicycles, so it’s essential 
in distinguishing between strings of words that are well-formed expressions and 
those that are not.
We can use diagrams to show how things are analysed into their constituent 
parts. For instance, [2] says that a bicycle can be analysed into two wheels, 
a frame, a chain, handlebars, among other things (the dots mean ‘and other 
things’):
 [2] 
 
Such diagrams are called tree diagrams (though the trees are upside-down).
I’ve mentioned that the constituents of a complex thing can themselves be 
complex. A bicycle wheel, for example. It is itself a constituent of the bicycle, but 
in turn consists of hub, spokes, rim, tyre, etc. Although it’s true that spokes are 
constituents of bicycles, it’s more important to note that they are constituents 
of bicycles only because they are constituents of the wheel which, in turn, is a 
constituent of the bicycle. The relation between spoke and bicycle is indirect, 
mediated by wheel. We can express this by saying that, although the spoke is 
a constituent of the bicycle, it is not an immediate constituent of it. It’s 
important to recognise the indirectness of the relationship between bicycle and 
spoke because, in giving a description of the structure of bicycles, we need to be 
able to say that wheels are parts of bicycles. But if we allowed that spokes were 
immediate constituents of bicycles rather than of wheels, this would leave wheels 
bicycle
wheel
wheel
frame
chain
handlebars

CHAPTER 1 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: CONSTITUENTS
8
out of the picture. It would imply that bicycles could have spokes independently 
of the fact that they have wheels.
As mentioned, specifying the function of constituents is an important part 
of structural analysis. Notice that if we were to represent spokes as immediate 
constituents of bicycles, it would be impossible to specify correctly what the 
function of the spokes is. The spokes don’t have a function in respect of the 
bicycle directly, but only in respect of the wheels. In talking of the function of 
the spokes, then, we’re going to have to mention the wheels anyway.
Which of the following tree diagrams best represents the structural relation-
ship between bicycle and spoke just discussed?
 [3a]  
[3b] 
 
 
     
 
Although each tree diagram is incomplete, the one that properly reﬂects the 
structural relationship between bicycle and spoke is [3b], since it says that 
spokes are constituents of wheels, which are, in turn, constituents of bicycle. It 
correctly describes the relation between bicycle, wheel, and spoke as being a 
hierarchical relation. [3a], on the other hand, says that spokes are immediate 
constituents of bicycles, independently of the fact that wheels are constituents 
of bicycles.
In dealing with syntactic structure, we will be doing three things: 
(a) analysing linguistic expressions into their constituents, (b) identifying 
the categories of those constituents, and (c) determining their functions. 
This chapter is mainly concerned with the first of these – constituency. But what 
kind of expressions should we begin with? I’ll take the sentence as the starting 
point for analysis. I’ll assume (and in fact already have assumed) that you have 
an intuitive idea of what counts as a sentence of English.
The ﬁrst question to be asked is, ‘What do sentences consist of?’ The answer 
might seem blindingly obvious: ‘Sentences consist of words.’ In the rest of this 
chapter (and, for that matter, the rest of the book), I’ll try to convince you 
that this apparently natural answer is not the most appropriate. In fact, 
the discussion of hierarchical structure and the importance of recognising that 
sentences have such structure forces us very quickly to abandon the idea that 
sentences consist, in any simple way, of words.
This can be shown by asking whether the relationship between a sentence 
and its words is direct or whether it is indirect, mediated by parts of inter-
mediate complexity. This amounts to asking: ‘Are words the immediate 
constituents of the sentences that contain them?’ It is only if the words 
bicycle
wheel
spoke
spoke
bicycle
wheel
spoke spoke

 
STRUCTURE
9
contained in a sentence are its immediate constituents that we can allow that 
sentences actually consist of words. As an aid to thinking about this question – 
and to gain practice in getting such diagrams to say what you want them to say 
– draw a tree diagram, starting with ‘Sentence’ at the top, which says of sentence 
[4] that its words are its immediate constituents, that it consists directly just of 
the words it contains. Having done that, ask yourself whether the diagram you 
have drawn gives an accurate representation of the structure of the sentence 
as you feel it to be.
 [4] Old Sam sunbathed beside a stream.
The diagram that says of sentence [4] that its words are its immediate constitu-
ents looks like this:
 [5] 
 
Do you feel that the diagram is wrong and/or unhelpful as a description of 
sentence [4]? How much does it tell us? Well, it tells us what words appear in 
the sentence. And in what order they appear. But nothing more. As well as being 
uninformative, the diagram is actually wrong as a description of the structure 
of the sentence. In essence, it says of sentence [4] that it has no structure – or no 
more structure than a sequence of numbers (1–2–3–4–5) or an ordered string 
of beads. This is surely wrong.
In not allowing that the sentence has constituents that mediate between it 
and its words, the diagram doesn’t allow that certain of the words seem to 
belong with others, that the words seem to work in groups. It says that the words 
have no relationship to each other except the relationship of being in a certain 
order in the same sentence. And, although the diagram tells us in what order the 
words occur, in failing to assign any but the simplest possible structure to the 
sentence, it fails to give any explanation of why they occur in that order to form 
a sentence, and why the orders in [6] and [7], for example, don’t form sentences 
of English.
 [6] *Stream old Sam sunbathed beside a
 [7] *Sunbathed old beside stream a Sam
We need to say that sentence [4] is more highly structured than [5] says it is. 
As we saw in the discussion of bicycles, the position of a spoke in the structure 
of a bicycle is determined by its being a constituent of the wheel, which itself 
has a certain position within the bicycle. If you reposition the spokes from out 
of their structural position in the wheel, you land up with an unworkable bicycle. 
A similar thing has happened in [6] and [7]. The position of words in a sentence 
is determined by the fact that the words are not immediate constituents of the 
Sentence
Old 
Sam 
sunbathed beside 
a 
stream

CHAPTER 1 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: CONSTITUENTS
10
sentence, but belong with other words to form groups – phrases – which have 
their own position in the structure of the sentence. It is these phrases (or further 
phrases made up of these phrases) that function as immediate constituents of the 
sentence. In short, while sentences certainly contain words, they don’t consist 
of words. They consist of phrases.
In addition, we need to say what kinds (or categories) of words can com-
bine to form structural groups. What’s wrong with [6] and [7] is that words have 
been displaced from positions in which they can form phrases with the words 
next to them to positions where they can’t, given the kinds of words they are. 
But the diagram gives no information of this sort. Such information is needed 
to account for the ungrammaticality of [6] and [7], but it’s also needed if we 
want to explain why replacing stream with road yields another good sentence of 
English:
 [8] Old Sam sunbathed beside a road.
but replacing stream with laughing or silently does not.
 [9a] *Old Sam sunbathed beside a laughing.
 [9b] *Old Sam sunbathed beside a silently.
Road can replace stream in [4] because road and stream belong to the same cat-
egory: they are both nouns. Laughing and silently cannot replace stream because 
they aren’t nouns; they belong to other categories (verb and adverb).
So we need to include information about grammatical categories in 
our diagrams and this is something we’ll look at in later chapters, especially 
Chapter 3. Together with information on how the words group into phrases, 
this will help to explain not only the facts about [6]–[9], but also facts about the 
functions of words (and phrases) in sentences.
The discussion so far suggests that diagram [5] is actually wrong as a struc-
tural description of sentence [4]. As soon as we want to explain even the simplest 
things about sentences, it’s necessary to go beyond the idea that sentences 
simply consist of words strung together in a line. We need to acknowledge that 
sentences have hierarchical structure.
Establishing constituents
I’ve been complaining in a general way about diagram [5]. What’s needed now 
is a more speciﬁc demonstration of exactly why it’s wrong. I won’t give a 
complete analysis of sentence [4] here, but just a general introduction to the 
identiﬁcation of constituents larger than the word.
Here’s one way of clearly establishing that [5] is wrong. If the sentence had 
the same (lack of) structure as an ordered sequence of numbers, we should be 

 
ESTABLISHING CONSTITUENTS
11
able to lop words off the end of the sentence and still be left with a good sentence 
every time we did that. We can lop numbers off the end of a number sequence 
and still be left with a good (though shorter) number sequence: 1–2–3–4–5, 
1–2–3–4, 1–2–3, 1–2, 1. Begin by removing ﬁrst one word and then another 
from the end of sentence [4] until you’re left with just one word. Each time, 
write down the string that remains. In front of every string of words that seems to 
you not to constitute a complete and grammatical sentence, put an asterisk.
Assuming we speak the same language, you should have a list of ﬁve strings 
marked in the following way:
[10] *Old Sam sunbathed beside a
[11] *Old Sam sunbathed beside
[12] Old Sam sunbathed
[13] *Old Sam
[14] *Old
Of the strings, only [12] could stand as a complete and well-formed sentence. 
[13] may not seem as odd as [10], [11], and [14] do, and I’ll explain why shortly. 
It should still be asterisked since it’s not a complete sentence. What needs 
explaining is why string [12] is a good sentence while none of the others are.
In the ﬁrst place, you should note that not all parts of a sentence are necessarily 
forming a complete and well-formed sentence. Consider [15].
[15] Martha smiled.
[15] is a good sentence as it stands. But notice that we could add to it. For example, 
we could add the word invitingly, to produce another good sentence [16]:
[16] Martha smiled invitingly.
In [16], then, we can say that invitingly is an optional part of the sentence: 
leaving it out gives us another (though shorter) complete and perfectly gram-
matical sentence, namely [15]. By contrast, Martha and smiled are obligatory.
The importance of this here is that I’ve referred to invitingly as a part, as a 
constituent, of sentence [16]. Well, it’s obvious that invitingly must be a con-
stituent in sentence [16], since it’s a word. But, to go back to sentence [4], we 
saw in [10]–[14] that we could omit the sequence of words beside plus a plus 
stream, leaving a perfectly good sentence. In other words, that sequence of 
words is optional. But notice it’s only the sequence as a whole, as a single unit, 
that’s optional. None of the words in that sequence can be omitted individually 
– that’s what *[10] and *[11] show. So, just as I needed to refer to the single 
word invitingly and say it was an optional constituent in the structure of 
sentence [16], so I need to be able to refer to the sequence of words [beside + a 
+ stream] and say that – as a unit – it’s optional in the structure of sentence [4]. 

CHAPTER 1 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: CONSTITUENTS
12
In doing so, I acknowledge that word-sequence as an identiﬁable part, as a con-
stituent, of that sentence.
Sequences of words that can function as constituents in the structure of 
sentences are called phrases. Tree diagrams represent structure by marking 
which sequences of words in a sentence are its constituent phrases. So syntactic 
tree diagrams are, more speciﬁcally, called phrase markers.
I’ve shown that the sequence of words beside a stream is a constituent of sen-
tence [4]. So [beside a stream] is a phrase. Having recognised it as a phrase, we 
must treat its words as parts, not directly of the sentence, but of the phrase itself. 
This phrase is intermediate between the sentence and its words, just as wheels 
are intermediate between the bicycle and its spokes. Since we can’t omit any of 
those three words individually, it appears that, while the phrase as a whole is 
optional in the structure of the sentence, the words themselves are not optional 
in the structure of that phrase.
In sentence [17] below, there are two separate sequences of words which 
can be omitted without affecting the grammaticality of the sentence. Can you 
identify them?
[17] The very talkative gentleman next to me lit a cigar.
[18], [19], and [20] are all perfectly good, complete sentences.
[18] The ( . . . ) gentleman next to me lit a cigar.
[19] The very talkative gentleman ( . . . ) lit a cigar.
[20] The ( . . . ) gentleman ( . . . ) lit a cigar.
So we need to be able to say that very talkative (omitted in [18] and [20]) and 
next to me (omitted in [19] and [20]) are optional constituents in the structure 
of sentence [17]. But they are not sentences and they are not words. They are 
phrases – elements of structure intermediate between sentence and word. 
Furthermore, we’ll see in due course that these phrases are immediate constitu-
ents, not of the sentence, but of yet further phrases within the sentence. They are 
phrases within phrases.
If a sequence of words can be omitted from a sentence leaving another good 
sentence, that’s a good indication that the sequence is a phrase functioning 
as a constituent in the structure of the sentence. However, not all phrases are 
omissible. So we need to ﬁnd a more general, systematic way of demonstrating 
that a given sequence of words is a phrase.
There are several different ways of doing this. Recall that we were never in 
doubt that invitingly was a constituent in [16]. It’s a single word, after all. And 
we wanted to say of the sequence of words beside a stream that it had the same 
unitary character as a single word. This suggests that if you can replace a 
sequence of words in a sentence with a single word without changing the 

 
ESTABLISHING CONSTITUENTS
13
overall structure of the sentence, then that sequence functions as a constituent 
of the sentence and is therefore a phrase. This test will conﬁrm that beside a 
stream is functioning as a constituent in sentence [4]. For example, if the speaker 
of sentence [4] were in a position to point to the spot where Sam sunbathed, she 
could replace beside a stream by here or there:
[21] Old Sam sunbathed here/there.
Or she could be less speciﬁc, replacing beside a stream with somewhere.
[22] Old Sam sunbathed somewhere.
Questions offer a clear example of this. We can form a question from [4] by 
replacing beside a stream with the question word where as in [23] and [24]:
[23] Old Sam sunbathed where?  [24] Where did old Sam sunbathe?
Since we have used where to replace beside a stream, it’s natural that beside a 
stream should be a possible answer to the question. Answering such questions is 
a matter of replacing the question word with an informative phrase. So, answers 
to ‘WH’ questions (that is, questions that contain one of the question words 
who, which, what, why, where, when, whose, and how) are phrases.
All this justiﬁes analysing beside a stream as a phrase. The question now is: 
How should we represent this phrase in terms of a phrase marker? As with the 
whole sentence, we need to know whether the words of the phrase are its imme-
diate constituents, or whether it contains further phrases. There are just three 
phrase markers that could possibly represent the structure of beside a stream:
 
  
[25a] 
[25b] 
[25c]
  
  
Each gives a different analysis. Which do you think is the best representation 
of the structure of the phrase? In coming to a decision, ask yourself whether a 
belongs more with beside than with stream ([25a]), more with stream than with 
beside ([25b]), or whether it doesn’t seem to belong more with one than the 
other ([25c]). The question is: Does the phrase beside a stream include a further 
phrase? If it doesn’t, then [c] is right. But if it does, then either [a] or [b] is right 
– and the question is: which?
Now check that the tests mentioned above, replacement by a single word and the 
question test, conﬁrm the analysis you’ve chosen.
Phrase
Phrase
beside 
a 
stream 
beside 
a 
stream 
beside 
a 
stream
Phrase
Phrase
Phrase

CHAPTER 1 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: CONSTITUENTS
14
Phrase marker [25c] says that the phrase does not contain any further phrase, 
that the words themselves are the immediate constituents of the phrase. Accord-
ing to [c], a does not belong more with either of the other words. Now, if [25c] 
is correct, [a] and [b] should seem equally bad. Well, I hope you agree that 
[a] is really bad. [a] suggests that we could ﬁnd a single word to replace the 
supposed phrase beside a. It’s difﬁcult to imagine what word could replace that 
sequence. It seems incomplete and it’s impossible to say what it means. On 
the other hand, a stream does seem complete, it’s fairly clear what it means, 
and we don’t have to rack our brains to ﬁnd single words that could replace it 
– for example, it, something, or one. These yield good phrases: beside it, beside 
something, and beside one.
Notice, too, that if we were to change singular stream to plural streams, we 
would get the ungrammatical word-sequence *beside a streams – unless we also 
omit a (to give beside streams). This strongly suggests that a belongs deﬁnitely 
with stream rather than with beside. Here, again, we are using the single word 
streams to replace the sequence a stream.
The question test, too, conﬁrms that a stream is a phrase:
[26] Question: [a] Old Sam sunbathed beside what?
 
 
[b] What did old Sam sunbathe beside?
 
Answer: 
A stream.
Notice there’s no question to which *beside a would be a coherent answer.
[27] provides yet further evidence that a stream forms a phrase, since it has 
been moved as a unit in forming a new construction.
[27] A stream is what old Sam sunbathed beside.
It’s worth noting, then, that the movement of a sequence of words in forming 
a construction indicates that the sequence is a phrase. As a further example, 
note the acceptability of moving beside a stream to the beginning of sentence [4]:
[28] Beside a stream, old Sam sunbathed.
In short, the various kinds of evidence discussed conﬁrm that [25b] is the correct 
representation of the structure of our phrase. It shows a phrase within a phrase.
As an exercise, think of some other possible answers to the what question in 
[26]. They can be as different as you like from the answer already given, and they 
can be as long as you like. Be adventurous. Provided they don’t sound ungram-
matical, every sequence of words you choose will be a phrase.
Here are some suggestions:
[29a] a large pile of Bokhara rugs
[29b] the magnolia bush at the bottom of his garden
[29c] an unreliable puppy that was taking occasional nips at his toes.

 
‘PHRASE’ AND ‘CONSTITUENT’
15
All these are phrases. They could all serve as answers to the what question, and 
they are all replaceable by a single word. Furthermore, they all contain further 
phrases.
Earlier, when I was asking if there was a single word that could be used to 
replace the sequence beside a, I mentioned meaning and implied that phrases form 
not only syntactic units (constituents in the structural form of sentences) 
but also semantic units. In other words, they form identiﬁable parts of the 
meaning of sentences; they form coherent units of sense. It’s reasonable to ask 
what beside a stream and a stream mean, but it is not reasonable to ask what 
beside a means; it’s meaningless.
Does the discussion so far suggest an explanation why [13] on page 11 seems 
more acceptable than those in [10], [11], and [14]? How, exactly?
I put an asterisk in front of [13] because it’s not a complete sentence. However, 
it is a complete phrase, and in this it contrasts with the other strings. Old Sam 
could be replaced by a single word – he, someone, or even just Sam – making no 
difference to the overall structure of the sentence. Furthermore, old Sam could 
be used as an answer to the question Who sunbathed beside a stream?, where the 
sequence old Sam has been replaced by the single ‘WH’ word who.
‘Phrase’ and ‘constituent’
I have said that a phrase is a sequence of words that can function as a 
constituent in the structure of sentences. The important word here is ‘can’.
We’ve seen that beside a stream, a stream, and old Sam can function as 
constituents in English sentence structure – and they do function as constituents 
in sentence [4] and many other sentences. They are therefore phrases. However, 
the fact that those word-sequences are constituents in sentence [4] doesn’t mean 
they function as constituents of every sentence in which they appear. Here, as 
an obvious example, is a sentence in which the word-sequence old + Sam is 
deﬁnitely not a constituent:
[30] Though he was old Sam did regular press-ups.
This is clear when we try to replace that sequence with a single word:
[31] *Though he was someone did regular press-ups.
[32] *Though he was who did regular press-ups?
Out of the context of any particular sentence, old Sam is a phrase. It’s a phrase 
of the English language because it can be a constituent of English sentences. But 
that word-sequence is not a constituent of every sentence in which it appears. It’s 
not a constituent of sentence [30], for example.

CHAPTER 1 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: CONSTITUENTS
16
So: although old Sam is indeed a phrase, it’s not a phrase that actually ﬁgures 
in the structure of [30]! As I mentioned in the Introduction, there’s – literally 
– more to syntax, and to your own understanding of sentences, than meets the 
eye. Hierarchical sentence structure is really quite abstract. It is not there visibly 
on the page. It’s in your head. Your understanding of particular word-sequences 
is matter of how you structure them in your mind. That’s why syntax is interest-
ing. And that’s why we need to construct physical (graphic) phrase markers to 
represent these abstract mental structures.
Consider now sentence [33] and decide whether the sequence a + stream + 
that + had + dried + up is a constituent or not.
[33] Sam sunbathed beside a stream that had dried up.
That sequence of words would be a good answer to the question What did old 
Sam sunbathe beside? Plus, it’s replaceable by a single word while preserving the 
overall structure of the sentence (e.g. something that). So it’s a constituent of 
[33]. And, just as with a stream in sentence [4], it forms a further phrase with 
beside. This further phrase can be represented as in [34]:
[34] 
 
In [34] I’ve used a triangle to represent a constituent when I’m not concerned 
with its internal structure. For ease of reference, I have distinguished the phrases 
by letter.
The question I want you to consider now is this: Does the sequence beside + 
a + stream – which formed a constituent in sentence [4] – form a constituent in 
sentence [33]? And if not, why not? The phrase marker [34] should help you 
answer this.
You’ve probably guessed the answer is ‘No’: beside + a + stream is not a con-
stituent in [33]. Why not? Well, we agreed that in [33]/[34] a + stream is part of 
a larger phrase, but that larger phrase is not here beside a stream – it’s a stream 
that had dried up. Beside forms a phrase, not with a + stream, but with the 
sequence a stream that had dried up. In this case, the words a and stream are part 
of PHRASE-b, but beside isn’t. If an element (word or phrase) is part of a phrase, 
it can only relate to other elements within that same phrase. If we wanted to say 
that beside a stream formed a phrase in [33], we’d be forced to represent the 
complete phrase beside a stream that had dried up as in [35]:
Phrase-a
beside
Phrase-b
a stream that had dried up

 
‘PHRASE’ AND ‘CONSTITUENT’
17
[35] 
 
But [35] is wrong (*): it fails to represent a stream that had dried up as a phrase. 
The moral is that an element can belong directly only to one phrase at a time. 
I say ‘directly’ since in [34], for example, a stream belongs both to PHRASE-b 
(directly) and to PHRASE-a (indirectly). It is, in fact, impossible to draw a 
phrase marker that says of a stream that it simultaneously forms a phrase directly 
with beside and with that had dried up.
You may be uncertain whether or not a given sequence of elements is 
represented as a phrase by a phrase marker. Before explaining this, I’ll introduce 
some terminology that helps in ﬁnding our way around phrase markers. Here 
goes.
Any point in a phrase marker that could branch and bear a label is called a 
‘node’. In phrase marker [34] there are two nodes, labelled ‘PHRASE-a’ and 
‘PHRASE-b’. A node is said to dominate everything that appears below it and 
joined to it by a line. Thus the node labelled ‘PHRASE-a’ dominates all the 
following elements: beside, PHRASE-b, a, stream, that, had, dried, and up. A 
node is said to immediately dominate another element when there are no 
intervening nodes. Thus PHRASE-a in [34] immediately dominates just beside 
and PHRASE-b. PHRASE-a dominates stream but it does not immediately 
dominate it, because the node labelled ‘PHRASE-b’ intervenes.
Using this terminology, I can now show how to decide whether a sequence of 
elements is represented as a constituent by a phrase marker. In a phrase marker, 
a sequence of elements is represented as a constituent if there is a node that 
dominates all those elements and no others. In other words, if you can trace 
just the elements under consideration (i.e. all those elements and only those 
elements) up to a single node, then those elements are represented as a constitu-
ent (a phrase).
Look at [34] again. The sequence a + stream + that + had + dried + up is rep-
resented as a constituent because the elements (words, in this case) can all be 
traced back to a single node that does not dominate any other element, namely, 
PHRASE-b. The sequence beside + a, on the other hand, is not represented as a 
constituent because the only node that dominates both those words (namely, 
PHRASE-a) dominates other elements as well (namely, stream, that, had, dried, 
and up). Similarly, in the incorrect phrase marker [35], a stream that had dried 
up is not represented as a constituent because there is no node that dominates 
all and only those words. The only node that dominates all of them is PHRASE-a, 
but PHRASE-a doesn’t dominate only those words, it also dominates beside.
*Phrase-a
Phrase-b
Phrase-c
beside a stream
that had dried up

CHAPTER 1 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: CONSTITUENTS
18
I’ve given two examples in which a sequence of words functioning as a con-
stituent in one sentence is therefore a phrase of the language does not function 
as a constituent in another. Here, as a ﬁnal example, is what’s known as a 
structurally ambiguous sentence. On one interpretation, the sequence old + 
Sam does function as a constituent but on the other interpretation it doesn’t:
[36] Heseltine asked how old Sam was.
Try to identify the two meanings of [36]. A good way of doing this is to decide 
on the exact question Heseltine is reported in [36] to have asked. It will help to 
make a written note of the two questions.
Having identiﬁed the two meanings in the way suggested, you shouldn’t have 
much difﬁculty in deciding which interpretation demands that the sequence 
does form a constituent and which demands that it does not.
The two different questions that could have been asked by Heseltine are 
[a] How old is Sam? and [b] How is old Sam? As these different questions show, 
on the ﬁrst interpretation, [a], old belongs with how to form the phrase how old. 
In this question, the phrase as a unit has been moved from its position at the 
end of the sentence (Sam is how old?). On this interpretation, since old forms a 
constituent with how, it simply cannot also form a constituent with Sam. It’s on 
the second interpretation, [b], that old and Sam go together, forming a constitu-
ent. This example illustrates how deciding what phrases there are in the sentence 
is a crucial part of deciding what the sentence actually means.
Most people, when presented with a sequence of words out of the context 
of any sentence, have feelings as to whether that sequence could function as a 
constituent in a sentence (i.e. whether it’s a phrase of the language) – at least 
once they start thinking about it (as you’re being encouraged to do here). It’s 
usually simply a matter of deciding whether it seems to form a coherent unit of 
sense. In the main, this is a reliable guide as to whether that sequence actually is 
a constituent in a sentence to be analysed, though, as we have seen from the last 
three examples, not one hundred per cent reliable. And, even in the context of a 
sentence, you’ll ﬁnd you do have an intuitive feeling as to which sequences are 
functioning as its constituents. In this chapter I have considered various kinds 
of evidence for constituents – (a) omission, (b) replacement by a single 
word, (c) the question test, (d) movement, (e) the sense test. These are 
useful in conﬁrming your intuitions, and in checking on cases where you’re in 
doubt – one’s ﬁrst intuitions are not always strong and not always reliable.

 
EXERCISES
19
 Exercises
1. Look again at the discussion on page 17 above and then, on the basis of the tree 
diagram below, say which of the following sequences are constituents of A.
(1) c + d.  (2) a + b + c.  (3) c + d + e + f.  (4) e + f.  (5) e + f + g + h.
(6) g + h.  (7) E + C.  (8) D + E.  (9) F + g + h.
(a)
 
2. In tree diagram (a) above, what are the immediate constituents of:
(1) A?  (2) B?  (3) C?
3. (a)  Draw a phrase marker for the phrase two rather dubious jokes which shows 
that it contains the further phrase rather dubious jokes, which in turn contains 
rather dubious as a phrase.
(b) Men from the Ministry is a phrase which contains from the Ministry and the 
Ministry as phrases. Draw a phrase marker for the whole phrase.
4. Decide whether the italicised strings in the following sentences are constituents 
of those sentences or not. Note that (g) is ambiguous; as with the ambiguous 
example discussed in this chapter, you should identify the two interpretations and 
say on which interpretation the italicised sequence forms a constituent.
(a) John considered visiting his aunt.
(b) Maria simply gazed at the bollard she had just demolished.
(c) Maria simply gazed at the bollard she had just demolished.
(d) In the machine the gremlin could be heard juggling with ball-bearings.
(e) In the machine the gremlin could be heard juggling with ball-bearings.
(f) Rory put a silencer on the gun.
(g) Sam managed to touch the man with the umbrella.
5. In the light of the discussion of this chapter, how many constituents can you identify 
in sentence (a) below, given that the much shorter (b) is a grammatical sentence? 
(Don’t attempt a complete analysis of sentence (a) – the fact that sentence (b) is 
well-formed doesn’t provide enough information for that.)
A
B
C
D 
E 
F 
g 
h
c 
d
e 
f
a 
b

CHAPTER 1 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: CONSTITUENTS
20
(a) Being of a cautious disposition, Tim very wisely avoided the heavily built man 
whenever he drank at the Wrestler’s Arms.
(b) Tim avoided the man.
6. I’ve not yet provided a complete analysis of sentence [4] in the chapter. We’ve 
agreed that old Sam, beside a stream, and a stream are among its constituents. So 
we can at least draw an incomplete phrase marker for it, as in (a):
(a)   
Sentence
 
 
 
We know that the complete string constitutes a sentence. In a complete phrase 
marker, then, everything must be joined up to the Sentence node in some way. 
The question is: How? There are three ways this could be done. Each way offers a 
different analysis of the sentence – a different analysis of how sunbathed ﬁts into 
the structure and thus a different account of the immediate constituents of the 
sentence. Draw the three different phrase markers and explain in words (using 
‘constituent’ and ‘immediate constituent of the sentence’) what different claims 
are made about the structure of the sentence by each phrase marker. (Make sure 
the phrases we’ve already acknowledged remain represented as phrases in your 
complete phrase markers!) I’m not here asking you to choose which analysis you 
think is best – though I hope you have views on the matter. Only one of them is 
generally accepted these days and it’s this that I’ll be adopting in the following 
chapters.
■ Discussion of exercises
Don’t forget, there are additional exercises (with answers) on the website.
1. (1)  Yes. Both c and d – and only c and d – can be traced back to node E.
(2) No. D dominates a and b but not c. Node B does dominate a, b and c, but it 
also dominates d; so there is no node that dominates all and only a, b, and c.
(3) No. No single node dominates all and only c, d, e, and f. Only A dominates 
them all, but A dominates a, b, g, and h too.
(4) Yes. e and f (and only e and f ) can be traced back to the single node F.
(5) Yes. They alone can all be traced back to C.
(6) No. (7) No. (8) Yes. (9) Yes.
2. (1) B and C.  (2) D and E.  (3) F, g, and h.
Phrase
Phrase
Phrase
old 
Sam
sunbathed 
beside
a 
stream

 
EXERCISES
21
3. (a)  
(b) 
 
4. (a)  Yes. It could be replaced by it and by what in forming the question What 
did he consider?, to which visiting his aunt is a possible answer. (Note also that 
the sequence moves as a unit in forming the construction Visiting his aunt is 
what he considered.)
(b) Yes. (cf. she simply gazed at it. What did she gaze at? Answer: the bollard she 
had just demolished.)
(c) No. In (b) above, the sequence the + bollard was shown to be part of the 
phrase the bollard she had just demolished; it cannot then form a constituent 
with at. (See the discussion of beside a stream that had dried up [33], 
pages 16–17.)
(d) Yes. It could be replaced by there or somewhere. Furthermore, in the machine 
is a good answer to the question Where could the gremlin be heard juggling 
with ball-bearings? Finally, the sequence could be omitted leaving a well-
formed sentence.
(e) No. There is no question that In the machine the gremlin could possibly be 
an answer to. Who/What could be heard . . . ? could receive the gremlin as a 
possible answer; Where could the gremlin be heard . . . could receive In the 
machine. Each of these, then, are phrases. So we have a sequence of phrases 
here but those two phrases don’t make up a further phrase.
(f) No. Note the oddity of *Rory put it and *Rory put something. And the oddity 
of *What did Rory put?
(g) On one interpretation the sequence is a constituent, cf. Sam managed to 
touch him and Who did Sam manage to touch? (Answer: The man with the 
umbrella.) On the other interpretation, it is not a single phrase but a sequence 
of two phrases. Cf. Sam managed to touch him with an umbrella, Who did Sam 
manage to touch with an umbrella? (Answer: the man.)
5. The fact that (b) is a well-formed sentence means that every sequence of words 
omitted from (a) in order to form (b) can be counted as a constituent of (a). 
These are:
Being of a cautious disposition
very wisely
heavily built
whenever he drank at the Wrestler’s Arms.
Phrase
Phrase
Phrase
Phrase
Phrase
Phrase
two
rather dubious
jokes
men
from
the 
ministry

CHAPTER 1 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: CONSTITUENTS
22
 
There are other constituents in the (a) sentence, of course, and the constituents 
listed here themselves contain further phrases as constituents.
6. Here are the three complete phrase markers. New bits are in bold.
(a) 
 
  
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
 
 
 
(a) represents sunbathed as forming a constituent with beside a stream, and 
divides the sentence into just two immediate constituents: old Sam and sunbathed 
beside a stream. (b) also divides the sentence into two, but this time the two parts 
are old Sam sunbathed and beside a stream. Phrase marker (c) represents the sen-
tence as having three immediate constituents, old Sam and sunbathed and beside 
a stream; it says that sunbathed forms a constituent neither with old Sam nor with 
beside a stream.
In trying to represent what phrase marker (a) represents, you may have been 
tempted simply to draw an extra line out from the phrase node dominating beside 
a stream as (d):
Sentence
Phrase
Phrase
Phrase
Old 
Sam
sunbathed 
beside
a 
stream
Sentence
Phrase
Phrase
Phrase
Phrase
Old 
Sam
sunbathed
beside
a 
stream
Sentence
Phrase
Phrase
Old 
Sam
sunbathed
beside
a 
stream
Phrase
Phrase

 
FURTHER EXERCISES
23
(d) 
 
 
But (d) is incorrect. Can you see why? (Check the discussion on page 17.) 
Although it associates sunbathed with beside a stream, it fails to represent beside 
a stream as a phrase in its own right, independently of sunbathed. It fails to do 
this because there’s no node that dominates all and only beside + a + stream. 
(The only node that dominates them all dominates sunbathed as well.) Check 
you’ve not succumbed to a similar temptation in connection with (b).
 Further exercises
1. The structural ambiguity of [36] in the text is a matter of whether old Sam or how 
old is a constituent. All the following are structurally ambiguous. In each case, 
identify the source of the ambiguity in terms of two different constituent analyses, 
as I’ve just done here with [36].
(1) This story shows what evil men can do.
(2) They only sell rotten fruit and vegetables.
(3) More interesting meals would have been welcome.
(4) We need an agreement between workers on overtime.
(5) Bill asked the man who he had seen.
2. Draw a phrase marker for the phrase no previous experience of syntax, showing that 
it contains the phrase previous experience of syntax as a constituent, which in turn 
has the phrase experience of syntax as a constituent, which in turn has the phrase 
of syntax as a constituent (which, of course, is made up by of and syntax).
3. The new students are very worried is a sentence. Assume that it has two phrases 
as immediate constituents: the new students and are very worried. Further, assume 
the new students consists of the word the and the phrase new students. And that 
are very worried consists of the word are and the phrase very worried. Try drawing 
the phrase marker for the sentence in the light of all that.
Phrase
sunbathed
beside
a 
stream
Phrase

24
As I pointed out in Chapter 1, understanding the structure of a sentence involves 
knowing not only what its constituents are, but also the category and the 
function of those constituents. As you’ll see in this and the next chapter, these 
three aspects of syntactic analysis are closely bound up with one another. This 
chapter is mainly about syntactic functions, and about how function relates to 
category and constituency.
A systematic sentence analysis is best begun, not by immediately considering 
the words in the sentence, but by ﬁrst identifying the very largest phrases – those 
phrases which are immediate constituents, not of any other phrase, but of the 
sentence itself. So my ﬁrst illustration of the relationship between constituents, 
their categories and their functions, will concern the functions and categories of 
the immediate constituents of the sentence itself.
Subject and predicate
To be sure of identifying only the largest (i.e. immediate) constituents of the 
sentence I shall, wherever possible, divide the sentence into the fewest possible 
parts, i.e. into just two. An example of the simplest possible complete sentence 
structure is [1]:
 [1] Ducks paddle.
Other such examples are: Max coughed, Pigs ﬂy, Empires decline, and Martha 
retaliated. In all such cases, we have no option but to analyse the sentence as 
consisting of two parts, as in [2]:
 [2] 
 
But what about more complicated sentences? A speaker’s ability to recognise the 
structure of the sentences of her language is largely a matter of being able to 
2
Sentence structure
Functions
Sentence
Ducks
paddle

 
SUBJECT AND PREDICATE
25
perceive a similar pattern across a wide range of apparently different sentences. 
Take [3], for example:
 [3] The ducks are paddling away.
We want to say that [3] has the same general structure as [1]. Like [1], it’s 
divisible into two constituents, and the two constituents are of the same 
general kind (category) as the corresponding constituents of [1]. Furthermore, 
they have exactly the same syntactic functions as those in [1] – put another 
way, the relation between them is the same.
In asking which sequence of words in [3] corresponds to ducks in [1], we’re 
asking which sequence of words in [3] could be replaced by the single word 
ducks while leaving a grammatical sentence. The answer can only be the ducks. 
Replacing that sequence by ducks yields the well-formed sentence Ducks are 
paddling away. In each of these sentences, both ducks and the ducks could be 
replaced by the same single word they. And the rest of [3] – are paddling away 
– can be replaced by the single word paddle (from [1]), giving the well-formed 
sentence The ducks paddle.
This exhaustively divides [3] into two parts, as in [4]:
 [4] [The ducks] + [are paddling away].
The same division is shown in [5] and [6]:
 [5] [Those gigantic ducks] + [were paddling away furiously].
 [6] [The mouth-watering duck on the table] + [won’t be paddling away 
again].
All these sentences ([1] – [6]) have the same general structure. They only differ 
at a lower (more detailed) level in their hierarchical structure. At the general 
level that concerns us here, they illustrate the same relation and the same func-
tions. In making this ﬁrst division, we have divided these sentences into two 
constituents, the ﬁrst of which is traditionally said to function as subject, and 
the second as predicate.
One way of thinking of these functions is to think of the subject as being 
used to mention something (e.g. the ducks) and the predicate as used to say 
something about the subject (e.g. that they were paddling away). The subject 
generally identiﬁes what the sentence is about; the predicate identiﬁes what’s 
being said about it. This is usually a good way of identifying subject and predi-
cate but, as we’ll see below, there are sentences in which it doesn’t work.
In Exercise 6 of Chapter 1, I raised the question of how sunbathed ﬁts into the 
structure of Old Sam sunbathed beside a stream, and offered three alternative 
analyses. Each analysis makes a different claim as to what the immediate con-
stituents of that sentence are. On the basis of the discussion so far, can you 

CHAPTER 2 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: FUNCTIONS
26
see which of those analyses is being adopted here? The answer is given in the 
footnote to this page.1
Sentences can be a good deal more complicated than the ones we’ve looked 
at here. In fact, theoretically, there’s no limit. If you’re presented with a more 
complicated sentence and you’re in doubt as to the correct subject~predicate 
division, a simple test can be applied:
Question test for subject:
Turn the sentence into a question that can be answered by ‘yes’ or ‘no’ (a yes/
no question). The phrase functioning as subject is the one that changes its 
position when the sentence is so changed.
You may remember from Chapter 1 that the movement of a sequence of 
words in forming a construction shows that it is a constituent. This particular 
movement test conﬁrms not only that the ducks, those gigantic ducks, and that 
mouth-watering duck on the table are constituents, but that they are functioning 
as the subjects of the sentences:
 [7] 
Now form the yes/no questions that correspond to [5] and [6].
You may ﬁnd you intuitively know what the correct subject~predicate division 
is without applying the question movement test. Even so, the test is important 
because it’s actually part of the deﬁnition of what a ‘subject’ is. It’s the subject 
that changes position in ‘yes/no’ questions. Here are the questions that corres-
pond to [5] and [6].
 [8] Were [those gigantic ducks] paddling away furiously?
 [9] Won’t [the mouth-watering duck on the table] be paddling away again?
The question test is essential in cases like the following:
[10a] It is snowing again.  [10b] There is nothing to eat.
In [10a] it is in fact impossible to think of the predicate (is snowing again) as 
being used to say something about what it mentions because it doesn’t mention 
anything – it’s an ‘empty subject’ (in technical terms, an ‘expletive’). Notice that 
[10a] is not an answer to the question ‘What is snowing again?’, which is an 
odd question anyway. The same goes for there in [10b]: there doesn’t mention 
1 It is analysis (a): Subject: [Old Sam] Predicate: [sunbathed beside a stream]. See also Further Exercise 3 
in Chapter 1.
Are [the ducks] paddling away?

 
SUBJECT AND PREDICATE
27
anything (it’s an expletive). Nevertheless, it is the subject of [10a] and there the 
subject of [10b] precisely because those are the expressions that change position 
in the yes/no questions:
[11a] 
  [11b] 
Using this test, identify the subjects of the following sentences:
[12] Some nasty accident could have occurred.
[13] The clown in the make-up room doesn’t want to perform.
[14] Elizabeth and Leicester are rowing on the river.
[15] None of her attempts to give up chocolate were successful.
[16] As a matter of fact, the man you paid to do it has been arrested.
Examples [12]–[15] have the following subject~predicate structures:
[12] [Some nasty accident]  [could have occurred].
 
 (Could some nasty accident have occurred?)
[13] [The clown in the make-up room]  [doesn’t want to perform].
 
 (Doesn’t the clown in the make-up room want to perform?)
[14] [Elizabeth and Leicester]  [are rowing on the river].
 
 (Are Elizabeth and Leicester rowing on the river?)
[15] [None of her attempts to give up chocolate]  [were successful].
 
 (Were none of her attempts to give up chocolate successful?)
I included [16] to show that the subject doesn’t always begin the sentence. I 
hope you discovered this for yourself in applying the question test. The question 
that corresponds to this example is:
[16] As a matter of fact, has the man you paid to do it been arrested?
This identiﬁes the man you paid to do it as the subject. The phrase as a matter of 
fact hasn’t moved in forming the question, so it’s not part of the subject. Since 
as a matter of fact belongs neither within subject nor within predicate, [16] is one 
sentence that can’t be exhaustively analysed into a two-part, subject~predicate 
structure. For the moment, I’ll concentrate on sentences that can.
A temptation the question movement test will help you avoid is that of taking 
the ﬁrst string of words that could be a subject as actually being the subject of 
the sentence you’re considering. Look again at [13], [14], and [15]. [13] begins 
with the sequence the clown, [14] with Elizabeth, and [15] with none of her 
attempts. All these expressions could be subjects (see [17]–[19] below) but they 
are not the subjects of [13]–[15].
[17] The clown refuses to perform.
[18] Elizabeth excels at Real Tennis.
[19] None of her attempts were really serious.
Is [it] snowing again?
Is [there] nothing to eat?

CHAPTER 2 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: FUNCTIONS
28
The temptation to identify less than the whole of the relevant phrase crops up 
in all constituent analysis. In the case of subjects, the question test helps. For 
example, if you take the subjects of [17]–[19] to be the subjects of [13]–[15], all 
attempts to form the appropriate questions will result in ungrammatical sentences 
– gobbledegook, in fact. In [14], for example, it results in *And Leicester are 
Elizabeth rowing on the river?
In general, taking less than the whole of the subject will leave you with a 
residue that won’t count as a well-formed predicate. For example, if the clown, 
Elizabeth, and none of her attempts are taken to be the subjects of [13]–[15] 
respectively, the following are left as residues:
[20] in the make-up room doesn’t want to perform
[21] and Leicester are rowing on the river
[22] to give up chocolate were successful.
But, I hope you agree, these don’t hang together as phrases, they don’t form 
units of sense, and it’s difﬁcult to see what their function could be. They can’t be 
predicates; we couldn’t say, for example, that to give up chocolate were successful 
is predicated as being true of none of her attempts.
In applying the question movement test to the following examples, you’ll ﬁnd 
that you have to modify it slightly. Form the yes/no questions that correspond 
to these examples.
[23] My new duck lays lightly boiled eggs.
[24] Elizabeth and Leicester excel at Real Tennis.
[25] The chiropodist fell in love with most of his patients.
As you will have discovered, the appropriate questions are formed by introduc-
ing a form of the verb do. For the purposes of this test, it’s convenient to assume 
that do is introduced as in [26]–[28],
[26] My new duck does lay lightly boiled eggs.
[27] Elizabeth and Leicester do excel at Real Tennis.
[28] The chiropodist did fall in love with most of his patients.
and that the questions are formed from [26]–[28] by the now familiar movement 
of the subject (shown just in [29]), giving
[29] 
[30] Do [Elizabeth and Leicester] excel at Real Tennis?
[31] Did [the chiropodist] fall in love with most of his patients?
This difference between [12]–[16] and [23]–[25] is explained in Chapter 6.
Does [my new duck] lay lightly boiled eggs?

 
NOUN PHRASE AND VERB PHRASE
29
Noun Phrase and Verb Phrase
So much, then, for the functions – subject and predicate – of the immediate 
constituents of the sentence. I’ll return to the functions of constituents, in a 
more general way, later in the chapter. The question that now arises is: What 
kinds – categories – of phrases function as subjects and as predicates? We’ve 
seen that such phrases can vary widely in their form and complexity. Nevertheless, 
all the subjects we’ve looked at have one thing in common: they all contain, 
and are centred on, the same category of word: noun (n). They are all noun 
phrases (np). The single words that can replace them are all nouns or pro-
nouns. The phrases functioning as predicates, on the other hand, all contain, 
and are centred on, a verb (v). They are all verb phrases (vp). Predictably, 
they are all replaceable by single-word verbs. For example, the ducks and those 
gigantic ducks are Noun Phrases centred on the Noun ducks. The clown in the 
make up room is a Noun Phrase, centred on the Noun clown. Don’t worry if 
you’re unsure which words are nouns or verbs at this stage. You’ll get a rough 
idea indirectly during the course of this chapter but we look properly at cat-
egories in the next chapter. You can assume that any phrase that can function 
as a subject is a Noun Phrase.
You might ask: Why do we need to distinguish between the category and 
the function of a constituent? We need to do this because most categories of 
phrase have a variety of different functions. Although we’re assuming subjects 
are always Noun Phrases, this doesn’t mean all Noun Phrases function as sub-
ject. For example, the Noun Phrase the chiropodist functions as subject in [25] 
above, but not in [32]:
[32] The pianist has rejected the chiropodist.
Notice it doesn’t change position in the question Has the pianist rejected the 
chiropodist? Here it’s the pianist that has moved. The chiropodist is here part of 
the predicate rejected the chiropodist. It’s a constituent of the Verb Phrase and 
has a function we’ll look at in Chapter 4.
Below is a list of phrases. Some are Noun Phrases, some are Verb Phrases 
and some are phrases belonging to categories not yet introduced. Identify the 
phrases – as Noun Phrase, Verb Phrase, or ‘other’ – by combining them (just 
two at a time) and seeing which combinations make well-formed sentences of 
subject (NP) + predicate (VP).
(a) remind me of you
(b) as quickly as he could
(c) soggy chips
(d) pamphlets advertising new syntactic theories

CHAPTER 2 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: FUNCTIONS
30
(e) by the end of this week
(f) suddenly rained from the sky
(g) are in demand.
The only well-formed subject~predicate combinations are:
(c) + (a), (c) + (f), (c) + (g), (d) + (a), (d) + (f), and (d) + (g).
Since (c) and (d) can function as subjects they are NPs. (a), (f), and (g), which 
can function as predicates, are all VPs. (a) is centred on the verb remind, (f) is 
centred on the verb rained, and (g) is centred on the verb are. As for (b) and (e), 
they don’t combine, in any order, with any of the other phrases nor with each 
other, so they belong to categories other than NP and VP.
We can now include information about the categories of the immediate con-
stituents of the sentence in a phrase marker, by labelling the appropriate nodes, 
as in [33]:
[33] 
 
The diagram has the obvious interpretation: the sequence those gigantic ducks 
forms a constituent belonging to the category Noun Phrase; the sequence were 
paddling away furiously forms a constituent belonging to the category Verb 
Phrase; the NP and the VP together form a sentence (S).
In the next few chapters, all our phrase markers for sentences are going to 
look like [33], with S immediately dominating NP (to the left) and VP (to the 
right). Since I’ve been concerned just with the immediate constituents of the 
sentence itself, NP and VP, I’ve used the triangle notation for them to avoid 
giving further details about their internal structure. So, the phrase marker in 
[33] serves as a partial analysis of all the sentences considered in this chapter – 
with the exception of [16], which, for reasons already given, is a special case.
A point to note about [33] – and phrase markers in general – is that a 
speciﬁcation of the functions of the constituents (given in brackets in [33]) 
is not strictly part of the phrase marker, and is not normally included. This is 
because the functions of constituents follows directly from other information 
already contained in the phrase marker – information about category and posi-
tion. Thus:
s
NP
VP
Those gigantic ducks 
(Subject)
were paddling away furiously 
(Predicate)

 
DEPENDENCY AND FUNCTION
31
The subject of a sentence is the NP immediately dominated by S.
The predicate of a sentence is the VP immediately dominated by S.
This deﬁnition of subject in terms of the phrase marker will conﬁrm that 
the chiropodist is not the subject of [32]. Here’s the phrase marker.
[34] 
 
In [34] there are two NPs, the pianist and the chiropodist, but only the ﬁrst is 
immediately dominated by S. So the NP the pianist is the subject. The NP the 
chiropodist is not immediately dominated by S because the VP node intervenes 
between it and S. So, by the above deﬁnition of subject, it’s not the subject.
As mentioned, categories are dealt with in more detail in the next chapter. 
What’s important here is for you to see how the parts of a sentence can be 
expected to function in relation to each other. Without the idea of subject func-
tion and predicate function, it would be difﬁcult to know where to begin the 
analysis of a sentence. In giving an analysis of a sentence, you should always 
be sure that anything you want to say is a constituent and has a well-deﬁned 
function and meaning. This goes not only for the immediate constituents of S 
but for all constituents. So I’ll generalise the discussion a little.
Dependency and function
In discussing the functions of constituents, we need some terminology to 
describe relationships between them. When two constituent nodes are immedi-
ately dominated by the same single node, as is the case with B and C in [35],
[35] 
 
they are said to be sisters. As you might guess, since B and C are sisters in [35], 
they are the daughters of A, the node that immediately dominates them. And 
A is the mother of B and C. Fanciful perhaps – but easily remembered!
It’s the relationship of sister that concerns us here. sister constituents are 
represented at the same level of structure in phrase markers. Constituents always 
have their functions in respect of their sister constituents. Thus, in each of 
the sentences considered so far, the subject NP and the predicate VP are sisters 
s
NP
VP
[The pianist]
has rejected [the chiropodist]
A
B
C

CHAPTER 2 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: FUNCTIONS
32
and as such are represented at the same level of structure. The NP (e.g. the ducks) 
has its subject function in respect of its sister, the VP (e.g. are paddling away). 
And the VP has its predicate function in respect of the subject NP. Notice that 
subject and predicate are dependent on each other (mutually dependent). An NP 
only functions as a subject in the presence of a sister VP, and a VP only functions 
as predicate in the presence of a sister NP. The two together are required to form 
a complete sentence; neither can be omitted in a complete and well-formed 
sentence. They are both obligatory in the structure of sentences.
Anticipating later chapters, let’s take a ﬁrst look at the other main functions. 
There are three general concepts here. These are head, and the two functions 
that other elements have in relation to heads, modifier and complement.
■ Head
The head of a phrase is the element that the phrase is centred on. It is the one 
essential – obligatory – element in that phrase. If you think of the phrase as a 
solar system, then the head is the sun. Everything else in the phrase revolves 
around and depends on the head. Just as a system is a solar system because it’s 
centred on a sun, so a phrase is Noun Phrase because it’s centred on a Noun. 
Similarly for Verb Phrase. So: it’s the category of the head of a phrase that deter-
mines the category of the phrase.
■ The modiﬁer~head relation
Consider the structure I assigned to two rather dubious jokes in Exercise 3 of 
Chapter 1. (Since I’m concentrating on the relationship between constituency 
and function here, I’m omitting the category labels which would be required for 
a complete analysis.)
[36] 
 
There are three sister relationships in [36]: (1) between two and PHRASE-b 
(rather dubious jokes), (2) between PHRASE-c (rather dubious) and jokes, and 
(3) between rather and dubious. The relation that holds between these sister 
constituents is of the same general kind, namely modification.
PHRASE-a
two
PHRASE-b
PHRASE-c
jokes
rather 
dubious

 
DEPENDENCY AND FUNCTION
33
To begin at the lowest level of structure, rather has its function in respect 
of its sister dubious. It speciﬁes the degree of the dubiousness, telling us how 
dubious the jokes are. Rather is dependent on dubious, in the sense that it’s only 
present because dubious is. Were we to omit dubious, rather would be left with-
out any function, and the omission would result in an ill-formed string (*two 
rather jokes). Notice, though, that dubious is in no way dependent on rather. We 
can omit rather and still be left with a perfectly good phrase (two dubious jokes). 
This, then, is a one-way function/dependency. Rather depends on dubious 
but not vice-versa. This function is called modification. The function of rather 
is to modify dubious.
What about the function of dubious itself? You may have guessed – from 
the above discussion of heads – that dubious is the head of rather dubious. 
I hope this seems right to you in the light of what you now know about heads. 
Whatever the category of dubious, that’s going to be the category of the phrase 
rather dubious. (For information – but don’t worry about it now if you didn’t 
already know – dubious is an adjective. So rather dubious is an Adjective Phrase 
(AP).)
The big difference between modiﬁers and heads, then, is this: in the 
structure of a phrase, modiﬁers are optional; the head is the obligatory 
element.
A modifier–head relation also holds, at the next (higher) level of structure, 
between the whole phrase rather dubious and the word jokes. Rather dubious 
speciﬁes the character of the jokes. Again, rather dubious as a whole is a dependent 
modifier of jokes but not vice-versa. Rather dubious is optional since it could 
be omitted (giving two jokes), but jokes – the head of the phrase – could not be 
omitted (*two rather dubious). And the same goes for the relation – at the highest 
level of structure – between two and rather dubious jokes. Two is the (optional, 
dependent) modifier of the head rather dubious jokes.
A useful way of picturing the functional relations in [33] is given in [37], 
where the direction of the dependencies is indicated by an arrow, and the func-
tions by M (Modiﬁer) and H (Head):
[37]
 
As [37] shows, phrases – as well as words – can function as heads and as 
modiﬁers.
two
M
H
jokes
dubious
H
rather
M
M
H

CHAPTER 2 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: FUNCTIONS
34
Compare analysis [36] above with the incorrect (*) analyses in [38] and [39]:
[38] 
 
[39] 
 
Both these analyses should now strike you as odd. Two and rather both belong 
to categories that have modifying functions. They can’t themselves function as the 
head of a phrase. So they can’t have their functions in respect of each other – they 
can’t both be heads and can’t modify each other. In a given phrase, there can only 
be one head. But in [38], two and rather are represented as sisters, forming a 
phrase. The fact that this supposed phrase (*two rather) doesn’t have a well-deﬁned 
meaning – and couldn’t be the answer to any question – is thus quite predictable. 
Notice that, since constituents function in respect of their sister constituents, rather 
in [38] is completely cut off from the element (dubious) it wants to modify.
[39] is marginally better, but still wrong. Before reading further, decide for 
yourself in the light of the preceding discussion exactly in what respect it’s better 
than [38], and exactly in what respect it’s still not as good as [36].
[39] is better than [38] in that two is correctly represented as a (modifying) sister 
of PHRASE-b (rather dubious jokes). [39] is still wrong, though, because it 
represents rather and dubious jokes as sisters, so that rather is now modifying, not 
dubious, but the phrase dubious jokes. But we saw earlier that rather is dependent 
on (and belongs with) just dubious. Rather has to do with the dubiousness of the 
jokes, not the jokes themselves. The original analysis of PHRASE-b (given in 
[36]) correctly predicts that the string rather dubious jokes corresponds in meaning 
with the phrase given as [40]:
[40] jokes which are rather dubious.
By contrast, PHRASE-b in [39] is odd because it predicts that rather dubious 
jokes corresponds in meaning with the ungrammatical [41]:
[41] *dubious jokes which are rather.
*PHRASE-a
PHRASE-b
PHRASE-c
two 
rather
dubious 
jokes
*PHRASE-a
two 
PHRASE-b
rather 
PHRASE-c
dubious 
jokes

 
DEPENDENCY AND FUNCTION
35
By the way, dubious jokes is another example of a word-sequence that forms a 
phrasal constituent in some contexts but not others. We’ve seen that, in the 
context of rather, we need to relate rather and dubious to each other before relating 
the whole phrase rather dubious to jokes. So dubious and jokes don’t form a 
constituent in the context of rather. In the absence of rather (or any other 
modifier of dubious), on the other hand, dubious and jokes may well form a con-
stituent, as they do in the phrase two dubious jokes.
[42] 
 
■ The head~complement relation
We have now looked at the two-way function/mutual dependency of subject 
and predicate and several examples of the one-way function/dependency of 
modiﬁer and head. Now look again at the phrase beside a stream (from the sentence 
Old Sam sunbathed beside a stream) in the light of the discussion in this chapter. 
Here’s the phrase marker. How many sister relations are there in the phrase?
[43] 
 
At the lowest level of structure, a and stream are sisters and, at the next level 
up, beside and PHRASE–b (a stream) are sisters. In the last chapter I showed that 
a has its function only in respect of stream. But what kind of relationship holds 
between beside and PHRASE–b (a stream)? Try to determine whether it’s a two-
way dependency (both elements obligatory) or the one-way dependency of 
(optional) modifier and (obligatory) head. You will need to consider the 
phrase in the context of its sentence, Old Sam sunbathed beside a stream.
The way to do this, remember, is to see if either of the constituents of the phrase can be 
omitted individually in the context of the sentence. In fact, neither can be omitted. 
Both [44] (with beside omitted) and [45] (with a stream omitted) are ungrammatical:
[44] *Old Sam sunbathed a stream
[45] *Old Sam sunbathed beside
PHRASE-a
two
PHRASE-b
dubious 
jokes
PHRASE-a
beside 
PHRASE-b
a 
stream

CHAPTER 2 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: FUNCTIONS
36
Although the whole phrase could be omitted from Old Sam sunbathed beside a 
stream, giving Old Sam sunbathed, neither of the constituents of beside a stream 
can be omitted individually. It seems (a) that beside calls for – requires – the 
presence of a phrase like a stream and (b) that a stream depends on the presence 
of beside. So it’s a two-way (mutual) dependency; both elements are obligatory 
in the structure of the phrase beside a stream.
That phrase tells us where the sunbathing took place. It speciﬁes a location. 
The location of a thing or an activity is usually expressed by orientating it in 
space (or time: after the storm, before midnight) in relation to some other thing, 
activity, event, or time. We can’t express a spatial location just by means of 
beside; we have to specify beside what. Now, although beside and a stream are 
both needed to express the spatial orientation in this case, it’s clearly the word 
beside that’s giving the phrase as a whole its locational character. So beside is 
the head of the phrase. And, just as Noun Phrases are named after – have the 
same category as – their heads (Nouns), we will be naming the whole phrase 
beside a stream after the category of the word beside. This is dealt with in the next 
chapter (but, if you’re interested, it’s a preposition).
We’ve seen that, unlike the modiﬁer–head relations considered earlier, the 
relation between beside and a stream is a two-way dependency, with both 
obligatory. So we need to distinguish between the function of elements that 
relate to a head in a one-way dependency (i.e. as modiﬁers) from the function 
of elements that relate to a head in a two-way dependency. When a head 
demands a further expression, that further (obligatory) expression is said to 
complement the head. A stream functions as the complement of beside. Notice 
that a stream doesn’t tell us something about the head (beside) as modiﬁers do. 
What we have here, then, is not the functional relation of modification, but the 
functional relation of complementation.
Complements typically follow their heads in English. Modiﬁers can precede 
or follow their heads, though so far I’ve only given examples of modiﬁers 
preceding their heads.
Now look at [46].
[46] Phil dreads affectionate cats.
It’s a sentence – so, overall, it’s an example of the subject~predicate relation. But 
its predicate includes both a relation of modiﬁcation and a relation of comple-
mentation. Before reading further, ﬁrst identify the subject and predicate and 
then try to identify the modiﬁer~head relation and the head~complement 
relation within the predicate.
Phil is the subject and [dreads affectionate cats] is the predicate. Within the 
predicate, affectionate can be omitted (Phil dreads cats), so it must be a modiﬁer. 
It’s clearly telling us about the cats. So it’s modifying cats. Cats, then, is the 

 
SUMMARY
37
head of the phrase [affectionate cats]. Now for the relation between dreads and 
[affectionate cats]. I hope you agree that neither can be omitted. Neither *Phil 
affectionate cats nor *Phil dreads is a well-formed sentence. This shows that the 
relation between dreads and [affectionate cats] is a (two-way) head~complement 
dependency. Since heads precede their complements in English, dreads must be 
the head and [affectionate cats] the complement. There’s a more important rea-
son for thinking that dreads is the head. You now know that, as the predicate of 
the sentence, [dreads affectionate cats] is a Verb Phrase and must therefore have 
a Verb as its head. If you didn’t already know, dreads is a verb (more on this in 
Chapter 4). These functional dependencies can be represented as in [47]:
[47]
 
With this example, and throughout the chapter, I’ve aimed to show how 
constituency, function, and meaning are interrelated. Giving appropriate ana-
lyses of sentences in terms of their constituents depends on how you actually 
understand those sentences. Constructing the phrase marker of a sentence 
involves giving an explicit graphic representation of what you intuitively know 
about that sentence. The meaning of a sentence depends not just on the meaning 
of its words, but on how those words are structured into phrases, and on the 
functions of those words and phrases. If you insist that each sequence of words 
that you want to say forms a constituent has a well-deﬁned meaning and func-
tion (is a phrase), that’s a good starting point for analysis.
 Summary
Constituents have their functions in respect of their sisters.
There are three kinds of functional relation between sisters:
Subject~Predicate. The functional relation between the immediate constituents 
of sentences, Noun Phrase (NP) and Verb Phrase (VP).
It is a mutual (two-way) dependency – S and P are both obligatory.
S precedes P.
Modiﬁer~Head. This is a one-way dependency: modiﬁers depend on heads.
 
Modiﬁers are optional (omissible).
 
Some modiﬁers precede and some follow the heads they modify.
s
p
c
H
H
M
dreads
Phil
affectionate
cats

CHAPTER 2 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: FUNCTIONS
38
Head~Complement. A two-way dependency.
 
Complements are obligatory, needed to complete the meaning of the phrase.
 
The head generally precedes its complement.
Heads. The head is the obligatory centre of its phrase.
 
Every phrase has a head and no more than one head.
 
The category of the head determines the category of the phrase.
 Exercises
1. Identify the subjects and predicates of the following sentences. Remember to 
apply the question movement test in cases of uncertainty.
(a) No one has ordered my lovely prune-and-spinach fritters.
(b) Her memory for names was a constant source of amazement to him.
(c) There are too many uninvited guests here.
(d) Only two of the sky-diving team brought their parachutes.
(e) It was Lydia who ﬁnally trapped the pig.
(f) The fact that you received no birthday greetings from Mars doesn’t mean 
it is uninhabited.
(g) That evening, Laura learned the Health and Safety Regulations by heart.
2. Identify the category of the following phrases (as Noun Phrase, Verb Phrase, or 
‘other’).
(a) installed for only £199.95
(b) were being given away
(c) too far to drive in a day
(d) obsolescent washing machines
(e) ten long holidays at the Hotel Mortiﬁcation
(f) which I had bought only the day before
(g) have made me realise that ‘cheap’ does indeed mean ‘nasty’.
3. The phrase more exciting ideas is ambiguous and needs a different structural 
analysis for each of its two interpretations. Draw the phrase markers, giving a brief 
indication of which interpretation goes with which analysis.
4. Draw phrase markers for the following phrases:
(a) young car salesmen;  (b) used car salesmen.
5. The phrase the old Romanian history teacher has several different interpretations. 
Here are three structural analyses.

 
EXERCISES
39
(a) 
 
 
(b)  
(c)
 
 
 
     
(1) Which analysis corresponds with the interpretation ‘the old teacher of 
Romanian history’?
(2) Give the interpretations that correspond with the other analyses.
(3) ‘The history teacher from Old Romania’ is an unlikely interpretation. Never-
theless, it is possible to construct a phrase marker that would impose that 
interpretation on the phrase. Draw the phrase marker.
6. Decide on the functions of the bracketed constituents in the following sentences.
(a) Old Sam sunbathed [beside a stream].
(b) The [well-built] gentleman offered me a cigar.
(c) People [in running kit] are coming from all directions.
(d) People in [running kit] are coming from all directions.
 
To answer this properly, you should not only give the function of the 
constituent but also indicate in respect of what other constituent it has that 
function. As mentioned in this chapter, you’ll ﬁnd this easier if you ﬁrst make 
sure you know the general structure of each sentence (i.e. can identify the 
subject NP and the predicate VP). First decide whether the bracketed con-
stituent belongs within the subject or the predicate. Since constituents have 
their functions in respect of SISTER constituents, a constituent within the subject 
can only relate to other constituents within the subject, and a constituent 
within the predicate to other constituents within that predicate.
the 
PHRASE
old 
PHRASE
Romanian 
PHRASE
history 
teacher
PHRASE
the 
PHRASE
PHRASE 
teacher
old 
PHRASE
Romanian 
history
PHRASE
the 
PHRASE
old 
PHRASE
PHRASE 
teacher
Romanian 
history
PHRASE

CHAPTER 2 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: FUNCTIONS
40
■ Discussion of exercises
1. (a) [No one] [has ordered my lovely prune-and-spinach fritters].
(b) [Her memory for names] [was a constant source of amazement to him].
(c) [There] [are too many uninvited guests here]. As mentioned in the chapter, 
there doesn’t mention anything. Nevertheless, the question movement test 
gives a clear result: cf. Are there too many uninvited guests here?
(d) [Only two of the sky-diving team] [brought their parachutes]. If you applied 
the question movement test with this one, you would have had to 
supply a form of the verb do: Did only two of the sky-diving team bring their 
parachutes?
(e) [It] [was Lydia who ﬁnally trapped the pig]. Like there in (c) above, it is an 
empty subject, but it undergoes movement in the question (cf. Was it Lydia 
who ﬁnally trapped the pig?).
(f) [The fact that you received no birthday greetings from Mars] [doesn’t mean 
it is uninhabited].
(g) This is an example where the subject does not begin the sentence. That eve-
ning is not part of the subject. So:
 
 [Laura] [learned the Health and Safety Regulations by heart].
2. The following are the only well-formed subject~predicate combinations: (d) + (b); 
(d) + (g); (e) + (b); (e) + (g). Since they can function as subjects, (d) and (e) are 
the NPs; (b) and (g), functioning as predicates, are the VPs. (a), (c), and (f) belong 
to other categories.
3. One interpretation (a) is equivalent to that of ‘more ideas that are exciting’. The 
other (b) corresponds with ‘ideas that are more exciting’. On both interpre-
tations, the syntactic function of more is that of a modiﬁer (notice that it can be 
omitted). The difference in interpretation is a matter of whether more modiﬁes 
just exciting, as in (b) or exciting ideas (that is, ideas, which happens to be modiﬁed 
by exciting), as in (a). The two phrase markers are:
for (a)   
for (b)
 
 
 
 
4. (a) Since people (e.g. salesmen) but not things (e.g. cars) can be described as 
‘young’, young must modify a constituent that has salesmen as head. It can-
not modify car and hence doesn’t form a constituent with car. The natural 
phrase marker, then, is:
PHRASE
more
PHRASE
exciting 
ideas
PHRASE
PHRASE 
ideas
more 
exciting

 
EXERCISES
41
 
(i.e. ‘young salesmen of cars’, 
not ‘salesmen of young cars’)
(b) Things, but not people, can be used, so used must modify (and form a con-
stituent with) car, rather than any constituent having salesmen as its head.
 
 
 
(i.e. ‘salesmen of used cars’, not 
‘used salesmen of cars’)
 
5. (1) Phrase marker (c). This should be clearer after the following discussion.
(2) In diagram (a) Romanian modiﬁes a phrase (history teacher) which has teacher 
(modiﬁed by history) as its head, so it is the (history) teacher that is Romanian, 
not the history. The same goes for old: it modiﬁes a phrase (Romanian history 
teacher) which has teacher as its head. So, again, it is the teacher who is old. The 
interpretation can be expressed as ‘the old teacher of history who comes from 
Romania’. In diagram (b), Romanian is the sister, and hence the modiﬁer, of 
history. Here it’s the history that is Romanian, not the teacher. And old modiﬁes 
a phrase that has history as head, so again it‘s the (Romanian) history that is old, 
not the teacher. So the interpretation is ‘the teacher of old Romanian history’.
(3) 
 
 
6. (a)  You know the sentence is divided into subject and predicate as follows: [Old 
Sam] [sunbathed beside a stream], so beside a stream must have its function 
in respect of its sister within the predicate VP, sunbathed. We’ve already noted 
that it’s optional and that it speciﬁes something about the sunbathing, 
namely its location. So the function of beside a stream is that of modiﬁer of 
sunbathed. This is our ﬁrst example of a modiﬁer following the head.
(b) Well-built is a constituent in the structure of the subject NP the well-built 
gentleman, so it must have its function in respect of either the or gentleman. 
Well-built gentleman seems to form a unit of sense, unlike the well-built. In fact, 
PHRASE
young 
PHRASE
car
salesmen
PHRASE
PHRASE 
salesmen
used
car
PHRASE
the 
PHRASE
PHRASE
PHRASE
Old 
Romanian 
history teacher

CHAPTER 2 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: FUNCTIONS
42
the structure of this phrase is almost identical to that of their rather dubious 
jokes (also a Noun Phrase – as you may have already noticed). So the function 
of well-built is that of modiﬁer of gentleman.
(c) It should be clear that people in running kit is the subject NP. In running kit 
must therefore have its function in respect of people. It is also optional in that 
NP (people are coming from all directions is a well-formed sentence). By con-
trast, people is obligatory. So people must be the head of that NP (indeed, 
people is a Noun); in running kit is the modiﬁer of that head. This is another 
example of the modiﬁer following the head.
(d) Notice that neither in nor running kit can be omitted individually: *people run-
ning kit are coming from all directions; *people in are coming from all directions. 
This indicates that running kit is required to complete the meaning of in and 
that running kit is only present because in is. We have here the mutual depen-
dency of complementation, and – as usual in complementation – the second 
constituent (running kit) is said to complement the ﬁrst (in), which is the head. 
This is the same category of phrase as beside a stream. See the next chapter.
 Further exercises
1. For each of the following sentences, identify the subject NP and the predicate VP 
by drawing phrase markers like that in [33] on page 30. In the (two!) cases where 
the sentence is not exhaustively divisible into NP followed by VP, list the extra 
constituents separately.
(a) I am accepting your invitation.
(b) The income received from ﬁnes can’t be taken into account.
(c) Grishkin and the man in brown are in league.
(d) A gorilla swinging about in the trees above our heads interrupted this already 
lengthy story.
(e) One day will be enough for this job.
(f) One day, my boy, all this will be yours.
(g) Next Sunday or the Sunday after that would be convenient dates.
(h) Regrettably, your dancing and colourful language are frightening the guests.
(i) The existence of stars of such extreme density that not even light can escape 
them has not been doubted recently.
(j) The temptation to identify less than the whole of the relevant phrase crops 
up in all constituent analysis.
(k) No one who accepted that invitation to visit the slaughterhouse found it 
quite as enjoyable as you.
(l) A lengthy discussion about the unreliability and irrelevance of parental advice 
followed.

 
FURTHER EXERCISES
43
(m) The many meetings in Downing Street between the Prime Minister and other 
leaders involved in the crisis have failed to yield any solution acceptable to 
them or to the United Nations.
2. Below are ﬁve phrases and four phrase markers. On the basis of your understand-
ing of them, assign each phrase to the appropriate phrase marker. One of 
the phrase markers is appropriate for two of the phrases. If you have problems, 
re-read the discussion of the ‘sister’ relation in the chapter.
(1) Refurbished citrus fruit markets
(2) New central fruit markets
(3) Animals from the zoo
(4) Gas appliances from Italy
(5) Home grown vegetable sales
(a)   
(b)   
 
 
 
(c)  
(d) 
 
 
 
3. Using just ‘phrase’ and ‘word’ (as in Exercise 2 above), draw phrase markers for 
the following phrases:
(a) Students doing chemistry.
(b) Students doing chemistry in September.
(c) Students with long hair doing chemistry.
(d) Several very noisy newspaper vendors.
(e) Ten fully automatic deluxe hair driers.
4. For each sister relation in the phrase marker you have drawn for (c) in Exercise 3, 
decide whether it is a head~complement relation or a modiﬁer~head relation. In 
each case, which element is the head?
PHRASE
PHRASE 
PHRASE
word 
word word 
word
PHRASE
word
PHRASE
word 
PHRASE
word 
word
PHRASE
PHRASE
word
PHRASE 
word
word 
word
PHRASE
word 
PHRASE
PHRASE 
word
word 
word

44
I’ve explained the oddity of *two rather jokes as being due to the fact that rather 
has a function only in respect of dubious so that, if you omit dubious, rather is 
left without a function. But why is rather left without a function? In the absence 
of dubious, why can’t rather modify jokes instead? Or couldn’t we say that rather 
modiﬁes two?
In a sense, you already know the answers to these questions. You already 
know that rather just isn’t the kind – or category – of word that can modify 
(and so form a constituent with) jokes. Nor is jokes the kind of word that can be 
modiﬁed by rather. You already know that dubious differs from rather in being 
the kind of word that can modify jokes, and that dubious differs from jokes in 
being the kind of word that can be modiﬁed by rather.
It’s a brute fact about the way speakers understand their language that they 
recognise several different categories of word. In doing so, they recognise that 
each word has a restricted range of possible functions and that there are restric-
tions on how words can combine to form phrases. In illustration of the fact that 
you yourself do this, try the following exercise. Decide which of the following 
words belongs to the same category as rather, which to the same category as 
dubious, and which to the same category as jokes. One of the words is of a 
category distinct from all three.
plans, extremely, could, clever
Consider the following strings (noting the ungrammaticality asterisks):
 
[1a] two plans 
[2a] *two extremely
 
[1b] two dubious plans 
[2b] *two dubious extremely
 
[1c] *two rather plans 
[2c] *two extremely jokes
 
[1d] *two plans dubious jokes 
[2d] two extremely dubious jokes
 
[1e] *two rather plans jokes 
[2e] *two rather extremely jokes
The strings in [1] show that plans has the same distribution as jokes. In 
other words, plans has the same range of functions, can combine with the 
same other elements, and can occupy the same positions as jokes. Like jokes, it 
3
Sentence structure
Categories

 
NOUNS
45
can be modiﬁed by two [1a] and by dubious [1b]. Like jokes, plans can’t be 
modiﬁed by rather [1c]. [1d] and [1e] show that plans can’t occupy the positions 
or assume the same functions as either rather [1d] or dubious [1c]. In short, 
plans and jokes belong to the same category, which is probably the decision you 
came to by intuition.
Now check list [2], making a note of what each string tells you about 
extremely.
In contrast to jokes and plans, extremely can’t be modiﬁed by either two [2a] or 
dubious [2b]. And, in contrast to dubious, extremely can neither modify jokes [2c], 
nor be modiﬁed by rather [2e]. Extremely has all this in common with rather. 
More positively, in common with rather, when it appears in a position in which 
it can be interpreted as modifying dubious [2d], it’s acceptable. So extremely 
and rather have the same distribution and belong to the same category. 
They both specify the degree of the dubiousness of the jokes.
The same considerations would lead you to assign clever to the same category 
as dubious. They both specify some characteristic of the jokes/plans. The odd one 
out is could. Every attempt to incorporate could into the structure of the phrase 
results in an ill-formed string, so it must belong to yet another category.
I’ve mentioned only categories of single words. These are called lexical 
categories. ‘Noun’ is one lexical category. But you know from Chapter 2 
that phrases have categories too. These are phrasal categories (e.g. ‘Noun 
Phrase’). Notice that, since two rather dubious jokes is a well-formed phrase, 
and since rather and extremely, dubious and clever, and jokes and plans belong 
to the same categories, it’s predictable that two extremely clever plans is a 
well-formed phrase as well. It’s also predictable that the two phrases belong 
to the same phrasal category, and have the same internal structure. As at the 
word level, this allows us to predict that, as whole phrases, they have the same 
distribution – they can occupy the same positions in sentence structure and 
have the same range of functions.
Instead of talking about individual words and phrases, then, we need to 
make more general statements about what does and what does not constitute 
a well-formed expression in terms of the categories involved. So, ﬁrst of all, 
we need to name these categories. In the rest of this chapter, I’ll introduce some 
lexical categories by name and give hints on how to identify their members.
Nouns
It’s best to start with a very traditional deﬁnition of what a noun is: a noun is 
the name of a person, place, or thing. There are problems with this traditional 
deﬁnition. For example, ‘thing’ has to be interpreted very broadly, to include 

CHAPTER 3 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: CATEGORIES
46
substances like butter and foam (since butter and foam are nouns), abstract con-
cepts like honesty and multiplication (since honesty and multiplication are nouns), 
collections of things like federations, crowds, and cutlery, and phenomena like 
gravity and time (for the same reason). Suspicions, accidents, refusals, and facts 
aren’t obviously things, yet suspicion, accident, refusal, and fact are all nouns. On 
the other hand, while behind and ahead might be said to stand for places, they 
are not normally taken to be nouns. Nevertheless the traditional deﬁnition is 
useful as a starting point. Here are some further examples of nouns:
January, Frankenstein, Bugsy, Jessica, Java, Portsmouth, gorilla, university, jam, theory, 
inspector, nationalisation, gremlin, joke, tactic, gallon, furniture, year, couple.
You might ask why I so conﬁdently insist that suspicion, honesty, and January 
are nouns when suspicions, honesty, and January are not strictly either people, 
places, or things. In answer to this, you need to remember what the point 
of categorising words was in the ﬁrst place. By assigning a word to a particular 
category, we make a general statement about its distribution – i.e. about its 
possible syntactic positions and functions. Honesty, suspicions, and January 
are nouns because they occupy the same range of positions and have the 
same range of functions – i.e. have the same distribution – as other words that 
obviously are nouns by the traditional deﬁnition. In the ﬁnal analysis, then, it’s 
distribution that decides the matter. So I’ll supplement the traditional account 
of nouns with some distributional clues to their identiﬁcation.
In addition, every category of words has its own range of possible word 
forms (its morphological possibilities). Nouns are no exception. This too 
can be useful in identifying nouns.
One morphological identifying feature of all nouns is that they have a 
genitive (or possessive) form. For example, Bill’s (as in Bill’s pancakes or 
those are Bill’s), mud’s (as in the mud’s consistency), and joke’s (as in the joke’s 
punch line).
Other features are shared by some nouns and not by others. In other words, 
there are several sub-categories of the noun category. I’ll mention four sub-
categories of noun: proper vs. common and count vs. mass.
proper nouns are names, spelt with an initial capital. Examples from the above 
list are: January, Frankenstein, Bugsy, Jessica, Java, Portsmouth. These generally 
constitute Noun Phrases in their own right.
All other nouns are common nouns. What follows normally applies only to 
common nouns.
All common nouns can combine with the word the (the deﬁnite article) to 
form a Noun Phrase (e.g. the accident, the mud, the cutlery). In any two-word 
phrase (w1 + w2) of the form [the + w2], w2 will always be a Noun (N).

 
NOUNS
47
In addition, common nouns that refer to things that can be counted – count 
nouns –
(a) can combine with a/an (the indeﬁnite article) to form a Noun Phrase 
(e.g. a stream, an accident). In all two-word phrases of the form [a/an + w], 
w will always be a Noun.
(b) can combine with numerals (one, two, three . . . ) to form a Noun Phrase, 
and with expressions like several, many, etc..
(c) can be marked for plural. The regular marking for plural is the sufﬁx -s 
(singular nouns lack this sufﬁx). But there are several irregular plural 
markers:
 
singular 
plural
 
accident, 
accidents,
 
man, foot, analysis, sheep. 
men, feet, analyses, sheep.
mass nouns refer to ‘things’ that cannot be counted (so they are sometimes 
called non-count nouns). Examples are butter, foam, cutlery, furniture, honesty, 
grace. Mass nouns don’t normally display any of the above possibilities. They 
can’t normally appear in a plural form (*foams, *butters, *honesties). Nor can 
they normally follow a/an (*a foam, *a butter, *a furniture), numerals or similar 
expressions (*one foam, *nine furnitures). But they do follow some (some foam, 
some furniture). In a two-word phrase of the form [some + w], w will be a 
noun. Also, they combine with the.
The above remarks have been qualiﬁed by ‘normally’ because it is often 
possible to turn a mass noun into a count noun precisely by preceding it 
with a/an, or a numeral, and/or giving it a plural form. This usually involves a 
change of meaning: a mud, two butters (a kind of mud, two kinds of butter); 
a beer, three beers (a kind of beer, or a drink of beer). (See also with an honesty 
that surprised me.)
Many nouns are both mass and count. For example, theory can stand alone 
or with some (cf. we need to do some theory) as a mass noun, but it can also be 
preceded by a and by numerals and be plural as a count noun (a theory, theories, 
three theories). Other examples are suspicion, egg, cake, and charity.
Proper nouns, because they anyway stand for single, identiﬁable individuals, 
do not normally have any modiﬁers at all or appear in a plural form. However, in 
special circumstances, even they can be modiﬁed by the or a and appear in a 
plural form: the Ewings (= the Ewing family), the Murray of Wimbledon fame, 
the Einsteins of this world, a pensive Holmes. Here they are treated as if they were 
common nouns.
Now identify all the nouns in the following passage. The list is given in the 
footnote to the passage.

CHAPTER 3 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: CATEGORIES
48
As Max and Adrian were talking, the daylight was fading from the West. Clouds were 
gathering and there was a chill in the air. They decided to end their conversation. 
Lights were shining from a passing steamer. Pessimistic thoughts ﬁlled the minds of 
both men, but Adrian pushed them aside as being merely the result of his tiredness. 
Besides, he had sand in his shoes.1
If you included they, them, and he on the grounds that they stood for persons 
and things, that’s reasonable. They are pronouns. pronouns are used to stand 
in place of complete Noun Phrases (NPs). In the above passage, they stands for 
Max and Adrian, them stands for pessimistic thoughts, and he for Adrian. As you 
saw in Chapter 1, substituting single words like these is an important test for 
whether a sequence of words constitutes a phrase or not. In substituting a 
pronoun, we test more speciﬁcally whether the phrase is an NP.
Here are some further examples of pronouns:
deﬁnite pronouns: she/her, it, I/me, we/us, you, they/them
reﬂexive (deﬁnite) pronouns: myself, itself, ourselves, etc.
indeﬁnite pronouns: something, someone, anything, anyone
demonstrative pronouns: this, that, these, those
interrogative (question) pronouns: who, which, what
possessive pronouns: mine, yours, his, hers, ours, theirs.
Lexical and phrasal categories (noun and 
Noun Phrase)
Before introducing further lexical categories, I will look at the relation between 
lexical and phrasal categories, using nouns and Noun Phrases as an example. 
In Chapter 2 we saw that an NP is a phrase that contains, and is centred on, a 
noun. Two rather dubious jokes is an NP and it contains the noun jokes. But 
it contains words of other categories as well. Why does the phrase as a whole 
have to be of the same category as jokes? Why can’t it be of the same category as 
two or rather or dubious? The answer crucially involves the notion of head 
introduced in Chapter 2. Let’s revise this brieﬂy.
In Chapter 2 I showed how rather modiﬁed dubious, rather dubious modiﬁed 
jokes, and two modiﬁed rather dubious jokes. At every level of structure in the 
phrase, it’s jokes that functions as head. It is the category of the head word that 
determines the category of the phrase as a whole. The other words are present 
only because of the function they (directly or indirectly) have in respect of the 
1 The nouns are: Max, Adrian, daylight, West, clouds, chill, air, conversation, lights, steamer, thoughts, 
minds, men, Adrian, result, tiredness, sand, shoes.

 
LEXICAL AND PHRASAL CATEGORIES (NOUN AND NOUN PHRASE) 
49
head noun. So, you can think of two rather dubious jokes and two extremely clever 
plans as expansions of jokes and plans respectively.
It is the head noun that determines the number (singular or plural) and the 
gender (masculine, feminine, or neutral) of the Noun Phrase as a whole. This 
can be seen by considering what pronoun could be used to replace the NP in a 
sentence:
 [3] two extremely clever plans – they, them
 [4] an extremely clever plan – it
 [5] an extremely clever actress – she, her
 [6] an extremely clever actor – he, him.
Plans, to take just the ﬁrst example, is the plural head noun. So the NP as a 
whole is plural, as indicated by the fact that it could only be replaced by the 
plural pronouns they or them.
Before I comment further on the relation between NP and N, here is a phrase 
marker of two extremely clever plans, in which I have ﬁlled in all the information 
about categories introduced so far:
 [7] 
 
For the topmost node, I’ve categorised PHRASE-a as a Noun Phrase (NP). In 
order to say that plans is a noun, I’ve introduced an extra node, immediately 
dominating plans, which I’ve labelled N.
Noun Phrases, of course, may contain more than one noun. But (with one 
exception to be discussed in a moment) only one noun in a Noun Phrase can 
function as its head. In each of the following sentences, ﬁrst identify the subject 
NP and then all the nouns contained in those subject NPs, indicating which is 
the head noun.
 [8] The man devouring the plums is grinning broadly.
 [9] The comedy actress John met in the foyer seemed excited.
In [8] the subject NP is the man devouring the plums. It contains two nouns, man 
and plums, but it is clear that man is the head noun. The appropriate pronoun to 
replace the whole Noun Phrase would be he – a singular masculine pronoun 
– which is consistent with the number and gender of man but not with the 
number and gender of plums. In [9] the subject NP is the comedy actress John met 
NP
two 
PHRASE-b
PHRASE-c 
N
extremely 
clever 
plans

CHAPTER 3 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: CATEGORIES
50
in the foyer. It contains the nouns comedy, actress, John, foyer. The appropriate 
pronoun is she, a feminine pronoun consistent only with the gender of actress. 
Actress is therefore the head noun.
As the discussion of these examples implies, it is the head noun that deter-
mines what sort of thing or person the whole NP refers to. The subject NP of 
[8] refers to a man – it is a man (not plums!) that’s doing the grinning. In [9] 
the NP refers to an actress – it’s an actress who seemed excited (not John, or 
comedy, or the foyer).
I’ve mentioned that, in an NP, constituents that modify the head noun are 
typically optional – they can be omitted without affecting the well-formedness 
of either the NP itself or the sentence in which it appears:
[10] Two extremely clever plans confused me.
[11] Two plans confused me.
[12] Plans confuse me.
The question that I want to raise here concerns sentence [12]. On the one hand, 
I have said that plans is a noun. On the other hand, I’ve said that, wherever 
possible, sentences should be analysed into a two-part, NP + VP, structure. 
Clearly, the VP is confuse me. But this suggests that plans is the NP – i.e. a 
full Noun Phrase. In [12] then, is plans just a noun, or is it a full Noun Phrase? 
There might seem to be a conﬂict here. The same apparent conﬂict crops up 
with proper nouns, which generally don’t appear with modiﬁers, as in [13]:
[13] Max confuses me.
In [13], is Max just a noun or is it a full NP? Think about this question before 
reading further. Can you think of any way of resolving the conﬂict?
As suggested, the conﬂict is only apparent. We don’t have to choose between 
these alternatives. Max in [13] – and plans in [12] – is both a Noun and a full 
NP. In saying this, I’m allowing that a Noun Phrase can consist simply of a head 
noun. If we say that an NP consists of a (head) noun plus its modiﬁers, and if 
modiﬁers are typically optional, it follows automatically that NPs can consist 
just of a head Noun.
As regards proper nouns – i.e. names (e.g. Max) – these do not, as names, 
admit of any modiﬁcation. They are full NPs in their right. So I shall represent 
names as in [14]
[14] 
 
NP
name
Max

 
LEXICAL AND PHRASAL CATEGORIES (NOUN AND NOUN PHRASE) 
51
Some further remarks may help to clarify this point. I’ve mentioned that 
pronouns stand in place of full NPs. Just as we can replace the subject NPs 
of [10] and [11] by they, so we can replace the subject NPs of [12] and [13] by 
pronouns (they and he respectively). On the other hand, if you try replacing a 
simple noun (as opposed to a full NP) with a pronoun, you’ll get very odd 
results. Consider again
[15] [The ducks] are paddling away.
The ducks is an NP and it contains the noun ducks. Only the whole NP can be 
replaced by a pronoun (as in [16]), not the simple noun ducks (see [17]):
[16] They are paddling away.
[17] *The they are paddling away.
This clearly shows that simple nouns as such cannot be replaced by a pronoun. 
Since plans in [12] and Max in [13] can be replaced by pronouns, they must be 
analysed as being full NPs as well as simple nouns.
In [16] we see that the pronoun they has assumed the position and function 
of a full NP. So they is itself an example of a one-word NP. They is a pronoun 
and pronouns are in themselves complete NPs. In terms of a phrase marker it 
would be represented as in [18].
[18] 
 
(The subject NP of [12] – plans – is neither a name nor a pronoun, so it will 
receive a different treatment, for reasons explained in Chapter 7.)
Now decide whether plans in [10] – Two extremely clever plans confused me – 
is a full NP or not.
By the pronoun test, it’s not a full NP: *Two extremely clever they confused me 
is ungrammatical. An NP consists of a simple noun and its modiﬁers. Two and 
extremely clever are the modiﬁers and plans is the (simple) noun within the NP.
The discussion illustrates the close relation between the function of subject 
and the phrasal category of NP. In [12] and [13] plans and Max are functioning 
as subjects. They therefore count as full NPs in those sentences. But in Two plans 
confused me, it is the whole phrase (two plans) that’s functioning as the subject, 
not the simple noun plans itself; plans there is just a constituent (albeit the 
central constituent) of the phrase functioning as subject.
So, more generally, when single words have the functions that full phrases 
have, we need to treat them as full phrases of the appropriate category. In fact, 
pronoun
they
NP

CHAPTER 3 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: CATEGORIES
52
I opened Chapter 2 by discussing a sentence that consisted of two one-word 
phrases, namely Ducks paddle, where ducks is a simple noun that counts also 
as the subject NP, and paddle is a verb that counts as a VP. The simple verb 
paddle counts as a full VP in that sentence because it functions, by itself, as 
a complete predicate.
The idea of one-word phrases sometimes causes difﬁculty because words 
are traditionally contrasted with phrases. After all, words are just words, but 
phrases are sequences, or strings, of words. However, in this context at least, it 
is necessary to understand ‘word-sequence/string’ as meaning ‘a sequence/string 
of one or more words’.
Adjectives and adverbs
Dubious and clever are adjectives. Any word that has the same distribution as those 
words is an adjective. Many adjectives have characteristic endings, such as -able, 
-al, -ate, -ful, -ic, -ing, -ish, -ive, -less, -ous, -y. Examples are:
capable, economical, Italianate, beautiful, microscopic, surprising, priggish, inventive, 
hopeless, eponymous, ﬂuffy.
There are other adjectival endings, and the endings given are only typical of 
adjectives, not an infallible guide. The more common adjectives tend not to 
have characteristic endings (e.g. nice, old, hot, dull, short, tight, full, long, quick) 
and this goes for the colour adjectives (blue, yellow, etc.).
Many adjectives have the morphological possibility of taking a comparative 
(-er) and a superlative (-est) sufﬁx, as in newer and newest, subtler and subtlest. 
Others do not (cf. *beautifuller/*beautifullest, *dubiouser/*dubiousest) but instead 
may be modiﬁed by the comparative and superlative degree adverbs more and 
most, less and least. Yet other adjectives have irregular comparative and superlative 
forms (good, better, best – bad, worse, worst).
I’ve just mentioned the comparative and superlative degree adverbs more and 
most, less and least. The main function of degree adverbs is to modify adjectives 
(specifying the degree of the attribute expressed by the adjective), so this seems 
the appropriate place to mention degree adverbs as a category. They are words 
having the same distribution as rather and extremely, for example:
very, quite, so, too, slightly, hardly, highly, moderately, completely, increasingly, incredibly, 
somewhat, etc.
Adjectives that accept the -er/-est inﬂection or modiﬁcation by degree adverbs 
are called gradable adjectives. Unfortunately for the purposes of identifying 
adjectives, not all adjectives are gradable. non-gradable adjectives do not 
accept the -er/-est inﬂection, or modiﬁcation by degree adverb. Here are some 
examples of non-gradable adjectives:

 
ADJECTIVE PHRASES AND ADVERB PHRASES
53
atomic, dead, potential, right, main, consummate, medical, fatal, ﬁnal, second, third, 
supreme, unique.
Note the oddity of the following: *dead, *deadest, *more dead, *very dead, *rather 
dead, *too dead, *somewhat dead.
All those are impossible when dead is used literally. However, used metaphoric-
ally (e.g. to describe a sad and deserted night club), dead is gradable.
As I introduce further categories in later chapters, we’ll encounter words 
which are adjectives but less obviously so. With these introductory remarks I 
have restricted myself to the clear cases.
Now, bearing in mind that adjectives have a variety of functions (not only the 
illustrated function of modifying nouns), identify the adjectives in the following 
passage. There are a few degree adverbs too. Make a note of them. And, if you 
want more practice, identify the nouns, too. The lists are given in the footnote.
The great architectural interest of the royal palace didn’t strike William at that precise 
moment, grotesque and ﬂamboyant though it was. He had eyes only for Millie’s 
gorgeous purple hair. Could it be artiﬁcial? It was difﬁcult to believe she was so edgy 
as to have dyed it such a fantastic hue. She seemed too modest and shy for that. In 
silent admiration, he decided it was entirely natural.2
Adjective Phrases and Adverb Phrases
Rather dubious, extremely clever, and too modest are Adjective Phrases. As with the 
NP, the phrase is of the same category as its head word; Adjective Phrases (AP) 
are centred on adjectives (A). And, like NPs, an AP can consist of an unmodiﬁed 
head, a simple adjective.
For example, in Aldo’s quite delicious pizzas the AP, quite delicious, functions 
as the modiﬁer of pizzas and delicious is the adjective functioning as the head 
of the AP. On the other hand, in Luigi’s inedible pizzas, the simple adjective 
functions both as the head and – in itself – as the complete modiﬁer of pizzas, 
so it counts as a full AP as well as an A. In phrase markers I shall simply employ 
the label ‘degree’ (shortened to ‘deg’) for the degree adverb.
You should now be able to draw the phrase marker for very energetic, using 
all the appropriate category labels. It’s given as phrase marker (a) at the end of 
this chapter.
2 Adjectives: great, architectural, royal, precise, grotesque, ﬂamboyant, gorgeous, purple, artiﬁcial, difﬁcult, 
edgy, fantastic, modest, shy, silent, natural.
Degree adverbs: so, too, entirely.
Nouns: interest, palace, William, moment, eyes, Millie, hair, hue, admiration.

CHAPTER 3 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: CATEGORIES
54
Other constituents can appear in adjective phrases. I’ll mention here only the 
general adverbs. Examples are:
frankly, potentially, oddly, enthusiastically, immediately, suspiciously, awkwardly, 
theoretically.
As these examples illustrate, the vast majority of general adverbs (and, you’ll 
have noted, some of the degree adverbs) are formed from adjectives by the 
addition of -ly, and so are easily identiﬁed.
Like degree adverbs, general adverbs can modify adjectives within Adjective 
Phrases (though general adverbs do have other functions as well): theoretically 
untenable, oddly inconclusive, diabolically tinted, immediately recognisable.
General adverbs differ from degree adverbs in specifying a much wider range 
of concepts than just degree. Furthermore, general adverbs can themselves be 
modiﬁed by degree adverbs, to form adverb phrases (AdvPs) – for example, 
very oddly, quite frankly. Since modiﬁcation of a general adverb by a degree 
adverb is optional, an AdvP can consist of just a simple (general) adverb.
By way of a summary, I’ll give an analysis of more obviously artiﬁcial. As you 
read this paragraph, construct a labelled phrase marker of the phrase, starting at 
the top. First, it’s an adjective phrase (AP). Its immediate constituents are the 
(head) adjective (A) artiﬁcial and the (pre-modifying) adverb phrase (AdvP) 
more obviously. The AdvP in turn consists of the (head) adverb (Adv) obviously 
and the (pre-modifying) degree adverb (deg) more. The phrase marker is given 
as (b) at the end of the chapter.
Prepositions and Prepositional Phrases
Recall the discussion of beside a stream. Beside is a preposition (P) and it’s the 
head of the phrase. So the phrase as a whole is a prepositional phrase (PP). 
Now, a stream (NP), we decided in the last chapter, is functioning as comple-
ment to that head. Within a PP, the relation between a preposition and the 
following Noun Phrase is a head~complement relation.
Prepositions are generally short words that express relations, often locational 
relations in space or time. Other examples are: to, at, from, with, towards, in, off, 
by, up, down, since, before, after, during, until, like. Prepositions don’t always 
express locational concepts, though: in an accident, in a blue coat, off work, 
under pressure, at great speed, on the make, like a maniac. The most commonly 
used preposition in the English language – of – does not express a location (in 
fact, if you think about it, it’s remarkably difﬁcult to say what of does express).
I’ll consider just two basic forms of PP: (a) PPs in which the preposition (P) 
is complemented by an NP (e.g. beside a stream and to Max) and (b) PPs 

 
CO-ORDINATE PHRASES
55
consisting of just a P. Notice we can replace the PP beside a stream with the single 
words there, or here (or where). And we could replace the PP to her friends in 
She gave them to her friends with away (She gave them away). Since these words 
(and several other words with a-, for example aside, aboard, abroad, along) 
replace PPs, they must be prepositions. They are prepositions that count as 
Prepositional Phrases in their own right – they don’t need a complement NP 
to express a location. The same goes for upstairs and downstairs and for words 
ending in -wards: onwards, upwards, downwards etc.
Those single-word PPs express a spatial location. There are other single-word 
PPs that express temporal locations. For example the temporal PPs in those days 
and at the moment can be replaced by the single words then, now (or when). 
So, again, these must be prepositions that count as PPs in their own right.3
The two forms of PP considered here, then, are:
[19a] 
 
[19b]     
Co-ordinate Phrases
I’ve now introduced four main lexical categories, nouns, adjectives, adverbs 
(general and degree), and prepositions, and taken a brief look at the phrasal 
categories associated with them. I’ll end this chapter with one very general point 
about categories and constituency.
Discussing nouns and Noun Phrases, I mentioned that, in an NP, only one 
noun can be head of the phrase. There’s an important exception to this, illus-
trated in the following examples.
[20a] [Max and Adrian] are being melodramatic.
[20b] [The clowns and the acrobats] refused to co-operate.
I’ve bracketed the subject NPs of these sentences. Each subject NP contains 
two nouns (in italics). Do you agree that, in each of these cases, it’s difﬁcult to 
pick just one of those nouns as the head of the subject NP, excluding the other? 
In [20a] neither Max nor Adrian seems more central than the other. It is not 
just Max, nor just Adrian, who’s being melodramatic, both are. The same goes 
for the clowns and the acrobats in [20b].
3 It is only fair to warn you that more traditional grammars often categorise such single-word PPs 
as adverbs.
pp
p
There/now
PP
P
NP
beside
a stream

CHAPTER 3 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: CATEGORIES
56
In such cases, if any noun is head of the NP, then both nouns must be. In 
phrases such as these, we must allow that NPs can have more than one head. Both 
Max and Adrian are the noun heads of the NP Max and Adrian. Such phrases 
are called co-ordinate phrases. Max and Adrian is a co-ordinate noun 
phrase, with Max and Adrian co-ordinated by and. Co-ordinate NPs have as 
many heads as there are nouns co-ordinated in them. Other co-ordinators 
are but and or.
In view of what’s been said so far, you might feel inclined to say that Max 
and Adrian isn’t a single subject but is a sequence of two separate subjects. 
The weight of evidence is against this view. Can you think of any arguments 
against it?
In the ﬁrst place, we have already identiﬁed Max and Adrian as a single con-
stituent in saying that it functions as the subject of its sentence. You can check 
for yourself that it is that complete phrase (rather than any sub-part of it) 
that changes position in the question (remember the Chapter 1 example with 
Elizabeth and Leicester). Also, we can use who to replace the whole co-ordinate 
phrase, and answer the resulting question with it:
[21] Q: Who are being melodramatic? A: Max and Adrian.
[22] Q: Who refused to co-operate? A: The clowns and the acrobats.
Furthermore, those co-ordinate NPs can be replaced by they:
[23] They are being melodramatic.
[24] They refused to co-operate.
As you may have noticed, with co-ordinate NPs it is usual to ﬁnd that the 
NP as a whole is plural regardless of whether the heads are singular or plural. 
Hence, although Max and Adrian are individually singular, the NP as a whole 
needs to be replaced by the plural pronoun they.
What, then, is the structure of these phrases? Ask yourself ﬁrst whether the 
subject NP of [20b] consists directly of the nouns it contains (plus and), or 
whether you can identify any intermediate constituents. If you can, what are 
their categories?
It should have been a simple matter to identify both the clowns and the 
acrobats as constituent phrases in [20b]. But note: they are NPs themselves. This 
can be demonstrated by showing that, even within the co-ordinate NP, they can 
themselves be replaced by pronouns (though generally only in context) as in 
[25] and [26]:
[25] They and the acrobats refused to co-operate.
[26] The clowns and they refused to co-operate.

 
CO-ORDINATE PHRASES
57
The same goes for Max and Adrian in [Max and Adrian]. As names, they are 
each full NPs in their own right. Each is replaceable by a pronoun that can only 
replace a full NP. [27] and [28] are both well-formed:
[27] He and Adrian are being melodramatic.
[28] Max and he are being melodramatic.
In short, the subject NPs of [20a] and [20b] are co-ordinations of NPs. The 
whole co-ordinate phrase and the elements that are co-ordinated in them have 
the same distribution and so are of the same category. They can be represented 
as in [29] and [30]:
[29]    
[30] 
 
  
 
     
There’s a general point here, which I’ll approach by ﬁrst asking you to judge 
which of the following strings are well-formed phrases and which not.
[31] Max and quickly
[32] the acrobats and quite incomprehensible
[33] the actress that John met in the foyer and the acrobats
[34] in the foundations and under the rafters
[35] obviously intelligent and to Newcastle
[36] moderately cheap and extremely nasty
[37] rather and inconsistent
For the purposes of this exercise, let’s assume we agree in our judgements: 
[33], [34], and [36] are well-formed; [31], [32], [35], and [37] are ill-formed. 
Can you suggest a general explanation for the ungrammaticality of the last lot 
of examples?
Let’s approach this by ﬁrst looking at the well-formed phrases. Take [33]. 
What category of phrase is it, and how do you know?
[33] passes all the tests for NP. In the light of the above discussion, one could 
reliably guess it’s an NP since it is a co-ordination of phrases that have already 
been identiﬁed as NPs. Now identify the category of phrases that are co-ordinated 
in [34] and [36] and make a (reliable!) guess as to the category of the phrases as 
a whole.
NP
NP
and
name
name
Max
Adrian
NP
and
NP
the downs
the acrobats
NP
NP

CHAPTER 3 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: CATEGORIES
58
In the foundations and under the rafters are both PPs. You won’t (I hope) be 
surprised to hear that [34] is itself a PP. In the foundations has the same distribu-
tion as in the foundations and under the rafters – wherever one could appear so 
could the other – so they must belong to the same category. In [36] moderately 
cheap and extremely nasty are both APs. Not surprisingly, [36] is an AP.
Now identify the phrases that have been co-ordinated in the ill-formed 
examples. On the basis of that, try to decide the category of the whole expression. 
The difﬁculty you’ll experience in trying to do this provides the explanation for 
their oddity. Try to formulate in your mind what the problem is.
[31] is a co-ordination of a Noun Phrase and an Adverb Phrase. How do we decide 
what category the whole co-ordination should belong to? Answer: we can’t. Both 
phrases are heads of the co-ordinate phrase, but their categories conﬂict. In [32] 
a Noun Phrase and an Adjective Phrase have been co-ordinated and we have 
the same problem. In [35] it is an Adjective Phrase and a Prepositional Phrase, 
in [37] a Degree Adverb and an Adjective Phrase. And again, there is no way of 
deciding what the category of the whole string is.
To sum up, any constituent, of any category, can consist of a co-ordination 
of constituents of the same category. It follows that only constituents of the 
same category can be co-ordinated.
This very general principle has provided an often-used test in language 
study. It has been used as a test of two things, (a) constituency and (b) category. 
As regards (a), notice that the general principle allows only constituents to be 
co-ordinated. So if you can co-ordinate a string of words with another string of 
words, this indicates that each of those strings is a phrase. As regards (b), if you 
know the category of one of those strings of words, you know that the other 
string of words must be of the same category, since only identical categories can 
be co-ordinated.
I’ve illustrated this general principle only with co-ordinations of phrasal 
categories. But the principle holds for all categories, including lexical categories 
and sentences themselves. Compare [38] and [39]:
[38] Stuffy and too hot.
[39] Too hot and stuffy.
Both are APs. [38] is a co-ordination of two APs, the ﬁrst of which is a simple A. 
The most likely interpretation of [39], on the other hand, is that it means the 
same as too hot and too stuffy. In this case, the modiﬁer of hot is shared by 
stuffy, so that too modiﬁes not just hot but the whole phrase hot and stuffy. 
Hot and stuffy, therefore, are each simple adjectives, and too must be analysed 
as modifying a co-ordinate adjective. So, as with many other APs discussed, 
this AP consists of a degree adverb and a (co-ordinate) adjective, as shown in 
[40b]:

 
CO-ORDINATE PHRASES
59
[40a]  
[40b]
 
 
Up and down the staircase is a Prepositional Phrase (PP). It contains a 
co-ordination of prepositions (Ps). Draw the phrase marker for the whole PP 
(using a triangle for the NP).
Now draw the phrase marker for the PP in the foundations and under the rafters.
As noted, those phrases are both PPs, but the ﬁrst contains a lexical co-
ordination (with the staircase complementing a co-ordination of Ps) while the 
second is a phrasal co-ordination (of PPs):
[41a]  
 
[41b]
 
The important thing to note about all these co-ordinations is that the mother 
and the sisters of the co-ordinator (and in this case) all have the same category 
label.
In these ﬁrst three chapters, I’ve discussed constituency, function and category, 
and how these concepts relate to each other. I can show how the points made 
about constituency and category in connection with co-ordination can be looked 
at in terms of function.
Co-ordinations of different categories are ill-formed because they could have 
no coherent function. Consider again [31] – Max and quickly – the co-ordination 
AP
AP
AP 
and 
AP
A 
DEG 
A
stuffy 
too 
hot
DEG 
A
too 
A 
and 
A
hot 
stuffy
PP
P 
NP
P 
and 
P
the staircase
up 
down
PP
PP
and
PP
P 
NP
P 
NP
in the foundations
under 
the rafters

CHAPTER 3 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: CATEGORIES
60
of an NP and an AdvP. Both the NP and the AdvP, remember, are heads. 
Attempting to make the whole co-ordinate phrase function in the way that an 
NP does, while all right as far as Max is concerned, involves making the AdvP 
function like an NP. But if the AdvP could function like an NP, it would be 
an NP, not an AdvP. And if we try to make the whole phrase function like an 
AdvP, the same problem arises in respect of the NP. So the phrase as a whole 
is without any possible function.
In fact, it may well be that this lack of any possible function will turn out 
to be more important than the mixing of categories: for when the different 
categories can function in the same way it is sometimes possible to co-ordinate 
them. An example of this is (He was) in trouble and very worried, which is a 
co-ordination of PP and AP. Consider also (He’s) a city trader and very wealthy. 
Such examples are awkward for linguistic analysis and are the subject of some 
debate: it’s not clear how we should label the phrase a whole. For that reason, 
in this book I won’t be troubling you further with examples like it.
Finally, an important general point. We have seen that PHRASAL 
CATEGORIES (NP, VP, AP, PP, and AdvP) have a variety of functions: subject, 
predicate, modifier or complement. But LEXICAL CATEGORIES (N, V, A, P, and 
Adv) have only one function – they always function as HEAD of the appropriate 
phrasal category. This means that, in any phrase marker, LEXICAL categories 
must always be dominated by a node bearing the appropriate PHRASAL category 
label (even if those phrases contain nothing in addition to the head).
■ Diagrams for in-text exercises
(a)  
(b)
 
 
 Exercises
1. Identify the following lexical categories in the passage below: (a) nouns, (b) adjec-
tives, (c) degree adverbs, (d) general adverbs, and (e) prepositions.
On the court, she openly displayed a perfectly outrageous cheek towards ofﬁcials 
recently appointed by the club. At home, on the other hand, she was an incredibly 
warm and loving human being, full of sensitivity for people’s feelings.
AP
DEG 
A
very 
energetic
AP
AdvP
A
DEG 
Adv 
artificial
more obviously

 
EXERCISES
61
2. We’ve now identiﬁed two functions of Noun Phrases: subject, and complement 
to a preposition. There are other functions. Bearing this in mind, identify the NPs 
in the ﬁrst sentence of the above passage. Remember to identify ﬁrst the largest 
NPs and only then any NPs that may be contained within them. Then identify the 
head noun of each NP. Which NP is functioning as subject of that ﬁrst sentence? 
Which NPs are functioning as the complement to a preposition? Is there an NP 
functioning in some other way?
3. Draw phrase markers for the following expressions. In some cases, you’ll ﬁnd that 
you don’t have all the information necessary to give a complete analysis. Where 
this is so (and only where this is so!), follow the example of the preceding chapters 
– use triangles.
(a) for you and Pete
(b) rather nervous but very excited
(c) slowly and very carefully
(d) Fernandez drank brandy and smoked cheroots.
(e) Herbert struck the board and I had to mend it.
(f) Now and in the future.
4. In this chapter, we’ve seen that adjectives can be modiﬁed by degree adverbs 
(forming an AP). Now, it’s possible for an AP to contain sequences of degree 
adverbs.
(a) so very touchy
(b) so completely stupid
(c) very very odd
 
Suggest an analysis for these APs. If you need a hint here, it comes in two parts: 
(1) all of (a), (b) and (c) are APs and (2) notice that very touchy, completely stupid 
and very odd are also APs.
■ Discussion of exercises
1. NOUNS: court, cheek, ofﬁcials, club, home, hand, being, sensitivity, people, feelings
 
ADJECTIVES: outrageous, other, warm, loving, human, full
 
DEGREE ADVERBS: perfectly, incredibly
 
GENERAL ADVERBS: openly, recently
 
PREPOSITIONS: on, towards, by, at, on, of, for
2. NPs: (a) the court (b) she (c) a perfectly outrageous cheek (d) ofﬁcials recently 
appointed by the club (e) the club. You may have missed she: it’s a pronoun having 
one of the functions of full NPs (subject).

CHAPTER 3 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: CATEGORIES
62
 
HEADS: (a) court (b) she (c) cheek (d) ofﬁcials (e) club.
 
FUNCTIONS: the court is functioning as complement of the preposition on. She 
is functioning as the subject. A perfectly outrageous cheek has a function other 
than subject or complement to a preposition. Ofﬁcials appointed by the club 
is complement to the preposition towards. The club is complement to the pre-
position by.
3. (a) 
 
 
(b)  
 
 
(c) 
 
 
(d) 
 
 
P 
NP
for 
NP and NP
pronoun 
name
you 
Pete
AP
AP 
but 
AP
DEG 
A 
DEG 
A
rather 
nervous 
very 
excited
AdvP
AdvP 
and 
AdvP
Adv 
DEG 
Adv
slowly 
very 
carefully
S
NP 
VP
name 
VP 
and 
VP
Fernandez 
drank brandy 
smoked cheroots
PP

 
FURTHER EXERCISES
63
(e) 
 
 
(f) 
 
 
4. Those APs must be analysed as containing a further AP modiﬁed by DEG:
 
 Further exercises
1. Between the black pages of the album, ancient photographs dimly revealed ancestors 
nervelessly paralysed in different attitudes of apparent concentration.
(a) In the above sentence, identify all the (i) nouns, (ii) adjectives, (iii) adverbs, 
(iv) prepositions
(b) Identify its subject.
 
If the NP in a PP is long and complicated, the PP will appear complicated, 
though the overall structure is in fact simply [P + NP]. In fact there’s no limit 
to how long a PP can be. One reason for this is that the NP within a PP can 
itself contain a PP (which will contain another NP (which can contain another 
PP (and so on (and so on)))). Bearing this in mind,
(c) ﬁrst, for each preposition in the above sentence, identify the PP of which 
it is head,
s
s
and
S
NP 
VP
NP 
VP
name
Herbert struck the board
pronoun
I 
had to mend it
PP
PP
and
PP
P
P
NP
now
in 
the future
AP
DEG 
AP
so 
DEG 
A
very 
touchy

CHAPTER 3 SENTENCE STRUCTURE: CATEGORIES
64
(d) then, for each N, identify the NP of which it is the head.
 
Example: The ﬁrst P is between, which is complemented by the NP the black 
pages of the album. So, between is the head of the PP between the black pages 
of the album. Notice that the PP isn’t just between the black pages. This is 
because of the album modiﬁes pages and so must be included within the NP 
complementing between. The next P is of . . .
2. In the following, a co-ordinator has been italicised. In each case, identify the 
constituents it co-ordinates and their category, attending carefully to the meaning. 
For example, in (a) and clearly doesn’t co-ordinate just the single words on either 
side of it (towel and his). So, how much of the preceding and following material 
must be included in the co-ordination? Note that (d) is ambiguous.
(a) He kept a towel and his old razor hidden in one of the lifeboats.
(b) Her brothers and sisters came to the graduation ceremony.
(c) The driver stopped the car and offered them a lift to the castle.
(d) She wouldn’t take John’s dog or any of the pets from the cage.
(e) They were slowly but surely getting to grips with syntax.
(f) All the applause during the performance and at the following party made him 
feel quite elated.
(g) The water was icy and her friends refused to go swimming.
3. Draw phrase markers for the co-ordinate elements in the above sentences. Use 
triangles for the co-ordinated constituents. This means that for each, you will only 
need one category label (used three times in each case). See phrase marker [30] 
in the chapter for an example.
4. I’ve claimed that every sentence in English has a subject (NP) and a predicate (VP). 
But consider now the following IMPERATIVE sentences:
(a) Release the clutch gently!
(b) Hold your breath for a minute!
(c) Leave some money to charity in your will!
(d) Help yourselves to champagne!
 
These imperative sentences seem to consist of just a VP. Are they then counter-
examples to the claim that every English sentence must have a subject NP? It 
is relevant, in connection with (d), to consider the circumstances under which 
REFLEXIVE PRONOUNS (e.g. yourself, himself, themselves) can be used and to note the 
oddity of Help themselves to champagne! In connection with (b), note the oddity 
of Hold my/his breath for a minute! and, with (c), the oddity of Leave some money 
to charity in his/John’s will!

65
You now know that the basic sentence consists of a Noun Phrase (functioning 
as subject) followed by a Verb Phrase (functioning as predicate). You have 
encountered several examples of VPs, though very little has been said about 
them. This chapter deals with the general structure (the immediate constituents) 
of the VP half of the basic sentence. Paddle, sunbathed beside a stream, loves 
ﬁsh, hated the chips, dreads affectionate cats, and seemed happy are all VPs. 
As these VPs illustrate, categories introduced in previous chapters may appear 
in the VP, including Noun Phrases. Within the VP, however, NPs have different 
functions. It’s these different functions of NP and other categories of phrase that 
I am mainly concerned with here.
A ﬁrst look at verbs
The one constituent that a Verb Phrase (VP) must contain is a verb (V). VPs 
are centred on V.
There are two kinds of verb in English: lexical and auxiliary. Lexical 
verbs are the ones that belong to the indeﬁnitely large general vocabulary 
of the language (e.g. run, eat, seem, explain, recycle, shatter, prepare, depend). 
Auxiliary verbs, by contrast, are a special and very restricted set of verbs. The 
clear ones are: be, have, and do (which can also be lexical) and can/could, 
will/would, shall/should, may/might, must, and need.
A full VP must contain a lexical verb and it may contain auxiliary verbs. 
In the following, the lexical verbs are in bold and the auxiliary verbs are in 
italics.
[1a] Diana plays the piano.
[1b]  Diana played the piano.
[2] 
Anders is explaining his generalisation.
[3] 
Maggie should have recycled those bottles.
[4] 
Wim may have been preparing his lecture.
4
The basic Verb Phrase

CHAPTER 4 THE BASIC VERB PHRASE
66
I’ll say no more about auxiliary verbs here; they are discussed in Chapter 6. 
So, in calling this chapter ‘The Basic Verb Phrase’, I mean that it concerns VPs 
that contain just lexical verbs.
Lexical verbs are easily identiﬁed by their morphological (i.e. their word-form) 
possibilities. They are words that take some if not all of the verbal inﬂ ections 
-s, -ing, -ed, -en. For example: plays, playing, played and writes, writing, written.
In VPs containing only a lexical verb, that verb will always carry a present 
or past meaning. In fact, present and past are explicitly marked in [1] above: 
in [1a] play carries the present tense infelction -s and in [1b] it carries the 
past tense inﬂ ection, -ed. More often than not, though, present tense is 
not explicitly marked (though it’s understood). Since tense is not relevant here, 
I won’t bother you with it in this chapter. Chapter 6 deals with that.
A general point to note in identifying categories – one that applies particularly 
to verbs – is that words can belong to more than one category. For example, 
interest is certainly a verb: cf. interests, interesting, interested. It’s a verb in [5].
 [5] Millie’s hair interested him.
But both interest and interests can also be nouns (singular and plural respectively) 
– as in [6a–b] – and interesting and interested can be adjectives – as in [7a–b].
 [6a] Its great architectural interest did not strike him immediately.
 [6b] John’s interests are rather eccentric.
 [7a] A very interesting plan was proposed.
 [7b] He wasn’t very interested in the bean production.
Notice in passing that the adjectives interesting and interested are gradable and 
so can be modiﬁed by very. By contrast, no verb can be modiﬁed by very:
 [8a] *Millie’s hair very interested him.
 [8b] *Her hair was very interesting him.
Now decide on the category – or categories – of each of the following words. 
Most of them belong to more than one category. You’ll ﬁnd it helpful to con-
struct sentences in which they can function. This exercise is discussed at the end 
of the chapter: Discussion 1, page 78.
open, impossible, appeal, up, content, between, export, edit.
The complements of lexical verbs
This chapter is concerned with the functional relations between lexical verbs and 
other constituents that appear in the basic Verb Phrase. In Chapter 2, we looked 
at the function of affectionate cats in the sentence

 
THE COMPLEMENTS OF LEXICAL VERBS
67
 [9] Phil dreads affectionate cats.
The VP is dreads affectionate cats, and dreads is the verb. We decided that the rela-
tion between the V (dreads) and the NP (affectionate cats) is a head–complement 
relation. It’s a two-way (mutual) dependency between the verb (as head) and the 
NP (its complement). The use of dreads without a following NP is ungrammatical 
as a sentence, and so is the use of the NP without dreads:
[10] *Phil dreads.  [11]  *Phil affectionate cats.
But not all lexical verbs do require a following NP. If we change the verb from 
dread to sunbathed, for example, we get a different pattern of grammaticality:
[12] *Phil sunbathed affectionate cats.  [13]  Phil sunbathed.
While dread must take an NP, sunbathe cannot take an NP. So, the presence of 
the NP depends not just on there being a verb present but, more importantly, 
on what sort of verb it is. Dread and sunbathe are examples of two general sorts 
– or sub-categories – of lexical verb. Lexical verbs are sub-categorised 
according to what other elements must appear with them in the VP. In other 
words, they are sub-categorised in terms of what complements they demand.
Just because an NP cannot follow the V sunbathe doesn’t mean that nothing 
can follow the V in the VP. We have seen, for example, that the PP beside a 
stream can. But this PP can’t be the complement of sunbathe because it is not 
required to complete the meaning of the VP. What [13] shows is that the verb 
sunbathed functions as a complete VP in its own right. Beside a stream just 
gives extra – optional – information. If we omit it, we’re still left with a com-
plete VP. So, in the VP sunbathed beside a stream, the PP is a modiﬁer, not a 
complement. The fact that a PP can follow sunbathe can’t therefore be used to 
sub-categorise the verb. All VPs can include (optional) modiﬁcation by a PP. 
Notice, for example, that a PP can be added after dreads affectionate cats:
[14] Phil dreads affectionate cats in the hay-fever season.
So, dread and sunbathe are distinguished by the obligatory presence or 
absence of a following NP but not by the (optional) presence or absence of 
a following PP.
In this chapter I concentrate just on the complements of the verb. This is 
another sense in which the VPs discussed here are ‘basic VPs’. Chapter 5 deals 
with how optional modiﬁers ﬁt into the structure of VP.
To see how general these verb sub-categories are, decide which of the 
following verbs belong to the same sub-category as dread (requiring an NP) and 
which to the same sub-category as sunbathe (requiring no NP). One of them 
belongs to both sub-categories.
die, make, sleep, inspect, laugh, play, spot, throw.

CHAPTER 4 THE BASIC VERB PHRASE
68
Taking just the ﬁrst two examples, note the following pattern of grammaticality:
 [15a] Max died. 
[16a] *Max made.
 [15b] *Max died Bill. 
[16b] Max made a noise.
Die clearly belongs to the same sub-category as sunbathe, as do sleep and laugh: 
none of these verbs allows a following NP. But make clearly belongs with dread, 
as do inspect, spot, and throw: these demand a following NP. Play, on the other 
hand, belongs to both sub-categories, with different meanings:
[17] The children played.
[18] Max played the tuba.
Paddle, reﬂect, break, and relax are further verbs that belong to both sub-
categories. You can check this for yourself (for example, Superman relaxed and 
Superman relaxed his grip). Sentences containing them in their different uses are 
given at the end of the chapter: Discussion 2, pages 78–9.
The two sub-categories discussed above are not the only ones. This chapter 
deals with six sub-categories of lexical verbs:
(1) transitive,
(2) intransitive,
(3) ditransitive,
(4) intensive,
(5) complex transitive,
(6) prepositional.
■ Transitive verbs
A transitive verb is one which requires a single Noun Phrase to complement 
it. Of the verbs considered above, then, dread, make, spot, throw, and inspect are 
transitive verbs.
The NP that complements a transitive verb is said to function (more 
speciﬁcally) as its direct object. So, in Phil dreads affectionate cats, the NP 
within the VP (affectionate cats) is complementing the transitive verb dread as 
its direct object.
Notice that, where an NP functioning as the direct object of a verb is a 
pronoun, it has a special form. This form is called the objective case (more 
traditionally, ‘accusative case’). Thus the direct object pronouns in the objective 
case are grammatical in [19], but the corresponding pronouns in the subjective 
(traditionally, ‘nominative’) case are ungrammatical, [20]:

 
THE COMPLEMENTS OF LEXICAL VERBS
69
[19]   
[20]   
 
 
 
 
Phil dreads 
1
4
2
4
3
me
her
him
us
them
 
 
*Phil dreads 
1
4
2
4
3
I
she
he
we
they
When the form of an NP is determined by its complement relation with 
another constituent, it is said to be governed by that other constituent (in this 
case, the verb). Notice that this goes for NPs complementing prepositions in 
PPs as well. The preposition governs the NP, demanding that it appear in the 
objective case: for him vs. *for he, against them vs. *against they. You and it are 
the only pronouns that don’t have a special distinct form in the objective case.
Since the V and the NP are in a functional relationship, the NP needs to 
be represented as a sister of the V (and therefore as a daughter of the VP) as 
in [21]:
[21] 
 
In [21] I’ve added to the V node the extra label ‘[trans]’, short for ‘transitive’. 
This extra label is called a feature, and it simply sub-categorises the verb as 
being transitive. This sub-categorisation feature is needed in order to specify 
the function of the following NP in terms of the phrase marker itself. Thus, 
when an NP is the sister of a V bearing the [trans] feature, we know that the 
NP is functioning as direct object. The point of this feature will become 
clearer when I deal with other sub-categories of verbs and the other functions 
associated with them.
■ Intransitive verbs
An intransitive verb is one that does not require any further constituent as a 
sister in the VP. ‘INtransitive’ means ‘has (and needs) no complement’. Sleep, 
die, laugh and sigh (and play on one interpretation) are intransitive verbs. Since 
an intransitive verb requires no further element to form a complete predicate, 
an intransitive verb counts as a complete VP in its own right. (Remember the 
discussion of Ducks paddle in Chapter 3.) So a very simple sentence like Omar 
sighed is represented as in [22]. Note the [intrans] feature on the V node.
s
NP
VP
Phil
V
NP
[trans]
dreads affectionate cats

CHAPTER 4 THE BASIC VERB PHRASE
70
[22] 
 
■ Ditransitive verbs
Ditransitive verbs require TWO NPs as complements. The classic example of a 
ditransitive verb is give. Others are send and buy:
 [23a] William gave Millie some bleach.
 [24a] The staff sent the general a message.
 [25a] Max buys his butler all necessary work-clothes.
In [23a]–[25a] the ﬁrst complement (the NP in bold) functions, more 
speciﬁcally, as the indirect object of the ditransitive verb. Indirect objects are 
usually the recipients or beneﬁciaries of the action. The second complement 
NP (in italics) functions as the direct object – it has the same function as 
the NP that complements a transitive verb. Here’s a phrase marker for [23a]. 
Note the [ditrans] feature on V.
[26] 
 
Both the NPs are governed by the V gave and would appear in the objective case 
if they were pronouns.
Now decide which of the following verbs are ditransitive.
(a) show  (b) offer  (c) see  (d) tell  (e) announce
Consider the following sentences:
[27] Max showed Matilda his collection of razors.
[28] Tarzan offered Jane his hairy arm.
[29] Heseltine told his boss the news.
s
NP 
VP
name
V
[intrans]
Omar 
sighed
S
NP
VP
William
V
[ditrans]
NP 
NP
gave 
Millie 
some bleach

 
THE COMPLEMENTS OF LEXICAL VERBS
71
(a), (b), and (d), since they accept two consecutive NPs, are ditransitive verbs. 
But (c) and (e) don’t accept two NPs so they are not ditransitive (in fact they are 
transitive):
[30] *Max saw Matilda his collection of razors.
[31] *Heseltine announced his boss the news.
The important thing to note about VPs consisting of a ditransitive verb com-
plemented by two NPs is that they are systematically related to VPs in which the 
indirect object NP (bold in [23a]–[29]) corresponds to a Prepositional Phrase 
(PP) in a position following the direct object. Thus [23a] corresponds with [23b]:
 [23b] William gave some bleach to Millie.
The PPs that correspond in this way with indirect objects are always introduced 
by either to or for.
What are the appropriate [b] forms for [24a] and [25a]?
 [24b] The staff sent a message to the general.
 [25b] Max buys all necessary work-clothes for his butler.
These [b] sentences can be represented as in [32]:
[32] 
 
The PP corresponding to an indirect object NP has a special status. With 
transitive verbs, when a PP follows the direct object NP, it’s not part of the 
complementation of the verb but is an optional modiﬁer. However, in using a 
ditransitive verb such as send, we need to specify not only (a) a sender (usually 
subject), and (b) what is sent (usually the direct object), but also (c) to whom it is 
sent (usually indirect object). As mentioned, indirect objects can take the 
form of either an NP or a PP containing to or for. So PPs that correspond to 
indirect objects are part of the complementation of ditransitive verbs and need 
to be represented as sisters of V within the basic VP.
The indirect object, then, is either (a) the ﬁrst of two NP sisters of a V bearing 
a [ditrans] feature (as in [26]) or (b) the PP which is a sister of a V bearing a [ditrans] 
feature (as in [32]). As for the direct object of a [ditrans] verb, it’s either (a) the 
second NP sister of V or (b) the NP sister of V which has a following PP sister.
s
NP
VP
William
V
[ditrans]
NP 
PP
gave 
some bleach to Millie

CHAPTER 4 THE BASIC VERB PHRASE
72
■ Intensive verbs
Intensive verbs require a single complement, which can take the form of an 
Adjective Phrase, a Noun Phrase or a Prepositional Phrase. The most obvious 
and commonly used intensive verb is be. As the classic example of the intensive 
sub-category of verb, be is called ‘the copula’.
[33] Ed is rather extravagant. (AP)
[34] Sigmund was an auctioneer. (NP)
[35] Oscar and the First Mate were in the engine room. (PP)
The complement of an intensive verb functions (more speciﬁcally) as a 
predicative. (By the way, don’t confuse this term with ‘predicate’.) Other 
intensive verbs – i.e. other verbs taking a predicative as complement – are: 
become, seem, appear, turn, remain, look, taste, feel, smell, sound.
When a verb is complemented just by an AP, you can be sure you’re 
dealing with an intensive verb. This is because [intensive] is the only sub-
category of verb that can take just an AP complement. The point is worth 
noting because, as mentioned, intensive verbs can be complemented by an 
NP or a PP and, when a verb is complemented by an NP, you’re going to 
have to decide whether [V + NP] is an example of [transitive V + direct object] 
or an example of [intensive V + predicative]. Understanding the ‘predicative’ 
function involves understanding the difference between predicative and direct 
object. I explain this now.
Compare [34] above (repeated as [36]) with [37]:
[36] Sigmund was an auctioneer.
[37] Sigmund spotted an auctioneer.
In both, we have a verb complemented by an NP. In [37] the verb is transitive, 
so the NP complement functions more speciﬁcally as direct object. As a direct 
object, the NP identiﬁes an individual distinct from Sigmund (referred to by 
the subject NP Sigmund). In saying that Sigmund spotted an auctioneer, we 
mention two distinct individuals – Sigmund and the auctioneer – and say that 
the former spotted the latter. It is in the nature of spotting that it’s a relation 
between two individuals: a spotter (subject) and a spottee (direct object). That’s 
what makes spot a transitive verb.
A moment’s thought will show something quite different going on in [36]. [36] 
does not express a relation between two individuals. In [36], with the intensive 
verb, only one individual is mentioned (by means of the subject Sigmund). The 
rest of the sentence (the VP) is used to characterise the subject. If [36] can 
be said to express a relation at all, it’s a relation between an individual and a 
property: the sentence expresses the idea that Sigmund has the property of being 
an auctioneer. Predicatives are used to attribute properties to the things or 

 
THE COMPLEMENTS OF LEXICAL VERBS
73
people referred to by other expressions. Unlike direct/indirect objects, they do 
not themselves refer to things or people.1
It is because intensive verbs only take predicatives that they can be com-
plemented by Adjective Phrases: APs only ever identify properties. Thus, [33] 
mentions Ed and simply attributes the property of extravagance to him. NPs, by 
contrast, can be used either to identify properties or to refer to individuals. This 
is why an NP can function either as predicative (complementing an intensive 
verb) or as direct object (complementing a transitive verb).
Many of the intensive verbs listed above also belong to the transitive sub-
category – but with a different meaning. This difference between transitive 
(+ direct object) and intensive (+ predicative) can be made quite vivid by 
contrasting the two meanings of such verbs. For each of the following decide 
whether the (italicised) complement NP is complementing a transitive verb as 
direct object or complementing an intensive verb as predicative:
[38] Max turned a subtle shade of green.
[39] Max turned another card.
[40] Tarzan felt a tap on his shoulder.
[41] Tarzan felt a real idiot.
[42] The leopard-skin pillbox hat didn’t become her.
[43] The hat became a very useful wastepaper basket.
[44] The captain sounds an absolute tyrant.
[45] The captain sounded the ship’s horn.
The NPs are functioning as direct objects (complementing the verbs in their 
transitive senses) in [39], [40], [42], and [45]. They are functioning as predicatives 
(complementing the verbs in their intensive senses) in [38], [41], [43], and [44]. 
Notice that, in the latter cases, those NPs could be replaced by APs without 
changing the sense of the verb (green in [38], really idiotic in [41], ever more 
useful in [43], and absolutely tyrannical in [44]).
I’ve said that predicatives are used to attribute properties to the things referred 
to by other expressions. We have seen that, in the case of intensive verbs, that 
other expression is always the subject. So, to be more speciﬁc about the function 
of the italicised complement expressions in [33]–[35]: they are predicatives; 
and more speciﬁcally yet, they are subject-predicatives. In the next section, 
I’ll be introducing object-predicatives.
I can now show more clearly what the point is of attaching a sub-categorisation 
feature to the V node. Without such a feature, [36] and [37] – and all the examples 
[38]–[45] – would receive exactly the same analysis. It is the distinction between 
the features, [intens] and [trans] that distinguishes them – as in [46a–b].
1 Note that the reflexive pronoun himself in Max shaved himself does refer (to Max), so it’s a direct object.

CHAPTER 4 THE BASIC VERB PHRASE
74
 [46a] 
 
 [46b] 
 
An [intens] verb, by deﬁnition, takes a subject-predicative. A [trans] verb, by 
deﬁnition, takes a direct object. So, by using those features, you are effectively 
assigning a (more speciﬁc) function to the complement of the verb.
A word now about PPs functioning as subject-predicatives. I’ve already men-
tioned that all VPs can include optional modiﬁcation by PPs. PPs should only 
be treated as part of the necessary complementation of an intensive verb (i.e. as 
subject-predicatives) if they cannot be omitted. So, in the engine room in [35] is 
a predicative since [47] is not a complete sentence (though the missing element 
might be understood in context – see Chapter 5):
[47] *Oscar and the First Mate were.
I look again at PP complements below.
■ Complex transitive verbs
Complex transitive verbs take two complements: a direct object (NP) 
and an object-predicative. Again, the predicative can take the form of an 
AP, an NP or a PP. Here are some examples, with the direct object in italics 
and the predicative in bold.
[48] Jack ﬁnds his own jokes extremely funny. (AP)
[49] They made Stella their spokesperson. (NP)
[50] Liza put the liquor under her bed. (PP)
Everything I said about predicatives in the previous section goes for the pre-
dicative in a complex VP, but with one big difference. The difference is that 
s
NP
VP
Sigmund
V
[intens]
NP
was 
an auctioneer
S
NP 
VP
Sigmund
V
[trans]
NP
spotted
an auctioneer

 
THE COMPLEMENTS OF LEXICAL VERBS
75
the predicative in a complex transitive VP characterises (attributes a property 
to) the direct object, not the subject, hence the name ‘object-predicative’. The 
semantic relation between direct object and object-predicative in a complex 
transitive VP, then, parallels that between the subject and the subject-predicative 
in an intensive sentence. It’s an intensive relation. For example, if [48] is true, 
then, as far as Jack is concerned, his own jokes are extremely funny; if [49] is 
true, then Stella became their spokesperson; and if [50] is true, then the liquor 
came to be under Liza’s bed.
Here’s the phrase marker representation of [48]:
[51] 
 
In assigning the feature [complex] to the V node, we are making the phrase 
marker represent the function of his own jokes as direct object and the function of 
extremely funny as object-predicative (because those are the functions associated 
with complex transitive verbs). This is particularly needed in a case like [52a].
 [52a] Max found [Bill] [an amusing companion].
This example is ambiguous. First identify the two interpretations in your mind 
and then explain the ambiguity by assigning different functions to the two 
complements of the verb. On the basis of that, you should be able to assign 
two different sub-categorisation features to the V found.
On one interpretation, [52a] corresponds in meaning with (a) Max found an 
amusing companion for Bill. On this interpretation, the verb ﬁnd is ditransitive: 
Bill refers to the beneﬁciary and is functioning as indirect object, and an amusing 
companion is the direct object. Notice that three participants are involved on 
this (ditransitive) interpretation. On the other interpretation, [52a] corresponds 
with (b) Max found Bill to be an amusing companion. On this interpretation, 
Bill and an amusing companion have the functions associated with the comple-
ments of complex transitive verbs: direct object (Bill) and object-predicative (an 
amusing companion). On this complex transitive interpretation, there are only two 
participants, Max and Bill; an amusing companion merely attributes a property 
to Bill. The distinction in meaning between (a) and (b) – and hence the ambiguity 
– and the different functions of Bill and an amusing companion is all accounted 
for simply by the difference in sub-categorisation feature attached to the V.
s
NP
VP
jack
V
[complex]
NP
AP
finds
his own jokes extremely funny

CHAPTER 4 THE BASIC VERB PHRASE
76
[52b] 
 
This example is useful because it very clearly distinguishes between [ditrans] and 
[complex] VPs. Bear it in mind if you’re ever confused on the matter.
■ Prepositional verbs
Glance (at NP), reply (to NP), refer (to NP), listen (to NP) and worry (about NP) 
are examples of prepositional verbs – complemented by a Prepositional Phrase. 
Take glance, for example (note the asterisks):
[53] *Max glanced. 
(glance is not intransitive)
[54] *Max glanced the falling acrobat. (glance is not transitive)
[55] Max glanced at the falling acrobat. (glance demands a PP complement)
[56] 
 
I shall call the PP that complements a [prepositional] verb, a prepositional 
complement.
As a reminder, there are three kinds of VP consisting of [V + PP] we’ve looked 
at so far:
(a) V[intens] + PP. 
The PP is a complement (subject predicative);
(b) V[prep] + PP. 
The PP is a complement (prepositional complement);
(c) V[intrans] + PP. The PP is an optional modiﬁer.
s
NP
VP
Max
V
(a) [ditrans]
(b) [complex]
NP
NP
found
Bill
an amusing companion
S
NP
VP
Name
V
[prep]
PP
Max
glanced
at the falling acrobat

 
SUMMARY
77
As the complement of V, the PP in (a) and (b) is represented as sister-of-V. As 
we’ll see in the next chapter, the modiﬁer PP in (c) is represented in another 
position.
Prepositional verbs are called ‘prepositional’ because they can only be 
complemented by a PP. In this, they contrast with [intens] verbs, which can 
be complemented by NP, AP or PP. The [prep] subcategory of verb is a bit of 
a ragbag. The fact is there just are verbs that require a PP as complement and 
don’t ﬁ t into any of the other subcategories. Notice also that each [prep] verb 
generally demands that the head of that PP be one particular preposition – 
for example, we have glance [at NP], not *glance [to NP], and refer [to NP], not 
*refer [at NP].
We have now looked at a six-way distinction among verbs and their associated 
sentence patterns. Not all verbs – and not all uses of all verbs – ﬁt neatly into 
this classiﬁcation or do so only with a certain amount of ingenuity on the 
part of the analyst. The distinctions given nevertheless provide an introduction 
to the topic of sub-categorisation and, in discussing them, I’ve dealt with all 
the major constituent functions in VP and so with the sisters of V within the 
basic VP.
 Summary
TRANSITIVE – ‘[trans]’:
subject – V – direct object
(S)      (dO)
INTRANSITIVE – ‘[intrans]’:
subject – V
(S)
DITRANSITIVE – ‘[ditrans]’:
or:
subject – V – indirect object – direct object
(S)      (iO)       (dO)
subject – V – direct object – indirect object
(S)      (dO)      (iO)
INTENSIVE – ‘[intens]’:
subject – V – subject-predicative
(S)     (sP)
COMPLEX – ‘[complex]’:
subject – V – direct object – object-predicative
(S)     (dO)        (oP)
PREPOSITIONAL – ‘[prep]’:
subject – V – prepositional complement
(S)     (PC)

CHAPTER 4 THE BASIC VERB PHRASE
78
The following may help in identifying the sub-categories of verb in sentences:
Categories
Functions
NO complements? 
 [intrans]
 
 
[trans]
ONE complement? 
 [prep]
 
 
[intens]
NP only
PP only
AP/NP/PP
dO
PC
sP
 
 
[ditrans]
TWO complements? 
 [complex]
NP + NP/NP + PP
NP + AP/NP/PP
iO + dO
dO
■ Discussion of in-text exercises
1. The following sentences illustrate the different uses of the words given. As a 
further exercise, identify the category of the italicised word in each sentence. 
The category of the word in each sentence is given below.
 1. Morgan opened his mouth.
 2. Morgan’s open mouth admitted the ﬂy.
 3. That was clearly impossible.
 4. Mary appealed to John to take the rubbish out.
 5. Her repeated appeals were unsuccessful.
 6. He booted his drunken colleague up the gangway.
 7. They up the rent every other month.
 8. Georgette is perfectly content.
 9. Jenny criticised the content of the paragraph.
10. He contented himself with a second-hand copy.
11. The recalcitrant mango slipped between Grace’s ﬁngers.
12. Toffee-wrappers are the main export.
13. Boggis and Stone export toffee-wrappers to Mesopotamia.
14. Max has edited a grand total of 253 books.
1: Verb. 2: Adjective. 3: Adjective. 4: Verb. 5: Noun. 6: Preposition. 7: Verb. 
8: Adjective. 9: Noun. 10: Verb. 11: Preposition. 12: Noun. 13: Verb. 14: Verb.
2. 1. The ducks paddled (across the lake) – [intransitive]
 
2. He paddled the raft (across the lake) – [transitive]
 
3. Morgan is reﬂecting (quietly) – [intransitive]

 
EXERCISES
79
 
4. The glass reﬂected Max’s ugly face – [transitive]
 
5. The samovar broke – [intransitive]
 
6. Anna broke the samovar – [transitive].
 Exercises
1. Identify the major functions in the following sentences (subject, direct object, 
indirect object, subject-predicative, object-predicative, and prepositional comple-
ment). Identify the verbs and sub-categorise them. Example:
 
Otto 
devoured 
the couscous
 
subject 
    V 
direct object
 
 
[trans]
(a) The girl in the palace dyed her hair a strange colour.
(b) Hot air rises.
(c) Richard promised me his spaghetti machine.
(d) The sedan-chair proved very useful.
(e) Someone stole my contact-lenses.
(f) It sounds like a really good ﬁlm.
(g) The candidate’s antics amused the board of examiners.
(h) The committee nominated her Acrobat of the Year.
(i) 
Oscar feeds his cat smoked salmon.
(j) 
I like my curries as hot as you can make them.
(k) This calls for a celebration.
(l) 
The main witness for the prosecution disappeared.
(m) He applied for a gun licence.
2. Decide whether the PP in the following sentences is part of the complementation 
of a DITRANSITIVE verb or not.
(a) Holden wrote ten letters to Africa.
(b) Holden wrote ten letters to the White House.
(c) Max took the hyena to the station.
(d) Max lent his hyena to the Dramatics Society.
(e) William baked a cake for everyone.
(f) William baked a cake for Christmas.
(g) Laura saved the money for a piano.
(h) Laura saved a place for Martha.

CHAPTER 4 THE BASIC VERB PHRASE
80
3. Using any of the following phrases, construct (1) a sentence in which smelt is 
used as an intransitive verb; (2) a sentence in which it is used as a transitive verb; 
(3) a sentence in which it is used as an intensive verb.
(a) smelt  (b) the apprehensive butler  (c) Jim’s attempt at a stew
(d) rather strange.
4. Using triangles for all major constituents (as used in this chapter) draw phrase 
markers for the following sentences.
(a) Nicholas felt strangely euphoric.
(b) The local gallery lends us the materials.
(c) The condition of the cakes left out overnight deteriorated.
(d) They voted the Senator out of ofﬁce.
(e) A bucket of cold water revived that particular patient.
(f) The Venetians submitted to Napoleon’s demands.
■ Discussion of exercises
1. (a) [The girl in the palace]  [dyed]  [her hair]  [a strange colour].
 
 
S 
V 
dO 
oP
 
 
[complex]
(b) [Hot air]  [rises].
 
 
S 
V
 
 
[intrans]
(c) [Richard]  [promised]  [me]  [his spaghetti machine].
 
 
S 
V 
iO 
dO
 
 
[ditrans]
(d) [The sedan-chair]  [proved]  [very useful].
 
 
S 
V 
sP
 
 
[intens]
(e) [Someone]  [stole]  [my contact lenses].
 
 
S 
V 
dO
 
 
[trans]
(f) 
[It]  [sounds]  [like a really good ﬁlm].
 
 S 
V 
sP
 
 
[intens]
(g) [The candidate’s antics]  [amused]  [the board of examiners].
 
 
S 
V 
dO
 
 
[trans]
(h) [The committee]  [nominated]  [her]  [Acrobat of the Year].
 
 
S 
V 
dO 
oP
 
 
[complex]

 
EXERCISES
81
(i) 
[Oscar]  [feeds]  [his cat]  [smoked salmon].
 
 
S 
V 
iO 
dO
 
 
[ditrans]
(j) [I]  [like]  [my curries]  [as hot as you can make them].
 
 
S 
V 
dO 
oP
 
 [complex]
(k) [This]  [calls]  [for a celebration].
 
 
S 
V 
PC
 
 
[prep]
(l) 
[The main witness for the prosecution]  [disappeared].
 
 
S 
V
 
 
[intrans]
(m) [He]  [applied]  [for a gun licence].
 
 S 
V 
PC
 
 
[prep]
2. As mentioned in this chapter, a PP is part of the complementation of a ditransitive 
verb only if it corresponds to an NP functioning as an indirect object. Take 
examples (a) and (b). (1) is not a reasonable paraphrase of (a), but (2) is a reason-
able paraphrase of (b):
(1) ?Holden wrote Africa ten letters.
(2) Holden wrote the White House ten letters.
 
So the PP in (b) is part of the complementation of the verb, and write in that 
sentence must be sub-categorised as [ditrans]. In (a), on the other hand, write is 
a [trans] verb, complemented by the direct object letters or perhaps letters to 
Africa. Note that, if to Africa is not part of the direct object NP in (1), then it must 
be analysed as an optional modiﬁer within the VP. I discuss why there should be 
this difference between (a) and (b) after dealing with the remaining examples.
(c) No. cf. *Max took the station his hyena. Take here is [complex] and the PP is
 
 functioning as object predicative.
(d) Yes. cf. Max lent the Dramatics Society his hyena. Lend is a [ditrans] verb.
(e) Yes. cf. William baked everyone a cake. This is a [ditrans] sense of bake.
(f) No. cf. *William baked Christmas a cake. (See below)
(g) No. cf. *She saved a piano the money. The PP is a modiﬁer.
(h) Yes. cf. She saved Martha a place. A [ditrans] sense of save.
 
Notice it is only NPs denoting ANIMATE things (or things that could be interpreted as 
being animate) that can be indirect objects. For example, if interpret Christmas 
as a person rather than a festival, William baked Christmas a cake sounds OK. 
In (2) above, the White House can be an indirect object because, as well as being 
a building, it’s an organisation of human beings, as is the Dramatics Society. By 
contrast, there is no single human institution that represents Africa as a whole, 
so Africa is an inanimate location and cannot function as indirect object.

CHAPTER 4 THE BASIC VERB PHRASE
82
3. INTRANSITIVE: 1. The apprehensive butler smelt.
 
 
2. Jim’s attempt at a stew smelt.
 
TRANSITIVE: 
1. The apprehensive butler smelt Jim’s attempt at a stew.
 
INTENSIVE: 
1. The apprehensive butler smelt rather strange.
 
 
2. Jim’s attempt at a stew smelt rather strange.
4. (a)   
 
 
(b)   
 
 
(c) 
 
 
(d) 
 
 
s
NP
VP
Nicholas
V
[intens]
AP
feit
strangely euphoric
S
NP
VP
the local gallery
V
[ditrans]
NP
NP
lends
us
the materials
S
NP
VP
the condition of 
the cakes left out 
overnight
v
[intrans]
deteriorated
S
NP
VP
they
V
[complex]
NP
PP
voted
the Senator
out of office

 
FURTHER EXERCISES
83
(e) 
 
 
(f) 
 
 
 
In these six phrase markers, all six complementation types are represented, and 
hence all six types of basic sentence considered in this chapter.
 Further exercises
1. For each of the following sentences
(a) identify the verb and give its sub-category.
(b) Identify all the major functions: subject (S), direct object (dO), indirect object 
(iO), subject-predicative (sP), object-predicative (oP), prepositional comple-
ment (PC). Make sure the sub-category of the verb is consistent with the 
functions you assign.
(c) Give the category of each constituent you have identiﬁed under (b) above.
 
Example:
 
 
[Phil ] 
[dreads] 
[affectionate cats]
 
 
Function: 
S 
V 
dO
 
 
 
 
[trans]
 
 
Category: 
NP 
 
NP
 
(1) Petrol got more expensive.
 
(2) Alexander’s father left him.
 
(3) Alexander’s father left him the theatre.
 
(4) Alexander’s father left him in the care of the bishop.
s
NP
VP
a bucket of 
cold water
V
[trans]
NP
revived 
that particular patient
S
NP
VP
the Venetians
V
[prep]
PP
submitted
to Napoleon's demands

CHAPTER 4 THE BASIC VERB PHRASE
84
 
(5) Several of the men complained.
 
(6) He referred to the fact that you had no clothes on.
 
(7) All the customers sit their children on the counter.
 
(8) Her mother and father approve of Matilda’s behaviour.
 
(9) Most of the students do the work you set.
 
(10) Moriarty locked Holmes in the library.
 
(11) The sergeant and his men climbed up the drain pipes.
 
(12) His ﬁsh and chips went cold and greasy.
 
(13) The obliging manager poured everyone a glass of wine.
 
(14) Joan placed her latest trophy in a prominent position.
 
(15) Karen peered into the gaping hole.
 
(16) The new chef liquidised last week’s uneaten fritters.
 
(17) That spot made a perfect picnic place.
 
(18) Bill made a brilliant picnic table. (The most likely interpretation, please!)
 
(19) This so-called music makes me mad.
 
(20) He made the men a decent meal.
 
(21) The exhausted team members made for the nearest pub.
2. Draw phrase markers for at least some of the above sentences, using triangles for 
all the constituents you identiﬁed under 1(a)–(b) above. For examples, see the 
Discussion of Exercise 4 above.
3. As we’ve seen, Prepositional Phrases have a variety of functions. We’ve looked at 
four so far. As (obligatory) complements of verbs, they may function as
[A] subject-predicative in [intens] VPs,
[B] object-predicative in [complex] VPs,
[C] indirect-object in [ditrans] VPs (but only with to or for),
[D] prepositional complement in [prep] VPs.
As we shall see, they can also function as (optional) modiﬁers:
[E] modiﬁers within the structure of NP (e.g. the book in your pocket),
[F] modiﬁers within the structure of VP (e.g. sunbathed beside a stream).
 
Decide which one of these functions the bracketed PPs have in the following 
sentences (this can be done just by giving one of the above letters). NB. Some 
allow more than one reasonable answer. This is particularly true of (14). Note that 
(3) is crucially ambiguous.
 
(1) Bertram is the man [for the job].
 
(2) She was very happy [in the Spring].

 
FURTHER EXERCISES
85
 
(3) I touched the man [with the umbrella].
 
(4) This award is [for outstanding culinary achievement].
 
(5) I’m doing this course [for my own satisfaction].
 
(6) Eliot left most of his manuscripts [to the museum].
 
(7) Eliot left most of his manuscripts [at the museum].
 
(8) He passed the wine [to Tessa].
 
(9) He passed the house [on his way to the parking lot].
 
(10) We stayed [for ten minutes].
 
(11) We stayed [at the Hotel Mortiﬁcation].
 
(12) He knocked a glass [of wine] [onto the ﬂoor].
 
(13) He remained [in a state of shock] [for ten days].
 
(14) Dionysus remained [in the bar].

86
Adjunct adverbials (VP adverbials)
So far, we’ve looked at just the BASIC Verb Phrase – that is, VPs containing just 
a lexical verb plus its complements. In this chapter I look more closely at the 
distinction between complements and modiﬁers in the Verb Phrase.
We’ve already encountered PPs functioning as modiﬁers in VP. Examples are:
 [1] Old Sam sunbathed !
@
beside a stream.
like a maniac.
 
 [2] Max spotted those wildcats !
@
in the spring.
with his binoculars.
As mentioned, since these PPs are optional and can occur with almost any 
verb, they can’t be used to sub-categorise the verb. In other words, they are not 
functioning as complements. They give additional, though not grammatically 
essential, information. When a constituent functions within a VP as the PPs 
in [1] and [2] are func tioning, it is said to function as an adjunct adverbial 
(or simply adjunct).
[1] and [2], then, are examples of intransitive and transitive sentences with adjunct 
adverbials. Here are further examples of PPs functioning as adjuncts in intensive 
[3] and [4], transitive [5], ditransitive [6], and complex transitive [7] structures:
 [3] Ed was rather extravagant in the bazaar.
 [4] Oscar was in the engine-room during the whole voyage.
 [5] The king of Sicily imprisoned them for reasons of state.
 [6] William gave Millie some bleach on her birthday.
 [7] Liza kept the liquor under the bed as a precaution.
As the adjunct PPs in these examples illustrate, adjuncts express a wide range 
of ideas, including manner, means, purpose, reason, place, and time (including 
duration and frequency). They tend to answer questions like Where? Why? When? 
How? What for? How long? How often? How many times?
Since adjunct is one type of adverbial function, you won’t be surprised to 
learn that, in addition to PPs, adverb phrases (AdvP) can also function as 
5
Adverbials and other 
matters

 
LEVELS OF VERB PHRASE
87
adjunct adverbials. Nevertheless, take care not to confuse the term adverbial 
– this denotes a function, not included in phrase markers – and the labels 
adverb and adverb phrase, which are category labels and do ﬁgure in 
phrase markers. We’ve seen that AdvPs can have a function other than that of 
adverbial: they can modify adjectives, within APs. Conversely, you know that 
not all constituents functioning as adverbials are AdvPs: we’ve just seen that PPs 
can function as adverbials. Here are examples of AdvPs functioning, like the PPs 
above, as adverbials:
 [8] Sam sunbathed frequently.
 [9] He spotted the wildcats quite accidentally.
[10] She put it under the bed surreptitiously.
Many adverbs are not as easily identiﬁed as such by -ly morphology, particu-
larly adverbs relating to time: again, yet, still, already, seldom, often, always, 
ever, never.
In addition to AdvPs and PPs, certain NPs can function as (temporal) adver-
bials: last year, yesterday, tonight, tomorrow, the day before yesterday, the day after 
tomorrow, this afternoon . . .
Levels of Verb Phrase
How do adjunct adverbials ﬁt into the structure of VPs? I’ve described adjuncts 
as modiﬁers within the VP but so far I’ve avoided saying exactly what they 
modify. Two possibilities seem to offer themselves. In [2], for example, does 
in the spring modify just the verb spotted, or does it modify spotted those wildcats 
– that is, the verb plus its direct object? What do you think?
Answering this question involves making a decision about the constituent 
analysis of spotted those wildcats in the spring. If the PP modiﬁes just the verb 
spotted, then it should be a sister of the verb, along with those wildcats, as in [11]:
[11] 
 
If, on the other hand, we want to say that in the spring modiﬁes spotted those 
wildcats, then it must be the sister of a constituent consisting of [verb + direct 
object NP]. In other words, V + NP must form a constituent. They don’t form a 
s
NP
VP
Max
V
[trans]
NP
PP
spotted
those wildcats
in the spring

CHAPTER 5 ADVERBIALS AND OTHER MATTERS
88
constituent in [11], do they? So, if we choose this second option, [11] cannot be 
the right analysis.
I’m going for this second option. Intuitively, the adjunct PP does seem to 
modify a constituent consisting of [V + NP] rather than just the V by itself. I’ve 
already noted that those wildcats – as a complement of the verb – completes the 
sense of the verb and, together with that verb, forms a unit of sense. It does this 
quite independently of the adjunct in the spring.
We have seen that Max spotted those wildcats in the spring is a good 
subject~predicate sentence. Max is the subject NP. So spotted those wildcats 
in the spring is clearly a VP. Now, on the analysis we are adopting, we are saying 
that in the spring modiﬁes a constituent of the form V + NP (spotted those 
wildcats). Bearing in mind that Max spotted those wildcats is itself a good 
subject~predicate sentence (without in the spring), what category label should 
we attach to spotted those wildcats?
Having decided that, draw a phrase marker for the whole sentence Max spotted 
those wildcats in the spring. Use triangles for those wildcats and in the spring.
Spotted those wildcats must be a VP in its own right. It consists of a transitive 
verb plus its direct object NP. Now, that VP is a constituent of another, larger, 
VP – namely, spotted those wildcats in the spring. So the whole phrase marker 
must look like [12], in which, for ease of reference, I have numbered the two 
VPs. VP1 is the ‘basic VP’ discussed in the last chapter.
[12] 
 
This analysis has the effect of creating two levels of VP and thus allowing us 
to represent, within the phrase marker conﬁguration, the difference in function 
between the NP those wildcats (functioning as a complement, more speciﬁcally 
as direct object) and the PP in the Spring (a modifier, more speciﬁc ally, an 
adjunct adverbial). So, adjunct adverbials are modifiers of VPs. As such, they 
must be represented, in phrase markers, as sisters of VP.
If there is just one big idea in this chapter, it is this: the difference in func-
tion between (obligatory) complements of the verb and (optional, modifying) 
adjunct adverbials is to be represented in phrase markers as follows:
s
NP
VP2
Max
VP1
PP
V
[trans]
NP
in the spring
spotted
those wildcats

 
LEVELS OF VERB PHRASE
89
● complements of the verb are sisters of Verb (V)
● adjunct adverbials are sisters of Verb Phrase (VP).
A piece of evidence that supports this analysis was touched on in the Intro-
duction. But ﬁrst, draw the phrase markers for [13] and [14] in the light of the 
discussion so far, bearing in mind that mend is a [transitive] verb and put is a 
[complex transitive] verb.
[13] Bevis mended his bike in the garage.
[14] Bevis put his bike in the garage.
Since put is [complex transitive], the PP in the garage in [14] is one of the 
two complements of the verb. By contrast, in [13] it’s an (optional) adjunct 
adverbial. So, on the analysis adopted here, [15] and [16] are the two different 
phrase markers.
[15] 
 
[16] 
 
In the Introduction, I noted that [17] was grammatical, but [18] ungrammatical.
VP
VP
Adjunct adverbial
Complement(s)
S
NP
VP2
Bevis
VP1
PP
V
[trans]
NP
in the garage
mended
his bike
S
NP
VP!
Bevis
V
[complex]
NP
PP
put
his bike
in the garage
V

CHAPTER 5 ADVERBIALS AND OTHER MATTERS
90
[17] Bevis mended his bike in the garage and Max did so in the garden.
[18] *Bevis put his bike in the garage and Max did so in the garden.
What’s the explanation for this? The expression do so is used to avoid repeating 
material that has already appeared in the sentence. It stands for, or replaces, 
that material. Expressions that perform this function are called pro-forms. 
Pronouns are pro-forms. They replace NPs (so they should really be called ‘pro-
NP’s). Now, do so (did so, etc.) always and only replaces a VP. It is a pro-VP. So, 
if a constituent is a VP, it can be replaced by a form of the expression do so, 
otherwise it can’t.
In [17] we understand that did so is replacing mended his bike. This is ﬁne 
because, as [15] shows, mended his bike is indeed a VP (namely, VP1). If, as is 
natural, we take [18] to mean that Max put his bike in the garden, we must 
conclude that did so is replacing put his bike. But a careful look at [16] shows that 
put his bike is NOT a VP! In fact, it’s not even a constituent (check!). Since did 
so only ever replaces VPs, it’s predictable that [18] should be ungrammatical.
We have seen that did so in [17] replaces VP1 (mended his bike) in [15]. Let’s 
now check whether it can replace VP2 (mended his bike in the garage) in [15]:
[19] Bevis mended his bike in the garage and Max did so (too).
We understand this to mean that Max ‘mended his bike in the garage’. Since 
it’s replacing a VP, it’s grammatical (though perhaps more natural as and so 
did Max). You can check for yourself that did so can replace the single VP 
of [14]/[16].
The fact that did so, which replaces only VPs, can grammatically replace 
two strings of words – one contained within the other – in [13] provides vivid 
evidence that [13] does indeed contain two VPs, as represented in [15].
It is also good evidence for the distinction between complements and 
modiﬁers (i.e. adjuncts) in the VP – and for representing that distinction in 
terms of the distinction between sister-of-V (complement) and sister-of-VP 
(adjunct). Remember, complements are required by certain verbs to complete 
their meaning and make up a complete and grammatical VP. A verb that 
requires a complement – that is, all verbs except intransitives – doesn’t form a 
full VP on its own. That’s why the complement is obligatory. For example, mend 
is a transitive verb: it doesn’t form a VP without a direct object NP. So, were we 
to replace just mended in [13] by did so, we’d be replacing, not a Verb Phrase 
(VP), but just a verb (V) – and the result is ungrammatical:
[20] *Bevis mended his bike in the garage and Max did so his skateboard in the 
garden.
In the light of this discussion, suggest a phrase marker analysis for Sam sunbathed 
beside a stream. Remember, sunbathe is an intransitive verb and therefore forms 
a full VP in its own right. The phrase marker is given as Discussion 1, page 100.

 
THE MOBILITY OF ADVERBIALS
91
Notice that, since adjuncts are optional (their occurrence is not determined 
by the verb and its sub-category), there’s no reason why we can’t reiterate 
adjunct adverbials (aA) to our hearts’ delight, as in [21]:
[21] [He] [guzzled] [cream cakes] [noisily] [under the blankets] [every night]
 
 S 
V 
dO 
aA 
aA 
aA
Now draw a phrase marker for [22], bearing in mind that [23], [24], and [25] 
are all grammatical:
[22] Humphrey drove his car on the left in France.
[23] He drove his car on the left in France and Claude did so (too).
[24] He drove his car on the left in France and he did so in Germany (too).
[25] He drove his car on the left in France but did so on the right in the States.
The phrase marker is given at the end of the chapter – Discussion 2, page 101.
In teaching syntax over the years, I’ve found that students take a little time to 
get used to these different levels of VP, so here’s a tip when it comes to drawing 
phrase markers. Having drawn the immediate VP of S (the predicate), always ask 
yourself: does that VP include an adjunct adverbial? If it does, then it must have 
another VP as one of its constituents. And so on, for every VP.
The mobility of adverbials
Well, this division of complements into a lower (basic) VP and adjunct adver-
bials into higher VPs looks nice and neat. Unfortunately, a very prominent 
characteristic of adverbials is that they can appear in all sorts of positions in the 
sentence, not just following the V and its complements. Indeed, the very fact 
that you can move a PP around in a sentence is a sure sign that it’s functioning 
as an adverbial and not as a complement of the V, see [26].
[26] Beside a stream, old Sam sunbathed.
Which positions can very surreptitiously occupy in [27]?
[27] She put it under the bed.
[28] Very surreptitiously, she put it under the bed.
[29] She very surreptitiously put it under the bed.
[30] She put it very surreptitiously under the bed.
[31] She put it under the bed very surreptitiously.
Notice in passing that it can’t come between the V and its direct object.

CHAPTER 5 ADVERBIALS AND OTHER MATTERS
92
The position of the adjunct in [31] poses no problem for our analysis of 
adjuncts as modiﬁers of VP within a higher VP. And neither does its position in 
[29]. What would you suggest as the most appropriate phrase marker for [29]?
We can simply represent very surreptitiously as a preceding sister of the VP 
within another VP as in [32]:
[32] 
 
 
In [30], however, very surreptitiously is going to have to appear within VP1 
since it appears between the complements of the V, between the direct object and 
the object-predicative. This is awkward for our analysis. If we want to say that 
the adjunct modiﬁes the VP, it’s odd to ﬁnd it actually inside that VP. And [28] also 
poses a problem, because there the adjunct is completely removed from the VP.
It’s beyond the scope of this book to discuss this aspect of adverbials and 
its implications, important though it is. I won’t attempt to represent these ‘dis-
placed’ adverbials in phrase markers. I’ll only present you with examples in 
which adjunct adverbials can be represented as sisters of a VP within a higher 
VP. You should bear in mind, though, that this is a simpliﬁcation of the facts. 
Of course, if we are simply enumerating the major functions in a sentence, ignor-
ing constituency, no problems arise: [28] can be enumerated as aA–S–V–dO–oP, 
[29] as S–aA–V–dO–oP and [30] as S–V–dO–aA–oP (‘aA’ for ‘adjunct adverbial’).
We have seen that adjuncts can precede or follow the VP they modify. Now, 
in She hardly slept last night, there is a preceding adjunct (the AdvP hardly) and 
a following adjunct (the NP last night). In representing this sentence you’re 
going to have to decide, intuitively, whether hardly pre-modifies a VP of the 
form slept last night or whether last night post-modifies a VP of the form hardly 
slept. In other words, which of the two adjunct adverbials is higher in the struc-
ture? Try and decide this and then draw a phrase marker for the sentence. See 
Discussion 3, page 101.
Notice in passing that the position of the adverbial can make a difference to 
the meaning. Compare (a) They slowly answered all the questions and (b) They 
answered all the questions slowly. (b) suggests they answered each individual 
question slowly, whereas (a) suggests they were slow in answering the whole 
batch of questions.
s
NP
VP2
she
AdvP
VP1
very surreptitiously
put it under the bed

 
PHRASAL VERBS
93
Phrasal verbs
PPs functioning as adjuncts or complements within VP must be distinguished 
from another apparently similar structure. Compare [33] and [34]:
[33] He called up the street.
[34] He called up the boss.
In [33] up the street is a PP functioning as an adjunct. It modiﬁes a VP that con-
sists of the intransitive V called. By contrast, you will have noticed that the string 
up the boss does not form a unit of sense in [34] – and in fact is not a constituent, 
and hence not a PP. Instead, up belongs more with call, to form the phrasal 
verb call up (on the phone). Now, if called up is the V of [34], what do you sug-
gest is the function of the NP the boss?
It is the single NP complement of the verb (call up), so it must be either subject-
predicative or direct object. In fact, it’s the direct object (if this is not clear, check 
in Chapter 4 on the difference between dO and sP). So, call up is a transitive 
phrasal verb. [34] can be represented as in [35]:
[35] 
 
There are many such phrasal verbs in English, some more idiomatic than 
others:
TRANS: call off, look up, put down, hand down, hand over, sound out, drink up.
TRANS and INTRANS: give up, give in, throw up. (These have different [trans] and 
[intran] senses.)
PREP: put up (with NP), go along (with NP), run out (of NP), sign up ( for NP).
INTENS: turn out, end up, wind up.
Although up, off, down, over, and along look suspiciously like prepositions, 
they are traditionally distinguished from prepositions in this position and cate-
gorised as particles. I’ll follow the tradition here: a phrasal verb consists of 
a verb + a particle.
s
NP
VP
he
V
[trans]
[phrasal]
NP
called up
the boss

CHAPTER 5 ADVERBIALS AND OTHER MATTERS
94
Notice that [36] is ambiguous.
[36] He looked up the street.
On one interpretation, the VP consists of V + PP. This is the interpretation on 
which he would be looking up the street to see who was coming, for example. 
Up the street indicates where he looked. Look is a [prep] verb here. On the other 
interpretation, look up is a [trans] phrasal verb with the NP functioning as direct 
object (as in [34]). On this interpretation he would be trying to locate the street 
in the index of a street atlas.
A defining characteristic of particles is that they can appear in a position 
after the direct object NP. Thus, [34] is acceptably paraphrased by [37].
[37] He called the boss up.
But [33] is not paraphrased by [38].
[38] *He called the street up.
The VP of [37] can be represented as in [39], with ‘particle’ abbreviated to ‘Prt’.
[39] 
 
Indeed, when the direct object is a pronoun, the particle must appear after it:
[40a] He called him up.
[40b] *He called up him.
Only the particle of a phrasal verb can move over the direct object in this way. 
The preposition in a PP can never move to a position following its NP comple-
ment. So, particle movement provides a reliable test for distinguishing 
between [phrasal verb + (direct object) NP] and [verb + PP]. Notice that, while 
He looked up the street is ambiguous, He looked the street up is not ambiguous. 
Since up has moved, it cannot be the P of the PP up the street; it must be the 
particle of the phrasal verb look up.
The particle can only move over a direct object np. It can’t move over a 
PP (he put up with John, *he put with John up), nor can it move over a subject-
predicative NP (he turned out a brilliant lawyer, meaning he became one; *He 
turned a brilliant lawyer out is ungrammatical on that interpretation).
Now decide, for each of the following VPs, whether it includes a transitive 
phrasal verb + NP or a prepositional verb + PP.
VP
v
[trans]
[phrasal]
NP
Prt
called
the boss
up

 
ELLIPSIS
95
(a) shouted out the answers 
(b) looked out the window
(c) hangs about the ofﬁce 
(d) handed over the money
(e) viciously turned on John 
(f) saw through the term
(g) gave in my essay 
(h) saw through her disguise
See Discussion 4, pages 101–2, which makes a further important point about the 
distinction between phrasal and prepositional verbs.
Ellipsis
Now that I’ve introduced adjunct adverbials and distinguished them from the 
complements of the verb, we must look at a general issue that has a bearing on 
that distinction and thus on verb-subcategorisation.
Verb complements, remember, are a necessary part of sentence structure: 
they can’t be omitted without ungrammaticality. In this they contrast with 
adjunct adverbials (optional). But look now at the following sentences:
[41] William gave some bleach to Millie.
[42] William gave Millie some bleach.
[43] William gave some bleach.
In Chapter 4, give was sub-categorised as a ditransitive verb. This is as good as 
saying that both the direct and the indirect object are necessary, non-omissible. 
But [43] does appear to be acceptable, even though it contains nothing that 
corresponds to an indirect object. Should we say, then, that the indirect object 
NP in [42] or the PP in [41] are optional? What effect would this have on the 
sub-category of the verb?
It would make give a transitive verb. If it is transitive, then the PP in [41] would 
be an adjunct rather than part of the complementation of the verb. Alternatively, 
we might want to assign give to both sub-categories, [ditrans] in [41] and [42], 
but [trans] in [43].
For various reasons, neither of these solutions is desirable. The most import-
ant reason is that neither solution does justice to the fact that, although [43] 
is acceptable, it nevertheless seems incomplete. Or, more to the point, it seems 
incomplete when considered out of context. Out of context, we’d be 
prompted to ask who William gave the bleach to. However, in any context in 
which it could be understood who had been given the bleach, [43] is perfectly 
acceptable – for example, in the context of a conversation about Millie’s 
birthday presents. On the other hand, in the context of a discussion of what had 
happened to the bleach or of what William had done, its incompleteness would 
be unacceptable. Note the oddity of [44b] as an answer to [44a]:

CHAPTER 5 ADVERBIALS AND OTHER MATTERS
96
[44a] What the hell happened to the bleach?
[44b] *William gave it.
When a sentence is actually used by a speaker (i.e. when a speaker actually 
utters it), almost anything can be omitted, provided the omitted elements can be 
understood from the context in which it is used. The omission from sentences 
of grammatically obligatory elements capable of being understood in the 
context of use is called ellipsis. Ellipsis creates acceptable, but nonetheless 
grammatically incomplete, utterances. Even subjects can be ellipted, as in
[45] Visited Madame Sosostris this morning.
Almost certainly the ellipted subject is I (as in diary writing). But we would not 
want to say, simply because the utterance of [45] is acceptable in certain con-
texts, that in English subject NPs are grammatically optional.
In saying that certain constituents are grammatically necessary (obligatory), then, 
I’ve been relying implicitly on a distinction that is important in language description:
The grammaticality of sentences vs. the acceptability of utterances
i.e. the acceptability of uttering a particular sentence in a context.
The study of syntax, in its purest form, is more concerned with the concept of 
grammatical sentence than with the concept of acceptable utterance. In other 
words, syntax is concerned with the form of sentences, without taking into 
account the effects of uttering sentences in a context. Knowing what counts as 
a grammatical sentence plays an important part in a speaker’s ability to interpret 
the utterances she actually hears (or reads), but it is only a part.
You may wish to apply the sentence analysis offered in this book to utter-
ances – that is, to actual uses of sentences by a speaker, whether in speech or in 
writing. If so, it will be useful to have a way of representing ellipsis. This is easily 
done. For example, we can capture the fact that, even though [43] has no indirect 
object, it still counts as a ditransitive sentence (albeit an elliptical one), as in [46]:
[46] 
 
where ‘E’ indicates an ellipted element, in this case an NP functioning as 
indirect object.
Before leaving ellipsis, it is worth spending a little time considering how 
ellipsis interacts with decisions about sub-categorisation.
s
NP
VP
William
V
[ditransl
NP
NP
gave 
E 
some bleach

 
SENTENCE ADVERBIALS (S ADVERBIALS)
97
Compare [47] and [48]:
[47] Max played his tuba in the street.
[48] Max played in the street.
[47] is transitive with an adjunct PP (in the street). What about [48]? Well, in 
context, it could be an elliptical version of [47]. For example, if, as an utterance, 
it occurred in the context of a conversation about the players of the Chatanooga 
Stompers, and Max is known to be their tuba player, then [48] would reasonably 
be understood to mean exactly what [47] means. In such a context, it should be 
treated as an elliptical transitive sentence, with the dO ellipted. Out of context 
(that is, as a sentence rather than an actual utterance), or in another context, 
[48] is interpreted differently. Here, play means the same as ‘play about’ or 
‘amuse oneself’. This is an intransitive sense of play. As sentences out of context, 
then, [47] and [48] indicate that play belongs to two sub-categories [trans] and 
[intrans]. It has a distinct sense in each.
Compare now [49] and [50].
[49] Jean-Pierre ate the couscous rapidly.
[50] Jean-Pierre ate rapidly.
Should we assign eat to two sub-categories, [trans] in [49] and [intrans] in [50]? 
Or should we treat [50] as an elliptical [trans] with the direct object omitted?
Eat is different from play in that one always has to eat something. As we saw, 
one doesn’t always have to play something; it depends on the sense of play. This 
suggests that [50] should be treated as [transitive] with an ellipted direct object.
Sentence adverbials (S adverbials)
All the adverbials looked at so far are adjunct adverbials. They are modiﬁers of 
a VP within a higher VP. Adjunct adverbials, then, could just as well be called 
‘VP-adverbials’. In this section I contrast them with two other kinds of adverbial 
– disjunct and conjunct adverbials – which I shall group together as sen-
tence adverbials (S-adverbials).
Compare the [a] and [b] examples in the following pairs:
[51a] Buster admitted everything frankly.
[51b] Buster admitted everything, frankly.
[52a] Max can only do the tango rather awkwardly.
[52b] Max can only do the tango, rather awkwardly.
[53a] Helmut interfered between you and me.
[53b] Helmut interfered, between you and me.

CHAPTER 5 ADVERBIALS AND OTHER MATTERS
98
In the [a] examples the italicised constituent functions as an adjunct adver-
bial, a VP modiﬁer. In [51a], frankly tells us the manner of Buster’s admission 
(Buster was frank). But this is not how you understand [51b], with the comma. 
Here, frankly describes how the speaker/writer of [51b] feels she herself is 
expressing what she has to say. Here it’s the speaker/writer who’s being frank 
in saying that Buster admitted everything. [52a], with the VP-adverbial, 
expresses the idea that the manner of Max’s tango-dancing is awkward. It does 
not imply that the tango is Max’s only dance. By contrast, in [52b], nothing 
is said about how Max dances the tango, but it does say that the tango is Max’s 
only dance. [52b] expresses the idea that, however gracefully Max might dance 
the tango, the speaker/writer feels that its being Max’s only dance is a rather 
awkward fact. The same sort of distinction goes for [53a/b]. In [53b] between 
you and me is being used to mean the same as conﬁdentially (the speaker/
writer of [53b] is being conﬁdential in saying that Helmut interfered), but not 
in [53a].
All the [b] examples are sentence adverbials – more speciﬁcally, disjunct 
adverbials. Disjunct adverbials provide some comment by the speaker/writer 
about what she is reporting or about how she feels she herself is expressing 
what she has to say. They are called ‘S-adverbials’ because, in contrast to the 
VP-adverbials of the last section and in the [a] examples above, the adverbial 
doesn’t actually modify anything within the sentence. They are, in fact, only very 
loosely associated with the sentence. This feeling is borne out by the use of the 
comma in writing and by a distinct intonation in speech. Notice that the 
S-adverbial interpretation is much the more natural interpretation when the 
adverbial occurs at the beginning of the sentence (and in [52c] it’s the only pos-
sible interpretation):
 [51c] Frankly, Buster admitted everything.
 [52c] Rather awkwardly, Max can only do the tango.
 [53c] Between you and me, Helmut interfered.
Some traditionalists object to the use of hopefully in [54b] as against its use 
in [54a]:
[54a] He will look up hopefully.
[54b] He will look up, hopefully. (Hopefully, he will look up.)
Why this should be is not clear. Hopefully, just like frankly, between you and me, 
conﬁdentially, and rather awkwardly – and innumerable other adverbials – can 
(and does) function either as a VP-adverbial (as in [54a]) or as an S-adverbial 
(as in [54b]). Stupidly is another example: compare [a] He answered the question 
stupidly (= he gave a stupid answer) with [b] Stupidly, he answered the question 
(= it was stupid of him to give any answer).

 
SENTENCE ADVERBIALS (S ADVERBIALS)
99
As mentioned, instead of modifying some element within the sentence, 
the S-adverbial relates to the sentence as a whole, considered as a unit. So, as 
suggested by the terms ‘VP-adverbial’ and ‘S-adverbial’, the distinction between 
[51a] and [51b] is the distinction between frankly functioning as a modiﬁer 
of VP within a higher VP vs. functioning as a modiﬁer of S within a higher S, as 
in [55].
[55a] 
 
[55b] 
 
If the S-adverbial appears at the beginning, it should be represented as a pre-
ceding sister of the S it modiﬁes – just as, if the VP-adverbial appears between 
the subject NP and the VP, it should be represented as a preceding sister of 
the VP.
All the adverbials looked at so far can function both as VP (adjunct) adver-
bials and as S-adverbials. But some AdvPs and PPs can only be interpreted as 
VP-(adjunct) adverbials. Examples (if you think about it) are: sideways, daintily, 
noisily, with grace and speed. On the other hand, there are AdvPs and PPs that 
can only function as S-adverbials. Examples are: admittedly, certainly, of course, 
perhaps, possibly.
In particular, there’s a group of AdvPs and PPs that have a quite speciﬁc 
interpretation and can only have an S-adverbial function. Examples are: (AdvPs) 
nevertheless, therefore, furthermore, thus, however, incidentally, and (PPs) on the 
contrary, by contrast, in other words, for a start, in short, in conclusion, on the 
other hand. Such S-adverbials are sometimes more speciﬁcally referred to as 
‘conjunct adverbials’. They indicate what kind of relation holds between 
s
NP
VP
Buster
VP
AdvP
admitted
everything
frankly
S
S
AdvP
NP
VP
frankly
Buster
admitted
everything

CHAPTER 5 ADVERBIALS AND OTHER MATTERS
100
the sentences they modify and the preceding or following discourse. As 
S-adverbials, they have no function within the sentence they modify. They serve 
to link distinct and grammatically unconnected sentences into a coherent and 
structured discourse. As a result, notice that when a conjunct S-adverbial is 
present, the sentence sounds odd in isolation, as if it’s been ripped out of 
a discourse context:
[56] In short, you’re ﬁred.
[57] You’ve got no clothes on, for a start.
[58] 
 
The representation of S-adverbials as sisters of S (within another S) is again a 
simpliﬁcation, however. Like VP-(adjunct) adverbials, S-adverbials can appear 
in a variety of positions, not only at the beginning and the end of sentences, but 
actually inside the sentences they modify:
[59] Rashid, on the other hand, came dressed as a washing machine.
In these ﬁrst ﬁve chapters, the general structure of simple sentences has been 
outlined. In the next two chapters, I go into more detail on the structure of 
simple sentences.
■ Discussion of in-text exercises
1. 
 
 
Beside a stream is a VP-adverbial. As an [intrans] V, sunbathed forms a VP in its own 
right. Notice that we could continue with . . . and Miranda did so on the verandah, 
meaning ‘Miranda sunbathed on the verandah’. Here did so replaces the [intrans] 
VP, sunbathed.
s
pp
s
in short 
you're fired
S
NP
VP
Sam
VP
PP
V
[intrans]
beside a stream
sunbathed

 
SENTENCE ADVERBIALS (S ADVERBIALS)
101
2. 
 
3. Intuitively, last night modiﬁes [hardly slept] and is thus the higher of the two 
adjuncts. A hint that this analysis is correct: last night can move to the front of the 
sentence without change of meaning and this leaves hardly slept as a clear VP. But 
hardly cannot move:
 
(a) Last night, she hardly slept  (b) *Hardly, she slept last night.
4. (a)  Transitive phrasal verb + NP. The grammaticality of . . . shouted the 
answers out shows we are dealing here with the moveable particle of a 
phrasal verb.
(b) Prepositional verb + PP (Note the ungrammaticality of *. . . looked the 
window out).
s
NP
VP3
VP2 
PP
Humphrey
VP1
PP
in France
on the left
NP
V
[trans]
drove
his car
did so [25]
did so [24]
did so (too) [23]
S
NP
VP
She
VP
NP
AdvP
VP
last night
hardly
V
[intrans]
slept

CHAPTER 5 ADVERBIALS AND OTHER MATTERS
102
(c) Prepositional verb + PP (*. . . hangs the ofﬁce about).
(d) Transitive phrasal verb + NP (. . . handed the money over).
(e) Prepositional verb + PP (cf. *. . . viciously turned John on).
 
 Viciously was included in order to rule out the interpretation in which John 
is excited. On this latter interpretation, turned on John clearly would be a 
[phrasal verb + NP] and in fact sounds much better with the particle moved 
(as in turned John on).
(f) Transitive phrasal verb + NP, meaning ‘completed the term’ (saw the term 
through).
(g) Transitive phrasal verb + NP (handed my essay in).
(h) Prepositional verb + PP (*saw the disguise through).
 
What these examples show is that the distinction between [phrasal verb + NP] 
and [prepositional verb + PP] is NOT a distinction between an idiomatic con-
struction and a non-idiomatic construction. As (c), (e), and (h) illustrate, the 
combination of prepositional verb and PP (e.g. saw through the disguise) can be 
just as idiomatic as a phrasal verb + NP (saw through the term). Idiomaticity is 
independent of, and cuts across, the phrasal/prepositional distinction. This is 
why the particle movement test for phrasal verbs is so important.
 Exercises
1. Identify the sub-category of the V and the functions of the major elements in the 
following sentences in terms of S, V, dO, iO, sP, oP, PC, aA (for adjunct adverbial), 
and sA (for sentence adverbial).
(a) That so-called music very quickly drove him mad.
(b) Margaret and Michael celebrated their success with a bottle of champagne.
(c) They were in the ofﬁce for twelve hours every single day.
(d) Incidentally, I sold your vests to the museum for a small fortune.
(e) The acrobats often sleep until ten o’clock.
(f) Luckily enough, they gave in in seconds.
(g) Murdstone brought the child up too strictly, in my opinion.
(h) Few students worry about exams until the end of term.
2. Having checked the answers to Exercise 1, draw phrase markers for sentences 
(a) – (f), using triangles where appropriate. As regards (e): it contains a preceding 
adjunct and a following adjunct and, as in in-text Exercise 3, you’ll have to decide 
which of these adjuncts is the highest.

 
EXERCISES
103
3. The following verbs are all transitive. Try and decide for each verb whether the 
absence of a direct object should be treated (a) as an instance of ellipsis or (b) as 
indicating that the verb also belongs to the intransitive sub-category (see the 
discussion of play in this chapter).
read, launch, kick, jump, recall, pay.
4. Look at the following sentences and decide on the sub-category of the V and 
the functions of the italicised constituents. Some questions to ask: Does appear 
belong to one sub-category or more than one? Does appear have the same sense 
in all cases? Are any of the sentences ambiguous? Is (e) elliptical?
(a) Hieronimo appeared rather jumpy.
(b) Hieronimo appeared a veritable tyrant.
(c) Hieronimo appeared in a ﬂurry of snow.
(d) Hieronimo appeared in a dangerous mood.
(e) Hieronimo appeared.
5. Let’s agree that the following sentence is ungrammatical:
(a) *Tim went to the circus and Max did so to the zoo.
 
 And let’s assume that it is an ungrammatical way of saying
(b) Tim went to the circus and Max went to the zoo.
 
Now tackle the following questions in order:
(1) What string of words does did so replace in (a)?
(2) What does the UNgrammaticality of (a) tell you about the CATEGORY of the 
string it replaces?
(3) On the basis of your answers to (1) and (2), decide whether the PP to the 
circus is an adjunct or a complement of the verb.
(4) On the basis of your answer to (3), how should we sub-categorise go in (a)?
(5) Look at the following two conversations between Abe and Ben:
 
(c) Abe: Where’s Maria? Ben: She went.
 
(d)  Abe: Great party, wasn’t it! Ben: Even Maria went!
 
How do you suggest we handle the sub-categorisation of go in each of these uses?
6. The senses of discover in the following two sentences are quite different.
(a) Kelvin discovered the 2nd Law of Thermodynamics in his lab.
(b) Max discovered rats in his lab.
 
The two senses correspond to two different verb subcategories. Draw phrase 
markers for (a) and (b) to reﬂect this difference. (Abbreviate ‘the 2nd Law of 
Thermodynamics’ to ‘the law’.)

CHAPTER 5 ADVERBIALS AND OTHER MATTERS
104
■ Discussion of exercises
1. (a) [This so-called music]  [very quickly]  [drove]  [him]  [mad]
 
 
S 
aA 
V 
dO 
oP
 
 
[complex]
(b) [Margaret and Michael]  [celebrated]  [their success]  [with a bottle of
 
 
 
 
 
champagne]
 
 
S 
V 
dO 
aA
 
 
[trans]
(c) [They]  [were]  [in the ofﬁce]  [for twelve hours]  [every single day]
 
 
S 
V 
sP 
aA 
aA
 
 
[intens]
(d) [Incidentally]  [I]  [sold]  [your vests]  [to the museum]  [for a small fortune]
 
 
sA 
S 
V 
dO 
iO 
aA
 
 
[ditrans]
(e) [The acrobats]  [often]  [slept]  [until ten o’clock]
 
 
S 
aA 
V 
aA
 
 
[intrans]
(f) [Luckily enough]  [they]  [gave in]  [in seconds]
 
 
sA 
S 
V 
aA
 
 
[phrasal]
 
 
[intrans]
(g) [Murdstone]   [brought]   [the child]   [up]   [too strictly]   [in my opinion]
 
 
S 
V 
dO 
Prt 
aA 
sA
 
 
[phrasal]
 
 
[trans]
(h) [Few students]  [worry]  [about exams]  [until the end of term]
 
 
S 
V 
PC 
aA
 
 
[prep]
2. (a) 
 
 
s
NP
VP
That so-called music
AdvP
VP
very quickly
V
[complex]
NP
AP
drove
him
mad

 
EXERCISES
105
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
 
 
(d) 
 
 
s
NP
VP
Margaret & Michael
VP
PP
V
[trans]
NP
with a bottle of champagne
celebrated 
their success
S
NP
VP
They
VP
NP
VP
PP
every single day
V
[intens]
PP
for 12 hours
were 
in the office
S
AdvP
S
Incidentally
NP
VP
I
VP
PP
V
Tditransl
NP
PP
for a small 
fortune
sold 
your vests 
to the museum

CHAPTER 5 ADVERBIALS AND OTHER MATTERS
106
(e) 
 
 
Note: Often the acrobats sleep until ten vs. *Until ten the acrobats often sleep. 
(f) 
 
 
3. This exercise is a matter of judgement rather than getting the answer right or 
wrong. My judgements are as follows. The verbs seem to fall into three groups:
 
(a) jump and kick  (b) read and pay  (c) recall and launch
(a) Jump and kick are similar; you can jump a stack of books and kick an obstinate 
car but, in another sense of the verb, you can jump without jumping any-
thing (jumping up and down) and you can just kick (babies do it all the 
time). So jump and kick belong to both sub-categories [transitive] and 
[intransitive].
(b) Read and pay are similar to eat. You do always have to read SOMETHING. And 
when after a meal you inform your partner that he/she is ‘paying’, they 
will understand that it’s the bill that is to be paid. So both read and pay are 
s
NP 
VP
The acrobats
AdvP 
VP
often 
VP 
PP
V
[intrans]
until ten o'clock
slept
AdvP
Luckily enough
S
S
NP 
VP
they 
VP 
PP
V
[intrans]
[phrasal]
in seconds
gave in

 
EXERCISES
107
[transitive] and the absence of a direct object is a matter of ellipsis. Notice 
that both pay and read can also be [ditransitive]: They paid me the money and 
I read her a story. Pay is also [prep]: she paid for the meal.
(c) I’ve grouped launch and recall separately from pay since, while they are 
clearly [transitive] and require a direct object, they require it so strongly that 
it is almost unacceptable to omit the object by ellipsis. These are [transitive] 
only.
4. In (a) appear is complemented by an AP. This indicates that the verb is [intensive], 
with the AP functioning as subject-predicative. The complement NP in (b) has 
the same relation to the verb (and the subject) as the AP in (a), so again there 
is no reason not to take the verb in (b) as [intensive], complemented by a 
subject-predicative. We usually ﬁnd that [intensive] verbs can be complemented 
by an AP, NP, or PP. So we might expect the verb in (c) to be [intensive] again, 
with the PP functioning as subject-predicative. But notice that the sense of appear 
in (c) is quite different from that in (a) and (b). (a) and (b) can be paraphrased 
by (f) and (g):
(f) Hieronimo appeared to be !
@
rather jumpy.
a veritable tyrant.
(g) It appeared that Hieronimo was !
@
rather jumpy.
a veritable tyrant.
 
Here the verb has a sense similar to seem. (c), by contrast, can’t be paraphrased 
in these ways:
(h) Hieronimo appeared to be in a ﬂurry of snow.
(i) It appeared that Hieronimo was in a ﬂurry of snow.
 
Here the verb has the sense of ‘come into view’ or ‘turn up’. It can be paraphrased 
by (j).
(j) Hieronimo appeared, and did so in a ﬂurry of snow.
 
Contrast this with (a) and (b). In the sense of the verb in (c)/(j), appear is [intran-
sitive] with the PP functioning as an (optional) adverbial.
Coming to (d) now, notice it’s ambiguous: it can have either the sense it 
has in (a) and (b) (Hieronimo appeared to be in a dangerous mood ) or the sense 
it has in (c) (Hieronimo appeared and did so in a dangerous mood ). On the 
ﬁrst interpretation, we have an [intensive] V complemented by a PP as subject-
predicative; on the second, we have an [intransitive] V modiﬁed by an optional 
PP as adverbial.
As for (e), this is an [intransitive] sentence, not an elliptical [intensive] sentence. 
Since appear also belongs to the [intransitive] sub-category, the subject-predicative 
cannot, in fact, be ellipted with the [intensive] sense of the verb. In ellipting the 
subject-predicative, the speaker would risk having appear misunderstood and 
analysed by her hearers as [intransitive].

CHAPTER 5 ADVERBIALS AND OTHER MATTERS
108
5. (1) Did so replaces went.
(2) Since do so only replaces VPs and since (a) is UNgrammatical, we must conclude 
that went does not constitute, in itself, a VP (but just a V).
(3) If to the circus was an adjunct, it would be the sister of a VP (within a higher 
VP). In that case, went would have to be analysed as a VP. But went isn’t a VP 
(as shown in (2)). So the PP can’t be an adjunct. If, on the other hand, the 
PP is a complement, then it must be a sister of the V and form a VP with that 
V. And notice that do so can indeed replace the string went to the circus as in:
Max went to the circus and Hogarth did so (too).
So we must analyse the PP as a complement. It is only by doing this that 
we can avoid analysing went as a full VP in its own right.
(4) We must analyse go as a prepositional verb.
(5) Two quite different senses of go are involved here. In (c), the verb is used in 
the sense of ‘leave’ or ‘depart’ and is [intransitive]. Go, therefore, is both an 
[intransitive] and a [prepositional] verb. In (d), on the other hand, the verb is 
interpreted, in the context of that second conversation, as went to the party. 
The prepositional complement is understood. This is an elliptical use of the 
[prepositional] verb.
6. (a)
 
 
 
(b)
 
 
 
In (b) there is an intensive (predicative) relation between rats and in his lab – Max 
discovered that rats were in his lab. Kelvin of course did not discover that the law 
was in his lab. He was in his lab when he discovered the law.
s
NP
VP
Kelvin
VP
PP
V
[trans]
NP
in his lab
discovered
the law
S
NP 
VP
Max
V
[complex]
NP
PP
discovered
rats
in his lab

 
FURTHER EXERCISES
109
 Further exercises
Here are three sets of sentences, illustrating all the points made in the last two 
chapters. Draw phrase markers for them. Allow yourself plenty of room. Ambiguous 
examples will need two phrase markers. The examples become more intricate, and 
may admit of more discussion, as the sets progress. Those in Set I don’t include 
sentence-adverbials; this will allow you to concentrate more on the distinction 
between verb complements (sisters of V) and VP-(adjunct) adverbials (sisters of VP).
Example: Their spokesman’s pronouncements quickly landed him in gaol.
Set I
 1. The trainees got much quicker over those three months.
 2. All our planes landed within twenty minutes.
 3. Millie silently bottled up her feelings.
 4. The speaker made this the main point of his argument.
 5. The boss wished all his staff a Merry Christmas.
 6. My housekeeper never believed in ghosts.
 7. Matilda and her friends polished off the toast by eight thirty.
 8. He opened his mail very reluctantly that morning.
 9. It rained for three hours on the Continent last night.
10. Martha left the bathroom in a mess. (ambiguous)
Set II
 1. They often seem really nervous at ﬁrst.
 2. They lived in Paris quite happily for a good ten years.
 3. The old man grew increasingly intolerant, in my opinion.
 4. They decided on the train. (ambiguous; elliptical on one interpretation)
 5. You turned the high-wire into a death-trap, for your information!
 6. The trapeze artistes asked for a meeting with the circus management.
s
NP
VP
their spokesman's 
pronouncements
AdvP
VP
quickly
V
[complex]
NP
PP
landed
him
in gaol

CHAPTER 5 ADVERBIALS AND OTHER MATTERS
110
 7. Floyd’s surprise puddings always blow up in your face.
 8. He cooked us a delicious meal with just pasta and soy for the price of a Coke.
 9.  The architects positioned the windows too close to each other in the earlier 
building.
10.  Amazingly, they allowed him total freedom without a thought for the 
consequences.
Set III
 1. The drunken recruits repeatedly tripped over the guy ropes until the early hours.
 2. He never looked back on his years at sea with much nostalgia, however.
 3. Unfortunately, his new rotting compound quickly leaked into the foundations.
 4. Several ﬁgures gingerly edged towards the precipice in full view of the police.
 5. She ignored all those people in the studio. (ambiguous)
 6. She kept all those people in the studio. (ambiguous)
 7. Interestingly, Matilda barely gets on with her new colleagues.
 8. They soon ran out of energy and for ten hours slept like babies.
 9.  The butler usually mopped up the crumbs after each course in the old days. 
(This will need careful attention to the meaning in deciding what constituents 
each of the (three) adverbials is modifying.)
10. Time ﬂies like an arrow but fruit ﬂies like a banana. (Groucho Marx)

111
This chapter comes in two parts.
Part I: Lexical and auxiliary verbs. Here I ﬁrst explain the various forms and the 
ordering of lexical and auxiliary verbs. Then I explain how auxiliary verbs ﬁgure 
in the structure of VP.
Part II: Constructions that depend on auxiliary verbs. Here I explain three 
constructions that crucially involve auxiliary verbs: passive sentences, negative 
sentences, and questions.
Part I: Lexical and auxiliary verbs
As explained, every full (non-elliptical) VP includes a lexical verb and it may 
contain one or more auxiliary verbs. So far we’ve looked at sentences contain-
ing only a lexical verb. My main purpose here is to introduce auxiliary verbs.
I listed the auxiliaries in Chapter 4. Here’s the list again: be, have, and do 
(these three can also be lexical, though with different senses) and can/could, will/
would, shall/should, may/might, must, and need. Be, have and do are sometimes 
called primary auxiliaries. This serves to contrast them with the rest, which 
are all modal auxiliaries.
I’ll use ﬁll as my example of a regular lexical verb and write as my example 
of an irregular lexical verb. These are in italics in [2]–[5]. The auxiliary verbs are 
in bold.
 
[1a] Daisy ﬁlls/ﬁlled the pool. 
[1b] Max writes/wrote nothing.
 
[2a] Daisy will/would ﬁll the pool. 
[2b] Max can/could write nothing.
 
[3a] Daisy has/had ﬁlled the pool. 
[3b] Max has/had written nothing.
 
[4a] Daisy is/was ﬁlling the pool. 
[4b] Max is/was writing nothing.
 
[5a] The pool is/was ﬁlled. 
[5b] Nothing is/was written.
These examples show that, in a sequence of verbs,
A) it is always just the first verb – whether lexical or auxiliary – that dis-
plays the tense distinction between present and past;
6
More on verbs
Auxiliary VPs

CHAPTER 6 MORE ON VERBS: AUXILIARY VPS
112
B) auxiliary verbs (if present) always precede the lexical verb;
C) the form of a verb is determined by the verb that precedes it.
In [2]–[5], I’ve given examples containing just one auxiliary each. In fact, 
there can be up to four auxiliaries. For the moment, though, let’s keep things 
simple.
Tense and time
Verb forms that are tensed are traditionally called finite verb forms. All 
other verb forms are non-finite (not tensed). Every sentence must contain a 
ﬁnite verb. In the absence of any auxiliary, it is the lexical verb that is tensed 
(ﬁnite). So I’ll start by looking at tense in lexical verbs, as in [1a–b] above.
Fill is a regular lexical verb in English. That’s to say, its present tense form 
consists of the basic stem, V itself, plus the present tense inflection -s, and 
its past tense form consists of the stem plus the past tense inflection -ed.
There are many irregular lexical verbs in English. The more common verbs 
tend to be irregular. As indicated, write has the irregular past tense wrote. Other 
lexical verbs with an irregular past tense are give (gave), forbid ( forbade), see 
(saw), go (went), leave (left), and meet (met). And there are lexical verbs which 
are irregular in that, even when interpreted as being in the past tense – and thus 
as ﬁnite – they don’t have a past tense form distinct from their bare stem form 
(V). Examples are put, bet, read, and hit. Compare [6a] and [6b].
 [6a] He puts it in his ear. (pres)  [6b] He put it in his ear. (past)
Put in [6b] is shown to be in the past tense – and thus a ﬁnite form of the verb 
– by the fact that, if we replace it with a regular verb such as place, and don’t 
change the meaning of the sentence in any other way, we would replace it with 
placed, an overtly past tense form (He placed it in his ear).
Although it’s irregular for a lexical verb not to change its form in the past 
tense, it is perfectly regular for verbs not to change from their stem form in 
the present tense. In fact, lexical verbs only change their form in the present 
tense when (as in [1a]) the subject NP is he, she, it, or any Noun Phrase 
that could be replaced by one of those pronouns (e.g. Daisy). Such NPs are 
third person singular NPs. In all other cases, the present tense form of the 
verb is identical to the bare stem form. The only exception to this general rule is 
the verb be:

 
TENSE AND TIME
113
 [7]   
 
FILL 
BE
 
Number 
Person 
Pres    Pres 
Past
 
singular 
1
2
3
1st (I) 
ﬁll 
am 
was
2nd (you) 
ﬁll 
are 
were
3rd (he, she, it)    ﬁll-s 
is 
was
 
plural 
1
2
3
1st (we) 
ﬁll 
are 
were
2nd (you) 
ﬁll 
are 
were
3rd (they) 
ﬁll 
are 
were
 
This change of form in the ﬁnite verb according to the number and person of 
the subject NP is called subject–verb agreement. So, English verbs display 
overt subject–verb agreement only in the present tense and then only with a 
third-person singular subject.
How are you supposed to know, when a verb appears in the bare stem form, 
whether it’s ﬁnite (in the present tense – as in they ﬁll the pool) or non-ﬁnite (not 
tensed)? Well, change the subject (e.g. they) to a third-person singular NP 
(e.g. she, Daisy): if it’s ﬁnite – tensed for present – the verb will change to the 
-s form, ﬁlls.
How should we represent tense in phrase markers? In this book I’m primarily 
concerned with whether a verb is ﬁnite – tensed for present or past. This is a 
matter of syntax. I’m less concerned with the actual form a verb takes when 
tensed for present or past. This is more a matter of morphology, phonology, and 
spelling. So, in phrase markers, I won’t attempt to segment a tensed verb into a 
verb stem and a tense inﬂection. Instead, from now on I’ll decorate the V node 
with a tense feature, as in [8] and [9].
[8]   
[9]
 
 
 
    
I mentioned that it’s always just the ﬁrst verb – whether lexical or auxiliary – 
that is ﬁnite. So it’s only in [1a/b] above that the lexical verb is ﬁnite (present or 
past). In [2]–[5], the lexical verb follows an auxiliary verb, so it is the auxiliary 
that is ﬁnite. The various forms of ﬁll and write in [2]–[5] are all un-tensed 
(non-ﬁnite) forms. These forms are determined by the auxiliary verb that 
precedes them. More on this in a moment.
With the irregular verb write, the difference between the ﬁnite (past tense) 
form, wrote in [1b], and the non-ﬁnite form in [3b] and [5b], written, is clear for 
all to see. Not so with ﬁll! The non-ﬁnite form of ﬁll in [3a] and [5a] is identical 
to the past tense (and thus ﬁnite) form: ﬁlled. Confusing, perhaps – but not if 
you remember that only the first verb in a sequence of verbs can be ﬁnite 
V
[trans]
[pres]
r fill(s) 1 
I write(s)\
V
[trans]
[past]
f filled | 
wrote/

CHAPTER 6 MORE ON VERBS: AUXILIARY VPS
114
(present or past). All verbs following an auxiliary verb are non-ﬁnite (neither 
present nor past).
English has just two tenses: Present and Past. You may be wondering about 
the future. Future time is expressible in a variety of ways – for example, by 
means of the auxiliary (modal) verb will, as in He will go – but there is no future 
tense as such.
It’s important to recognise that there is no simple correlation between the 
grammatical category tense and the notion of time. For example, in the right 
circumstances, both present tense and past tense are compatible with the expres-
sion of future time, as shown by [10] and [11]:
[10] The boat leaves at ten tonight. (Present tense – future time)
[11] If he gave me the bleach tomorrow, I’d use it. (Past tense – future time)
Furthermore, will is capable of expressing ideas other than future time, as in 
[12], which is an exasperated way of saying he is always doing it:
[12] He will keep pestering me!
In addition – as we shall see with the auxiliary verb have – there are more ways 
of expressing past time than using past tense.
The contrast between lexical and auxiliary verbs
The two most important differences between lexical and auxiliary verbs are 
these:
 
1.  In questions, auxiliary verbs can move in front of the subject NP. A 
lexical verb cannot.
 
2.  The negative particle (not or n’t) can attach to an auxiliary verb but 
never to a lexical verb.
Compare the auxiliary verbs can and be in [13] and [14] with the lexical verbs 
speak and drink in [15] and [16]:
[13] [a] He can go. 
[b] Can he go? 
[c] He cannot/can’t go.
[14] [a] He is going. 
[b] Is he going? 
[c] He is not/isn’t going.
[15] [a] He spoke. 
[b] *Spoke he? 
[c] *He spoke not (*spoken’t).
[16] [a] He drinks. 
[b] *Drinks he? 
[c] *He drinks not (*drinksn’t).
The correct forms for [15b–c] and [16b–c], of course, are
[17] [b] Did he speak? 
[c] He didn’t speak.
[18] [b] Does he drink? 
[c] He doesn’t drink.
which involve the auxiliary verb do. This is dealt with in Part II of this chapter.

 
MODAL AUXILIARIES (MOD)
115
I’ve listed need among the modal auxiliary verbs. In fact, there are two verbs 
need, one an auxiliary, the other lexical – with a subtle difference in meaning:
LEXICAL 
AUXILIARY
[19a] He doesn’t need !
@
to go.
a drink. 
[19b] He needn’t go.
[20a] Does he need !
@
to go
a drink? 
[20b] Need he go?
As indicated, the lexical verb can take a direct object NP – a drink – so it’s tran-
sitive. By contrast, auxiliary verbs never take an NP complement (they are always 
followed by other verbs). So when need behaves like an auxiliary – in accepting 
negation and moving in the question – it can’t take an NP complement:
 [21a] *He needn’t a drink. [21b] *Needs he a drink?
Notice that, following the lexical verb need – but not auxiliary need – the follow-
ing verb is introduced by to. This is the infinitive particle (discussed in 
Chapter 10). This then illustrates another distinction between auxiliary and 
lexical verbs: when a verb follows a lexical verb, it can be introduced by the 
infinitive particle to but not when it follows an auxiliary verb. For example, 
hope and forget are lexical verbs and, when they are followed by another verb, 
that other verb is lexical and is introduced by to: He hopes to pass but he forgot to 
study. I explain this in Chapter 10.
In what follows, I say more about the four kinds of auxiliary verb and their 
(very strict) ordering.
Modal auxiliaries (MOD)
Modal auxiliary verbs (‘modals’, for short) are special – quite different from 
other verbs, both lexical and auxiliary.
For a start, modals are always tensed (ﬁnite). They do not have untensed 
(non-ﬁnite) forms. This distinguishes modals from the primary auxiliaries (do, 
have and be) and from lexical verbs.
PRESENT:  can 
will 
shall 
may
PAST: 
could would should might
You may be surprised to hear that will is present tense, since it usually has a 
future-time meaning. The point is that will in the present tense provides one way 
of referring to what is (at the present) a future point in time. In the past tense 
(would), it provides a way of referring what was (in the past) a future point in 
time. Compare [22] and [23]:

CHAPTER 6 MORE ON VERBS: AUXILIARY VPS
116
[22] (Present): He says he will come.
[23] (Past): He said he would come.
The modal verbs must and need don’t even have a past tense form but just 
the one (present tense) form already given. Compare this situation with that 
which holds with a lexical verb like give. Besides its ﬁnite (present and past tense) 
forms, give(s) and gave, it has three non-ﬁnite forms: (i) give (the stem form, as 
in to give), (ii) giving, and (iii) given. Notice that, in contrast to auxiliary need, 
lexical need does have a past tense form. He needed to go (preceding the inﬁnitive 
particle to) and He needed a drink (taking an NP complement) are ﬁne.
A further peculiarity of modals is that they never show subject-verb agree-
ment. They don’t change their form in the present tense – not even with a third-
person singular subject NP (so we have She can go, not *She cans go).
Recall that it’s always just the ﬁrst verb in a sequence of verbs that is ﬁnite 
(tensed). It follows from this that, since modals are always tensed, they always 
come first in any sequence of verbs. It also follows that, in a sequence of verbs, 
there can be only one modal verb (*He could would go, *He will must go).
I’ll represent the modal as ‘MOD’ and decorate it with a tense feature, as in 
[24] and [25]:
 [24]  
[25]
 
 
 
     
I’ve mentioned that every auxiliary verb determines the form of the following 
verb. The verb that follows a modal auxiliary always appears in its basic (non-
ﬁnite) stem form. This applies whether the following verb is lexical – as in 
[2a–b] above, (would) ﬁll and (can) write – or another auxiliary.
The perfect auxiliary — have (PERF)
There are two verbs have, lexical and auxiliary. The lexical verb is transitive, tak-
ing an NP complement, as in I have a lovely bunch of coconuts. Auxiliary have is 
described as the ‘perfect’ auxiliary. Perfect have is always followed by another 
verb (ellipsis aside). This was illustrated in [3] above:
 [3a] Daisy has/had ﬁlled the pool.  [3b]  Max has/had written nothing.
Since it is the ﬁrst verb in the VP in these examples, have appears in a ﬁnite form: 
present tense (has) or past tense (had). Remember, though, that the form of a 
tensed verb does not always differ from the basic stem. If the subject were not 
third-person singular, the present tense form would be have – e.g. We have 
written nothing.
MOD
[pres]
MOD
[past]
can
could

117
 
THE PERFECT AUXILIARY — HAVE (PERF)
You will have noticed in [3a–b] that, even though have is in the present tense, 
those sentences refer to past time. This is a prime example of the lack of correla-
tion between time and tense, mentioned earlier. There are more ways of refer-
ring to the past than using the past tense. The perfect auxiliary have provides a 
way of referring to past time independently of past tense. Perfect have in the 
present tense allows us to refer to a present state of affairs resulting from a past 
event, as in He has gone. Contrast this with He went – simple past tense – which 
refers just to a past event. With perfect have in the past tense (as in had written), 
we have a reference to a period of time that was past at a past point in time – the 
‘past in the past’.
The verb that follows perfect have always appears in its (non-ﬁnite) perfect 
participle form. This applies whether the following verb is lexical or another 
auxiliary. Written in [3b] is the perfect participle form of write. Participle forms 
are non-ﬁnite. I’ve called it the ‘perfect participle’ to highlight the fact that 
this form is determined by the preceding perfect have.
As noted, write belongs to a group of verbs that are irregular in that their perfect 
participle form clearly differs from their past tense form (written vs. wrote). Other 
verbs that pattern like write in this respect are forbid, give and go. And the verb 
be – the most irregular verb in the language – is no different in this respect. By con-
trast, with many verbs – in fact, with all regular verbs (e.g. ﬁll) and some irregular 
verbs (e.g. put) – the perfect participle form is identical to the past tense form:
 [26] V 
past tense 
perfect participle
 
 forbid 
forbade 
(have) forbidden 
 
 give 
gave 
(have) given 
 
 go 
went 
(have) gone 
 
irregular
 
 be 
was/were 
(have) been 
 
 put 
put 
(have) put 
5
4
6
4
7
 
regular
 
 ﬁll 
ﬁlled 
(have) ﬁlled 
 
How can you tell whether you’re dealing with a (ﬁnite) past tense form or a 
(non-ﬁnite) perfect participle form when – as in the last two in [26] – the two are 
identical? Easy. It is ﬁnite (past tense) only if it’s the ﬁrst verb in the sequence 
(because only the first verb in the sequence can be finite). If the verb is preceded 
by perfect have, then it must be the non-ﬁnite, perfect participle of the verb.
I mentioned earlier that there are two verbs have, the transitive lexical verb 
and the perfect auxiliary. Here are examples that include both:
[27] Aldo has had a little chat with the doorman.
[28] By two a.m., I had had enough.
In [27] has is the perfect auxiliary (present tense) and it is followed by the lexical 
verb in the perfect participle form (had), which happens to be identical to the 
past tense form of have, as illustrated in [28].

CHAPTER 6 MORE ON VERBS: AUXILIARY VPS
118
I’ll represent perfect as ‘PERF’ and decorate it with the tense feature, as in 
[29] and [30]:
 [29]  
[30]
 
 
 
     
Remember, though, that PERF will only have the tense feature if it’s the ﬁrst 
verb in the sequence. Now that I’ve introduced MOD and PERF, I can give 
examples in which they both occur and in which PERF is not the ﬁrst verb in 
the sequence:
 [31] Millie will have ﬁlled the pool.  
[32] Max could have written something.
As explained, the lexical verb comes last. And, again as explained, the modal 
auxiliary (MOD) comes ﬁrst. It must come ﬁrst because modals are always 
tensed. Hence, when perfect have co-occurs with a modal, it follows the modal. 
It’s an unbreakable rule of English that perfect have precedes the lexical verb and 
modals precede perfect have:
MOD before PERF before Lexical V.
As already noted, MOD demands that the following verb appears in the basic 
(non ﬁnite) stem form; this is the form of perfect have in [31] and [32].
The progressive auxiliary — be (PROG)
Progressive be is easily identiﬁed. Look again at [4a–b]:
 [4a] Daisy is/was ﬁlling the pool.  [4b] Max is/was writing nothing.
In these, the tensed verbs are forms of the progressive auxiliary be. As you can 
see, just as perfect have demands that the following verb has the perfect parti-
ciple form, progressive be demands that the following verb has the (non ﬁnite) 
-ING form. Call this the progressive participle, to reﬂect its dependence 
on preceding progressive be. You’ll be pleased to hear (but you already knew!) 
that the progressive participle (-ing) form is completely regular – invariant for 
all verbs in the language.
Like have, be can function either as an auxiliary or as a lexical verb. Lexical 
be is the intensive verb, the copula of Chapter 4 – as in [33].
[33] Kubla Khan was very extravagant.
In [34], be ﬁgures twice:
[34] Nanny is being a nuisance again.
PERF
[pres]
PERF
[past]
has
had

119
THE PROGRESSIVE AUXILIARY — BE (PROG)
In [34] is is the present tense form of progressive be, and being is the progressive 
participle of the copula.
Now look at [35]:
 [35] This turn of events is worrying.
It might seem that [35] includes progressive be followed by a lexical verb (worry) 
in the progressive participle form. Not so! The verb worry is transitive – it 
requires a direct object. But there is no dO in [35]. So, worrying here is not the 
verb. It’s the adjective. Notice that in [35] it can be modiﬁed by very. This means 
that is in [35] is not the progressive auxiliary. Progressive be is always followed 
by further verb – but here be is followed by an adjective (more strictly, an AP) 
complementing be. So, is in [35] is the intensive lexical verb (the copula).
I’ll represent progressive as ‘PROG’ and decorate it with the tense feature:
 [36]  
[37]
 
 
 
     
But, just as with perfect have, PROG will only have the tense feature if it’s the ﬁrst 
verb in the sequence. Having introduced MOD and PERF, I can give examples in 
which PROG co-occurs with MOD, with PERF and with both MOD and PERF:
 [38] You may be wondering about the future.  (MOD + PROG)
 [39] Millie has been using the bleach.  (PERF + PROG)
 [40] Bill might have been teasing you.  (MOD + PERF + PROG)
Following the modal in [38], progressive be appears in its (non-ﬁnite) bare stem 
form. Following perfect have in [39] and [40], it appears in the (non-ﬁnite) 
perfect participle form (been).
Again, the ordering of the verbs is absolutely ﬁxed.
 MOD before PERF before PROG before Lexical V.
The passive auxiliary — be (PASS)
All the examples discussed so far are said to be in the active voice. They don’t 
contain the passive auxiliary. Sentences that include the passive auxiliary verb 
be are said to be in the passive voice.
Passive be was illustrated in [5a–b], repeated here:
 [5a] The pool is/was ﬁlled.  [5b] Nothing is/was written.
If you compare these with the (active) examples in [1]–[4], you’ll see that the 
choice of passive be affects the form of the sentence as a whole. This difference 
PROG
[pres]
PROG
[past]
is
was

CHAPTER 6 MORE ON VERBS: AUXILIARY VPS
120
in the form of sentences with passive be – passive sentences – is discussed in 
Part II of this chapter. Here I focus just on passive be itself and how it interacts 
with other verbs.
The obvious point to make is that be is also the progressive auxiliary. How to 
distinguish between progressive be and passive be? The answer lies in the form 
of the following verb. Following progressive be, we’ve seen, a verb adopts the 
progressive participle form (V-ing – e.g. stealing). But following passive be, a 
verb adopts the passive participle form (e.g. stolen).
Notice that the passive participle form and the perfect participle form are 
always the same. Since the two participles are the same with every verb in the 
language, it’s traditional not to distinguish them and call them both ‘the past 
participle’. I’ve not adopted that term here because it suggests the form has 
something to do with past tense. It doesn’t. But notice, in passing, that the passive 
option introduces no new form into the language. Economically, it just recom-
bines forms anyway required for the formation of the perfect and the progressive:
I’ll represent passive as ‘PASS’ and decorate it with the tense feature:
 [41]  
[42]
 
 
 
     
I hope you can guess what’s coming. Just as with perfect have and progressive be, 
PASS will only have the tense feature if it’s the ﬁrst verb in the sequence. PASS 
can co-occur with any combination of other auxiliaries:
 [43] Your water pistol will be conﬁscated. 
(MOD + PASS)
 [44] The pool has been ﬁlled by Daisy. 
(PERF + PASS)
 [45] Otto is being driven mad by all the noise. 
(PROG + PASS)
 [46] It should have been written by now. 
(MOD + PERF + PASS)
 [47] It may be being written right now. 
(MOD + PROG + PASS)
 [48] It could have been being written. 
(MOD + PERF + PROG + PASS)
As always, it’s just the ﬁrst verb that’s tensed and the form of each further verb 
is determined (in ways outlined above) by the verb that precedes it. It is all very 
systematic – as is the order of the verbs:
MOD before PERF before PROG before PASS before Lexical V.
[was] stealing 
[was] filling
had [stolen] 
had [filled]
[was] [stolen] 
[was] [filled]
PASS
[pres]
PASS
[past]
is
was
PROGRESSIVE
PERFECT
PASSIVE

 
WHERE AUXILIARIES FIT IN THE STRUCTURE OF VP
121
So much for the forms – and the order – of auxiliaries and lexical verbs. 
The ordering is clear for all to see. What may not be so obvious is the hierar-
chical structure of VPs in which auxiliaries occur. The next section deals 
with this.
Where auxiliaries ﬁt in the structure of VP
In discussing subcategories of lexical verbs in Chapter 4, we saw that comple-
ments of the lexical verb (V) form a VP constituent with that lexical V. This 
is the case whether or not there happen to be auxiliaries in the sentence. In the 
following examples, I’ve bracketed the VP formed by the transitive verb study 
and its direct object NP the menu:
 [49a] Monsieur Blanc will VP[study the menu]
 [50a] Monsieur Blanc has VP[studied the menu].
 [51a] Monsieur Blanc is VP[studying the menu].
What [49a]–[51a] show is that auxiliary verbs are necessarily followed by VPs. 
In fact – and here’s the point – auxiliaries are verbs that take VP complements; 
they demand a following VP.
The bracketed sequences in [49a]–[51a] are shown to be VPs by the fact, 
continuing as in [49b]–[51b], you can replace them with a form of do so:
 [49b] . . . and I will do so, too.  (do so = ‘study the menu’)
 [50b] . . . and I have done so, too.  (done so = ‘studied the menu’)
 [51b] . . . and I am doing so, too.  (doing so = ‘studying the menu’).
And notice you don’t even need do so. The lexical VP can simply be ellipted 
without change of meaning. Ellipsis, remember, is the omission of a gram-
matically obligatory constituent that can be understood in the context of 
utterance. For the above examples, this would give . . . and I will, too; . . . and 
I have, too: . . . and I am, too. On the assumption that only constituents can 
be ellipted, this conﬁrms that the lexical verb plus its complement remains 
a constituent even in the presence of auxiliaries – and it can only be a VP 
constituent.
Now, in [49a]–[51a], Monsieur Blanc is the subject NP. So the rest of the 
sentence in each case is the VP. For example, in [51a] above, the VP consists 
of the progressive auxiliary verb (in the present tense) – is – plus its VP 
complement, studying the menu. Progressive be, in other words, is the head 
of [51a]’s VP.

CHAPTER 6 MORE ON VERBS: AUXILIARY VPS
122
Given all this, there can only be one phrase marker for [51a]:
 [51] 
 
I hope it’s obvious what the phrase marker for [50a] must be, so I won’t set it 
as an in-text exercise. (Even so, it’s given as Discussion 1 on page 133.)
By now you’re probably thinking, ‘More VPs within VPs! I thought sister-of-
VP-and-daughter-of-VP was for adverbials.’ Well, [sister-of-VP-and-daughter-
of-VP] is indeed the sign of a constituent functioning as an adverbial – but 
NOT if that constituent is an auxiliary verb (i.e. MOD, PERF, PROG or 
PASS). Verbs – whether lexical or auxiliary – never function as adverbials.
So, each auxiliary verb is the head of its VP and takes a VP complement. 
This applies when we have more than one auxiliary. Thus:
 [52a] You should have written an essay.
 [52b] 
 
Again, we can ellipt the lexical VP, as in [53], the PERF VP, as in [54], or the 
MOD VP, as in [55]:
 [53] . . . and Rory should have _, too. (i.e. ‘written an essay’)
 [54] . . . and Rory should _, too. (i.e. ‘have written an essay’)
[55] . . . and Rory _, too. (i.e. ‘should have written an essay’).
s
NP
VP
Monsieur Blanc
PROG
[près]
VP
is
V
[trans]
NP
studying 
the menu
S
NP
VP
you
MOD
[past]
VP
should
PERF
VP
have
V
[trans]
NP
written 
an essay

 
AUXILIARY VPS AND ADVERBIALS
123
For reasons explained above, I delay illustrating passive sentences until Part 
II, but everything I’ve said about MOD, PERF, and PROG applies to PASS as 
well. Example [56] includes all the auxiliary options except PASS. Try drawing a 
phrase marker for it. Discussion 2 (page 133).
[56] You should have been writing that essay.
Auxiliary VPs and adverbials
As noted, in introducing auxiliaries, we’ve introduced further VPs. How do 
adverbials interact with these further VPs?
As you can see from the following, adverbials can occur between verbs.
 [57] That hippo could easily have killed me!
 [58] You are deliberately missing the point!
 [59] Bill might just have been teasing you.
 [60] Matilda had been quietly reading Simon a story.
 [61] She may have never been there.
A favoured position for adverbials is the position following the ﬁrst auxiliary, 
as in [57]–[59]. (In fact – and this is awkward for our analysis of S-adverbials – 
this position is particularly favoured for S-adverbials.) In [60] and [61], the 
adverbial precedes the lexical verb, following two auxiliaries.
The interaction between auxiliary VPs and adverbials is an intricate topic, 
well beyond the scope of this book. So I’m going to simplify things:
 Assumption 1.   If an adverbial precedes a verb, assume it modiﬁes the 
following VP.
On that assumption – and bearing in mind that adverbials combine with a VP to 
form a higher VP – the phrase marker for [57], for example, is going to look like [62].
 [62] 
 
s
NP
VP
that hippo
MOD
[past]
VP
could
AdvP
VP
easily
PERF
VP
have
V
[trans]
NP
killed 
me

CHAPTER 6 MORE ON VERBS: AUXILIARY VPS
124
I’ll leave the phrase marker for [60] as an exercise (Discussion 3).
Compare the interpretations of [63] and [64]:
 [63] He just might pass.  [64] He might just pass.
In [63], just precedes might and thus modiﬁes the MOD VP, might pass. It means 
‘it’s just possible he will pass’. By contrast, in [64], just precedes pass and thus 
modiﬁes the lexical VP. It means ‘it’s possible he will just pass (i.e. scrape through)’.
What about when adverbials appear at the end of a sentence containing 
auxiliary VPs? Take [65] for example:
 [65] They have been complaining for the fun of it.
There are three VPs that the adverbial PP for the fun of it could be modifying:
i) the PERF VP have been complaining,
ii) the PROG VP been complaining,
iii) the LEXICAL [intrans] VP complaining.
In this example at least, it doesn’t seem to make much difference which we 
choose, as far as meaning is concerned. So, to simplify things:
 Assumption 2.   Assume that sentence-final adverbials modify (and form 
a VP constituent with) the lexical VP.
On that assumption, the phrase marker for [65] will look like this:
 [66] 
 
I am going to make one exception to Assumption 2, however. It has to do 
with certain time adverbials. Consider [67]:
 [67] Kim and Peter are going to India next week now.
s
NP
VP
they
PERF
[presi
VP
have 
PROG 
VP
been
VP 
PP
V
[intrans]
for the fun of it
complaining

 
PASSIVE SENTENCES
125
Next week modiﬁes going to India. So what is now doing in there? Well, it has to 
do, not directly with their going-to-India, but with their present intentions 
(to go to India next week). Now, it’s PROG be that expresses their intentions 
and PROG be is in the present tense form are in [67]. So, it’s appropriate to say 
that now modiﬁes the (higher) PROG VP. In this connection consider [68]:
 [68] They were going to India next week last week.
Try drawing the phrase marker for [68] before reading further.
For [68] – with its two time adverbials – to make sense, we must analyse next week 
as modifying the lexical VP (going to India) and the past time adverbial last week as 
modifying the past tense PROG VP (WERE going to India next week) – it concerns 
their past intentions. Here’s the phrase marker.
[69] 
 
Notice that this predicts the ordering of next week and last week in [68]. 
Reversing that order yields an incomprehensible sentence:
 [70] *They were going to India last week next week.
Part II: Constructions that depend on auxiliaries
In this part, I explain three sentence constructions that crucially involve auxili-
ary verbs: passive sentences, negative sentences and questions.
Passive sentences
In Part I, I noted that the choice of passive be affects the form of the sentence as 
a whole. Here I explain the form of passive sentences.
Compare the active sentence in [71a] with the passive sentence in [71b].
[71a] The boss ﬁred Max.  [71b] Max was ﬁred (by the boss).
s
NP
VP
they
VP
NP
PROG
[past]
VP
last week
NP
were
VP
going 
to India
next week

CHAPTER 6 MORE ON VERBS: AUXILIARY VPS
126
The verb ﬁre is transitive and – in the active sentence [71a] – we have Max in 
direct object position. But in the corresponding passive sentence [71b], Max has 
migrated to subject position. So, here’s the big idea of this section: the object in 
an active sentence becomes the subject of the corresponding passive sentence.
[71a] and [71b] describe the same state of affairs – but they describe it differ-
ently. It’s the subject that canonically identiﬁes what the sentence is about. So 
the active is understood as being more about the boss than about Max; the pas-
sive, by contrast, is more about the unfortunate Max.
What about the subject of an active sentence when the sentence is passivised 
(the boss in [71a])? Well, if we still want to mention who did the ﬁring, we can 
do so by means of a prepositional phrase – a PP with by as its head. But, since 
the passive sentence is more about Max, we don’t have to mention who did the 
firing (we might not even know who did it). That’s the virtue of passive sen-
tences. As indicated by my brackets in [71b], the by-phrase is optional. It func-
tions as adverbial. It modiﬁes – and is the sister of – a VP. Which VP? Since it’s 
sentence-ﬁnal, it modiﬁes the lexical VP. Evidence for this comes from the co-
ordination of lexical VPs in examples like The ﬁsh were [caught by Emily] and 
[cooked by Raymond].
Now construct the passive counterparts of the following sentences.
[72] Mrs Golightly forgave the lodger.
[73] The bouncer is ejecting the intruder.
If it is not intuitively obvious how to do this, make the change in stages. First 
introduce passive be (in the appropriate tensed form) and put the lexical V in 
the passive participle form (e.g. *Mrs Golightly was forgiven the lodger). Then 
kick the subject out into a sentence-ﬁnal by-phrase (*was forgiven the lodger by 
Mrs Golightly). Finally, shift the object into subject position. This gives:
[74] The lodger was forgiven (by Mrs Golightly).
[75] The intruder is being ejected (by the bouncer).
Now, since converting an active sentence into its passive counterpart 
involves shifting the object into subject position, it follows that only lexical 
verbs that take objects (direct or indirect) can ﬁgure in passive sentences.
intransitive verbs don’t take objects, so active sentences containing them 
don’t have passive counterparts. In Chapter 4, transitive and intensive verbs 
were distinguished. Both can be complemented by an NP, as in [76a] and [77a],
[76a] Everyone present saw a doctor. (transitive)
[77a] Everyone present was a doctor. (intensive)
but the complement NP functions as object only in the transitive [76a]. In the 
intensive [77a] the complement NP functions as subject-predicative. Only 

 
PASSIVE SENTENCES
127
objects shift to subject position in passive sentences. So, while [76a] has a pas-
sive counterpart, [77a] does not:
[76b] A doctor was seen by everyone present.
[77b] *A doctor was been by everyone present.
Since the direct object in the active becomes the subject in the passive, the 
direct object position required by a transitive verb won’t be ﬁlled in the passive. 
Now, ‘[trans]’ means ‘taking a direct object’. Can we still call such verbs ‘tran-
sitive’ in the passive, when they necessarily appear without an NP in direct 
object position? Certainly we can (we must!). Even though Max appears as sub-
ject in the passive [71b], we still understand Max as undergoing the ﬁring – i.e. 
as being the ex-direct object of the transitive verb ﬁre. Simply, it has moved, 
leaving a gap in the direct object position. In passive sentences, a gap is created 
in the object position left by the movement of the object to subject position. I’ll 
represent this gap with a conspicuous blob: ●.
The phrase marker for [71b] above must therefore look this:
[78] 
 
The arrow is not part of the phrase marker. You don’t need to draw it (but feel 
free to do so if it helps). I have done so in [78] simply to make the point explicit.
Exactly the same goes for complex transitive verbs. ‘[complex]’, remem-
ber, means ‘taking a direct object (dO) and an object-predicative (oP) as com-
plements’. In the passive, though, the dO becomes subject, leaving a gap in the 
dO position.
[79] The noise drove Otto mad.
[80]  
s
NP
VP
Max
PASS
[past]
VP
VP
PP
was
V
[trans]
NP
by the boss
fired
dO 
oP
Otto was driven (•) mad (by the noise).

CHAPTER 6 MORE ON VERBS: AUXILIARY VPS
128
Paradoxically, then, the object-predicative (mad) of the active isn’t in fact 
describing the object in the passive – it’s now describing the new subject, Otto. 
Should we then call it a ‘subject-predicative (sP)’? Deﬁnitely not. That would 
be as good as saying that drive was [intensive] – which it isn’t. The paradox is 
resolved by reference to the gap:
[81] 
 
Since the V is [complex], the AP mad must be functioning as object-predicative 
– even in this passive sentence. But on inspecting the dO position, we ﬁnd only 
‘•’. This tells us to look elsewhere for the dO NP that mad is characterising. 
It is PASS be (+ passive participle) that tells us to look for that NP in the subject 
position.
Consider also the effect of PASS on ditransitive verbs. Ditransitives, remember, 
take two objects in the active (direct and indirect). With ditransitive verbs, it is 
always the first object that becomes subject in the passive (leaving the other 
object in position). So the passive of [82a] is [82b] and the passive of [83a] is [83b]:
[82a] Max sent the boss an anonymous letter. 
(NP + NP: iO + dO)
[82b] The boss was sent (•) an anonymous letter.
[83a] Max sent an anonymous letter to the boss. (NP + PP: dO + iO)
[83b] An anonymous letter was sent (•) to the boss.
Give the phrase marker for [82b], using triangles for the NPs. Discussion 4, 
page 134.
 
Negative sentences and auxiliary do
The rule for forming negative sentences with the negative particle not is this:
The negative particle not is placed immediately after the tensed auxiliary.
s
NP
VP
Otto
PASS
[past]
VP
was
VP
PP
V
[complex]
NP
AP
by the noise
driven
mad

129
NEGATIVE SENTENCES AND AUXILIARY DO
In fact, the negative particle can actually contract onto that auxiliary.
[84] Byron would not dance. (contracted form: wouldn’t)
[85] Byron has not been dancing. (contracted form: hasn’t)
In representing these, I will simply attach not to that auxiliary. So [84], for 
example, will have [86] as its phrase marker.
 [86] 
 
Now, the above rule for placing not makes crucial reference to the tensed 
auxiliary. What if there is no auxiliary but only a lexical verb, as in [87a]?
[87a] Byron danced.
Here it’s the lexical verb itself that carries the tense. I mentioned in Part I of this 
chapter that lexical verbs never accept a following negative particle: *Byron 
danced not. In such cases – to maintain the above rule – an auxiliary verb has to 
be supplied to carry the tense and the negation. In negative sentences with not, 
auxiliary do is required to carry the tense in the absence of any other auxiliary.
[87b] Byron did not dance. (didn’t)
Since auxiliary do is now carrying the (past) tense, dance must appear in its 
(non-ﬁnite, untensed) stem form. Compare *Byron did not danced.
Auxiliary do is quite empty of meaning here. Its sole function here is to carry 
tense and negation instead of the lexical verb. So I shall represent did as imme-
diately dominated by tense – and I’ll simply attach not to it, as in [88].
 [88] 
 
s
NP
VP
Byron
MOD
[past]
VP
would not
Nntransl
dance
S
NP
VP
Byron
TENSE
[past]
VP
did not
V
[intrans]
dance

CHAPTER 6 MORE ON VERBS: AUXILIARY VPS
130
Notice, by the way, that auxiliary do can also be used for emphasis in positive 
sentences, as in Byron did dance.
Like have and be, do can function as an auxiliary verb and as a transitive 
lexical verb. In [89] we have both.
 [89] They didn’t do the exercises.
Questions — fronting the tensed auxiliary
Look at [90a] and [90b]:
[90a] Byron was dancing.  [90b] 
The rule for forming the question is this:
The tensed auxiliary verb moves in front of the subject.
We’ve already encountered movement, in passive sentences. Notice that, in pas-
sives, phrases were moved only into positions already acknowledged – subject 
position and VP-adverbial position. This suggests there should be a structural 
position in the phrase marker that is able to accept the fronted auxiliary. The 
question is: what structural position does the tensed auxiliary move to? 
No such position has been mentioned yet. So I need to introduce it now. Look 
carefully at [91].
 [91] 
 
There are two new nodes here (in bold). First, there is an S′ node. This 
is called ‘S-bar’. Then there is a ‘C’ node. ‘C’ is for ‘Complementiser’. The 
Complementiser position is: sister of S and daughter of S-bar (S′). So, the 
structural position that a fronted auxiliary moves to is the Complementiser 
position. As with passive, the movement has left a gap in the original position.
Was Byron • dancing?
S'
c
s
was
NP
VP
Byron
PROG
[past]
VP
V
[intrans]
dancing

 
QUESTIONS — FRONTING THE TENSED AUXILIARY
131
It may seem that I’ve just invented this new position simply to ﬁnd a place for 
the fronted auxiliary. Well, that would be a good enough reason. But I’ve not 
invented it. We’ll see in later chapters that this position is real and is required for 
other purposes as well.
To help you get used to all this, try drawing a phrase marker for [92]. It is 
given as Discussion 5 (page 134).
 [92] Could Simon have written these words?
Just like the negative rule considered earlier, the question rule makes crucial 
reference to the tensed auxiliary. Lexical verbs never move in front of the 
subject (*Danced he?). So, again, auxiliary do is required to carry the tense in 
the absence of any auxiliary. It is do that moves to C – and thus in front of the 
subject. Here is the phrase marker for Does Byron dance?
 [93] 
 
Now look at [94a].
[94a] Hasn’t Oleg been arrested?
This is both a question and passive. So it exhibits both movements explained 
in this chapter – auxiliary-fronting to C and passive object-to-subject – creating 
two different gaps.
 [94b] 
Bearing this in mind, draw a phrase marker for [94a]. Discussion 6 (page 134).
c
s
does
NP
VP
Byron
TENSE
[pres]
VP
V
[intrans]
dance
[Hasn't] [Oleq] • been arrested •
S'

CHAPTER 6 MORE ON VERBS: AUXILIARY VPS
132
More on have and be
I’ve mentioned that have and be can function both as auxiliary verbs and 
as lexical verbs. As you might expect, when functioning as auxiliaries, they 
behave like auxiliaries: fronting to C in questions and accepting the negative 
particle ([95] and [96]). Do, which is normally required in the absence of an 
auxiliary, is ungrammatical with the auxiliary use of have and be ([97] and [98]).
[95a] Are they going? 
[95b] They aren’t going.
[96a] Have they gone? 
[96b] They haven’t gone.
[97a] *Do they be going? 
[97b] *They don’t be going.
[98a] *Do they have gone? [98b] *They don’t have gone.
Surprisingly, though, have can behave like an auxiliary or like a lexical verb 
even when it is functioning as a lexical verb. All the following are grammatical:
 Functioning as a lexical verb, behaving like a lexical verb:
[99a] Do we have any garlic?  [99b] We don’t have any garlic.
Functioning as a lexical verb, behaving like an auxiliary:
[100a] Have we any garlic?  [100b] We haven’t any garlic.
Be is more regular in its irregularity: it always behaves like an auxiliary – 
whether functioning as auxiliary or lexical. Only [101a–b] are grammatical:
Functioning as a lexical verb, behaving like an auxiliary:
[101a] Was Kubla extravagant?  [101b] Kubla wasn’t extravagant.
*Functioning as a lexical verb, behaving like a lexical verb:
[102a] *Did Kubla be extravagant?  [102b] *Kubla didn’t be extravagant.
The phrase marker for [101a] looks like this:
[103] 
 
s
c
s
was
NP
VP
Kubla
V
[intens]
[past]
AP
extravagant

133
MORE ON HAVE AND BE
■ Discussion of in-text exercises
1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 
 
s
NP
VP
Monsieur Blanc
PERF
[près]
VP
has
V
[trans]
NP
studied the menu
S
NP
VP
you
MOD
[past]
VP
should
PERF
VP
have
PROG 
VP
been
V
[trans]
NP
writing 
that essay
S
NP
VP
Matilda
PERF
[past]
VP
had
PROG
VP
been
AdvP
VP
quietly
V
[ditrans]
NP
NP
reading
Simon 
a story

CHAPTER 6 MORE ON VERBS: AUXILIARY VPS
134
4. 
 
5.
 
6. 
 
s
NP 
VP
the boss
PASS
[past]
VP
was
V
[ditrans]
NP
NP
sent
an anonymous letter
S'
C
S
could
NP
VP
MOD
[past]
VP
PERF
VP
have
V
[trans]
NP
written 
these words
S'
C
S
hasn't
NP
VP
Oleg
PERF
[pres]
VP
PASS
VP
been
V
[trans]
NP
arrested
Simon

 
EXERCISES 
135
Exercises for Part I
1. Draw phrase markers for the following sentences using triangles for NPs, APs, PPs, 
AdvPs (but not, of course, VPs).
(1) Nanny is being a nuisance again.
(2) Millie will have ﬁlled the pool by tonight.
(3) Andy has been on court for ﬁve hours now.
2. Turn to the ﬁrst page of the ‘Preface to the Second Edition’ in this book (page xii) 
and identify the following verbs and their forms.
Example: had on the ﬁrst line is the past tense form of the lexical verb.
(1) Line 4: be.  (2) Line 8: were.  (3) Line 1 of para 2: have.
(4) Line 1 of para 2: made. (5) Line 2 of para 2: made.
(6) Line 3 of para 2: come. (7) Line 5 of para 2: want.
Exercises for Part II
3. Using triangles for NPs, APs, AdvPs, and PPs, draw phrase markers for the following.
(a) Max and Adrian were having a really tedious conversation this morning.
(b) The cattle are being persecuted by ﬂies.
(c) Could this have been her famous purple wig?
(d) Was this put in my pocket by you?
(e) His article was accepted and quickly published.
4. Now that auxiliary do has been introduced – and bearing in mind that, as an 
auxiliary, it takes a VP complement – you should be able to work out the phrase 
marker for He did so.
■ Discussion of exercises
1. (1) 
 
 
s
NP
VP
Nanny
PROG
[pres]
VP
VP
AdvP
/s
V
[intens]
NP
again
being
a nuisance

CHAPTER 6 MORE ON VERBS: AUXILIARY VPS
136
(2) 
 
 
 
(3) 
 
 
2. (1) Stem form of progressive be. (2) Past tense, lexical (copula) be.
(3) Present tense, perfect have. 
(4) Passive participle.
(5) Past tense.  (6) Perfect participle.  (7) Present tense.
s
NP
VP
Millie
VP
PP
MOD
[pres]
VP
by tonight
PERF
VP
will
have
V
[trans]
NP
filled
the pool
S
NP
VP
Andy
VP
PP
PERF
[pres]
VP
now
VP
PP
has
V
[intens]
PP
for 5 hours
on court
been

 
EXERCISES 
137
3. (a) 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
 
 
s
NP
VP
Max & Adrian
VP
NP
PROG
[past]
VP
this morning
were
V
[trans]
NP
having
a really tedious 
conversation
S
NP
VP
the cattle
PROG
[presi
VP
are
PASS
VP
being
VP
PP
V
[trans]
NP
by flies
persecuted
S'
C
S
could
NP
VP
this
MOD
[past]
VP
PERF
have
VP
V
[intens]
NP
been
her famous 
purple wig

CHAPTER 6 MORE ON VERBS: AUXILIARY VPS
138
(d) 
 
 
(e) 
 
 
4. 
 
The Pro-VP is actually ‘so’ but ‘do’ is required to carry the tense.
c 
s
was 
NP 
VP
this
PASS
[past]
VP
VP 
PP
V
[complex]
NP 
PP 
by you
put
in my 
pocket
S
NP 
VP
his article
PASS
[past]
VP
VP
and
VP
was
V
[trans]
NP
AdvP
VP
accepted
quickly
V
[trans]
NP
published
S
NP
VP
pronoun
TENSE
[past]
VP
he
did
so
S'

 
FURTHER EXERCISES 
139
 Further exercises (Part I)
1. Turn to page 254 of this book and identify the following on that page:
 
(1)  Three different examples of lexical verbs in the present tense. Include at least 
one that does not have a third-person singular subject.
 
(2) Five different examples of lexical verbs in the past tense form.
 
(3) Two past tense modals and two present tense modals.
 
(4) Two perfect participle forms.
 
(5) A passive participle form.
 
(6) Passive be in its bare stem form.
 
(7) Two different tensed forms of passive be.
 
(8) Two lexical verbs in the (non-ﬁnite) bare stem form.
 
(9) A sentence in which both lexical and perfect have occur.
2. For each of the italicised forms of the verb be in the following sentences, say 
whether it is an instance of the lexical (copula) verb, the progressive auxiliary, or 
the passive auxiliary.
 
 (1) His behaviour may be peculiar. 
(2) It was becoming noticeable.
 
 (3) He was overheard by Polonius. 
(4) It was unexpected.
 
 (5) Hamlet was being offensive. 
(6) Ophelia was being driven mad.
 
 (7) He had been going mad. 
(8) He could have been her husband.
 
 (9) The play was unnerving. 
(10) The play was unnerving the king.
 
 (11) The wine was drunk by Hamlet. 
(12) Hamlet was drunk by midnight.
 
 (13) Yorick had been buried for years. (14) Hamlet was buried the next day.
3. Draw phrase markers for the following sentences, using triangles for all NPs, APs, 
PPs, and AdvPs (but not VPs).
(1) They might even have slipped out for a smoke.
(2) She always has dyed her hair a strange colour
(3) The exercises should have been much easier.
(4) I will be happily looking after your charming children.
(5) William must have surreptitiously shown Millie the answers.
(6) We had already run out of sausages by ten pm.
(7) They were peeling the bananas and slicing them lengthways.
(8) They will do the work and hand it in tomorrow.
(9) I can’t watch it for another ten minutes. (Ambiguous!)

CHAPTER 6 MORE ON VERBS: AUXILIARY VPS
140
 Further exercises (Part II)
4. What exactly is wrong with each of the following? Explain brieﬂy but clearly.
(1) *Emily can may have thrown away those pork pies.
(2) *She is having questioned their freshness.
(3) *She didn’t went to another shop.
(4) *Complained she to the manager?
(5) *Would she be treated her complaint politely?
(6) *Be she never going there again?
(7) *She is persuasive and getting her money back.
 
(i.e. for (7), why can’t we ellipt the second occurrence of is in She is persuasive 
and is getting her money back?)
5. Draw phrase markers for the following sentences, using triangles for NPs, APs, 
AdvPs, PPs (but not VPs).
(1) I don’t lend my toothbrush to anybody.
(2) You will be seen by the doctor within ﬁve minutes.
(3) Doesn’t Max ever sit quietly?
(4) Have all the applicants been interviewed already?
(5) All the information will be made available shortly.
(6) They will be drunk soon. (Ambiguous!)
(7) Gomez may have been keeping quiet and minding his own business.
(8) Should we invite the boss or would that be misunderstood?
(9) I’ve never read your diary but Mary has quite often.

141
From the preceding chapters you’ll have gained an idea of how phrasal categories 
(NP, VP, AP, PP and AdvP) ﬁt into the structure of sentences. Of these, 
we’ve only looked in detail at the structure of VP: complements of V in VP, 
adverbials in VP and auxiliary verbs (and their VP complements). In this chapter, 
I look in more detail at the internal structure of other phrasal categories, Noun 
Phrases in particular.
So far we’ve only looked at the internal structure (such as it is) of NPs con-
sisting of just a pronoun or just a name – single words that count as full NPs 
in themselves. Here’s a reminder of what they look like.
 [1]  
[2] 
 
 
 
 
The NP node in [1] and [2] is said to be non-branching – it just goes straight 
down. NPs consisting of a pronoun or a name are the only non-branching 
NPs allowed for in this book. All other NPs have branching representations. 
They all have two immediate constituents.
In the basic case, the two immediate constituents of NP are: DET and NOM 
(Determiner and Nominal). Here are two examples:
 [3]  
[4]
 
 
 
    
7
The structure of 
Noun Phrases
NP
pronoun
NP
name
they
Daisy
NP
DET
NOM
DET
NP
NOM
ART
N
ART
AP
N
the
clowns
the
A
clowns
sad

CHAPTER 7 THE STRUCTURE OF NOUN PHRASES
142
DET always has NOM as its sister. DET determines NOM. NOM is a level of 
NP-structure intermediate between the phrasal (NP) level and the lexical 
(N) level. In [4], sad is a modiﬁer of the head noun. All modiﬁers of the head 
noun fall under NOM. Since modiﬁers are optional, it follows that NOM can 
consist just of N, as in [3]. I look ﬁrst at the elements that can come under the 
DET node.
Determiners
These are a ﬁxed set of ‘grammatical’ words that give information relating to 
deﬁniteness and indeﬁniteness (roughly, whether the thing referred to by the NP 
is familiar to both speaker and hearer or not) and information about quantity 
and proportion.
The basic determiners are the articles (ART): the definite article – the 
– and the indefinite article – a(n). The articles are ‘basic’ in the sense that 
they provide a touchstone as to what counts as a determiner. Any expression 
that occupies the same position in NP structure as an article counts as a 
determiner. How can you tell whether an expression is occupying the same 
(determiner) position as an article? Well, if a word can appear in sequence with 
an article – put another way, if a word can co-occur with an article – in an NP, 
then that word must be analysed as occupying a different position; it cannot be 
the determiner.
There is a small set of words which perform the same function as the articles:
demonstratives (DEM): this, that, these, those
Certain quantifiers (Q): some, any, no, each, every, either, neither
possessives (POSS): my, your, its, her, his, our, their, John’s
None of these can co-occur in sequence with an article in an NP – see, for 
example: *this the clown, *the this clown, *a some clown, *some a clown, *the my 
shoe, *your the shoe,*any a day. So they are determiners themselves.
[5], [6], and [7] are the phrase marker representations of those trampolines, 
some mistake, and my address.
 
[5]  
[6] 
[7]
 
 
 
    
 
    
DET 
NOM
DEM 
N
those 
trampolines
DET 
NOM
Q 
N
some 
mistake
DET 
NOM
POSS 
N
my 
address
NP
NP
NP

 
DETERMINERS
143
Now here’s an important point: the determiner position may not always be 
ﬁlled by an actual word. Look at the subject NPs in the following:
 [8] Essays must be word-processed.
 [9] Smoke gets in your eyes.
Although these NPs contain just one word, they should still be analysed as 
having a [DET + NOM] structure, as in [10]:
[10] 
 
The reason for this ‘empty determiner’ analysis is this. First, both of these 
NPs could take a determiner (the/some smoke, the/your essays). We need to 
allow for this by making a DET slot available, as in [10]. Second, the empty 
determiner affects the interpretation of the NP. The empty determiner gives the 
NP an indefinite and/or more general interpretation. The subject of [9], for 
example, is clearly indeﬁnite, as compared with the deﬁnite NP the/that smoke. 
It is also more general than the indeﬁnite NP some smoke.
Which head nouns can take the empty determiner? There are just two types of 
noun that can: plural count nouns (as in [8]) and mass nouns (as in [9]).
As mentioned, the subjects in [8] and [9] are single-word NPs – and they have 
that in common with NPs that consist of a pronoun or a name. But the empty 
DET + NOM analysis clearly distinguishes these NPs from pronoun NPs and 
name NPs. The lack of a determiner with a name indicates neither indeﬁniteness 
nor generality. On the contrary, names don’t normally take determiners precisely 
because names are inherently deﬁnite and individual (not general). Pronouns, 
too, are inherently deﬁnite (e.g. she, we, they, them) or inherently indeﬁnite 
(someone, anyone), independently of any determiner.
Consider now the NP in [11]:
[11] John’s father.
John’s was listed above among the possessive determiners. Now, John is a name 
and names count as full NPs in their own right. So it appears that a possessive 
determiner (POSS) can either be simple (my, your, etc., as in [7] above) or 
consist of a full NP plus ’s. This is called the possessive, or genitive, ’s. The 
addition of ’s to John makes for a possessive determiner. So [11] has [12] as its 
phrase marker.
DET
NOM
N
essays/smoke
NP

CHAPTER 7 THE STRUCTURE OF NOUN PHRASES
144
[12] 
 
More generally, the addition of genitive ’s to any NP makes for a possessive 
determiner.1 And there’s nothing to prevent possessive determiner NPs display-
ing all the structure that other NPs do, including DET + NOM. In the light of 
this, draw a phrase marker for the book’s cover. It’s given as [14] below.
In fact, a possessive NP can itself be determined by another possessive NP, 
as in [13]:
[13] Hieronimo’s brother’s behaviour.
In principle, there’s no limit to the number of times this can be done. Draw the 
phrase marker for [13]. Discussion 1, page 157.
Here’s the phrase marker for the book’s cover:
[14] 
 
1 The only possessive determiner that does NOT take apostrophe +s is its (no apostrophe, just s by itself). 
It’s is not possessive but is the contracted form of it is. There is much confusion surrounding this fact!
NP
DET
NOM
POSS 
N
NP 
's
father
name
John
NP
DET 
NOM
POSS 
N
NP 
's
cover
DET 
NOM
ART 
N
the 
book

 
PRE-DETERMINERS
145
Pre-determiners
Consider now the words all, both, and half. These resemble the determiners we 
have looked at. However, they do co-occur with and precede determiners:
[15] all the men  [16] both those trampolines  [17] half Jim’s money
So they can’t be determiners themselves. Instead, I categorise them as pre-
determiners (PRE-DET). Expressions like double, treble, and so forth are also 
pre-determiners (e.g. double that amount).
In deciding how pre-determiners ﬁt into the structure of NPs, we must decide 
what they (pre-)determine. Give this a thought. Notice the following: within the 
NP all the men, there is a sequence that looks very much like a familiar constituent, 
namely the men. What, then, would you suggest as a likely analysis of all the men?
The points just made suggest that pre-determiners determine an NP. The pre-
determined NP in [15] consists of the (DET) + men (NOM). And the whole thing 
is itself an NP. So PRE-DET should be represented as sister of an NP within NP:
[18] 
 
But now look at [19] and [20]:
[19] all men [20] both men.
Although they don’t precede determiners in these NPs, all and both are still 
analysed as pre-determiners here. The determiner position itself is empty. The 
idea that there is an empty determiner in [19], with all, is perhaps more plausible 
than in [20] with both. All men (= all DET men) is both more indeﬁnite and more 
general than all the men. By contrast, both the men and both men differ neither 
in deﬁniteness nor generality. Nevertheless, I’ll continue to analyse both in [20] 
as a pre-determiner since, as [16] shows, it can co-occur with, and precede, the 
article.
The majority of determiners and all the pre-determiners are capable of func-
tioning as if they were pronouns:
[21] I’ve always wanted those. [22] Some fell on stony ground.
[23] John’s are turning blue. 
[24] All is ruined.
NP
PRE-DET 
NP
all 
DET 
NOM
ART 
N
the 
men

CHAPTER 7 THE STRUCTURE OF NOUN PHRASES
146
There’s a section on this at the end of the chapter.
Among the determiners that cannot function as pronouns, there are some 
that correspond to forms that can. For example, the quantiﬁer no cannot func-
tion as a pronoun (*I want no) but it corresponds to none, which can (I want 
none). And with the possessives, we ﬁnd the following alternations:
DETERMINER:  my 
your 
her 
his our 
their
PRONOUN: 
mine  yours  hers  his  ours  theirs
It’s predictable that pre-determiners, which pre-determine full NPs, should 
be able to co-occur with pronouns. Draw the phrase marker of the subject NP 
in All mine are at the cleaners. Discussion 2, page 157.
This concludes our brief survey of determiners and pre-determiners. Notice that 
the discussion has allowed for three ways the NP node can be expanded:
 
But, bearing in mind that any category can be co-ordinated, including NPs, 
there is of course a fourth way the NP node can be expanded:
 
  
.
Pre-modifiers in NOM
The most obvious pre-modiﬁers of the noun within NOM are Adjective phrases 
(APs), introduced in Chapter 3. The position of pre-modifying APs in NP was 
illustrated in [4] (sad). But remember, as [4] illustrates, A is always dominated 
by AP. The function of A is always head-of-AP. It’s the AP that has the modify-
ing function. And don’t forget that APs have other functions: subject and object 
predicative (sP and oP) in VP.
Here I’ll mention other pre-modiﬁers in NP, before discussing the structure 
of NOMs in which there are several pre-modiﬁers.
■ Quantifying adjectives
Much, many, few, and little are quantifying adjectives (QA). As adjectives, they 
come under NOM in NPs. Here are my reasons for treating them as adjectives 
(rather than determiners):
Non-branching: (1) NP
pronoun
or
name
Branching: (2) NP
DET + NOM
(3) NP
PRE-DET + NP
(4) NP
NP + & + NP.

 
PRE-MODIFIERS IN NOM
147
(a) Like adjectives, they co-occur with and follow determiners (those many books, 
the little butter that I have, some few successes). But remember, the determiner 
may be empty, many books (= DET many books), much garlic (= DET much garlic).
(b) Like adjectives, they may occur in the VP, functioning as subject-predicatives: 
His mistakes were many, It wasn’t much, It was little enough.
(c) Like adjectives, they are gradable: very many books, too much garlic, so few 
ideas, very little tact, where they are modiﬁed by DEG. The comparative and 
superlative forms of many and much are more and most; of little, less and 
least; of few, fewer, and fewest.
numerals (the cardinal numerals one, two, three . . . and the ordinal numerals 
ﬁrst, second, third . . . ) should also be treated as quantifying adjectives within NOM, 
since they follow DET (the one mistake), including empty DET (DET one mistake).
Quantifying adjectives (QAs) are head of AP. APs with a QA as head always 
precede other APs in NOM. Here are phrase markers for very many mistakes and 
the one mistake:
[25]    
[26]
 
 
 
    
■ Participle phrases (PartP)
The non-ﬁnite forms of verbs referred to in Chapter 6 as the progressive, perfect, 
and passive participles (V-part, for short) may also appear as pre-modiﬁers 
within NOM:
PROGRESSIVE 
PERFECT or PASSIVE
[27a] the leering manager  [28a] a faded dream
[27b] the sleeping guard 
[28b] the departed nymphs
 
  
[28c] sliced cake
 
  
[28d] a forgotten valley
In this position, the perfect and passive participles can only be distinguished by 
appealing to the meaning. [28a and b] are perfect, referring to a dream that has 
faded and nymphs who have departed. [28c and d], by contrast, are passive – 
they refer to cake that has been sliced and a valley that has been forgotten.
NP
DET 
NOM
AP 
N
DEG 
QA 
mistakes
very 
many
NP
DET 
NOM
ART 
AP 
N
the 
QA 
mistake
one

CHAPTER 7 THE STRUCTURE OF NOUN PHRASES
148
Since these forms are verbal rather than adjectival, they are not gradable: 
*the very leering manager, *rather sliced cake, *the slightly sleeping guard. But they 
can be modiﬁed by general adverbs, as in the rapidly congealing gravy. Draw the 
phrase marker for this NP. Discussion 3, page 158.
As we saw in Chapter 6, certain true adjectives look very much like verb parti-
ciples: charming, pleasing, (un)interested, worrying, (un)surprising, unexpected. 
However, since they’re gradable, they are easily distinguished from participles: 
rather pleasing, very interested. The negative ones don’t even correspond to any 
known English verb anyway (cf. *unexpect).
The distinction between true adjectives and verb participles is sometimes 
blurred. For example, although [29] might look as though it contains a passive 
lexical verb,
[29] They were very disturbed by the play.
the presence of very rules this out (cf. *The play very disturbed them). Very here 
indicates we’re dealing with an AP complementing the (intensive) copula be.
■ Nouns
Nouns themselves may act as pre-modiﬁers of nouns. Examples are chess piece, 
trafﬁc light, roof maintenance, carbon trader, computer game. The relation between 
a head noun and a pre-modifying noun is much closer than that between the 
head noun and any other pre-modiﬁer. In a sequence of modiﬁers that includes 
a noun modiﬁer, noun modiﬁers always appear last. They can’t be separated 
from the head noun.
[30] some expensive roof maintenance
[31] *some roof expensive maintenance
Such noun–noun combinations are compound nouns. They are not treated as 
phrasal, but as compound words. The compound noun roof maintenance 
should therefore be dominated by N as in [32]:
[32] 
 
DET 
NOM
Q 
AP 
N
expensive
roof
maintenance
some
A
N
N
NP

 
MORE ON THE STRUCTURE OF NOM
149
In the light of what you’ve read so far in this chapter about (a) pre-
determiners, (b) determiners, (c) adjectival modiﬁers, and (d) noun modiﬁers, 
draw the phrase marker for the NP in [33]. Discussion 4, page 158.
[33] all those dusty gorilla suits
More on the structure of NOM
How should sequences of more than one AP within NOM be represented? 
Consider [34]–[35]:
[34] a red car  [35] a new red car
Before deciding how [35] should be represented, give the phrase marker 
for [34].
The phrase marker for [34] will be the same as that for the sad clowns – [4] at the 
beginning of the chapter. So [red car] is a NOM in [34]. Now, there’s no reason 
to suppose that it is not a NOM in [35] as well. On that assumption, new must 
be modifying the NOM [red car]. You now have all the information needed to 
draw the phrase marker for [35].
The important thing to notice here is that, for [35], we need two NOMs. This 
follows from the comments of the preceding paragraph. So [36] is the phrase 
marker for [35].
[36] 
 
What this shows is that NOM is a recursive category. In other words, NOM 
can have NOM as an immediate constituent. In fact, apart from noun modi-
ﬁers, every modifier must be immediately dominated by a NOM. In the 
NP
DET
NOM
ART 
AP 
NOM
a
A
AP
N
new
A
car
red

CHAPTER 7 THE STRUCTURE OF NOUN PHRASES
150
light of this, give the phrase markers for the following NPs. Discussion 5, 
pages 158–9.
[37] some large greasy uneaten fritters
[38] those two very charming atomic scientists
I’ll be reﬁning the analysis of NPs in Chapter 9. If you’re interested in ﬁnding 
out now why it needs reﬁning, see the Appendix at the end of this chapter.
Post-modifiers
In this section I look at just two of the categories that follow the head noun 
within NOM: Prepositional Phrases and certain types of Adjective Phrase.
■ Prepositional Phrases
In the NP an expedition to the pub, the head N is expedition and it is modiﬁed 
by the PP to the pub, which consists of P + NP. In this case, we have a post-
modifying (PP) sister to the noun, within NOM. So:
[39a] 
 
Now, just as expedition can be modiﬁed by a PP, so can pub. For example: (an 
expedition to) the pub in the village. The phrase marker for this is going to start 
off exactly like [39a] – but the bold italicised NOM in [39a] will now branch, as 
in [39b]:
NP
DET
NOM
ART 
N 
PP
an
expedition
P
NP
to
DET 
NOM
ART 
N
the 
pub

 
POST-MODIFIERS
151
[39b]
 
As my dotted line shows, this could go on indeﬁnitely – for example,
[40] an expedition to the pub in the village at the foot of that mountain
This might seem complicated but it’s really very simple. It’s the same story again 
and again. Were you to draw the phrase marker for [40] and look at the right-hand 
nodes, you’d ﬁnd it goes NP – NOM – PP again and again (four times, in fact).
All those NPs have a regular right-branching structure (see [39a–b]). 
Now, at ﬁrst glance, [41] might seem to have the same structure.
[41] an expedition to the pub for more cherry brandy
Not so. I hope you agree that, unlike the pub in the village in [39a–b], the pub for 
more cherry brandy is not a constituent of [41]. For more cherry brandy is not 
modifying pub. So what is it modifying? Consult your intuitions about the mean-
ing of [41] and in the light of that suggest an appropriate analysis for it. Use a 
triangle for each of the PPs. Hint: remember that NOM is a recursive category.
You’ve got it, I’m sure. For more cherry brandy modiﬁes a constituent that has 
expedition as its head – it’s an expedition ( . . . ) for more cherry brandy. So, it 
must be modifying expedition to the pub. Now, expedition to the pub is a NOM. 
And expedition to the pub for more cherry brandy is a NOM as well. So we have a 
NOM within a NOM – as in [42]:
[42] 
 
N 
PP
pub 
P 
NP
in 
DET 
NOM
ART 
N
the 
village
NP
DET 
NOM
ART 
NOM 
PP
an
N
PP
for more cherry brandy
expedition 
to the pub
NOM

CHAPTER 7 THE STRUCTURE OF NOUN PHRASES
152
This is not a regular right-branching structure. Notice that this arrangement of 
(post-modifying) PPs is the mirror image of the arrangement of (pre-modifying) 
APs in [36]. Again, there are as many NOMS as there are modiﬁers.
You may remember the NP an agreement between workers on overtime from 
a previous exercise. This is ambiguous, depending on whether on overtime 
modiﬁes (a) the NOM [agreement (between workers)] – ‘an overtime agreement’ 
– or (b) just the N workers – ‘workers who are on overtime’. Now decide what 
element the italicised PP in each of the following NPs modiﬁes. Is it (a) modify-
ing a NOM consisting of the head N plus PP (as in [42]), or is it (b) modifying 
just the preceding N (as in [39a–b])? Discussion 6, page 159.
[43] those observations on alchemy by Newton.
[44] an interpretation of that sentence in Proust’s novel.
[45] a book of quotations from Shakespeare.
[46] a book of quotations from Oxford University Press.
All the NPs considered so far have included just pre-modiﬁers or just post-
modiﬁers. What happens when NOM includes both a pre-modifying AP and a 
post-modifying PP? Remember, there must be as many NOMs as there are 
modiﬁers. There are two possibilities, then:
 [A]    
[B]
 
 
 
With some NPs, it doesn’t matter much which analysis we give (I give 
examples later). For others it does matter, and deciding which analysis is 
appropriate involves attending to the meaning in each case. In each of the 
following, it matters. Try to decide which analysis – A or B – is appropriate in 
each case.
[47] that nuclear scientist from Germany.
[48] the famous writer of detective stories.
[49] an anxious applicant for the job.
[50] structural engineers in disgrace.
[51] the personal assistant in the hat.
[52] their secret visits to the kitchen.
[53] Larry’s neat summary of the argument.
NP
DET
NOM
NOM
PP
AP 
N
NP
DET
NOM
AP
NOM
N 
PP

 
POST-MODIFIERS
153
Analysing [47] as in [B] – *[nuclear] [scientist from Germany] – is not right. 
Nuclear scientist denotes a category of scientist. Since such a category exists, it’s 
appropriate there should be an expression to denote it. So [nuclear scientist] is a 
constituent of [47]. The distinction between nuclear and from Germany (in their 
relation to scientist) is brought out by noting that, while That [nuclear scientist] 
IS from Germany is quite natural, That [scientist from Germany] IS nuclear is just 
bizarre. Assuming the PP from Germany means what German means, the same 
bizarre effect is achieved by the ordering *that nuclear German scientist, where 
nuclear is again separated from the element it wants to form a constituent with. 
By contrast, that German nuclear scientist is ﬁne. All this indicates analysis [A] 
for [47] – from Germany modiﬁes [nuclear scientist].
The same kind of thinking suggests analysis [A] for [50] and [51]. By contrast, 
analysis [B] is appropriate for [48], [49], [52], and [53].
As regards the NP [53], for example, note its parallelism to the sentence [54]:
[53a] Larry’s neat summary of the argument. (NOUN PHRASE)
[54a] Larry neatly summarised the argument. (SENTENCE)
Give the phrase marker for the sentence in [54a].
In the sentence, the argument is the direct object of the verb summarised. As 
a complement, it combines with summarised (V) to form a VP – and that VP is 
modiﬁed by neatly. Now, it’s reasonable to expect the structural conﬁguration 
of the NP to parallel that of the sentence. After all, [53a] is simply sentence [54a] 
recast as an NP:
[53b] 
 
[54b] 
 
DET
NOM2
Larrys
AP
NOMI
neat
N
PP
summary 
of the argument
S
NP
VP2
Larry
AdvP
VP1
neatly
V
NP
summarised
the argument
NP

CHAPTER 7 THE STRUCTURE OF NOUN PHRASES
154
Only the categories have changed. Notice that the NOMs in the NP match the 
VPs in the S. The same goes for the NPs in [48], [49], and [52]. The Appendix 
to this chapter discusses a reﬁnement suggested by this parallelism between 
S and NP.
Now compare the NPs in [47]–[53] above – in each of which the choice 
between analyses [A] and [B] clearly matters – with the following NPs:
[55] The unknown scientist from Germany.
[56] The new railings in the park.
[57] That tall student in the hat.
With these, either analysis is possible. The topmost NOM in [55], for example, 
could be analysed either as [A] [[unknown scientist] [from Germany]] or [B] 
[[unknown] [scientist from Germany]]. So which should we choose? Well, 
the analysis that associates the more permanent and/or intrinsic property 
more closely with the head noun will generally seem more natural. Thus the 
[B] analysis seems more natural for [55], since being from Germany is more 
permanent/intrinsic than being unknown.
The NP in [58] includes three modiﬁers:
[58] that tall student of maths in the hat.
Bearing in mind that there will be as many NOMs as there are modiﬁers, and 
that student of maths corresponds to the VP constituent [studies maths], give a 
complete phrase marker for that NP (i.e. using no triangles). Discussion 7, 
page 159.
■ More on Adjective Phrases
A few adjectives (including present, absent, responsible, visible) can pre-modify or 
post-modify the head noun in NOM.
[59a] the responsible men 
[59b] the men responsible
[60a] the present members [60b] the members present
As post-modiﬁers, APs occupy the same position in the structure of NOM as 
PPs. A difference in meaning is associated with this difference of position of the 
AP. In [59a] the men are responsible sort of people – that’s their nature. But in 
[59b] they are responsible FOR something. In [60a] they are the current mem-
bers. But in [60b] they were present AT (i.e. attended) some event. In contrast to 
the pre-modifying APs, when an AP appears in the post-modifying position, I 
hope you agree it feels as if something has ellipted from the AP.
The ellipted element functions as complement of the adjective. In the 
following APs, the complement is explicit.

 
MODIFICATION OF PRONOUNS
155
[61] responsible for the sauces. [62] happy in his job.
[63] nervous of exams. 
[64] devoid of hope.
When, in an NP, a modifying AP includes a complement, it always post-
modiﬁes the head noun:
[65a] the chef responsible for the sauces 
[66a] a stuntman happy in his job.
[65b] *the responsible for the sauces chef  [66b] *a happy in his job stuntman
Here’s the phrase marker for [65a]:
[67] 
 
There’s a reason why such APs must post-modify the Noun. Call it ‘The 
Friendly Head Principle’ (FHP): within NOM, the head of a modifying phrase 
wants to be as close as possible to the head noun. In [65a], the head of the AP 
(responsible) is right next to the head of the NP (chef ). By contrast, in pre-
modifying position, in *[65b], the head of the AP is separated from the noun by 
the AP’s own complement. Notice that the FHP explains why PPs of the form 
P+NP always post-modify the head noun (since the head (P) will then sit next 
to the head N). It also explains why, when a modifying AP includes – or even 
could include – (pre-)modiﬁcation by DEG, it pre-modiﬁes the head noun. 
Compare [68] and [69a–b]:
[68] the very responsible men
[69] a. *the chef very responsible
 
 b. *the chef very responsible for the sauces.
Modification of pronouns
I’ve said that pronouns replace full NPs. It is rather awkward, therefore, to ﬁnd 
pronouns combining with an AP [70a–b] or PP [71a–b] within the structure of 
an NP.
[70a] something wonderful. 
[70b] anyone intelligent.
[71a] someone in the crowd. [71b] no-one/none from the bank.
NP
DET 
NOM
ART 
N 
AP
the 
chef
A 
PP
responsible 
for the sauces

CHAPTER 7 THE STRUCTURE OF NOUN PHRASES
156
In the case of indeﬁnite pronouns such as something/one, anything/one, nothing/
no-one/none, what’s happened, historically, is that a determiner (some, any, no) 
and a head noun (thing/one) have coalesced into a single word (some surprising 
thing → something surprising, any intelligent one → anyone intelligent). The fact 
that such pronouns can only be post-modiﬁed (not pre-modiﬁed, as in *intel-
ligent anyone) is connected with this historical fact. It means we must allow for 
phrase marker representations like [72a–b].
[72a]    
[72b]
 
 
 
 
The same analysis might seem appropriate for [73]–[74], especially since the 
italicised words are sometimes categorised as pronouns:
[73a] some of the animals. 
[73b] those in the cabin.
[74]  1
2
3
all
both
half
5
6
7 of the bottles.
However, if (big ‘if’) they are pronouns, notice they are also determiners 
([73a–b]) or pre-determiners ([74]). In fact, genuine pronouns, which cannot 
also function as determiners or pre-determiners, cannot be post-modiﬁed: *they 
from the factory, *he of the men.
It’s arguable, then, that the ‘pronouns’ in [73]–[74] are not pronouns at all, 
but are what they always were: determiners or pre-determiners. They only 
appear to have changed into pronouns – and thus be functioning as the head of 
their NP because the real head of the NP has been ellipted. This suggests that 
[73a], for example, should be analysed as in [75], in which animals is the ellipted 
head:
[75] 
 
I’ll adopt this elliptical head analysis. This maintains the categorisation of the 
italicised words in [73]–[74] as determiners/pre-determiners. Applied to [76], 
for example, the elliptical head analysis allows us to maintain the categorisation 
of numerals (e.g. two) as quantifying adjectives (QA).
pronoun 
AP
anyone 
intelligent
pronoun 
PP
someone 
in the crowd
NP
DET
NOM
Q
N 
PP
some 
E 
of the animals
NP
NP

 
MODIFICATION OF PRONOUNS
157
[76] the two in the dungeons.
Give the phrase marker for [76]. Discussion 8, page 160.
There are facets of NP structure that this chapter hasn’t covered. Some are dealt 
with in the chapters that follow. Furthermore, several problems have been 
skated over. You can get an idea of what these are by looking closely at NPs in 
any piece of writing and seeing to what extent the analyses proposed here can 
handle them. A reﬁnement to the analysis, which you and/or your tutor may 
want to incorporate, is discussed in the Appendix to this chapter.
■ Discussion of in-text exercises
1. 
 
 
2. 
 
 
 
NP
DET 
NOM
POSS 
N
NP 
s 
behaviour
DET 
NOM
POSS 
N
NP 
"s 
brother
name
Hieronimo
NP
PRE-DET 
NP
all 
pronoun
mine

CHAPTER 7 THE STRUCTURE OF NOUN PHRASES
158
3. 
 
 
4. 
 
 
5. 
 
 
DET
NOM
ART
PartP 
N
the
AdvP
V-part
gravy
Adv
rapidly
congealing
NP
PRE-DET
NP
all
DET 
NOM
DEM
AP
N
those
A
N
N
dusty 
gorilla 
suits
NP
DET
NOM
Q
some
AP 
NOM
A
AP
NOM
large
A
AP
N
greasy
A
fritters
uneaten
NP

 
MODIFICATION OF PRONOUNS
159
 
 
6. [48] Those [[observations on alchemy] [by Newton]]. 
(a)
 [49] An [[interpretation] [of that sentence in Proust’s novel]]. (b)
 [50] A [[book] [of quotations from Shakespeare]]. 
(b)
 [51] A [[book of quotations] [from Oxford University Press]]. 
(a)
7. Of maths relates most closely to the head N student. And tall denotes a more 
permanent property than in a hat. So:
 
 
 
NP
DET
NOM
DEM
those
AP
NOM
QA
AP 
NOM
two
DEG
A
AP 
N
very 
charming
A 
scientists
atomic
NP
DET
DEM
that
NOM2
NOM3
AP
A
tall
NOMI
PP
P 
NP
in
DET 
NOM
ART 
N
N
PP
student
P 
NP
of
DET 
NOM
the 
hat
N
maths

CHAPTER 7 THE STRUCTURE OF NOUN PHRASES
160
8. 
 
 
Exercises
1. Draw complete phrase markers for the following NPs. ‘Complete’ means not 
using any triangles. Several of them involve empty DET (some more than once). 
(c) is ambiguous and should be assigned two phrase markers. (f) contains a co-
ordination. Remember that the mother and the two sisters of the co-ordinator 
and must be of the same category. Before attempting (f), ask yourself whether it’s 
a co-ordination at the lexical (N), intermediate (NOM), or phrasal (NP) level.
(a) Experts at syntax.
(b) Those ten paintings of his garden by Monet.
(c) More ferocious curries.
(d) The dying king’s ﬁnal message.
(e) All Gulbenkian’s contributions to charity.
(f) Some rather off-putting gestures and remarks.
2. On page 146, few was categorised as a quantifying adjective (QA), so the few 
students would be analysed as in (a):
(a) 
(b)
NP
DET 
NOM
ART
the
AP 
NOM
QA 
N 
PP
two 
E
P 
NP
in 
DET 
NOM
ART 
N
the 
dungeons
NP
DET 
NOM
ART 
AP 
N
the
QA 
students
few
NP
DET 
NOM
a few
N
students

 
EXERCISES
161
 
However, analysis (a) is not appropriate for a few students. For this, I propose 
analysis (b), in which a few is represented as a constituent. Explain what’s wrong 
with analysing a few students as in (a). A similar issue arises with the NP a little 
butter. A few and a little are special – highly irregular – determiners.
■ Discussion of exercises
1. (a) 
(b) 
 
NP
DET 
NOM
N 
PP
experts
P 
NP
at
DET 
NOM
N
syntax
NP
DET 
NOM
DEM 
AP
those 
QA
ten
NOM
NOM 
PP
N 
PP
P 
NP
paintings
P 
NP
by 
name
of
DET 
NOM
Monet
POSS 
N
his 
garden

CHAPTER 7 THE STRUCTURE OF NOUN PHRASES
162
(c)
 
(d)
 
(e) 
 
NP
DET 
NOM
AP 
NOM
QA
more
AP 
N
A 
curries
ferocious
NP
DET 
NOM
AP 
N
DEG 
A
curries
more 
ferocious
NP
DET 
NOM
POSS
AP 
N
NP 
's
A
final
message
DET
NOM
ART
the
PartP 
N
V-part 
king
dying
NP
PRE-DET 
NP
all
DET 
NOM
POSS
N 
PP
NP 
's
contributions
P 
NP
name
Culbenkian
to
DET 
NOM
N
charity
(i)
(ii)

 
FURTHER EXERCISES
163
(f) 
 
2. The head of the NP a few students is plural, so the whole NP is plural and can’t 
have the (singular) determiner a, the indefinite article. Similarly, butter is a mass 
noun and mass nouns can’t be determined by the indefinite article. The whole NP 
a little butter is mass, not count.
Further exercises
1. Draw complete phrase markers for the following NPs.
Set I
(a) Melancholy thoughts.
(b) Some very clever chess moves.
(c) The boat’s sudden move to the left.
(d) The word on the tip of my tongue.
(e) An invitation to the palace from the Queen.
(f) All performers absent from the rehearsal.
(g) Two of those city plans.
Set II
(a) Coffee and oranges. (See also Rhythm and blues.)
 
(Not ambiguous, but three analyses are possible. If you give only one of 
these, save ink and give the simplest.)
(b) Three stars visible to the naked eye.
(c) The king of England’s short and turbulent reign.
(d) These smartly-dressed men and women. (ambiguous)
(e) Both the man’s eyes.
(f) Both the men’s behaviour.
 
((e) and (f) need care. (e) means ‘both eyes of the man’, not *‘the eyes of 
both the man’. (f) means ‘the behaviour of both the men’, not *‘both the 
behaviour of the men’.)
NP
DET 
NOM
Q
some
AP 
N
DEG 
A
N 
and 
N
rather off-putting
gestures 
remarks

CHAPTER 7 THE STRUCTURE OF NOUN PHRASES
164
Set III
(a) The few remaining pieces of kitchen furniture.
(b) Anyone capable of rational thought or reasonably sensitive.
(c) Some of those people at the back.
(d) These two coins and the three in the pocket of your coat.
(e) Three tall passengers angry about the altered height of the bulkheads.
(f) Many of the more successful chess players.
2. This chapter concludes my survey of simple sentences. The remaining chapters 
deal with complex sentences (sentences that contain sentences as constituents). 
So this is an appropriate point to revise what has been covered thus far on simple 
sentences. Draw complete phrase markers, then, for the following. Leave yourself 
plenty of room. Several contain co-ordinations; before analysing them, satisfy 
yourself as to the category of the constituents co-ordinated in them.
(a) Obviously, this calls for a thorough examination of the facts.
(b) Did the old man’s secretary open the mail on that particular day?
(c) You must always stop the vehicle at a red trafﬁc light.
(d) Extra hands have been hired for no good reason, apparently.
(e) Bruno and the spy at the embassy might be the same person.
(f) The driver of a passing limousine didn’t stop or offer them a lift to the castle.
(g) Could Olaf be being investigated by the Intelligence Agency?
(h) Aren’t any students or staff signing up for the parachute jump?
(i) The essays must be submitted tomorrow but I won’t be marking them before 
April.
Appendix: NOM and the pro-form one
Here I introduce a reﬁnement of the analysis provided in this chapter. Your 
tutor may ask you to adopt this.
Look again at the discussion on pages 153–4, especially the discussion of the 
NP [53] and its corresponding sentence [54], repeated here:
[1] Larry’s neat summary of the argument. (NP)
[2] Larry neatly summarised the argument. (S)
In Chapter 5, we saw that in sentences like [2] there are two VPs, one within 
the other: VP1 [summarised the argument] and VP2 [neatly summarised the argu-
ment]. I gave evidence for this, involving the expression do so. Do so replaces 
VPs and only VPs (not Vs, for example).
[3] Larry summarised the argument neatly and Bill did so too.

 
APPENDIX: NOM AND THE PRO-FORM ONE
165
We understand [3] in a way that demands that did so be thought of as replac-
ing VP2 (summarised the argument neatly). In [4], by contrast, did so must be 
understood as replacing just VP1, [summarised the argument]:
[4] Larry summarised the argument neatly but Bill did so clumsily.
It is the ungrammaticality of [5] that shows that did so can’t replace just the V 
summarised:
[5] *Larry summarised the argument and Bill did so the conclusion.
In the text I drew attention to the parallelism between VP and NOM. For 
every VP in the S there’s a corresponding NOM in the NP. Since do so provides 
a test for VP, you might ask whether there’s a corresponding test for NOM in 
NP. There is. It involves the pronoun one. In fact one(s) should really be called 
a pro-NOM, since it only ever replaces the intermediate category NOM (never a 
full NP and never just N). Look:
[6] Larry’s neat summary of the argument and [this one], too.
 
   (one = NOM2: neat summary of the argument)
[7] Larry’s neat summary of the argument and [Bill’s clumsy one].
 
   (one = NOM1: summary of the argument)
[8] *Larry’s summary of the argument and [Bill’s one of the conclusion].
 
   (!*one = N: summary)
Just as do so cannot replace just the V summarised but only a VP, so one cannot 
replace just the N summary but only a NOM.
So, one provides a test for whether we have a NOM or not. Feel free to check 
the NOMs in any of the examples in the text of the chapter. You will ﬁnd that 
wherever there is a NOM, that sequence of words can be replaced by one(s). So, 
if everything’s going so swimmingly, why is a reﬁnement needed?
Well, take for example one of the ﬁrst NPs considered in this chapter, the sad 
clowns and the phrase marker I gave for it [4] on page 141. That phrase marker 
only contains one NOM [sad clowns]. If that’s correct, the one test for NOMs 
suggests that we should only be able to replace [sad clowns] by ones. Well, we 
can indeed do that:
 [9] Bill hired those sad clowns and you hired these ones.
 
    (ones = sad clowns)
However, we can also have:
[10] For heaven’s sake, ﬁre the sad clowns and hire some happy ones!
Before reading further, think carefully about why this is a problem for the 
analysis proposed in [4] in the text. How should we alter that analysis to make 
it consistent with the acceptability of [10]?

CHAPTER 7 THE STRUCTURE OF NOUN PHRASES
166
In [10], ones can’t be understood as replacing the NOM [sad clowns]. If it were, 
[10] would be demanding that some happy sad clowns be hired. But that’s not 
what [10] means. [10] implies a contrast between happy ones and sad ones. So, 
in [10] ones is replacing just clowns. In phrase marker [4], though, clowns 
by itself is just a simple N, not a NOM. But we’ve seen that one(s) can’t replace 
just simple nouns. If one(s) could replace a simple noun, [8] would have been 
grammatical. This suggests that phrase marker [4] is wrong. Certainly, clowns is 
a noun but – because it is replaceable by ones – it must also be a NOM as well as 
an N. So the phrase marker must look like [11], with an extra NOM (in bold) 
dominating N.
[11] 
 
 
An important contrast has emerged. This is the contrast between the NOM 
sad clowns in [11] – which contains an extra, non-branching, NOM node – and 
the NOM summary of the argument in [1] – which branches. In other words, 
in those two examples, clowns is, in its own right, a NOM as well as an N, but 
summary is just an N, not a NOM in its own right.
How can you tell when the extra NOM node is required? Well, you can test 
for it by replacement by one. However, while that will help you to get things 
right, it doesn’t in itself explain the nature of the contrast. What you really need 
to know is why one can replace just clowns in sad clowns but not just summary 
in summary of the argument.
The answer lies in the different ways in which sad and of the argument relate 
to their respective head nouns. It comes down to this: sad is a sister of NOM, 
whereas of the argument is a sister of N. Put this way, this should remind you of 
the distinction, within VP, between sister of VP (adjunct) and sister of V 
(complement). The point is that, within the NP, the PP of the argument relates 
to the head N summary in exactly the same way as, within the VP, the direct 
object NP the argument relates to the V summarise. They are both functioning as 
complements of the head, whether that head is an N or a V. By contrast, there’s 
no intuitive reason to suppose that sad relates to the head N clowns as a comple-
ment does to a V. This intuition is borne out by the fact that the sad ones is 
grammatical, indicating that sad is not modifying an N, but a NOM. Sad relates 
NP
DET 
NOM
ART 
AP 
NOM
the 
bold 
N
clowns

 
APPENDIX: NOM AND THE PRO-FORM ONE
167
to clowns (NOM) in exactly the same way that neat relates to summary (of the 
argument); and this, essentially, is how adjuncts relate to the VP (summarise 
the argument).
In sum, the distinction between sister-of-V and sister-of-VP – which is the dis-
tinction between complement and adjunct – is paralleled in NP by the distinction 
between sister-of-N and sister-of-NOM. So, a sister-of-N in an NP functions as 
a complement in the NP and a sister-of-NOM functions as an adjunct in NP.
As another example, consider [48] in the chapter, repeated as [12a]:
[12a] the famous writer of detective stories.
In this NP, of detective stories relates to writer as a complement (as in the VP 
wrote detective stories). And, sure enough, *The one of detective stories is ungram-
matical. So of detective stories must be the sister of N. Famous, by contrast, is 
more peripheral in its relation to writer. It is a (modifying) adjunct. As such it’s 
the sister of a NOM (writer of detective stories). This predicts that the famous one 
will be grammatical, which it is.
In respect of this example, we have simply conﬁrmed what was established in 
the chapter. The reﬁnement being presented here concerns not [12a] so much 
as [12b]:
[12b] the famous writer.
We’ve established that famous is a NOM-sister in [12a]. Clearly, famous has 
exactly the same relation to writer in [12b] as it does in [12a]. So it must be a 
NOM-sister in [12b] as well. One can replace just writer in [12b]. So [12b] must 
have the extra NOM node.
The effect of the analysis proposed in this Appendix then is this: the distinc-
tion between sister-of-N and sister-of-NOM is now a linguistically signiﬁcant 
distinction. It’s the distinction, within NP, between complement and adjunct. 
If an expression can co-occur with the pro-NOM one, it must be a sister of 
NOM – functioning as an adjunct (regardless of whether or not there’s a sister-
of-N present, i.e. regardless of whether the NOM branches or not). Notice, 
though, that while V-complements are obligatory, N-complements are optional.
Now that we have a consistent distinction between adjuncts and comple-
ments in NP, we can explain some obvious ordering facts. For example of maths 
and in hats have to appear in the order given in [13a]:
[13a] those students of maths in hats.  [13b] *those students in hats of maths.
The explanation is that of maths relates to the N student in the same way as maths 
relates to the verb studies in the VP studies maths. It’s an N-complement – and 
thus sister-of-N. Inevitably, a sister-of-N must appear immediately adjacent to 
N, as in [13a]. [13b] is ungrammatical because of maths is in a position in which 

CHAPTER 7 THE STRUCTURE OF NOUN PHRASES
168
it could only be the sister of the NOM students in hats. In hats, on the other hand, 
is an adjunct and thus sister-of-NOM, so it tolerates being separated from the 
head noun.
Consider now:
[14] a painter with real talent from Germany.
[15] a painter from Germany with real talent.
What conclusion can be drawn from the acceptability of both these orders, in 
the light of what was said about order in [13a] and [13b]?
Since from Germany can modify painter with real talent, as in [14], it must be 
a sister-of-NOM (an adjunct). Now, painter with real talent could consist of 
N + PP or NOM + PP. But which? Put another way, is with real talent a comple-
ment or an adjunct? The fact that it can be separated from the head N – as in 
[15], where it’s modifying painter from Germany (a NOM) – indicates that it 
too is a sister-of-NOM (an adjunct). So with real talent and from Germany are 
both adjuncts (sisters of NOM) and this explains why they can occur in either 
order. Consistent with this, notice that, in both [14] and [15], one can replace 
just painter.
In the light of the analysis proposed in this Appendix, draw the phrase 
markers for the following. They are given as Answers to Appendix Exercise at 
the end of this Appendix.
[16] those observations by Newton.
[17] Larry’s neat summary.
[18] Larry’s summary of the argument.
There’s a ﬁnal point to notice about one. Remember, it is a pro-NOM. As 
a NOM, it co-occurs with DET (the one, that one). But what about the following 
NPs?
[19a] one from Poland.  [20a] one (as in I’ve just eaten one).
By contrast with the one from Poland, which is deﬁnite, [19a] and [20a] are 
indeﬁnite. This suggests that one can be determined by empty DET.
[19b]  
[20b]
 
 
 
     
NP
DET 
NOM
NOM 
PP
one 
from Poland
NP
DET 
NOM
one

 
APPENDIX: NOM AND THE PRO-FORM ONE
169
Notice that, in this one case, NOM does not dominate N, but dominates one 
directly. One must be immediately dominated by NOM and not by N, because 
it is a pro-NOM, not a pro-N (not a pronoun).
■ Answers to appendix exercise
[16] 
 
By Newton tolerates being separated from observations – as in those observations on 
alchemy by Newton – so it’s sister-of-NOM (cf. those ones by Newton).
[17] 
 
[18] 
 
NP
DET 
NOM
DEM 
NOM 
PP
those 
N 
P 
NP
observations 
by 
Newton
NP
DET 
NOM
POSS 
AP 
NOM
Larry's 
neat 
N
summary
NP
DET 
NOM
POSS 
N 
PP
Larry's 
summary 
of the argument

CHAPTER 7 THE STRUCTURE OF NOUN PHRASES
170
■ Further exercise (appendix)
Decide, for each of the following italicised expressions, whether they are comple-
ments or adjuncts. Some are ambiguous. In this connection, notice that a diplomatic 
appointment can mean either ‘an appointment that was (very) diplomatic’ or ‘the 
appointment of a diplomat’. Which of these interpretations does a diplomatic one 
have? Answering that will help you correlate the interpretative distinction (comple-
ment vs. adjunct) with the distinction between sister-of-N and sister-of-NOM.
(a) Contributions from unknown sources. 
(b) Contributions to the fund.
(c) The destruction of the building. 
(d) The destruction of April 1944.
(e) The applicant in the waiting room. 
(f) The applicant for the job.
(g) An adviser to royalty. 
(h) A royal adviser.
(i) A nuclear scientist. 
(j) A charming scientist.
(k) An attentive student. 
(l) A French student.
(m) A criminal lawyer. 
(n) A stellar observatory.
(o) A pessimistic engineer. 
(p) A structural engineer.

171
You are now familiar with the idea that a constituent can contain constituents 
of the same category as itself. For example, an NP may contain further NPs, 
a NOM may contain further NOMs, a VP further VPs, and so on. This is called 
recursion. This and the next two chapters are concerned with the description of 
sentences that contain sentences as constituents – in other words, with senten-
tial recursion.
You shouldn’t have much difﬁculty picking out, within the structure of the 
following sentence, a sequence that can itself be analysed as a sentence.
 [1a] Georgette said she burned the fritters.
The verb say is transitive and its direct object is [she burned the fritters], which is 
itself analysable as a sentence. Here’s an initial phrase marker for [1a] (I modify 
it slightly below):
 [1b] 
 
[1b] is a complex sentence: it contains a sentential structure as a constituent 
(marked off by the dotted line). Contrast [1a] with the co-ordinate, compound 
sentence [2]:
 [2] He hired the acrobats and you hired the clowns.
8
Sentences within 
sentences
SI
NP 
VP
Georgette 
V
[trans]
[past]
said
S2
NP 
VP
she 
V 
NP
[trans]
[past]
the fritters
burned

CHAPTER 8 SENTENCES WITHIN SENTENCES
172
The two sentential structures in [2] are independent of each other. Neither is a 
constituent of the other. They are at the same level in the structure of [2]. That’s 
why they are described as co-ordinate – with the emphasis on ‘co’.
You can see that the two sentential structures in [1a/b] are not at the same 
level of structure. S2 is part of the structure of S1. Stripped down to essentials, 
S1 = [Georgette said S2]. So, S2 is said to be subordinate to S1, with the 
emphasis on ‘sub’. It’s lower in the structure. And S1 itself is superordinate 
to S2 – emphasis on ‘super’. It’s higher than and includes S2.
Subordinate sentential structures are traditionally called subordinate 
clauses (less traditionally, ‘embedded sentences’). So this chapter is all about 
subordinate clauses, and how they relate to their superordinate clauses.
Now look at [3], which contains two subordinate clauses:
 [3] I thought Georgette said she burned the fritters.
As before, [she burned the fritters] is a sentential structure (a clause) which is 
subordinate to, and contributes to the structure of, [Georgette said S]. But now, 
in [3], [Georgette said S] is in turn subordinate to [I thought S]. We thus have 
three clauses in [3].
Every clause has a lexical verb. So we can identify clauses in terms of their 
lexical verbs, referring in [3] to the burn-clause, the say-clause and the think-
clause. [3] shows that a clause can simultaneously be subordinate to one clause 
and superordinate to another. In [3] the say-clause is subordinate to the think-
clause but superordinate to the burn-clause. The burn-clause is subordinate to 
both the other clauses.
The clause that is not subordinate to any other clause is the main clause. In 
[3], then, the main clause is the think-clause. The lexical verb of the main clause 
is the main verb. In phrase markers, the main clause will be the highest 
(topmost) clause.
If we want to concentrate just on what clauses a sentence contains and on 
how those clauses relate to each other in the structure, we can strip away all 
other details and use triangles for clauses. I shall call any phrase marker that does 
just this an abbreviated clausal analysis (ACA). The ACA of [3] is:
 [4a] 
 
Alternatively, an ACA can take the form of a labelled bracketing, as in [4b]:
 [4b] S1[I thought S2[Georgette said S3[she burned the fritters]]]
I thought S2
Georgette said S3
she burned the fritters
S1

173
The representation in [4a] shows that [3] is a right-branching clausal structure: 
each subordinate clause branches off regularly from the right of its superordinate 
clause. Although right-branching is preferred in the structure of English, not 
all clausal structures are right-branching. To see this, identify the subordinate 
clause in [5] and the two subordinate clauses in [6]. Which is the main verb in 
[5] and in [6]?
 [5] He reminded the men that he was in command at every opportunity.
 [6] The fact that you received no greeting from Mars doesn’t mean that it is 
uninhabited.
Within the structure of [5], [7] can be identiﬁed as a subordinate clause, and 
within the structure of [6], [8a], and [8b] can.
 [7] 
He was in command.
  [8a] You received no greeting from Mars.  [8b] It is uninhabited.
Reminded is the main verb of [5] and mean is the main verb of [6].
It’s important to note that, in [5], at every opportunity has its function in 
respect of the main verb reminded. At every opportunity, then, belongs in the 
main clause: He reminded the men . . . at every opportunity. It can’t be part of the 
subordinate clause, since he was in command at every opportunity is clearly not 
part of the meaning of [5].
The abbreviated clausal analysis of [5], then, will be:
 [9a] 
 
 [9b] S1[He reminded the men that S2[he was in command] at every 
opportunity]
As you can see from [9a], [5] is not right-branching. Now try an abbreviated 
clausal analysis of [6] above.
You may remember the subject–predicate analysis of this sentence from Chapter 2, 
Exercise 1(f): subject [the fact that you received no greeting from Mars], predicate 
[doesn’t mean that it is uninhabited]. The ﬁrst subordinate clause, [8a], falls wholly 
within the main clause subject, while the second, [8b], falls wholly within the main 
clause predicate. So, although [6], like [3], contains two subordinate clauses, it 
differs from [3] in that each subordinate clause is subordinated directly to the 
main clause; neither is subordinate to the other subordinate clause. As the follow-
ing analysis shows, [6] is not a regularly right-branching structure either.
CHAPTER 8 SENTENCES WITHIN SENTENCES
SI
He reminded the men that S2 at every opportunity
he was in command

CHAPTER 8 SENTENCES WITHIN SENTENCES
174
 [10a] 
 
 [10b] S1[the fact that S2[you received no greeting from Mars] doesn’t mean
 
 that S3[it is uninhabited]]]
Stripped down to clausal essentials, this sentence amounts to The fact that S2 
doesn’t mean that S3.
As noted, subordinate clauses are straightforwardly analysable as sentences, 
exactly as in previous chapters. In the rest of the chapter, then, I concentrate not 
so much on the internal structure of subordinate clauses but on how they ﬁt into 
the structure of, and their functions within, their superordinate clauses.
Complementisers: that and whether
You’ll have noticed that the subordinate clauses in [5] and [6] were preceded by 
that. That is a marker of clausal subordination. It serves to introduce subordi-
nate clauses. When it functions in this way (rather than as a determiner), that 
is a complementiser.
As a complementiser, that ﬁlls the C position occupied by fronted auxiliaries 
in questions. This was introduced in Chapter 6. Remember, the complementiser 
position – ‘C’ – is deﬁned as: daughter of S-bar (S′) and sister of a following S. 
The representation of the complementiser and subordinate clause in [5], then, 
is as in [11a]. This can be further abbreviated as in [11b].
 [11a]  
[11b] 
 
 
   
From now on, I’ll assume that all subordinate clauses are introduced by a 
complementiser and therefore dominated by S-bar. However, we’ve seen that 
the complementiser may not always be overtly present. In [5] and [6] it was overt. 
By contrast, neither of the subordinate clauses in [3] was overtly introduced by 
a complementiser – though both could have been, as in [12].
[12] I thought that Georgette said that she wouldn’t burn the fritters.
When the complementiser is absent, think of it as having been ellipted. As it were, 
it is there, but not overtly. There are circumstances in which the complementiser 
The fact that S2 
doesn't mean that S3
you received no 
areetinq from Mars
it is uninhabited
S '
C 
S
that 
he was in command
S'
that he was in command
S1

175
 
COMPLEMENTISERS: THAT AND WHETHER
simply cannot be ellipted. In my dialect at least, it can’t be ellipted in the ﬁrst 
subordinate clause of [6] – as in [13] – but it can in the second – as in [14].
[13] *The fact [ • [you received no greetings from Mars]] . . .
[14] . . . doesn’t mean [• [it is uninhabited]].
The subordinate clause within the VP in [14] would be fully represented as in 
[15], with the complementiser position left unﬁlled.
[15] 
 
The ‘complementiser position’ – C – has that name, then, because it is 
the position occupied by the complementiser that (overt or not). As noted, 
the C position is needed for fronted auxiliaries in questions. Interestingly, 
auxiliary-fronting is possible only in main clauses, never in subordinate clauses. 
The explanation for this is that complementiser that and fronted auxiliaries 
occupy the same position, namely C: auxiliaries can’t be fronted to a position 
already occupied by a complementiser (whether the complementiser is overt 
or not).
I’ll refer to clauses which can be introduced by that as that-clauses. Not 
all subordinate clauses are that-clauses, however. Another expression that can 
occupy C, and thus introduce a subordinate clause, is whether.
[16] Sarah asked [whether those stupid sausages were ready yet].
[17] Rashid doesn’t know [whether his disguise was successful].
[18] [Whether Rory should be ﬁred] was worrying them.
[19] [Whether Millie will go up in that machine] is doubtful.
The big difference between a whether-clause and a that-clause is this. In [16] 
Sarah is reported as asking something. So, without actually being used itself 
to ask a question, [16] does make reference to a question, and it does so by 
means of the subordinate clause [whether those stupid sausages were ready yet]. If 
[16] is true, then, Sarah in all probability said ‘Are those stupid sausages ready 
yet?’ Much the same goes for [17], where Rashid is reported as not knowing the 
c 
s
NP 
VP
pronoun 
V 
AP
it
[intens]
[pres]
A
is
uninhabited
S'

CHAPTER 8 SENTENCES WITHIN SENTENCES
176
answer to a question, the question represented by [whether his disguise was 
successful]. These subordinate clauses are interrogative in character.
So, in addition to functioning (like that) as a marker of clausal subordination, 
whether indicates that the subordinate clause is an interrogative clause. 
The yes/no questions considered in Chapter 6 are interrogative clauses. As main 
interrogative clauses, they display auxiliary-fronting and are used actually to ask 
a question. Whether-clauses are subordinate interrogative clauses; they are 
the subordinate counterparts to yes/no questions. They can’t display auxiliary-
fronting to the complementiser position because that position is ﬁlled by whether 
(see *Sarah asked whether were those sausages ready yet). Incidentally, notice that 
the interrogative complementiser can take the form of if. It can in [16] and [17], 
but not in [18] or [19].
In addition to that-clauses and interrogative whether-clauses, subordinate 
clauses can be introduced by subordinating conjunctions. Before dealing with 
these, I look at the functions of the clauses dealt with so far.
This would be a good point to try Exercise 1 at the end of the chapter (page 191).
The functions of that- and whether-clauses
I shall consider the following functions:
1. Subject – and extraposed subject.
2. Complement of V (within VP).
3. Complement of A (within AP).
4. Complement of N (within NP).
5. Complement of P (within PP).
■ Subject — and extraposed subject
Divide the following sentences into subject and predicate:
 [20a] That the king was in his counting house disconcerted her.
 [21a] That the book had a missing chapter was noticed by the critics.
 [22a] That Rashid’s disguise was a success is undeniable.
Your analysis should show that a subordinate that-clause is functioning as 
subject in each case:
 
 SUBJECT: 
PREDICATE:
[20a] That the king was in his counting house 
disconcerted her
[21a] That the book had a missing chapter 
was noticed by the critics
[22a] That Rashid’s disguise was a success 
is undeniable

177
 
THE FUNCTIONS OF THAT- AND WHETHER-CLAUSES
And, in [18] and [19] above, we had examples of an interrogative (whether-) clause 
functioning as subject (with was worrying them and is doubtful functioning as 
predicates).
Now, we’ve been analysing subjects as NPs. So I’ll analyse these subject 
clauses (otherwise known as ‘clausal subjects’) as dominated by NP. So, for 
example, [20a] will be represented by [23], though I have summarised liberally 
with triangles.
[23]  
 
In support of having clausal subjects dominated by NP, notice that they can 
be replaced by a pronoun: it disconcerted her, it was noticed by the critics, it is 
undeniable.
Having a clause as subject makes for a very ‘heavy’ subject. If [20a]–[22a] 
seemed at all unnatural to you, you’re almost certainly responding to this. In 
English we generally prefer to defer such complexity to the end of the sentence. 
So a characteristic of clausal subjects is that they can be extraposed from 
under the subject NP node to the end of the sentence, leaving behind the empty 
pronoun it. Here are the extraposed versions of [20a]–[22a]:
[20b] It disconcerted her [that the king was in his counting house].
[21b] It was noticed by the critics [that the book had a missing chapter].
[22b] It is undeniable [that Rashid’s disguise was a success].
What are the extraposed versions of [18] and [19] above? (I give them below.)
The it that takes the place of the clausal subject is special: it’s quite empty of 
meaning. It simply serves as a ‘dummy’ subject. This is the it of it is raining, 
which is there just to give the verb rain a subject, obligatory in English though 
not in some other languages, e.g. Italian (piove: it is raining). Just as it makes no 
sense to ask ‘What is raining?’ (the only possible answer being ‘rain’), it makes 
no sense to ask ‘What disconcerted her that the king was in his counting house?’ 
This is called expletive it, to distinguish it from referring uses of it.
I’ll represent these extraposed subjects as daughters of the main clause S, as in 
[24], for example.
s
NP
VP
S'
disconcerted her
C 
S
that 
the king was in his counting house

CHAPTER 8 SENTENCES WITHIN SENTENCES
178
[24]
 
The extraposed versions [18] and [19] are:
[25] It was worrying them whether Rory should be ﬁred.
[26] It is doubtful whether Millie will go up in that machine.
So, the extraposed subject construction has a clausal subject displaced to the 
end of the sentence and expletive it in the normal subject position, dominated 
directly by NP. But now look at the following:
[27a] It seems [that the recipe involves some dubious ingredients].
[28a] It transpires [that dinosaurs were extinct by then].
With these, if you try putting the subordinate clause (‘back’?) into the normal 
subject position, the result is ungrammatical:
[27b] *[That the recipe involves some dubious ingredients] seems.
[28b] *[That dinosaurs were extinct by then] transpires.
There’s a handful of special verbs – including seem, appear, transpire, and 
happen – that can’t have clauses in the normal subject position. This raises the 
question whether the subordinate clauses in [27a]–[28a] can really be regarded 
as extraposed subjects. However, since [27a] and [28a] display the expletive it 
associated with the extraposed subject construction, I’ll analyse them as such, 
with an analysis like that in [24]. Since this implies that the subordinate clauses 
are to be regarded as subjects, this group of verbs must be thought of as being 
[intransitive] in this use.
Notice, by contrast, that in [18]–[22], none of the verbs involved were 
[intransitive]. Those in [18], [20], and [21] were [transitive] and those in [19] 
and [22] were [intensive]. With these, extraposition of the clausal subject was 
optional: the subordinate clause could appear either in the normal subject 
position or extraposed. In connection with our ‘special’ verbs, then, the gener-
alisation seems to be that extraposition of a clausal subject is obligatory when 
the verb is [intransitive].
Now draw phrase markers for the following sentences, using triangles for all 
NPs. Discussions 1 and 2, page 188.
[29] That the squid sauce was a mistake soon became clear.
[30] It isn’t my fault Max crushed your monocle.
s
NP 
VP 
S'
it 
disconcerted her 
that the king was in his counting house

179
■ Complement of V within VP
Look again [3] above, repeated here as [31]:
[31] I thought S2[Georgette said S3[she burned the fritters]]
Here we have two that-clauses functioning as complements of the transitive 
verbs think and say (i.e. as direct objects). This chapter has already included 
several other examples of a subordinate clause functioning as the complement 
of a transitive verb. Review the examples given so far and list the clauses func-
tioning as complements of verbs.
In addition to those in [3], the subordinate clause in [5], the second subordinate 
clause in [6], that in [16], and that in [17] are all functioning as complements 
of a verb. Furthermore, the subordinate clause in [21a/b] is the subject of a 
passive sentence, so it too originated as a verb complement in the active 
sentence [32]:
[32] The critics noticed [that the book had a missing chapter].
So, in addition to notice (as in [32]), verbs that can take clausal direct objects 
include think ([3]), the ditransitive verb remind ([5]), mean ([6]), ask ([16]), 
and know ([17]), and a host of others. Some of these can take either a that-clause 
or an interrogative (whether-) clause (e.g. know, tell, and worry), some can only 
take a that-clause (e.g. claim and remind) and some can only take an interroga-
tive clause (e.g. ask and wonder).
We’ve seen that the ditransitive verb remind can take a clausal direct object. 
Other such ditransitive verbs are tell, convince, warn, persuade, promise, and 
inform.
[33] Anna told him (that) his shirt was hanging out.
[34] She ﬁnally convinced him (that) he needed a shave.
That- and whether-clauses can function as the complements of verbs which 
also take NPs (including pronouns) as direct objects, as in [35]:
[35] I have always 
1
4
4
2
4
4
3
admitted
denied
thought
claimed
 believed
5
4
4
6
4
4
7 
it/this.
Furthermore, we’ve seen that clauses functioning as objects in active sentences 
can become subject NPs in the passive. So I’ll analyse them as being dominated 
by an NP node, just like the clausal subjects considered in the last section. Here’s 
the phrase marker for [33].
 
THE FUNCTIONS OF THAT- AND WHETHER-CLAUSES

CHAPTER 8 SENTENCES WITHIN SENTENCES
180
[36] 
 
You should note, though, that not all verbs that take clausal complements can 
take an NP complement. Hope and insist, for example, cannot:
[37a] She hoped/insisted [(that) the performance would be a success].
[37b] *She hoped/insisted it.
Furthermore, not all object clauses can appear as subjects in passive sentences:
[38] *That his shirt was hanging out was told him.
[39] *That he should abandon the monocle was insisted by the whole company.
Since some transitive verbs can’t take a clausal object but only an NP (e.g. 
kick, boil, and analyse, among many others), and since not all transitive verbs 
that do take clausal objects can take NP objects, the sub-categorisation label 
‘[transitive]’ is not much help here. So there’s a strong case for going beyond the 
sub-categorisations given in Chapter 4 and sub-categorising verbs according to 
whether they can take clausal complements. The subcategorisations introduced in 
Chapter 4 will do for the moment, though; we’ll look again at subcategorization 
in Chapter 10.
Now, using triangles for PPs and NPs, draw the phrase marker for [21b] on 
page 177. Three things to note about it: (a) its main verb is a passive [transitive] 
V, (b) by the critics is a VP-adverbial and (c) the subordinate clause is an extra-
posed subject. Discussion 3, page 188.
In addition to functioning as direct objects in the complementation of V, 
that- and whether-clauses can function as subject-predicatives:
[40] The consensus is that you should taste the stew ﬁrst.
[41] The question is whether he should have accepted that offer.
s
NP 
VP
Anna 
V 
NP 
NP
[ditrans]
[past]
him
S'
told
C 
S
(that) 
his shirt was hanging out

181
Notice that, of all the intensive verbs, only the copula (be) can take a clausal 
predicative. Taste, smell, sound, and look can’t. Appear and seem are intensive 
verbs (Julia seemed restless, Magda appeared happy), but remember, when those 
verbs are followed by clauses, we are analysing those clauses, not as subject-
predicatives, but as extraposed subjects. This is because that-clauses only follow 
appear and seem in sentences with expletive it as subject. So [42], with its non-
expletive subject (Julia), is ungrammatical:
[42] *Julia seemed that she was restless.
In the extraposed-subject construction, remember, appear and seem are 
[intransitive].
As regards clauses functioning as subject-predicatives, since we’ve already 
allowed that a range of categories (NP, AP and PP) can function as subject-
predicatives, there’s no motive for having the clause dominated by NP. So we 
can just allow that – in addition to NP, AP, and PP – S′ can function as a subject 
predicative.
Now try drawing the phrase marker for [40], using the triangle notation for 
all NPs. Discussion 4, page 189.
■ Complement of A within AP
As noted in Chapter 7, an AP can consist of A complemented by a PP (e.g. 
nervous of exams, worried about the outcome, full of hope). Adjectives can also be 
complemented by a that-clause or a whether-clause. So: an AP can consist of the 
head A plus a clausal (S′) complement. Examples are:
[43a] happy (that) they had not been chosen.
[44a] aware (that) he had overstepped the mark.
[45a] unsure whether he should sacriﬁce that pawn.
Such APs have all the usual range of functions for AP: subject-predicative ([43b] 
and [44b]), object-predicative ([45b]), modiﬁer of N, or NOM, within NP 
([46]).
[43b] The men seemed AP[happy [they had not been chosen]].
[44b] Hassan was AP[unsure [whether he should sacriﬁce that pawn]].
[45b] She made him AP[aware [that he had overstepped the mark]].
[46]  Drivers AP[anxious [that they had made mistakes]] complained.
 
THE FUNCTIONS OF THAT- AND WHETHER-CLAUSES

CHAPTER 8 SENTENCES WITHIN SENTENCES
182
[47] 
 
Using triangles for NPs and the embedded S, draw a phrase marker for the 
sentence in [45b], bearing in mind that make in that sentence has two comple-
ments. Discussion 5, page 189.
By way of revision, why not draw a complete phrase marker for sentence [46]? 
You’ll need to leave yourself plenty of room. Discussion 6, page 190.
An important point to notice here is the distinction between:
[48] It is certain that her hair is dyed.
[49] William is certain that her hair is dyed.
Can you explain the difference? (Look again at pages 176–178.)
Only one of them contains an AP with a clausal complement of the A. The 
other contains an extraposed-subject clause. It is only in [49] that [certain that 
her hair is dyed] is an AP. [48] has the expletive it as subject and this means 
[that her hair is dyed] is an extraposed subject. Note that [48] is paraphrased 
by That her hair is dyed is certain. So in [48] the AP consists just of the adjective 
certain.
■ Complement of N within NP
Consider the following NP:
[50] the fact that you received no greetings from Mars.
This NP contains a that-clause complementing the N ( fact). A feature of noun 
complement clauses – useful in distinguishing them from other clauses that can 
appear in NPs – is that they can only complement abstract nouns like fact, 
s
NP
VP
the men
V
[intens]
[past]
AP
A 
S'
seemed
happy
C
S
(that) 
they had not been chosen

183
rumour, idea, news, claim, suggestion, rule, message, indication, etc. Thus we have 
NPs like those in [51] but not those in [52]:
 [51] The 
1
4
4
2
4
4
3
news
contention
idea
suggestion
rumour
5
4
4
6
4
4
7
 that Sophie has arrived.
[52] *The 
1
4
2
4
3
book
newspaper article
programme
bucket
5
4
6
4
7
 
that Sophie has arrived.
The clause is said to ‘complement the noun’ because it’s in the same relation 
to the N within NP as clauses that complement the V in VP. The same goes for 
clauses complementing A in AP. Compare the following:
 [53a] His absence [INDICATES that he disapproves]. (VP)
 [53b] His absence is [INDICATIVE that he disapproves]. (AP)
 [53c] His absence is [an INDICATION that he disapproves]. (NP)
The bracketed string in [53b] is simply an AP version of the VP in [53a] – minus 
the tense. And that in [53c] is simply the NP version of that VP (again, minus the 
tense). To capture this parallelism, we must regard the clause as complement of 
the A in [53b] and of the N in [53c] because in [53a] it’s clearly functioning as 
complement of the V indicates. So, the clausal complement of the A in AP is 
represented as the sister of the head A. And the same goes for the clausal comple-
ment in NP. As a sister of the head N, it’ll be dominated by NOM. The NP in 
[50], then, will look like this:
[54] 
 
In Chapter 9 I deal with another kind of clause – the relative clause – in the 
structure of NP. Relative clauses have a different relation to the head N and this 
will be reﬂected in how they are represented in phrase markers. The distinction 
 
THE FUNCTIONS OF THAT- AND WHETHER-CLAUSES
DET
ART
the
NOM
N
S'
fact
that you received no 
greeting from Mars
NP

CHAPTER 8 SENTENCES WITHIN SENTENCES
184
between noun-complement clauses and relative clauses need not concern you in 
this chapter, but it will become important in the next, and that’s why I mention 
it here.
NPs containing complement clauses have the functions usually expected of 
NPs. When an NP with a clausal complement functions as subject-predicative, 
however, a possible confusion with the extraposed subject clause arises again. All 
the following sentences include a that-clause following a noun, but only in two 
of them does that clause function as noun-complement clause within an NP. 
Identify them.
 [55] It is a disappointment that his monocle was not stolen.
 [56] One small difﬁculty is the fact that dinosaurs were extinct by then.
 [57] It was a message that the party had been cancelled.
 [58] It is a well-known fact that beavers build dams.
 [59] It is our contention that you could dispense with that silly monocle.
Since extraposed subject (ES) clauses only ever occur with expletive it, and since 
it doesn’t ﬁgure in [56], you can be sure that in [56] we are dealing, not with an 
ES clause but with a noun-complement clause, within the NP the fact that dino-
saurs were extinct by then. The others all have it as subject. The question is 
whether the it is expletive or not. If this is not intuitively obvious, you can 
check by seeing whether the it in subject position can be replaced by the sub-
ordinate clause. If it can, you are dealing with an ES clause. This works with [55], 
[58], and [59]:
[55a] That his monocle was not stolen is a disappointment.
[58a] That beavers build dams is a well-known fact.
[59a] That you could dispense with that silly monocle is our contention.
In [57], by contrast, it does actually refer to something (a phone call perhaps). 
Replacing it with the subordinate clause yields [57a]:
[57a] *That the party had been cancelled was a message.
Even if grammatical, this is not a true paraphrase of [57]. So, in [57], a message 
that the party was cancelled is an NP with a noun complement clause, not an ES 
clause.
■ Complement of P within PP
 [60a] The question of whether they should revamp the website was raised.
 [60b] Sarah’s concerns about whether anyone had enough time were ignored.
 [60c] It depends on whether the rations arrive in time.

185
[60a–c] show that an interrogative (whether-) clause can function as the com-
plement of a preposition within PP – represented as in [61]:
[61] 
 
By contrast, that-clauses cannot function as complement to a P within PP.
[62a] *about that she left 
[63a] *of that the tree falls down
[62b] *about she left 
[63b] *of the tree falls down
As [62b]–[63b] show, things are made no better by omission of that.
But consider now after, until, before, and since. These four words do admit of 
a following clause, but not one introduced by that:
[64a] after (*that) she left. 
[65a] until (*that) the tree falls down.
[66a] before (*that) it gets cold. [67a] since (*that) you came.
Some grammars explain this by categorising these four words – after, until, 
before, and since – as a kind of complementiser. As complementisers, they would 
ﬁll the ‘C’ slot and thus leave no room for the complementiser that. Well, that’s 
quite a nice explanation of why these four words can’t co-occur with that. 
However, it means categorising these words in two different ways: as comple-
mentisers when they take a clause but as prepositions when they take an NP 
as in [64b]–[67b]:
 [64b] after the game 
[65b] until this evening.
 [66b] before the meeting 
[67b] since his arrival.
It is simpler to say that these four words (after, until, before, and since) are pre-
positions which can take either a clause (S) or an NP as complement. They 
don’t change their category simply because they have S rather than NP as com-
plement. So I shall analyse [67a], for example, as in [67c]:
 [67c] 
 
 
THE FUNCTIONS OF THAT- AND WHETHER-CLAUSES
pp
P 
S'
about
of
Comp 
S
whether
PP
P 
S
since 
you came

CHAPTER 8 SENTENCES WITHIN SENTENCES
186
This PP analysis distinguishes these four words – after, until, before, since – from 
other seemingly similar words that can only take a clausal complement (not 
an NP complement). I turn to these now, in discussing adverbial clauses.
Adverbial clauses
What distinguishes adverbial clauses from that- and whether-clauses, and clauses 
complementing a P within PP, is that they are introduced by subordinating 
conjunctions such as although, unless, if, because, once, as, now, so, while, since. 
These are subordinating conjunctions – rather than prepositions – because they 
can only introduce clauses (not NPs).
I shall also take certain word-sequences as phrasal complementisers without 
further analysis (using triangles): now that, so that, except that, as if, in case, in 
order that, as soon as.
As subordinating conjunctions, these occupy the complementiser position, C. 
Compared with the complementisers that and whether, they carry extra meaning 
and it is this extra meaning that allows the clause they introduce to function as 
an adverbial. For example, in
[68] Things will be rather dull if Hieronimo leaves.
It’s the subordinating conjunction if that makes the subordinate clause function 
as a conditional adverbial clause (as does its negative counterpart, unless). 
Because makes for an adverbial clauses of reason or result. So makes for an 
adverbial clause of purpose.
[69] Taxes are rising because the bankers need huge bonuses.
[70] I’m slaving away here so you can have clean clothes tomorrow.
Here, slightly abbreviated, is a phrase marker for [68].
[71] 
 
s
NP 
VP
things 
VP 
S'
MOD
[pres]
VP
C 
S
will
V
[intens]
AP
if 
NP 
VP
be
rather dull
Hieronimo 
leaves

 
ADVERBIAL CLAUSES
187
If you are extremely observant, you will have noticed I’ve listed since twice: 
once, in the last section, as a preposition and, in this section, as a subordinating 
conjunction. This is not a mistake. As a preposition, since has a temporal meaning 
– [67a/b] above and [72] below. By contrast, the subordinating conjunction 
since has a meaning akin to because or as – see [73] – and, with that meaning, it 
can only introduce a clause, not an NP.
[72] Since he became a friend, I’ve been to all his concerts.
[73] Since he is a friend, I go to all his concerts.
It may seem implausible to categorise the italicised expression in [72] as a PP but 
that in [73] as a clause. However, notice that, as a PP, the italicised expression in 
[72] can function as a modiﬁer in an NP (see [74]) – and we already know that 
PPs can do that – but the adverbial clause can’t (see [75]). Adverbials can’t 
modify N or NOM.
[74] his behaviour since he became a friend.
[75] *his behaviour since he is a friend.
Equally, before, after, and until are prepositions – head of PP – and PPs can 
post-modify Ns in NP:
[76] the discussion after you left.
[77] a long wait until the pubs opened.
[78] the weeks before the ﬁghting started.
By contrast, unless, as if, and although, for example, are subordinating con-
junctions, which make for adverbial clauses. And again, adverbials can’t modify 
N or NOM:
[79] * NP[the discussion unless you go]
[80] * NP[his behaviour as if you weren’t there]
[81] * NP[the lack of activity although war had been declared ]
Finally, all the examples of adverbial clauses given so far are VP-adverbials. 
Here are examples of adverbial clauses functioning as S-adverbials:
[82] Unless I’m gravely mistaken, you are King Kong.
[83] Since you ask, my name is Ozymandias.
[84] That’s my toothbrush, in case you were wondering.
As a ﬁnal exercise, give phrase markers for [69] and [82] above. Use triangles 
for NPs and APs. Discussions 7 and 8 respectively, pages 190 and 191.

CHAPTER 8 SENTENCES WITHIN SENTENCES
188
■ Discussion of in-text exercises
1. 
2. 
3. 
s
NP 
VP
S'
AdvP 
VP
C 
S
Adv 
V 
AP
that
NP 
VP
soon
[intensj
[past]
A
the squid 
sauce
V
[intens]
[past]
NP
became
clear
was
a mistake
S
NP 
VP 
S'
it
V
[intens]
[pres]
NP 
C 
S
my fault
NP
VP
isn't
Max
V 
NP
[trans]
[past]
your monocle
crushed
S
NP 
VP
S'
it
PASS
[past]
VP 
C 
S
VP 
PP
that 
NP 
VP
was
V
[trans]
NP 
by the critics
the book
V
[trans]
[past]
NP
a missing 
chapter
had
noticed

 
ADVERBIAL CLAUSES
189
4. 
5. 
s
NP 
VP
the consensus
V
[intens]
[pres]
S'
C 
S
is 
that
NP 
VP
you
MOD
[past]
VP
should
VP 
AdvP
V
[trans]
NP
Adv
taste
the stew 
first
S
NP
VP
she
V
[complex]
[past]
NP
AP
him
A 
S'
made
aware
C 
S
that he had overstepped the mark

CHAPTER 8 SENTENCES WITHIN SENTENCES
190
6. 
 
NB: In terms of the analysis in the Appendix to Chapter 7, the AP will be represented 
as a sister of an extra non-branching NOM node.
7. 
s
NP 
VP
DET 
NOM
V
[intrans]
[past]
N 
AP
drivers 
A 
S'
complained
anxious 
C 
S
that 
NP 
VP
pronoun
they
PERF
[past]
VP
had
V
[trans]
NP
DET 
NOM
made
N
mistakes
S
NP 
VP
taxes
VP 
S'
PROG
[pres]
VP
C 
S
are
V
[intrans]
because 
NP 
VP
rising
the bankers 
V 
VP
[trans]
[pres]
need
huge bonuses

 
EXERCISES
191
8. 
 Exercises
1. Give abbreviated clausal analyses (ACAs) of the following sentences. (c) and (d) 
contain two subordinate clauses each. Include all complementisers within the 
subordinate clause triangle. Strictly speaking, this should mean that all subordi-
nate clause triangles should be labelled S′ (S-bar) but, for ease of presentation, 
I’ve omitted the bar in my phrase markers and I suggest you do too. Apart from 
the main clause – which should always be ‘S1’ – it’s not important how the clauses 
are numbered.
Here are SOME HINTS ON HOW TO PROCEED. First decide how many clauses there are. 
You can do this by counting the lexical verbs (one per clause). Then identify the 
main verb and everything associated with it in the main clause. Draw the main 
clause triangle and label it ‘S1’. All the other clauses will be subordinate to S1 and 
hence below it (and contained within it). Then deal likewise with the subordinate 
clauses.
(a) They did not suspect they were being observed at all.
(b) That the ejector seat didn’t work was quite forgotten.
(c) I don’t think the fact that the moped has an ejector seat is a great selling point.
(d) Your suggestion that Max might refuse a second zabaglione just shows you 
don’t know Max.
2. Give ACAs of the following and give the function of all subordinate clauses.
(a) Until you mentioned it, it had not struck me that the book would make 
a good ﬁlm.
(b) I am surprised Rory has learned so much because he’s usually asleep.
(c) As soon as the princess had ascended, I knew the palanquin would not budge.
s
c 
s
NP 
VP
unless
NP 
VP
/
V
[intens]
[pres]
AP
you 
V 
NP
[intens]
[pres]
King Kong
gravely mistaken
are
'm
S'
s

CHAPTER 8 SENTENCES WITHIN SENTENCES
192
(d) The fact that you endorse Omar’s feeling that life is too short doesn’t imply 
you should get drunk every day.
(e) It appears that the new chef thought he could slip away before the missing 
steaks were noticed.
(f) If you are wondering whether Max is turning up, the rumour is that, since 
he’s getting married, he won’t be in for a month.
■ Discussion of exercises
1. (a) 
(b) 
 
  
(c)   
(d) 
 
  
Alternatively:
(a) S1[They did not suspect S2[they were being observed]S2 at all]S1.
(b) S1[ S2[That the ejector seat didn’t work]S2 was quite forgotten]S1.
(c) S1[I don’t think S2[the fact S3[that the moped has an ejector seat]S3 is a great 
selling point]S2]S1.
(d) S1[Your suggestion S2[that Max might refuse a second zabaglione]S2 just shows 
S3[you don’t know Max]S3]S1.
2. (a) 
 
 
 
 
S1[Until S2[you mentioned it]S2 it had not struck me S3[that the book would 
make an good ﬁlm]S3]S1.
S1 = main clause.
S2 = complement to P (until).
S3 = extraposed subject.
SI
SI
they did not suspect S2 at all
S2 was quite forgotten
thev were beina observed
that the ejector seat didn't work
SI
SI
I don't think S2
your suggestion S2
iust shows S3
the fact S3 is a great selling point
that Max might refuse 
a second zabaglione
you don't 
know Max
that the moped has 
an ejector seat
SI
until S2 it had not struck me 
S3
vou mentioned it
that the book would make a good film

 
EXERCISES
193
(b) 
 
 
 
S1[I am surprised S2[Rory has learned so much]S2 S3[because he’s usually 
asleep]S3]S1.
S1 = main clause.
S2 = complement to A (surprised).
S3 = VP-adverbial – in S1. Were S3 an adverbial in S2 rather than S1, S2 
would be [Rory has learned so much because he’s usually asleep], which is 
presumably not what was intended!
(c) 
 
 
 
S1[ S2[As soon as the princess had ascended]S2 I knew S3[the palanquin would 
not budge]S3]S1.
S1 = main clause.
S2 = VP-adverbial.
S3 = complement to V (knew): direct object.
(d) 
 
 
 
S1[The fact S2[that you endorse Omar’s feeling S3[that life is too short]S3]S2 
doesn’t imply S4[that you should get drunk everyday]S4]S1.
S1 = main clause.
S2 = complement to N (fact).
S3 = complement to N (feeling).
S4 = complement to V (imply): direct object.
I am surprised
S2 
S3
Rory has learned 
because he's 
so much 
usually asleep
SI
S2 
I knew 
S3
/4s soon as the princess 
the palanquin
had ascended 
would not budge
SI
the fact S2 
doesn't imply 
S4
that you endorse Omar's feeling S3 
you should get drunk every day
that life is too short
S1

CHAPTER 8 SENTENCES WITHIN SENTENCES
194
(e) 
 
 
 
S1[It appears S2[that the new chef thought S3[he could slip away S4[before the 
missing steaks were noticed]S4]S3]S2]S1.
S1 = main clause.
S2 = extraposed subject. (S1 has expletive it as subject.)
S3 = complement to V (thought): direct object.
S4 = Complement to P (before).
(f) 
 
 
 
S1[ S2[If you are wondering S3[whether Max is turning up]S3]S2 the rumour is 
S4[that S5[since he’s getting married]S5 he won’t be in for a month]S4]S1.
S1 = main clause.
S2 = S-adverbial.
S3 = complement to V (wondering): direct object.
S4 = complement to V (is): subject-predicative.
S5 = VP-adverbial.
 Further exercises
1. Give Abbreviated Clausal Analyses (either by means of trees or by means of bracket-
ings) of the following sentences. For each subordinate clause, say what its 
function is. Look at Exercise 1 above for hints on how to proceed. The ﬁrst few 
contain just one subordinate clause. Later examples contain more.
(a) He told me Rory had composed several symphonies at our ﬁrst meeting.
(b) That anyone would actually like his paintings came as a surprise.
it appears 
S2
that the new chef thought S3
he could slip away before S4
the missing steaks were noticed
SI
S2 
the rumour is 
S4
if you are wondering S3 
that S5 he won't be in for a month
whether Max is 
since he is 
turning up 
getting married
S1

 
FURTHER EXERCISES
195
(c) The big idea here is that we all become rich as quickly as possible.
(d) The announcement that Frank has resigned will be made after the plane 
takes off.
(e) It’s well known that Max thinks syntax is good for the brain.
(f) Before the exhibition opened, the gallery had been certain his paintings 
would sell extremely well.
(g) That Savonarola came to power is a direct consequence of Lorenzo’s insis-
tence that his sermons were harmless.
(h) Once it was certain that all the paintings were copies, the exhibition closed.
(i) The gallery’s defence was that they didn’t realise they were copies until it was 
too late.
2. Draw complete phrase markers for the following sentences:
(a) Do you think she’s good at syntax?
(b) This is a proposal that we should support the strike.
(c) Whether Frank or Bill would be promoted wasn’t entirely clear.
(d) His friends were certain he would not pass the test.
(e) It is most unfortunate the lecture was cancelled.
(f) Is it so obvious that she doesn’t like the paintings?
(g) The exhibition closed because the paintings were copies.
(h) Max was under the impression that Cynthia was glad he had arrived.
3. Consider the following sentences carefully. How do you suggest the function of 
the subordinate clauses should be described? This possibility has not been men-
tioned in the chapter, but it’s related to a function that has been mentioned.
(a) They thought it a shame that no-one had crushed that silly monocle.
(b) She considered it odd that so few had signed the petition.
4. Another possibility not mentioned is illustrated by the following:
(a) The thought occurred to him that he should have done the washing up.
(b) The claim was made that syntax is actually good for the brain.
(c) A rumour is spreading that the Prime Minister has resigned.
 
In the light of the discussion in this chapter, how exactly would you describe the 
function of the subordinate clause in these? Precisely how does it differ from any-
thing explicitly described in the chapter?

196
In Chapter 1, I used replacement by a single word to show that a sequence of 
words should be analysed as a constituent. As pointed out there, wh-words – 
who, what, which, whose, why, when, where, how – can be used in this way. For 
example, given
 [1] Vince is taking Violetta’s icon to Athens.
we can replace Vince with who – as in [2], Violetta’s icon with what – as in [3], 
Violetta’s with which or whose – as in [4], and to Athens with where – as in [5]:
 [2] Who is taking Violetta’s icon to Athens?
 [3] Vince is taking what to Athens?
 [4] Vince is taking whose/which icon to Athens?
 [5] Vince is taking Violetta’s icon where?
Similarly, by plane and secretly could be replaced by how; in two hours or on 
Tuesday could be replaced by when, and for restoration and so it can be restored 
could be replaced by why.
Clauses that include a wh-word are called wh-clauses. Wh-words can 
appear in main clauses and in subordinate clauses. As you can see from [2]–[5], 
the inclusion of a wh-word in a main clause has the effect of making it into a 
question – more speciﬁcally, a wh-question. Wh-questions contrast with the 
yes/no questions introduced in Chapter 6. A yes/no question asks whether some-
thing is the case or not. A wh-question, by contrast, questions some particular 
constituent – for example, the subject in [2], the direct object in [3], and so on. 
Hence wh-questions are commonly called constituent questions.
I begin by describing main wh-clauses – wh-questions, in other words – and 
then go on to discuss subordinate wh-clauses.
Wh-questions
Compare [3] above, repeated here, with [6]:
 [3] Vince is taking what to Athens?
 [6] What is Vince taking to Athens?
9
Wh-clauses

 
WH-QUESTIONS
197
When the wh-question takes the form in [3] there is nothing special about its 
analysis. It can be analysed exactly as [1] would be – except that, where [1] has 
the NP Violetta’s icon, [3] has an NP consisting of the wh-pronoun what.
But the more usual form of that question – and the real interest of wh-clauses 
in general (indeed the whole point of this chapter) – is illustrated in [6]. It will 
help you to focus on the differences between [3] and [6] if you ﬁrst draw a 
phrase marker for [3]. Assume that take is [transitive] and that the PP to Athens 
is therefore a VP-adverbial. Use triangles for NPs and PPs. The phrase marker 
will be given shortly.
Now, [6] differs from [3] in exactly two ways. Try to identify the two differences.
In both [3] and [6], what is understood as the direct object of the V, take. The ﬁrst 
difference is that, while what is actually in the direct object position in [3], it has 
moved to the front of the sentence in [6] (i.e. it is fronted). The second differ-
ence is that [6], but not [3], exhibits fronting of the tensed auxiliary. So the two 
differences are: (1) fronting of the wh-phrase, (2) fronting of the tensed auxiliary.
Write down the sentences that correspond to [4] and [5] as [6] corresponds 
to [3].
You will have discovered for yourself that in [4] we cannot front just the wh-word. 
That would give *Whose/Which is Vince taking icon to Athens? In [4], which and 
whose are functioning as determiners. Only the full phrasal category – NP – can 
be fronted. So it’s the full NP containing that wh-determiner (which icon or 
whose icon) that’s fronted:
 [7] !
@
Whose icon
Which icon
#
$ 
is Vince taking to Athens?
 [8] Where is Vince taking Violetta’s icon?
As for the auxiliary-fronting shown in [6]–[8], this is exactly the auxiliary-
fronting introduced in Chapter 6 for yes/no questions. It’s auxiliary-fronting 
that makes for questions. This is fronting to the ‘C’ position – daughter of S-bar 
and sister of S. Nothing new there, then. What is new here is the fronting of the 
wh-phrase (‘wh-fronting’).
As with the movement of an object to the subject position in passive sentences 
– and, more generally, as with all movements – wh-fronting leaves behind a gap 
(•) of the appropriate category. I’ll show this in a moment.
But ﬁrst we have to ask: Where does the wh-phrase move to? As mentioned, 
auxiliary-fronting is fronting to the C position. But if the fronted auxiliary occupies 
the C position, where does the wh-phrase get fronted to? Clearly, it moves in 
front of the fronted auxiliary.

CHAPTER 9 WH-CLAUSES
198
 [9a] 
That tells us where in the linear order it appears, but it doesn’t tell us what 
structural position it occupies. Is the wh-phrase in the C position as well as the 
fronted auxiliary? Well, in the last chapter, I suggested we don’t get auxiliary 
fronting in that- and whether-clauses because auxiliaries can’t move to a position 
already ﬁlled by that/whether (overtly or otherwise). The fact that a sentence 
can exhibit both auxiliary-fronting and wh-fronting suggests that the wh-phrase 
doesn’t move to the C position that auxiliaries move to. It moves above-and-
beyond that C position.
 [9b] 
This in turn suggests it moves into another C position. So we need a second – 
higher – C position.
Just as the already familiar C position introduces S (and is dominated by 
S-bar – S′), this second C position introduces S′. So it must be dominated by a 
node that also dominates S′. I’ll call this node ‘S-double-bar’ – S″. So, this 
second, higher C position – the landing site for fronted wh-phrases – can be 
deﬁned as: daughter of S″, sister of S′:
 [10]  
 
We can now give a representation of [6]. Essentially, it’ll be like the repre-
sentation of [3], except for the two frontings and the S′ and S″ nodes. So let’s 
remind ourselves explicitly of the points made so far. [6] displays fronting 
of a wh-NP from the direct object position to the C2 position just deﬁned. 
The object position following the V must therefore have an NP gap. And 
the auxiliary carrying tense (in this case, PROG be) has been fronted to the 
familiar C1 position, leaving a gap under the PROG node. Earlier I asked you for 
a phrase marker for [3]. It is given in [11a]. Compare it with [11b], the phrase 
marker for [6]:
What is Vince • taking • to Athens
What s'[is s[Vince • taking • to Athens]]
S"
C2 
S'
Cl 
S

 
WH-QUESTIONS
199
[11a] 
 
[11b]
 
As before, the dotted movement lines are not part of the phrase marker but they 
do help to show what’s going on here. It may help you to get things right if you 
draw such movements in your own phrase markers.
To summarise, we now have two C positions:
C1 (lower): Daughter of S-bar (S′) and sister of S
Filled, in subordinate clauses, by that, whether, and subordinating conjunctions.
Filled, in main clauses, by fronted tensed auxiliaries.
C2 (higher): Daughter of S-double-bar (S″) and sister of S-bar (S′)
Filled, in both main and subordinate clauses, by fronted wh-expressions.
The major contrast between that/whether (and subordinating conjunctions) 
in C1 and the wh-expressions in C2 is this: that/whether, etc. are simply 
s
NP 
VP
Vince
PROG
[pres]
VP
VP 
PP
is
V
[trans]
NP 
to Athens
what
taking
S"
C2 
S'
what
Cl 
S
is
NP 
VP
Vince
PROG
[pres]
VP
VP 
PP
V
[trans]
NP
to Athens
taking

CHAPTER 9 WH-CLAUSES
200
complementisers – complementisers and nothing else. They belong to no other 
syntactic category. They are not fronted from within the clause they introduce 
and hence have no function within that clause. By contrast, wh-expressions in 
C2 are always fronted from within the clause (the basic S). So, in addition to 
introducing the clause, they do have a function within that clause and this 
function is indicated by the position of the gap they leave behind. These fronted 
wh-expressions in the C2 position must, then, belong to categories capable of 
having clausal functions: NP, AP, PP, AdvP. The fact that what in the C2 position 
in [11b] is an NP is captured by there being an NP gap in the clause (the basic S).
Now give the (auxiliary and wh-) fronted versions of the following sentences:
[12a] You are giving which books to Bill?
[12b] Julia will give the pen to who(m)? (two wh-fronting options here)
 [12c] He drank that beer how quickly?
 [12d] Max is how tall?
These examples show the variety of phrases that can be fronted. In [12a] it is, 
again, a (direct object) NP. In [12b] we have two options. In very formal styles, 
the whole PP (to whom) can be fronted – leaving a PP gap in S. In my dialect, 
the wh-pronoun must then be in the objective case (whom). In ordinary conver-
sational style, however, just the wh-NP is fronted. This will leave the preposition 
(and the PP of which it is head) in place in S and there will be just an NP gap 
within the PP. In my dialect, when just the NP is fronted from within the PP, it 
is not (except in very formal style) in the objective case (i.e. it’s who rather than 
whom). As regards [12c–d], how is a degree adverb and degree adverbs cannot 
be fronted alone. So, the whole AdvP how quickly must be fronted in [12c]. The 
same goes for the AP how tall in [12d].
 [13a] Which books are you giving • to Bill?  (• = NP)
 [13b] (i) Who will Julia give the pen to • ?  (• = NP)
 
 (ii) To whom will Julia give the pen • ?  (• = PP)
 [13c] How quickly did he drink that beer • ?  (• = AdvP)
 [13d] How tall is Max • ?  (• = AP)
Notice that the verb in [13d] is the intensive verb, copula be. Recall that, although 
the copula is a full verb, it behaves (when tensed) like an auxiliary. In other words, 
it fronts to the C1 position in questions. This, together with the fact that the whole 
AP (how tall) has to be fronted, means that very little is actually left in the clause 
(the basic S) itself. In fact, only the subject (Max) is left in its original place!
Take time now to draw a phrase marker for each of the ﬁve sentences in [13]. Use 
triangles for NPs, APs, and AdvPs. Leave yourself plenty of room. Discussion 1, 
pages 211–2.
 

 
WH-QUESTIONS
201
Now look again at [2]–[5] at the beginning of this chapter. [3]–[5] are unfronted 
questions. These unfronted question forms are commonly called echo-questions: 
they are used to echo – and ask about – something said earlier. They all have 
normal (non-echo) alternative forms displaying auxiliary- and wh-fronting, 
namely [6]–[8]. But what about [2], repeated here as [14]?
[14] Who is taking Violetta’s icon to Athens?
[2]/[14] is itself the only possible form for that particular question, and it 
doesn’t sound noticeably echoic. [2]/[14] is distinctive because, there, it’s the 
subject constituent that is questioned. The point is that, as subject, the wh-phrase 
appears at the beginning of the sentence anyway. So, the ﬁrst question raised by 
this example is: should a wh-subject be represented as actually being in the 
subject position or represented as fronted to the C2 position? In other words, 
does [14] display wh-fronting – just like [6]–[8] – or not?
In research on wh-questions, both answers have been given. For con-
venience, I’ll make the following general assumption: without exception, all 
wh-expressions appearing at the front of clauses are to be represented as 
occupying the higher C2 position. In moving to the C2 position, however, 
a subject doesn’t cross any other expression, so the movement makes no 
difference to the order of words.
The next question is: does [14] display auxiliary-fronting? Again, given our 
assumption that the wh-phrase is up in C2, auxiliary-fronting makes no dif-
ference to the order of words. And, again, I’ll adopt the strategy of assuming 
that, without exception, auxiliary-fronting to C1 occurs in all (non-echo) 
questions. 
In the light of the above answers (in bold) to our two questions, draw a 
phrase marker for [14]. Use triangles for the NP and the PP. Discussion 2, 
page 213.
A word now about where, when, how, and why. These are often regarded as 
adverbs and hence as head of AdvP. But, as mentioned at the beginning of the 
chapter, they don’t only stand in place of AdvPs, but also PPs, APs, and even 
clauses. I’ve adopted a representation whereby you’re not required to give the 
category of the wh-phrase in the C2 position. But you do still have to decide on 
the most likely category of the gap it has left behind. In this connection, suggest 
complete phrase markers for the following. Discussion 3, page 213.
[15] How are you? (Possible answer: well/good.)
[16] Where did Lisa put it? (Possible answer: under the bed.)
To conclude this survey of wh-questions, it’s important to notice that a wh-
phrase can be fronted, not just from the (immediately following) main clause, 
but also from a subordinate clause. Here are two examples.

CHAPTER 9 WH-CLAUSES
202
 [17a] Whose poem did Stevens suggest would be ideal for the lecture?
 [17b] Who did Leopold think Haydn admired?
In each of these, insert a blob (•) exactly where the gap corresponding to the 
fronted wh-phrase should be. On the basis of that, decide on the function of 
the wh-expression. Giving Abbreviated Clausal Analyses might help here.
Possible answers to these questions are:
 [18a] Stevens suggested S2 [his own poem would be ideal for the lecture].
 [18b] Leopold thought S2 [Haydn admired Mozart].
So, in [17a] there’s a subject gap in S2. In [17b] the gap is in the direct object 
position in S2.
[19a] S1″[Whose poem S1′[did S1[Stevens suggest S2[• would be ideal for the 
lecture]]]]?
[19b] S1″[Who S1′[did S1[Leopold think S2[Haydn admired •]]]]?
Subordinate wh-clauses
The big idea in this chapter is that wh-clauses are introduced by a fronted 
wh-phrase occupying the C2 position (daughter of S″, sister of S′) and this 
corresponds to a gap of the appropriate category in the position from which 
it was fronted.
This goes for all wh-clauses, whether main or subordinate. The one structural 
difference between a main and a subordinate wh-clause is that only main 
wh-clauses display auxiliary-fronting as well as wh-fronting. Auxiliary-fronting 
occurs only in main clauses. In the rest of this chapter, I deal with two types of 
subordinate wh-clause, interrogative clauses and relative clauses.
Subordinate wh-interrogative clauses
The distinction between main wh-interrogative (wh-questions) and sub-
ordinate wh-interrogative clauses is exactly the same as that between main 
and subordinate yes/no interrogatives. See Chapter 8, pages 175–6.
The following all contain subordinate wh-interrogative clauses:
[20] Martha enquired why he wore it on his foot.
[21] How he would fare on the trapeze preoccupied him.
[22] It is my affair what I wear at night.
[23] Marcel wasn’t certain who he sent the flowers to.
[24] The immediate problem was where they could hide those fritters.
[25] The little matter of who is going to pay for all this has yet to be resolved.

 
SUBORDINATE WH-INTERROGATIVE CLAUSES
203
The subordinate wh-clauses in each of these sentences have functions familiar to 
you from previous chapters. First, identify the subordinate clauses and show the 
gaps in it. Second, for each clause, give its function. Third, give the function of 
the wh-phrase.
 [20a] [why [he wore it on his foot •]] – dO of [trans] V, enquire.
Why: VP-adverbial.
[21a] [how [he would fare on the trapeze •]] – subject.
How: VP-adverbial.
[22a] [what [I wear • at night]] – extraposed subject.
What: dO of trans V, wear.
[23a] [who [he sent the flowers to •]] – complement of A (certain) in AP.
Who: complement of P (to) in PP.
[24a] [where [they could hide those fritters •]] – sP of intensive V, was.
Where: oP of complex V, hide.
[25a] [who [• is going to pay for all this]] – complement of P (of ) in PP.
Who: subject.
As mentioned, these subordinate wh-clauses have exactly the same structure 
as the wh-questions considered in the last section: the fronted wh-phrase occu-
pies the higher C2 position. But since these interrogative clauses are subordinate 
and therefore don’t display auxiliary fronting, the lower C1 position will be 
empty. Here’s the phrase marker for [23]:
[26] 
 
Phrase markers for [20] and [22] are given in Discussion 4, page 214.
s
NP 
VP
Marcel 
V 
AP
[intens]
[pres]
A 
S"
wasn't
certain
C2 
S'
who
Cl 
S
NP 
VP
he
V
[ditrans]
[past]
NP
PP
the flowers P 
NP
to
sent

CHAPTER 9 WH-CLAUSES
204
Relative clauses
It would be understandable if you had formed the impression that all wh-clauses 
are interrogative clauses. Not so. Relative clauses are non-interrogative wh-
clauses. In contrast to interrogative clauses (which can be main or subordinate), 
relative clauses are, by their nature, subordinate. This is because relative clauses 
function as modiﬁers. They can modify a range of categories, but I focus here 
just on their modifying function within NP.
Have a good look at the following NPs, all of which contain a relative clause. 
Identify (a) the relative clause in each NP and (b) the function of the wh-word/
phrase within that clause.
[27] The trampolines which they bought yesterday.
[28] The fool who lent you all that money.
[29] A friend whose house we borrowed.
[30] The usher who I showed my ticket to.
[31] The place where we had that picnic.
These relative clauses have exactly the same structure as the subordinate 
wh-interrogative clauses discussed in the previous sections. They display wh-
fronting into the higher C2 position, leaving a gap within the clause:
[27a] [which [they bought • yesterday]] (which = dO)
[28a] [who [• lent you all that money]] (who = subject)
[29a] [whose house [we borrowed •]] (whose house = dO)
[30a] [who [I showed my ticket to •]] (who = complement to P in PP)
[31a] [where [we had that picnic •]] (where = VP-adverbial)
What concerns us here, then, is not their (by now familiar) internal structure 
but how they ﬁt into the structure of sentences – more speciﬁcally, how they 
ﬁt into the structure of the NPs in which they function as modiﬁers. In this 
connection, we need to compare (wh-) relative clauses with noun complement 
(that-) clauses, introduced in the last chapter. Among the following NPs, the [a] 
examples contain noun complement clauses, while the [b] examples contain 
relative clauses.
[32a] The conclusion [that Mars was inhabited].
 [32b] The conclusion [which Gomez disputes].
[33a] The thought [that he should have done the washing up].
 [33b] The thought [which occurred to him].
[34a] The claim [that syntax is good for the brain].
 [34b] The claim [with which he ended his lecture].

 
RELATIVE CLAUSES
205
The contrast here is that the noun-complement clauses in [a] give us central 
information about the head noun; it tells us the actual content of the con-
clusion, thought, or claim (what exactly the conclusion etc. was), while the 
relative clauses tell something else about it, something more peripheral. 
From [32b], for example, we don’t know what nature of conclusion Gomez  
disputes; we only know that it’s the one he disputes.
Noun ‘complement’ clauses are so-called because the clause relates to the 
Noun exactly as a clause complementing a Verb relates to that Verb. Compare 
the [a] NPs above with the [bracketed] VPs in the following sentences, in which 
the clauses function as direct object of the Verbs:
[35] He [concluded that Mars was inhabited].
[36] He [thought he should have done the washing up].
[37] Surely he couldn’t [claim that syntax is good for the brain].
As complements, noun-complement clauses are sisters to the head N 
within NOM, just as verb complements are sisters to V within VP. Here, then, 
is a reminder of how NPs with complement clauses are represented:
[38] NP WITH NOUN-COMPLEMENT CLAUSE (reminder):
 
 
Noun-complement clauses, remember, are introduced by the lower, C1 
complementiser that, dominated by S-bar (S′). Since nothing has been fronted 
from within it, the clause itself is complete (no gaps). By contrast, the relative 
clause is a wh-clause: the wh-phrase is in the higher, C2 position, dominated by 
S-double-bar (S″). It’s been fronted, leaving a gap.
The points just made serve to distinguish noun-complement clauses and rela-
tive clauses quite clearly as regards their internal structure. But we still haven’t 
answered the question of how relative clauses ﬁt into the structure of NPs. 
Well, relative clauses clearly don’t relate to the head noun as noun-complement 
clauses do. They are modifying clauses, NOT complement clauses; so they 
can’t be represented as sisters of the head N. So, just as VP modifiers (adjunct) 
are sisters of VP within a higher VP, relative clauses are represented, not as 
sisters-of-N, but as sisters-of-NOM within a higher NOM:
NP
DET 
NOM
ART 
N 
S'
the 
conclusion 
that Mars was inhabited

CHAPTER 9 WH-CLAUSES
206
[39] NP WITH RELATIVE CLAUSE:
 
 
In short, relative clauses can be thought of as ADJUNCTS in NP. If you 
tackled the Appendix of Chapter 7, the distinction between modiﬁer (adjunct)  
and complement within NP will be already familiar to you, as will the following 
discussion.
Evidence supporting this distinction between sister-of-N (complement) and 
sister-of-NOM (modifying adjunct) comes from the pro-form one. You’ll need 
to read what follows carefully. One is a pro-NOM: it stands in place of NOMs. 
It cannot replace an N by itself unless N is the only constituent of a NOM. So we 
must interpret one as replacing, not the noun itself, but the NOM that dominates 
it. Now, since a noun-complement clause is the sister of the N itself, a NOM is 
created only by the combination of N plus complement clause together. So we 
predict that the pro-NOM one should not be able to replace just the N in the 
context of a following complement clause. By contrast, since a relative clause is 
sister-of-NOM, we predict that its sister should be replaceable by the pro-NOM one. 
In short, the prediction is that [one + complement clause] will be ungrammatical, 
but [one + relative clause] will be ﬁne. These predictions are fully borne out:
[40a] *The one that Mars is inhabited.
 [40b] The one which Gomez disputes.
[41a] *The one that he should have done the washing up.
 [41b] The one which occurred to him.
[42a] *The one that syntax is good for the brain.
 [42b] The one with which he ended his lecture.
[43a] *I accept all the conclusions, including the one that Mars is inhabited.
[43b] I accept all the conclusions, including the one which Gomez disputes.
(For more detail on the distinction between adjuncts and complements in 
NP, see the Appendix of Chapter 7.)
Now give a complete phrase marker for the NP in [34b] above, the claim with 
which he ended his lecture. Discussion 5, page 215.
NP
DET 
NOM
ART 
NOM 
S"
the 
N 
which Comez disputes •
conclusion

 
RELATIVE CLAUSES
207
■ Omission of the wh-phrase
In many cases, the wh-form in a relative clause can be omitted (by ellipsis). 
Look again at [27]–[31] above and decide for yourself in which of those it 
can be ellipted. Under what two different circumstances can it not be ellipted? 
Consider also [32b]–[34b] above.
[44] The trampolines ^ they bought yesterday (were dangerous).
[45] *The fool ^ lent you all that money (lent me some, too).
[46] *A friend ^ house we borrowed (needs it back next week).
[47] The usher ^ I showed my ticket to (has had it framed).
[48] The place ^ we had that picnic (is too far away now).
See also: The conclusion ^ Gomez disputes (was indeed absurd) vs. *The thought 
^ occurred to him (cheered him up); *The claim with ^ he ended his lecture 
(surprised them) vs. The claim ^ he ended his lecture with (surprised them).
The fronted wh-form cannot be ellipted, first, when it functions as subject 
([45] and [33b]) and, second, when other material has been fronted with it ([46] 
and [34b]). Generally, ellipsis is possible only when it doesn’t interfere with 
the interpretation or with ease of comprehension. For example, fronted wh-
subjects – e.g. in [45] and [33b] – cannot be ellipted because this would create 
the misleading ﬁrst impression that lent/occurred are the main verbs, whereas in 
fact each is the verb of a subordinate clause. In the absence of the wh-form, the 
mistake would only become apparent when the real main verb (lent, cheered) 
makes its appearance.
■ That again
Now look at the following NPs:
[49] The fool that lent you all that money.
[50] The thought that occurred to him.
[51] The trampolines that they bought yesterday.
[52] The conclusion that Gomez disputes.
In these NPs, the clause is introduced by that. What should we make of these? Are 
they relative (wh-) clauses or noun-complement (that) clauses? Try to decide.
Relative clauses always include a gap. In genuine that-clauses, by contrast, that 
has not been fronted, so the clause itself (the basic S) is complete. Now, the 
clauses in [49]–[52] are clearly not complete: [• lent you all that money], 
[• occurred to him], [they bought • yesterday], [Gomez disputes •]. This indicates 
that, despite the presence of that rather than a wh-form, these are indeed 

CHAPTER 9 WH-CLAUSES
208
relative clauses, not that-clauses. Compare the relative clauses in the following 
[a] examples of relative clauses with the noun-complement clauses in the [b] 
examples:
[53a] This is a proposal that we should support (•).
[53b] This is a proposal that we should support the strike.
[54a] The news that she had given John (•) shocked them all.
[54b] The news that she had given John a good kick shocked them all.
One traditional approach to that in relative clauses is simply to say that, in 
this kind of relative clause, wh-forms can be replaced by that. In other words, 
that is regarded as an alternative form of the relative word, and the NP [the con-
clusion that Gomez disputes] will be represented exactly like [the conclusion which 
Gomez disputes]. This approach has the merit of simplicity so, for convenience, 
I’ll adopt it here. In the light of this decision, draw contrasting phrase markers 
for the italicised NPs in [53a] and [53b]. Discussion 6, pages 215–16.
An alternative analysis would insist that that is not a relative word (in C2) but 
the familiar C1 complementiser, which is permitted to make an overt appear-
ance in (the C1 position of) a relative clause only when the wh-phrase in C2 has 
been ellipted.
■ Restrictive vs. non-restrictive
All the relative clauses considered so far are restrictive relative clauses. The 
other kind of relative clause is described as non-restrictive (or appositive). 
The internal structure of these two kinds of relative clause is identical. The dif-
ference between restrictives and non-restrictives lies in the way they relate to 
the head noun within the overall NP. In the following sentences, all the subject 
NPs contain relative clauses. Those in the [a]s are restrictive, those in the [b]s 
are non-restrictive.
[55a] The books which John has consulted are out of date.
[55b] The books, which John has consulted, are out of date.
[56a] The dogs which have rabies are dangerous.
[56b] The dogs, which have rabies, are dangerous.
As you can see, the non-restrictives are distinguished in writing from restric-
tives by being marked off by commas. The difference between them, though, 
doesn’t consist in the presence vs. absence of commas, so we need to ask what 
the commas in the [b] examples are telling us about the relation between the 
main clause and the relative clause. This can be brought out by showing that 
certain relative clauses can only be used non-restrictively in certain contexts:

 
RELATIVE CLAUSES
209
[57a] *The dogs which are mammals need treatment.
[57b] The dogs, which are mammals, need treatment.
[58a] *Triangles which have three sides are fascinating.
[58b] Triangles, which have three sides, are fascinating.
The oddity of the (restrictive) [a] examples is due to the fact that restric-
tive relative clauses specify more exactly which of the things picked out by the 
head noun are being mentioned. In [55a], for example, the relative clause tells 
us which books are out of date. It’s described as ‘restrictive’ because it serves to 
restrict the set of books to a sub-set of books, namely those consulted by John. 
It is that more restricted set of books that are said, in [55a], to be out of date. 
But the relative clauses in [57] and [58] can’t be used to pick out a restricted set 
of dogs or triangles, because all dogs are mammals, and all triangles three-sided, 
anyway. You can’t (as in [58a]) use which have three sides to pick out a sub-set 
of triangles. Nevertheless, there’s nothing to stop us, parenthetically, adding 
the extra information that triangles have three sides or that dogs are mammals. 
This is precisely what the non-restrictive clause allows us to do. non-restrictive 
relative clauses serve to add extra – parenthetical – information, without 
restricting the set of things (triangles, dogs, books, etc.) being mentioned.
In the light of this, compare [56a] and [56b]. [56a], with the restrictive clause, 
does not imply that all the relevant dogs are dangerous; it’s only the rabid ones 
that are said to be dangerous. But [56b], with the non-restrictive clause, does 
imply that all the relevant dogs are dangerous – and it adds the further infor-
mation that they also have rabies. The big difference, then, is that [56a] makes 
just one statement – a statement about the rabid dogs to the effect that they 
dangerous – but [56b] makes two separate statements: (1) that the dogs are 
dangerous, (2) that the dogs have rabies.
The representation of NPs containing a restrictive relative clause has already 
been given. As a reminder, that in [56a] is given here as [59]:
[59] NP with RESTRICTIVE relative clause (reminder):
 
 
Notice that in [59], the determiner is the sister of a constituent that includes 
the relative clause – the NOM [dogs which have rabies]. This means that the 
DET 
NOM
the
NOM 
S"
N
which have rabies
dogs
NP

CHAPTER 9 WH-CLAUSES
210
restrictive clause falls within the scope of the determining function of the 
deﬁnite article (i.e. the is determining, not dogs, but dogs which have rabies). So, 
in [56a], there is no NP of the form the dogs that is the subject of the VP are 
dangerous. This seems right: we’ve agreed that, in [56a], no statement is made 
about the dogs as such, only about a sub-set of them, the rabid dogs.
What about [56b], with its non-restrictive clause? Well, we agreed (I hope) 
that in [56b] two statements are made, both of them about the dogs. Here, the 
subject of the main clause predicate VP (are dangerous) is indeed the dogs. So, 
the non-restrictive clause is a modiﬁer, not just of dogs, but of the dogs, which is 
an NP in its own right. As the modiﬁer of a complete NP, the non-restrictive 
relative clause must be represented as the sister of that NP within a higher NP, 
as in [60]:
[60] NP with NON-RESTRICTIVE relative clause:
 
 
There are a couple of further differences between restrictive and non-
restrictive relative clauses: in contrast with restrictives, the wh-phrase/word 
in non-restrictives can’t be ellipted and it can’t be replaced by that.
In conclusion, let’s brieﬂy review the three kinds of clauses that can appear 
within NP: (a) noun-complement clauses, (b) restrictive relative clauses, and 
(c) non-restrictive relative clauses. Restrictive relatives are more peripheral 
than noun-complement clauses, and non-restrictive relatives more peripheral 
still. This three-way distinction corresponds with the three levels of NP struc-
ture: (a) the lexical (lowest) level, N itself, (b) the intermediate level, NOM, and 
(c) the phrasal (highest) level, the NP itself.
Noun-complement clause: sister of N (within NOM).
Restrictive relative clause: sister of NOM (within NOM).
Non-restrictive relative clause: sister of NP (within NP).
NP
NP
S"
DET 
NOM 
which have rabies
the 
N
doqs

 
RELATIVE CLAUSES
211
■ Discussion of in-text exercises
(I show the movements only in the ﬁrst example.)
1. (a)
 
 
(b) (i)
 
 
 
 
 
S"
C2 
S'
which books 
Cl 
S
are 
NP 
VP
you
PROG
[pres]
VP
V
[ditrans]
NP 
PP
giving
to Bill
S"
C2 
S'
who 
Cl 
S
will 
NP 
VP
Julia
M O D
[pres]
VP
V
[ditrans]
NP
PP
give
the pen 
P 
NP
to

CHAPTER 9 WH-CLAUSES
212
(ii)
 
 
 
 
(c)
 
 
(d)
 
 
S"
C2 
S'
to whom 
Cl 
S
will 
NP 
VP
Julia
MOD
[pres]
VP
V
[ditrans]
NP 
PP
the pen
give
S"
C2 
S'
how quickly 
Cl 
S
did
NP 
VP
he
TENSE
[past]
VP
VP 
AdvP
V
[trans]
NP
drink
that beer
S"
C2 
S'
how tall 
Cl 
S
is 
NP 
VP
Max
V
[intens]
[pres]
AP

 
RELATIVE CLAUSES
213
2.
 
3. (a)
 
 
 
Since most answers to the question are APs (well, good, awful, too busy), I’ve 
assumed that how corresponds to an AP gap. But a PP is possible (in good spirits).
(b)
 
 
S"
C2 
S'
who 
C l 
S
is 
NP 
VP
PROG
[pres]
VP
VP 
PP
V
[trans]
NP 
to Athens
V's icon
taking
S"
C2 
S'
how 
Cl 
S
are 
NP 
VP
pronoun 
V 
AP
you
[intens]
[pres]
S"
C2 
S'
where 
Cl 
S
did 
NP 
VP
name
TENSE
[past]
VP
Lisa
V
komplex!
NP 
PP
put
pronoun
it

CHAPTER 9 WH-CLAUSES
214
 
As indicated, put is complex transitive, taking an NP and a PP as complements. So 
I’ve represented where as corresponding to a PP gap.
4. [20] 
 
  
[22]
 
  
s
NP 
VP
Martha
V
[trans]
[past]
NP
S"
enquired
C2 
S'
why
Cl 
S
NP
VP
he
VP 
AdvP
VP 
PP
V
[trans]
[past]
NP
on his 
foot
it
wore
S
NP 
VP 
S"
it
V
[intens]
[pres]
NP 
C2 
S'
my affair 
what 
Cl 
S
is
NP 
VP
I
VP 
PP
V
[trans]
[pres]
NP
at night
wear

 
RELATIVE CLAUSES
215
5. 
6. [53a] – relative clause.
 
NP
DET 
NOM
ART 
NOM 
S"
the 
N 
C2 
S'
claim 
with which
Cl 
S
NP 
VP
he 
VP 
PP
V
[trans]
[past]
NP
his lecture
ended
NP
DET 
NOM
ART 
NOM 
S"
a 
N 
C2 
S'
proposal 
that 
Cl 
S
NP 
VP
we
MOD
[past]
VP
should
V
[trans]
NP
support

CHAPTER 9 WH-CLAUSES
216
 
[53b] – noun complement clause.
 
 
 
 Exercises
1. Replace the italicised constituent in the following sentences by an appropriate 
wh-word, and give the question that results from wh- and auxiliary fronting.
(a) We shall feed the cat smoked salmon today.
(b) He got to London by hitch-hiking.
(c) The man at the front was laughing.
(d) A recidivist is a persistent offender.
(e) Lola showed up in dark glasses.
(f) Tessa pocketed the fried egg because it was too greasy to eat.
(g) He cleaned his keyboard with his sister’s toothbrush.
(h) Mary suggested Lomax should be fired.
(i) Albie thought Sophie had said she would buy him a new buggy.
2. For each of the following, embed the (i) clause as a relative clause in an NP of the 
(ii) clause, giving the sentence that results.
Example: (i) and (ii) would yield (iii):
 
(i) You mislaid some cheese last Christmas.
 
(ii) The cheese has just strolled into the bedroom.
 
(iii)  The cheese which you mislaid last Christmas has just strolled into the 
bedroom.
NP
DET 
NOM
ART 
N 
S'
a 
proposal
Cl 
S
that 
NP 
VP
we
MOD
[past]
VP
should
V
[trans]
NP
support
the strike

 
EXERCISES
217
(a) (i) I had been trying to extract a cork.
 
(ii) The cork suddenly launched itself at Widmerpool.
(b) (i) Some officer issued this ridiculous order.
 
(ii) I am going to override the officer.
(c) (i) Crusoe said he had been marooned on an island.
 
(ii) The island has never been discovered.
(d) (i) I had borrowed a passenger’s toothbrush.
 
(ii) The passenger complained bitterly.
3. For each of the following sentences, decide whether the relative clause that 
follows it could be (i) only restrictive, (ii) only non-restrictive, or (iii) either, when 
included in the italicised NP. Then draw the phrase marker for sentence (a) includ-
ing the relative clauses. (Use triangles for PP and the NP the penal code.)
(a) Napoleon died in exile.
 
 
who inaugurated the penal code.
(b) I haven’t owned a pig in my life.
 
 
which could fly.
(c) I prefer (i) cats to (ii) cats.
 
(i) which have stripes.
 
(ii) which have spots.
(d) The acrobat ate ravenously.
 
 
who I had just hired.
(e) The source of the Nile was discovered by Speke.
 
 
which I have just visited.
4. Give Abbreviated Clausal Analyses of the following sentences. For each subordin-
ate clause, state what type of clause it is (that-clause, interrogative, or relative 
(restrictive or non-restrictive)) and give its function.
 
Example: The books from the library that John has consulted are out of date.
 
S2: restrictive relative clause – modifier of NOM (books from the library).
(a) I never understood how the theory worked until I read your book.
(b) Why Max didn’t answer the accusation that he had cheated is a mystery.
(c) Why Max didn’t answer the poor man that he had cheated is a mystery.
(d) The acrobat, who is injured, is insistent that the high-wire is strengthened if 
it is used again.
s
the books from the library S2 are out of date
that John has consulted

CHAPTER 9 WH-CLAUSES
218
■ Discussion of exercises
1. (a) What shall we feed the cat today?
(b) How did he get to London?
(c) Who was laughing?
(d) What is a recidivist?
(e) What did Lola show up in?
(f) Why did Tessa pocket the fried egg?
(g) Whose toothbrush did he clean his keyboard with? (Or: With whose tooth-
brush did he clean his keyboard?)
(h) Who did Mary suggest should be fired?
(i) What did Albie think Sophie had said she would buy him?
2. (a)  The cork which/that I had been trying to extract suddenly launched itself at 
Widmerpool.
(b) I am going to override the officer who issued this ridiculous order.
(c) The island on which Crusoe said he had been marooned has never been 
discovered. (Or: The island which Crusoe said he had been marooned on . . .)
(d) The passenger whose toothbrush I had borrowed complained bitterly.
3. (a)  Non-restrictive only. Since Napoleon, a name, already uniquely identifies a 
particular individual, it’s impossible to restrict the range of reference of this 
NP further.
(b) Restrictive only. If we included the clause as non-restrictive, the whole sen-
tence would be equivalent to I haven’t owned a pig and a pig could fly which 
hardly makes sense. In the context of this (negative) sentence, the expression 
a pig does not pick out any particular pig. Only if it did pick out a particular 
pig could we add the further information that it could fly.
(c) (i) and (ii) must both be restrictive. If either or both of them were non-
restrictive, the resulting sentence would be contradictory, as indeed (c) is 
without the relative clauses.
(d) Both restrictive and non-restrictive are possible here.
(e) Non-restrictive only. The source of the Nile already uniquely identifies a fully 
specified thing.

 
EXERCISES
219
(a) 
 
 
4. (a) 
 
 
S1: Main clause.
S2: Wh-interrogative clause: Complement (dO) of V (understood).
S3: Complement of P (until ).
(b) and (c) 
 
 
S1: Main clause.
S2: Wh-interrogative clause: subject of S1.
(b) S3: That-clause: complement to noun (accusation). Cheat is [intrans] here.
(c) S3: Restrictive relative clause: modifier of NOM (poor man). Cheat is [trans] 
here, with a gap in dO position.
s
NP 
VP
NP 
S"
VP 
PP
name
C2 
S'
V
[intrans]
[past]
in exile
Napoleon 
who 
Cl 
S
died
NP 
VP
V
[trans]
[past]
NP
the penal 
code
inaugurated
SI
I never understood S2 
until S3
how the theory worked 
I read your book
SI
S2 is a mystery
Whv Max didn't answer the accusation (b) S3
the poor man (c)
that he had cheated

CHAPTER 9 WH-CLAUSES
220
(d) 
 
 
S1: Main clause.
S2: Non-restrictive relative clause: modifier of NP (the acrobat).
S3: That-clause: complement to A (insistent).
S4: Adverbial clause.
 Further exercises
■ Questions and interrogatives
1. Draw complete phrase markers for the following.
Set I
(1) 
Which salami shall we buy?
(2) 
Where have I put my glasses?
(3) 
Where did they have the picnic?
(4) 
Who’s been eating my porridge?
(5) 
How much food should I give the dog?
(6) 
Which of these books does John recommend?
(7) 
Do you know what they ate?
(8) 
What do you think they put in that soup?
 
(In (8), notice, what has been fronted from a subordinate clause.)
Set II
(9a) 
I don’t know who he found an amusing companion.
(9b) 
I don’t know whether he found an amusing companion.
(10a) Who did Granny say should play?
(10b) Who did Granny say I should play?
(11a) Who is a phonologist?
(11b) What is a phonologist?
SI
the acrobat 
S2 
is insistent 
S3
who is injured
that the high-wire 
is strengthened S4
if it is used again

 
FURTHER EXERCISES
221
Set III
(These need care.)
(12) Which exam was it certain Julia would pass?
(13) Who has been sacked?
(14) Who were they given to?
(15) Did you discover who was giving the lecture?
(16) Who did you discover was giving the lecture?
(17) Who did John ask which films they had seen?
 
(Note that (15) is a yes/no question, with wh-fronting in the subordin-
ate clause. (16) requires a double wh-fronting. In (17) there are two 
separate wh-frontings.)
■ Relative clauses and other matters
2. Draw complete phrase markers for the following NPs:
(1) The chef who I fired. 
(2) The woman in whose care we left you.
(3) The spy who loved me. 
(4) The place where we had the picnic. 
(5) The reason why it spits. 
(6) A style he thought appropriate. 
3. Draw complete phrase markers for the following sentences:
(1a) The man they cheated is furious.
(1b) The reason they cheated is clear.
(2a) I have an idea we should think about.
(2b) I have an idea we should think about exams.
(3a) The fact that I communicated with Mona is crucial.
(3b) The fact that I communicated to Mona is crucial.
4. I’ve discussed only relative clauses appearing in the structure of NPs. A difference 
between restrictive and non-restrictive relatives is that, while restrictives only ever 
function as modifiers within NP, non-restrictives can modify a range of categories. 
Give the constituents (and their categories) that the non-restrictive relative clauses 
are modifying in (l)–(3). Then draw a complete phrase marker for (1).
(1) He was very rude, which I never am.
(2) Lomax argued for trampolines, which surprised me.
(3) Hedda got out with the aid of a trampoline, which seemed a sensible way of 
doing it.

CHAPTER 9 WH-CLAUSES
222
5. (1)–(2) below illustrate a function of wh-clauses not explicitly discussed in 
this chapter. Decide on their function and then draw a phrase marker for each 
sentence.
(1) Lola merely smiled when I proposed marriage.
(2) They pitched the tent where they always pitch it.
6. Give Abbreviated Clausal Analyses of the following sentences. Indicate the gaps. 
For each subordinate clause, state what type of clause it is (that-clause, yes/no 
interrogative, wh-interrogative, or relative (restrictive or non-restrictive)) and give 
its function. For all wh-clauses, identify and give the function of the wh-phrase/word 
that introduces it (whether overt or not). For examples of what I’m asking for here, 
see Discussion of Exercise 4 on pages 219–20.
 (1) The man who broke the bank at Monte Carlo is now my butler.
 (2) Which animals Bertram feeds is his decision.
 (3) We should find out who the visitors to the restaurant were.
 (4) It’s hardly surprising you can’t get your teeth into the fritters Jim cooks.
 (5) When we are going for a picnic is a question that he is always asking.
 (6) I’m nervous that the hoops that have been alight will topple over when the 
hippos jump through them.
 (7) Watson, who was never very quick, is wondering if Holmes’s theory that the 
governess is the guilty party can possibly be right.
 (8) Do you know how many players have guessed what instrument Miss Scarlet 
was murdered with?
 (9) None of the people who went to Narnia when it was first created ever 
explained how they got there.
(10) Marcel often wondered whether Gilberte ever asked Swann what the boy 
she’d seen in the garden was called.
7. The following are ambiguous. For each, draw a phrase marker for each inter-
pretation. Abbreviate them as far as possible (but not so far as to obscure the 
distinction between the interpretations).
(a) I forgot how bitter beer tastes.
(b) When did you say he should go?
(c) The news that Max left Greta was alarming.
(d) He asked the man who he had seen.

223
All the sentences/clauses considered so far in this book have been ﬁnite. In other 
words, they all included a ﬁnite verb (auxiliary or lexical) – tensed for present 
or past. A non-ﬁnite clause is a clause in which there is no tensed verb. They 
are tenseless clauses. Main clauses, remember, are always ﬁnite. So non-ﬁnite 
clauses can only be subordinate.
This chapter comes in two parts. Part I is about the form of non-ﬁnite clauses 
and Part II is about their functions.
 Part I: The form of non-finite clauses
There is in fact more to the difference between ﬁnite and non-ﬁnite clauses than 
just the presence vs. absence of tense. So, before we look at non-ﬁnite verbs and 
how to represent them, a general point about non-ﬁnite clauses needs to be made.
In addition to lacking tense, non-ﬁnite clauses may lack one or more major 
overt NPs. They frequently lack an overt subject, for example. In a ﬁnite clause, 
the ﬁnite verb must have an overt subject to agree with. Non-ﬁnite verbs are not 
subject to this constraint.
When this is so, I’ll say that the relevant NP is covert. There are two separate 
circumstances governing the occurrence of a covert NP:
(a) the reference of the NP is general (indeﬁnite, non-speciﬁc), or
(b) its reference is identical to a constituent in a higher (superordinate) clause.
Consider, for example, the (three) subordinate clauses in [1] and [2]. Their 
verbs (chatting and wasting) are tenseless and they lack an overt subject.
 [1] [Chatting with the construction workers] is a good way of [wasting time].
 [2] Hedda enjoys [chatting with the construction workers].
 [3] Hedda doesn’t like [Anna chatting with the construction workers].
There’s a clear difference between the non-ﬁnite clauses in [1] and those in [2] 
and [3]. In [1], we have two examples of (a) above. [1] mentions chatting with 
10
Non-finite clauses

CHAPTER 10 NON-FINITE CLAUSES
224
the construction workers and wasting time in general – regardless of who 
does it. We don’t have anyone speciﬁc in mind. Contrast that with the covert 
subject of the non-ﬁnite clause in [2]. Here we have an example of (b) above. 
The understood subject here is perfectly speciﬁc. It’s identical with the subject 
of the main clause, Hedda. What Hedda enjoys in [2] is Hedda chatting with 
construction workers. Anna, it seems, is another matter! In [3], the subject of the 
subordinate clause has to be overt precisely because it differs from the main 
clause subject.
We need a short-hand term for this contrast between NPs that are covert 
because general and nonspeciﬁc – (a) – and those that are covert because under-
stood as identical to a constituent in a higher clause – (b). When a covert NP is 
understood as identical to an overt element in a higher clause, the higher overt 
element is said to control the covert NP. So the subject of the subordinate 
clause in [2] is controlled by the main clause subject (Hedda). By contrast, 
neither of the covert subjects in [1] has a controller in the main clause. That’s 
why they have such a nonspeciﬁc, general interpretation. A covert constituent 
that is not controlled is described as ‘free’.
Try Exercise 1 (page 247) before reading further.
I’ll represent covert NPs in the same way as gaps – by ‘•’. That will do for 
covert constituents that are free. But for covert constituents that are con-
trolled, we need to indicate that they are controlled and what they are con-
trolled by. Using subscript numerals for this, we can indicate that the covert 
subject of the subordinate clause in [2], for example, is controlled by Hedda by 
adding a subscript ‘1’ to both ‘•’ and the subject NP node in the main clause, 
thus: •1 and NP1. This numeral is called an index. So, giving two nodes the same 
index is ‘co-indexing’. From now on, we will always co-index a controlled gap, 
including gaps created by movement (passive and wh).
The form of non-finite verbs
Non-ﬁnite verbs are traditionally divided into (I) inﬁnitives and (II) participles. 
Each of these is further divided: (Ia) bare inﬁnitives and (Ib) to-inﬁnitives; 
(IIa) passive participles and (IIb) -ing participles.
I. INFINITIVE verbs:
a. Bare inﬁnitive 
b. To-inﬁnitive
II. PARTICIPLE verbs:
a. Passive participle  b. -ing participle

 
THE FORM OF NON-FINITE VERBS
225
■ Ia. Bare infinitive verbs
These just consist of the (untensed) stem of a lexical verb. The lexical verb is 
not preceded by any auxiliary verb. It is called ‘bare’ because it lacks the infini-
tive particle to. Examples of sentences with bare inﬁnitive clauses are:
 [4] She made him [wash her socks].
 [5] All you have to do is [squeeze the trigger slowly].
These non-ﬁnite (untensed) forms can be distinguished from simple present 
tense forms (as in I wash her socks every week) by a [-tense] feature on V, to be 
read as ‘minus tense’, as in [6].
 [6] 
 
[-tense] will ﬁgure – in one way or another – in all non-ﬁnite clauses.
■ Ib. To-infinitive verbs
 [7] We eagerly accepted his invitation [to taste the wine].
 [8] He is thought [to be hiding in Brazil].
 [9] Gomez is unlikely [to be beaten by a six year old].
[10] [For Max to have been beaten] is barely credible.
As you can see, when the infinitive particle to is present, auxiliary poss-
ibilities mentioned in Chapter 6 (PERF, PROG, PASS) can also make an appear-
ance. However, since modals (MOD) are inherently tensed, modals don’t ﬁgure 
in non-ﬁnite clauses.
Like the verb that follows MOD, the verb following the inﬁnitive particle to 
has the basic stem form. In several respects, then, it’s appropriate to think of to 
as replacing the MOD option. So I shall analyse to itself as a [-tense] auxiliary. 
For example:
[11]  
 
VP
V
[trans]
[-tense]
wash
[-tense] 
VP
to 
V 
NP
[trans]
taste
the wine

CHAPTER 10 NON-FINITE CLAUSES
226
[12] 
 
Notice I’ve indexed the gap left by passive movement. Had I represented the 
whole clause (for Max to have been beaten), the gap would be co-indexed with 
the (subject) NP node dominating Max.
■ IIa. Passive participle verbs
These are like bare inﬁnitives in consisting of just a lexical verb – but in the 
passive participle form (with a passive meaning). Here are some examples:
[13] [The palanquin loaded], we took a rest.
[14] [Loaded to capacity], the palanquin lurched on.
[15] I saw [your book reviewed in the paper].
[16] I want [these accusations investigated].
As with the bare inﬁnitives, [-tense] will appear as a feature on V.
[17] 
 
Remember that only verbs taking objects in the active ([trans], [ditrans], and 
[complex] verbs) can be passive, since passive entails promoting an object to the 
subject, leaving a gap in object position. In [13], [15], and [16] this subject 
is overt (the palanquin, your book, these accusations). In [14] it is not overt 
but is controlled by – understood as identical to – the main clause subject (the 
palanquin). In the subordinate clause of [14], then, there will be both a subject-
gap and an object-gap:
VP
[-tense] 
VP
to 
PERF 
VP
have 
PASS 
VP
been
V
[trans]
NP
beaten
V
[trans]
[-tense]
loaded

 
THE FORM OF NON-FINITE VERBS
227
 [14a]
 
In [14a], I have co-indexed the two gaps. When this subordinate clause is 
plugged into its super-ordinate main clause (as in [14] above), these gaps need 
to be co-indexed with the main clause subject, the palanquin.
■ IIb. -ing participle verbs
As with to-inﬁnitive clauses, auxiliaries can ﬁgure in -ing participle clauses. 
Instead of the ﬁrst verb being preceded by to, it takes the -ing afﬁx.
[18] He always had difficulty in [apologising].
[19] Judith was busy [stuffing the peppers].
[20] [Murtlock having been hospitalised], I conducted a bedside interview.
I’ll attach [-tense] as a feature to the Verb in the -ing form (whether lexical or 
auxiliary). Here are phrase markers for the subordinate clauses in [18] and [20].
[21] 
 
NP
VP
VP 
PP
V
[trans]
[-tense]
NP
to capacity
loaded
S2
NP 
VP
V
[intrans]
[-tense]
apologising
S2

CHAPTER 10 NON-FINITE CLAUSES
228
[22]
 
In [21] the gap will be co-indexed with the main clause subject of [18], he.
Notice I have called the initial verb in these non-ﬁnite clauses ‘-ing participle’, 
not ‘progressive participle’. While the participles discussed under IIa above clearly 
are passive, -ing participles cannot be regarded as progressive. The reason for this 
is that there are verbs (called stative verbs), such as know and own, which can-
not appear in the progressive participle form following PROG be ([23a], [24a]); 
however, they can appear in non-ﬁnite -ing participle clauses ([23b], [24b]):
[23a] *I am knowing the Beethoven trios intimately.
[23b] Knowing the Beethoven trios intimately helps a lot.
[24a] *He was owning that mangrove swamp.
[24b] Owning that mangrove swamp meant nothing to him.
Furthermore, we know that progressive be cannot precede perfect have. 
This means that perfect have cannot assume the progressive participle -ing 
form demanded by a preceding prog auxiliary. See [25a]. But perfect have can 
assume the -ing participle form in non-ﬁnite clauses, as in [25b]. So the -ing 
form that ﬁgures in non-ﬁnite clauses must be distinguished from the progressive 
participle.
[25a] *Buster is having sold the swamp.
[25b] Having sold the swamp, Buster departed.
I now turn to more general aspects of the form of non-ﬁnite clauses.
Complementisers and non-finite clauses
As in ﬁnite clauses, there are two complementiser positions in non-ﬁnite clauses. 
These are ﬁlled by the (unfronted) C1 complementisers, for and whether, and 
(fronted) C2 wh-expressions. I’ll represent all subordinate clauses as introduced 
NP, 
VP
Murtlock
PERF
[-tense]
VP
having
PASS 
VP
been
V
[trans]
NP
hospitalised
S2

 
COMPLEMENTISERS AND NON-FINITE CLAUSES
229
by C1 and dominated by S′ (unless complementing a preposition) but I’ll only 
represent the C2 position and S″ when necessary.
■ C1: for and whether
Only to-inﬁnitive clauses can be introduced by the C1 interrogative complemen-
tiser whether or – a new C1 complementiser, this – for.
For ﬁgures overtly only in (to-inﬁnitive) clauses with an overt subject. See 
[26]–[28]. Even then – as [29] shows – for is not always possible, in which case 
the C1 position will be empty.
[26] [For [Angelo to get all the blame]] seems unfair.
[27] The police issued orders [for [the vehicles to be removed]].
[28] It will be difficult [for [me to get there on time]].
[29] The magician expected [(*for) [the rabbits to disappear]].
Notice that when the subject is a pronoun, as in [28], it has accusative/
objective case form. I discuss this below.
The phrase marker for the non-ﬁnite clause in [26] is given as Discussion 1, 
page 243.
To-inﬁnitive whether-clauses, by contrast, never have an overt subject. 
Generally, their covert subject is controlled by the subject of the superordinate 
clause, as in [30] and [31]. Notice that when the whether-clause is itself function-
ing as subject, as in [32], the covert subject is not controlled (it’s free):
[30] [King Louis]1 was uncertain [whether [•1 to support the Pope]].
[31] [Olsen]1 asked the Captain [whether [•1 to cut the engines]].
[32] [Whether [• to permit such activities]] is a tricky question.
■ C2: fronted wh-phrases
Non-ﬁnite wh-clauses can be interrogative or relative. First, interrogative 
clauses. As with the (yes/no) interrogative whether-clauses just looked at, non-
ﬁnite wh-interrogative clauses can only be to-inﬁnitive and they always have a 
covert subject.
[33] 
.
[34] 
[35] 
[36] 
Sarahn asked me [[how many guests]2 [#i to expect • J]
He told me, [[where]2 [»i to put it *2]] in no uncertain terms.
The Orsinii never had doubts about [[who]2 [*i to vote for *2]].
It was not clear [[who], [• to nominate »!]].

CHAPTER 10 NON-FINITE CLAUSES
230
In [36] the main clause subject is expletive it. This is not a referring expression 
and so cannot control the interpretation of the covert subject of the subordinate 
clause (which is, therefore, free). Notice also a difference between tell and ask. 
In [33], with ask, the subject of the interrogative clause is controlled by the 
main clause subject (Sarah). In [34], with tell, by contrast, it is controlled by 
the object (me).
Since the subject in the subordinate clauses must be either free – as in [36] – 
or controlled by a constituent in the superordinate clause, the subject is the one 
constituent that cannot be fronted to the C2 position of the subordinate clause. 
Here’s the phrase marker for the subordinate clause in [33].
[37]
 
Assuming that Sarah in the main clause of [33] has the index ‘1’, I have co-
indexed the covert subject with Sarah. And, to keep track of all these gaps, 
I have co-indexed how many guests in C2 with the direct object gap. Since how 
many guests has here been fronted from the dO position, it is the controller of 
the gap there.
Now for non-ﬁnite relative clauses. These are less readily identiﬁable as 
wh-clauses (with fronting) than the wh-interrogative clauses just considered. 
This is because the fronted wh-phrase is never overt in non-ﬁnite relative 
clauses. As the following show, all forms of non-ﬁnite verb are permitted in 
relative clauses except the bare inﬁnitive:
[38a] The instrument [to use] is a No.9 scalpel.
[39a] A book [for you to review] is in the post.
[40a] There are no WCs on the overnight train [now departing].
[41a] A cat [fed on smoked salmon] will start demanding champagne.
S"
C2 
S'
[how many 
guests]2
Cl 
S
NP 
VP
[-tense] 
VP
to 
V 
[trans]
NP
expect
1
1 = Sarah

 
COMPLEMENTISERS AND NON-FINITE CLAUSES
231
Although there is no overt wh-phrase in these, we know they must be relative 
clauses (a) because they are functioning as modiﬁers within NP (modiﬁers of 
NOM) and (b) because – in addition to any covert constituent they may have 
in virtue of being non-ﬁnite – they always have a gap created by the fronting of 
a covert wh-phrase (to C2). In the following, I give the closest corresponding 
ﬁnite clause, each of which is an overt relative clause.
 
  
 
 
[38b] [• to use •] 
[38c] which [one should use •]
[39b] [for [you to review •]] 
[39c] which [you might/should review •]
[40b] [• now departing]] 
[40c] which [• is now departing]
[41b] [• fed • on smoked salmon] 
[41c] which [• has been fed • on
 
  
 
smoked salmon].
In [38] the subject of use is free and the object is controlled by a fronted wh-
phrase (covert in [b], overt in [c]). In [39] the object gap is due to the fronting 
of the covert wh-phrase. The same goes for the subjects in [40] and [41]. As for 
the object gap in [41b], this is due to the passive participle. The object has been 
promoted to subject – and then wh-fronted. [39d] is the phrase marker for [39b]:
[39d]
  
The phrase marker for the whole NP in [38a] is given below ([38d], page 235).
 Part II: The functions of non-finite clauses
The functions of non-ﬁnite clauses will be familiar to you from previous chap-
ters. They are illustrated (some of them several times) in the examples given 
S"
C2 
S'
i
Cl 
s
for
NP 
VP
you [-tense]
VP
to
V
[trans]
NP
review

CHAPTER 10 NON-FINITE CLAUSES
232
so far in this chapter. Before reading further, then, take time to go through 
the examples of sentences containing non-ﬁnite clauses presented thus far and 
decide on the function of that clause in each. List them by function; when you 
encounter a function for the ﬁrst time, start a new list. This (quite big) exercise 
is answered in the following sections.
In the rest of this chapter I simply list those functions, giving further examples 
where necessary. Occasionally it’ll be necessary to comment on particular issues 
but I’ve kept these to a minimum. Complementation of verbs by non-ﬁnite 
clause requires more discussion and this has been reserved until the end.
Subject and extraposed subject
This function is illustrated in [1] (ﬁrst clause), [10], [23b], [24b], [26] and [32]. 
As with the ﬁnite clauses of Chapter 8, a non-ﬁnite clausal subject should be 
dominated by NP. In [28] and [36] the subject clause is extraposed.
[42a] [Stripping wallpaper] is a wretched business.
[42b] It’s a wretched business [stripping wallpaper].
Notice that -ing participle clauses with overt subject cannot be extraposed:
[43a] [Oscar attempting the double somersault] should amuse you.
[43b] *It should amuse you [Oscar attempting the double somersault].
The phrase marker for [42a] is given as Discussion 2, page 244.
Complement of A in AP
This function of non-ﬁnite clauses was illustrated in [9], [19], and [30] (not [28], 
as this is an example of extraposed subject). This is an intriguing construction. 
There are several types of adjective complementation by to-inﬁnitive clause, 
depending on the head adjective itself. Here I distinguish two main types, 
exempliﬁed by
[44a] Max is reluctant [to try it].
[44b] That piano is impossible [to move].
Adjectives that pattern [A] like reluctant are: anxious, eager, keen, hesitant, 
(un)willing, (un)likely, happy, and liable. Adjectives that pattern [B] like imposs-
ible are: easy, hard, difﬁcult, tough, tiresome, boring, enjoyable, disgusting, and 

 
COMPLEMENT OF P IN PP
233
delicious. Focusing on the interpretation of the covert constituents, what is the 
difference between the two types?
With the [A] adjectives, the higher subject controls the covert subject of the 
adjective complement clause. By contrast, with the [B] adjectives, the higher sub-
ject controls the object of that clause. The lower subject with the [B] adjective 
cannot be controlled: it must either be free, as in [44b], or overt, as in [45].
[45]  That piano is impossible for the dancers to move.
Sentences with a to-inﬁnitive clause complementing a [B]-type adjective cor-
respond to sentences in which the object ﬁgures overtly, in a clause functioning 
as subject or extraposed subject. Thus [44b] (repeated here) is paraphrased by 
[46] and [47]:
[44b] That piano is impossible [to move].
[46]  [To move that piano] is impossible.
[47]  It is impossible [to move that piano].
It could be argued, then, that the [B]-construction actually involves, not a 
complement of A in AP, but extraposition of the clausal subject (as in [47]). 
However, in the absence of expletive it in [44b], I’ll treat the clause there as an 
adjective-complement. Phrase markers for [44a]–[44b] are given as Discussion 3, 
pages 244–5.
Complement of P in PP
Only -ing participle clauses can complement a preposition within PP. Examples 
already given are [1] (second clause) and those in [18] and [35]. In each of those, 
the PP itself is functioning as a noun-complement in NP. But PPs with a non-
ﬁnite clausal complement have other functions too. Give the functions of the 
relevant PP in the following.
[48] John re-parked the car in his absence [by [leaving the handbrake off]].
[49] [With [the troglodytes approaching]], Argon capitulated.
[50] We became zombies [through [watching too much TV]].
[51] This resulted [in [Murtlock being hospitalised]].
[52] He was hopeless [at [writing letters]].
The PPs in [48]–[50] are functioning as adverbials, that in [51] as complement 
of the [prep] verb result, and that in [52] as complement to A (hopeless) in AP. 
The phrase marker for [50] is given as Discussion 4, page 245.

CHAPTER 10 NON-FINITE CLAUSES
234
Adverbial
We have just seen that non-ﬁnite clauses can function as the complement of 
P in a PP functioning as an adverbial. Non-finite clauses can also function as 
adverbials in their own right. Examples already given are: [13], [14], [20], and 
[25b]. As the following show, the subject must either be overt or controlled by 
the subject of the superordinate clause.
-ing participle (with and without overt subject):
[53a] [Count Dracula having invited us], we cancelled other plans.
[53b] [•1 Having furnished ourselves with garlic], we1 set off.
To-infinitive (with and without overt subject):
[54a] We hung around [for the Count to appear].
[54b] We1 helped ourselves to wine [•1 to relieve the boredom].
(Note that for in [54a] is the non-finite complementiser, not the preposition.)
Passive participle (with and without overt subject):
[55a] [The wine finished], we dozed fitfully in our chairs.
[55b] We1 returned, [•1 disappointed by our evening].
The phrase marker for [55b] is given as Discussion 5, page 246.
Mention should be made here of non-ﬁnite adverbial clauses with a (C1) 
subordinating conjunction. Examples are:
[56] I will come [if needed].
[57] The mixture will explode [unless kept below freezing].
[58] [Although feeding twice a day], he still seems hungry.
[59] He claims he never used his mobile [while driving].
[60] Max brandished the weapon [as if to frighten them].
Complement of N in NP
Examples were given in [7] and [27] above. Here are further examples:
[61] We simply ignored [his appeals [for us to join the folk-dance]].
[62] [His ability [to think]] was severely impaired by the experience.
[63] [His proposal [to show us his holiday snaps]] was treated politely.
Which constituent controls the covert subject in the inﬁnitive clauses of [62] 
and [63]?

 
MODIFIER IN NP
235
The bracketed NPs in [62] and [63] are NP versions of the following clauses:
[64] He was able to think.  [65] He proposed to show us his holiday snaps.
In these, the covert subject of the inﬁnitive clause is controlled by the subject of 
the superordinate clause. Now, in the NPs in [62] and [63], this subject has 
assumed the form of a possessive determiner. So the covert subject of the 
inﬁnitive clauses in [62] and [63] is controlled by the determiner of the NP in 
which the clause appears.
The phrase marker for the subject NP of [62] is given as Discussion 6, page 246.
Modifier in NP
Examples are [38a]–[41a]. There is little more that needs to be said here. Clausal 
modiﬁers in NPs are relative clauses with a covert wh-phrase. They are 
restrictive only and thus modiﬁers of NOM in NP.
Here’s the phrase marker for the subject NP of [38a] above:
 [38d] 
 
Notice that, in addition to co-indexing the object NP gap and the covert C2, 
I have co-indexed both with the NOM instrument. This captures the fact that 
the direct object of use is understood as an NP having instrument as head.
NP
DET 
NOM
ART 
NOM, 
S"
the
N 
C2 
S'
instrument
Cl
S
NP 
VP
[-tense]
VP
to
V
[trans]
NP
use
i

CHAPTER 10 NON-FINITE CLAUSES
236
Complement of V
As mentioned, complementation of verbs by non-ﬁnite clause requires more 
discussion. What follows is intended to give an initial impression of this rich and 
controversial area of English grammar.
Since Chapter 4 we have operated with a six-way sub-categorisation of verbs. 
This has the effect of assigning more speciﬁc functions to their complements 
(direct and indirect object, subject- and object-predicative, prepositional 
complement). It is not clear, however, that this sub-categorisation system is 
appropriate in cases of complementation by non-ﬁnite clause.
For example, there are straightforwardly transitive verbs (taking an NP as 
direct object) that can also take a non-ﬁnite clause as complement (e.g. believe 
as in [66a–b]), but there are other verbs that can take a clause but not an NP 
(e.g. hope and condescend as in [67a–b]).
[66a] I believe his story/William.
[66b] I believe William to have been in the garden.
[67a] Michelangelo condescended/hoped to decorate the ceiling.
[67b] *Michelangelo condescended/hoped the decoration of the ceiling.
Can we then think of the clause in [67a] as a direct object exactly?
Furthermore, promise and ask are ditransitive verbs, taking an indirect object 
NP and a direct object NP (as in [68a], [69a]). This might lead us to analyse 
[68b] and [69b] as ditransitive and analyse the non-ﬁnite clause as the direct 
object:
[68a] I promised [Herzog] [my spaghetti machine].
[68b] I promised [Herzog] [to wear the wig].
[69a] I asked [Astrid] [a question].
[69b] I asked [Astrid] [to make no comment].
So far, so good. There are good reasons, though, for analysing VPs with force and 
dare as having the same constituent structure as those with promise and ask.
[70] I !
@
forced
dared
#
$ [Astrid] [to wear the wig].
Yet neither force nor dare can take two NPs (i.e. they are not obviously ditransi-
tive). Besides, it’s not obvious that the function of Astrid in [70] (and even in 
[69b]) is really describable as indirect object.
Rather than give further examples of speciﬁc problems to do with the func-
tions of complements in the various sub-categories, I’ll mention a more general 
consideration. To capture the full intricacy of verb complementation, we really 

 
COMPLEMENT OF V
237
need to sub-categorise verbs in a way independent of, and more detailed than, 
the six subcategory feature labels used so far.
For example: subcategorising kick, believe, say, and watch, as ‘[trans]’ hardly 
does justice to the different complements they can or cannot take. True, all 
four can take a direct object NP (kicked the chessboard, believed the story, said 
a prayer, watched the fun). But, unlike say and believe, kick and watch can’t take 
a that-clause.
[71] She said that Rashid had the perfect disguise.
[72] She believed that William was in the outhouse.
[73] *Gomez kicked that he had lost the match.
[74] *Talullah watched that the clown was putting on his make-up.
Furthermore, leaving kick aside (since it can’t take any sort of clause), believe can 
take a to-inﬁnitive clause with overt subject, but say and watch cannot.
[72a] She believed William to be in the outhouse.
[73a] *She said Rashid to have the perfect disguise.
[74a] *Talullah watched the clown to put on his make-up.
On the other hand, watch can take an ing-participle clause, but believe and say can’t.
[72b] Talullah watched the clown putting on his make-up.
[73b] *She believed William being in the outhouse.
[74b] *She said Rashid having the perfect disguise.
A fully detailed and explicit sub-categorisation system, one that did justice to 
the intricacy of this aspect of the English language, would need to sub-categorise 
each verb for at least the following:
[75] (a) whether it can take a clause as complement;
 
 (b) if so, whether that clause may or must be interrogative;
 
 (c) whether it can be finite or non-finite;
 
 (d) if non-finite, which of the four types of non-finite clause are permitted;
 
 (e)  whether an overt NP can intervene between the (higher) finite and the 
(lower) non-finite verb;
 
 (f) if so, what the function of that NP is;
 
 (g)  what constituent, if any, controls the covert constituents (if any) in the 
non-finite clause.
Answering these questions for the several thousand English verbs would be 
ambitious by any standard – well beyond the scope of this chapter. Even so, as 
I hope the discussion of kick, say, etc. shows, it would result in an approach to 
the sub-categorisation of verbs rather different from that employed so far, one 

CHAPTER 10 NON-FINITE CLAUSES
238
independent of the functions dO, iO, sP, and oP. This is not to say there is no 
correspondence between verb complementation by non-ﬁnite clause and the 
six-way sub-categorisation of previous chapters. There is, as we saw with ask 
and promise. Consider also the complements of the [intensive] copula be in the 
following, which are clearly subject-predicatives.
[76] The noise you can hear is [my cousin slurping her coffee].
[77] All he ever did was [lounge about and clean his ears].
When a non-ﬁnite clause complements a verb, then, I won’t attempt to 
assign that clause a more speciﬁc function (dO, iO, sP, oP) in terms of the 
sub-categorisation of the verb that it complements. This means that the sub-
categorisation feature on that verb can be dispensed with when it has a 
non-finite clause as complement. And, since we’ve questioned whether such 
complement clauses do function precisely as direct objects, I won’t demand they 
be dominated by an NP node.
For verbs complemented just by a non-ﬁnite clause with a covert subject, it’s 
enough to note that only to-inﬁnitive and -ing participle clauses are admitted. 
The covert subject is always controlled by the subject of the superordinate clause. 
Further examples are [78]–[79]. Notice the distinction in meaning between the 
to-inﬁnitive (which implies that he didn’t kiss her) and the ing-participle (which 
implies he did).
[78]  He didn’t remember to kiss Millie.
[79a] He didn’t remember kissing Millie.
[79b] 
 
s
NP,
VP
he
TENSE
[past]
VP
didn't
V 
S'
remember 
Cl 
S
NP 
VP
i
V
[trans]
[-tense]
NP
kissing
Millie

 
COMPLEMENT OF V
239
Matters are not so straightforward when an overt NP intervenes between the 
verb of the superordinate clause and the non-ﬁnite verb of the subordinate 
clause. In the following, the relevant NP is italicised.
V + NP + to-infinitive.
[80] I’d prefer the butler to taste it first.
[81] She encouraged Muldoon to buy her the diamonds.
[82] Machiavelli believed him to be the ideal prince.
[83] I’d like the Senator to try it for a week.
V + NP + -ing participle.
[84] He had heard Victoria and Albert singing that duet.
[85] I caught the clowns helping the elephants onto the trapeze.
V + NP + bare infinitive.
[86] Marcel made Celeste peel him a grape.
[87] He watched Magda polish off the toast.
V + NP + passive participle.
[88] She found the icon buried in the wall.
[89] She kept Raleigh imprisoned in the tower.
The question raised by these examples is [75(f)] above. Is the italicised NP the 
subject of the subordinate clause or the object of the superordinate clause? 
Take [87]. Is Magda subject of polish off or is it object of watched? It makes a 
difference to the constituent analysis of the higher VP: (I) If that NP is the 
subject of the lower verb, the higher VP will consist of V and a non-ﬁnite 
clause (with overt subject) functioning as the single complement of V. By 
contrast, (II) if the NP is object of the higher verb, then it must be a 
constituent in the structure of the higher VP (a sister of the higher V). The 
higher V will then have two complements, an NP and a non-ﬁnite clause with 
covert subject.
VP
V 
S'
C1 
s
NP 
VP
Magda
VP
V 
NP 
S'
Magda C1 
S
NP 
VP
I. Subject of lower V
II. Object of higher V

CHAPTER 10 NON-FINITE CLAUSES
240
This uncertainty arises for several reasons, three of which I’ll mention here.
(i) When functioning as the complement of V, non-ﬁnite clauses very rarely 
allow an overt complementiser. Prefer is among the very few verbs, in British 
English at least, to do so – and then only for some speakers.
[90] I’d prefer [for the butler to taste it].
Since the function of the complementiser is to introduce the subordinate 
(lower) clause, it very clearly marks the division between the higher and the 
lower clause. In [90] (and [80] above), then, the butler falls squarely within 
the lower clause and must be regarded as its subject. However, in the (much 
more usual) absence of an overt complementiser, there’s no such obvious clue 
as to the function of the NP.
(ii) If you replace the italicised NPs in [80]–[89] by pronouns, those pro-
nouns must appear in the objective (accusative) case: me, him, her, us, them. 
This might suggest that those NPs must be functioning as objects rather than 
as subjects (cf. She loves him and he loves her). Against this, it could be (indeed 
has been) argued that it is not just objects that take accusative case form, 
but also subjects of non-ﬁnite clauses. And the following examples, in 
which the accusative pronoun clearly is functioning as subject of its clause, bear 
this out.
[91] [For him to attempt it] would be silly and dangerous.
[92] The noise you can hear is [them slurping their drinks].
So, the fact that the NP is accusative is consistent with either analysis.
(iii) The fact that the relevant NP can be understood as the subject of the 
lower verb doesn’t help us either – for, again, this can be explained in either of 
two ways. On the one hand, the NP is understood as the subject of the lower verb 
because it actually is the subject of the lower verb (Analysis I). What could be 
more straightforward? On the other hand, however, it’s possible to say that, 
while it is actually the object of the higher verb, that higher object controls the 
covert subject of the lower verb. On this analysis (Analysis II) the fact that the 
NP is understood as the subject of the lower clause is consistent with its actually 
being object in the higher clause.
These structures have been subject to much discussion. The one point of 
agreement is that they can’t all receive the same analysis: it depends on the verb 
that heads the higher VP. For the purposes of this chapter, I’ll divide verbs 
taking non-ﬁnite clausal complements into two types: verbs that take just a 
single clausal complement with overt subject (Analysis I) and verbs taking two 
complements, a direct object NP and a clausal complement with a (controlled) 
covert subject (Analysis II).

 
COMPLEMENT OF V
241
Type I verbs include: assume, believe, consider, desire, dread, expect, know, like, observe, 
prefer, regret, witness, see, feel, hear.
Type II verbs include: advise, ask, coax, compel, dare, encourage, force, promise, persuade.
The rest of this chapter discusses how to decide which type a given verb 
belongs to.
It’s best to start with what’s special about Type II verbs. The crucial thing 
about Type II verbs is that they call for complements referring to things that 
have volition, i.e. agents (people or animals). You can’t advise, persuade, dare 
(etc.) volition-less things to do something. So, these verbs require an agentive 
NP as a (dO) complement, in addition to the non-finite clause.
To make this clearer, consider:
[93] The tree lost its leaves.  [94] !I advised the tree.
[93] expresses something that can be believed without making any special 
assumption about trees. [94], by contrast, requires the fairy-tale assumption 
that a tree can follow advice (i.e. is an agent). So, [93] shows no special assump-
tion is required for the tree to be subject of lost its leaves, while [94] shows 
that the special assumption is required for it to be object of advise. In the 
light of this, consider now [95], in which the function of the italicised NP is 
in question.
[95] !I advised the tree to lose its leaves.
[96] I expected the tree to lose its leaves.
[95] requires exactly the special assumption about trees that [94] did. This shows 
that in [95] the tree is functioning just as it did in [94] – as dO of advise. Certainly, 
the tree is understood as the subject of to lose its leaves – but this is because, while 
functioning as dO of advise, it controls the covert subject of to lose its leaves. This 
confirms that advise is a Type II verb.
Expect, by contrast, is a Type I verb. In contrast to what we saw in [95], there’s 
no compelling reason in [96] to analyse the tree as direct object of expect. So we 
could – much more simply – analyse it as the overt subject of the lower clause. 
More positive evidence that the tree in [96] is indeed the overt subject of to lose 
its leaves involves expletive there, as illustrated in [97b]:
[97a] Five gorillas are in the outhouse.
[97b] There are five gorillas in the outhouse.
The point is that, in contrast to expletive it (which can function as subject 
or object), expletive there can only function as subject, never as object. Since 
the NP following a Type II verb functions as its object, expletive there can only 
follow Type I verbs, not Type II verbs – and we get the following contrast:

CHAPTER 10 NON-FINITE CLAUSES
242
[98–Type I] 
Rowena expected there to be more food.
[98–Type II] 
*Rowena advised there to be more food.
[99–Type I] 
I prefer there to be plenty of exercises.
[99–Type II] 
*I persuaded there to be plenty of exercises.
[100–Type I] 
He dreaded there being reporters in the lobby.
[100–Type II] *He forced there to be reporters in the lobby.
With just one verb, promise, there is an even more compelling reason for 
assigning it to Type II. With all other verbs of Type II, the covert subject of the 
lower clause is controlled by the object of the higher clause. But with promise, 
the covert subject of the lower clause is controlled, not by the overt object of the 
higher clause, but by its subject (e.g. I[1] promised Tessa [•[1] to post that parcel]). 
Promise thus very clearly demands both a direct object and a clause with a dis-
tinct (covert) subject. Compare promise and beg (which are both Type II) in 
Exercise 1 (iii) and (iv) below. Further Exercise 5 deals with an intriguing further 
difference between the two types of verb.
To conclude, then: [101a], with the Type I verb expect, should be represented 
as in [101b], and [102a], with the Type II verb persuade, as in [102b].
[101a] They expected the bear to dance.
[102a] They persuaded the bear to dance.
[101b]
 
s
NP 
VP
they
V(l)
[past]
S'
Cl 
S
expected
NP 
VP
the bear
[-tense] 
VP
to
V
[intrans]
dance

 
COMPLEMENT OF V
243
[102b] 
 
Now decide which type each of the following verbs belongs to: teach, claim, love, 
forbid, ﬁnd, hate, want, invite, beg, warn, tell, prove, recommend, imagine, prevent, 
urge, mean. The answers are given as Discussion 7, page 246.
■ Discussion of in-text exercises
1. 
s
NP 
VP
they 
V (ll) 
[past]
NPn 
S'
persuaded
the bear
Cl
S
NP 
VP
i
[-tense] 
VP
to
V
[intrans]
dance
S'
C l 
S
for
NP 
VP
Anaelo 
T-tensel 
VP
to
V
[trans]
NP
get
all the blame

CHAPTER 10 NON-FINITE CLAUSES
244
2. 
(The subject of the non-finite clause is free.)
3. [44a] 
 
 
s
NP 
VP
S'
V
[intens]
[pres]
NP
a wretched 
business
Cl 
S
is
NP
VP
V
[trans]
[-tense]
NP
wallpaper
stripping
S
NP, 
VP
Max 
V 
AP
[intens]
[pres]
is
A 
S'
reluctant
Cl 
S
NP 
VP
[-tense] 
VP
to 
V 
NP
[trans]
try 
it

 
COMPLEMENT OF V
245
[44b] 
 
 
(The subject of the non-finite clause is free.)
4. [50] 
     
s
NP, 
VP
that
piano
V
[intens]
[pres]
AP
A 
S'
is
impossible 
Cl 
S
NP 
VP
[-tense] 
VP
to 
V 
NP
[trans]
move
i
S
NP, 
VP
we
VP 
PP
V
[intens]
[past]
NP
P 
S
zombies through
NP 
VP
became
V
[trans]
f-tensel
NP
too much TV
watching

CHAPTER 10 NON-FINITE CLAUSES
246
5. [55b] 
 
 
6. 
7. Type I verbs: claim, love, find, hate, prove, want, imagine, prevent, mean.
 
Type II verbs: teach, forbid, invite, beg, warn, tell, recommend, urge.
s
NP, 
VP
we
VP 
S'
V
[intrans]
[past]
Cl 
S
NP 
VF
returned
VP 
PP
V
[trans]
[-tense]
NP
by our 
evening
disappointed
NP
DET 
NOM
POSS, 
N 
S'
his 
ability
NP 
VP
i
[-tense] 
VP
to
V
[intrans]
think

 
EXERCISES
247
 Exercises
1. (a)  Identify the covert constituents (if any) in the bracketed non-finite clauses of 
the following sentences.
(b) State whether they are controlled or free. If they are controlled, identify the 
controller.
 
Example: Louis was wondering [whether • to support the Pope].
 
(a) Subject, (b) controlled by main clause subject (Louis).
(i) 
I want [to be alone].
(ii) 
I wanted [John to be alone].
(iii) 
Morgan promised Bill [to give the film a good review].
(iv) 
Morgan begged Bill [to give the film a good review].
(v) 
[Getting to the top] finished Hedda off.
(vi) 
[Giving it a swift kick] sometimes works.
(vii) The trombone is too old [to play].
(viii) Max is too stubborn [to talk].
(ix) Max is too stubborn [to talk to].
(x) 
Svengali was too clever [for them to entrap].
(xi) It should be clear [how to do this].
(xii) John was not clear [how to do this].
2. Under complement of A in AP, we considered
(i) This piano is impossible to move.
Notice that we could refer to the piano by means of the pronoun it:
(ii) It is impossible to move.
 
But now (ii) is ambiguous. The ambiguity is created by two distinct factors. First, 
the it of (ii) is ambiguous. Out of context we can’t tell whether it’s the expletive 
it associated with an extraposed subject, or whether it’s a referring expression 
(referring e.g. to a piano). Second, move can be either transitive or intransitive. 
Bearing these points in mind, draw a phrase marker for each interpretation of (ii).
3. (a) Draw Abbreviated Clausal Analyses of the following sentences:
(b) Indicate covert constituents (with ‘•’). If they are controlled, co-index them 
with their controllers.
(c) For each clause, give its form and function.
Remember, there will be as many clauses as there are lexical verbs.

CHAPTER 10 NON-FINITE CLAUSES
248
 
Example: Having shaved your head, will you ask the wig man if he is ready to 
fit you? (Lexical verbs in bold.)
 
 
S1: finite yes/no interrogative, main.
S2: non-finite (-ing participle), adverbial.
S3: finite interrogative, complement of V (ask).
S4: to-infinitive, complement to A (ready).
(i) The Doge of Venice appears to have been eager to join the Crusade.
(ii) Which authors does the professor hope to lecture on this term?
(iii) Plans to recover the vehicles abandoned during the night are under 
consideration.
(iv) The first chef to be informed of it congratulated Melvin on rescuing the 
steaks without damaging them.
(v) It seems that, having been taught by Mozart himself, Joachim knew the 
sonata to be well within his capacities.
■ Discussion of exercises
1. (i) 
Subject, controlled by main clause subject (I).
(ii) 
No covert constituents.
(iii) 
Subject, controlled by main clause subject (Morgan).
(iv) 
Subject, controlled by main clause indirect object (Bill ).
(v) 
Subject, controlled by main clause object (Hedda).
(vi) 
Subject, free.
(vii) Subject, free. Object, controlled by main clause subject (the trombone).
(viii) Subject, controlled by main clause subject (Max).
(ix) Subject, free. Object of P in PP, controlled by main clause subject (Max).
(x) 
Object, controlled by main clause subject (Svengali).
(xi) Subject, free.
(xii) Subject, controlled by main clause subject (John).
SI
S2 will [you]! ask [the wig man]2 S3
if [he] 2 is ready S4
t having shaved your head
2 to fit you

 
EXERCISES
249
2. With it as a referring expression, the clause complements A, and the covert object 
of the transitive verb move is controlled by the main clause subject (the referring 
expression it). See (a) below. On the other (b) interpretation, it is expletive and 
the clause is an extraposed subject. Expletive it cannot be a controller (see 
Exercise 1 (xi) above). Here move is intransitive, and (ii) is equivalent to Moving 
is impossible.
(a) 
     
(b) 
     
s
NP, 
VP
it
V
[intens]
[presi
AP
A 
S'
is 
impossible Cl
S
NP 
VP
[-tensel 
VP
to 
V 
[trans]
NP
move
i
S
NP 
VP 
S'
It 
is impossible
Cl 
S
NP 
VP
f-tensel 
VP
to 
V
[intrans]
move

CHAPTER 10 NON-FINITE CLAUSES
250
3. (i) 
 
 
 
 
S1: Finite, main.
 
 
S2: Non-finite (to-infinitive), complement of V (appears).
 
 
S3: Non-finite (to-infinitive), complement to A (eager).
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
S1: Finite Wh-interrogative, main.
 
 
S2: Non-finite (to-infinitive), complement of V (hope).
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
 
S1: Finite, main.
 
 
S2: Non-finite (to-infinitive), complement to N (plans).
 
 
S3: Non-finite (passive participle) relative, modifier of NOM (vehicles).
 
(iv) 
 
 
 
 
S1: Finite, main.
 
 
S2: Non-finite (to-infinitive) relative, modifier of NOM (chef ).
SI
[the Doge of Venice], appears S2
, to have been eager S3
, to join the Crusade
SI
[which authors]-! does [the professor]2 hope S2
2 to lecture on •, this term
SI
plans S2 are under consideration
to recover the [vehicles]-, S3
, abandoned
, during the night
SI
the first [chef], S2 congratulated [Melvin], on S3
i to be informed
i of It
2 rescuing the steaks without S4
2 damaging them

 
FURTHER EXERCISES
251
 
 
S3: Non-finite (-ing participle), complement of P (on).
 
 
S4: Non-finite (-ing participle), complement of P (without).
 
(v) 
 
 
 
 
S1: Finite, main.
 
 
S2: Finite, extraposed subject.
 
 
S3: Non-finite (-ing participle), adverbial.
 
 
S4: Non-finite (to-infinitive), complement of V (knew).
 Further exercises
1. Draw Abbreviated Clausal Analyses for the following (with all the information 
asked for in Exercise 3 above). (c), by the way, is a definition of what it is to malin-
ger. With eight clauses, (f) is ridiculously complex, but it is the very last.
(a) Who did Sarah try to tell what to say?
(b) Tutors can decide whether to insist on these distinctions being respected.
(c) Malingering is pretending to be ill with the intention of avoiding work.
(d) Virginia is reluctant to ask any of the players which court it made them most 
nervous playing on.
(e) Don’t you remember suggesting that any circus staff caught allowing animals 
on the trapeze should be fired?
(f) The invitation to attend the ball sent to Cinderella at her stepmother’s 
address was intercepted by her ugly sisters, who were anxious not to be 
outshone in beauty while dancing and to have the washing-up done in their 
absence.
2. Draw phrase markers for each of the interpretations of the following ambiguous 
sentences. In (d) and (e), the differences are a matter of indexing only.
(a) Richard has plans to leave.
(b) I saw the boy studying in the library. (Three possibilities)
(c) Flying planes can be dangerous.
SI
it seems that S2
S3 [joachim], knew S4
i having been 
tauqht by
the sonata to 
be well within 
his capacities
Mozart himself

CHAPTER 10 NON-FINITE CLAUSES
252
(d) The chicken is ready to eat.
(e) Max thought Jim too old to play.
 
Note: As regards (e), assume there are three levels of AP structure: AP, ADJ, 
and A, (parallel to NP, NOM, and N) and that too pre-modifies ADJ (old 
to play).
3. Look again at the section ‘Complement of A in AP’ above and, in the light of it, 
explain the ungrammaticality of *John is impossible to sleep.
4. Draw phrase markers for the following, paying special attention to indexing. 
To bring out the intricate differences between the examples, assign indexes to 
all NPs, including the pronoun them. Where them cannot be co-indexed with 
another NP, can you explain why it can’t? It will help if you consider what small 
change to that object NP would be required to allow (indeed force) it to be 
co-indexed with another NP.
(a) I wonder who the men expected to see.
(b) I wonder who the men expected to see them.
(c) I wonder how the men expected to see them.
5. The difference between Type I and Type II verbs manifests itself in more ways than 
were discussed in the text. Compare, for example, the following three (a)–(b) 
pairs. In the (i)s the subordinate clauses are active but in the (ii)s they are passive. 
Discuss precisely how the difference in interpretation (and acceptability) between 
the (a)s and (b)s further illustrates the distinction. Try this out with other verbs.
(1a) (i) Sarah believed Dr. Fernandez to have treated Paul.
 
(ii) Sarah believed Paul to have been treated by Dr. Fernandez.
(1b) (i) Sarah persuaded Dr. Fernandez to treat Paul.
 
(ii) Sarah persuaded Paul to be treated by Dr. Fernandez.
(2a) (i) She wanted her colleagues to trust Paul.
 
(ii) She wanted Paul to be trusted by her colleagues.
(2b) (i) She encouraged her colleagues to trust Paul.
 
(ii) *!She encouraged Paul to be trusted by her colleagues.
(3a) (i) She expected all trainees to crush the garlic really well.
 
(ii) She expected the garlic to be crushed really well by all trainees.
(3b) (i) She reminded all trainees to crush the garlic really well.
 
(ii) *!She reminded the garlic to be crushed really well by all trainees.

253
This concluding chapter is concerned with the general background to, and ultimate 
purpose of, the kind of analysis you’ve encountered in previous chapters, rather 
than with extending that analysis.
Languages
I’ll begin by considering a very general question:
 [1] What is a language?
How do you begin to think about this? The question seems so general as to 
be almost empty of content. How one goes about answering such a question 
depends very much on one’s reasons for asking it in the ﬁrst place. It would not 
be far from the truth to say that one could really understand the question only 
in the light of particular answers to it. Different thinkers about language have 
answered it in their different ways and, in doing so, have given the question a 
different signiﬁcance.
A natural answer often given is
 [2] A language is a system of communication.
Expanding that answer (deciding e.g. what we meant by ‘system’ and 
‘communication’, and what it is about the system that permits communication) 
and exploring its implications would open up one avenue of thought about 
language, and a perfectly valid one. But other answers are possible. My purpose 
in considering the question in [1] is to raise certain questions about the kind of 
analysis encountered in previous chapters, and to put it in context. To do this, 
I’ll consider the following answer:
 [3] A language is a set of sentences.
It would be understandable if at this stage you felt that this was a rather dry, 
unappealing answer to our question, one that fails to do justice to any sense 
of the wonder of language. I hope by the end of this chapter to show that this 
11
Languages, sentences 
and grammars

CHAPTER 11 LANGUAGES, SENTENCES AND GRAMMARS
254
answer – when its implications are properly teased out – does do justice to 
the wonder of language. It was Noam Chomsky (Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology) who early in his career suggested that thinking of a language in this 
way (as a set of sentences) opened up a fruitful avenue of thought on the nature 
of language, more interesting and accurate than any other idea around at the 
time. Taken alone and out of context it makes little sense. But answers like that 
are just beginnings: we have to ask what [3] means, what its implications are for 
how languages are to be described, what further questions it raises. In fact, the 
further questions raised by [3] have had a profound effect on the development 
of language study over the last seventy years or so.
Before considering these, however, we need to compare this account with 
what is perhaps a more common idea of what a language is. If a language really 
is a set of sentences, it follows that different languages are distinguished by 
being made up of different sets of sentences. Two people will speak exactly the 
same language if (and only if) the set of sentences in each of their languages are 
exactly the same. A consequence of this is that, almost certainly, no two people 
speak exactly the same language.
By way of illustration of this, consider again [4]:
 [4] Max put his bike in the garage and Bill did so in his bedroom.
If I had inadvertently said this, I would consider it a mistake on my part and, 
given the opportunity, I would want to correct myself. So, for me, [4] is not 
a (grammatical) sentence of my language, even though I ﬁnd it perfectly under-
standable. In fact, there is a measure of agreement among English speakers 
that [4] is not a sentence of their language. But suppose we do ﬁnd someone 
who could use [4] without any feeling that there is something wrong with it. 
Then, for that person, [4] is a sentence of his or her language. Now, if a language 
is a set of sentences, that person and I must be said to speak slightly different 
languages, different to the extent that the set of (grammatical) sentences that 
constitutes his or her language includes [4] whereas the set of sentences that con-
stitutes my language excludes [4].
When I say that this other speaker and I speak ‘slightly’ different languages, 
I’m assuming for the purposes of the discussion that she and I agree about the 
other sentences mentioned in this book, disagreeing only about this sentence [4]. 
But wait a moment. If all the (grammatical) sentences mentioned in this book 
are sentences of this other speaker’s language, doesn’t that mean that this other 
speaker speaks what is known as English? And don’t I, as author of this book, 
speak English too? And English, after all, is a language. Surely, then, we speak 
the same language.
This appears to contradict the idea that a language is a set of sentences 
and that particular languages are distinguished by consisting of different sets of 
sentences. English is normally regarded as a language, yet by the deﬁnition of a 

 
LANGUAGES
255
language given in [3], speakers of English are characterised as speaking more 
or less different languages. Do speakers of English speak the same language or 
don’t they?
This last question is really a matter for us to decide, because it amounts to 
this: should we use the expression ‘a language’ in a way that allows us to say that 
English is a language, the common language of its speakers (this is a decision to 
abandon [3]), or should we use that expression in a way that obliges us to say 
that strictly speaking, English is not a language itself, but a gigantic collection 
of largely overlapping languages? Answer [3] encourages this second use – and 
is arguably closer to the facts of the matter.
There is nothing to stop us using the expression ‘a language’ in both of these 
ways. In fact, we normally do use it in both ways. It depends on the context. 
Clearly, by comparison with French (or, the huge collection of overlapping lan-
guages that go to make up what is known as French), English is an identiﬁable 
language (in the ﬁrst sense above), absolutely distinct from the French language. 
But within what is known as English, you know as well as I that there are differ-
ences. Geordies, Glaswegians, Londoners, Californians, Belfastians, Jamaicans, 
Canberrans, Sidneysiders speak differently. This is not simply a matter of accent. 
Each and every Geordie, Glaswegian, Californian (etc.) has a language and each 
of these languages can be described as a set of sentences. These sets are known 
to differ to a greater or lesser degree. I’ll give just two small examples. [5] is a 
grammatical sentence of the language spoken by many Geordies:
 [5] You can’t do it, can’t you not?
but not of the languages spoken by, for example, Jamaicans, Californians, or 
Glaswegians. Conversely, [6]
 [6] Did you eat yet?
is a grammatical sentence of the language of Californians (and most US languages) 
but not, for example, of Geordies or Londoners.
The discussion so far suggests that it is not in fact such a calamity to conclude 
that, in one useful sense of the expression ‘a language’, English is not a single 
language but a huge collection of overlapping languages.
There’s almost no limit to the variety within English we may recognise if it 
suits our purpose. I’ve mentioned general variation associated with geographical 
differences. I could also have mentioned variation associated with age differ-
ences, educational, social, and political differences, and I would still have said 
nothing about linguistic variation across time, variation caused by the fact 
that languages change through the centuries. In one sense of ‘a language’, we, 
Shakespeare, Chaucer, and the Gawain poet have different languages. In another 
sense, it is all the same language. Amid all the variety, we cannot lose sight of the 
common ground, the overlap between the varieties. It is this overlap that justiﬁes 

CHAPTER 11 LANGUAGES, SENTENCES AND GRAMMARS
256
the label ‘the English language’ (and the use of the word ‘English’ in the subtitle 
of this book) and it is this that enables its speakers, with more or less success, 
to communicate with each other.
Linguistic variation is a study in its own right (sometimes called socio-
linguistics, or dialectology) and is not the topic of this book. I shall continue 
to assume, safely I believe, that the sentences and structures analysed in this 
book fall within the common ground, forming a central part of the language 
of its readers. Let’s now consider some more speciﬁc consequences of [3] for 
the description of languages.
Describing languages
If a language is a set of sentences, then the job of describing a language consists 
in indicating, for every sequence of words, whether or not that sequence counts 
as a grammatical sentence of the language.
The idea that a language is a set of sentences suggests to many people encoun-
tering it for the ﬁrst time that you should be able to gather all the sentences of a 
language together, make a list of them, and say ‘This is the complete language’. 
And certainly, if you could make a list of all the sentences of a language, [3] 
suggests a very easy way to go about describing it: to give a fully explicit and 
comprehensive description of a language, all that’s required is to draw up such 
a list, one that includes all the word sequences that are grammatical sentences of 
the language and excludes all word sequences that are not.
Imagine, if you can, a language in which there are just ten sentences. We could 
call this language ‘Justen’. If a language is a set of sentences, we have only to list 
those ten sentences in order to have an explicit and comprehensive description 
of Justen. By consulting that list we would be able to tell immediately what was, 
and what was not, Justen.
How realistic is this? Can you imagine a language in which you could say 
just ten things? I doubt whether such a ‘language’ properly deserves the name. 
‘Code’ would be a more appropriate description. So, that account of what 
a language is works well enough for Justen, but Justen is altogether unreal. 
Should we, then, reject that account?
Well, if you share the feeling that [3], as a deﬁnition of what a language 
is, makes it appear as though all languages are as simple as Justen, then you 
probably do want to reject it. This is probably because the deﬁnition suggests 
to you that a language has to be a fairly small set of sentences, small enough 
at least to make a list of and put a number on. But there’s nothing in the idea 
that a language is a set of sentences to suggest that it has to have any limit on 
it. A set of things can be indeﬁnitely large. Indeed, there’s no reason why a set of 
things should even be ﬁnite. For example, numbers form a set of things, and this 

 
DESCRIBING LANGUAGES
257
set is inﬁnite: there is no largest number. What about the set of sentences that 
form a language?
We’ve agreed that Justen is unreal. But how unreal is it? If your language 
does not contain just ten sentences, how many does it contain? Five hundred? 
Five thousand? Five million . . . ? Could you, in fact, put a number on it?
In asking this, I am not asking how many sentences you have actually used 
and understood so far in your life. Nor am I asking how many you will have 
used and understood by the time you die. These are questions, not about your 
language as such, but about your use of language. We are concerned with 
your language, not the use you happen to make of it. So the question concerns 
the number of word sequences that you would accept as being sentences of 
your language, available for your use whether or not you actually get to make 
use of them. Now, if what we are concerned with is not the number you will 
actually use in your lifetime but the number that are in principle available for 
use, we come closest to the truth in saying that you speak an inﬁnite language.
There are well-known ways of demonstrating this. Take, for example, a 
single word of your language, the word and. We can be perfectly conﬁdent 
that Justen doesn’t include any word having the same function as and. How 
can we be so sure of this? Adding this one word to that ten-sentence language 
changes it, at a stroke, into an inﬁnite language. One of the functions of and 
is to join any two or more sentences together to form another, co-ordinate, 
sentence. Say we number the sentences of the original Justen, S1 to S10. With 
the addition of and a whole new language opens up, one that includes the 
following four sentences:
(i) 
[S1 and S2]
(ii) [S1, S2, and S3]
(iii) [[S1 and S2] and S5]
(iv) [[S1 and S2], [S6 and S3], and S8]
and an inﬁnity of further sentences.
Your language includes and. There is no sentence of which you could say, 
‘This is the longest sentence in my language’. For any sentence that you care to 
think of, however long, it is always possible to create another, longer, sentence 
by co-ordinating a further clause within it.
And is not the only device that allows you to elaborate the length and 
complexity of your sentences. Another, encountered in Chapter 9, is the relative 
clause. Think of the nursery rhyme ‘This is the house that Jack built’. Here’s 
the last sentence: This is the farmer sowing his corn that kept the cock that crowed 
in the morn that woke the priest all shaven and shorn that married the man all 
tattered and torn that kissed the maiden all forlorn that milked the cow with the 
crumpled horn that tossed the dog that chased the cat that killed the rat that ate 

CHAPTER 11 LANGUAGES, SENTENCES AND GRAMMARS
258
the malt that lay in the house that Jack built. Each new sentence is created by 
subordinating the previous sentence as a relative clause functioning as a modiﬁer 
in a newly-introduced NP. This could go on for ever. The fact that it doesn’t go 
on longer has nothing to do with the language itself but with factors affecting the 
use of language: boredom, exhaustion, hunger and, ﬁnally, mortality.
Before I continue, let me summarise the last two most important points. 
(1) In contrast to the artiﬁcial example of Justen, natural languages (the lan-
guages which, in the words of the phrase, we learn at our mother’s knee) are 
inﬁnite. (2) The inﬁnity of natural languages in no way conﬂicts with the idea 
that a language is a set of sentences; sets can be inﬁnite and a language can be 
deﬁned as an inﬁnite set of sentences.
Describing infinite languages
But now we have a new question and it is this:
 [7] How do you describe an infinite set of sentences (an infinite language)?
Clearly, we must abandon the idea of listing. Just as you cannot list an inﬁnity of 
numbers, so you cannot list an inﬁnity of sentences. [7] is perhaps the important 
question posed by [3]. By suggesting we think of a language as a set of sentences, 
Chomsky was implicitly questioning an inﬂuential view of language proposed 
in the late nineteenth century by the great Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure. 
Saussure readily recognised it was impossible to list the sentences of a person’s 
language. He therefore limited the notion of a language (langue) to those expres-
sions that could be ﬁnitely listed – morphemes, words, ﬁxed phrases, idioms. 
Sentences were excluded as pertaining, not to the language as such, but to a 
person’s particular use of language (parole). Chomsky, in focusing on sentences, 
encouraged us to see the enterprise of describing a person’s language as the 
enterprise of describing and explaining a mental capacity, the capacity to utter/
understand an inﬁnity of sentences (a capacity he calls linguistic ‘competence’) 
– something Saussure, for all his insights, had less to say about. It is in this 
sense – by forcing us to concentrate on a person’s capacity to speak an inﬁnite 
language and on how that capacity is acquired – that [3] does seem to address 
the real wonder of language. [3] forces us to state explicitly which are the 
grammatical sentences of the language and which are not, and do this for an 
inﬁnity of sentences and non-sentences. Since listing is out, [3] encourages us 
to ﬁnd an alternative principle on which to base our description.
We can approach this alternative by comparing the two artiﬁcial languages 
considered above, Justen and the language that consists of the ten sentences of 
Justen augmented by and. We could call this second language ‘Justenand’. I’ve 
shown that nothing is easier than the complete description of Justen: because 

 
DESCRIBING INFINITE LANGUAGES
259
it is a ﬁnite language, we merely list its ten sentences. But we can’t do this for 
Justenand. Before reading further, ask yourself whether it is possible to give a 
complete description of Justenand and, if so, how you would go about doing 
so. Remember, in asking for a complete description of Justenand, I want to 
know categorically, for any sequence I care to think of, whether it is a sentence 
of the language or not.
If you’ve thought about this, you will have realised that Justenand, inﬁnite 
though it is, is still a very rudimentary language. It is not only possible to 
describe this language in its entirety, it is not even very difﬁcult. The description 
will fall into two parts. The ﬁrst part must be the original list of ten sentences. 
To account for the inﬁnity of other sentences which have become possibilities 
by the addition of and, something different is required. What we need, for the 
second part, is an explicit statement to the effect that a sentence of Justenand may 
consist of any two or more sentences of Justen joined by and. This statement 
tell us that, given that S1, S2, and S3 are sentences of Justen, (i) and (ii) above 
are also sentences, having the form
And, since S(i) has just been admitted as a sentence of Justenand (and S5 is 
listed) we know, by the same token, that (iii) is one too:
and so on ad inﬁnitum. Notice that, from the explicit statement in bold above, 
we not only derive the information that (iii) is indeed a sentence of Justenand, 
but are given a clue as to how to analyse that sentence. The statement auto-
matically implies a partial description of S(iii).
By means of the statement in the second part of the description, we have given 
a complete description of Justenand without resorting to an inﬁnite and hence 
uncompletable list. We have, in fact, provided a ﬁnite description of an inﬁnite 
set of sentences. Although a list is included in the full description (and it is 
this list that makes Justenand hardly less artiﬁcial than Justen), that list has been 
supplemented by something quite different, namely a rule. For that is what the 
above statement is, a rule for forming the inﬁnity of Justenand sentences. It is by 
means of rules that we can give ﬁnite descriptions of inﬁnite sets of sentences.
This difference between list and rule is of central importance in language 
study. The very idea of ‘sentence’ as you and I understand it is bound up with 
s®
SI 
and 
S2
SOO
SI 
S2 
and 
S3
S(¡¡¡)
SO) 
and 
S5
SI 
and 
S2

CHAPTER 11 LANGUAGES, SENTENCES AND GRAMMARS
260
the notion of ‘rule’. To see this, think about Justen again. This toy language is 
probably more different from your own language than you realise. In particular, 
it is not even clear that what we have been calling its ‘sentences’ bear any rela-
tion at all to the things that you call sentences in your language. In explanation, 
remember that, since Justen is a ﬁnite ‘language’, it is actually possible to identify 
its ‘sentences’ by numbers. Indeed, the speakers of this so-called language could 
themselves identify their ten sentences by number. The only problem with this 
idea is that whereas numbers are inﬁnite, Justen has only ten sentences. But, 
if it is unlikely that numbers would be used, there is nothing to prevent these 
speakers having names for their ten sentences. S1 could be Oink, S2 Woops, S3 
Umph, S4 Whack, and so on.
Do you see, then, how different Justen is from your language? Names are 
simple words. They don’t have syntactic structure. In other words, a language 
that could consist of names alone has no need of, indeed cannot be said to 
have, hierarchical structure, syntactic categories, or syntactic functions. In a word, 
it would have no syntax. The very distinction between ‘sentence’ and ‘word’ is 
meaningless for Justen. Rules would have no part to play in the description of 
such a language. Not only can we list the ‘sentences’ of this language, we must 
list them if we want to describe it.
By contrast, sentence-listing plays no part either in the description of your 
language or in the way you use that language. You don’t have a list of ready-
made sentences in your head. If you did, the language would have to be ﬁnite; 
your head, after all, has a ﬁnite capacity. Furthermore, if you could hold them 
all in your head, as pre-packaged sentences, there would be no need for them to 
be complex, i.e. there would be no need for them to have structure. If knowing 
a natural language could be a matter of remembering sentences as such, why 
bother with complex things like sentences at all? It would be easier to remember 
simple names, and more efﬁcient.1
Instead, you have to construct your sentences as and when the need arises. 
And it is the fact that you do construct sentences on the spot that enables you 
to utter any of an inﬁnite number of sentences, appropriate to an inﬁnite variety 
of situations. Knowing a natural language, then, does not consist in having 
an inventory of sentences in your head, but in knowing how to construct the 
sentences. But, and this is the important point, in order to know how to con-
struct the grammatical sentences of a natural language, you have to know in 
very general terms what counts as a grammatical sentence of the language.
When it comes to describing languages, we can take our cue from this. Our 
ultimate task in describing a language is still to specify what the grammatical 
sentences of the language are. But we cannot expect to do this directly. What we 
1 Jorge Luis Borges, in ‘Funes the Memorious’ (translated into English in Labyrinths, published by 
Penguin) wrote an interesting story on the effects of an infallible memory on a person’s language.

 
GRAMMARS
261
can and must do is specify what it is that makes a sequence of words grammatical 
or ungrammatical. This amounts to saying that, in order to describe a particular 
language, you have to give a general deﬁnition of the concept ‘grammatical 
sentence’ for that language. It is by reference to this general deﬁnition that we 
can state, for each of an inﬁnity of word-sequences, whether it’s a grammatical 
sentence or not. This will be done, not by consulting a sentence-list, but by 
prediction. The general deﬁnition forces us to make predictions about word-
sequences we had never even thought about or encountered before. This in turn 
means that, in describing an inﬁnite language, we cannot say that a particular 
sequence of words is not a grammatical sentence of the language without simul-
taneously explaining why it isn’t.
This was not done for Justen. In listing the ‘grammatical sentences’ of Justen, 
we didn’t deﬁne what it was for something to be a Justen sentence. This, as we 
saw, was not necessary. In fact, it is not even possible. The idea of ‘knowing how 
to construct a sentence’ is completely inappropriate in the context of Justen. 
In the ﬁrst place, you can only construct something if that thing is complex, 
has structure. But the sentences of Justen are perfectly simple. In the second 
place, you can only ‘know how to construct’ the things in a set by knowing 
general principles that apply to them. And this entails knowing not only what 
distinguishes them from each other but what they have in common. But only 
complex things (things that have parts) can have something in common and 
yet be different. Totally simple things can only be absolutely the same (identical) 
or absolutely different.
If a ‘speaker’ of Justen were to point out that we had overlooked the existence 
of an eleventh ‘sentence’, all we could do would be to shrug our shoulders and 
add it to the list. We would have learnt nothing more about what it was to be 
a Justen sentence. There’s no way we could have predicted or explained its 
existence because we have no general idea – no general deﬁnition – of what 
counts as a Justen sentence in the ﬁrst place.
We have a better general idea of what counts as a Justenand sentence, though, 
and this is expressed in the general statement (the rule) that formed the second 
part of its description. That rule gives a partial deﬁnition of what it is for some-
thing to be a grammatical sentence of Justenand. It is only partial, since we still 
don’t have any deﬁnition that covers the original ten sentences.
Grammars
At the risk of repetitiveness, I’ll summarise what seems to have emerged so far. 
The discussion of Justen is neatly summarised in the following statement:
 [8] A finite language is its own grammar.

CHAPTER 11 LANGUAGES, SENTENCES AND GRAMMARS
262
I’ve not used the term ‘grammar’ before in this chapter. Instead, I’ve talked 
about language description. But this is what a grammar is, the description of a 
language. In the terms established so far, then, the function of the grammar of 
a language is to specify which word sequences are, and which are not, in the 
inﬁnite set of its sentences.
Justen illustrates [8] as follows: If a language is a set of sentences, then Justen 
is exactly those ten ‘sentences’. A grammar describes a language. But, as we have 
seen, the grammar of Justen is the list of those ten sentences. The ten sentences 
of Justen, then, constitute both the grammar itself and the language itself. It is 
in this sense that Justen, being a ﬁnite language, is its own grammar.
It’s an odd sort of grammar, though, that doesn’t specify any kind of syntax 
for its language, one far removed from our ordinary conception of what a 
grammar is. And this is pretty well what is said in [8]. Essentially, there is no 
real grammar of Justen. In view of our conclusion that Justen can’t seriously be 
considered as a language, this is not surprising.
By contrast, the discussion of natural languages and their grammars can be 
summarised as follows.
(a) A natural language is an inﬁnite set of sentences.
(b) The description of a language (the grammar of a language) states which are, 
and which are not, in the inﬁnite set of its sentences.
(c) It is the complexity of natural language sentences (the fact that they have 
structure) that makes it possible to construct an inﬁnity of sentences, and 
it is the inﬁnity of natural languages that makes a general deﬁnition of 
‘sentence’ necessary in order to achieve what is described in (b) above.
(d) Equally, it’s the fact that the sentences of a natural language are complex 
that allows each different sentence to have more or less in common with 
every other different sentence.
(e) And it is the fact that the sentences of a language do have more or less in 
common with every other different sentence that makes it possible to state 
general principles (to formulate rules) about them.
(f) The complexity of natural language sentences, then, makes a general 
deﬁnition of ‘sentence’ both possible and necessary.
(g) In conclusion, the ideal envisioned here is that a grammar is the description 
of a language by means of a general deﬁnition of ‘sentence’ in that language. 
The deﬁnition takes the form of a set of rules. It has two interrelated 
functions: (i) it admits (or deﬁnes) as a sentence whatever conforms to the 
rules, excluding whatever does not, and (ii) gives a structural description 
of whatever it admits as a sentence. These are connected, for the grammar 
admits a sentence only in virtue of assigning a structural description to it. 

 
GRAMMARS
263
Furthermore, by reference to the general deﬁnition of sentence embodied in 
the grammar, we can expect to derive explanations of the ungrammaticality 
of non-sentences.
I alluded earlier to the idea that the enterprise of describing a language is 
the enterprise of describing a mental capacity. Chomsky’s suggestion is that this 
internal capacity is constituted by a grammar. In ‘knowing’ (or having) a lan-
guage, a speaker ‘knows’ (or has) an internal grammar, a set of rules constituting 
the deﬁnition of ‘sentence’ in that language. And when we, as linguists, attempt 
to describe a language, we are attempting to model the speaker’s knowledge 
of language by formulating a grammar that corresponds as closely as possible 
to the mind-internal grammar of the speaker of that language. (It is actually 
slightly misleading to talk just of ‘speakers of a language’ here. ‘Possessors of a 
language’ would be better, since it is possible to have a language without being 
able actually to speak it. Stroke victims and victims of total paralysis are an 
example.)
The main thrust behind Chomsky’s thinking here is that language (and thus 
the notion of ‘sentence’ deﬁned by the grammar) is a wholly mental (internal) 
phenomenon. It does not exist externally to or independently of internal 
‘knowledge’ of it. This is all very abstract, so I’ll give a concrete illustration 
of what is at issue here. Further Exercise 4 of Chapter 10 invited the reader to 
consider the differences between three sentences, two of which I represent here.
 [9] I wonder who the men expected to see them.
[10] I wonder how the men expected to see them.
The two sentences are radically different. You can get an idea of the difference 
by asking yourself whether them can refer to the men or not. Having satisﬁed 
yourself as to the differences, reﬂect on this. This book has been concerned 
with what is involved in the analysis of sentences. Now, a common view of 
sentences is that they are the sort of (mind-external) thing you can actually see 
on the page (a view implied by regarding sentences as things that begin with a 
capital letter and end with a full stop). As a possessor of the language, you know 
just how different the relevant sentences are. But look at [9] and [10] again. 
What difference between [9] and [10] is actually there to be SEEN? Hardly 
anything. Simply, the letter w has hopped over the h and the o. That simple 
visible difference can hardly be held responsible for the intricate interpretative 
differences between the two sentences. The linguistic difference doesn’t consist 
in the difference in position of the letter w. Someone capable only of identify-
ing that typographical difference could stare at those letter sequences for ever 
without forming the merest idea of the linguistic (grammatical) differences so 
important to you as a possessor of the language.

CHAPTER 11 LANGUAGES, SENTENCES AND GRAMMARS
264
The point I am drawing your attention to here is simply this. The external, 
visible, difference between [9] and [10] is exhaustively described by saying that 
the letter w is the eighth letter in [9] but the tenth letter in [10]. Since this state-
ment, although entirely accurate, completely fails even to touch on the crucial 
linguistic differences between two sentences of your language, we must conclude 
that in analysing linguistic expressions such as sentences, we are not analysing 
anything that is there to be seen on the page. Indeed, we are not analysing any-
thing that is external to your mentally constituted possession of the language. 
In considering the linguistic differences, you looked inwards and consulted your 
mentally constituted grammar.
A caveat is in order here. You need to bear in mind that, when Chomsky 
suggests that language does not exist externally to or independently of internal 
‘knowledge’ of it, he is emphatically not saying that language (or linguistic expres-
sions such as sentences) is in any sense unreal. Quite the contrary. Linguistic 
expressions (the grammars in terms of which they are deﬁned) are real enough, 
believe me: the linguistic difference (i.e. the internally constituted ‘knowledge’ 
of the difference) between Flick the switch or the machine will explode and Flick 
the switch and the machine will explode might one day have the very real effect of 
saving lives.
Grammars and sentence analysis
How do these very general considerations relate to the analyses discussed 
in previous chapters? You might be forgiven if at some point in your reading 
of those chapters you had asked yourself whether phrase markers were the 
be-all-and-end-all of syntax. You might be forgiven for thinking, ‘OK, so 
now I know how to draw a plausible phrase marker. Where do we go from 
here?’
We have seen what phrase markers can do. They provide explicit descriptions 
of sentences in terms of category, function, and constituency. Descriptions of 
sentences, whether given in the form of phrase markers or some equivalent 
notation (e.g. labelled brackets), are an important part of language-description. 
But they are not the whole story. Your reading of this chapter should have given 
you an idea of what phrase markers, in themselves, cannot do.
For example, you know that [11] does not represent a (grammatical) sentence 
of your language.
[11] *Stream a beside sunbathed Sam.
Nothing I have said so far in this book, however, prevents us assigning it a 
phrase marker, [12] for example:

 
GRAMMARS AND SENTENCE ANALYSIS
265
[12] 
 
In fact, there is nothing that obliges us to give it that phrase marker even.
I’ve suggested that, to describe a natural language, a deﬁnition is required of 
what it is to be a (grammatical) sentence of the language. And I’ve suggested 
that, if correct, such a deﬁnition would, automatically and simultaneously, pre-
dict which are the grammatical sentences and which are not; it would describe 
the grammatical sentences, and explain the ungrammaticality of non-sentences. 
In other words, if you want to predict that [11] is not a grammatical S in your 
language, nor Stream a beside sunbathed a grammatical VP, nor stream a beside 
a grammatical PP, nor stream a a grammatical NP, you must explain why not 
and, in order to explain why not, you must describe (by means of rules) what 
does count as a grammatical S, VP, PP, NP . . . in your language.
While phrase markers describe sentences, they don’t, in themselves, give 
an indication of what it is to be a sentence; hence they don’t, in themselves, 
make any predictions, or give any explanations. Ultimately, then, we must make 
the connection between the phrase markers on the one hand and, on the 
other, the rules that constitute the deﬁnition of what it is to be a grammatical 
sentence.
This is a natural connection to make. It is clear from the discussion of this 
chapter that the rules of the grammar must be expressed in terms of syntactic 
categories and how they are structured into sentences. After all, it’s the com-
plexity of natural language sentences (i.e. all that we understand by their having 
structure) that makes such rules both possible and necessary. And the descrip-
tions given in previous chapters are expressed in phrase markers in just these 
terms. This suggests that the rules should be formulated in such a way that they, 
in some sense, create phrase markers as their descriptions of sentences, so that, in 
admitting a sequence of words as a grammatical sentence, the rules assign it a 
descriptive phrase marker.
s
VP
NP
PP 
VP 
name
NP 
P 
V 
Sam
[past]
NOM 
DET 
beside
N 
ART 
sunbathed
stream 
a

CHAPTER 11 LANGUAGES, SENTENCES AND GRAMMARS
266
Phrase markers, in themselves, then, are just a beginning. A variety of ques-
tions now present themselves. The most general and obvious one is: What are 
the rules governing the construction of phrase markers? But there are others, 
among them: What are the best rules? And what counts as ‘best’ in this context? 
Given that the rules will be formulated in terms of syntactic categories, what 
syntactic categories do we need to recognise? Can everything we want to say 
about sentences be expressed in phrase markers? Can everything we want to 
say about each sentence be expressed in a single phrase marker?
Of course, it will have occurred to you that, although no explicit mention 
was made of rules in the preceding chapters, the analyses suggested there are 
not just arbitrary; in suggesting them, I have been guided implicitly by general 
principles. In asking ‘What are the rules?’, then, we are concerned with laying 
bare those general principles, with making them fully explicit, and with whether 
those are the best general principles available.
Such questions, and the thinking that leads up to them, open up the prospect 
of a rich and extremely ambitious method of language description. When 
a grammar is conceived of in the terms outlined in this chapter, it’s called a 
generative grammar. In giving a general deﬁnition of ‘sentence’ for a language, 
the grammar is said to ‘generate’ the sentences of that language. In the Further 
Reading section that follows, I brieﬂy discuss more detailed introductions to 
the enterprise of generative grammar. Here I’ve been concerned to give an idea 
of the kind of thinking that gives rise to that enterprise, and to place the phrase 
marker descriptions within a more general context. Of course, a conclusion that 
consists of questions like those above is something of a cliff-hanger. If you feel 
this, I have at least succeeded in whetting your appetite.
Finally, why bother? Why is it so important to formulate the rules of natural 
languages in a fully explicit manner? After all, we all speak one language or 
another without bother. Why not leave it at that?
There are two related answers to this. The ﬁrst takes us back to comments 
made in the Introduction. It is precisely the fact that we all speak (and, more 
mysteriously, acquire) a language without bother that gives this enterprise its 
interest and importance. There is a sense in which you know the rules of 
your language. This must be so, since you are capable of making an inﬁnite 
number of judgements as to what is and what is not a grammatical sentence of 
your language. But the sense in which you know these rules is different from 
the sense in which you know the rules of chess, know how to read music, make 
zabaglione, or drive a car. You know (and acquired) the rules of your language 
implicitly, as if by instinct. The job of the generative grammarian of a lan-
guage is to describe what its speakers implicitly and instinctively know about 
that language; in other words, to make explicit what it is that speakers know in 
knowing their language.

 
GRAMMARS AND SENTENCE ANALYSIS
267
Second, the discussion above might have given the impression that the 
grammarian ﬁrst of all decides what the most appropriate descriptions of 
sentences are and then goes to work on the rules that govern the construction 
of those descriptions. It is not quite like this, however. There is no guarantee 
that, when we attempt to state the rules in the best possible way and as explicitly 
as possible, we won’t want to revise our ideas as to what the best descriptions 
are. Quite the opposite in fact: it is by attempting to formulate a systematic and 
fully explicit set of rules for a language that we can expect to gain new insights 
into its structure – that is, new insights into what it is that a speaker knows in 
knowing that language.

268
 Further reading
There is a wide range of texts on descriptive English grammar and on linguistics in 
general. The following is a small selection of those appropriate as further reading in con-
nection with the present text, which has been inﬂuenced both by a descriptive English 
grammar tradition and by the theoretical perspective of generative grammar.
Bas Aarts’ English Syntax and Argumentation should be easy to follow after reading 
the present text. Although not exactly a textbook, Jim McCawley’s monumental The 
Syntactic Phenomena of English offers an advanced, in-depth, and fascinating rummage 
through the language by an acute observer of it.
Apart from my assumption of some correlation between constituent structure and 
meaning, little has been said about meaning. This was particularly marked in the dis-
cussion of verbs. Leech’s Meaning and the English Verb, though venerable, is an excellent 
short introduction.
Geoff Poole’s Syntactic Theory is a good and not too lengthy introduction to gener-
ative syntactic theory, using mainly (but not exclusively) examples from English. For a 
more general but quite detailed introduction to generative linguistics, I can recommend 
Andrew Radford et al.’s Linguistics: an Introduction.
There are two big reference grammars that should be mentioned. Quirk et al.’s 
A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language is a standard reference work on 
descriptive English grammar, offering a wealth of detail on the structures mentioned here 
and lots more besides. The verb sub-categorisation of my Chapter 4 is based on theirs. A 
more recent (and even bigger) reference grammar, and one more explicitly informed by 
generative grammar, is Rodney Huddleston and Geoff Pullum’s The Cambridge Grammar 
of the English Language. These are not textbooks. Furthermore (and, unfortunately, this 
is something that pervades descriptive English grammar) they differ in certain aspects of 
their terminology, both from each other and from the present text.
More generally, I can recommend Stephen Pinker’s The Language Instinct, which 
is entertaining and intriguing. On Chomsky’s conception of language, I recommend 
Neil Smith’s Chomsky: Ideas and ideals. Of Chomsky’s own work, The Architecture of 
Language is short and accessible. Only slightly longer is his On Nature and Language.
Aarts, B. (2008) English Syntax and Argumentation. 3rd edition. Palgrave Publishers. 
Chomsky, N. (2000) The Architecture of Language. Oxford University Press.
Chomsky, N. (2002) On Nature and Language. Cambridge University Press.
Huddleston, R. and Pullum, G. (2002) The Cambridge Grammar of the English 
Language. Cambridge University Press.
Leech, G. (1971) Meaning and the English Verb. Longman.
McCawley, J. (1998) The Syntactic Phenomena of English. Chicago University Press.

 
FURTHER READING
269
Pinker, S. (1994) The Language Instinct. Penguin.
Poole, G. (2010) Syntactic Theory. 2nd edition. Palgrave Publishers.
Quirk, R., S. Greenbaum, G. Leech, and J. Svartvik (1985) A Comprehensive 
Grammar of the English Language. Longman.
Radford, A., Atkinson, M., Britain, D., Clahsen, H., and Spencer, A. (1999) 
Linguistics: an Introduction. Cambridge University Press.
Smith, N. (1999) Chomsky: Ideas and ideals. Cambridge University Press.

270
abbreviated clausal analysis (ACA), 172– 4
abstract noun, 182–3
acceptability, 96
 see also grammaticality
accusative see objective case
active voice, 119
active vs. passive sentences, 119 –21, 125– 8, 
179, 226 –7
adjective (A), 52–3
 characteristic endings, 52
 comparative and superlative, 52
 complement of, within AP, 181–2, 
232–3
 co-ordinate, 58 –9
 gradable, 52–3, 66, 147, 148
 non-gradable, 52–3
 quantifying, 146 –7
adjective phrase (AP), 33, 53 – 4, 57– 8
 complement of A in, 181–2, 232–3
 as complement of intensive verb, 72–3
 as post-modifier, 154 –5
adjunct adverbial, 86 –7
 vs. complement, 88 –90, 91–2, 166 – 8
 discussion of in-text exercises, 100 –2
 exercises, 102–10
 mobility of, 91–2
 as modifier, 87–91, 97–100
 see also VP-adverbial
 adjunct in NP, 167–70, 204 – 6
adverb (Adv), 52–3
 degree (DEG), 52–3, 54, 58 –9, 200
 general, 54
adverb phrase (AdvP), 54, 58
 as adjunct adverbial, 86 –7
 wh- expressions and, 201
adverbial, 86 –7
 and auxiliary verb, 122–5
 conjunct, 99 –100
 disjunct, 97– 8
 as function, 88
 finite clause as, 186 –7
 non-finite clause as, 233 – 4
 by-phrase as, 126
 see also adjunct adverbial; sentence 
adverbial; VP-adverbial
adverbial clause, 186 –7
after, 185 – 6, 187
agent, 241
agreement see subject-verb agreement
although, 186, 187
ambiguity, 18, 75, 94, 152
and, 256, 259
appear, 181
appositive clause see non-restrictive 
relative clause
article (ART), 142
 definite (the), 46, 142, 210
 indefinite (a/an), 47, 142
as if, 186, 187
ask, 230, 236, 241
asterisk, 7, 11
auxiliary verb, Chapter 6
 and adverbial, 122–5
 constructions that depend on, 125 –32
 discussion of in-text exercises, 133 – 4
 exercises, 135 – 40
 finite vs. non-finite, 112–14
 vs. lexical verb, 65 – 6, 111–25
 modal (MOD), 111, 114, 115 –16, 118, 
119, 120, 225 – 6
 in negative sentences, 114, 128 –30
 passive (PASS), 119 –21
 in passive sentences, 125 – 8
 perfect (PERF), 116 –18, 122
 primary, 111
 progressive (PROG), 118 –19, 120, 121, 
124 –5
 in questions, 130–1
 and structure of VP, 65, 121–3
 tensed, 66, 112–14, 115 –20, 125, 128 –31
auxiliary-fronting, 131, 175, 176, 197–201, 
202
 Index
a/an see indefinite article

 
INDEX
271
bare infinitive verbs, 225
‘basic VP’, 66, 67
be, 117
 always behaves as an auxiliary, 132
 as copula, 72, 118 –19, 148, 181, 200, 238
 as passive auxiliary, 119 –21, 126
 as progressive auxiliary, 118 –19, 120, 
121, 124 –5
because, 186 –7
before, 185 – 6, 187
brackets, labelled, 172–3, 264
but, 56
C1 and C2 see complementiser positions
case
 objective (accusative), 68 –9, 70, 200, 
229, 240
 subjective (nominative), 68 –9
category, 6, 8, 10, 24, 44 – 64
 co-ordinate phrase, 55 – 60
 diagrams for in-text exercises, 60
 exercises, 60 – 4
 and function, 29 –31
 of head of a phrase, 32
 lexical vs. phrasal, 45, 48 –52
 recursive, 149 –50
 words can belong to more than one, 66
 see also specific categories
Chomsky, Noam, 254, 258, 264
clausal subject, 176 – 8
clause
 abbreviated clausal analysis, 172–3
 adverbial, 186 – 8, 234
 interrogative, 176, 179, 229 –30
 lexical verb essential to, 172
 main, 172
 and non-finite verb, 224 – 8
 superordinate vs. subordinate, 172
 see also non-finite clause; subordinate 
clause; that-clause; wh-clause; 
whether-clause
co-indexing, 224, 235
common noun, 46 –7
comparative, 52, 147
complement
 of A, 3, 181–2, 232
 vs. adjunct adverbial, 88 –90, 91–2, 166 – 8
 clausal, 179 – 86, 205 – 8, 232– 45
 head-complement relation, 36 – 8, 54
 vs. modifier, 71, 88, 92
 of A, 154 –5
 of N, 182– 4, 205 – 8, 235
 of P, 184 – 6, 233
 of V, 66 –78, 121, 179 – 81, 236 – 43
 VP as, 66 – 8, 179 – 81
complementiser, 130 –1
 after, until, before and since as? 185
 and ellipsis, 174 –5
 for, 229
 and fronted auxiliary, 130 –1, 175, 176
 and non-finite clause, 228 –31
 overt vs. covert, 240
 vs. subordinating conjunction, 186 –7
 that and whether, 174 – 86, 199 –200
complementiser positions
 C1, 198 –200, 201, 203, 205, 208, 228 –9
 C2, 198 –200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 208, 
229 –32
complex sentence, 171–2
complex transitive verb, 74 – 6, 77, 127– 8
complexity, 6 –7, 171–2, 262
compound noun, 148
compound sentence, 60, 171–2
conditional adverbial clause, 186
conjunct adverbial, 99 –100
conjunction
 and, 256, 258
 subordinating, 186 –7, 199, 234
constituents, 6, 15
 in co-ordinate phrase, 59
 establishing, 10 –15, 15 –16, 18
 exercises, 19 –23
 and function, 7– 8
 immediate, 7– 8, 24 – 8
 sisters, 31–2, 37– 8
constituent question, 196
 see also wh-question 
 context, 95 –97
controlled vs. free, 224, 229, 230, 231, 233
co-ordinate sentence, 60, 172
co-ordination (co-ordinate phrase), 55 – 60
 lexical vs. phrasal, 58, 59, 60
co-ordinator, 56, 59
copula be, 72, 118 –19, 148, 181, 200, 238
count noun, 47, 143
covert subject, 223 – 4, 229 –31, 233, 234 –5, 
238, 239 – 41, 242
 see also overt subject

INDEX
272
dare, 236, 241
daughter, 31–2
definite article, 46, 142, 210
definite pronoun, 48
definiteness, 142, 145
degree adverb (DEG), 52–3, 54, 58 –9, 200
demonstrative (DEM), 48, 142
dependency, 67
 and function, 31– 8
 one-way, 33, 35, 3637
 two-way, 35 –7, 67
determiner (DET), 141– 4
 empty, 143, 145, 147, 168 –9
 possessive, 143 – 4, 235
 pre-determiner, 145 – 6, 156
 pronoun as, 145 – 6, 156
 vs. quantifying adjective, 146 –7
 wh-determiner, 197
direct object, 68 –75, 77, 87– 8, 94, 179 – 80
disjunct adverbial, 97– 8
distribution, 44 –5
ditransitive verb, 70 –1, 75, 77, 179
 effect of PASS on, 128
 and ellipsis, 95, 96
 and non-finite clause, 236
do, 28, 111, 114, 128 –30, 131, 132
do so, 90, 121, 138, 164 –5
domination, 17, 31, 60, 146, 148, 149, 169, 
198, 205, 232
echo-question, 216
ellipsis, 95 –7, 121, 207
 ellipted head, 156
embedded sentence, 172
 see also subordinate clause
emphasis, 130
empty determiner, 143, 145
expect, 241–2
expletive
 it, 26, 177– 8, 181, 182, 184, 230, 233, 
241
 there, 26 –7, 241–2
extraposed subject (ES), 176 – 8, 181, 182, 
184, 232–3
feature
 sub-categorisation, 73, 75, 96 –7
 tense feature, 113
find (ditrans vs. complex) 75 – 6
finite vs. non-finite verb, 112–14, 115, 117, 
224
for (complementiser), 229
force, 236, 241
free vs. controlled, 224, 229, 230, 231, 233
Friendly Head Principle (FHP), 155
fronting see auxiliary-fronting; wh-fronting
function, 8, 24 – 43
 complement, 35 –7
 co-ordinate phrase and, 59 – 60
 dependency and, 31– 8
 exercises, 38 – 43
 head, 32–7
 modifier, 32– 4
 subject and predicate, 24 –32
 summary, 37– 8
 see also modifier; complement
future time, 114, 115
gaps, 127– 8
 and relative clause, 207– 8
 and wh-clause, 197, 198, 200, 201–2, 203
 see also controlled vs. free
gender, 49
general adverb, 54
generative grammar, 266
genitive, 46, 143, 144
 see also possessive
gerund see ing- participle form
give, 116, 117
governed, 69gradable adjective, 42–3
 vs. participle, 148
grammar, 262– 8
 generative, 266
grammaticality, 1–3, 10, 254, 255, 258, 
261–3
 vs. acceptability, 96
have
 -ing participle form, 228, 234
 lexical vs. auxiliary, 116, 117–18, 132
 as perfect auxiliary (PERF), 116 –18, 122
head, 32, 37, 48 –9, 60
 in co-ordinate phrase, 55 – 6, 58
 ellipted, 156 –7
 Friendly Head Principle (FHP), 155
 head-complement relation, 36 – 8, 54
 modifier-head relation, 32–5, 36, 37, 
41–2

 
INDEX
273
hierarchical structure, 6, 7, 16
 and auxiliaries, 121–3
hope, 180
how, 18, 86, 196, 200, 201
 see also wh-question
idiomaticity, 102
idioms, 258
if, 186
immediate constituent, 7, 8 –9
immediately dominate, 17, 31, 149, 169
imperative, 64
indefinite article, 47, 142
indefinite pronoun, 48, 156
indefiniteness, 142, 143
index, 224
indirect object, 70 –1, 77, 236
infinitive particle to, 114, 115, 116, 225 – 6, 
232–3, 234, 237, 238 –9
infinitive verb, 224 – 6
inflection, 52–3, 66, 112
-ing participle form, 118, 120, 227– 8, 232, 
233, 234, 238 –9
intensive verb, 72– 4, 118, 126, 181
 see also copula be
interrogative clause, 176, 179, 229 –30
 see also question
interrogative pronoun, 48
 see also wh-question
intransitive verb, 69 –70, 77, 93, 126
irregular verb, 111, 112, 113, 117
it (expletive), 26, 177– 8, 181, 182, 184, 
230, 233, 241
its vs. it’s 144 (note)
language(s), 1–3, 253 – 67
 as collection of overlapping languages, 
255 – 6
 complexity, 6, 7, 262, 265
 describing, 256 – 61
 and grammar, 254, 255, 260 –1, 
262–7
 grammaticality, 1–3, 10, 96, 254, 255, 
258, 261–3
 infinite, 257– 61, 262
 as mental phenomenon, 258, 263
 natural, 258, 260, 262, 265, 266
 possession of, 263 – 4
 prediction, 261, 265
 rules, 259 – 60, 262–3, 265 –7
 as sets of sentences, 253 –5, 256 – 61, 262
lexical verb see also verb
 vs. auxiliary, 65 – 6, 111–25
 complement of, 66 –78
lexical vs. phrasal category see also category, 
48 –52
lexical vs. phrasal co-ordination, 60
location, 36, 55
 spatial vs. temporal, 54, 55
mass noun, 47, 143
meaning see also ambiguity; semantics, 
3, 15
mobility of adverbials, 91–2
modal (MOD), 111, 114, 115 –16, 118, 119, 
120, 225 – 6
modification (modifier), 32–3, 37
 adjunct adverbial as, 87–91, 97–100
 in AP, 53, 54, 58, 154 –5
 vs. complement, 71, 88, 92
 and dependency, 33, 35 – 6, 37
 NOM and, 146 –55
 in NP, 50, 51, 146 –9, 235
 optionality, 33, 37, 142
 post-modifier, 150 –5, 156
 PP as, 67, 71, 74, 76, 86
 pre-modifier, 146 –9, 152
 of pronoun, 155 –7
 proper noun and, 46, 47, 50, 57, 141, 
143, 260
 relative clause as, 204 –11
 in VP, 67, 86, 87– 8, 90, 92, 97–100
modifier-head relation, 32–5, 36, 37, 41–2
morphemes, 3, 258
morphology, 3, 113
mother, 31–2
must, 116
names (proper noun), 46, 47, 50, 57, 141, 
143, 260
need, 115, 116
negative particle, 114, 128 –30
negative sentence, 128 –30
no (quantifier), 142, 146
nodes
 labelling, 17
 non-branching in NP, 50 –2, 141
 relationships between, 31

INDEX
274
nominal (NOM), 141–2, 149 –50
 modified by relative clause, 206
 post-modifier in, 150 –5
 pre-modifier in, 146 –9
 and the pro-form one, 164 –70
nominative see subjective case
non-finite clause, 223 –52
 bare infinitive, 225
 as complement of V, 236 – 43
 complementiser and, 228 –31
 discussion of in-text exercises, 243 – 6
 exercises, 247–52
 vs. finite verb, 112–14, 115, 117, 224
 form, 223 –31
 function, 231– 43
 function of NP and, 239 – 41
 -ing participle form, 118, 227– 8, 234, 
238 –9
 non-finite verb, 224 – 8
 passive participle form, 120, 226 –7, 235
 to-infinitive, 115, 116, 225 – 6, 229, 232, 
233, 234, 237, 238, 239
non-restrictive relative clause, 208 –11
not, 128 –30
noun (N), 29, 45 – 8
 abstract, 182–3
 common, 46 –7
 compound, 148
 count vs. mass, 47, 143
 as noun phrase (NP), 50 –2
 as pre-modifier, 148
 proper, 46, 47, 50, 57, 141, 143, 260
noun phrase (NP), 29 –32, 38, 46, 48 –52
 as adverbial, 87
 complement of N in, 182– 4, 204 – 8, 
234 –5
 as complement to complex verb, 74 – 6
 as complement to ditransitive verb, 
70 –1
 as complement to transitive verb, 68 –9, 
72, 73
 co-ordinate, 55 – 8
 covert in non-finite clauses, 223 – 4, 238, 
239 – 41
 determiners in, 141– 4
 discussion of in-text exercises, 157– 60
 exercises, 160 – 4
 function in non-finite clause, 239 – 41
 modification of pronoun in, 155 –7
 modifier in, 50, 51, 146 –9, 235
 NOM and the pro-form one, 164 –70
 non finite clauses in, 235
 noun as, 50 –2
 post-modifiers in, 150 –5
 pre-determiners in, 145 – 6
 as predicative, 73 –76
 pre-modifiers in, 146 –9
 pronoun as, 56
 and relative clause, 204 – 8
 restrictive and non-restrictive clause in, 
208 –11
 structure, 141–70
 structure of NOM, 141–2, 149 –50
 that- and whether-clauses as, 179 – 80
noun-complement clauses, 182– 4, 204 – 8, 
236
 vs. relative clause, 204 – 6
number see plural; also singular numerals, 
49
object
 direct, 68 –75, 77, 87– 8, 94, 179 – 80
 indirect, 70 –1, 77, 236
 and non-finite clause, 240 –2
 and passive sentence, 126 – 8
 that- and whether-clauses as, 179 – 80
objective case (accusative), 68 –9, 70, 200, 
229, 240
object-predicative, 74 – 6
obligatory see optionality
one
 pro-NOM, 164 –70, 206
optionality, 11–12, 33, 35, 37, 50, 67, 71, 
88 –9, 178
 vs. ellipsis, 95 – 6
or, 56
overt subject in non-finite clause, 223 – 4, 
229, 232, 234, 237, 239, 240 –1
 see also covert subject
parenthesis, 209
participle
 -ing form, 118, 120, 227– 8, 232, 233, 
234, 238 –9
 passive, 120, 126, 147, 226 –7, 234
 perfect, 117, 118, 120
 progressive, 118 –19, 120, 228
participle phrase (PartP), 147– 8

 
INDEX
275
particle in phrasal verb, 93 –5
 infinitive to, 115, 116, 225 – 6, 232–3, 
234, 237, 238 –9
 negative, 128 –30
passive auxiliary be (PASS), 119 –21, 128
passive participle, 120, 126, 147, 226 –7, 
234
passive sentence, 119 –21, 125 – 8, 130
passive voice, 119
past participle
 passive, 120, 126, 147, 226 –7, 234
 perfect, 117, 118, 120
past tense, 66, 112, 113 –14
 and modal, 115 –16
 perfect auxiliary and, 116 –18
perfect auxiliary have (PERF), 116 –18, 
122
perfect participle, 117, 118, 120
person, 112–13, 116
 and verb be, 112–13
persuade, 179, 241
phonology, 3, 113
phrasal categories, 45, 48 –51, 60
phrasal verb, 93 –5
phrase, 10, 12–18, 34 –5
 vs. constituent, 9 –10, 12–13, 15 –18
 co-ordinate, 55 – 60
 and dependency, 35 – 6
 head of, 32, 60
 noun phrase and verb phrase, 29 –31
 participle phrase, 147– 8
 single word as, 51–2, 55
 see also adjective phrase; adverb phrase; 
prepositional phrase; verb phrase
phrase marker, 12–14, 30 –1, 38 –9, 40 –1, 
264 – 6
 abbreviated clausal analysis, 172–3
 features in, 73 – 4, 75, 113, 264 – 6
 index/co-indexing in, 224, 235
 right-branching, 150 –2
 tree diagram, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13
 triangle, 16, 30
 see also nodes
plural see also number, 14, 47, 56
 count noun, 49, 143
possessive (POSS), 48, 142, 143 – 4, 235
possessive determiner, 143 – 4, 146, 235
post-modifier, 150 –5, 156
pre-determiner, 145 – 6, 156
predicate
 subject and, 24 –9, 38, 40, 176 –7
 verb phrase as, 29 –32
predicative, 72
 vs. direct object, 72–3
 object-predicative, 74 –5
 subject-predicative, 73 – 4, 126 –7, 147, 
180 –1
prediction, 206, 261, 265
prefer, 240, 241
pre-modifier, 146 –9, 152
preposition (P), 54 –5
 after, until, before, since, 185 – 6
 complement of, within PP, 184 – 6, 233
 vs. subordinating conjunction, 186 –7
prepositional complement, 76 –7
prepositional phrase (PP), 54 –5, 58, 59 – 60, 
184 – 6, 233
 as adjunct adverbial, 86 –7, 88, 89, 91, 93
 as complement, 76 –7
 as indirect object, 70 –1
 as modifier, 67, 71, 74, 76, 86
 as post-modifier, 150 – 4
 as subject-predicative, 74
prepositional verb, 76 –7, 94 –5
present tense, 66, 112, 113 –14
 and modal, 115 –16
primary auxiliary, 111, 115
pro-form, 90
 one, 164 –70, 206
progressive auxiliary be (PROG), 118 –19, 
120, 121, 124 –5
progressive participle, 118 –19, 120, 228
 vs.-ing participle, 228
promise, 179, 236, 241, 242
pro-NOM one, 164 –70, 206
pronoun, 29, 48, 49, 141
 accusative (in non-finite clause), 229, 240
 and clausal subject, 177
 definite, 48, 143
 determiner functioning as, 145 – 6
 indefinite, 48, 143, 156
 interrogative, 204
 modification of, 155 –7
 as noun phrase, 51
 number, 49, 113
 as pro-form, 90
 relative, 48, 203, 207
 sub-categories of, 48

INDEX
276
proper noun (name), 46, 47, 50, 57, 141, 
143, 260
property, 72–3
purpose, 186
quantifier (Q), 142, 146
quantifying adjective (QA), 146 –7
question
 auxiliary verb and, 130 –1
 constituent, 196
 echo, 216
 fronting the tensed auxiliary, 130 –1
 interrogative clause, 176, 179, 229 –30
 interrogative pronoun, 204
 whether clause as allusion to, 175 – 6
 wh-question, 13, 14 –15, 196 –202
 yes/no, 26 –7
question movement test, 26 – 8
recursion, 171
 sentential, 171– 4
recursive category, 149 –50
reflexive, 48
regular verb, 112, 117
relation
 head-complement relation, 36 – 8, 54
 modifier-head relation, 32–5, 36, 37, 
41–2
relative clause, 204 –11
 as adjunct in NP, 204 – 6
 non finite, 230 –1
 vs. noun complement clause, 204 –7
 omission of the wh-phrase, 207
 restrictive vs. non-restrictive, 208 –11
 and that, 207– 8
relative pronoun, 48
right-branching, 150 –2
rules, 260 –1, 262, 263, 265 –7
S adverbial see sentence adverbial 
Saussure, Ferdinand de, 258
S-bar (S’), 130 –1, 174, 197, 198, 199, 205
 when dominated by NP, 177, 179, 181
S-double-bar (S’’), 198, 199, 205
semantics, 3, 15
 see also ambiguity
sentence
 analysis, 8 –10
 as basis of language, 253 –5, 256 – 61, 262
 complex vs. compound, 171–2
 definition, 263 – 4
 embedded, 172
 and grammar, 263 – 8
 grammaticality, 1–3, 10, 96, 254, 255, 
258, 261–3
 negative, 114, 128 –30
 noun phrase and verb phrase, 29 –31
 passive, 119 –21, 125 – 8, 130
 simple, 24
 vs. utterance, 96
sentence adverbial (S adverbial), 97–100, 
123
sentential recursion, 171– 4
 see also subordinate clause
sequence, 11–14
since, 185 – 6, 187
singular, 14, 47, 49, 112–13
sister, 31–2, 37– 8
sister-of-N vs. sister-of-NOM, 167– 8, 206
sister-of-V vs. sister-of-VP, 90, 122, 167
stative verb, 228
structural ambiguity see ambiguity
structure, 6 –10, 16, 121–3, 261, 262
sub-categorisation
 ellipsis and, 95 –7
 features, 73, 75 – 6
 of noun, 46 – 8
 of pronoun, 48
 of verb, 67–78, 96 – 8, 180, 236 – 8, 240 –3
subject, 24 – 8
 and accusative case, 229, 240
 and C2 position, 231
 clausal, 176 – 8
 controlled vs. free, 224, 229, 230, 231, 
233
 covert, 223 – 4, 229 –31, 233, 234 –5, 238, 
239 – 41, 242
 ‘dummy,’ 177
 and ellipsis, 96 –7
 extraposed, 176 – 8, 181, 182, 184, 232–3
 and non-finite clause, 223 – 4, 226 –7, 
228, 229, 230 –1, 232– 4, 235, 238, 
240 –1, 242
 noun phrase as, 29 –32, 55
 and passive sentence, 126 – 8
 and predicate, 24 –9, 38, 40, 176 –7
subject-auxiliary inversion see see 
auxiliary-fronting

 
INDEX
277
subjective case (nominative), 68 –9
subject-predicative, 73 – 4, 126 –7, 147, 
180 –1
subject-verb agreement, 113, 116
subordinate clause, 171– 4
 complementisers that and whether, 
174 – 86, 199 –200
 discussion of in-text exercises, 
188 –91
 exercises, 191–5
 as subject, 176 – 8
 see also adverbial; non-finite clause; 
relative clause; wh-clause
subordinating conjunction, 186 –7
superlative, 52, 147
superordinate clause, 172–3, 229, 230, 
234, 235, 239
syntactic unit, 7, 15
tell, 230
tense, 111–12
 feature, 113
 modals and, 111, 115 –16, 118, 119, 
225
 negative sentence and auxiliary do, 
128 –30
 and non-finite clause, 225, 226, 227
 passive auxiliary be, 120
 perfect auxiliary have, 116 –18
 progressive auxiliary be, 118 –19, 120, 
121, 124 –5
 in questions, 130 –1
 and time, 114
that
 as complementiser, 174 – 6, 199 –200
 in relative clause, 207– 8
that-clause, 175, 176 – 86
 complement of A within AP, 181–2
 complement of N within NP, 182– 4, 
204 –5
 complement of P within PP, 184 – 6
 complement of V within VP, 179 – 81
 subject and extraposed subject, 176 – 8
 as subject-predicative, 180 –1
 vs. whether-clause, 175 – 6
the, see definite article
there (expletive), 26 –7, 241–2
third person singular, 112–13, 116
time vs. tense, 114, 117
to (infinitive particle), 115, 116, 225 – 6, 
232–3, 234, 237, 238 –9
transitive verb, 68 –9, 73, 74, 77
 and clausal object, 180
 and ellipsis, 97
 and non-finite clause, 236 –7
 and passive sentence, 126 – 8
tree diagram see phrase marker
triangle, 16, 30, 172
unless, 186, 187
until, 54, 185 – 6, 187
utterance vs. sentence, 96
verb (V), 29, 67–70
 discussion of in-text exercises, 78
 exercises, 79 – 85
 finite vs. non-finite, 112–14, 115, 117, 
224
 infinitive, 224 – 6
 inflection, 66, 112
 irregular vs. regular, 111, 112, 113, 117
 lexical vs. auxiliary, 65 – 6, 111–12, 
114 –15
 main, 172
 phrasal, 93 –5
 stem, 112–13, 116
 sub-categories, 67–78, 96 – 8, 180, 236 – 8, 
240 –3
 subject-verb agreement, 113, 116
 Type I and Type II, 240 –3
 see also auxiliary verb; non-finite clause; 
participle
verb phrase (VP), 29–32, 37, 38, 65
 and adjunct adverbial, 87–91, 97–100
 auxiliary verb in structure of, 65, 121–5
 ‘basic’, 66, 67
 complement of V within, 66 –78, 
179 – 81
 do so as replacement for, 90, 121, 138, 
164 –5
 intransitive verb as, 69 –70, 77
 levels of, 87–91
 modifier in, 67, 86, 87– 8, 90, 92, 97–100
 and NOM, 165
 quantifying adjective in, 147
 single word as, 52
VP-adverbial, 86 –7, 97–9, 100
 see also adjunct adverbial

INDEX
278
wh-clause, 196 –223
 discussion of in-text exercises, 211–16
 exercises, 216 –22
 to-infinitive, 229
 main vs. subordinate, 202–3
 omission of wh-phrase, 207
 relative, 204 – 6
 restrictive vs. non-restrictive, 208 –10
 subordinate interrogative, 202–3
 see also wh-fronting; wh-question
wh-determiner, 197
whether-clause, 175, 176 – 86
 complement of A within AP, 181–2
 complement of N within NP, 182– 4
 complement of P within PP, 184 – 6
 complement of V within VP, 179 – 81
 vs. fronted wh-expression, 199 –200
 subject, and extraposed subject, 176 – 8
 as subject-predicative, 180 –1
wh-expression, 199 –200, 201
 omission of, 207
wh-fronting, 197–202, 203, 204, 207
 of degree adverb, 200
 of determiner, 197
 in non-finite clause, 229 –32
 of phrase vs. word, 197, 200
 of subject, 201
wh-question, 13, 14 –15, 196 –202
wh-subject, 201
will, 115 –16
yes/no question, 26 –7, 28, 176, 196, 197

