Copyright © 2007 by the Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for 
commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first 
page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on 
servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request 
permissions from Permissions Dept, ACM Inc., fax +1 (212) 869-0481 or e-mail 
permissions@acm.org. 
APGV 2007, Tübingen, Germany, July 26–27, 2007. 
© 2007 ACM 978-1-59593-670-7/07/0007 $5.00
 
21
2D texture mapping: real-time perceptual surface roughening
Sylvia C. Pont∗
Helmholtz Institute
Utrecht University
Pradeep Sen†
Advanced Graphics Lab
University of New Mexico
Pat Hanrahan‡
Stanford University
Figure 1: Cylinders with an orthogonally-projected plaster texture. In the ﬁrst cylinder the texture is only warped, while in the second we
have added diffuse shading as is conventionally done for texture-mapped Lambertian surfaces. In the third, the blackshot was modiﬁed, and
in the last one the luminance values were remapped according to the texture-contrast function (2 1
2D texture mapping) presented in this paper.
Out of the four approaches, ours gives the best sense of surface relief.
Abstract
We applied fundamental perceptual and physico-mathematical
studies to a fast method for luminance remapping of 2D texture
maps which enhances perceived surface roughness in comparison
with conventional 2D texture mapping. The fundamental physi-
cal mechanism underlying the method is the fact that texture con-
trast increases as the incident illumination tends towards grazing
for rough matte surfaces, actually “exploding” near the shadow
edge [Pont and Koenderink 2005]. A psychophysical study by Ho
et al. [Ho et al. 2006] conﬁrmed that human observers use texture
contrast as a cue for relief-depth or surface roughness. Thus, 2D
texture-mapped objects will appear to have a rougher surface if the
texture contrast is increased as a function of the local illumination
angle. In particular, we increase the bidirectional texture contrast
in close accordance with the contrast gradients measured for real
objects with rough surfaces.
The method presented works well
for random textures of locally-matte surfaces if the original tex-
ture does not have a contrast that is too high. This modiﬁcation is
in addition to the usual attenuation of the surface irradiance due to
the angle of the incident illumination and the computational costs
of the technique are similar to that of conventional diffuse shading.
This low cost makes it straightforward to implement the technique
with real-time shaders which allow interactive rendering on modern
graphics hardware.
CR Categories:
I.3.7 [Computing Methodologies]: Computer
Graphics—Three-Dimensional Graphics and Realism; J.2 [Com-
puter Applications]: Physical sciences and engineering; J.4 [Com-
puter Applications]: Social and behavioral sciences
Keywords: BTF, BTCF, texture, material, luminance remapping
∗e-mail: s.c.pont@phys.uu.nl
†e-mail: psen@ece.unm.edu
‡e-mail: hanrahan@cs.stanford.edu
1
Introduction
Currently 2D texture rendering techniques are still widely used in
real-time rendering systems in which realism is desirable, but the
computational costs have to be kept within limits. The standard
technique of 2D texture mapping and shading which involves the
warping of “wallpaper textures” onto a surface followed by the
modulation of the texture values by a parameter dependendent on
the direction of the incident illumination results in renderings in
which the surface relief appears to be much less than that of real
objects with rough surfaces [Dana et al. 1999], as shown in the
second image of Figure 1. Texture maps that represent rough sur-
faces cannot be represented properly due to the illumination- and
view-dependent effects of shading, shadowing, interreﬂections and
differential foreshortening. However, in this paper we present a
method called “2 1
2D texture mapping,” which approximates local
texture shading and shadowing effects using a simple modiﬁcation
of the luminance values of a single standard 2D texture map. This
results in the illusion of a surface with enhanced 3D relief (which is
why we call it “2 1
2D,” as in Marr’s 2 1
2D sketch [Marr and Poggio
1983]), at a computational cost which is similar to that of conven-
tional shading.
The phenomenon that grazing illumination brings out surface relief
has been used for a long time by artists, for instance by photog-
raphers to capture surface relief of matte rough surfaces [Adams
1981; Hunter and Fuqua 1990], in artwork to draw or paint rough
surfaces [Baxandall 1995; Jacobs 1988], in art historical research
to analyse brush strokes [Bomford et al. 1990], etc. Surprisingly,
this texture-contrast effect has not yet been applied in rendering
69

systems, though it can be implemented via simple and fast lumi-
nance remapping. This will result in an enhancement of the illusion
of surface depth relief, which is currently simulated in real-time
rendering systems by using bump-mapping [Blinn 1978]. In bump-
mapping, the surface normal at every position of the object is per-
turbed by values accessed from a texture map. When the perturbed
normals are used during shading, they create the appearance of a
bumpy or wrinkled surface.
For real-world objects with rough surfaces, the appearance of their
texture depends strongly on illumination direction and viewing an-
gle. In particular, for locally-matte materials, their roughness or
surface relief will appear most clearly for grazing illumination. Us-
ing a simple micro-facet model that assumes locally-Lambertian
reﬂectance, Pont and Koenderink found that the bidirectional tex-
ture contrast increases monotonically as a function of the illumina-
tion angle to arbitrarily high values (“exploding”) near the shadow
edge [Pont and Koenderink 2005]. Ho et al. [Ho et al. 2006] stud-
ied human perception of surface roughness and found that surfaces
appear to be more rough for more shallow illumination due to in-
creased texture contrast (a measure of the width of the luminance
histogram), average luminance (a measure of the position(s) of the
mode(s) in the histogram), standard deviation of the luminance (an-
other measure of the histogram width) and blackshot (number of
shadowed pixels). The average luminance as a function of illu-
mination and viewing angles is described by the bidirectional re-
ﬂectance distribution function (BRDF) [Nicodemus et al. 1977],
and is usually simulated by Lambertian shading in 2D texture map-
ping for real-time applications. The increase in blackshot as a func-
tion of illumination direction can be simulated by simple clipping
of the luminance values depending on illumination angle. Modiﬁ-
cation of the histogram width (e.g. contrast) as a function of local-
illumination direction may result in blackshot modiﬁcation, but will
also inﬂuence all other pixels in the image.
The micro-facet model of rough, opaque, locally-Lambertian sur-
faces used in the algorithm of Pont et al. [Pont and Koenderink
2005] assumed a distribution of attitudes which was bounded by
micro-facets with an attitude ∆θ. Those facets, which deviate max-
imally from the global or ﬁducial normal on the surface, give rise to
local illuminance values which differ from the ﬁducial value cos θ
according to cos(θ ± ∆θ). The texture contrast was deﬁned as
(max −min)/(2 ﬁducial) for which it was found that the contrast
increases with illumination angle and actually exploded near the
terminator: c = sin ∆θ tan θ. Results agreed with texture contrast
gradients of real textures, for which the minimum, maximum and
ﬁducial values were deﬁned to be the 5%, 95% and 50% percentiles
(deﬁning the ﬁducial to be the median), in order to get robust mea-
surements.
2
21
2D texture mapping
Conventional
2D
texture
mapping
follows
t′(x, y, θ)
=
t(x, y) cos θ where t(x, y) is the gray-value of a pixel at po-
sition (x, y) in the original texture image and t′(x, y, θ) is the
gray-value of the texture-mapped pixel.
The global luminance
gradient follows Lambertian shading as a function of the local illu-
mination angle with respect to the local surface normal θ [Lambert
1760]. It is clear that in this case, the texture contrast c′ is indepen-
dent of the illumination angle: c′ = (max cos θ −min cos θ)/(2
median cos θ) = (max −min)/(2 median) = c.
This might
well be one of the main reasons why surfaces rendered using
conventional 2D texture mapping techniques appear “ﬂat.”
Our
2 1
2D texture mapping can be applied in several ways. Based on
our micro facet model we can specify one version of the technique
with the following equation:
t′(x, y, θ) = t(x, y) cos(θ−ssign[t(x, y)−m] arccos t(x, y) −m
m
).
In this case, m is the median luminance of the original texture and
s is a scalar value with which the magnitude of the effect can be
scaled (in Figure 1 s = .09). The cos θ shading term now includes
an arccos term which mimics the deviation of the local facet at-
titude from the ﬁducial one (∆θ for the minimum and maximum
in the micro-facet model). After this illumination-dependent lumi-
nance remapping, we clamp the luminance values to the range 0
to 255. The exact parameters of the algorithm can be varied in or-
der to change the exact shape of the resulting contrast function, the
amount of stretching of the gray-values around the ﬁducial value,
the choice of ﬁducial value, the baseline contrast, etc., as long as
the contrast increases steeply towards the shadow edge.
In Figure 3, we show textures of Gaussian random surfaces and
their gray-value histograms for real surfaces, for conventional 2D
textures maps, and for 2 1
2D texture mapped surfaces. The two ren-
dered sets were mapped with the images of the 40◦real surfaces.
For all three cases, we show results for low-relief and high-relief
surfaces in the ﬁrst and second rows. It is clear that the histograms
for the real and 2 1
2D texture mapped images show bimodal struc-
tures that are characteristic for real rough surfaces [Dana et al.
1999], in contradistinction to those of the conventionally mapped
textures. These bimodal structures are due to a combination of a
shadow and a diffuse mode. At the right of the images in ﬁgure 3
we show the texture contrast functions for the Gaussian surfaces.
The upper graphs show the median (black line), minimum and max-
imum (gray lines) values as a function of illumination angle, while
the lower ones plot the median and contrast (gray line), which was
scaled with regard to the median curve. In the real data we can see
that: 1) the median value decreases according to a cosine-like func-
tion, 2) the minimum and maximum curves deviate more for higher
relief, 3) the contrast increases towards the shadow edge and ac-
tually “explodes” just before the terminator. In the conventionally
mapped data, all luminance curves decrease and converge while the
contrast stays constant. For the 2 1
2D texture mapped images we ﬁnd
curves with the same main properties 1)-3) as for the photographs
of the real surfaces.
Since the computational costs of texture-contrast mapping are sim-
ilar to standard Lambertian shading because the algorithm is sim-
ple, it can be implemented in real-time hardware shaders. Figure 2
shows screen shots of a system in which the texture-mapped and
texture-contrast-mapped objects can be rotated interactively. Un-
like the bump-mapping approach, only a single texture map needs
to be accessed to shade the points on the surface of the objects.
3
Discussion and conclusions
The beneﬁt of non-realistic 2D texture mapping techniques is the
low computational and memory capacity which is needed by real-
time applications. Conventional 2D texture mapping, however, re-
sults in ﬂat and non-convincing renderings of surface roughness. In
order to solve this problem, we applied results from perception and
optics studies to a “cheap” fast luminance remapping method. This
method, 2 1
2D texture mapping, mimics the texture contrast gradi-
ents and histogram transformations that occur in real-world rough
objects, at a cost which is similar to that of standard diffuse shad-
ing. This method is therefore suitable for fast real-time applications
such as games. We showed quantitative results for real surfaces,
2D mappings and 2 1
2D texture mappings which demonstrate why
conventionally 2D texture-mapped objects appear to have less sur-
face relief than our 2 1
2D texture-mapped objects. Furthermore, the
70

Figure 2: Screen shots of a real-time hardware implementation of our approach, using the Gaussian random texture (the 10◦sample) from
Figure 3 and a plaster texture from the Curet database. For every object, we show it rendered using conventional 2D texture mapping on the
left, and our 2 1
2D texture mapping on the right. The images render at over 100 fps and the objects can be rotated interactively.
psychophysical study by Ho et al. [Ho et al. 2006] provided funda-
mental perceptual insights which underlie this method: roughness
perception was found to be correlated with measures of the width of
the luminance histogram such as the texture contrast and standard
deviation. In our method, the histogram width was modiﬁed as a
function of local illumination angle.
Ho et al. [Ho et al. 2006] also found a correlation between black-
shot and roughness perception. For comparison, we applied this
simple modiﬁcation by clamping luminance values based on the
local-illumination direction, causing the number of shadowed pix-
els to increase towards the shadow edge to achieve the proper re-
sult. The third image of Figure 1 shows an example of our black-
shot modiﬁcation algorithm, which indeed results in an increase of
perceived surface roughness, when compared to the conventionally
shaded image. However, since only the darkest pixels are remapped
to black in this approach, the result looks fairly artiﬁcial. Our 2 1
2D
texture mapping method applies to the full range of luminance val-
ues while at the same time enhances shadows for grazing illumina-
tion, resulting in a more realistic rendering of a rough surface.
Today, it is possible to use sophisticated 3D texture rendering tech-
niques because fast computers and large memory are available. In
3D texture mapping approaches, bidirectional texture functions are
used in which illumination and view-dependent effects of local oc-
clusions, interreﬂections, shading, shadows and differential fore-
shortening play a role. These photometrical effects result in intri-
cate transformations of the gray-value histograms and spatial prop-
erties of the textures, for instance of the illuminance ﬂow [Pont and
Koenderink 2003]. The absence of such systematical spatial trans-
formations in 2D texture maps causes them to look more like ﬂat
“wallpaper textures” instead of rough “3D surface textures”. Non-
realistic rendering methods to mimic such spatial modiﬁcations will
not be able to weigh up to current developments in 3D texture ren-
dering. However, the value of very fast luminance remapping meth-
ods for altering material appearance has already been recognized by
other researchers [Motoyoshi et al. 2005; Kahn et al. 2006].
In this paper, we have presented a fast, simple method which can
be used to enhance the illusion of surface depth relief in 2D tex-
ture maps and is based on a physical model and on psychophysi-
cal ﬁndings. The method modulates the texture contrast gradient,
thereby simulating local shading and shadowing effects due to sur-
face roughness. 2 1
2D texture mapping is fast and inexpensive, and
is therefore very suitable for real-time rendering systems.
Acknowledgements
Sylvia Pont was supported by the Netherlands Organization for Sci-
entiﬁc Research (NWO). We thank Robbert Volcic, Maarten Wijn-
tjes and Wouter Bergman Tiest for their valuable remarks.
References
ADAMS, A. 1981. The negative; The Ansel Adams photography
series 2. Little, Brown and Company.
BAXANDALL, M. 1995. Shadows and enlightenment. Yale Uni-
versity Press.
BLINN, J. F. 1978. Simulation of wrinkled surfaces. In SIGGRAPH
’78: Proceedings of the 5th annual conference on Computer
graphics and interactive techniques, ACM Press, New York, NY,
USA, 286–292.
BOMFORD, D., KIRBY, J., LEIGHTON, J., AND ROY, A. 1990.
Art in the Making Impressionism. National Gallery Publications.
DANA, K. J., VAN GINNEKEN, B., NAYAR, S. K., AND KOEN-
DERINK, J. J. 1999. Reﬂectance and texture of real–world sur-
faces. ACM Transactions on Graphics 18, 1–34.
HO, Y.-X., LANDY, M. S., AND MALONEY, L. T. 2006. How di-
rection of illumination affects visually perceived surface rough-
ness. Journal of Vision 6(5), 634–648.
HUNTER, F., AND FUQUA, P. 1990. Light, Science & Magic: An
Introduction to Photographic Lighting. Focal Press.
JACOBS, T. 1988. Light for the Artist. Watson–Guptill.
KAHN,
E. A.,
REINHARD,
E.,
FLEMING,
R. W.,
AND
BUELTHOFF, H. H. 2006. Image-based material editing. ACM
Transactions on Graphics 25(3), 654–663.
LAMBERT, J. H. 1760. Photometria Sive de Mensure de Gradibus
Luminis, Colorum et Umbræ. Eberhard Klett, Augsburg.
MARR, D., AND POGGIO, T. 1983. Vision: A computational inves-
tigation into the human representation and processing of visual
information. W.H. Freeman.
MOTOYOSHI, I., NISHIDA, S., AND ADELSON, E. 2005. Lu-
minance re-mapping for the control of apparent material.
In
ACM Proceedings of the 2nd Symposium on Appied Perception
in Graphics and Visualization, ACM, ACM SIGGRAPH, 165.
NICODEMUS, F. E., RICHMOND, J. C., AND HSIA, J. J. 1977.
Geometrical Considerations and Nomenclature for Reﬂectance.
Natl.Bur.Stand., U.S., Monogr. 160.
PONT, S. C., AND KOENDERINK, J. J. 2003. Illuminance ﬂow.
In CAIP 2003, Springer-Verlag, M. A. W. N. Petkov, Ed., LNCS
2756, 90–97.
PONT, S. C., AND KOENDERINK, J. J. 2005. Bidirectional tex-
ture contrast function. International Journal of Computer Vision
62(1/2), 17–34.
71

Q  10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
measured
2D mapped (40 deg images)
2 1/2 D texture mapped (40 deg images)
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
Q
Q
Q
min
min
med
max
max
contr
contr
med
Figure 3: Textures of Gaussian random surfaces for illumination angles ranging from 10 to 80 degrees (from left to right). The ﬁrst two
rows show photographs of two real random Gaussian surfaces 40cm × 40cm in size, which were painted matte white. The ﬁrst row is of
a low-relief surface, the second row of a high-relief surface (on the order of 0.5cm and 1.7cm respectively). The second set shows images
generated with standard 2D texture mapping, while the third set uses the approach described in the paper for modifying the texture contrast.
The two rendered sets use the 40◦photographs from the ﬁrst set as inputs. At the right we show the texture contrast as a function of incident
illumination angle. In each row, the top plot shows the median (black line) in comparison to the minimum and maximum (gray lines). The
bottom plot shows the contrast (gray line) against the median (black line).
72

