Applied English 
Phonology
Applied English Phonology, Second Edition       Mehmet Yavaş 
© 2011 Mehmet Yavaş ISBN: 978-1-444-33322-0 

Applied English 
Phonology
Second Edition
Mehmet Yavau
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication

This edition ﬁrst published 2011
© 2011 Mehmet Yavas
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell’s publishing
program has been merged with Wiley’s global Scientiﬁc, Technical, and Medical business to form
Wiley-Blackwell.
Registered Ofﬁce
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, 
United Kingdom
Editorial Ofﬁces
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5020, USA
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
For details of our global editorial ofﬁces, for customer services, and for information about how to
apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of Mehmet Yavas to be identiﬁed as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance
with the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior
permission of the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print
may not be available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All
brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or
registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or
vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative
information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher
is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is
required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Yavas, Mehmet S.
Applied English phonology / Mehmet Yavas. – 2nd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4443-3322-0 (pbk.)
1. English language–Study and teaching–Foreign speakers.
2. English language–Phonology.
I. Title. 
PE1128.A2Y38 2011
428.0071–dc22
2010036827
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 10/12.5pt Palatino by Graphicraft Limited, Hong Kong
1
2011

Contents
Preface to Second Edition
ix
Preface
x
Note to the Instructor
xi
Chapter 1
Phonetics
1
1.1
Introduction
1
1.2
Phonetic Transcription
1
1.3
Description and Articulation of Sounds of English
4
1.3.1
The vocal tract
4
1.3.2
Voicing
5
1.3.3
Places of articulation
6
1.3.4
Manners of articulation
7
1.3.5
Voice onset time
9
1.3.6
Vowels and diphthongs
11
1.4
Additional Sounds
12
1.4.1
States of the glottis
12
1.4.2
Places and manners of articulation
13
1.4.3
Secondary articulations
15
1.4.4
Consonants made with non-pulmonic airstream mechanisms
17
1.4.5
Vowels
18
1.5
Cardinal Vowels
19
1.6
Syllables and Suprasegmentals
20
Summary
23
Exercises
24
Chapter 2
Phonology
30
2.1
Introduction
30
2.2
Complementary versus Overlapping Distribution
31
2.2.1
Overlapping distribution and contrast
31
2.2.2
Complementary distribution
33

vi
CONTENTS
2.3
Phonemic Analysis: A Mini-demo
37
2.4
Free Variation
45
2.5
Morphophonology
45
2.6
Practical Uses of Phonological Analysis
48
Summary
51
Exercises
52
Chapter 3
English Consonants
57
3.1
Stops
57
3.2
Fricatives
62
3.3
Affricates
65
3.4
Nasals
67
3.5
Approximants
68
3.6
Sociophonetic Variation
71
Summary
72
Exercises
73
Chapter 4
English Vowels
77
4.1
Introduction
77
4.2
Vowel Set of American English
77
4.2.1
Phonetic properties of vowels
78
4.2.2
Tense–lax
79
4.2.3
Nasalized vowels
80
4.2.4
Length
80
4.2.5
Vowels before /@/
81
4.2.6
Vowels before /l/
82
4.3
Front Vowels
83
4.4
Central Vowels
84
4.5
Back Vowels
84
4.6
Diphthongs
86
4.7
Sociophonetic Variation
88
4.8
Non-US Varieties
89
4.9
Full Vowels–Reduced Vowels
92
4.10
Full (Strong) Forms versus Reduced (Weak) 
Forms of Function Words
93
Summary
96
Exercises
97
Chapter 5
Acoustics of Vowels and Consonants
100
5.1
Introduction
100
5.2
Vowels
102
5.3
Diphthongs
106
5.4
Consonants
107

CONTENTS
vii
5.4.1
Stops
107
5.4.2
Fricatives
111
5.4.3
Affricates
114
5.4.4
Approximants
115
5.4.5
Nasals
115
5.5
Putting It Together
116
5.6
Context
119
5.7
Practical Applications: Some Examples
121
Summary
124
Appendix
125
Exercises
127
Chapter 6
Syllables
131
6.1
Introduction
131
6.2
Number of Syllables
134
6.3
Sonority
135
6.4
Syllabiﬁcation
137
6.5
English Syllable Phonotactics
139
6.5.1
Single onsets
140
6.5.2
Double onsets
140
6.5.3
Triple onsets
142
6.5.4
Codas
142
6.5.5
Double codas
143
6.5.6
Triple codas
143
6.6
Written Syllabiﬁcation
146
6.7
Syllable Weight and Ambisyllabicity
149
6.8
Practical Applications
151
Summary
153
Exercises
154
Chapter 7
Stress and Intonation
156
7.1
Introduction
156
7.2
Noun and Adjective Stress
157
7.3
Verb Stress
160
7.4
Secondary Stress
162
7.5
Afﬁxes
164
7.5.1
Stress-bearing (attracting) sufﬁxes
165
7.5.2
Stress-neutral sufﬁxes
165
7.5.3
Stress-shifting (ﬁxing) sufﬁxes
166
7.6
Stress in Compounds
168
7.7
Differences between American and British English
169
7.8
Intonation
172
7.9
Variations among the Varieties
177
Summary
178
Exercises
180

viii
CONTENTS
Chapter 8
Structural Factors in Second Language 
Phonology
183
8.1
Introduction
183
8.2
Mini Contrastive Analyses
185
8.2.1
Spanish–English
185
8.2.2
Turkish–English
190
8.2.3
Greek–English
192
8.2.4
French–English
193
8.2.5
German–English
195
8.2.6
Arabic–English
196
8.2.7
Russian–English
198
8.2.8
Korean–English
199
8.2.9
Portuguese–English
201
8.2.10
Persian (Farsi)–English
203
8.3
Differential Treatment of Mismatches
204
8.3.1
Basic vs. derived context
206
8.3.2
Deflected contrast
206
8.3.3
Hypercontrast
207
8.4
Markedness
207
8.5
Ontogeny Phylogeny Model (OPM)
212
8.6
Optimality Theory (OT)
214
8.7
Perception
219
Summary
225
Exercises
227
Chapter 9
Spelling and Pronunciation
230
9.1
Irregularity of English Spelling
230
9.2
Phoneme–Grapheme Correspondences in English
231
9.2.1
Consonants
232
9.2.2
Vowels
236
9.3
Morphological Basis of English Spelling
241
9.4
American English vs. British English
243
Summary
245
Exercises
246
Recommended Readings
249
Appendix: List of Sound Files
252
Glossary
257
References
261
Index
268

Preface to Second Edition
The feedback I received from its users indicates that the ﬁrst edition of Applied
English Phonology has been quite successful in responding to the needs of stu-
dents and professionals. While it is gratifying to hear the positives, I have also
tried to pay a lot of attention to the users’ suggestions for improvement. Their
comments were an invaluable source in designing this revised second edition.
Although almost all chapters have been re-examined and received additional
material, some have received more revisions and expansion than the others.
Notably, ‘Sociophonetic Variation’ was added to chapters 3 and 4; chapter 4
also received a more systematic and expanded coverage on regional vowel shifts
in the United States. Chapter 8 is probably the one that has had the biggest
expansion, with entirely new sections on the role of ‘Optimality Theory’ and
‘Perception’ in interlanguage phonology.
An entirely new feature of the book is the addition of the sound ﬁles. It is
hoped that these will help to clarify many points made in the text and as such
will enhance students’ ease of understanding.
As with the ﬁrst edition, I have again had the good fortune to have worked
with wonderful professionals from Wiley-Blackwell. I am grateful to Danielle
Descoteaux, acquisitions editor in linguistics, and Julia Kirk, linguistics editor-
ial assistant, for their constant support during the project, and to Fiona Sewell
for her superb copy-editing. I was equally fortunate in receiving help on the
home side from two of my students. My deep thanks go to Manon van Keeken,
whose excellent work and tireless efforts in checking and rechecking the manu-
script for accuracy contributed to its timely conclusion, and to Taryn Zuckerman
for her availability for and diligent work on the sound ﬁles.
M.Y.
Miami

Preface
It has been widely recognized that professionals working in the ﬁeld of remedi-
ation (teaching/therapy) of sound patterns need to have a good understanding
of phonology in order to evaluate the productions of their clients (students/
patients), which differ from the norm in a systematic fashion. The aim of this
book is to provide material on the sound patterns of American English that is
usable by students and professionals in the ﬁeld of phonological remediation.
During my career, I have had several opportunities to work with individuals
from applied ﬁelds such as TESOL and Communication Sciences and Disorders.
My constant message to them has been that the more linguistic knowledge
(phonology in this particular case) they have, the better remediators they can
become. This has been based on the well-established principle that any attempt
at remediation requires a detailed phonological proﬁle of the client, and the
ability to do this can only be gained via good familiarity with the normative
sound patterns.
To provide a needed source for the applied ﬁelds, one needs to decide 
carefully the degree of sophistication of the material coming from a technical
ﬁeld such as linguistics. On the one hand, one wants to account for the patterns
accurately with no distortions; on the other, one would like to make the material
comprehensible and useful to practitioners in remediation. I aimed to strike such
a balance with this book, and the greatest help I received in this respect has
come from my several years of experience with students from applied ﬁelds.
I would like to thank my students who helped me by asking questions 
and making comments that made me think and rethink about the issues 
and answers and their relevance to the applied ﬁelds. I am also indebted to
the reviewers for their comments on the earlier draft; these comments are deeply
appreciated. I would like to thank my copy-editor Pandora Kerr Frost for her
expert work on my typescript. Finally, sincere thanks are due to Emily Finlan
for her assistance in preparing the manuscript and to Sarah Coleman and Ada
Brunstein of Blackwell Publishing, who were extremely helpful at every stage
of the completion of this text.
M.Y.

Note to the Instructor
Material presented in this book has been, partially or in its entirety, used 
effectively on different occasions. Instructors who work with a speciﬁc student
body and/or certain time constraints often have to make adjustments in the
inclusion or exclusion of the material found in the texts. There are three 
chapters that might deserve some comments in this respect. Firstly, chapter 8
(‘Structural Factors in Second Language Phonology’) may appear to be relevant
only to the ﬁeld of language teaching. However, the increasing participation
of individuals from the ﬁeld of Communication Disorders with respect to issues
such as ‘bilingual phonology’ and ‘accent reduction’ makes this chapter very
relevant to this ﬁeld too. Secondly, to have a chapter on spectrographic 
analysis (chapter 5) may appear rather uncommon in a book like this, and 
it may be skipped depending on time constraints. The experience I have, 
however, has been very encouraging with respect to its inclusion. Students 
have repeatedly stated that it has added a valuable new dimension to their 
understanding of issues. Finally, chapter 9 (‘Spelling and Pronunciation’) may
be of concern. I ﬁnd the inclusion of this chapter useful, as it enhances the under-
standing of matches and mismatches between spelling and phonological pat-
terns. As such, it may be read right after chapter 2, relating it to the discussion
of phonemics.
Finally, a few words in relation to the phonetic transcription are in order. 
I have put passages for phonetic transcription at the end of the chapters with
the central theme of history and varieties of the English language. I am aware
of the fact that these are not sufﬁcient, and that students need more opportun-
ities to feel comfortable with transcription. However, I did not want to inflate
the number of pages in the sections on exercises, because the materials in this
text can be, and indeed have always been, used very effectively together with
a transcription workbook.
The sound ﬁles included in the second edition are designed to enhance 
several issues discussed in the text. The 19 ﬁles highlight several points on the
pronunciation of the English consonants and vowels, stress, intonation, and reduc-
tion in weak forms. They also include the lengthy end-of-chapter passages to
enable students to check and recheck their phonetic transcriptions and feel more

xii
NOTE
TO
THE
INSTRUCTOR
conﬁdent about this very useful but sometimes overwhelming practice. The ﬁles
are shown with an indicator that appears at relevant points of the text and of
the online Answer Key, as illustrated here. The complete list of the ﬁles is found
in an appendix near the end of the book.

1
Phonetics
1.1
Introduction
Our aim in this book is to study the sound patterns of English. The understanding
of phonological patterns cannot be done without the raw material, phonetics.
In order to be able to come up with reliable phonological descriptions, we need
to have accurate phonetic data. Thus, students and professionals who deal with
the patterns of spoken language in various groups of speakers (linguists, speech
therapists, and language teachers) need a basic knowledge of phonetics.
Phonetics, which may be described as the study of the sounds of human 
language, can be approached from three different perspectives. Articulatory 
phonetics deals with the physiological mechanisms of speech production. Acoustic
phonetics studies the physical properties of sound waves in the message.
Auditory phonetics is concerned with the perception of speech by the hearer.
The coverage in this book will be limited to the ﬁrst two of these approaches.
The exclusion of auditory phonetics is basically due to the practical concerns
of the primary readership as well as the little information available about the
workings of the brain and speech perception. In this chapter, we will look 
at the basics of speech production. Acoustic properties, in a limited form of
spectrographic analysis, will be the subject of chapter 5.
1.2
Phonetic Transcription
Because we are constantly involved with reading and writing in our daily lives,
we tend to be influenced by the orthography when making judgments about
the sounds of words. After all, from kindergarten on, the written language has
been an integral part of our lives. Thus, it is very common to think that the
number of orthographic letters in a word is an accurate reflection of the number
of sounds. Indeed, this is the case for many words. If we look at the words
pan, form, print, and spirit, for example, we can see the match in the number
of letters (graphemes) with the number of sounds: three, four, ﬁve, and six,
respectively. However, this match in number of graphemes and sounds is 
one
Applied English Phonology, Second Edition       Mehmet Yavaş 
© 2011 Mehmet Yavaş. ISBN: 978-1-444-33322-0 

2
PHONETICS
violated in so many other words. For example, both though and choose have
six graphemes but only three sounds. Awesome has seven graphemes and four
sounds, while knowledge has nine graphemes and ﬁve sounds. This list of non-
matches can easily be extended to thousands of other words. These violations,
which may be due to ‘silent letters’ or a sound being represented by a combin-
ation of letters, are not the only problems with respect to the inadequacies of
orthography in its ability to represent the spoken language. Problems exist even
if the number of letters and sounds match. We can outline the discrepancies
that exist between the spelling and sounds in the following:
(a)
The same sound is represented by different letters. In words such as each, bleed,
either, achieve, scene, busy, we have the same vowel sound represented by
different letters, which are underlined. This is not unique to vowels and
can be veriﬁed with consonants, as in shop, ocean, machine, sure, conscience,
mission, nation.
(b) The same letter may represent different sounds. The letter a in words such as
gate, any, father, above, tall stands for different sounds. To give an example
of a consonantal letter for the same phenomenon, we can look at the letter
s, which stands for different sounds in each of the following: sugar, vision,
sale, resume.
(c)
One sound is represented by a combination of letters. The underlined portions
in each of the following words represent a single sound: thin, rough,
attempt, pharmacy.
(d) A single letter may represent more than one sound. This can be seen in the x
of exit, the u of union, and the h of human.
One or more of the above are responsible for the discrepancies between
spelling and sounds, and may result in multiple homophones such as rite, right,
write, and wright. The lack of consistent relationships between letters and sounds
is quite expected if we consider that the alphabet English uses tries to cope
with more than forty sounds with its limited twenty-six letters. Since letters
can only tell us about spelling and cannot be used as reliable tools for pro-
nunciation, the ﬁrst rule in studying phonetics and phonology is to ignore spelling
and focus only on the sounds of utterances.
To avoid the ambiguities created by the regular orthography and achieve a
system that can represent sounds unambiguously, professionals who deal
with language use a phonetic alphabet that is guided by the principle of a 
consistent one-to-one relationship between each phonetic symbol and the
sound it represents. Over time, several phonetic alphabets have been devised.
Probably, the most widespread is the one known as the International Phonetic
Alphabet (IPA), which was developed in 1888, and has been revised since then.
One may encounter some modiﬁcations of some symbols in books written by
American scholars. In this book, we will basically follow the IPA usage while
pointing out common alternatives that are frequently found in the literature.
First, we will present the symbols that are relevant to American English (see
table 1.1) and later in the chapter we will add some non-English sounds that

PHONETICS
3
Table 1.1
English consonant and vowel symbols with key words
Phonetic symbol
Word positions
Initial
Medial
Final
Consonants
p
pack
super
map
b
bed
rubber
rob
t
tea
attack
great
d
date
adore
good
k
catch
picking
look
g
gate
doggy
bag
f
fat
coffee
loaf
v
very
moving
dove
T
thin
ruthless
death
D
they
mother
breathe
s
sad
sister
bus
z
zoom
raisin
buzz
S (s)
shine
machine
cash
Z (z)
—
vision
massage
h
head
behind
—
tS (c)
chair
teacher
which
dZ (j)
jump
larger
huge
m
mail
remind
room
n
nest
tenor
bean
è
—
anger
king
j (y)
yard
beyond
soy
w
way
rewind
low
@ (r, „)
rain
boring
four
l
light
bullet
mail
Vowels and diphthongs
i (ij, iy)
ease
feet
bee
I
it
sit
—
e (ej, ei, ey)
eight
bake
say
E
edge
red
—
æ
anger
nap
—
√
oven
love
—
@
above
often
Tampa
A
arch
father
spa
O
all
hall
saw
o (ow, oU)
oat
goat
bow
U
—
book
—
u (uw)
ooze
loose
two
aI (aj, ay)
ice
side
buy
OI (Oj, Oy, oI, oj, oy)
oil
voice
boy
aU (au, aw)
out
sound
how

4
PHONETICS
are found in languages that our readership is likely to come in contact with.
The dialectal variations, since they are examined in detail in chapters 3 and 4,
will not be dealt with here.
The following should be pointed out to clarify some points about table 1.1.
Firstly, certain positions that are left blank for certain sounds indicate the unavail-
ability of vocabulary items in the language. Secondly, the table does not 
contain the symbol [∑] (or [hw], [W]), which may be found in some other books
to indicate the voiceless version of the labio-velar glide. This is used to dis-
tinguish between pairs such as witch and which, or Wales and whales. Some
speakers make a distinction by employing the voiceless glide for the second
members in these pairs; others pronounce these words homophonously. Here,
we follow the latter pattern. Finally, there is considerable overlap between 
ﬁnal /j/ and the ending portion of /i/, /e/, /aI/, and /OI/ on the one hand, 
and between ﬁnal /w/ of /o/, /u/, and /aU/ on the other. The alternative 
symbols cited make these relationships rather clear, and this point will be taken
up in chapter 4.
1.3
Description and Articulation of Sounds of English
1.3.1
The vocal tract
Our examination of how sounds are made will begin with the vocal organs.
The air we use in sound production comes from the lungs, proceeds through
the larynx where the vocal cords are situated, and then is shaped into speciﬁc
sounds at the vocal tract. In sound production, it is generally the case that the
articulators from the lower surface of the vocal tract (lower articulators, i.e. 
the lower lip, the lower teeth, and the tongue) move toward those that form
the upper surface (upper articulators, i.e. the upper lip, the upper teeth, the
upper surface of the mouth, and the pharyngeal wall). Figure 1.1 shows the
vocal tract.
Starting from the outer extreme, we have the lips and the teeth. In the upper
surface, behind the upper teeth, there is a bumpy area (the alveolar ridge), which
is followed by a larger bony area (the hard palate). Further back is a flaccid
area, the ‘soft palate’ (or ‘velum’), which is unsupported by bone. The soft palate
is a movable organ, which opens and closes the velopharyngeal passage (the
passage that links the pharynx to the nasal cavity). Finally, at the back, the velum
narrows to a long, thin pointed structure that is called the ‘uvula’.
In the lower part of the mouth, after the lower lip and the teeth, lies the tongue.
The ‘tip’ (or ‘apex’) of the tongue is the foremost part. Just behind the tip is
the small surface called the ‘blade’ (or ‘lamina’). The so-called ‘front’ part 
of the tongue is the area between the tip/blade and the center. The hindmost
part of the horizontal surface of the tongue is called the ‘back’ (or ‘dorsum’).
At the end of the tongue, we have the ‘root’, which is the vertical surface 
against the pharyngeal wall. Finally, we have the ‘epiglottis’, which is a leaf-
shaped cartilage that sticks up and back from the larynx.

PHONETICS
5
1.3.2
Voicing
The larynx, which sits on top of the trachea, is composed of cartilages held
together by ligaments. It houses the vocal cords, which lie horizontally just behind
the Adam’s apple (see ﬁgure 1.2). The space between the vocal cords, which
is known as the ‘glottis’, assumes different conﬁgurations for sounds known
as ‘voiced’ and ‘voiceless’. When the cords are apart (open), the air passes freely
through the glottis. Sounds made with such a conﬁguration of the glottis are
called ‘voiceless’ (see ﬁgure 1.3).
If, on the other hand, the vocal cords are brought together, the air passing
through creates vibration, and the resulting sounds are ‘voiced’ (see ﬁgure 1.4).
  1  Lips
  2  Teeth
  3  Alveolar ridge
  4  Hard palate
  5  Soft palate (velum)
  6  Uvula
  7  Tip of the tongue
  8  Front of the tongue
  9  Back of the tongue
10  Root of the tongue
11  Epiglottis
12  Pharynx
13  Larynx
14  Esophagus
15  Trachea
1
2
3
4
5
6
9
8
7
10
12
11
13
15
14
Figure 1.1
The vocal tract
1  Thyroid cartilage
2  Vocal cords
3  Glottis
4  Arytenoid cartilages
5  Cricoid cartilage
3
5
4
2
2
1
4
Figure 1.2
View of larynx, looking down

6
PHONETICS
It is important to point out that the cord vibration is not a muscular action.
When the cords are brought close to one another, the passing air creates a 
suction effect (Bernoulli principle), and the cords are brought together. As soon
as the cords are together, there is no suction effect and the cords move apart.
As soon as they are apart the suction is reinitiated, and the cycle repeats itself.
One can easily feel the difference between certain voiced and voiceless
sounds. If you pronounce the initial sounds of the word pairs sip – zip and
cheap – jeep and place your index ﬁnger on your Adam’s apple or place your
index ﬁngers in both ears, you should feel the buzz created by the voicing of
/z/ and /dZ/; this effect will not be present in the production of their voice-
less counterparts /s/ and /tS/.
1.3.3
Places of articulation
The place of articulation of a consonant is the description of where the con-
sonantal obstruction occurs in the vocal tract by the placement of the tongue
or by lip conﬁguration. Below are the places of articulation relevant for the 
consonants of English:
•
Bilabial: In the production of bilabial sounds the two lips come together.
The initial consonants of the words pay, bay, and may exemplify the
English bilabials /p, b, m/.
•
Labio-dental: Labio-dental sounds of English, /f, v/ (e.g. feel, veal), involve
a constriction between the lower lip and the upper teeth. Bilabials and labio-
dentals together are called ‘labials’.
Open glottis
Figure 1.3
Conﬁguration for voiceless sounds
Vibrating glottis
Figure 1.4
Conﬁguration for voiced sounds

PHONETICS
7
•
Interdental: /T/ and /D/ sounds of English (e.g. thin, that) are made 
by placing the tip or blade of the tongue between the upper and lower 
front teeth. For some speakers, the tongue tip/blade just barely touches 
behind the upper teeth (thus, the term ‘dental’ is used instead in some 
manuals).
•
Alveolar: When the active articulator, the tongue tip or blade, goes against
the alveolar ridge, we have an alveolar sound. The initial consonants of the
words tip, dip, sip, zip, nip, lip exemplify the English alveolars /t, d, s, z,
n, l/ respectively.
•
Palato-alveolar: In the production of palato-alveolar sounds of English, 
/S, Z, tS, dZ/ (exempliﬁed by the ﬁnal consonants of ﬁsh, garage, rich, 
ridge, respectively), the blade of the tongue moves towards the back of 
the alveolar ridge (approximates in the case of /S, Z/ and touches in the
case of /tS, dZ/).
•
Retroflex: Retroflex sounds are made by curling the tip of the tongue up
and back toward the back of the alveolar ridge. The only retroflex sound
in American English is the r-sound (/@/). Although both in retroflex
sounds and in palato-alveolar sounds the constriction is at the back of the
alveolar ridge, these two groups are not identical; the former is ‘apical’ (with
the tip of the tongue), and the latter is said to be ‘laminal’ (with the blade
of the tongue). It should also be noted that not all speakers use the retroflex
r-sound; many speakers have a ‘bunched’ r-sound made by raising the blade
of the tongue with the tip turned down.
•
Palatal: /j/, as in yes, is the only palatal sound of English. It is made with
the front of the tongue articulating against the hard palate.
•
Velar: In the production of English velars, /k, g, è/, exempliﬁed by the ﬁnal
sounds of back, bag, sing, respectively, the back of the tongue articulates
against the velum (soft palate).
•
Glottal: These are sounds formed at the glottis, which include /h/ (e.g. home)
and the glottal stop /?/.
•
Labio-velar: The sound /w/ (e.g. we) is the only consonant that has two
places of articulation. In the production of this sound, the lips are rounded
(thus, ‘labial’), while at the same time the back of the tongue is raised toward
the velum (thus, ‘velar’). As a result, we place the symbol at both bilabial
and velar places and call the sound ‘labio-velar’.
1.3.4
Manners of articulation
The manner of articulation of a sound is the degree and the kind of obstruc-
tion of a consonant in the vocal tract. For example, if we compare the ﬁrst sounds
of the words tip and sip, we realize that the airflow is obstructed in the same
area (alveolar), and in both sounds, /t/ and /s/, the conﬁguration of the vocal
cords is the same (voiceless). The difference between the two sounds lies in
the type of obstruction of the airflow. While in /t/ we stop the air completely
before the release, we simply obstruct (not stop) the airflow with a narrowing
created by the articulators in /s/.

8
PHONETICS
•
Stop: A stop consonant involves a complete closure of the articulators 
and thus total blockage of airflow. The stops found in English are /p, b, t,
d, k, g/.
•
Fricative: A fricative is a sound that is made with a small opening between
the articulators, allowing the air to escape with audible friction. In English
/f, v, T, D, s, z, S, Z, h/ are the fricative sounds. The common denominator
of fricatives is partial airflow with friction noise. Some manuals, adhering
strictly to the requirement of turbulent airstream, do not consider /h/ a
fricative. A subgroup of fricatives (alveolars and palato-alveolars), which
are more intense and have greater amounts of acoustic energy at higher 
frequencies, are known as ‘sibilants’.
•
Affricate: In a stop sound, the release of the closure is quick and abrupt;
however, in sounds where the closure release is gradual, it creates friction.
Such sounds are called affricates. In other words, affricates start like stops
(complete closure), and end like fricatives. Both affricates of English, /tS,
dZ/, are produced in the palato-alveolar place of articulation. The symbols
used for these sounds reveal the combination of stops /t/, /d/ with the
fricatives /S/, /Z/, respectively. An important point to remember is their
one-unit (inseparable) status. Unlike consonant clusters (e.g. /sk/, /pl/),
which are made up of two separable phonological units, affricates always
behave like one unit. For example, in a speech error such as key chain
[ki tSen] becoming [tSi ken], the affricate /tS/ is interchanged with a single
segment /k/; clusters, on the other hand, are separated in a comparable
situation, as illustrated in scotch tape [sk√tS tep] becoming [k√tS step] 
and not [t√tS skep] (see section 3.3 for more on this). Since affricates /tS/
and /dZ/ contain sibilant fricatives in them (/S/, /Z/, respectively), they
are also sibilants. Stops, fricatives, and affricates, which are produced by a
considerable amount of obstruction of the laryngeal airstream in the vocal
tract, are collectively known as ‘obstruents’.
•
Approximant: Approximants are consonants with a greater opening in the
vocal tract than fricatives, and thus do not create any friction. Identifying
a sound as an approximant or a fricative includes acoustic/auditory and
aerodynamic considerations as well as articulatory factors. Catford (1977)
states that the typical cross-sectional area of the maximum constriction in
a fricative ranges from about 3 to 20 mm2, while it is greater than 20 mm2
in an approximant. The sounds /l, @, j, w/ (the initial consonants of lay,
ray, yes, and week) are the approximants of English. Both fricatives and
approximants, because they let the airflow continue in the production, are
called ‘continuants’. Two of the English approximants, /l, @/, are ‘liquids’,
vowel-like consonants in which voicing energy passes through a vocal tract
with a constriction greater than that of vowels. The liquid /l/, which is called
the ‘lateral’ liquid, is produced with the tongue tip creating a closure with
the alveolar ridge while maintaining an opening at the sides of the tongue
where the air escapes. The non-lateral approximant, /@/, which was
described earlier in relation to retroflex place of articulation and is also known
as the ‘rhotic’, will not be repeated here.

PHONETICS
9
The remaining two approximants, /j/ and /w/, are known as ‘glides’
(also ‘semi-vowels’ in some manuals). These are vowel-like sounds that 
function like consonants. In other words, /j/ is like the vowel /i/ and /w/
is like the vowel /u/ in production, while functioning like consonants, as
they do not occupy the syllable nuclei and they always need a vowel to
lean on.
•
Nasal: If we compare the initial sounds of beat and meat, /b/ and /m/,
we see that they share the same place of articulation (bilabial) and voicing
(voiced). The difference between them lies in the velopharyngeal opening
and the channels of the outgoing airflow. In the production of /m/, the
velum is lowered and the velopharyngeal passage is open. Thus, upon release
of the closure, the air goes out through the nasal cavity as well as through
the oral cavity. In the production of /b/, on the other hand, the velum 
is raised and the passage is closed. Consequently, the only outlet for the
airflow is the oral cavity. Sounds that are made with the former conﬁgura-
tion, e.g. /m, n, è/, are called nasals; the others are oral sounds.
Approximants (liquids and glides) and nasals, because they include a 
relatively unobstructed flow of air between the articulator and the place of 
articulation, collectively form the group of consonants that is known as 
‘sonorants’.
Table 1.2 shows the places and manners of articulation for English con-
sonants. Whenever a cell has two consonants, the voiceless one is placed to the
left and the voiced one to the right.
1.3.5
Voice onset time
As stated earlier, a stop articulation consists of a closure formed by the two
articulators followed by an abrupt release of this closure. In this section, 
we will look at the production of stop sounds and the timing of vocal cord
vibration, which is relevant for voiced, voiceless, aspirated, and unaspirated
Table 1.2
Consonants of English
Bilabial
Labio-
Inter-
Alveolar
Retroﬂex
Palato-
Palatal
Velar
Glottal
dental
dental
alveolar
Stop
p
b
t
d
k
g
Fricative
f
v
T
D
s
z
S
Z
h
Affricate
tS
dZ
Nasal
m
n
è
Liquid
l
@
Glide
w
j
w

10
PHONETICS
distinctions. The differences for these various kinds of stops can be explained
by the time difference between the release of the stop closure and the 
beginning of vocal cord vibration. This timing relationship is known as the ‘voice
onset time’ (hereafter VOT). Figure 1.5 represents the different stop produc-
tions in the VOT continuum.
If the voicing starts before the release (i.e. during the closure period), as in
the case of lines (a) and (b), then the situation is described as having ‘voice
lead’ and given a negative VOT value (in milliseconds; ms). Line (a) represents
a fully voiced stop; we have vocal cord vibration throughout the closure, which
continues after the release. The /b, d, g/ sounds of Romance languages are
said to be typical examples of fully voiced stops.
Not all voiced stops are produced in this fashion. In some languages,
English and other Germanic languages included, /b, d, g/ are subject to a cer-
tain amount of loss of voicing (‘partially devoiced’) during their production.
Line (b) in ﬁgure 1.5 represents this conﬁguration; the voicing starts some time
into the closure stage and continues into the following vowel (the mirror image
of this is seen in ﬁnal voiced stops; these will be given in detail in chapter 3).
If, on the other hand, the voicing starts after the release of the stop closure,
then it is said to have a ‘voice lag’ and is described with a positive VOT 
value (in milliseconds; ms). Cross-linguistically, the amount of lag may be
signiﬁcant; while a lag greater than 30 ms results in stops that are called 
‘aspirated’ (or ‘long lag’), a shorter voice lag or voicing simultaneous with release
results in stops that are known as ‘unaspirated’. Lines (c) and (d) show these
two possibilities. In neither case do we have vocal cord vibration during the
stop closure (thus ‘voiceless’). The difference between the two cases lies in 
(a) fully voiced
(b) partially voiced
(c) voiceless unaspir.
(d) voiceless aspir.
A = moment (point) of closure
B = moment (point) of release
 
= voiceless
 
= voiced
A
Stop
Vowel
p/b
a
B
/ba/ (Spanish, French)
/ba/ (English)
/pa/ (Spanish, French)
/pa/ (English)
Figure 1.5
VOT continuum

PHONETICS
11
the point at which the voicing starts with respect to the moment of release. In
line (c), the vocal cord vibration is simultaneous with the stop release; the VOT
is zero and we have a ‘voiceless unaspirated stop’. The voiceless stops of Romance
languages are given as examples for this.
In line (d) the lag is longer than the 30 ms threshold, and the resulting sound
is a ‘voiceless aspirated stop’. The diacritic used for aspiration is a small raised
[h] to the top right of the stop (e.g. [ph]). English initial [ph, t h, kh] sounds are
produced in this way and we hear the resulting short burst before the buzz of
voicing in the vowel. The degree of aspiration may be different in different 
languages. For example, while English voiceless stops are slightly aspirated,
their counterparts in languages such as Mandarin, Thai, and Scots Gaelic are
strongly aspirated.
In some languages (e.g. Hindi of India, Sindhi of Pakistan and India), the
possibilities go beyond the three types of stops (voiced, voiceless unaspirated,
voiceless aspirated) we have discussed, with the addition of the so-called ‘voiced
aspirated stops’. These stops have, after the release of the stop closure, a period
of breathy voice (murmur) before the regular voicing starts for the following
segment. Thus we get the following four-way voicing distinction in Hindi:
[tal] “beat”; [thal] “plate”; [dal] “lentil”; [dhal] “knife”
1.3.6
Vowels and diphthongs
When we examined consonants, we talked about the varying degrees of
obstruction of the airflow in their production. As a general statement, we 
can say that the vocal tract is more open in vowels than in consonants. This,
however, can be a tentative formulation, because as we saw in the discussion
of glide/vowel separation, the consideration may be phonological and not 
phonetic.
For the characterization of vowels, we do not use the dimensions of place
and manner of articulation, as there is no contact between the articulators. Instead,
vowels are characterized by the position of the tongue and the lips. Since 
vowels are usually voiced, the voiced/voiceless distinction used for consonants
is not relevant either.
If you examine the vowels of beat, bit, bait, bet, and bat in the order given,
you will notice that your mouth opens gradually and the body of your tongue
lowers gradually. A similar situation is observed if we go through the vowels
of boot, book, boat, and bought; that is, gradual opening of the mouth and 
gradual lowering of the tongue. The difference between the two sets lies in the
part of the tongue involved. While in the former set the front part of the tongue
is involved (tongue pushed forward), the latter set focuses on the back of the
tongue (tongue pulled back). The traditional type of chart used to plot vowel
positions places the front vowels on the left, back vowels on the right, and 
central vowels in the middle. There are height dimensions: ‘high’ (or ‘close’),
‘mid’, and ‘low’ (or ‘open’), while the ‘mid’ is frequently divided into ‘high-mid’
and ‘low-mid’. Figure 1.6 shows the English vowels.

12
PHONETICS
Another dimension of vowel description refers to the lip position. Four 
/O, o, U, u/ of the ﬁve back vowels, which are given in circles in the chart, are
produced with rounded lips and thus are called ‘round’ (or ‘rounded’); all 
other vowels are unrounded.
Finally, in addition to the height, backness, and rounding characteristics, 
one other grouping, tense/lax, is given. This is a rather controversial issue and
will be dealt with in detail in chapter 4. Here, sufﬁce it to say that this book
will follow the distributional criteria and group /I, E, æ, U, √/ as ‘lax’, while
considering the rest ‘tense’.
The vowels we have described so far are considered to have a single,
unchanging quality and are called ‘monophthongs’. (This is not uncontrover-
sial for /i/ and /u/, and especially for /e/ and /o/; see chapter 4 for details.)
The vocalic elements of words such as bite, brown, and boy, on the other hand,
involve a complex articulation whereby we move from one vowel to another.
More speciﬁcally, we have /aI/, /aU/, and /OI/, respectively. Such sounds are
known as ‘diphthongs’. The complete account of vowels and diphthongs,
including their dialectal variations, will be discussed in chapter 4.
1.4
Additional Sounds
Our primary concern in this chapter has been the consonants and vowels 
of English. However, students of Speech Pathology and TESOL (teachers of
English to speakers of other languages) as well as of applied linguistics fre-
quently deal with speakers of other languages, either in the context of foreign
language learning or in the context of bilingualism (or multilingualism). Such
situations, needless to say, demand familiarity with several sounds that are not
present in English. Thus, the following is intended to provide the necessary
coverage.
1.4.1
States of the glottis
Besides the two conﬁgurations (voiced and voiceless) we mentioned for the
sounds of English, some languages use sounds that involve two additional states
Front
High
I
i
E
@
O
U
√
e
æ
A
o
u
Mid
Low
Central
Back
Note:
Circled vowels are 
rounded.
Figure 1.6
English vowels

PHONETICS
13
of the glottis. These are creaky voice (also known as ‘laryngealized’ or ‘vocal
fry’) and murmur (also called ‘breathy voice’).
In creaky voice the arytenoid cartilages at the back of the glottis are
together, and the cords vibrate at the other end. The result is a low-pitched
sound. Many Chadic languages (e.g. Hausa, Bura, and Margi of West Africa)
use such sounds to make changes in meaning in opposition to a regularly voiced
sound. Creaks can be transcribed by adding a subscript tilde to individual sounds
(e.g. [a]).
Murmurs (or breathy voiced sounds) are produced in such a way that the
vocal cords are apart at the back, while they vibrate at the front portion. The
opening of the cords is narrower than in voiceless sounds, and the cords vibrate
with high volume-velocity airflow through this gap, which subsides soon
because the high rate of flow cannot be maintained for long. Murmur sounds
can be transcribed by placing two dots [..] under individual sounds (e.g. [)]).
Niger-Congo languages in Africa (e.g. Zulu, Shona) and several languages 
spoken in India (e.g. Hindi, Sindhi, Marathi, Bengali, Gujarati) have murmured
stops. Also, in Mazatec (an Oto-Mangean language spoken in Mexico) laryn-
gealized vowels, breathy voiced vowels, and regular vowels can be found in
contrast (i.e. substitutions for each other making differences in meaning).
1.4.2
Places and manners of articulation
Stops
The bilabial, alveolar, and velar stops of English are very common in the 
languages of the world. Three additional places of articulation are noteworthy
for stops. Voiceless and voiced palatal stops, which are transcribed as [c, J] respec-
tively, are found in Hungarian, Czech, Turkish, Basque, and Irish. Retroflex stops
[À, d] (or [Ê, Î]) are common in Hindi. As for uvular (the back of the tongue
articulating against the uvula) stops, we can cite the voiceless [q] (found in Eskimo
and Quechua), and the voiced [G] (found in Persian). Mention should also 
be made of dental stops [9, 3], which are found in Romance languages 
(e.g. Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, etc.).
Fricatives
The fricative inventory of English is quite rich (nine fricatives), but there are
many more possibilities that are found in several languages of the world. The
voiceless bilabial fricative, [F], is common in Greek and Hausa, while the
voiced counterpart, [ã], is found in Spanish. Ewe of West Africa has both 
of these bilabial fricatives. Retroflex fricatives, both voiceless, which can be 
transcribed as [s] (or [ß]), and voiced, which can be transcribed as [z] (or [Ω],)
are found in Mandarin Chinese and in several Dravidian languages of India,
such as Tamil and Malayalam. Palatal fricatives are also found in several lan-
guages. While the voiceless [ç] is found in Irish, Bengali, German, Norwegian,
and Greek, the voiced counterpart, [Ô], is found in Swedish, Greenlandic, and

14
PHONETICS
Margi. Velar fricatives can be found in Indo-European languages. We can cite
Welsh, Irish, Bulgarian, Czech, German, Sindhi, and Slovene for the voiceless
[x], and Greek, Spanish, Arabic, Persian, German, and Irish for the voiced [ƒ].
The voiceless uvular fricative, [X], is common in Dutch and Semitic languages
(e.g. Arabic, Hebrew), and several Amerindian languages (e.g. Tlingit), while
the voiced counterpart, [‰], is frequent in Portuguese and French. Finally, 
pharyngeal fricatives, both voiceless, [Ó], and voiced, [¿], are commonly found
in Semitic languages.
Affricates
The two palato-alveolar affricates of English are by far the most common ones
in the languages of the world. Besides these, alveolars are also relatively fre-
quent. The voiceless member, [ts], of this group, which is the most common
one, is found in Chinese, Croatian, Japanese, Slovene, and Czech, while the voiced
[dz] may be found in Bulgarian. Also worth mentioning is the voiceless bilabial
affricate, [pf], which is found in German.
Nasals
Just like the affricates, the nasals of English are among the most common in
languages of the world. However, mention should be made of the next most
common nasal, [ê], which is palatal. This sound is part of several languages
such as French, Spanish, Portuguese, Vietnamese, Hungarian, Catalan, Irish,
and Sundanese. Other nasals that are worth mentioning are the uvular [N], which
is found in Japanese and in several Amerindian languages, and retroflex nasal
[n] (or [≤]) found in Malayalam.
Liquids
In this group, we look at sounds that are known as ‘l-sounds’ and ‘r-sounds’,
which present a wide variety. The voiced alveolar approximant [l], found in
English, is one of the most common laterals in languages. Palatal [¥], which is
found in languages such as Italian and Portuguese, is another common lateral
approximant. Laterals are most likely to be approximants and voiced; however,
neither of these qualities is necessarily the case. Fricative laterals are more 
commonly voiceless (e.g. voiceless, alveolar fricative [¬], as in Welsh).
The r-sounds, while they all are normally voiced, present a wider range 
in types than laterals. It is common to see a distinction between ‘continuant’
and ‘interrupted’ r-sounds. The r-sounds of English (retroflex approximant 
in American English, [@], alveolar approximant in British English, [®]) are
examples of continuants.
More commonly, r-sounds belong to one of the ‘interrupted’ types (taps, 
flaps, trills). Both taps and flaps involve a momentary contact between the 
articulators. The Spanish [Q], in caro [kaQo] “expensive” (or the American
English intervocalic /t/, as in writer), is made with a flicking movement of the
tip of the tongue against the upper articulator. Taps are sometimes equated

PHONETICS
15
with flaps, which is not accurate. First, taps are mostly dental/alveolar while flaps
are retroflex. Also, these two sounds are different in direction of the movement;
in taps we have a movement from up to down, and in flaps from back to front.
Trills are produced by the repeated tapping of one flexible articulator
against the other. The dental/alveolar trill, [r], (e.g. Spanish perro [pero]
“dog”) is one of the most common in languages of the world. Also note-
worthy is the uvular trill, [R], which is found in German and in some varieties
of French (e.g. [RuZ] “red”). In some other varieties of French (e.g. Parisian), this
sound is a uvular fricative or approximant (e.g. [‰uZ] “red”). Sometimes a trill
may be accompanied with friction. The Czech r-sound [&] is a good example
of a voiced alveolar fricative trill (e.g. Dvorak [dvo&ak]).
Glides
The sounds /j/ and /w/ that are found in English are by far the most com-
mon glides in languages of the world. A noteworthy addition to this category
is the labio-palatal approximant, [Á], found in French (e.g. [mÁEt] “mute”). 
Table 1.3 gives the updated consonant chart.
While the additional symbols are useful in dealing with sounds that are not
found in English, they may not be sufﬁcient when dealing with data from a
disordered population. Here, we may require extra reﬁnement in the form of
new symbols and/or diacritics to accurately reflect the atypical productions,
which are rarely found in natural languages, or not found at all. Among such
articulations we may ﬁnd the following: dento-labials, the reverse of labio-
dentals, are articulated between the upper lip and the lower front teeth. These
may include stops [8, 2], nasal [5], and fricatives [4, 0]. Labio-alveolars, which
are common with speakers with excessive overbite for target labials and 
labio-dentals, are articulated between the lower lip and the alveolar ridge (e.g.
[p, o, q, <, >]). In clinical data, fricatives may be found with simultaneously
median airflow over the center of the tongue and laterally (e.g. [,, /]), as well
as fricatives with friction located within the nasal cavity (i.e. fricatives with 
nasal escape), [x, y, h]. Also commonly cited are labio-dental stops [7, 1] and
the velopharyngeal fricative (more commonly known as the velopharyngeal
snort) [fè]. The sounds cited above do not constitute an exhaustive list of pos-
sible atypical articulations found in disordered speech. For a more detailed
account and complete diacritics, including transcription conventions for
phonatory activities and connected speech modes, the reader is referred to Ball
and Lowry (2001).
1.4.3
Secondary articulations
In the production of some consonant sounds, we observe the addition of a 
secondary, lesser constriction to the primary articulation. The distinct sound
that is superimposed on the original creates the secondary articulation. Four
types of secondary articulation are common: labialization, palatalization,
velarization, and pharyngealization.

Table 1.3
Consonants (English and other languages)
Bilabial
Labio-
Dental/ 
Alveolar
Retroﬂex
Palato-
Palatal
Velar
Uvular
Pharyngeal
Glottal
dental
interdental
alveolar
Stop
p
b
9
3
t
d
À(Ê) d(Î)
c
J
k
•
q
G
3
Fricative
F
ã
f
v
b
g
s
z
s(ß) z(Û)
c
e
ç
Ô
x
ƒ
X
‰
Ó
¿
h
Affricate
pf
ts
dz
tc
de
Nasal
m
n
n(≤)
ê
V
N
Liquid
l r Q ®
£(„)
¥
R
Glide
w
Á
j
Á
w
Note: Sounds given in bold type occur in English.

PHONETICS
17
•
Labialization: This term refers to the addition of lip rounding, resulting 
in the rounded vowel quality of the type seen in boot. An example of a 
labialized consonant is found in the initial sound of quick. The diacritic for
labialization is a raised [w], because it is often accompanied by raising 
the back of the tongue (e.g. [kwIk]). Labialized consonants contrast with 
non-labialized consonants in some African languages.
•
Palatalization: This is the raising of the blade of the tongue toward the hard
palate without touching the roof of the mouth. It can be considered as 
the addition of a [j] quality to the primary articulation, and the diacritic for
palatalized consonants is a raised [j]. Russian and other Slavic languages
have palatalized consonants contrasting with the regular consonants (e.g.
[brat] “brother” vs. [bratj] “to take”).
•
Velarization: This term refers to the raising of the back of the tongue
toward, but not touching, the velum, as for the vowel [u] without the 
lip rounding. The diacritic for velarization is [~]. Scots Gaelic contrasts 
velarized and non-velarized consonants (e.g. [bal@] “town” vs. [baÚ@] “ball/
wall”).
•
Pharyngealization: This refers to the lowering of the back of the tongue and
a retraction of the root toward the pharynx wall, resulting in a narrowing
of the pharynx (i.e. the addition of an [A] quality). The same diacritic that is
used for velarization is commonly used for pharyngealization, as no lan-
guage makes a contrast between these consonant types.
1.4.4
Consonants made with non-pulmonic 
airstream mechanisms
The sounds we have described so far are all produced using air from the 
lungs, and thus are called ‘pulmonic’ sounds. While the sounds in many 
languages are exclusively made with this pulmonic egressive (outgoing airflow)
airstream, several other languages may, in addition, utilize one or two other
airstream mechanisms, especially for the stop sounds. These mechanisms 
are ‘glottalic’ airstream (which employs the air above the closed glottis, that
is, pharynx air, and produces ‘ejectives’ and ‘implosives’, which are some-
times called ‘glottalized’ or ‘laryngealized’ consonants), and ‘velaric’ airstream
(which employs the air in the mouth, and produces ‘clicks’).
Ejectives
In order to produce ejectives the closed larynx is raised. This is accompanied
by a closure in the mouth (bilabial, alveolar, velar) and a raised velum. Raising
the larynx squeezes the air trapped between the glottis and the consonant 
closure in the vocal tract and raises the air pressure in this chamber. Upon 
release of the consonant closure, the air rushes out. Stops produced this way are
called ‘ejectives’. Because there is no vocal cord vibration, ejectives are typically
voiceless. They are symbolized by the appropriate consonant symbol with the
addition of an apostrophe ([p’, t’, k’]), and are common in many Amerindian

18
PHONETICS
languages (e.g. Nez Perce, Klamath, Nootka, Dakota), Circassian languages 
(e.g. Kabardian, Georgian), and African languages (e.g. Zulu, Hausa).
Implosives
The mechanism to produce implosives is the opposite of that of ejectives. 
Here, instead of squeezing the air and increasing the pressure, the downward-
moving larynx sucks the air inward and reduces the air pressure. In general,
the glottis cannot remain tightly closed during this downward movement of
the larynx, and there is vocal cord vibration. When the closure in the vocal tract
is released, the air rushes in, and thus ‘implosives’ are stops made by glottalic
ingressive airstream. Implosives can be found in many African languages 
(e.g. Zulu, Hausa) and are symbolized by the addition of an upper rightward
hook to the appropriate stop symbol ([∫, ∂, ∆, ©, Ì]).
Clicks
The enclosed cavity for the production of a ‘click’ is created in the mouth. The
back closure is formed by raising the back of the tongue against the soft palate
(velum), and the front closure is formed somewhere more front in the mouth
(e.g. alveolar ridge). The lowering of the body of the tongue rareﬁes the air,
and when the front closure is removed, the air is sucked into the mouth. The
result is a clicking sound; ‘tsk-tsk’ is one that we hear for disapproval in English.
Since the airflow is inward, clicks are known as sounds made with velaric ingres-
sive airstream mechanism. Clicks, as speech sounds, are conﬁned to languages
of southern Africa. To symbolize clicks, we ﬁnd the following: [\] bilabial, [|]
dental, [!] post-alveolar, and [||] alveolar lateral.
Stops made with pulmonic and non-pulmonic airstream mechanisms are given
in table 1.4.
1.4.5
Vowels
American English has a rather rich vowel inventory that covers many of the
positions on the vowel grid; however, there are many other possibilities that
are found in other languages. UPSID (UCLA Phonological Segment Inventory
Database) (Maddieson 1984), which looks at more than 300 languages that are
representative of different language families, shows a grid with 37 different
vowel symbols. We will not go into that much detail here. Instead, we will ﬁrst
point out some non-English vowels that are common in several familiar 
Table 1.4
Stops made with pulmonic and non-pulmonic airstream mechanisms
Bilabial
Dental
Alveolar
Palato-alveolar
Velar
Ejectives
p’
t’
k’
Implosives
∫
∂
©
Clicks
:
|
«
!

PHONETICS
19
languages, and then we will give a brief description of ‘cardinal vowels’,
which are commonly used for reference points in talking about the vowels of
other languages.
Although it is commonplace to ﬁnd front vowels as unrounded, there are
some front rounded vowels that are found in several familiar languages.
These are high front rounded, /y/ (/ü/) (the rounded counterpart of /i/), 
high-mid (close-mid) front rounded, /ø/ (/ö/) (the rounded counterpart of /e/),
and low-mid (open-mid) front rounded, /œ/ (the rounded counterpart of /E/).
All three are part of French and several Germanic languages (German,
Swedish, Danish, Norwegian). Hungarian has /y/ and /ø/, while Cantonese
and Turkish have /y/ and /œ/. Another noteworthy vowel that is not part
of English is the high back unrounded /µ/ (unrounded counterpart of /u/),
which is found in Korean, Turkish, and many Amerindian languages.
1.5
Cardinal Vowels
Although we use similar traditional labels for vowel descriptions of different
languages (e.g. high, front, rounded, etc.), we should not assume that vowels
that are described the same way are identical in two languages. For example,
both French and Galician have high front unrounded vowels, /i/, but their
qualities are not the same. Similarly, identically transcribed vowels from 
different languages may not be the same. For example, if we look at /œ/ of
Cantonese, French, and Dutch, we realize that they are all different; Cantonese
has the highest tongue position, French is in the middle, and Dutch has the
lowest. To avoid such problems in the description of vowels of different 
languages, phoneticians usually refer to the set of arbitrarily chosen vowels that
is known as ‘cardinal vowels’ and describe the particular vowel of a language
with reference to this system. The primary and secondary cardinal vowels are
given in ﬁgure 1.7.
The front vowels (1–4) and (9–12) and the back vowels (5–8) and (13–16)
are equidistant from one another. As such, they do not necessarily represent
the vowels of any language; rather, they are arbitrary reference points that 
the vowels of any language can be described against. The top left corner 
of the vowel space deﬁnes the highest and most front possible vowel, (1). The
bottom right corner (5) is the other extreme, which is the lowest and most back
(17) i u (18)
(14) √
O (6)
o (7)
u (8)
(16) µ
(15) Ï
(13) Å
(3) E
(1) i
(2) e
(4) a
A (5)
œ (11)
ø (10)
y (9)
œ (12)
Figure 1.7
Cardinal vowels

20
PHONETICS
vowel. The other two corners represent the extremes in low front (4) and high
back (8). The secondary cardinal vowels (the ones inside the grid) repeat the
primary set with the opposite lip rounding. As such, (9) is high front rounded,
(12) low front rounded, (13) low back rounded, and (16) high back unrounded.
Before we conclude this section, we will show how, using this system, we
can describe vowels from different languages. Although, as stated above /œ/
is in the inventory of Cantonese, Dutch, and French, the realizations are not
identical; this can be shown as in ﬁgure 1.8.
Thus, we can say that /œ/ of Cantonese is a little lower than (10) and a little
centralized. As for the French and Dutch counterparts, we can state the 
following: while French /œ/ is a little higher than (11), the Dutch sound is a 
little lower than (11) and more centralized.
1.6
Syllables and Suprasegmentals
So far in this chapter we have considered the phonetic characteristics of 
individual speech sounds or segments. However, segments do not exist in 
isolation but are part of larger units, such as syllables, which in turn make up
larger units of utterances.
Syllable
The syllable is a phonological unit consisting of segments around the pivotal
vowel or vowel-like (diphthong) sound, which is known as the nucleus. The
nucleus is the element that every syllable contains, and the other elements are
deﬁned in relation to it; the consonant(s) before the nucleus are called the onset,
and the consonant(s) after it the coda. Thus, in the following three words we
have syllables with different elements: in a [e], we have only the nucleus with
no onset and no coda; in at [æt], the syllable consists of the nucleus and the
coda and there is no onset; ﬁnally, in cat [kæt], we have all three elements 
present. We will not go into greater detail on various other possibilities, as the
detailed structure of English syllables will be discussed in chapter 6.
Nucleus and coda together (the elements after the onset) are known as the
rhyme (or rime), thus giving us the following hierarchical structure:
Cantonese
Dutch
French
Figure 1.8
Realizations of /œ/ in Cantonese, Dutch, and French

PHONETICS
21
Depending on the structure of the rhyme, syllables are classiﬁed as closed (with
coda(s)) and open (lacking coda(s)). Thus, in the word beacon [bi.k@n] we have
an open ﬁrst syllable followed by a closed second syllable.
Suprasegmentals
In the context of utterances, certain features such as pitch, stress, and length
are contributing factors to the messages. Such features, which are used simul-
taneously with units larger than segments, are called ‘suprasegmentals’.
Pitch:
The pitch of the voice refers to the frequency of the vocal cord vibra-
tion. It is influenced by the tension of the vocal cords and the amount of 
air that passes through them. In an utterance, different portions are pro-
duced at different pitches. The patterns of rises and falls (pitch variation) across a
stretch of speech such as a sentence is called its intonation. The meaning of 
a sentence may depend on its intonation pattern. For example, if we utter 
the sequence her uncle is coming next week with a falling pitch, this will be
interpreted as a statement. If, on the other hand, the same is uttered with a
rise in pitch at the end, it will be understood as a question.
In many languages, the pitch variation can signal differences in word mean-
ing. Such languages, exempliﬁed by several Sino-Tibetan languages (e.g.
Mandarin, Cantonese), Niger-Congo languages (e.g. Zulu, Yoruba, Igbo), and
many Amerindian languages (e.g. Apache, Navajo, Kiowa), are called tone 
languages. To demonstrate how tone can affect the lexical change, we can refer
to the much-celebrated example of [ma] of Mandarin Chinese:
[ma]
if uttered with a high level tone,
/A/,
“mother”
high rising tone,
/B/,
“hemp”
low falling rising tone,
/C/,
“horse”
high falling tone,
/D/,
“scold”
Such lexical changes cannot be accomplished in non-tonal languages such 
as English, Spanish, French, etc. In addition to the lexical differences, which 
are standard in all tone languages, some languages may utilize tonal shifts for
morphological or syntactic purposes (e.g. Bini of Nigeria for tense shift, Shona
of Zimbabwe to separate the main clause and the relative clause, and Igbo of
Nigeria to indicate possession).
Stress:
Stress can be deﬁned as syllable prominence. The prominence of a
stressed syllable over an unstressed one may be due to a number of factors.
dog [dOg]
nucleus
O
coda
onset
rhyme
d
g

22
PHONETICS
These may include (a) loudness (stressed syllables are louder than unstressed
syllables), (b) duration (stressed syllables are longer than unstressed syl-
lables), and (c) pitch (stressed syllables are produced with higher pitch than
unstressed syllables). Languages and dialects (varieties) vary in which of these
features are decisive in separating stressed syllables from the unstressed ones.
In English, higher pitch has been shown to be the most influential perceptual
cue in this respect (Fry 1955, 1979).
Variation in syllable duration and loudness produce differences in rhythm.
English rhythm (like that of most other Germanic languages) is said to be 
stress-timed. What this means is that stressed syllables tend to occur at roughly
equal intervals in time (isochronous). The opposite pattern, which is known as
syllable-timing, is the rhythmic beat by the recurrences of syllables, not stresses.
Spanish, Greek, French, Hindi, Italian, and Turkish are good examples of such
a rhythm. One of the signiﬁcant differences between the two types of languages
lies in the differences of length between stressed and unstressed syllables, and
vowel reduction or lack thereof. We can exemplify this by looking at English
and Spanish. If we consider the English word probability and its cognate Spanish
probabilidad, the difference becomes rather obvious. Although the words
share the same meaning and the same number of syllables, the similarities do
not go beyond that. In Spanish (a syllable-timed language), the stress is on the
last syllable, [proãaãiliDáD]. Although the remaining syllables are unstressed,
they all have full vowels, and the duration of all ﬁve syllables is approximately
the same. In English (a stress-timed language), on the other hand, the word
[p@àb@bil@Qi] reveals a rather different picture. The third syllable receives the
main stress (the most prominent) and the ﬁrst syllable has a secondary stress
(second most prominent). The ﬁrst, third, and last syllables have full vowels,
while the second and fourth syllables have reduced vowels. Thus, besides the
two stressed syllables, the last syllable, because it has a full vowel, has greater
duration than the second and fourth syllables. Because of such differences in
rhythm, English is said to have a ‘galloping’ rhythm as opposed to the ‘staccato’
rhythm of Spanish.
Several scholars (Dauer 1983; Giegerich 1992) object to the binary split
between ‘stress-timing’ and ‘syllable-timing’, and suggest a continuum in
which a given language may be placed. For example, while French is frequently
cited among ‘syllable-timed’ languages, it is also shown to have strong
stresses breaking the rhythm of the sentence, a characteristic that is normally
reserved for ‘stress-timed’ languages.
A rather uncontroversial split among languages with respect to stress
relates to ‘ﬁxed’ (predictable) stress versus ‘variable’ stress languages. In
English, as in other Germanic languages, the position of stress is variable. For
example, import as a noun will have the stress on the ﬁrst syllable, [impO®t],
whereas it will be on the second syllable if it is a verb, [Impc®t].
In several languages, however, stress is ﬁxed in a given word position. In
such cases, the ﬁrst syllable (e.g. Czech, Slovak, Hungarian, Finnish), the last
syllable (e.g. French, Farsi), or the next-to-last syllable (e.g. Polish, Welsh, Swahili,
Quechua, Italian) is favored.

PHONETICS
23
Length:
Length differences in vowels or consonants may be used to make 
lexical distinctions in languages. Swedish, Estonian, Finnish, Arabic, Japanese,
and Danish can be cited for vowel length contrasts (e.g. Danish [vil@] “wild”
vs. [vi:l@] “rest”). English does not have such meaning differences entirely based
on vowel length. Examples such as beat vs. bit and pool vs. pull are separated
not simply on the basis of length, but also on vowel height and tense/lax 
distinctions.
In consonantal length, we again make reference to languages other than
English. For example, in Italian and in Turkish different consonant length 
is responsible for lexical distinctions (e.g. Italian nonno [nOnno] “grandfather”
vs. nono [nOno] “ninth”; Turkish eli [Eli] “his/her hand” vs. elli [Elli] “ﬁfty”).
In English, we can have a longer consonant at word or morpheme bound-
aries: [k] black cat, [f] half full, and [n] ten names are produced with one long
obstruction.
SUMMARY
In this chapter, we examined the basic elements of phonetics, which are 
prerequisites to understanding the patterning of sounds. We looked at the 
fundamentals of articulatory phonetics including voicing, places and manners
of articulation, voice onset time, and dimensions that are relevant for vocalic
articulations such as tongue height and backness, as well as lip positions. We
also reviewed some common non-English sounds that might be of relevance.
Finally, we had a brief account of syllable and suprasegmental features such
as stress, tone, intonation, and length.

24
PHONETICS
EXERCISES
1.
Examine the following transcriptions. If you agree, do nothing; if the
transcription is erroneous, correct it.
injured [Inje@d]
gelatin [gEl@tIn]
measure [mEshu@]
inches [intS@s]
caution [kOS@n]
topical [topIk@l]
telephone [tel@phon]
syllable [s@l@b@l]
2.
How many sound segments are there in each of the following words?
homophone
equestrian
broach
writer
thatched
middle
knack
photographer
lesson
imagination
3.
State whether the place of articulation is the same (S) or different
(D) in the initial consonants of each pair. In either case, state the place
of articulation.
Example:
now – pneumonia
Same; alveolar
sun – sugar
Different; alveolar vs.
palato-alveolar
(a)
goose – gerrymander
(b)
simple – shackle
(c)
curious – cereal
(d)
phonetic – ﬁctional
(e)
manners – wicker
(f)
normal – location
(g)
wander – yesterday
(h)
those – Thursday
(i)
scissors – zipper
(j)
temperate – chestnut
(k)
chromosome – chief
(l)
baker – delegate
(m)
happened – usual
(n)
neuron – market
(o)
painting – broccoli

PHONETICS
25
4.
State whether the manner of articulation is the same (S) or different
(D) in the ﬁnal consonants of each pair. In either case, state the man-
ner of articulation.
Example:
bomb – ten
Same; nasal
rough – zip
Different; fricative vs. stop
(a)
album – broken
(b)
ideal – keepsake
(c)
prologue – conﬁne
(d)
aqueous – sociable
(e)
variable – watch
(f)
waste – adage
(g)
barometer – ﬁnish
(h)
inch – gauge
(i)
ﬁord – equip
(j)
barb – relief
(k)
alive – ﬁftieth
(l)
laughing – hydraulic
(m)
opulence – paramedic
(n)
outrage – swivel
(o)
dominion – eminent
5.
State whether the vowels in the underlined portions are the same or 
different in the following words. In either case, state the phonetic
description of the vowels, together with the phonetic symbols.
Example:
keel – city
Same: /i/ high, front, tense
mess – mass
Different: /E/ mid, front – /æ/ low, front
(a)
primary – nutrition
(b)
heal – electricity
(c)
beau – aperture
(d)
anywhere – phantasm
(e)
exposure – coaster
(f)
explicable – explicate
(g)
wave – irrigate
(h)
measure – finger
(i)
butter – tough
(j)
cholesterol – bottom
(k)
nymph – jump
(l)
abate – caught
(m)
hydrogen – hydrolysis
(n)
pawn – harsh

26
PHONETICS
6.
Circle the words that:
(a)
start with a fricative
foreign, theater, tidings, hospital, cassette, shroud
(b)
end in a sibilant
wishes, twelfth, clutch, indicates, admonish, furtive
(c)
have an approximant
winter, university, captive, ripe, little, mute
(d)
contain a back vowel
putter, boost, roast, fraud, matter, hospital
(e)
start with a voiced obstruent
government, pottery, taxonomy, jury, phonograph, sister
(f)
contain a lax vowel
auction, redeem, ledger, cram, boat, loom
(g)
end in an alveolar
went, atom, rigor, column, multiple, garnish
7.
Give the phonetic symbols for the following English sounds.
(a)
voiceless stops
________________
(b)
voiced fricatives
________________
(c)
approximants
________________
(d)
alveolar obstruents
________________
(e)
nasals
________________
(f)
voiced obstruents
________________
Now give the phonetic symbols for the following sounds that are
not found in English.
(g)
alveolar affricates
________________
(h)
voiceless velar and uvular fricatives
________________
(i)
bilabial and palatal fricatives
________________
(j)
non-lateral liquids
________________
(k)
palatal and uvular stops
________________
8.
The sounds in the underlined portions of the following pairs of words
share some phonetic properties and are different in some other
properties. Give the phonetic symbol for each sound and state the
shared feature(s) and difference(s).
Example:
[p] “park” – “phone” [f]
Shared: voiceless, obstruent
Difference(s): 
[p] bilabial, stop
[f] labio-dental, fricative

PHONETICS
27
(a)
telephone – television
(b)
atop – wiser
(c)
bitter – easy
(d)
mister – enemy
(e)
shipment – justice
(f)
wait – root
(g)
lime – window
(h)
alone – elevate
(i)
feather – fought
(j)
limp – soccer
9.
The following groups consist of sounds that share a phonetic fea-
ture plus one sound that does not belong to this group. Circle the
sound that does not belong to the group, and identify the feature
shared by the remaining sounds of the group.
Example: /l, d, s, t, k, z/ /k/ is a velar, the rest are alveolars
(a)
/f, S, tS, z, T, Z, D/ 
______________________________________
(b)
/t, z, n, m, d, l, s/ 
______________________________________
(c)
/I, E, U, u, æ, √/ 
______________________________________
(d)
/n, g, v, s, z, @, m/
_____________________________________
(e)
/m, w, è, p, b/ 
______________________________________
(f)
/i, I, æ, A, e, E/ 
______________________________________
10.
Fill in the boxes with the appropriate label for the ﬁnal sounds of each
word.
sipped
latex
triumph
bridge rough
fought dogs
palm
Upper 
articulator
Lower 
articulator
Voicing
Manner of 
articulation

28
PHONETICS
11.
Do the same for the initial sounds of the same words.
sipped
latex
triumph
bridge rough
fought dogs
palm
Upper 
articulator
Lower 
articulator
Voicing
Manner of 
articulation
12.
Fill in the boxes for the ﬁrst vowels of the following words.
park
ocean
make
ember
hamper
fought
hypocrite
chew
Tongue 
height
Frontness/
backness
Lip 
position
Tenseness/
laxness
13.
Circle the correct alternative(s):
(a)
Tensing the vocal cords makes them vibrate faster / slower, so
that the pitch increases / decreases.
(b)
In the production of stops / fricatives / glides / affricates, the
air is blocked from going out through the nose and the mouth.
(c)
In the production of stops / liquids / fricatives / nasals, the con-
striction of the vocal tract is such that a noisy airstream is formed.
(d)
In the production of palato-alveolar sounds, the tip / front /
blade / back of the tongue goes to the forward part of the hard
palate / soft palate / uvula.
(e)
In the production of labio-dental / bilabial / labio-velar / velar
sounds, the two lips approach one another, and the back of the
tongue is raised toward the soft palate.

PHONETICS
29
14.
Transcribe the following and state how many sonorant consonants,
obstruents, and voiced consonants the sentence has.
“Don’t talk unless you can improve silence.”
Jorge Luis Borges
15.
Transcribe the following (about “the spread of English”) from 
P. Trudgill and J. Hannah, International English, 4th edn. (London:
Edward Arnold, 2002).
The English language developed out of Germanic dialects that were 
brought to Britain, during the course of the 5th and 6th centuries, 
by Jutes (from modern Jutland, Denmark), Angles (from modern 
Schleswig, Denmark/Germany), and Frisians (from modern Friesland,
Netherlands/Germany). By medieval times, this Germanic language
had replaced the original Celtic language of Britain in nearly all of 
England as well as in southern and eastern Scotland. Until the 1600s,
however, English remained a language spoken by a relatively small 
number of people and was conﬁned geographically to the island of 
Great Britain. Indeed, even much of Britain remained non-English-
speaking. The original Celtic language of Britain survived in the form 
of Welsh in nearly all of Wales and as Cornish in much of Cornwall. 
The Highlands and islands of western and northern Scotland spoke 
Gaelic, another Celtic language which had been brought across from
Ireland in pre-medieval times. And the populations of the Northern 
Isles – Orkney and Shetland – still spoke the Scandinavian language,
Norn, which they had inherited from their Viking ancestors.

2
Phonology
2.1
Introduction
If we look at sound inventories of languages, we notice that several sounds
are shared by a multiplicity of languages. Indeed, it is also possible that two
or more languages have exactly the same sounds. However, having the same
sounds does not mean that their phonologies (their patterning) are the same.
Let us illustrate this with some concrete examples. If we presented the words
name, snail, panther, and invite to a native speaker of English and asked whether
there was any consonant sound that is shared by these words, we would invari-
ably get a positive answer, and the consonant sound identiﬁed would be the
one orthographically represented by n. In fact, the sounds that are identiﬁed
as the same are not phonetically identical. In name [nem] we have a voiced
alveolar nasal, which becomes partially devoiced in snail [sNel]. In panther, the
nasal sound is dental [pæ6T2], and ﬁnally, in invite, it is labio-dental, [IÂvaIt].
What is interesting and important here is the fact that, although there are phonetic
differences among these sounds, native speakers of English do not pay atten-
tion to them, as the differences are functionally not relevant in their language.
If, on the other hand, we present the ﬁrst and the third words in the above
list (name and panther) to a speaker of Malayalam (a Dravidian language, 
spoken in the southwest of India), the situation would be entirely different.
Since, in this language, employment of [6] instead of [n] in a given word can
change the meaning of the word, the phonetic difference between the dental
and alveolar nasals cannot be overlooked, and the speakers of Malayalam would
perceive the phonetic difference under consideration immediately.
Let us now consider another example in which the sensitivity to a given 
phonetic difference between two sounds will come from speakers of English,
while it is overlooked in another language. If we give the following words,
drama “drama”, dolor “pain”, comida “food”, and lado “side”, to native
speakers of Spanish and ask them whether there is any consonant sound
shared by all these words, the unmistakable answer would be the sound that
is orthographically represented by d. The fact is that while the sound that is
represented by the orthographic d in the ﬁrst two words is a stop, [3], the one
two
Applied English Phonology, Second Edition       Mehmet Yavaş 
© 2011 Mehmet Yavaş. ISBN: 978-1-444-33322-0 

PHONOLOGY
31
represented by the same grapheme in the third and the fourth words is a 
fricative, [D]. In a way similar to what happened in the above case with dif-
ferent nasals in English, Spanish speakers overlook the phonetically different
sounds, because their language does not employ the phonetic difference
between these two sounds in a structurally signiﬁcant fashion. If, on the other
hand, we give two words containing the same two sounds to a speaker of English,
the difference between [3] and [D] will be immediately noticed. The reason for
this is that the difference between these two sounds is very critical in English
and can separate one word from another, as exempliﬁed by the pair of words
day [de] and they [De].
When such mismatches are pointed out to the speakers of languages where
phonetic differences are overlooked, one very often sees an attempt to justify
this by suggesting that whatever difference is overlooked presents a very small
difference phonetically, whereas the immediately noticed one is very obvious.
That is, in the case of English, the speakers would defend the situation by saying
that the differences among the nasals [n, 6, N, Â] is small and may not be per-
ceptible, while the difference between [d] and [D] is larger and is easily noticed.
That such explanations cannot be taken seriously becomes obvious when we
switch the cases around and put the same questions to Malayalam speakers
for the difference between [6] and [n], and to Spanish speakers for [3] and [D].
The answers we will get will be diametrically opposed to what we receive from
speakers of English. We are likely to be told how obvious the difference
between the dental and alveolar nasals is by Malayalam speakers, and how
insigniﬁcant the difference is between [3] and [D] by speakers of Spanish. These
examples show that whether the users of a given language would be attuned
to a given phonetic difference simply depends on whether that difference is
contrastive (capable of changing the meaning of words) in that language.
Whether a given phonetic difference is meaningful (i.e. easily perceived, catches
the attention of native speakers, etc.) has to do with the functional (con-
trastive) status in a language, and this has to do with the distribution of sounds
in a given sound system.
2.2
Complementary versus Overlapping Distribution
2.2.1
Overlapping distribution and contrast
In languages, sounds are in either of two types of distribution. When two sounds
are capable of occurring in the same environment, we say that these sounds
are in overlapping distribution. For example, the sounds [l] and [@] are in 
overlapping distribution in English, because they can be found in the same 
environment, as exempliﬁed by the following pairs of words:
(a)
lake [lek] – rake [@ek]
(b) mole [mol] – more [mo@]
(c)
elect [IlEkt] – erect [I@Ekt]

32
PHONOLOGY
The examples above show that the sounds [l] and [@] are capable of occurring
in the same environment (in word-initial position, followed by the same
sound, in (a); in word-ﬁnal position, preceded by the same sounds, in (b); and
medially, preceded and followed by the same sounds, in (c)). It should be 
mentioned that the environments relevant to the distribution can be deﬁned
in terms of word or syllable position, neighboring sounds (preceding and/or
following), or suprasegmentals.
When we have an overlapping distribution as shown above, we say that 
the sounds in question are in a non-predictable distribution. An overlapping
distribution is not required to manifest itself in multiple positions; one 
environment will be enough to conclude the overlap. For example, the sounds
[n] and [è] in English may be found in an overlapping distribution only in a
syllable-ﬁnal position (e.g. kin [kIn] – king [kIè]). This is because [è] can be
found in English only in this environment.
When two sounds are found in an overlapping distribution, and the substi-
tution of one sound for the other changes the meaning of the word (e.g. [lek]
vs. [@ek], [kIn] vs. [kIè]), we say that they are in contrast, and they are the 
manifestations of different phonemes.
The pairs of words used above to show the overlapping environments and
contrasts are known as minimal pairs. Simply deﬁned, minimal pairs are pairs
of words that have exactly the same sounds in the same order except for a 
single difference in sounds, and have different meanings. These are well
exempliﬁed in the pairs (a)–(c) above. Notice that the only way we can create
a minimal pair with reference to the two sounds involved is to put them in
exactly the same environment in terms of word position and the surrounding
context. To clarify further, the pair: jail – Yale shows the contrast between /dZ/
and /j/ in initial position, budge – buzz focuses on the contrast between /dZ/
and /z/ in ﬁnal position, while witch – wish contrasts /tS/ and /S/ in ﬁnal
position. It should be noted that minimal pairs include forms that have dif-
ferent spellings, as evidenced in jail – Yale. In the following, we provide more
examples with different spellings:
Contrast
bite – light
/b/ and /l/ initially
bowl – soul
/b/ and /s/ initially
debt – dead
/t/ and /d/ ﬁnally
father – fodder
/D/ and /d/ medially
broth – brought
/T/ and /t/ ﬁnally
body – buddy
/A/ and /√/ medially
scene – bean
/s/ and /b/ initially
While ﬁnding minimal pairs is very comforting and makes our job easy 
in concluding that the ‘suspicious’ pair/group of sounds (i.e. the one we are
examining) are in contrast and should belong to separate phonemes, this may
not always be possible. The language simply may accidentally lack the needed
vocabulary items. This is probably more common in languages with long
words and large inventories. However, no language is immune to this. When

PHONOLOGY
33
we do not have the minimal pairs to prove that two or more sounds are in
contrast, we look for the ‘near-minimal pair’. This is a pair of words that would
be a minimal pair except for some irrelevant difference. What this rather
vague deﬁnition says is that the potentially influential elements in the linguistic
environment are kept constant, while others that are unlikely to influence a
change may be different. Essentially, we look at the immediately preceding and
immediately following environments, because these are the primary sources
of contextual conditioning for changes. For example, if we cannot ﬁnd an exact
minimal pair to show the contrast between [S] and [Z] in English, we can use
the words vision [vIZ@n] and mission [mIS@n], or illusion [@luZ@n] and solution
[s@luS@n]. Although these pairs do not constitute minimal pairs (because the
difference is not solely in the suspicious pair of sounds, [S] and [Z], but also
related to others), the relevant ‘preceding’ and ‘following’ environments of the
suspicious pairs of sounds are kept identical. Similarly, pairs such as lethargy
[lET2dZi] and leather [lED2] for [T] and [D], and lesion [liZ@n] and heathen [hiD@n]
for [Z] and [D], would serve as near-minimal pairs. Thus, we can answer the
question “Do the two sounds occur in the same/similar environment?”
afﬁrmatively, and conclude that the pairs of sounds considered above are in
contrast and belong to two separate phonemes.
2.2.2
Complementary distribution
The other distributional possibility, complementary distribution, presents the
diametrically opposing picture. Here we never ﬁnd the two or more sounds
in the same environment. Stating it simply, we can say that two sounds are 
in complementary distribution if /X/ never appears in any of the phonetic 
environments in which /Y/ occurs. Having said that, we can now go back to
some of the examples we gave at the beginning of the chapter and re-examine
them. The ﬁrst one concerns the dental and alveolar nasal sounds [6] and [n].
In English the distribution of these two sounds is such that they never appear
in the same environment (that is, they are mutually exclusive). We ﬁnd the 
dental only before /T/ or /D/, as in tenth [tE6T], in the game [I6 D@ . . . ], where
the other one never appears. When we ﬁnd the sound /X/ only in a certain
environment, and the sound /Y/ in a completely different environment, then
it is impossible for the difference between these two sounds to be contrastive,
because a contrast requires an overlapping distribution. In such cases of 
complementary distribution, we say that these sounds are allophones of one
and the same phoneme. We should be reminded, in passing, that the very 
same two sounds are capable of occurring in the same environment, as we saw
in the case of Malayalam, and function contrastively (thus, belong to two 
separate phonemes) in that language.
Another example of the complementary distribution of an allophonic 
relationship can be given for [3] and [D] of Spanish. These two sounds can never
occur in the same environment in Spanish; [D] occurs between two vowels 
or after a nasal, [3] occurs in the remaining environments. This is clearly 
an example of a complementary distribution where the occurrences of the two

34
PHONOLOGY
members are mutually exclusive. Consequently, we say that in Spanish [3] and
[D] are the allophones (positional variants) of the same phoneme.
The best analogy (and, surely, a student favorite) for complementary distri-
bution I have heard to date has been provided by the relationship between
‘Superman’ and ‘Clark Kent’ (I don’t know who the credit is due to). Although
these two characters belong to the same person, their presence is entirely 
mutually exclusive (they can never appear in the same environment). While
we invariably see ‘Superman’ during the moment of danger, ‘Clark Kent’ is
the fellow we encounter in the newspaper ofﬁce. Thus, these two characters
provide an excellent case of complementary distribution.
While it is true to say that the allophones of the same phoneme are in 
complementary distribution, this assertion can only be unidirectional. That is,
we cannot reverse the statement and say “if two sounds are in comple-
mentary distribution, then they are the allophones of the same phoneme”. 
The reason for this may be some defective distribution of certain sounds. 
The distributions of English [h] and [è] are a case in point. While [è] occurs
only as a coda (syllable-ﬁnal), and never as an onset (syllable-initial), [h] is 
found only as an onset and never as a coda. The distribution displayed 
here is a perfect match for the ‘Superman’ and ‘Clark Kent’ situation. Because
the contexts are mutually exclusive, the distribution will undoubtedly be
labeled as ‘complementary’. Despite this fact, no one has ever suggested (or
will ever suggest) that these two sounds should be treated as the allophones
of the same phoneme. This is because they do not satisfy the other important
requirement of an allophonic relationship, ‘phonetic similarity’. Allophones 
of the same phoneme always share phonetic features, and thus are phonetic-
ally similar. If we look at the two sounds in question, we hardly see any 
phonetic similarity; [h] is a voiceless glottal fricative, and [è] is a voiced 
velar nasal. In other words, these sounds do not share anything with respect
to place or manner of articulation; nor do they share voicing. Thus, we 
can state the following generalization: two or more sounds are allophones 
(positional variants) of the same phoneme, if (a) they are in complementary
distribution, and (b) they are phonetically similar.
While examining the environment that might be of relevance, there is one
very important aspect to keep in mind, and this is the particular phonetic 
feature(s) that separate(s) the sounds in the suspicious pair/group. The reason
for this is that different changes can and will be stimulated by different envir-
onments. For example, if we ﬁnd one member, e.g. [b], of the suspicious pair
in an exclusively intervocalic environment, and never ﬁnd the other member,
e.g. [p], in the same environment, we seem to have a very good case for con-
cluding that these two sounds should be the allophones of the same phoneme.
Besides satisfying the requirement of complementary distribution and phonetic
closeness between the two sounds, the appearance of the voiced member in
an intervocalic environment (surrounding two voiced sounds) is an excellent
way to stimulate voicing. In other words, the context makes perfect phonetic
sense for the change.

PHONOLOGY
35
There is no magic formula for arriving at an airtight conclusion for phonetic
similarity. However, the following can provide some useful guidelines as to
what constitutes a suspicious pair (or group) of sounds that might prove to be
the allophones of the same phoneme:
Obstruents
•
Voiced–voiceless pairs with same place and manner of articulation (e.g.
[p–b], [s–z], [tS–dZ]).
•
Pairs of sounds with same voicing and manner of articulation, and rather close
places of articulation (e.g. [s–S], [f–T]).
•
Pairs of sounds with same voicing and place of articulation but different 
manner of articulation (e.g. [t–tS], [k–x], [p–F]).
Sonorant consonants
•
All nasals (especially the ones that are close in place of articulation).
•
All liquids (within laterals, within non-laterals, and across these two 
subgroups).
•
Glides [j] and [w] and high vowels [i] and [u] respectively. Glides may 
also have a relationship with the fricatives of the same or similar places of
articulation.
The common theme in all the examples above is that there are more phonetic
features that unite them than features that divide them. For example, [s] is a
voiceless, alveolar fricative, and [S] is a voiceless, palato-alveolar fricative. In
other words, both sounds are voiceless and fricatives. The only feature in which
they differ is the place of articulation.
Having reviewed the relevant concepts regarding contrastive and com-
plementary distribution, we can now go back and re-examine the phonetic 
differences that were easily perceived or overlooked by speakers of certain 
languages. For example, the difference between the dental and alveolar nasals,
[6] and [n], is overlooked by speakers of English, but noticed immediately by
speakers of Malayalam. In the case of [d] and [D], the situation was different
for speakers of English: while the difference is easily perceived by speakers 
of English, the same phonetic distinction is overlooked by speakers of 
Spanish. The reasons for different reactions to the same phonetic differences
lie in the way these differences are employed in different languages. While [n–6]
are in complementary distribution in English and the difference is allophonic,
the same sounds are in contrastive distribution and belong to separate
phonemes in Malayalam. In English [d–D] is contrastive, but it is allophonic 
in Spanish. There seems to be little doubt that contrastiveness plays a major
role in the perception of language users. When two sounds are allophones 
of the same phoneme, a speaker of the language will feel that they are the 
same sound.
To sum up what has been reviewed so far, we can state that two or more
phonetically similar sounds may have a different phonemic (functional) status
in different languages. Their status is determined solely by their distribution

36
PHONOLOGY
in a given sound system. If they are in overlapping distribution (that is, 
can occur in the same environment, which can be veriﬁed via existence of 
a minimal or near-minimal pair), and the substitution of one for the other results
in a change of meaning, then these two or more sounds are in contrast and are
phonetic manifestations of different phonemes (for example, day [de] and they
[De] reveal that [d] and [D] belong to separate phonemes, /d/ and /D/ respec-
tively). When two sounds are in contrast (i.e. when the difference is phonemic),
the speakers of that language develop a high-grade sensitivity toward that 
difference, and notice any failure to observe it.
If, on the other hand, the distribution of two or more phonetically similar
sounds is complementary (that is, they are found in mutually exclusive 
environments), they are said to be the allophones of one and the same
phoneme. The difference between the two or more sounds, then, is allophonic
and not phonemic (e.g. [n], [N], [6], [Â] in name, snail, panther, and invite, 
respectively). In such cases, speakers’ sensitivity to these phonetic differences
is extremely low-grade, if it exists at all. The reason for this is that these 
differences are never utilized to make any meaning differences among words
(cf. the difference between [n] and [6] in Malayalam cited earlier).
Before we illustrate the points discussed with a mini-demo, it is useful to
summarize the strategy we use to decide on the phonemic status of similar sounds
(see ﬁgure 2.1).
Figure 2.1
Flowchart for discovering the distribution of two or more phonetically
similar sounds
START
Are there minimal or
near-minimal pairs?
List the environments in which
the sounds in question appear.
Do the sounds occur in the
same/similar environment(s),
representing different words?
The sounds are in
complementary distribution
The sounds are allophones of the
same phoneme
NO
YES
YES
NO
The sounds are in
contrastive distribution
The sounds are allophones
of different phonemes

PHONOLOGY
37
2.3
Phonemic Analysis: A Mini-demo
In the following, we will review the points made thus far and briefly show 
the mechanics of phonemic analysis. When we do a phonemic analysis to 
establish the phonological status of a pair or a group of sounds (phonetically
similar sounds that could potentially be allophones of the same phoneme), it
is necessary to examine their distribution. They are either in contrast and 
belong to separate phonemes, or represent allophones (positional variants) of
a phoneme that are in complementary distribution. The ﬁrst task is to spot the
‘suspicious’ pair or group of sounds. To exemplify this, we look at the sounds
[s], [z], and [S] in English and Korean. The three sounds [s, z, S], which can be
heard during the conversations of both English and Korean speakers, reveal
the needed phonetic similarities. Namely, (a) they all share manner of articu-
lation features (sibilant fricatives); (b) [s] and [z] share place of articulation 
(alveolar), differing only in voicing; (c) [s] and [S] share voicing (voiceless), 
differing only in place of articulation. The decision on their distributional 
character starts with the search for minimal pairs. When we look at English,
we ﬁnd these three sounds in an overlapping distribution, in that we have the
following minimal pairs: sip [sIp] – ship [SIp] – zip [zIp]. In other words, the
sounds in question do occur in the same word position (initial) before the same
vowel, [I], and the words mean different things. From this, we can conclude
that the three sounds are in contrast and belong to three separate phonemes.
Now, let us examine the situation in Korean. The following data, although
limited in scope, are representative of the pattern in the language.
(1)
[us]
“upper”
(8)
[maSi]
“delicious”
(2)
[sek]
“color”
(9)
[Sigan]
“time”
(3)
[kas@l]
“hypothesis”
(10)
*[Silsu]
“mistake”
(4)
[saram]
“person”
(11)
*[Sipsam]
“thirteen”
(5)
[sos@l]
“novel”
(12)
[Sike]
“clock”
(6)
[sul]
“wine”
(13)
[paèz@k]
“cushion”
(7)
[Si]
“poem”
(14)
[inza]
“greetings”
* Words that have both [s] and [S]
We start the search for the distribution of these sounds in Korean in exactly
the same way we started for English, namely by looking for minimal pairs.
The examination of the data reveals that here, unlike English, we do not have
minimal pairs to establish contrasts. Our next step is to look for near-minimal
pairs, in which the immediately preceding and the immediately following 
environments are the same. We do not seem to have those either. Under such
conditions, we list the environments in which the sounds in question appear,
and ask whether the sounds occur in the same or similar environments. We
do this by putting the preceding environment to the left of a blank, and the
following environment to the right of it. The blank itself shows the place 
that the sound occupies. For example, “# __ a” indicates that [s] occurs in 

38
PHONOLOGY
word-initial position (# stands for the word boundary) before the vowel [a], 
as exempliﬁed in word number (4). When we have more than two sounds in
question in the group, it is customary to look at them pairwise. Thus, we start
with [s – S]. The numbers next to each environment cited indicate the items
from the data above.
[s]
[c]
u __ # (1)
# __ i (7, 9, 10, 11, 12)
# __ e (2)
a __ i (8)
a __ @ (3)
# __ a (4)
# __ o (5)
o __ @ (5)
# __ u (6)
l __ u (10)
p __ a (11)
When we examine the distribution of the two sounds in question, we 
see that they can have the identical context for the preceding environment, namely
at the beginning of a word. As for what comes after, we note the following:
although both sounds can be followed by a vowel, the vowels are not identi-
cal. While [S] always appears before [i], [s] is found before other vowels 
and never before [i]. Before we decide whether the difference in the following
vowel may be signiﬁcant (that is, contextually create a change), we should 
remember what was said earlier with regard to the difference between the two
sounds. In the case of [s] and [S], the difference lies in the place of articulation
only (alveolar and palato-alveolar, respectively). The vowel [i] is known to cause
alveolar sounds to change in place of articulation and become palato-alveolar.
Thus, what happens in the Korean data is a good example of phonetically 
motivated contextual change. The fact that we ﬁnd [S] only before [i], and 
never ﬁnd [s] in the same environment, satisﬁes the requirement of mutual 
exclusivity of a pair of phonetically similar sounds that are in complementary
distribution, and thus they are allophones of the same phoneme.
The next task is to compare [s] and [z], as these two sounds share all features
(alveolar, fricative) except for voicing (voiceless and voiced, respectively).
Since we already have the environments for [s] listed, we need to look at the
occurrences of [z] alone.
è __ @ (13)
n __ a (14)
The listing shows that the following environment is irrelevant, because it can
be shared by the two sounds in question ([s] can be followed by an [@] as in
(3) and (5); it can also be followed by [a], as in (4) and (11). The examination
of the preceding environment, however, reveals that [z] is always preceded by
a nasal, and [s] can never be. Thus, the complementary distribution exhibited
by these two phonetically similar sounds leads us to the conclusion that they are 

PHONOLOGY
39
allophones of the same phoneme. Because we also said the same thing for 
the relationship between [s] and [S], the conclusion is that the three sounds are
allophones of the same phoneme.
At this juncture, we have another task that relates to the choice of the basic
allophone that will represent the phoneme. To determine this, we look at the
distribution of the three sounds again and realize that [s] is the one that
appears in the most different environments (the least restricted in occurrence).
Because [S] occurs only before [i], and [z] occurs only after nasals, [s] is clearly
the choice and thus represents the phoneme.
As shown above, the phoneme is represented with diagonal bars / /, and the
allophones are represented with brackets, [ ]. Also, in giving the environments
for the allophones, we write the more restricted one(s) ﬁrst, so that we can say
“elsewhere” for the basic (the least restricted) allophone of the phoneme.
If we compare the same three sounds in Korean and in English, we see 
a very different picture. While the sounds in question are in complementary
distribution and are allophones of one and the same phoneme in Korean, they
are in contrast and belong to three separate phonemes in English. We can 
illustrate these differences schematically in the following way:
Phonetic similarity: [s] and [z] share the place and the manner of articulation, dif-
ferent in voicing; [s] and [S] share the voicing and the manner of articulation,
different in place of articulation.
Allophonic processes: change to [S] before /i/, and to [z] after nasals.
In the displays above, and below, we place the phonetically similar sounds
that are shared by the two languages in the middle, between the brackets, [ ].
The language that makes the phonemic contrast has its two (or more) separate
phonemes placed in between diagonal bars. With the phoneme symbols, we
give a minimal pair to show the contrast. On the other side, the single
phoneme of the language is placed. Underneath the display, we have more
explicit statements regarding the phonetic similarity of the sounds (suspicious
[S]
[z]
[s]
/S/
/z/
/s/
English
Korean
Contrast: ship–zip–sip
/s/
/s/
[S] before [i]
[z] after nasals
[s] elsewhere

40
PHONOLOGY
pair), and the type of process for the contextual variants (allophones) that 
are in complementary distribution. The processes that are responsible for the
contextual variants are almost always assimilation processes. Simply deﬁned,
assimilation refers to the influence that one sound may have on another when
they are contiguous in time. To exemplify this, let us look at the Korean triplet
[s, z, S] we discussed earlier. We saw that /s/ was realized phonetically as [S]
before /i/. The change shown here is that a voiceless alveolar fricative
becomes a voiceless palato-alveolar fricative. If we think about the area that is
relevant for the articulation of [i], we realize that it corresponds to the same
area where palato-alveolars are made. In other words, the influence of [i] as a
conditioning environment for [S] is, phonetically, very plausible, and indeed
not infrequent in languages. Since in this case, the conditioning sound, [i], is
after the conditioned sound, the process is said to be an example of a regressive
assimilation (the following sound influences the preceding sound; called antici-
patory coarticulation in some books). If the influence comes from the preceding
sound on to the following sound, it is termed a progressive assimilation. The other
allophone of the Korean /s/ was [z], and the context it appeared in was always
after a nasal. In other words, the voicing of the nasal seems to be the culprit
in this change from a voiceless alveolar fricative to a voiced alveolar fricative.
Since the conditioning sound, nasal, is before the conditioned sound, alveolar
fricative, this is a case of progressive assimilation (called perseverative coarticu-
lation in some books).
Contextual assimilatory changes are not restricted to consonants. For example,
Totonac (an Amerindian language spoken in Mexico) has both voiced and voice-
less vowels that are in complementary distribution. We ﬁnd voiceless vowels
in ﬁnal position and the others elsewhere. The ﬁnal devoicing of vowels can
be considered as an assimilatory event, as it displays a situation in which the
vowel in ﬁnal position is influenced by what comes after it (i.e. ‘silence’, which
does not have vocal cord vibration).
Another case of a complementary distribution relating to vocalic segments
can be given from English. In certain dialects, the diphthong /aI/ has two 
phonetic manifestations, [aI] and [√I], as seen in the following.
nine
[naIn]
rice
[@√Is]
rise
[@aIz]
tight
[t√It]
tire
[taI@]
life
[l√If]
side
[saId]
pipe
[p√Ip]
buy
[baI]
Mike
[m√Ik]
What we see here is that [√I] is found before /s, t, f, p, k/, and [aI] is found
elsewhere. Thus, the characterization of this systematic change is “the diph-
thong is [√I] if it is followed by a voiceless sound; otherwise, it is [aI]”.
The conditioning environment is not always restricted to either the preceding
or the following environment; sometimes the effects come from both environ-
ments. For example, in Cree (an Amerindian language spoken in Canada) [p]
and [b] are in complementary distribution. We ﬁnd [b] intervocalically (between
two vowels) and [p] elsewhere. This clearly tells us that the assimilatory 
conditioning environment is from both the preceding and the following 

PHONOLOGY
41
environments; the voiced allophone [b] is found in between two vowels,
which are voiced.
Now, let us examine the two cases – Malayalam–English for dental and 
alveolar nasals, and Spanish–English for dental/alveolar stops and fricatives
– that we referred to earlier.
Phonetic similarity: shared voicing and manner of articulation; different in place
of articulation.
Allophonic process: nasal becomes dental before /T, D/ (interdentals). Regressive
assimilation.
Phonetic similarity: shared place of articulation and voicing; different in manner
of articulation.
Allophonic process: a stop becomes a fricative (more open articulation) between
two vowels. Both the preceding and following environments are relevant.
The cases above, which show that the same phonetic reality is interpreted
differently phonologically in different languages, are not limited to these pairs
of sounds and contexts and can easily be multiplied cross-linguistically. The
following are some examples between different pairs of languages:
Phonetic similarity: shared place and manner of articulation; different in voicing.
Allophonic process: voicing between two vowels. Both the preceding and the fol-
lowing environments are relevant.
[tS]
[dZ]
/tS/
/dZ/
/tS/
Cree
English
Contrast: cheap – jeep
[d]
[D]
/d/
/D/
/d/
Spanish
English
Contrast: day – they
[n]
[6]
/n/
/6/
Malayalam
English
Contrast: panni “pig”
 
kanni “ﬁrst”
/n/

42
PHONOLOGY
Phonetic similarity: both high, back, round; different in tense/lax.
Allophonic process: lowering (laxing) in ﬁnal position.
Phonetic similarity: shared manner of articulation and voicing; different in place
of articulation.
Allophonic process: nasal becomes velar before velars. Regressive assimilation.
Phonetic similarity: all features shared, except for lateral.
Allophonic process: liquid becomes non-lateral intervocalically. Both the preced-
ing and following environments are relevant.
Phonetic similarity: both voiceless obstruents; [tS] palato-alveolar affricate, [t] 
alveolar stop.
Allophonic process: an alveolar stop becomes a palato-alveolar affricate before
/i/. (Since there are no palato-alveolar stops in Portuguese, the affricate is the
closest sound. Palato-alveolar place is in the vicinity of the vowel area for /i/.)
Regressive assimilation.
[tS]
[t]
/tS/
/t/
/t/
Contrast: tip – chip
English
Portuguese
[r]
[ l]
/r/
/l/
/l/
Contrast: lake – rake
English
Korean
[è]
[n]
/è/
/n/
/n/
Contrast: sin – sing
English
Italian
[U]
[u]
/U/
/u/
/u/
Lebanese Arabic
English
Contrast: pull – pool

PHONOLOGY
43
Phonetic similarity: dental/alveolar. Voiceless, obstruents; different in manner of
articulation.
Allophonic process: a stop becomes a fricative (more open articulation) inter-
vocalically. Both the preceding and the following environments are relevant.
Phonetic similarity: all features shared, except for aspiration.
Allophonic process: aspirate a voiceless stop at the beginning of a stressed 
syllable.
The following examples have some other relationships that do not have an
exact point of reference in English, but reveal certain phonetically signiﬁcant
allophonic processes.
Phonetic similarity: both voiceless velar stops; different in labialization.
Allophonic process: labialize (add lip rounding to) the velar stop before /o, u/
(rounded vowels). Regressive assimilation.
/x/
Russian
[xw] before back round vowels
[xj] before front vowels
[x] elsewhere
/k/
Russian
[kw] before /o, u/
[k] elsewhere
[ph]
[ p ]
/ph/
/p/
/p/
Contrast: [p@nu] leaf – [ph@nu] snake hood
Sindhi
English
[T]
[t]
/T/
/t/
/t/
Contrast: thin – tin
English
Biblical Hebrew

44
PHONOLOGY
Phonetic similarity: all voiceless velar fricatives; different in labialization or
palatalization.
Allophonic process: labialize (add lip rounding to) the sound before a rounded
vowel, and palatalize it (more forward articulation, like adding an [i]-like 
quality) before a front vowel. Regressive assimilation.
Phonetic similarity: both alveolar r-sounds; different in voicing.
Allophonic process: devoice an r-sound next to a voiceless stop, or word-ﬁnally
(also a voiceless environment). Regressive assimilation.
Phonetic similarity: shared voicing and place of articulation; different in manner
of articulation (stop/fricative).
Allophonic process: a stop becomes a fricative (more open articulation) between
two vowels. Both the preceding and the following environments are relevant.
Phonetic similarity: both voiceless fricatives; different in place of articulation
(velar/palatal).
Allophonic process: move a fricative to a more front articulation after a front 
vowel. Progressive assimilation.
To sum up what has been said so far, we can say:
(a)
The goal of any phonemic (phonological) analysis is to determine the 
relationship between two or more sounds in a language.
(b) Two languages may share the same sounds, but arrange them differently.
That is, phonetic identity does not result in phonemic identity.
/x/
German
[ç] after front vowels
[x] elsewhere
/b/
Spanish
[ã] intervocalically
[b] elsewhere
/%/
Czech
[^] word-ﬁnally, next to a voiceless stop
[%] elsewhere

PHONOLOGY
45
(c)
Allophones of the same phoneme in a language must be phonetically 
similar and be in complementary distribution.
(d) Realizations of different phonemes are in overlapping distribution, and 
are in contrast. That is, they must be capable of changing the meaning of
a word if substituted for each other.
2.4
Free Variation
While the above generalizations are typically solid, there are two instances in
English where the last two, (c) and (d), are violated. In the ﬁrst, we see cases
in which the allophones of a phoneme occur in the same environment. This is
a violation of (c), because it does not follow the principle that the allophones
should be in complementary distribution. For example, the ﬁnal stops of
American English are normally unreleased and unaspirated (see chapter 3 for
details) as in bake [bek∏], dip [dIp∏], etc. However, a speaker may pronounce
these items with released ﬁnal stops. Although these alternative productions
are possible, they do not create any change in meaning. That is, in different
speakers’ pronunciations, we can ﬁnd the released and unreleased allophones
in an overlapping distribution. But, since the meaning of the word does not
change, this is termed a free variation.
The second type of free variation is related not to the allophones of the same
phoneme, but to the realizations of different phonemes. For example, the
sounds [i] and [E] belong to separate phonemes, /i/ and /E/ respectively, because
English possesses minimal pairs such as bead [bid] – bed [bEd], Pete [pit] – pet
[pEt]. Since the change in meaning in these pairs of words is due to the 
substitution of these vowels for each other, there can be no question about their
contrastiveness. However, for certain vocabulary items such as economics, which
may be pronounced as [Ek@namIks] or [ik@namIks], the two vowels in question
occur in an overlapping distribution but without creating a change in meaning.
A similar case can be cited between [aI] and [i], which are also normally in
contrast. Thus, in cite [saIt] versus seat [sit] the meaning change is due to these
two vowels being in contrast. However, alternative pronunciations for items
such as either ([iD2] or [aID2]), neither ([niD2] or [naID2]) clearly show them
in free variation (overlap but no meaning change). To summarize, we can say
that free variation, however infrequent, can be found between the realizations
of separate phonemes (phonemic free variation, as in [i] and [aI] of either), as
well as between the allophones of the same phoneme (allophonic free variation,
as in [k] and [k∏] of back).
2.5
Morphophonology
Up to this point we have looked at allophonic variations (contextual variation
of the sounds belonging to the same phoneme), which take place within a 
single morpheme. We should also point out that several of the processes that

46
PHONOLOGY
are shown to be crucial in accounting for the allophonic variations in languages
can also be found active across morpheme boundaries. A brief discussion of
these is useful, because they are frequent sources of confusion for students. 
When morphemes are combined to form bimorphemic (with two morphemes)
or polymorphemic words, many of the assimilatory phenomena discussed can
be present there too. Such things can also manifest themselves when two words
are spoken consecutively. What we see in these instances, then, is the contex-
tually determined alternations (different phonetic forms) of a morpheme.
To illustrate what has been said thus far, let us look at the nasal assimila-
tion rule in Italian we cited earlier (in section 2.3). For explicitness, we give the
relevant details below.
[dZEnte]
“people”
[aèke]
“also”
[tinta]
“dye”
[staèko]
“tired”
[tenda]
“tent”
[bjaèka]
“white”
[nero]
“black”
[fuègo]
“mushroom”
[dansa]
“dance”
As we see in the left column, [n] appears before [t, d, s, e] and, in the right col-
umn, [è] appears before [k, g]. The sounds [n] and [è] are in complementary
distribution, since they share no phonetic environments. The velar allophone,
[è], appears only before velar stops, and the alveolar, [n], appears elsewhere.
The phonetically motivated (nasal assimilating to the place of articulation of
the following segment) contextual variation occurs within a morpheme, and
thus qualiﬁes for allophonic variation.
The same/similar phonetically motivated nasal assimilation is also found across
morpheme boundaries in several other languages. Observe the following:
impersonal [Imp2s@n@l]
independent [Ind@pEnd@nt]
incomplete [Ièk@mplit]
improbable [Imp@Ab@b@l]
intolerant [IntAl@@@nt]
inconclusive [Ièk@nklusIv]
impossible [ImpAs@b@l]
inadvisable [InædvaIz@b@l]
incapable [Ièkep@b@l]
All the adjectives listed are preceded by the same negative preﬁx that manifests
itself as either im or in orthographically. As for the phonetic manifestation, 
we have three forms: [Im] for the left column, [In] for the middle column, 
and [Iè] for the right column. That is, the pronunciation of the negative preﬁx
is different only with respect to the nasal consonant, which is bilabial, [m], before
adjectives that start with a bilabial sound (left column), and velar, [è], before
ones that start with a velar sound (right column). In other instances, the nasal
is alveolar, [n], in the preﬁx (middle column). This predictable alternation of
the nasal is the result of the place of articulation assimilation that is reminis-
cent of the Italian example discussed above. Although the phonetic motivation
(place of articulation assimilation for articulatory ease) of this alternation is 
the same in these two situations, they are different structurally. While the 
Italian contextual variation was allophonic in nature (occurring within one mor-
pheme), the case of the English negative preﬁxes does not deal with allophones
of the same phoneme, but rather shows contextually predictable alternations

PHONOLOGY
47
among separate phonemes. That English [m], [n], and [è] are not allophones
of the same phoneme but belong to separate phonemes /m/, /n/, and /è/
can clearly be shown by the following triplet: sum [s√m], sun [s√n], sung [s√è].
Thus, what is revealed in the case of English negative preﬁxes is that there is
an alternation of different phonemes for the same morpheme (indicators of the
same meaning unit). Such cases are traditionally called morphophonemic
alternations, and the different phonetic manifestations of the same morpheme
(morpheme alternants) are called the allomorphs.
The previous case demonstrated allomorphic alternations across morpheme
boundaries in the same word. These cases, however, are not restricted to mor-
pheme boundary situations in one word but can occur across the boundaries
of two separate words. For example, if we examine the phonetic manifestations
of the morpheme meaning “one” in Spanish, we ﬁnd the following.
un peso [um p . . . ]
“one peso”
un taco [un t . . . ]
“one taco”
un gato [uè g . . . ]
“one cat”
While the morpheme meaning “one” in Spanish is consistently spelt as un, 
its pronunciation varies among [um], [un], and [uè]. Here, again, we have a
familiar picture regarding the nasals assimilating to the place of articulation
of the following obstruent. This time, however, the allomorphs (phonetically
conditioned variants of the same morpheme) of the meaning unit “one” reveal
the alternation across two words.
Another possibility is to ﬁnd some feature-changing assimilatory processes
that are restricted only across morpheme boundaries (i.e. acting only as mor-
phophonemic processes), and with no parallels in allophonic processes of
monomorphemic words. To illustrate this, examine the following past tense 
endings in English:
attempted [@tEmt@d]
walked [wOkt]
robbed [@abd]
blended [blEnd@d]
pushed [pUSt]
seemed [simd]
tested [tEst@d]
sipped [sIpt]
swayed [swed]
The above examples show that the regular past tense ending in English has
three predictable phonetic manifestations. We have [-@d] if the last sound of
the verb is an alveolar stop, /t, d/ (schwa insertion before another alveolar
stop). If the verb-ﬁnal sound is not an alveolar stop, however, then the shape
of the past tense ending is an alveolar stop, [-t] or [-d], which is determined
by the voicing of the verb-ﬁnal sound. We have the voiceless [t] if the verb-
ﬁnal sound is voiceless (middle column); however, the form is the voiced [d]
if the verb-ﬁnal sound is voiced (right column). This is a clear case of voicing
assimilation. However, this does not mean that this sequencing restriction occurs
throughout. While the past tense of the verb ban [bæn] is necessarily [bænd]
and cannot be [bænt], this does not mean that we cannot have a ﬁnal con-
sonant cluster with different voicing in its members ([-nt] sequence) in English.

48
PHONOLOGY
Words such as bent, tent, etc. reveal that there is no such restriction within 
a single morpheme, and that the assimilatory situation is at work only 
across morpheme boundaries. (See chapter 3 for similar situations regarding
the allomorphs of the plural morpheme.)
In concluding this section, we should also mention that while morpho-
phonemic alternations reveal several feature-changing assimilatory (phonetic-
ally motivated) processes, they are not limited to those only. Several other 
processes, such as epenthesis (insertion) and deletion of segments, as well as
metathesis (transposition) of segments, can be cited among those.
2.6
Practical Uses of Phonological Analysis
Linguists are interested in ﬁnding out the patterned nature of speech for
answers pertaining to psycholinguistics (the study of the interrelationship of
language and cognitive structures and the acquisition of language), historical
linguistics (the study of how languages change through time and the relationships
among languages), and sociolinguistics (the study of the interrelationships of
language and social structure of linguistic variation).
Besides its relevance in these areas, phonological analysis has great relevance
in certain real-world applications that go beyond the conﬁnes of linguistics. 
To start with, there is an intimate relationship between an alphabetic writing
system and the phonemic structure of a language. As such, the study of
phonemics is highly useful for literacy experts, and to people devising
orthographies for unwritten languages. This comes from the principle that assigns
an orthographical letter for each ‘phoneme’ (not for each sound) in the lan-
guage. Going back to the dental and alveolar nasals, [6] and [n], we discussed
in relation to English and Malayalam, we can state that difference in the 
following manner: While the alphabetic representation of these two nasals 
will be sufﬁciently shown by one letter, n, in English (because the allophonic
difference between [6] and [n] will be automatically supplied by native 
speakers of English), in the orthographic system of Malayalam we will 
have to have two distinct orthographic letters, because the two sounds are 
in contrast in this language. When we consider the two sounds [d] and [D],
with reference to Spanish and English, we come to the following conclusion:
Spanish is well served by a single grapheme, d, for the sounds [3] and [D], as
in dedo [3eDo]. Since the two sounds are allophones of the same phoneme, 
speakers of Spanish automatically supply the predictable fricative allophone
intervocalically. Thus, an additional grapheme for this predictable allophone
will be an unnecessary duplication. When, on the other hand, we look at English,
we realize that the language would require two distinct orthographical repre-
sentations for these two sounds that are in contrast and belong to separate
phonemes, as shown in the pair they [De] and day [de].
In chapter 1, the reader was urged to ignore spelling and focus only on the
sounds in studying phonetics and phonology. The reason for this is the many
discrepancies that exist between phoneme and grapheme correspondences in

PHONOLOGY
49
English. The orthographic th, which stands for two separate phonemes, /T/
and /D/ (e.g. ether [iT2] – either [iD2]), makes the point clearly. Had English
spelling reflected an ideal alphabetic writing system (i.e. one grapheme to 
one phoneme), these two phonemes would be represented by two separate
graphemes. We will have much more to say about English phonology and ortho-
graphy in chapter 9.
We can summarize what has been said in the following manner: alphabetic
writing systems are ideally phonemic in that they target one phoneme to one
grapheme. However, for several reasons in the history of a language, many
discrepancies may develop and the current state of the orthography of a lan-
guage may be far from ideal. Comparing the ir/regularity of the writing 
systems between languages, one hears remarks such as “the writing system of
language X is phonetic”. Such remarks should not be taken seriously, because
no alphabetic system ever targets being or aspires to be phonetic. What we 
want from an efﬁcient writing system is to represent only the relevant (func-
tional/phonemic) distinctions made in the language, and this precludes the 
introduction of separate graphemes for every predictable allophonic variation,
as that would result in incredible complexity.
Besides the indispensable applications of devising alphabetical writing 
systems, the study of phonemics is a vital tool for foreign language teachers
and for speech and language therapists, who constitute the major targeted 
audience of this book. The common trait of the professionals in these two groups
is that the populations they work with exhibit patterns (in sound systems, for
our purpose) that are different from the ambient language, and thus should
be remediated. Although the productions we observe in foreign language
learners and individuals with phonological disorders are, to varying degrees,
in disagreement with the norms of the ambient language, they nevertheless 
are not haphazard, but systematic. The importance of the application of
phonological principles to the remediation setting stems from this patterned
nature of the erroneous productions. In the remediation setting, information
on the patterned nature of the productions to be corrected is crucial for arriv-
ing at an accurate diagnosis, and this in turn serves as the basis for effective
remediation.
In many cases of erroneous productions, both in foreign language learners
and in individuals with phonological disorders, we ﬁnd several errors related
not to the complete lack of a particular sound in the client’s system, but to 
the problems of distribution. To illustrate this, let us examine the following 
productions from a Japanese speaker who is learning English as a foreign 
language:
city [sItci], team [tSim], totem [totEm], tune [tsun], tea [tSi]
As we see, the renditions for the /t/ targets of English are varied: correct 
in totem, [tS] in city, team, and tea, and [ts] in tune. While the situation may
initially look rather chaotic, a more careful look at the productions shows that
the erroneous renditions in the form of [tS] and [t s] are not random, but 

50
PHONOLOGY
systematic. Namely, the /t/ target of English is realized as [tS] if it is followed
by /i/, and is realized as [t s] if it is followed by /u/. When the target /t/ is
followed by any other sound, the learner’s renditions are correct. The explana-
tion for these phenomena is directly related to the learner’s native language
patterns, which can be illustrated as follows:
What the learner is doing is transferring the native rule to the English learning
context. Such events, which are known as native language interference, form
the central core of the ﬁeld known as contrastive phonology, and will be dealt
with in greater detail in chapter 8.
The importance of an accurate phonological proﬁle of the learner for effec-
tive remediation has also been recognized in the clinical setting. A disordered
system may also be a system with its own patterning and distribution that are
not identical to those of the ambient system. The therapist, like the language
teacher, needs to know the details of the system before any attempt at treatment
is made. Consider the following data from a three-year-old who has the phonetic
capacity to produce the target voiced stops /b, d, g/ but has distributional prob-
lems (Camarata and Gandour 1984):
bee [bi]
tea [di]
kite [gæ]
bath [bæ]
key [di]
tie [gæ]
bus [b√]
kick [di]
clown [gæn]
boot [bu]
two [du]
train [gæn]
book [bu]
cook [du]
cup [g√]
boat [bo]
duck [g√]
ball [bA]
goat [go]
pan [bæn]
car [gA]
We can see that the child has the contrast between the bilabial and alveolar
voiced stops, as revealed by bee [bi] versus tea [di]. On the other hand, we do
not have a contrast between the alveolar and the velar. What we gather from
the productions is that the client shows a case of complementary distribution
between these two; [d] appears before high vowels (second column), and [g]
appears before non-high (low or mid) vowels (third column). Once again, we
have a situation in which the initially chaotic-looking productions that present
mismatches with the ambient language have systematic patterns that could be
exploited in therapy.
Cases such as the ones described above can be easily multiplied in L2
(second language) classroom and clinical contexts, and make it clear that
familiarity with the phonemic analysis is indispensable for L2 teachers and 
therapists.
/t/
[tS] before [i]
[ts] before [u]
[ t ]  elsewhere

PHONOLOGY
51
SUMMARY
In this chapter, we examined the functional values of sounds in different 
systems. Two or more sounds may be shared by two or more languages/
systems, but the apparent phonetic identity of these sounds does not mean phono-
logical identity, as they may be employed differently in different systems. 
We looked at the analytical technique (phonemic analysis) for discovering the
functional values of sounds. It is commonly observed that while two sounds
are allophones of the same phoneme (complementary distribution) in one 
system, the very same two sounds can belong to separate phonemes (contrastive
distribution) in another system. Phonemic analysis, which deals with the 
distributional function of sounds, is not only a tool for linguists, but a very
important and helpful means for professionals (language teachers and therap-
ists) who deal with the mismatches of systems in remediation.

52
PHONOLOGY
EXERCISES
1.
Circle the correct alternative(s).
(a)
If two languages have the same sounds, then they (sometimes
/ always / often / never) have different phonologies.
(b)
If the phonetic difference between two sounds serves as the basis
for distinguishing words, then the difference is (distinctive /
phonemic / non-predictable / allophonic / predictable).
(c)
Occurrences of the allophones of a single phoneme are (always
/ sometimes / often / never) predictable.
(d)
Allophones of a single phoneme are (sometimes / often /
always / never) phonetically similar.
(e)
If two phonetically similar sounds are in complementary dis-
tribution, then they are (sometimes / often / always / never)
allophones of the same phoneme.
(f)
If two sounds are in free variation, then they are (sometimes /
always / never) allophones of the same phoneme.
(g)
Speakers of a language tend to be (more / less / equally) con-
sciously aware of phonemes than of allophones.
(h)
Two sounds that appear in a minimal pair (sometimes /
always / never) belong to distinct phonemes.
(i)
If two sounds are not phonemically distinct, their distribution
overlaps / does not overlap.
2.
Create two minimal pairs with each given word in different word
positions.
Initial
Medial
Final
Example: /t/ tea: pea, sea
charter: charmer, charger
seat: seed, seal
/p/ pack:
mapping:
ape:
/m/ mate:
slimming:
room:
/s/
seek:
leasing:
class:
/S/
sheet:
mashed:
bash:
/l/
lash:
rolling:
coal:
/f/
feel:
reﬁned:
staff:
/n/ knee:
sneak:
bone:
/d/ dash:
budding:
bed:
/g/ gain:
plugging:
wig:
/@/
rain:
roaring:
four:
/z/ zip:
buzzing:
seize:

PHONOLOGY
53
3.
Create three words with contrasts by supplying different vowels (diph-
thongs) in the following consonantal frames.
Example:
[b t]: beat, bait, bet
(a)
[s l]:
(b)
[pl ]:
(c)
[sp k]:
(d)
[m T]:
(e)
[l n]:
(f)
[k n]:
(g)
[d m]:
(h)
[t k]:
(i)
[g@ nd]:
4.
Identify the sounds in contrast in the following minimal pairs.
Example:
eke – ache
/i/ – /e/
(a)
ceased – cyst / / – / /
(b)
sinned – send / / – / /
(c)
gym – jam / / – / /
(d)
phase – fuzz / / – / /
(e)
laugh – life / / – / /
(f)
rot – wrote / / – / /
(g)
how – hi / / – / /
(h)
limp – lymph / / – / /
(i)
white – right / / – / /
(j)
miff – myth / / – / /
(k)
rough – rush / / – / /
(l)
phi – high / / – / /
(m)
thigh – shy / / – / /
(n)
wit – witch / / – / /
5.
Identify the sounds that are alternating in the following morpho-
phonemically related pairs.
(a)
profane / profanity
(b)
serene / serenity
(c)
pedagogue / pedagogy
(d)
receive / receptive
(e)
mine / mineral
(f)
verbose / verbosity
(g)
consume / consumption
(h)
public / publicity
(i)
sign / signature
6.
Examine the distribution of [s] and [S] in the speech of T, aged 4 years
and 3 months (4;3), a child with phonological disorders, and deter-
mine whether their distribution is:

54
PHONOLOGY
(a)
complementary
(b)
contrastive
State your evidence.
sail [Sel]
pushy [pUSi]
seek [Sik]
save [Sev]
Sam [Sæm]
gas [gæs]
grass [g@æs]
fasten [fæs@n]
crash [k@æs]
ship [SIp]
Irish [aI@Is]
fashion [fæS@n]
7.
Examine the following data from B (4;1), a child with phonological
disorders. The /@/ targets show three different realizations: [@], [w],
or ‘zero’ (i.e. deleted). What kind of distribution do these realizations
reveal? State your rationale.
rich [@ItS]
raise [@ez]
red [@Ed]
more [mo]
door [do]
deer [di]
wrong [@Oè]
correct [kOwEk]
mirror [mIw@]
rain [@en]
room [@um]
parrot [pæw@t]
roller [@Ol@]
parade [p@wed]
Henry [hEn@i]
8.
(a)
Examine the following data from Maasai, a Nilotic language 
spoken in Kenya and Tanzania, and determine the phonemic status
of [t], [d], and [D] (i.e. whether they belong to one, two, or three
phonemes). State your evidence.
[∫aDa]
“dangerous”
[endorop]
“bribe him”
[tasat]
“disabled”
[tisila]
“sift it”
[taru∫ini]
“binoculars”
[oltuli]
“buttock”
[iltoi]
“barrel”
[∂alut]
“mischievous”
[endaraDa]
“ﬁght each other”
[indai]
“‘you’ plural”
[endulelei]
“apple”
[eègiruDoDo]
“fright”
[em∫iDir]
“female wart hog”
[en∂araDa]
“thunder”
(b)
Note that the same three sounds are also found in English. 
Are their distributions in the two languages the same or different?
Explain.
(c)
In learning each other’s language (English speaker learning
Maasai – Maasai speaker learning English), who do you think will
have greater difﬁculty with respect to the three sounds in question?
Why?

PHONOLOGY
55
9.
(a)
Examine the following data from Hindi and determine the
phonemic status of [t], [th], and [d] (i.e. whether they belong to one,
two, or three phonemes). State your evidence.
[tantrik]
“tantra”
[than]
“a bolt of cloth”
[dan]
“donate”
[bath]
“words”
[tal]
“beat”
[thal]
“plate”
[pathak]
“one who studies”
[bad]
“later”
[dal]
“lentil”
[phatak]
“a gate”
(b)
Note that the same three sounds are also found in English. Are
their distributions the same or different in the two languages?
Explain.
(c)
In learning each other’s language (English speaker learning
Hindi – Hindi speaker learning English), who do you think will have
greater difﬁculty with respect to the three sounds in question?
Why?
10.
Examine the following data from German and determine the phon-
emic status of [ç] and [x] (that is, whether they are allophones of the
same phoneme or belong to separate phonemes). State your evidence.
[abmax@]
“to remove”
[Eçt@]
“to ban”
[axt]
“eight”
[E:nliç]
“like, resembling”
[blE:ç@n]
“small blister”
[drOliç]
“amusing”
[Elç]
“elk”
[fraxt]
“carriage”
[fruxt]
“fruit”
[glaIç]
“equal”
[knoplaUx]
“garlic”
[mEçtiç]
“powerful”
[ho:x]
“high”
[lax@n]
“to laugh”
[lox]
“hole”
[fEçt@n]
“to fence”
11.
Examine the following data from Persian (Farsi) and determine the
phonemic status of [r], [R], and [Q] (that is, whether they belong to
one, two, or three phonemes). State your evidence.
[aQam]
“calm”
[aQezu] “wish”
[kæQim]
“giving”
[ræhim]
“giver”
[SiR]
“lion”
[pæniR]
“cheese”
[ziQe]
“cumin”
[zærd] “yellow”
[farsi]
“Persian”
[musaﬁR] “traveler” [kæbiR] “grand”
[bæQe]
“sheep”
[nærm]
“soft”
[ræht] “laundry” [ræSid]
“strong”
[modeR]
“mother”
[sefeR] “trip”
[pæQiveS] “angel looking”

56
PHONOLOGY
12.
Transcribe the following and state how many voiceless consonants,
front vowels, and low vowels there are in (a) and how many
approximants, back vowels, and liquids in (b).
(a)
“As I grow older, I pay less attention to what men say. I just
watch what they do.”
Andrew Carnegie
(b)
“War does not determine who is right – only who is left.”
Bertrand Russell
13.
Transcribe the following (about “the spread of English”, continued)
from P. Trudgill and J. Hannah, International English, 4th edn.
(London: Edward Arnold, 2002).
It was not until the 17th century that the English language began 
the geographical and demographic expansion which has led to the 
situation in which it ﬁnds itself today, with more non-native speakers
than any other language in the world, and more native speakers than 
any other language except Chinese. This expansion began in the late 
1600s, with the arrival of English-speakers in the Americas – North 
America (the modern United States and Canada), Bermuda, the 
Bahamas, and the Caribbean – and the importation of English from 
Scotland, into the northern areas of Ireland. Subsequently, during the 
1700s, English also began to penetrate into southern Ireland, and it was
during this time, too, that Cornish ﬁnally disappeared from Cornwall,
and Norn from Orkney and Shetland. During the 1800s, English began 
making serious inroads into Wales, so that today only twenty 
percent of the population of that country are native Welsh speakers; 
and in the Highlands and islands of Scotland, English also began to 
replace Gaelic, which today has around 70,000 native speakers.

3
English Consonants
3.1
Stops
We will start our account of the English consonants and their allophones 
with the most versatile group, stops. As we saw in chapter 1, articulation of
stops can be analyzed in three stages (closing stage, closed stage, and release
stage).
English has six stop phonemes, /p, b, t, d, k, g/. Their differences can be
examined in different dimensions. Firstly, with respect to place of articulation,
there is a three-way distinction: bilabials /p, b/, alveolars /t, d/, and velars
/k, g/. Bilabials /p/ and /b/ are made by forming the closure with upper
and lower lips and, after building up the pressure necessary, releasing the 
closure abruptly, as in pay [pe] and bay [be]. Alveolar stops /t/ and /d/ utilize
the tip of the tongue to form the closure with the alveolar ridge, as in tip [tIp]
and dip [dIp]. Finally, for velars /k/ and /g/, we raise the back of the tongue
to make a contact with the soft palate (velum), as in cap [kæp] and gap [gæp].
While the account of the places of articulation for stops is very straightfor-
ward, the characteristics related to their voicing are not so. It is customary 
to see labels such as ‘voiceless’ and ‘voiced’ for /p, t, k/ and /b, d, g/, respec-
tively, in several manuals. Although this deﬁnitely reflects the truth for /p, t,
k/, which are always voiceless, and may indeed be true for /b, d, g/ of 
several languages (e.g. Spanish, French, etc.), it will hold in English only for
the intervocalic position in such words as aboard [@bO@d], adore [@dO@], eager
[ig2]. In initial and ﬁnal positions (following or preceding silence) /b, d, g/
are partially voiced, if at all.
(a)
bay
(b)
cab
(c)
bib
day
sad
did
gay
sag
gig
In the words in (a), we may have partially voiced (and indeed little voiced, i.e.
with very little vocal cord activity) /b, d, g/ in initial positions. In (b), the words
contain partially voiced ﬁnal stops. In (c), each word has /b, d, g/ in both 
initial and ﬁnal positions that are not fully voiced. Because English /b, d, g/
three
Applied English Phonology, Second Edition       Mehmet Yavaş 
© 2011 Mehmet Yavaş. ISBN: 978-1-444-33322-0 

58
ENGLISH
CONSONANTS
are fully voiced only in intervocalic position, several phoneticians prefer the
classiﬁcation in terms of fortis and lenis to differentiate /p, t, k/ from /b, d,
g/. Accordingly, fortis stops /p, t, k/ are pronounced with more muscular 
energy (force), higher intra-oral pressure, and a stronger breath effort than their
lenis counterparts /b, d, g/. Following the popular usage, we will employ 
the labels ‘voiced’ and ‘voiceless’, but the reader should remember the more
accurate lenis vs. fortis distinction in initial and ﬁnal positions.
Before we leave the discussion of initial and ﬁnal devoicing, some clariﬁ-
cations are needed. Firstly, it should be stated that devoicing in these positions
is not total, and does not make these stops indistinct from their voiceless counter-
parts. Thus, partially devoiced [b, D, H] are not [p, t, k], respectively. Secondly,
there is almost always a difference in the degree of voicing; ﬁnal devoicing is
greater than initial devoicing. Thus, in the (c) words above, [bIb], [DID], [HIH],
the ﬁnal stops normally have greater devoicing than their initial counterparts.
Finally, it should be pointed out that ﬁnal devoicing is present if there is no
voiced sound coming immediately after; if there is a voiced sound immediately
after, devoicing does not take place. For example, while the ﬁnal sound of dog
is partially devoiced, the same is not observed in dog meal, because in the latter,
/g/ is immediately followed by a voiced sound, /m/ (cf. dog-food).
When a stop is preceded by a /s/, the distinction between /p, t, k/ and 
/b, d, g/ is not in voicing, but lies in fortis/lenis. For example, the velar stops
/k/ and /g/ are not in any way different in voicing in the following pairs of
words: discussed – disgust, misspell – Miss Bell, disperse – disburse. The differ-
ence lies in fortis and lenis productions respectively.
The type of stop (/p, t, k/ or /b, d, g/) influences the length of the pre-
ceding vowel in that vowels are longer before voiced (lenis) stops than before
voiceless (fortis) stops. This difference seems to be much more noticeable
when the syllable contains a long vowel or a diphthong. Pairs such as 
lobe – slope, vibe – wipe (/b/ – /p/), wide – white, ride – right (/d/ – /t/),
league – seek, league – leak (/g/ – /k/) illustrate the difference in the length,
whereby the ﬁrst member of each pair has the longer vowel because it is fol-
lowed by a voiced stop. The influence on the length of the preceding segments
is not restricted to vowels and diphthongs, but can also be observed with nasals
and laterals. If we compare the following pairs, killed – kilt, send – sent, amber
– ampere, we see that the sonorants in the ﬁrst member of each pair are longer.
Another dimension that differentiates /p, t, k/ from /b, d, g/ in English is
the feature of aspiration. The voiceless set of stops is pronounced with aspira-
tion at the beginning of stressed syllables (pay [phe], take [t hek], cab [khæb]).
That this characteristic is not restricted to word-initial position can be veriﬁed
in words such as apart [@pha@t], attack [@t hæk], occur [@kh´], where the aspirated
stops are not word-initial, but in initial positions of stressed syllables. In
American English (AE), this is the most common pattern. In addition, voiceless
stops may be produced with weak aspiration in the following positions:
(a)
in an unstressed syllable: polite [p@láIt], vacuum [vôkjum];
(b)
before a syllabic consonant: pickle [pIkl];
(c)
if released in ﬁnal position: sit [sIt], sick [sIk].

ENGLISH
CONSONANTS
59
In their release stage, syllable-ﬁnal (especially word-ﬁnal) single coda stops are
often produced with no audible release. The following examples illustrate the
point with the appropriate diacritic for unreleased stops: mop [mOp∏], sit
[sIt∏], sack [sæk∏], mob [mab∏], sad [sæd∏], bag [bæg∏]. When it is not following
a vowel, most speakers release the ﬁnal /t/ (e.g. fast).
When we have a word with two non-homorganic (i.e. not from the same place
of articulation) stops in a row, there is no audible release for the ﬁrst stop; 
the closure of the second stop in sequence is made before the release of the
ﬁrst stop.
sipped [sIp∏t] /p + t/
cheap date [tSip∏det] /p + d/
sobbed [sAb∏d] /b + d/
When we have two homorganic (i.e. sharing the same place of articulation) stops
in a sequence, there is no separate release for the ﬁrst stop; rather, there is one
prolonged closure for the two stops in question. This is valid for cases where
there is voicing agreement, as in big girl, black cat, sad dog, stop please, as
well as sequences with different voicing, as in top block, white dog, black girl.
An assimilatory situation arises when a non-alveolar stop is preceded by an
alveolar stop, as in night cap [naIt kæp] →[naIk:æp], white paper [waIt pep2]
→[waIp:ep2], red badge [@Ed bædZ] →[@Eb:ædZ], weed killer [wid kIl2] →
[wigkIl2]. As we see in these examples, alveolar stops /t, d/ become bilabial
[p, b] or velar [k, g] respectively, because of the following bilabial/velar stops,
while maintaining the original voicing.
The stop closure is maintained and nasally released in cases in which the
stop is followed by a homorganic nasal. In this process, which is known as ‘nasal
plosion’, the air is released through the nasal cavity. This happens in the fol-
lowing environments:
(a)
The nasal is syllabic: button [b√ty] /t + n/, sudden [s√dy] /d + n/, taken
[tekg] /k + è/.
(b) The nasal is in the initial position of the following syllable of the word:
submarine [s√bm@@in] /b + m/, madness [mædn@s] /d + n/.
(c)
The nasal is in the initial position of the next word: hard nails [hA@dnelz]
/d + n/, sad news [sædnuz] /d + n/.
A comparable release, this time laterally, is provided when the stop is followed
by a homorganic lateral. This process, which is known as ‘lateral plosion’, 
can be observed in the following words: cattle [kætl] /t + l/, middle [mIdl] 
/d + l/, as well as in sequences of words, bud light [b√dlaIt] /d + l/, at last
[@tlæst] /t + l/. That this event requires homorganicity is further shown by 
examples such as tickle [tIkl] or nipple [nIpl], which have no lateral release.
Putting all this information together, we can say that the following param-
eters need to be looked at in differentiating the stops /p, t, k/ from /b, d, g/.
In initial position, fortis vs. lenis and/or aspirated vs. unaspirated should be
considered. Medial position is the only one in which voicing is a distinguishing
factor; in addition, length of the preceding sound (longer vowels and sonorants
before /b, d, g/) and aspiration if the stop is at the initial position of a stressed

60
ENGLISH
CONSONANTS
syllable should be considered. In ﬁnal position, the length of the preceding sound
would be the most crucial aspect.
Apart from these general patterns exhibited, certain stops have charac-
teristics of their own. Alveolar stops are realized as dental when they occur 
immediately before interdentals, as illustrated in the following: bad [bæd] –
bad things [bæ3TIèz]; great [g@et] – great things [g@e9TIèz].
For many speakers of American English, words such as letter, atom, header,
and ladder are pronounced as [lEQ2], [æQ@m], [hEQ2], [læQ2], respectively. This
process, which is known as flapping (tapping in some books, which is a more
correct characterization), converts an alveolar stop to a voiced flap/tap. The
most conducive environment for this process is intervocalic, when the second
syllable is not stressed. Thus, while attic [ôQIk] has a flap, attack [@t hôk] does
not because, in the latter, the alveolar stop is the onset of a stressed syllable.
This pattern is also revealed in morphologically related but prosodically 
different word pairs. Thus, while the /t/ targets in the left column below (in
unstressed syllables) undergo this process, they do not do so in the morpho-
logically related words in the right column (in stressed syllables).
atom [æQ@m]
atomic [@tAmIk]
metal [mEQ@l]
metallic [m@tælIk]
Italy [IQ@li]
Italian [Itælj@n]
autumn [OQ@m]
autumnal [@t√mn@l]
rhetoric [@EQ@@Ik]
rhetorical [@@tO@@k@l]
notable [noQ@bl]
notation [noteS@n]
The principle is also valid across word boundaries; for example, we get at all
[@QOl] (flapped because /t/ is the coda of the unstressed syllable) but a tall
[@ tOl] (not flapped because /t/ is the onset of the stressed syllable). Similarly,
the /t/ target in eat up [iQ√p] is flapped, but in e-top [i tap] it is not. Although
in a great majority of cases of flapping (all the above included) the ﬁrst vowel
is stressed, this is not a necessary condition. For example, in words such as
nationality [næS@nôl@Qi], sorority [s@@c@@Qi], calamity [k@lôm@Qi], flapping
occurs between two unstressed vowels. Thus, the only condition related to stress
is that the target alveolar stop cannot be in a stressed syllable. (This condition
also includes the secondary stress; thus, we don’t have flapping in words 
such as sanitary, sabotage, latex, etc., in which /t/ targets are in syllables with
secondary stress, which will be discussed in chapter 7.) Besides the clear inter-
vocalic environments that were given above, there are two other environments
that seem to provide the context for this process. These are (a) the r-coloring
of the ﬁrst vowel, as exempliﬁed in porter [pO@Q2], border [bO@Q2], and (b) the
following syllabic liquid, as in little [lIQl], cattle [kæQl], bitter [bIQ2], and 
butter [b√Q2].
Before ﬁnishing the discussion of flapping, mention should be made of the
cases of homophony created by the neutralization of the distinction between
the alveolar stops, as illustrated by the pairs writer – rider [@aIQ2], grater – grader
[g@eQ2], latter – ladder [læQ2], bitter – bidder [bIQ2], liter – leader [liQ2]. While
many speakers of American English pronounce such pairs homophonously, there

ENGLISH
CONSONANTS
61
are others who make a distinction between these words. However, whenever
the distinction is made, it is related not to the pronunciation of the alveolar
stop, but to the preceding vowel/diphthong. Following the generalization we
looked at earlier, where it was stated that vowels/diphthongs were longer before
voiced than before voiceless stops, we could predict that /aI/ and /e/ would
be longer in rider and grader than in writer and grater respectively. Similarly,
the vowels /æ/ and /I/ would be longer in ladder and bidder than in latter
and bitter. The phenomenon described above is not limited to the retroflex 
liquid, as it is also observed with the lateral liquid. Pairs such as petal – pedal
[pEQl], futile – feudal [fjuQl], metal – medal [mEQl] illustrate this point well.
Alveolar stops of English are produced with considerable affrication as
onsets when they are followed by /@/ (e.g. train, drain). The diacritic used for
this is a _ under the stop [t]. The tongue tip touches behind the alveolar ridge,
exactly to the point where affricates /tS, dZ/ are produced (note children’s fre-
quent spelling mistakes for the target train as chrain or chain).
Also noteworthy is the fact that /t, d/ may turn into palato-alveolar affricates
when they are followed by the palatal glide in the following word. Thus, we
get did you . . . ([dId ju . . . ] or [dIdZ ju . . . ]), ate your dinner [etS j2 dIn2]).
Another characteristic of American English in informal conversational
speech is the creation of homophonous productions for pairs such as planner
– planter [plæn2], canner – canter [kæn2], winner – winter [wIn2], tenor –
tenter [tEn2]. The loss of /t/ in the second member of these pairs is also seen
in many other words, as in rental, dental, renter, dented, twenty, gigantic,
Toronto. In all these examples we see that the /t/ that is lost is following 
a /n/. However, that such an environment is not a guarantee of this process
is revealed by examples such as contain, interred, entwined, in which /t/ fol-
lowing an /n/ cannot be deleted. The difference between these words and the
earlier ones is that /t/ is deleted only in an unstressed syllable.
Finally, mention should be made of the glottal stop or the preglottalized /t/
and the contexts in which it manifests itself. A glottal stop is the sound that
occurs when the vocal cords are held tightly together. In most speakers 
of American and British English (AE, BE), glottal stops or the preglottalized
/t/ are commonly found as allophones of /t/ in words such as Batman
[bæ?mæn], Hitler [hI?l2], atlas [æ?l@s], Atlanta [@?lænt@], he hit me [hihI?mi],
eat well [i?wEl], hot water [hA?wAQ2]. While the glottal stop can replace the
/t/ in these words, it is not allowed in atrocious [@t@oS@s] (not *[@?@oS@s]), 
attraction [@t@ækS@n] (not *[@?@ækS@n]; the asterisk here means “wrong” or 
“unattested”). The reason for this is that the glottal stop replacement requires
the target /t/ to be in a syllable-ﬁnal position ([bæ?.mæn], [@?.læn.t@]). The
words that do not allow the replacement have their /t/ in the onset position
([@.t@o.S@s], [@.t@æk.S@n]), as /t@/ is a permissible onset in English. We should
point out, however, that /t@/ being permissible is not carried over across words,
as the compound court-room illustrates. The expected production of this
sequence is with a glottal replacement, [kO@? rum], because the syllabiﬁcation
is not [kO@.t@um]. The glottal stop replacement of syllable-ﬁnal /t/ is also observ-
able before syllabic nasals (e.g. beaten [bi?y], kitten [kI?y]). The process under
discussion is most easily perceived after short vowels (e.g. put, hit), and least

62
ENGLISH
CONSONANTS
obvious after consonants (e.g. belt, sent). As pointed out above, in absolute ﬁnal
position, some speakers do not replace the /t/ with a glottal stop entirely, but
insert a glottal stop before /t/, as in hit [hI?t] (‘preglottalization’ or ‘glottal rein-
forcement’). The only difference between a glottal stop and a glottally reinforced
[?t] is that the tip of the tongue makes contact with the alveolar ridge in the
latter case but not in the former. It is also worth pointing out that this glottal
reinforcement may be applicable to other voiceless stops for many speakers,
as shown in tap [tæ?p], sack [sæ?k].
The velar stops of English, /k, g/, have appreciably different contact points
in the beginnings of the following two-word sequence: car key [ka@ ki]. The
initial stop of the ﬁrst word is made at a signiﬁcantly more back point in the
velum area than that of the initial sound of the second word, which is almost
making the stop closure at the hard palate. The reason for such a difference is
the back/front nature of the following vowel. Thus, velars are more front when
before a front vowel than when before a back vowel.
The other assimilatory process velar stops undergo relates to the different
lip positions in geese and goose. While in the latter example the lips are rounded
during the stop articulation, they are not so in the former. Again, the culprit
is the rounded/unrounded nature of the following vowel. The stop is produced
with lip rounding if it is followed by a rounded vowel. Putting together the
two assimilatory processes we have just discussed, we can see why the velar
stops in the sequence keep cool are produced differently. Predictably, the /k/
of the ﬁrst word, followed by /i/, is unrounded and more front, while that of
the second word, followed by /u/, is back and rounded.
Dialectal variation
The most signiﬁcant dialectal changes regarding stop consonants of English 
center on the alveolars. As mentioned earlier, the process of flapping is found
in American English (also in Irish English (IrE), Australian English (AuE), and
New Zealand English (NZE)). Thus, in other varieties of English, /t/ and /d/
are unchanged. In relation to this process, we can point out the differences in
aspiration. Since the following syllabic lateral provides a conducive environ-
ment for flapping in American English (e.g. bottle [baQl], little [lIQl]), there is
no aspiration in this word. However, in varieties without flapping, /t/ may
be released with some aspiration. Also noteworthy is the frequent unaspirated
realization of the voiceless stops in Scottish English (ScE). In African American
Vernacular English (AAVE), ﬁnal voiced stops may be devoiced (e.g. bad [bæd]
– [bæt], pig [pIg] – [pIk]), or may be deleted (e.g. hat [hæt] – [hæ], bad [bæd]
– [bæ]). In addition, /d/ may be deleted before the /z/ of the following 
plural/possessive morpheme (e.g. kids [kIdz] – [kIz]).
3.2
Fricatives
English has nine fricative phonemes occupying ﬁve places of articulation. Eight
of these fricatives are pairwise matching in voiceless/voiced for labio-dental

ENGLISH
CONSONANTS
63
/f, v/, inter-dental /T, D/, alveolar /s, z/, and palato-alveolar /S, Z/ places of
articulation. The remaining /h/ is a voiceless glottal fricative.
Although the labels ‘voiceless’/‘voiced’ are commonly used to separate 
certain fricatives, as with stops, the situation of voicing needs to be looked at
carefully. The picture presented by the voiced fricatives echoes what we saw
in stops; they are fully voiced only in intervocalic position, and partially
voiced in initial and ﬁnal positions.
(a)
sip [sIp]
(b)
assume [@sum]
(c)
bus [b√s]
zip [ZIp]
resume [@@zum]
buzz [b√Z]
Thus, among the three words with a voiced alveolar fricative, only the word-
medial /z/ in resume is fully voiced. Because of this, as with the stops, 
several phoneticians prefer the terms ‘fortis vs. lenis’ for the voiceless vs. voiced
distinction. The fortis fricatives are produced with louder friction noise than
their lenis counterparts.
There are other parallels between fricatives and stops. The length of the pre-
ceding vowel or sonorant consonant is dependent on the following fricative.
Thus, the ﬁrst member of each of the following pairs has a longer vowel/
sonorant than the second member, as it is followed by a lenis (voiced) fricative:
save [sev] – safe [sef], fens [fEnz] – fence [fEns], shelve [SElv] – shelf [SElf]
As with stops, when a word ends in a fricative and the next word starts with
the same fricative, we get one longer narrowing of the vocal tract, as in the
one long /s/ in tennis socks [tEnIs:Aks] and a long /f/ in half full [hæf:Ul].
A subgroup of fricatives (alveolars, /s, z/, and palato-alveolars /S, Z/), that
are known as ‘sibilants’ are very important for certain regularities in English
phonology. These fricatives are produced with a narrow longitudinal groove
on the upper surface of the tongue; acoustically, they are identiﬁed by noise
of relatively high intensity (hissing, hushing noise). In the formation of the 
regular noun plurals, third person possessive marking, and marking of the third
person verb ending in the simple present, sibilants play an important role. In
all these events, English has three possible markings, [s], [z], and [@z], as shown
in the following:
Plural
Possession
Simple present
cats [kæts]
Jack’s [dZæks]
s/he jumps [ . . . dZ√mps]
dogs [dOgz]
John’s [dZAnz]
s/he runs [ . . . @√nz]
buses [b√s@z]
George’s [dZO@dZ@z]
s/he catches [ . . . kætS@z]
All the above can be accounted for by stating one rule: if the last sound of 
the singular noun (in the left column), possessor (in the middle column), or
verb (in the right column) is a sibilant (affricates /tS/ and /dZ/ are sibilants
because they have in them the sibilant fricatives /S/ and /Z/ respectively), then
the ending is [@z]; if the last sound is not a sibilant, then the ending is either

64
ENGLISH
CONSONANTS
a [s] or a [z], and this is determined by its voicing. This pattern repeats itself
in the contractions with “is” and “has” in connected speech.
Pam’s very angry [pæmz vE@i æèg@i]
Pam’s been very angry [pæmz bIn vE@i æèg@i]
What’s your name? [w√ts jO@ nem]
It’s been a long time [Its bIn @ lOè taIm]
Ross is here [@Os Iz hi@]
Mitch has been there [mItS@z bIn DE@]
We can show all these in the following tree diagram.
Apart from these characteristics that are general to the fricatives, there 
are other points worth making for certain fricatives. To start with, palato-
alveolar fricatives /S, Z/ differ from the others by having an appreciable lip
rounding (labialization). Another pair, alveolars /s, z/, echoing the alveolar
stops, may undergo palatalization and turn into [S, Z] respectively, when they
occur before the palatal glide /j/. Commonly heard forms such as [aImISju] 
(I miss you), [DISji@] (this year), [aIpliZju] (I please you), [huZjU@ bAs] (who’s
your boss?) demonstrate this clearly. Thus, we can put together the behavior
of /t, d, s, z/ and state that the alveolar obstruents of English become palato-
alveolar when followed by a word that starts with the palatal glide /j/ (since
there are no palato-alveolar stops in English, the replacements are affricates
for /t, d/).
Interdental fricatives /T, D/ may undergo the elision process (i.e. they may
be left out) when they occur before the alveolar fricatives /s, z/, as exempliﬁed
by clothes [kloz], months [m√ns].
Certain fricatives are subject to some distributional restrictions. Firstly, the
voiced palato-alveolar /Z/, although it is well established in medial position
(e.g. vision [vIZ@n], measure [mEZ2]), is not found in word-initial position. Very
few seemingly contradictory cases are found in loan words in the speech of
only a limited number of speakers (e.g. genre [ZAn@@]). The standing of /Z/ in
ﬁnal position is better established, although one can still observe several fluc-
tuating forms, such as massage [m@sAZ/m@sAdZ], beige [beZ/bedZ], garage
[g@@AZ/g@@AdZ] ([gæ@IdZ] in BE).
The other fricative that has a defective distribution is the glottal /h/, which
can only appear in syllable-initial (never syllable-ﬁnal) position. This sound is
different from the other voiceless fricatives, as the source of the noise is not
air being forced through a narrow gap. The origin of /h/ is deep within the
vocal tract, and the turbulence is caused by the movement of air across the
surfaces of the vocal tract. Also worth mentioning is its voicing status; while
Last sound before the ending
[ ]
Sibilant?
Voiced?
YES
[z]
NO
YES
NO
[@z]
[s]

ENGLISH
CONSONANTS
65
it is voiceless word-initially, as in home [hom], his [hIz], etc., it is pronounced
with breathy voice intervocalically, as in ahead, behind, and behave.
The distribution of the voiced interdental fricative /D/ may also deserve some
comment in that, in initial position, it is restricted to grammatical morphemes.
It is important to note that although we have fewer than twenty words that
begin with this sound (the case forms of the personal pronouns they and thou,
the deﬁnite article the, demonstrative pronouns such as this, that, and so on, and
a handful of adverbs such as then, thus), these are words of high frequency in use.
Finally, we should mention the process whereby unstressed initial /D/ in
words such as the, this, that becomes assimilated (with or without complete
assimilation) to previous alveolar consonants (e.g. what the heck [wA93@hEk],
run the course [@√n:@kO@s], till they see [tIl:esi], how’s the dog? [haUz:@dOg], takes
them [teks:@m]).
Dialectal variation
While we do not see much of a difference across varieties regarding the labio-
dental and alveolar fricatives, interdentals and palato-alveolars present some
notable variations. One does ﬁnd dentalized realization of interdentals before
vowels in New York City, as in think [9Ièk], they [3e]; the same has been reported
in Southern Irish English. In African American Vernacular English (AAVE), 
interdentals turn into alveolar stops in the same environment (think [tIèk], they
[de]), but are realized as labio-dental fricatives in intervocalic and postvocalic
environments (e.g. nothing [n√fIè], with [wIf], mother [m√v2], smooth [smuv]).
Also in AAVE, and in some southern dialects of England, one sees a labio-
dental replacement for the voiceless /T/ before /@/, as in three [f@i]. Notable
too is the stopping of voiced fricatives /v/ and /z/ preceding nasals (e.g. seven
[sEv@n] →[sEbm], isn’t [Izyt] →[Idyt]).
In certain words, AE and BE show appreciable differences regarding the palato-
alveolar fricatives. While targets such as Asia, Persia, version all have /Z/ in
AE, they may have either /Z/ or /S/ in BE. In issue, sensual, we invariably
ﬁnd /S/ in AE; in BE these words may have either /S/ or /sj/. Similarly, seizure
and azure are pronounced with a /Z/ in AE, while they may have either /Z/
or /zj/ in BE.
Finally, although it was stated above that alveolars do not reveal any 
patterned dialectal variation, this author created from personal observation a
list of respectable length containing words that could have either of the two
alveolar fricatives /s, z/ (e.g. 
, Exxon, citizen, absorb, representing,
greasy, absurd, desolate, disburse, Texas, Renaissance) among AE speakers.
3.3
Affricates
The two English affricates, /tS, dZ/, follow the patterns of stops and fricatives
with regard to fortis/lenis (voiceless/voiced) distinction. Thus, we can state
that /dZ/ is fully voiced only in intervocalic position (e.g. agent [edZ@nt], ledger
resources

66
ENGLISH
CONSONANTS
[lEdZ2]); in initial and ﬁnal position it is only partially voiced (e.g. Jane [DZen],
fudge [f√DZ]).
Also, like stops and fricatives, sonorants (vowels, diphthongs, and sonorant
consonants) are longer preceding the voiced (lenis) affricate than when preced-
ing the voiceless (fortis) affricate. The vowels in ridge [@IdZ] and badge [bædZ]
are longer than the ones in rich [@ItS] and batch [bætS]; we obtain a similar differ-
ence for the nasal consonant in binge [bIndZ] and pinch [pIntS], and lunge [l√ndZ]
and lunch [l√ntS]. Since the above two generalizations are valid for stops, frica-
tives, and affricates, we can reformulate the rule and make it general for all
obstruents. Thus, we can state that (a) lenis obstruents are voiced only when
they occur intervocalically; they are partially voiced in initial and ﬁnal position,
unless immediately followed by a voiced sound; and (b) sonorants are longer
preceding a voiced (lenis) obstruent than when preceding a voiceless (fortis) one.
There is, however, a notable difference between the affricates on the one hand
and the stops and the fricatives on the other with respect to lengthening in 
geminates. Unlike stops and fricatives, in which one long articulation with no
separate release is observed in cases of two adjacent identical segments 
(e.g. stop Peter [stAp:it2], rough features [@√f:itS2z]), affricates have separate
releases. Thus, sequences such as much cheaper [m√tS tSip2] and orange juice
[O@@ndZ dZus] cannot be pronounced as *[m√tS:ip2] and *[O@@ndZ:us]. The
same principle holds when the two affricates are different in voicing (e.g. much
jollier [m√tS dZOli2], large chair [lA@dZ tSE@]).
Although affricates are phonetically made up of two sounds /t + S/ and 
/d + Z/, phonologically they behave like one segment and not like consonant
clusters. There are several supporting arguments for this assertion. Firstly, English
does not allow any onsets with a stop + fricative combination. Secondly, as 
indicated earlier in section 1.3.4, data from speech errors (spoonerisms) show
that affricates, when transported from one position to another, ﬁll the space
that is vacated by a single segment, as illustrated by key chain [ki tSen] becom-
ing [tSi ken], Ray Jackendoff [@e dZæk@ndOf] becoming [dZe @æk@ndOf], and last
cigarette Tim had in June [ . . . tIm hæd In dZun] becoming [ . . . dZIm hæd In
tun] (Fromkin 1973). Thus, if roughly cheaper [@√fli tSip2] were to suffer a
spoonerism, the likely form would be [tS√fli @ip2], and never *[t@√fli Sip2]. Lastly,
sounds representing an affricate are noticeably shorter than the sequence of
the sounds that make up the affricate. Thus, /tS/ in watch ear is shorter than
a sequence of [t] + [S] in what sheer.
Dialectal variation
Affricates do not present any variation among AE dialects. However, there are
some notable differences between AE and BE with respect to the pronunciation
of certain words. In AE words such as statue and virtue are always pronounced
with /tS/; however, they may have either /tS/ or /tj/ in BE. A similar thing is
found with the voiced counterpart: individual and education are pronounced
with /dZ/ in AE, but may be either with /dZ/ or /dj/ in BE. Also, in BE, we
note a tendency to use /S/ for /tS/ after a /n/, as in pinched, lunch, wrench.

ENGLISH
CONSONANTS
67
3.4
Nasals
English has three nasals in the following places of articulation: bilabial /m/,
alveolar /n/, and velar /è/. The ﬁrst two of these can occur in all word and
syllable positions, but the last one has defective distribution in that it can only
occur in syllable-ﬁnal position.
Like the stops, a nasal will have one prolonged closure in cases where it is
followed by an identical nasal, as in ten names [tEn:emz], some more [s√m:O@].
The alveolar nasal, /n/, is articulated in a more forward fashion (dental) when
it is followed by an interdental (/T, D/): tenth [tE6T], ban the ﬁlm [bæ6D@fIlm],
when they [wE6De].
Bilabial and alveolar nasals become labio-dentals when they are followed by
a labio-dental sound, as in emphasis [EÂf@sIs], comfort [k√Âf2t], invite
[IÂvaIt], infant [IÂf@nt]. This assimilation is not restricted to the adjacent sounds
in the same word and still occurs when the labio-dental fricative is at the 
beginning of the next word, for example come ﬁrst [k√Â f2st], on ﬁre [aÂ faI@],
warm feet [wO@Â ﬁt].
The susceptibility of nasals to assimilation is further demonstrated by total
change in place of articulation in the following: ten pairs [tEmpE@z], one piece
[w√mpis], ten girls [tEèg2lz], you can go [juk@ègo].
The above-mentioned cases of regressive assimilations that nasals go
through do not exhaust all the assimilatory possibilities. The alveolar nasal /n/
is retroflexed when it occurs after /@/ (progressive assimilation), as in burn,
barn. Finally, /m/ and /n/ are also subject to progressive assimilation in cases
of partial devoicing after the voiceless obstruent /s/, as in snail [sNel], small
[sMOl].
As mentioned earlier, nasals, together with liquids, can be syllabic in
English. In words such as sudden, button, open, taken, and chasm, the second
syllables may be represented solely by nasal consonants ([s√dy], [b√ty], [opm],
[tekg], [kæzm]). Although these forms are possible, and indeed are preferable
over the ones with an [@] in the second syllables in running speech, the same
is not possible in words such as felon, carom, which are pronounced only as
[fEl@n] and [kæ@@m] (not [fEly] and [kæ@m]) respectively. Neither is it possible
to have a syllabic nasal in ﬁlm or charm. Why? The key issue appears to be
the manner of articulation of the segment preceding the nasal. For a nasal 
to be syllabic, it has to be immediately preceded by an obstruent. Since the 
segments preceding the nasal in ﬁlm and charm are sonorants, the nasals 
cannot be syllabic. It should also be stated that when the consonant preceding
the nasal is preceded by another consonant, the nasal tends not to be syllabic,
as we normally insert an [@] in that syllable, as exempliﬁed by piston [pIst@n]
not [pIsty], Lincoln [lIèk@n] not [lIèky].
One issue that has been subject to some controversy is the homorganicity of
the syllabic nasal and the preceding obstruent. The overwhelming majority of
examples of syllabic nasals come from homorganic sequences such as bidden
[bIdy], golden [goldy], Latin [læty], kitten [kIty], etc. Indeed, the motivation

68
ENGLISH
CONSONANTS
for homorganicity is further revealed by examples such as ribbon [@Ib@n] vs.
[@Ibm], open [op@n] vs. [opm], bacon [bek@n] vs. [bekg], broken [b@ok@n] vs.
[b@okg], in which the syllabic nasal assimilates to the place of articulation of
the preceding obstruent in colloquial speech. While these examples support the
homorganicity view, it should be pointed out that we can also encounter
words such as madam [mædm] and modem [modm] with [dm], and chasm
[kæzm] and prism [p@Izm] with [zm], which present notable exceptions, because
their syllabic nasals are not homorganic with the preceding obstruent, and they
are not subject to further assimilation to become *[mædy] *[mody], *[kæzy],
*[p@Izy].
Finally, mention needs to be made of some points unique to the velar nasal.
As stated above, /è/ can occur only in coda position in English. However, even
in that position there are further restrictions: it can only be preceded by /I, E,
æ, √, U/ (lax vowels). Another point worth mentioning is related to the ortho-
graphic correspondences for this phoneme. While /è/ is typically represented
by the ng sequence orthographically, this is a unidirectional relationship.
While some words with orthographic ng in the middle have the pronunci-
ation /è/ only, others will have /èg/. Morphology seems to be a factor. 
For example, while ng in ﬁnger, mango, and anger stands for /èg/ ([fIèg2],
[mæègo], [æèg2]), it stands for /è/ in singer, hanger, and wrongful ([sIè2],
[hæè2], [@OèfUl). The difference between the two groups of words is that while
the former are monomorphemic words, the latter have two morphemes. There
are, however, other monomorphemic words such as sing and hang in which
ng stands for /è/ ([sIè], [hæè]). Thus, the generalization will have to be made
in the following manner: the orthographic ng stands for /è/ at the end of a
morpheme, or when inside a polymorphemic word. Such a generalization will
have one notable exception related to comparative and superlative sufﬁxes. While
adjectives such as long, strong are pronounced with a /è/ ([lOè], [st@Oè]), their
comparatives and superlatives have /èg/ ([lOèg2], [st@Oèg2], and [lOèg@st],
[st@Oèg@st]).
Dialectal variation
In AAVE, ﬁnal nasals may be deleted and the preceding vowel is nasalized
(e.g. den [dEn] →[d˜E]). In the North of England, there is dialectal variation
between /è/ and /èg/; the old /èg/ survives, especially before vowels (e.g.
singer). Similar cases can be found in the US southern mountains. The most
obvious variation in the USA is the substitution of /n/ for /è/ in the
unstressed -ing, as in going, something, and so on. This appears to occur, 
at least for several speakers, more commonly in the progressive (e.g. “he is 
reading”) than in gerunds (e.g. “reading is fun”).
3.5
Approximants
Liquids and glides form the category of approximants. These sounds are made
in such a way that one articulator is close to another without narrowing the

ENGLISH
CONSONANTS
69
vocal tract to create any friction. Approximants are joined with stops in 
two-member English onset clusters, as in play [ple], green [g@in], twin [twIn],
beauty [bjuti]. In addition to this general pattern, certain members of this class
have speciﬁc combinatorial characteristics. The lateral liquid /l/ can be com-
bined with /s/ (e.g. sleep [slip]) and /f/ (e.g. fly [flaI]), and the non-lateral
liquid /@/ can combine with /f/ (e.g. free [f@i]), /T/ (e.g. three [T@i]), and /S/
(e.g. shrimp [S@Imp]). The labio-velar glide /w/ can follow a /s/ (e.g. sweet
[swit]) and /T/ (e.g. thwart [TwO@t]) in clusters, while the possibilities are more
numerous for the palatal glide /j/ (e.g. /m/ music [mjuzIk], /f/ few [fju], /v/
view [vju], and /h/ hue [hju]). When the ﬁrst member of the cluster is a voice-
less obstruent, approximants are devoiced ([g@in] but [pre], [glu] but [sLip],
[dwIndl] but [sWit]).
The palatal glide /j/ is articulated with an audible friction before /i/ or /I/
(e.g. year [ji@], yip [jIp]), while there is no friction with other vowels (e.g. yes [jEs],
yacht [jAt], yawn [jOn]). Another point to be made about /j/ is that it is restricted
to appearing before /u/ in initial clusters (e.g. music [mjuzIk], pure [pju@]).
The labio-velar glide /w/ is unique among the consonants of English, as it
involves two places of articulation. While we have lip rounding (thus, labial),
the back part of the tongue is also raised toward the velum (thus, velar) in the
production of this sound.
The liquids, /l, @/, differ from the glides in one important respect: they 
can be syllabic in English. The conducive environment for the syllabicity of the
liquids is similar, but not identical, to that of the nasals we examined earlier.
Nasals required an obstruent as the preceding segment to become syllabic, while
liquids can accept any consonant for this condition. For example, in words such
as channel [tSænl], kennel [kEnl], the ﬁnal syllable has the syllabic liquid after
a sonorant consonant. Also worth mentioning is the lack of the requirement 
of homorganicity between the syllabic liquids and the preceding consonant.
Unlike nasals, which overwhelmingly require homorganicity with the preced-
ing obstruent, syllabic liquids have the freedom to occur after consonants 
with different places of articulation, as exempliﬁed by apple [æpl], removal
[@@muvl], pickle [pIkl], eagle [igl].
We should also add, in parallel to what was said in relation to nasals, 
that whenever the consonant that precedes the lateral is preceded by another
consonant, we normally insert an [@] between the liquid and the consonant 
preceding it, and thus, the liquid does not become syllabic. Examples such 
as pistol [pIst@l] not [pIstl], tingle [tIèg@l] not [tIègl], and candle [kænd@l] not
[kændl] illustrate this clearly. Finally, when the syllabic [l] is followed by an
unstressed vowel, its loss of syllabicity is variable; traveling and traveler have
either two or three syllables.
The alveolar lateral liquid, /l/, which is produced with varying degrees 
of ‘velarization’ (i.e. raising the back of the tongue), is articulated in a more
forward (dental) fashion when it is followed by an interdental fricative 
(e.g. wealth [wE!T], kill them [kI!DEm]).
The retroflex approximant /@/ is produced with the tip of the tongue curled
back toward the hard palate in AE. However, this is not the only way to produce

70
ENGLISH
CONSONANTS
the /@/ in AE. Some speakers have no retroflexion and use a ‘bunched’ articu-
lation. The /@/ is produced with friction (affricated) in onset clusters after the
alveolar stops (e.g. try, dry). It is commonplace to use a ‘retracted’ diacritic for
this phenomenon (e.g. [t$aI]).
Dialectal variation
In BE, the /®/ has no retroflexion; the tip of the tongue approaches the 
alveolar area in a way similar to that of alveolar stops, but does not make any
contact with the roof of the mouth. This is commonly described as a post-
alveolar approximant. Besides the difference in production, the distribution of
this sound varies greatly. Whereas in AE and other so-called ‘rhotic’ (or ‘r-full’)
dialects, such as IrE, ScE, Canadian English (CnE), /r/ can occur without much
restriction, in BE (except the southwest of England) and in other ‘non-rhotic’
(or ‘r-less’) dialects, such as in New England and the Southern USA, Australia,
New Zealand, and Wales, it can occur only before vowels. Thus, we observe
differences such as car ([kA] / [kA®]), farm ([fa:m] / [fA®m]). When a word 
ending in r is followed by a word beginning with a vowel, we see a ‘linking
r’ in non-rhotic dialects (e.g. player of the game [ple@$ @v . . . ]). Another aspect
of the ‘r-less’, non-rhotic dialects is the ‘intrusive r’, whereby an /®/ is inserted
between a word ending in /@/ and a following word that starts with a vowel,
as in India and Pakistan [Indi@® ænd . . . ], the idea is [ . . . aIdi2Iz]. In AAVE,
/@/ may be deleted intervocalically (e.g. during [dU@Iè] →[dUIè], Carol
[kæ@@l] →[kæU]), as well as in clusters (e.g. professor [p@@fEs2] →[p@fEs2]).
The other liquid, alveolar lateral approximant /l/, also presents appreciable
differences among different varieties. While it is customary to see the groupings
of ‘dark l’ and ‘clear l’ (‘light’ or ‘bright’ in some publications) in referring to
both AE and BE, the reality is rather different. In BE, we ﬁnd the ‘clear l’, which
is articulated with the tongue tip in contact with the alveolar ridge (resembling
an /i/ vowel, with no raising of the back of the tongue) in prevocalic (onset)
position, as in like, law; in postvocalic (coda) position (e.g. fall, belt) the realiza-
tion is the velarized ‘dark l’, which has a quality similar to /u/ with raising
of the back of the tongue toward the velum. In AE, as well as ScE and IrE,
however, we may hardly ﬁnd the ‘clear l’; most commonly, the realizations 
differ in terms of shades of the ‘dark l’. Thus, we ﬁnd a ‘dark l’ before front
vowels (e.g. left), a more velarized darker variety before back vowels (e.g. loose,
low), and the darkest one in postvocalic position (e.g. bolt, full). The syllabic
[l] is invariably ‘dark’ in AE. In Welsh English (WeE), the /l/ is always ‘clear’.
In AAVE, postvocalic /l/ may vocalize to [u] or [U], as in bell [bEl] or [bEU],
and /l/ may be deleted before a labial consonant (e.g. help [hElp] or [hEp],
wolf [wUlf] or [wUf]).
Words such as music [mjuzIk], museum [mjuzi@m], pure [pju@], cure [kju@],
cute [kjut] have to have the same two-sounds sequence in their onsets in both
AE and BE. However, the two dialects vary when we examine words such as
tune, nude, dune, news, lute. While in BE, and to a lesser degree in New England,
we see a /j/ after the ﬁrst consonant in these words ([tjun], [njud], [djun], [njuz],

ENGLISH
CONSONANTS
71
[ljut]), the expected AE pronunciations are without a /j/ ([tun], [nud], etc.).
The same difference is observed in words such as assume, resume ([@sjum],
[®@zjum] in BE, and [@sum], [@@zum] in AE). These examples may suggest that
/j/ may not follow an alveolar in the same morpheme in AE (across morphemes
this is possible, as in would you, bet you). This generalization, however, has
to be amended, because words such as onion [Anj@n], tenure [tEnj2], annual
[ænju@l], value [vælju], failure [felj2], million [mIlj@n] have alveolars /n/ or
/l/ followed by a /j/ in AE as well as in BE. Thus, the correct characteriza-
tion of the AE restriction on alveolars should read as “/j/ cannot follow an
alveolar obstruent; it can follow an alveolar sonorant when in an unstressed
syllable”. In AAVE, /j/ can be deleted in a [CjV] sequence (e.g. computer
[k@mpjut2] or [k@mput2]).
For several speakers of AE, as well as ScE, IrE, and NZE, /w/ has a voice-
less version (phonetically shown as [hw] or [∑]) in words spelled with wh.
Thus, these speakers make the following distinctions in pairs such as Wales –
whales [welz] – [hwelz], witch – which [wItS] – [hwItS].
3.6
Sociophonetic Variation
What we have seen so far has dealt with variable productions due to linguistic
contexts (word/syllable positions, adjacent segments, stress, etc.) and regionally
manifested variation. In recent years attention has also been paid to sociophonetic
variation (aspects of phonetic realizations that vary as a function of a range of
social factors, such as age, gender, ethnicity, class, and individual identity).
Investigations of how phonetic detail indexes social categories encompass
both consonantal and vocalic variations. What follow are some consonantal 
variations mentioned in the literature. Sociophonetic variations pertaining to
vowels will be given in the next chapter.
A frequently cited consonantal variation indexing social class comes from
Labov’s (1972) New York City study, which investigated the absence or 
presence of postvocalic /@/, as in fourth, floor etc., and found statistically
signiﬁcant differences among socioeconomic classes. Absence of postvocalic /@/
is a common phenomenon in New York City. Members of higher socioeconomic
groups typically use postvocalic /@/ more than those of lower social groups;
thus, the use of /@/ was associated with high prestige, and the lack of it 
with low prestige. To test this claim, Labov used data from salespeople in three
department stores associated with different levels of prestige: Saks (upper-
middle-class customers, thus ‘high prestige’), Klein’s (working-class customers,
thus ‘low prestige’), and Macy’s, the store that was in between the two others
in prestige and socioeconomic class. Results conﬁrmed the hypothesis that the
variation of postvocalic /@/s was indexed by different socioeconomic groups.
Everybody dropped their /@/s some of the time, but the least absence was found
with the salespeople in Saks. The highest degree of dropped /@/s was found
with the salespeople in Klein’s. The salespeople in Macy’s fell in the middle.
We should, however, immediately add that the relationship of presence or

72
ENGLISH
CONSONANTS
absence of the r-sound in this position and class is entirely arbitrary, for in another
variety (e.g. in England) the opposite social evaluation of coda /®/ can be found;
the presence of the ﬁnal /®/ is often considered as a sign of low social status
(Wells 1982).
Group membership can also interact with phonetic productions. In the
speech of two rival street gangs, Labov (1972) found several non-standard forms
including [n] for /è/ and [d] or [v] for /D/. The productions, however, were
considerably higher by the ‘core members’ of both gangs than by peripheral
associates of either group.
Bucholtz (1998, 1999) found that, to differentiate themselves from their
peers, ‘nerds’ in California produced the released forms of word-ﬁnal /t/, instead
of the typical unreleased or glottalized forms.
Dubois and Horvath’s (1998, 1999) studies, looking at Louisiana Cajun
English speakers, showed that “network strength” and age can interact with
phonetic productions. Resurgent use of dental stops [9] and [3] for /T/ and
/D/ respectively was found in younger informants (20–39 years of age) who
were “closed network members” (enclave or otherwise insular communities)
and not in “open network members” (individuals who were more participa-
tive in the wider society).
Finally, “perceived gender of the speaker” has been shown to influence 
perception. Strand and Johnson (1996) found that participants shifted in their
perception of a /s/–/S/ continuum depending on the perceived gender of the
speaker. A sibilant was more likely to be perceived as /S/ when participants
were shown a photo of a person more stereotypically female. This ﬁnding is
consistent with the differences in production between males and females,
because females have a higher acoustic boundary between /s/ and /S/ in 
production.
SUMMARY
In this chapter, we looked at the consonant phonemes of American English and
their contextual variants. The variants clearly attest the highly rule-governed
nature of language and are critical for practitioners who need to identify the
mismatches of their population with the norm. We noted too the differences
among the varieties, which are also systematic. Information gathered from these
varieties is particularly helpful to remediators who may otherwise confuse some
dialect features with disordered speech.

ENGLISH
CONSONANTS
73
EXERCISES
1.
Complete the following statements and give examples (in phonetic
transcription). Your examples should be different from the ones pro-
vided in the chapter and from the ones in the sound ﬁles.
(a)
Vowels/diphthongs are longer before
___________________
stops than before
___________________
stops.
e.g. ____________/____________
____________/____________
(b)
Voiceless (fortis) stops are aspirated when
_________________
e.g. ________________
________________
________________
(c)
Stops are unreleased when
_______________________________
e.g. ________________
________________
________________
(d)
Stops are nasally released when
__________________________
e.g. ________________
________________
________________
(e)
Alveolar stops become dental when
_______________________
e.g. ________________
________________
________________
(f)
Alveolar stops are flapped when
__________________________
e.g. ________________
________________
________________
(g)
/t/ is deleted when
_____________________________________
e.g. ________________
________________
________________
(h)
/t/ may be replaced by a glottal stop when
________________
e.g. ________________
________________
________________
(i)
Velar stops are more front when
__________________________
e.g. _______/________
_______/________
_______/________
(j)
Velar stops are rounded when
____________________________
e.g. _______/________
_______/________
_______/________
(k)
Vowels, nasals, and /l/ are longer before
__________________
fricatives than before
_________________
fricatives.
e.g. _______/________
_______/________
_______/________
(l)
Stops, fricatives, and nasals are long when
_________________
e.g. ________________
________________
________________

74
ENGLISH
CONSONANTS
(m) Alveolar sonorants become dental when
___________________
e.g. ___________
___________
____________
____________
(n)
Non-velar nasals become labio-dental when
________________
e.g. ___________
___________
____________
____________
(o)
Nasals may be syllabic when
_____________________________
e.g. ________________
________________
________________
(p)
Approximants / /, / /, / /, / / are devoiced when
_______
e.g. ___________
___________
____________
____________
(q)
Approximants / / and / / may be syllabic when
________
e.g. ___________
___________
____________
____________
2.
/t/ is probably the most versatile of all stops of English, as it can
undergo several processes such as becoming dental, preglottalization,
glottal stop replacement, deletion, flapping, aspiration, etc. Examine
the following list of words and indicate the various possibilities for
the /t/ targets together with the phonetic transcription.
Example:
entity [EntIti]
t-deletion: [EnIti], ﬂapping [EntIQi], t-deletion and 
ﬂapping [EnIQi]
mentality
______________________________________________________
scientist
_______________________________________________________
stunting
_______________________________________________________
betting
________________________________________________________
attest
_________________________________________________________
trustable
______________________________________________________
tractor
________________________________________________________
don’t think
__________________________________________________
mortality
______________________________________________________
quarter
________________________________________________________
battle
_________________________________________________________
at large
_____________________________________________________
3.
Transcribe the following and discuss the release of the stops.
(a)
skip town
[________________]
_____________________
(b)
sheep dog
[________________]
_____________________
(c)
great dane
[________________]
_____________________

ENGLISH
CONSONANTS
75
(d)
drip blood
[________________]
_____________________
(e)
light bulb
[________________]
_____________________
(f)
fake gun
[________________]
_____________________
(g)
ship mate
[________________]
_____________________
(h)
club member
[________________]
_____________________
(i)
cat tail
[________________]
_____________________
4.
Circle the items that qualify for lateral plosion. State the generalization. 
puddle, bottle, goggle, apple, head lice, deep lake, red light, pickle
5.
Transcribe the following. Pay special attention to the nasals.
keep him here
___________________________________
looking good
____________________________________
I can go
_________________________________________
lamb meat
_______________________________________
green thumb
_____________________________________
Citizen Kane
_____________________________________
pen-pal
__________________________________________
home free
_______________________________________
run there
________________________________________
blame me
_______________________________________
in Greece
________________________________________
6.
If the following were to undergo spoonerisms, what would be the likely
and unlikely results, and why?
red jeep
____________________________________________________
just right
___________________________________________________
cheap rate
__________________________________________________
7.
Transcribe the following and state the number of syllables, high 
vowels, and voiceless fricatives in (a) and the number of sibilants, 
diphthongs, and ﬁnal consonant clusters in (b).
(a)
“Setting an example is not the main means of influencing others;
it is the only means.”
Albert Einstein
(b)
“I have not failed. I have found 10,000 ways that won’t work.”
Thomas A. Edison

76
ENGLISH
CONSONANTS
8.
Transcribe the following (about “the spread of English”, continued)
from P. Trudgill and J. Hannah, International English, 4th edn.
(London: Edward Arnold, 2002).
It was also during the 1800s that the development of Southern 
Hemisphere varieties of English began. During the early 19th century, 
large-scale colonization of Australia began to take place and, at a slightly 
later date, New Zealand, South Africa, and the Falkland Islands also 
began to be colonized from the British Isles. The South Atlantic islands
of St Helena and Tristan da Cunha also acquired English-speaking 
populations during the 1800s, as did Pitcairn Island and, subsequently,
Norfolk Island in the South Paciﬁc. Not surprisingly, these patterns 
of expansion, settlement and colonization have had an effect on the 
relationships, similarities and differences between the varieties of 
English which have grown up in different parts of the world. For 
example, there are very many similarities between Scottish and 
northern Irish English. North American English and the English of 
southern Ireland also have many points of similarity. And the English 
varieties of the Southern Hemisphere (Australia, New Zealand, South
Africa, Falklands), which were transplanted relatively recently from the
British Isles, are very similar to those of the south-east of England, from 
where most emigrants to Australasia and South Africa came. They are 
quite naturally much less different from the English of England than are
the varieties spoken in the Americas, which were settled much earlier.

4
English Vowels
4.1
Introduction
Describing the vowels of English is a much more complex task than doing 
the same for the consonants. The main reason for this is the magnitude of 
variation and differences in the inventories of different varieties of English. The
number of consonant phonemes is the same in all varieties of English (24), 
and the dialectal variations are relatively small. When we look at the vowels,
however, we see that the number of phonemes varies, and the phonetic 
realizations of these phonemes may differ from one variety to another. Thus,
in order not to overwhelm the primary readership of this book – students and
practitioners of Applied Linguistics, TESOL (Teaching English to Speakers of
Other Languages), and Communication Disorders in the United States – our main
focus will be American English. At the end of the chapter, we will also present
a comparison of American English with some other major varieties spoken 
outside the USA.
4.2
Vowel Set of American English
The vowel set of American English can be described with the following 
key words. To the left of the key word, we place the symbol that is used in
this book; the symbols to the right of the key word can be found in other 
publications. The following list contains what are commonly described as
monophthongal vowels, which are mostly ﬂanked between obstruents:
/i/
beat
(/i:/, /ij/, /iy/)
/I/
bit
/e/
bait
(/eI/, /ej/, /ey/)
/E/
bet
/æ/
bat
/√/
bus
(/@/ in unstressed syllables)
/A/
pot
(/A:/)
four
Applied English Phonology, Second Edition       Mehmet Yavaş 
© 2011 Mehmet Yavaş. ISBN: 978-1-444-33322-0 

78
ENGLISH
VOWELS
/O/
cloth
(/O:/)
/o/
boat
(/oU/, /ow/)
/U/
book
/u/
boot
(/uw/, /u:/)
Although these vowels are commonly described as ‘simple’, we have to 
mention that /i/ and /u/ are slightly diphthongized (hence the symbols /ij/,
/iy/, and /uw/, respectively, in some books and manuals), and /e/ and /o/
are even more diphthongized (hence the symbols /ej/, /ey/, /eI/, and /oU/,
/ow/, respectively, in some books and manuals).
Diphthongs
The following three are the main diphthongs of American English:
/aI/
bite
(/aj/, /ay/, /ai/)
/aU/
bout
(/aw/, /au/, /AU/)
/OI/
void
(/oy/, /oj/, /Oj/, /Oy/, /oI/, /oi/)
4.2.1
Phonetic properties of vowels
As we saw in chapter 1, in the description of vowels, tongue position plays a
very important role. Accordingly, one of the important dimensions is related
to the part of the tongue involved, and the other is related to the height of 
the tongue in the production of a speciﬁc vowel. According to the former 
criterion, English vowels can be classiﬁed as:
Front: /i/, /I/, /e/, /E/, /æ/
Central: /√/
Back: /u/, /U/, /o/, /O/, /A/
As for tongue height, we have the following groupings:
High: /i/, /I/, /u/, /U/
Mid: /e/, /E/, /o/, /O/
In some publications, a separation between ‘high-mid’ and ‘low-mid’ is
given to separate /e/ and /o/ from /E/ and /O/.
Low: /æ/, /√/, /A/
If we put these two dimensions together, we obtain the vowel chart shown in
ﬁgure 4.1.
Besides the tongue height and the tongue part involved, the vowels of
English are also grouped according to the lip position. The binary split is between
the rounded vowels (/u, U, o, O/), and the unrounded vowels (the remainder).
All rounded vowels of English are back; in fact we can make the following 
generalization: all non-low back vowels are rounded in English.

ENGLISH
VOWELS
79
4.2.2
Tense–lax
It is also customary to see another binary grouping between the ‘tense’ and ‘lax’
vowels of English. This issue requires more detailed attention, as we may ﬁnd
different rationales and classiﬁcations in different publications. In some manuals,
the tense–lax distinction is present to account for two vowels that are otherwise
described identically. For example, vowels /i/ and /I/, according to the dimen-
sions discussed above, will both be described as “high, front, unrounded” vowels;
the same problem is present with regard to /u/ and /U/, because both are
“high, back, rounded”. Similarly, the front and back mid vowels /e, E/ and
/o, O/, if not separated as high-mid and low-mid, will end up being described
identically. To solve these problems, tense and lax are introduced; the ﬁrst mem-
ber in each of these pairs of vowels is called ‘tense’, because (a) it has a higher
tongue position, (b) it has greater duration than its ‘lax’ counterpart, and (c) it
requires a greater muscular effort in production (hence the term ‘tense’) than
the lax vowel. This phonetic deﬁnition, however, is not universally adopted.
Rather, one ﬁnds a phonologically deﬁned ‘tense–lax’ separation more popular
in the literature. This distributionally based classiﬁcation is more useful,
because it divides the vowels into two groups that are distinguished by the
environments in which they occur. Also, as we will see later in chapter 7, this
division will play an important role in the stress rules of English.
The following describes the tense–lax rationale in terms of the different kinds
of syllables in which the vowels can occur. Since all English vowels can occur
in closed syllables (as shown in the list at the beginning of this chapter), this
cannot be used as a criterion. However, when we examine the vowels and diph-
thongs that can occur in stressed open syllables, we ﬁnd /i, e, A, O, o, u, aI, aU,
OI/ (tense vowels); /I, E, æ, U, √/ (lax vowels) are absent in such syllables. Another
syllable type that is said to favor the occurrence of tense vowels and, thus, 
generally rejects lax vowels is closed by /@/. This, however, is a somewhat 
complex issue, because the contrasts between the tense vowels and their closest
lax counterparts are generally lost before /@/ for many speakers of American
English. We will have more to say about this later. As for the syllable types that
favor the occurrence of the ‘lax’ vowels of English, we can cite the syllables closed
by /S/ or by /è/. To summarize the mutually exclusive environments, we can
say that ‘tense’ vowels are found in stressed open syllables (and syllables with
/@/ coda), while ‘lax’ vowels are found in syllables with /S/ or /è/ coda.
FRONT
CENTRAL
BACK
HIGH
beat i
u boot
bit I
U book
MID (high-mid)
bait e
o boat
(low-mid)
bet E
O cloth
LOW
bus √
bat æ
A pot
Figure 4.1
American English vowels

80
ENGLISH
VOWELS
This distributionally based phonological classiﬁcation of tense–lax does
come into conﬂict with the earlier mentioned phonetically based classiﬁcation.
First of all, both /o/ and /O/ are ‘tense’ in the latter classiﬁcation, while they
were separated (‘tense’ for the former, ‘lax’ for the latter) in the phonetic
classiﬁcation. Secondly, there will be a problem with regard to ‘duration’, which
the phonetically based criterion focuses on. While it is true that several of the
lax vowels (/I, E, U, v/) are short, /æ/ is not. Indeed, this vowel has equal
duration with, or even greater duration than, typically long and tense vowels
such as /A, e, o/. We will not go into further details in this introductory text
and, following the widespread usage, will utilize the ‘tense’ and ‘lax’ grouping
as deﬁned by the occurrences in different syllable types.
Now we can revise the vowel chart and incorporate all that has been said.
Before we examine in detail the different subgroups of vowels and their
dialectal variation, we will look at some other characteristics that are relevant
to all vowels.
4.2.3
Nasalized vowels
The words bead and bean form a minimal pair, and any native speaker of 
English can tell that the ﬁnal consonants in these words are responsible for 
the contrast. Besides this obvious fact, however, there lies another difference
between these two words and that has to do with the vowel sounds. While
both vowels belong to the phoneme /i/, the phonetic manifestation of the vowel
of the second word, bean, is nasalized and, phonetically, an [(]. This predictable
allophonic rule of English is valid for all vowels; that is, English vowels (and
diphthongs) are nasalized when they occur before a nasal consonant.
4.2.4
Length
Length of vowels (and diphthongs) varies predictably according to the context
they appear in. More speciﬁcally:
(a)
Vowels are longer before voiced consonants than before their voiceless coun-
terparts. Thus, the phonetic realization of the vowel /æ/ in bag [bæg] is
longer than its realization in back [bæk].
(b) Vowels are longer before sonorant consonants than before obstruents. Thus
the phonetic realization of the vowel /o/ in goal [gol] is longer than its
realization in goad [god].
I
i
E
√
e
Lax
O
A
o
u
U
æ

ENGLISH
VOWELS
81
(c)
Vowels are longer in open syllables than in closed syllables. Thus, the phon-
etic realization of the vowel /e/ in bay [be] is longer than its realization
in bait [bet].
We can combine the three rules above and say that we ﬁnd a vowel longest
in an open syllable (e.g. /i/ in knee [ni]); next longest in a syllable closed by
a sonorant consonant (e.g. /i/ in kneel [nil]); next longest in a syllable closed
by a voiced obstruent (e.g. /i/ in need [nid]); and shortest in a syllable closed
by a voiceless consonant (e.g. /i/ in neat [nit]).
(d) Vowels are longer in stressed syllables than in unstressed syllables. Thus,
the phonetic realization of the phoneme /i/ in the stressed (bold-faced)
syllable of the word appreciate [@.p£i.Si.et] is longer than its realization in
the following unstressed syllable.
4.2.5
Vowels before /m/
Earlier we mentioned that vowels are affected by the surrounding consonants,
and this effect is much more noticeable with certain consonants, especially with
liquids. In this section, we will examine the vowels before /@/. In most forms
of American English some form of r-sound after a vowel is permitted. When
the following /@/ is in the same syllable (as in ear, cure, work, party), the vowel
takes on some retroﬂex quality, which is commonly known as ‘r-coloring’. When
this happens, several otherwise well-established vowel contrasts of English are
neutralized (i.e. lost) with many speakers of American English. For example,
the contrast between the two high front vowels /i/ and /I/ seems to disappear
in words such as ear, fear, beard, pier, etc. The r-colored production resembles
neither /i/ nor /I/; it is somewhere in between (traditionally transcribed as
[i@]). A similar situation can be observed between the two high back vowels
/u/ and /U/ in words such as tour, mature, endure, and poor. The r-colored
vowel is not identical to either /u/ or /U/. This phenomenon of neutraliza-
tions of contrasts continues with full force in the front and back mid vowel
series. For many speakers of American English, the r-colored vowel in Mary,
merry, and marry is the same, thus revealing a neutralization of the contrasts
between /e/, /E/, and /æ/. As for the back vowels, words such as pork, bore,
horn, and fork do not seem to reveal any distinction between /o/ and /O/, as
the /@/ has the effect of raising the /O/ toward /o/ (cf. morning vs. mourning).
Similarly, with respect to the high back vowels, the contrast between /u/ and
/U/ may be neutralized in words such as poor and cure. Some speakers even
go further and neutralize the four back vowels /o, O, u, U/ before /@/ in 
coversational speech (e.g. pour, pore, poor).
Besides neutralizing the above-mentioned distinctions, r-coloring is present
in the following two diphthongs: /aI@/ (e.g. ﬁre, entire, inspire) and /aU@/ (e.g.
sour, devour). Finally, the central vowel schwa has two r-colored manifesta-
tions: [´] in stressed syllables and [2] in unstressed syllables (e.g. herder [h´d2]).
We summarize the r-colored vowels with the tautosyllabic /@/ in ﬁgure 4.2.

82
ENGLISH
VOWELS
Before we end this section, we should mention that an additional neutral-
ization is present in some varieties of General American, and especially in 
eastern New England, New York City, and Southern American, whereby /O@/
may shift to /A@/, when the vowel and the following /@/ are not tautosyllabic.
In words such as foreign, moral, forest, and horrible, the vowel shown with
the orthographic o may be pronounced as /A/, thus giving us [fA@@n], [mA@@l],
[fA@@st], and [hA@@bl]. Note that this shift is not possible if the vowel is in the
same syllable as the following /@/, as exempliﬁed in score, shore, organized,
and storm. The following example, observed in its multiple occurrences with
several speakers, makes the point succinctly. The word forehead may be heard
as [fO@hEd] or [fA@@d]; in the ﬁrst rendition, [@] is the coda of the ﬁrst syllable
(tautosyllabic with the preceding vowel), and thus is not lowered to [A] (not
[fA@hEd]). However, the second rendition, which has the lower vowel, [A], 
necessarily puts the [@] in the onset position of the second syllable.
4.2.6
Vowels before /l/
The effect of /l/ on the preceding tautosyllabic vowel, although not as drastic
as that of /@/, is still noticeable. As we saw in the preceding chapter, postvocalic
/l/ is highly velarized (dark) in American English, and this has a retracting
effect on the front vowels. As a result, we have a more centralized vowel in
the second word of each pair below:
/i/
meat – meal
/I/
Mick – milk
/e/
pay – pale
/E/
bet – belt
/æ/
tack – talc
The effect of the postvocalic /l/ on the remaining vowels (central and back)
and diphthongs is more of a raising and backing, but might be less noticeable.
/A/
dot – doll
/√/
hut – hull
/o/
so – sole
i
u
pier
poor
I
U
e
Mary
herder
[h´d2]
o
E
pair
merry
pour
æ
marry
O
coir
OI@
aI@
ﬁre
aU@
sour
car
a@
Figure 4.2
Vowels before the tautosyllabic /@/

ENGLISH
VOWELS
83
/U/
foot – full
/u/
food – fool
/aI/
might – mile
/aU/
bout – bowel
/OI/
coin – coil
In Southern states and in the Mid-Atlantic region the mergers of /ul/-/Ul/ (e.g.
pool – pull) and /il/-/Il/ (e.g. peel – pill) are common. Also reported is the
/√l/-/ol/ merger in California.
4.3
Front Vowels
High front
The two American English high front vowels, /i/ and /I/, differ in height,
length, and tense–lax dimension. The /i/ is longer, higher, and slightly diph-
thongal (hence symbols such as /i:/, /ij/, /iy/ in some books). In the production,
the highest point of the tongue is a little lower and centralized, and is raised
and fronted in articulation. This is most noticeable in the ﬁnal position, as in
see, and least noticeable before voiceless stops, as in feat, where the duration
is shortest. For some speakers, [i] may be in free variation with [I] in ﬁnal posi-
tion (e.g. city [sIti/sItI], happy [hæpi/hæpI]). The use of ﬁnal unstressed [I] 
is most common to the south of a line drawn west from Atlantic City to northern
Missouri, thence southwest to New Mexico.
The vowel /I/ has several different phonetic manifestations; it may undergo
‘tensing’ and be realized as [i] before palato-alveolar fricatives (e.g. ﬁsh [ﬁS]).
In AAVE and in Southern American English, /I/ tends to be lowered to [E]
before nasals (e.g. thing [TEè]). Also observed in the same region is the ten-
dency that converges the front vowels to [I] (e.g. gater, kettle, daddy). Finally,
we should note the free variation of [I] with [@] in unstressed syllables (e.g.
believe [b@liv/bIliv], kitchen [kItS@n/kItSIn]) and in sufﬁxes -ed, -es, -est, as
in tempted [tEmpt(@/I)d], bushes [bUS(@/I)z], longest [lOèg(@/I)st].
Mid front
The difference between the mid front vowels /e/ and /E/ is similar to that
between the high front vowels /i/ and /I/; /e/ is longer, higher, and tense,
and /E/ is lower, shorter, and lax. The diphthongal nature of the tense 
one, however, is more pronounced; this is more obvious in open stressed 
syllables, such as say, or before voiced consonants (e.g. game, grade) than 
before voiceless consonants (e.g. gate) or in weak syllables (e.g. create). A more
monophthongal (or very narrow) diphthong can be found in the northernmost
Midwest region (e.g. Wisconsin, Minnesota).
Parallel to the tensing of /I/ to [i], the vowel /E/ may be realized as diph-
thongal [e] before /S, Z/ (e.g. special [speS@l], cf. spatial) in the South. This is
also extended to contexts before voiced stops (e.g. bed, dead), and as a result
the contrast between /e/ and /E/ is lost, and egg rhymes with vague. Besides

84
ENGLISH
VOWELS
the free variation that exists before a tautosyllabic [@], there is also a free 
variation between /e/ and /æ/ (e.g. apricot, matrix); this exists as well in the
negative preﬁx, as in amoral, asymmetric. Similar to the southern variety, /E/
may be raised to /I/ before a nasal in AAVE (e.g. pen [pEn] →[pIn]).
Low front
English has one low front vowel, /æ/, which has different realizations in dif-
ferent regions. In Eastern American, especially in some New England varieties
(Boston), the lower and more back vowel [a] is common (e.g. half [haf], rat [@at]).
(In the South, a diphthongal allophone is frequently heard (e.g. glass [glæIs],
bad [bæId].)
Before an [@] plus another vowel, as in carry, Paris, Arabic, [æ] occurs along
the Atlantic, along the Gulf Coast, and in the South, but [E] occurs more 
frequently in other areas. This vowel can be diphthongal, especially before 
/S, Z, k/, in the South (e.g. splash [splæIS], back [bæIk]).
4.4
Central Vowels
The central, low-mid, lax vowel of English is /√/ (e.g. bus [b√s]). This vowel
is found only in stressed syllables; in unstressed syllables, a higher vowel, [@]
‘schwa’ [SwA], is the realization (e.g. around [@@aUnd]).
Before a tautosyllabic [@] in stressed syllables, as in nurse, her, etc., a slightly
higher, r-colored vowel, [´], is found. Its corresponding unstressed version is
[2]. These are the two r-colored vowels of the word herder [h´d2]. When /@/
is intervocalic, as in courage, it may be represented as in [k´@@dZ] to show that
the vowel is not in the same syllable as /@/. In some such words (e.g. hurry,
worry), [√@], instead of [´@], may be found along the Atlantic seaboard,
throughout most of Pennsylvania ([h√@i], [w√@i]). There are several different
treatments of these central vowels in different manuals with respect to the 
number of phonemes. Without going into these controversies, we will adopt
the following in our transcriptions:
[√] in stressed syllables (e.g. bus [b√s])
[@] in unstressed syllables (e.g. sofa [sof@])
[´] in stressed syllables before a tautosyllabic [@] (e.g. bird [b´d])
[2] in unstressed syllables before a tautosyllabic [@] (e.g. father [fAD2])
[´@] in stressed syllables before a heterosyllabic [@] (e.g. courage [k´@@dZ])
[@@] in unstressed syllables before a heterosyllabic [@] (e.g. parade [p@@ed])
4.5
Back Vowels
Low back
The low back vowel in American English is /A/, as in father. While many 
speakers of American English make a distinction between /O/ and /A/, as in

ENGLISH
VOWELS
85
the pairs collar – caller [kAl2] – [kOl2], cot – caught [kAt] – [kOt], Don – dawn
[dAn] – [dOn], many others do not make this distinction and use /A/ for both.
This collapse of /A/ and /O/ is one of the most signiﬁcant vowel mergers 
in American English. The areas where this merger dominates include Maine,
New Hampshire, Vermont, northern Massachusetts, Western Pennsylvania,
Midland territory, and the American West (with the exception of the
metropolitan areas of Los Angeles and San Francisco). The areas resistant to
this merger are the inland North (US side of the Great Lakes region), and most
of the South and the Northeast corridor (Providence to Baltimore). As men-
tioned in section 4.2.5, the merger does not apply when the vowel is followed
by a tautosyllabic /@/; thus, born and barn are always distinct (cf. orange [O@@ndZ]
or [A@@ndZ]). Some speakers around southeastern Ohio and northern West
Virginia have /A/ and /O/ neutralized before /t/, but not in other contexts.
There are also speakers who limit this merger before nasals (e.g. Don and dawn).
Some books suggest that, in some areas, /A/ has two allophones: [A] and
[Å]. The vowel [Å], which is heard mainly on the Eastern seaboard, has slight
lip rounding and lies between [A] and [O]; it is not used by all Americans. For
those people who use it, the distribution is as follows: [A] occurs in both open
syllables (e.g. spa) and syllables closed by a sonorant consonant (e.g. car, prom),
and [Å] in syllables closed by an obstruent (e.g. hot, posh).
Mid back
The relationship between the mid back vowels of American English, /o/ and
/O/, is similar to that of their front counterparts, /e/ and /E/. The vowel /o/,
like /e/, is somewhat diphthongized and has a movement higher toward the
end in production (hence the symbols /oU/ and /ow/ in some books). It is
monophthongal (or very narrowly diphthongal) in the northernmost Midwest
(Wisconsin, Minnesota). As mentioned earlier, before a tautosyllabic /@/, the
distinction between the two vowels is lost for speakers in the New York City
area and across the northern USA, west of New England. In the South and upper
New England, however, the distinction is maintained. Thus, pairs such as hoarse
– horse and morning – mourning may or may not be homophonous depending
on the region.
High back
The high back vowels, /u/ and /U/, behave very similarly to their front 
counterparts, /i/ and /I/. The vowel /u/ is slightly diphthongal (hence the
symbol /uw/ in some books). While /u/ is centralized in the southeastern USA
(e.g. school, good), /U/ may undergo ‘tensing’ and be realized as [u] before a
palato-alveolar fricative coda, as in bush [buS], which rhymes with douche. 
As mentioned earlier, the distinction between /u/ and /U/ is lost before a 
tautosyllabic /@/ (e.g. tour) or /l/ (e.g. pull – pool); a similar situation may be
observed in some other words spelled with oo (e.g. hoof, roof, root), where
either vowel is acceptable. Finally, in unstressed syllables preceding another
vowel, /u/ may become lax [U] (e.g. gradual [g@ædZU@l]).

86
ENGLISH
VOWELS
4.6
Diphthongs
The three diphthongs of American English, /aI, aU, OI/, given in ﬁgure 4.3, can
appear in all word positions, are all stressed on the ﬁrst vowel, and all end 
in a high vowel. While the end points are pretty well established across the
varieties of American English, the ﬁrst element of these diphthongs may show
considerable variation.
•
/aI/:
The most common beginning point for this diphthong is [a], but it may
shift to a more back [A]. In the southern USA, /aI/ becomes [A:] or [a:] if not
followed by a voiceless consonant (e.g. buy [bA:], miles [mA:lz]). In southern
Philadelphia and parts of New York City, one hears [√I] instead. In the mid-
land and South, it is often reduced to a monophthong before /@/ (e.g. ﬁre [fa@]).
•
/™I/:
For this diphthong, the starting point is back lower-mid, and the
tongue glides from /O/ toward /I/. The lips are slightly rounded for the
ﬁrst element and neutral for the second. In Pennsylvania, Maryland, and
Delaware, /OI/ sometimes approximates to [oI]. In AAVE and in the South,
we normally get a monophthongized [O:] (e.g. oil [O:l], foil [fO:l], boil [bO:l]).
In Outer Banks islands off the coast of North Carolina, [aI] may be found,
thus making toid and tide homophonous.
•
/a1/:
The starting point for this diphthong is normally not as front as that
of /aI/, but not as back as that of /A/, although the latter may be the case
across the North from New England through the Great Lakes, and on into
Minnesota. In the South, [aU] and [æU] (fronting and raising of the nucleus)
are common, while in Nebraska and Iowa [æU] predominates. Raising the
nucleus is typical in Canada (e.g. out [@Ut]). In Virginia and to some extent
in northern New England, Wisconsin, and Minnesota, the allophone [√U]
is found before voiceless consonants (e.g. house [h√Us], out [√Ut]). Along
the southern coastal area, [aI] may be found, making down and dine
homophonous [daIn]. Monopthongization of this diphthong is found in
Pittsburgh (e.g. down [da:n]).
Front
High
Mid
Low
Central
Back
aI
OI
aU
Figure 4.3
American English diphthongs

ENGLISH
VOWELS
87
Besides these diphthongs, in non-rhotic varieties (eastern New England, New
York City, lower South), the targets with V + /@/ turn into centering diphthongs.
Thus, we have the following correspondences:
Rhotic
Non-rhotic
/i/
pier
[pI@]
/I/
/E/
pear
[pE@]
/u/
poor
[pU@]
/U/
/o/
pour
[pO@]
/O/
In the case of [A@], we get a prolonged [A:] rather than [A@] (e.g. car [kA:]).
The remaining three diphthongs show the following centralizations:
[aI@]
ﬁre
[faI@]
[aU@]
sour
[saU@]
[OI@]
coir
[kOI@]
As we have seen, there is considerable variation in the vowels and diphthongs
of American English. Most of these differences deal with the following two 
well-known chain shifts: Northern Cities Shift and Southern Shift. These shifts
are systematic changes in vowel systems with a rotation of the entire system.
That is, when a sound shifts to the place of another sound, the latter sound
shifts as well in order to ensure that the two sounds remain distinct enough
to convey meaning differences. The two chain shifts that are underway in
American English are described below.
Northern Cities Shift is seen in western New England, New York State, 
northern Pennsylvania, northern Ohio, Illinois, Michigan, and Wisconsin. A more
advanced form of this shift is mainly concentrated in the larger metropolitan
areas (Syracuse, Buffalo, Cleveland, Toledo, Detroit, Chicago, Madison). This
shift, which is a clockwise rotation, is shown in ﬁgure 4.4.
Six vowels, /O, A, æ, E, I, √/, are affected. The low vowels /æ/ and /A/ are
moved forward and/or raised, and the others are moved backward and/or
lowered. /O/ in thought moves down and starts to sound like the /A/ of father.
The /A/, in turn, moves toward /æ/, thus lock starts to sound like lack. The
/æ/ in man is raised and fronted to [i@] and the word sounds like [mi@n]. The
two non-low lax front vowels /E/ and /I/ undergo a move backward (and
also lower in the latter); thus, bet starts to sound like but. Finally, /√/ moves
backward to /O/, making shut sound like shot.
Southern Shift is found throughout the southern states, the Mid-Atlantic
states, and the southern mountain states. This shift, besides monophthongiz-
ing /aI/ (e.g. ﬁve [faIv] →[fa:v]), affects the following six vowels: /i, I, e, E,

88
ENGLISH
VOWELS
u, o/. It rotates them as follows: front lax vowels /I, E, æ/ move upward 
(e.g. him [hIm] →[him]; bed [bEd] →[bId]; can’t [kænt] →[kEnt]), and front
tense vowels /i/ and /e/ are lowered and centralized (e.g. beet [bit] →[bIt];
bait [bet] →[bEt]). Finally, the back tense rounded vowels /u/ and /o/ move
forward (e.g. boot [but] →[b¨t]; boat [bot] →[b√t]). Also observed are the
raising of /O@/ to /o@/ (e.g. born [bO@n] →[bo@n]) and /A@/ to /O@/ (e.g. barn
[bA@n] →[bO@n]). These are summarized in ﬁgure 4.5.
4.7
Sociophonetic Variation
Besides the aforementioned variable productions due to linguistic context 
and regional varieties, socially conditioned phonetic variation is also pervasive
in vowels. Mendoza-Denton (1996) found that, in the speech of girls in
Chicana/Mexicana groups in California, realizations of the vowel /I/ could
be predicted by centrality of membership to a particular group.
The inﬂuence of sexual orientation on speech patterns has been subject to
several studies. Pierrehumbert et al. (2004) examined the vowel production in
i
u
e
o
bit
bet
shut
bat
lock
man
I
E
æ
O
U
√
A
thought
Figure 4.4
Northern Cities Shift
i
u
e
o
bait
boat
can’t
nice
him
I
E
æ
O
U
√
A
born barn
bed
beet
boot
aI
Figure 4.5
Southern Shift

ENGLISH
VOWELS
89
gay, lesbian, and bisexual speakers in read sentences and found differences in
the acoustic characteristics of vowels as a function of sexual orientation.
Lesbian and bisexual women produced less fronted /u/ and /A/ than 
heterosexual women. Gay men produced a more expanded vowel space than 
heterosexual men.
Munson et al. (2006) examined the acoustic characteristics of simple words.
(Formant frequencies (F1, F2 etc.) are resonance frequencies of vowels/
diphthongs associated with cavities in the vocal tract. A detailed account 
of formants is given in chapter 5.) Gay men produced lower /æ/ and /E/ (i.e.
with higher F1 frequency) than heterosexual men. Lesbian and bisexual
women produced higher /E/ (i.e. with lower F1 frequency) and more back /o/
(with lower F2 frequency) than heterosexual women. In perceptual experiments,
investigators found that men who produced low vowels lower (i.e. with a high
F1 frequency) and back vowels more back (with a low F2) were more likely to
be rated as gay-sounding than were men with the opposite characteristics.
Women were likely to be rated lesbian or bisexual if they produced higher low
vowels (with a low F1) and back vowels more back (with a low F2).
4.8
Non-US Varieties
In addition to the differences we observed within the United States, the non-
US varieties show signiﬁcant variations. Tables 4.1 to 4.4 show the differences
between American English and some other Englishes.
The tables are intended to provide some basics regarding the vowel (and 
diphthong) variations among several varieties of English. However, they are
neither comprehensive descriptions of all varieties of English, nor do they 
pretend to give the details of variations within a single variety.
It should also be remembered that the symbols in tables 4.1 to 4.4 are
abstract in that the use of the same symbol for a sound in two or more vari-
eties does not mean the sound is identical in different varieties. For example,
when we consider AmE, CnE, RP, ScE, IrE, and WeE, we see that all have the
same symbol /e/ for a word such as hate [het]. This may give the impression
that the phonetic qualities are identical in all varieties. This is deﬁnitely not
the case. While the vowel is deﬁnitely diphthongal in RP, its degree of diph-
thongization is very slight in AmE, or basically monophthongal in ScE, IrE,
and WeE. The vowel /o/ is another case where the same symbol is used for
different qualities; in AmE, this sound is often diphthongal, whereas in ScE,
IrE, and WeE, it is monophthongal. Besides these monophthongal/diphthon-
gal differences, there may be other variations. For example, although we use
the same symbols /E/, /æ/, and /√/ for the words pet [pEt], sat [sæt], and
bus [b√s], respectively, in AmE and in RP we realize that these sounds are 
different in the two varieties. While the ﬁrst two have higher tongue position
in RP than in AmE, the situation is the reverse for /√/, that is, it has higher
tongue position in AmE than RP.

90
ENGLISH
VOWELS
Table 4.2
Vowel and diphthong variations before /r/, and the [i – I], [@ – √] variations
in ﬁnal position, between American English and non-Caribbean varieties 
AmE
CnE
RP
ScE
IrE
WeE
AuE
NZE
sneer
I@
i®
i@
ir
ir
i@
I@
I@
pear
E@
e®
E@
er
er
E@
e@
e@
heart
A@
A®
A:
ar
ar
a:
a:
a:
nurse
´
´
´:
√r
Er
@:
´:
´:
runner
2
2
@
@r
@r
@
@
@
poor
U@
U®
U@
u–r
ur
u@
U@
U@
sore
O@
O®
O@
or
or
O:
O:
O:
ﬁre
aI@
√I®
aI@
æIr
aIr
@I@
aI@
aI@
sour
aU@
√U®
aU@
√u–r
aUr
@U@
æU@
æU@
coir
OI@
OI®
OI@
Oer
OIr
OI@
OI@
OI@
baby
i
i
I
I
i
I
i
i
coma
@
@
@
√
@
@
@
@
Note: See notes to table 4.1 for abbreviations.
Table 4.1
Comparison of the vowels and diphthongs of American English with those
of non-Caribbean varieties
AmE
CnE
RP
ScE
IrE
WeE
AuE
NZE
beak
i
i
I
i
i
i
i
i
pit
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
È
hate
e
e
e
e
e
e
√I
√I
pet
E
E
E
E
E
E
e
e
sat
æ
æ
æ
a
æ
a
E
E
bath
æ
æ
A
a
a
a
a:
a:
bus
√
@
√
a
a
@
a
a
pot
A
A
Å
O
A
O
Å
Å
calm
A
A
A
a
a:
a:
a:
a:
loft
O
A
Å
O
Å
Å
Å
Å
bought
O/A
A
O:
O
O:
O:
O:
O:
soak
o
o
@w
o
o
o
√U
√U
book
U
U
U
u–
u–
U
U
U
boot
u
u
U
u–
u–:
u–:
√u–
√u–
bike
aI
√I
aI
√I
aI
@I
aI
aI
about
aU
√U
aU
√u–
aU
@U
æU
æU
coin
OI
OI
OI
Oe
OI
OI
OI
OI
AmE
=
American English
IrE 
=
Irish English
CnE
=
Canadian English
WeE
=
Welsh English
RP 
=
Received Pronunciation 
AuE
=
Australian English
(British English)
NZE =
New Zealand English
ScE 
=
Scottish English

ENGLISH
VOWELS
91
Table 4.3
Comparison of the vowels and diphthongs of American English with those
of Caribbean varieties
AmE
Jamaica
Guyana
Barbados
Trinidad
Bahamas
beak
i
i
i
i
i
i
pit
I
I
I
I
I
I
hate
e
e
e
e
e
e
pet
E
E
E
E
E
E
sat
æ
a
a
a
a
a
bath
æ
a:
a:
a:
a
a:
bus
√
√
√
√
√
√
pot
A
a/A
A
a:
a
a:/A
calm
A
a:
a:
a:
A/a
a:/A
loft
O
a:/O:
a:/O:
Å:
Å/O
A:
bought
O/A
O:
a:/A:
Å
O
A:
soak
o
o
o
o
o
o
book
U
U
U
U
U
U
boot
u
u
u
u
u
u
bike
aI
aI
aI
√I
aI
√I
about
aU
OU
OU
√U
OU
aU
coin
OI
OI
aI/OI
√I/oI
OI
@I
Note: AmE = American English.
Table 4.4
Vowel and diphthong variations before /r/, and the [i – I], [@ – √] variations
in ﬁnal position, between American English and Caribbean varieties
AmE
Jamaica
Guyana
Barbados
Trinidad
Bahamas
sneer
I@
E:r
e:(r)
e:r
E@
ea
pear
E@
E:r
e:(r)
e:r
E@
ea
heart
A@
A:(r)
A:(r)
A:r
a/A
A:
nurse
´
√/√r
√r
´
Å/´
@i
runner
2
a/√r/@
a/@
2
a/@
@
poor
U@
o:r
o:(r)
o:r
Å/O
oa
sore
O@
o:r
o:(r)
o:r
Å/O
oa
ﬁre
aI@
aIr
aI(r)
√Ir
aI@
√I@
sour
aU@
OUr
OU(r)
√Ur
OU@
√U@
coir
OI@
OIr
OI(r)
√Ir
OI@
@I@
baby
i
I
i
i
i
I
coma
@
a
a/@
@
a/@
@
Note: AmE = American English.

92
ENGLISH
VOWELS
4.9
Full Vowels–Reduced Vowels
Although stress is the topic we will discuss in the next chapter, there is one
issue that we will take up here, and this relates to reduced vowels. While all
vowels of English (except [@]) can occur in stressed syllables, many of these
vowels reveal alternations with an [@] in unstressed syllables in a morpholo-
gically related word.
Stressed syllable with a full vowel
Reduced syllable with [r]
/i/
homogeneous [homodZini@s]
homogenize [h@mAdZ@naIz]
/I/
implicit [ImplIs@t]
implication [Impl@keS@n]
/e/
rotate [@otet]
rotary [@ot@@i]
/E/
perpetuate [p2pEtSuet]
perpetuity [p2p@tSu@ti]
/æ/
enigmatic [@nIgmætIk]
enigma [@nIgm@]
/A/
stigmata [stIgmAt@]
stigma [stIgm@]
/O/
author [OT2]
authoritarian [@TO@@tE@i@n]
/o/
photograph [fot@g@æf]
photography [f@tAg@@ﬁ]
/√/
confront [k@nf@√nt]
confrontation [kAnf@@nteS@n]
/u/
compute [k@mpjut]
computation [kAmpj@teS@n]
/aI/
design [d@zAIn]
designation [dEz@gneS@n]
We should immediately point out, however, that a vowel’s appearance in 
an unstressed syllable does not necessarily result in a reduced vowel [@]. It is
perfectly possible for the English vowels to appear in full (unreduced) form 
in unstressed syllables (or in syllables with secondary stress, which will be 
discussed in detail in chapter 7), as shown in the following:
/i/
labial
/I/
implicit
/e/
rotate
/E/
centennial
/æ/
sarcasm
/A/
October
/O/
causality
/o/
location
/U/
boyhood
/u/
acoustician
/aI/
titration
/aU/
outside
/OI/
exploitation
Thus, the unidirectional generalization to be made is the following: while a
reduced vowel is necessarily in an unstressed syllable, a vowel in an unstressed
syllable is not necessarily reduced.
Although we have consistently used [@] in reduced syllables, it is not
uncommon to ﬁnd an [I] in people’s speech. That is, for a word such as impli-
cation we can get [ImplIkeS@n] as well as [Impl@keS@n]. In general, [I] is found

ENGLISH
VOWELS
93
before palato-alveolars (e.g. selﬁsh [sElfIS], sandwich [sændwItS], marriage
[mæ@IdZ]) and velars (e.g. metric [mEt@Ik], running [@√nIè]). It should be
noted, however, that the syllable structure is also a factor. The inﬂuence of palato-
alveolar/velar consonants is more visible when there is tautosyllabicity. For
example, we tend to ﬁnd [I] in topic [tApIk], which is likely to change to an [@]
in a related word such as topical [tAp@k@l], because the velar, [k], is the onset
of the following syllable. Individuals should check their pronunciation of such
syllables and transcribe the vowels accordingly. However, since reduced syllables
are necessarily unstressed, and [@] cannot appear in a stressed syllable (but [I]
can), we encourage our students to use [@] for such vowels, for practical reasons.
We should also point out that [@], besides having this relationship with the
unstressed [I], has a special relationship with three other vowels, /i, o, u/. In
unstressed syllables, the range of pronunciation values of these three vowels
extends to the central [@] area, as shown in the following:
[i]
[r]
record
[@ikO@d]
[@@kO@d]
denounce
[dinaUns]
[d@naUns]
eleven
[ilEv@n]
[@lEv@n]
[o]
[r]
produce
[p@odus]
[p@@dus]
romantic
[@omæntIk]
[@@mæntIk]
protest
[p@otEst]
[p@@tEst]
[u]
[r]
regular
[@Egjul2]
[@Egj@l2]
graduate
[g@ædZuet]
[g@ædZ@et]
circular
[s´kjul2]
[s´kj@l2]
4.10
Full (Strong) Forms versus Reduced (Weak)
Forms of Function Words
The pronunciations of words reveal differences, whether we consider them in
isolation (i.e. citation form) or in connected speech. The latter is a very fertile
context for accommodating many changes, especially for unstressed monosyl-
labic function words (free grammatical morphemes). The class of function words
includes auxiliaries, prepositions, articles, conjunctions, pronouns, and some
adverbs. In connected speech utterances, such words are typically not the focus
of information (they are unstressed), and thus they readily lend themselves to
reduction. The reduced forms are very common in connected speech, and their
under-use (i.e. employing the strong (full) forms) quickly strikes the native 
speaker’s ear as unnatural. Also, learners who have no familiarity with these
forms are likely to have difﬁculty understanding native speakers who use them
regularly in connected speech. Thus, learners should be frequently reminded
of this aspect of English phonology. The existence of strong and weak forms,

94
ENGLISH
VOWELS
although limited to a few dozen words, is very signiﬁcant since these are some
of the most basic words of the language, with a very high frequency of use.
As will be obvious from the list below, some of these function words have more
than one weak form. While some of these variations are predictable (e.g. [D@]
before consonants as in the book [D@ bUk], and [Di] before others as in the apple
[Di æp@l]), many others are far from being invariable. Also noteworthy are the
cases where two identically spelt words behave differently. For example,
while that as a relative pronoun, as in “You said that she ate”, is reduced to
[D@t], the identically spelt demonstrative that, as in that boy, is not reduceable,
and is always pronounced as [Dæt].
Before we list the items in question, we would like to remind the reader that
the citation form in isolation is not the only context that the strong (full) forms
of these words can be used in. They are also expected when these words become
the focal point in the exchange; for example, when given special emphasis, 
as in:
A:
“We can serve strawberries or grapes for dessert.”
B:
“I think we should serve strawberries and grapes.”
or to make a contrast (assertion), as in:
A:
“I can’t ﬁnish this job by Tuesday.”
B:
“Yes you can.”
While the reduced forms [@n] and [k@n] are the expected forms in normal 
running speech, in the above examples the words will be uttered in their 
full form, [ænd] and [kæn] respectively, when they become the focus of the
exchange.
Strong and weak forms of some common function words in English follow:
Strong
Weak
a
[e]
[@]
“a book”
[@ bUk]
that (rel.pr)
[Dæt]
[D@t]
“you said that . . .”
[ju sEd D@t . . . ]
but
[b√t]
[b@t]
“it’s good but late”
[Its gUd b@t . . . ]
and
[ænd]
[@nd, @n, Y]
“boys and girls”
[bOIz @n g´lz]
than
[Dæn]
[D@n]
“better than ever”
[bEQ2 D@n . . . ]
his
[hIz]
[Iz]
“put his name down”
[pUt Iz . . . ]
her
[h´]
[2]
“put her name down”
[pUt 2 . . . ]
your
[jU@]
[j2]
“put your name down”
[pUt j2 . . . ]
he
[hi]
[hI, i, I]
“will he read?”
[wIl i @id]
him
[hIm]
[Im, m]
“I told him to come”
[aI tOld Im . . . ]
you
[ju]
[j@]
“do you eat this?”
[dj@ it . . . ]
them
[DEm]
[D@m, @m, m]
“leave them alone”
[liv D@m . . . ]
us
[√s]
[@s]
“leave us alone”
[liv @s . . . ]
an
[æn]
[@n]
“have an apple”
[hæv @n . . . ]
or
[O@]
[2]
“pen or pencil”
[pEn 2 . . . ]
just
[dZ√st]
[dZ@st]
“he’s just arrived”
[hiz dZ@st . . . ]

ENGLISH
VOWELS
95
In addition to these, the words in the following group occur in their strong
forms when they are in sentence-ﬁnal position:
at
[æt]
[@t]
“at home”
[@t h . . . ]
for
[fO@]
[f2]
“this is for me”
[ . . . f2 mi]
to
[tu]
[t@]
“he went to school”
[hi wEnt t@ . . . ]
from
[f@√m]
[f@@m]
“back from work”
[bæk f@@m . . . ]
of
[Av]
[@v, @]
“a cup of coffee”
[@ k√p @ kAﬁ]
some
[s√m]
[s@m]
“have some coffee”
[hæv s@m . . . ]
as
[æz]
[@z]
“as funny as . . .”
[@z f√ni @z]
do
[du]
[d@, d]
“do you eat this?”
[dj@ it . . . ]
had
[hæd]
[@d]
“we had done that”
[wi @d . . . ]
has (perfect)
[hæz]
[@z]
“John has gone”
[dZAn @z gAn]
has (possessive)
[hæz]
[h@z, @z]
“she has two of those’
[Si@z t . . . ]
can
[kæn]
[k@n, kg]
“I can do it”
[aI kg du . . . ]
will
[wIl]
[w@l, @l]
“I’ll be there”
[aI@l bi . . . ]
would
[wUd]
[w@d, @d]
“he would like to come”
[hI@d . . . ]
should
[SUd]
[S@d]
“I should go”
[aI S@d . . . ]
must
[m√st]
[m@st (before
“you must tell me”
[ju m@s tEl . . . ]
vowels), m@s]
could
[kUd]
[k@d]
“He could do it”
[hi k@d . . . ]
have
[hæv]
[h@v, @v]
“The kids have done it”
[D@ kIdz@v 
dAn . . . ]
am
[æm]
[@m, m]
“I’m going”
[aI (@)m . . . ]
are
[A@]
[2]
“students are going”
[stud@nts 2 . . . ]
was
[w√z]
[w@z]
“He was there”
[hi w@z . . . ]
were
[w´]
[w2]
“We were just leaving”
[wi w2 . . . ]
Some of these function (minor) words also have contracted forms made by
losing their vowel and consequently merging with the preceding syllable.
“He will come” →[hIl . . . ]
“I have seen it” →[aIv . . . ]
“They are here” →[DE@ . . . ]
“Bill has done it” →[bIlz . . . ]
It is worth mentioning that prepositions and auxiliary verbs have certain
requirements for their reduced forms. Thus, for example, the preposition “by”
behaves differently in the following two sentences:
(a)
He walked by the other day.
(b)
He walked by the other route.
The reduced form occurs only in (b) because the preposition is followed by a
noun phrase (i.e. by has an object noun phrase and thus is a ‘transitive’ pre-
position). The ‘intransitive’ (with no object) preposition by in (a) is stressed and
does not reduce.
Auxiliary verbs are typically unstressed and are reduced or contracted,
except:

96
ENGLISH
VOWELS
(a)
when they occur with the negative particle not. In such cases, only one of
them can reduce/contract, not both:
“The game hasn’t started” (not is contracted, has is not);
“The game’s not started” (has is contracted, not is not).
The following two are not possible:
* “The [gemz@nt] started” (has is reduced and not is contracted);
* “The game [@z@nt] started” (both has and not are contracted).
(b)
when they occur in ﬁnal position:
“Is she coming?”
“She is”
“Has she returned?”
“She has”
“Do they like it?”
“They do”
“Who will read?”
“John will”
Finally, we should point out that reduced vowels are not restricted to func-
tion words only, and are found in lexical morphemes (nouns, verbs, adjectives,
adverbs) too. These will be looked at in the next chapter.
SUMMARY
In this chapter, we looked at the vowels and diphthongs of American 
English and their contextual variants. Since the dialectal variations in vowels
are far greater than those of consonants, the discussion was focused on the US
varieties. Non-US varieties are given in summary lists. As was noted in the
previous chapter regarding the consonants, knowledge of the highly rule-
governed nature of vowel variations is invaluable for practitioners in the ﬁelds
of communication disorders and foreign language teaching.

ENGLISH
VOWELS
97
EXERCISES
1.
In some words, the sequence represented by orthographical or has
the phonetic realization [O@], which may be shifted to [A@]. In which of
the following words would this be possible? Explain your reasoning.
forge, ignore, divorce, bore, horoscope, Oregon, explore, tomorrow, lord
2.
As we saw in section 4.9, [@] has a special relationship with /i, o, u/
whereby the pronunciation of the word can be with an [@] as well as
with one of these vowels. Examine the following words and state which
one(s) would qualify for this alternation:
devoid, satisfactory, photography, progress (v), episcopal, calculate,
statutory, reserve, meaning, gratefully, supremely, obscene, consumer,
vocation
3.
Circle the words that contain:
[i]:
audible, hitter, lisp, pity, foreign, Nancy, horrible, slowly, leave,
heed, crease, Greek, tweet, teal, gleam, weather, live, heart, gene,
deal
[I]:
seen, pitch, sneaker, feast, knit, cheap, sing, ﬁst, greed, simmer,
evening, each, eat, isle, slick, sigh, grit, cider, spirit, hill, until
[e]:
sense, aide, starved, sensational, amaze, enough, nation, revolver,
nervous, forgiven, lace, freight, bacon, phase, brave, pendant,
habitat, basket
[E]:
locate, perceive, slapped, said, maid, adept, laughed, check, came,
tread, grained, gel, gene, edge, debt, serene, pretty, lens, element
[æ]:
panda, peptic, cabin, delta, cobra, bandit, camel, alone, inept,
coma, acted, dragon, Asia, games, slap, axe, racket, clad,
alabaster, avoid
[A]:
hopper, dole, hotter, father, tranquil, market, polar, bargain, magn-
ify, organizer, vanity, old, lone, bold, rock, shock, follow, clock
[o]:
could, groan, brook, ﬂowed, boiling, cook, told, boat, crook,
poised, posed, bowling, Joan, bold, coal, broad, clock, town,
groan, hormone
[U]:
should, most, coin, could, poled, good, stood, broke, soul,
hoop, cooled, wood, booking, pool, hood, full, room, google,
look, took, bully
[u]:
goodness, groom, foot, cooled, woman, root, broom, shook,
school, coiled, couch, under, renew, stew, ponder, fudge, sur-
render, who, fool

98
ENGLISH
VOWELS
[aI]:
imply, ironic, point, arrive, halve, advice, save, thyself,
fatherly, breath, decide, lake, sprite, sigh, brisket, hindrance, ani-
mation, grind, cider
[OI]:
spoiling, beside, guile, pointless, boil, Norwegian, soil, voyages,
ofﬁcial, soy, continent, honey, poised, loin, corrupt, tonsils
[aU]:
bought, laundry, bound, owl, vowed, old, nose, cow, ploy, toad,
Joan, foul, drowsy, chowder, trout, tower, hound, follow, haz-
ardous, acoustic, town
4.
Circle the words that have both [√] and [@]:
undone, luckily, abundance, Monday, rushing, redundant, trouble, Paris,
plaza, suspend, crumble, sudden, grovel, rupture, jungle, stutter
5.
Circle the words that have both [√] and [2]:
mustard, award, wonderful, support, guarded, thunder, serpent,
walker, tremor, barley, harbor, rubber, custard, under, others, usher,
ﬂutter, runner, dumpster
6.
Which words have:
(a)
both [´] and [@]
(b)
both [´] and [2]
(c)
only [´]
(d)
only [2]
(e)
only [@]
Example: bourbon: a
cursor ____, person ____, career ____, abort ____, verses ____, 
whisper ____, suburb ____, carat ____, convert (v) ____, surprise ____,
heard ____, Herbert ____, under ____, shivered ____, birthday ____,
worker ____, serviced ____, murder ____
7.
Transcribe the following and state the number of fricatives, alveolar
consonants, and tense vowels in (a), and the number of lax vowels,
voiced consonants, and voiceless obstruents in (b).
(a)
“I don’t know the key to success, but the key to failure is trying
to please everybody.”
Bill Cosby

ENGLISH
VOWELS
99
(b)
“If a million people say a foolish thing, it is still a foolish thing.”
Anatole France
8.
Transcribe the following (about “English as a world language”) 
from D. Crystal, The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995).
The movement of English around the world began with the pioneering
voyages to the Americas, Asia, and the Antipodes, continued with the 
19th century colonial developments in Africa and the South Paciﬁc, 
and took a signiﬁcant further step when it was adopted in the 20th 
century as an ofﬁcial or semi-ofﬁcial language by many newly 
independent states. English is now the dominant or ofﬁcial language 
in over 60 countries, and is represented in every continent. It is this 
spread of representation which makes the application of the term ‘world 
language’ a reality. The present-day world status of English is primarily
the result of two factors: the expansion of British colonial power, which 
peaked towards the end of the 19th century, and the emergence of 
the United States as the leading economic power of the 20th century. 
It is the latter factor which continues to explain the position of the 
English language today. The USA contains nearly four times as many 
English-mother-tongue speakers as the next most important nation 
(UK), and these two countries comprise 70 percent of all English-
mother-tongue speakers in the world.

5
Acoustics of Vowels and
Consonants
5.1
Introduction
The aim of this chapter is to present information that will be helpful to teachers
of English and/or speech therapists in their assessment and planning of 
remediation. As such, it does not deal with the details of speech acoustics. Rather,
it is intended to supply some basic knowledge concerning the spectrographic
analysis of speech. In order to make a reliable assessment, we need an accur-
ate and adequate description of the client’s speech. The affordable software 
currently available makes such procedures a real possibility both in therapy
centers and in classrooms. Since speech that requires remediation reveals 
patterns that are different from the ‘norm’ (average speaker), the professional
who works with remediation may compare the speech of the client to the ‘norm’
to determine the amount of deviation. Speech spectrograms or ‘voice prints’,
as many people refer to them, are a very convenient means of displaying the
acoustic characteristics of speech in a compact form. Learning to interpret them
is also relatively easy with practice. The spectrographic data can be utilized to
monitor the changes in remediation and can guide the practitioner in adjust-
ing the remediation plan.
Before we begin a spectrographic description of speech, we need to alert the
reader to the following important points. Firstly, while spectrograms provide
detailed information about several aspects of speech and can be very helpful
in assessment and remediation, it should be noted that not all acoustically 
distinct phenomena are perceptually distinct. Thus the practitioner must be able
to pinpoint the information in the spectrographic data that is pertinent for a
particular case. It is also important to emphasize the fact that perceptual cues
interact with each other, and often, the coexistence of several cues is required
to reliably identify an opposition with respect to a single feature, such as height
or backness of vowels. Secondly, it is important to emphasize that there are
inherent problems associated with recognizing words from acoustic informa-
tion in a spectrogram. In addition to the expected differences because of inter-
and intra-talker variations, two other issues – ‘linearity’ and ‘invariance’ – are
particularly relevant. Although in our phonetic transcriptions we represent the
ﬁve
Applied English Phonology, Second Edition       Mehmet Yavaş 
© 2011 Mehmet Yavaş. ISBN: 978-1-444-33322-0 

ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
101
sounds in a linear fashion, this is simply an abstraction. Speech articulations
typically overlap each other in time, and result in sound patterns that are in
transition much of the time. The boundaries are blurred and the individual
sounds can lose some of their distinctive characteristics. Thus, one should not
expect that sounds be linearly mapped on to spectrographic displays. Also, as
we will see in detail later in the chapter, characteristics of a given sound change
in different phonetic environments (e.g. the nature of adjacent segments, the
length of the word, position of the word in a phrase, stress, rate of speech, and
so on), and consequently, one should not assume that sounds exhibit invari-
ant characteristics in all contexts.
Production of every sound sets a body of air in vibration. Two factors
inﬂuence the sounds produced. One of these is the size and the shape of the
air. When a short and narrow body of air vibrates, it results in a higher pitch
than a body of air that is longer and wider. The other factor is related to 
the intensity of the sound. The wave forms created by these differences may
result in simple (periodic) or complex (aperiodic) patterns, the former showing
regular vibrations, and the latter resulting in turbulent patterns. The sound 
source for vowels is always periodic. For consonants, it may be periodic
(glides, nasals) or aperiodic (fricatives), determined by the narrowness of the
consonantal constriction. Too much narrowing results in turbulent airﬂow.
The three acoustic properties of speech sounds are frequency, time, and 
amplitude.
•
Frequency:
Frequency relates to the individual pulsations produced by the
vocal cord vibrations for a unit of time. The rate of vibration depends on
the length, thickness, and tension of the cords, and thus is different for child,
adult male, and female speech. A speech sound contains two types of fre-
quencies. The ﬁrst, fundamental frequency (f0), relates to vocal cord function
and reﬂects the rate of vocal cord vibration during phonation (pitch). The
other, formant frequency, relates to vocal tract conﬁguration.
•
Time:
Time as a property of speech sounds reﬂects the duration of a given
sound. For example, the duration of an alveolar fricative such as /s/ is greater
than the corresponding alveolar stop /t/.
•
Amplitude:
The amplitude of a sound refers to the amount of subglottal
(beneath the vocal cords) air pressure.
These three acoustic properties can be analyzed in a spectrographic display.
A spectrogram analyzes a speech wave into its frequency components and shows
variation in the frequency components of a sound as a function of time. This
allows us to see more detail regarding the articulation of the sounds. On a spec-
trogram, time is represented by the horizontal axis and given in milliseconds
(ms). The vertical axis represents the frequency, which is the acoustic charac-
teristic expressed in cycles per second, or Hz. Each horizontal line on this axis
indicates 1,000 Hz (or 1 kHz). The intensity (amplitude) is marked by the 
darkness of the bands; the greater the intensity of the sound energy present at
a given time and frequency, the darker will be the mark at the corresponding
point on the screen/printout.

102
ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
If we look at the spectrogram of the monosyllabic word in ﬁgure 5.1, we can
make the following observations. The vowel portion of the word, /I/, contains
a series of thin vertical lines (striations) whose darkness varies with loudness.
These lines represent the vocal cord vibrations. The space between the lines is
in inverse relationship with the fundamental frequency (pitch), given in Hz.
For example, with a fundamental frequency of 220 Hz (typical for the female
voice), the vertical lines indicating voicing will be 1/220 second, or 4.5 ms, apart
in time. The same vowel, with a fundamental frequency of 125 Hz (typical 
for the male voice), will have its vertical lines 8 ms apart in time. The vowel
portion also shows very clear horizontal dark bands. These are the resonance
frequencies, called formants. The portion before the vowel /I/ represents the
fricative /s/ with its high-amplitude frication noise in the higher frequencies.
The portion after the vowel represents the stop /t/. This is shown with a gap,
which is the closure portion for /t/, followed by a vertical spike indicating the
release of the ﬁnal /t/. Each of these points will be made more explicit when
we examine the spectrograms of different classes of sounds.
Adjustment of the spectrograph can create two different kinds of spectro-
grams. Broad-band spectrograms have good time resolution, but blur frequency.
Narrow-band spectrograms, although they are not as clear on the time dimen-
sion, have good resolution for frequency, and are generally the ones we see in
books and manuals.
5.2
Vowels
As shown in the case of [sIt], vowels have their frequency components
grouped into broad horizontal bands, called formants. Different formants
characterize different vowels and are the result of the different ways in which
the air in the vocal tract vibrates. Every time the vocal cords open and close,
there is a pulse of air exiting the lungs, and these pulses act like sharp taps on
the air in the vocal tract. The resonance patterns created by the vibration of
this body of air are determined by the size and the shape of the vocal tract. 
In a vowel sound, the air in the vocal tract vibrates at a number of different
s
t
I
Figure 5.1
Spectrogram of sit

ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
103
frequencies simultaneously. These are the resonance frequencies of the particu-
lar vocal tract shape. A formant frequency, then, is a bandwidth containing 
a concentration of energy. Irrespective of the rate of vibration, the air in the
vocal tract will continue to resonate at these frequencies as long as the shape
of the vocal tract remains the same. The precise acoustic makeup of each sound
will differ for each individual speaker, but there are certain core features that
make it possible for us to identify the general categories. This is exactly the
reason why we can recognize the same vowel produced at different pitches by
different individuals. Since vowels are associated with a steady-state articu-
latory conﬁguration and a steady-state acoustic pattern, they are the simplest
sounds to analyze acoustically. Customarily, formants are represented from 
the lower end of the spectrogram to the upper end. The clearly marked dark
bandwidth at the lower end of the spectrogram is the ﬁrst formant, denoted
as F1. The subsequent bands of similarly marked energy locations are the second
(F2) and third (F3) formants. Vowel spectra have at least four or ﬁve obvious
spectral peaks. In general, the frequencies of the ﬁrst three formants are
sufﬁcient to identify the vowels, and the frequencies of F4 and higher formants
vary among speakers because they are primarily determined by the shape and
size of the speaker’s head, nasal cavity, sinus cavities, etc.
Differences between the vowels of English can be explained in terms of 
the different locations and widths of the formant frequencies. It is commonly
stated that there is a clear relationship between the frequency of the ﬁrst for-
mant and the height of the vowel. This happens to be an inverse relationship;
high vowels have low ﬁrst formants, and low vowels have higher ﬁrst formants.
As for the front/back distinction, the frequency of second formants is often
mentioned; we see that the frequency of the second formant is much higher 
in front vowels than in back vowels. However, the correlation between the 
second formant frequency and the backness of the vowel does not seem to be
as solid as the correlation between the ﬁrst formant frequency and the vowel
height. This is primarily due to the fact that rounding in the case of back 
vowels can affect the frequency of the second formant too. Thus, backness of
a vowel can better be related to the difference between F2 frequency and F1
frequency. The simple formula is as follows: A vowel is more front when 
the difference between F2 frequency and F1 frequency is greater than the same
difference for another vowel. Whatever has been said above can be illustrated
in the differences between beat and bet (see ﬁgure 5.2).
When we consider the ‘height’ dimension, the expected inverse relationship
with the frequency of F1 is very clear. The sound /i/, which is higher than /E/,
has its F1 around 300 Hz, whereas the frequency of F1 of /E/ is around 550 Hz.
As for the difference between F2 and F1 determining the degree of backness,
we can look at the two words again. The resulting numbers from F2 minus F1
frequencies for the vowels /i/ in beat (around 2,150 minus 300 = 1,850), and
for /E/ in bet (around 1,700 minus 550 = 1,150) quite clearly conﬁrm that /i/
is, by nature, more front than /E/.
To better understand how changes in the vocal tract shape result in different
formant frequencies, think of the ‘highest point of the tongue’ dividing the vocal

104
ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
tract into two cavities (front/back). In a movement from the high front vowel
/i/ to the low front vowel /æ/, the body of the tongue is retracted, making
the front cavity larger (this results in a smaller back cavity). Since the resonating
frequency is higher for the smaller vibrating cavity than the larger one, such
a movement will have the effect of lowering the resonating frequency of the
front cavity (the cavity that has become larger), and increasing the frequency
of the back cavity (the cavity that has become smaller). If we think that the F1
frequency is representative of the back cavity, and the F2 frequency is repre-
sentative of the front cavity, we can understand how the changes in the vocal
tract shape can result in the changes in formant frequencies. Thus, there is a
gradual increase in F1 frequency as we move from /i/ to /I/ to /E/ to /æ/.
A similar argument can be given to explain the lowering of both F1 and F2
frequencies as we move from /a/ to /u/. As the tongue root is raised toward
higher back vowels, the back cavity enlarges, resulting in the lowering of the
frequency of F1. Also, the highest point of the tongue is moving farther back
from /a/ to /u/, and this creates a larger front cavity, which results in lower-
ing the frequency of F2. While the above statements are quite solid for the 
gradual lowering of F1 frequency for the back series, /A/ to /O/ to /o/ to /U/
to /u/, it is not so for the lowering of the frequency of F2. We consistently see
higher F2 frequencies for /U/ than /O/. This is primarily due to the more front
production of /U/ than /O/. Table 5.1 shows the formant frequencies of the
ﬁrst three formants in ten American English vowels. It should be remembered
that these values are given as guidelines, not as absolute values. However, they
are useful because they indicate the typical vowel patterns in relation to each
other. For the front vowels, we see a gradual rise in values for F1 and gradual
decrease for F2. For the back vowels, we see a decrease in the values of F1 and
F2 as we move from the lowest back vowel to the highest.
If the frequency of F1 is plotted against the distance between F1 and F2, a
chart is obtained that strongly resembles the traditional vowel height charts.
This further attests that these diagrams have acoustic correlates (see ﬁgure 5.3).
The frequency of F3 has no simple articulatory correlates, but is useful in the
identiﬁcation of labial consonants and retroﬂexion. The F3 frequency for the
English vowels can be predicted fairly accurately from the frequencies of their
F1 and F2. The single exception to this is [´], as in bird. Although its ﬁrst two
formants are very similar to that of /U/, the frequency of its F3 is very low;
this will be clear in the discussion of /@/ later in the chapter.
b 
i 
t
/i/ More front vowel;
greater F2–F1 distance
b 
E 
t
F2
F1
F2
F1
Figure 5.2
Spectrogram of beat and bet

ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
105
The frequencies given in ﬁgure 5.3 represent male speech. Men’s vowels 
typically have lower formant frequencies than those of women, and those, in
turn, have lower frequencies than those of children. This is due to the size of
the vocal tract; the larger the vocal tract, the bigger the bodies of air contained.
Since larger bodies of air vibrate more slowly, the formants will have lower
frequencies. Table 5.2 shows the comparison between men, women, and chil-
dren (often, the F3 cannot be seen in children’s spectrograms). The frequencies
Table 5.1
Frequencies of the ﬁrst three formants in ten American English vowels
(averages of three adult male speakers)
Vowel
F1
F2
F3
i
270
2,200
2,900
I
400
1,900
2,500
E
550
1,700
2,450
æ
670
1,670
2,450
A
700
1,100
2,500
O
600
870
2,450
U
450
1,000
2,300
u
320
850
2,250
√
600
1,250
2,450
´
500
1,400
1,650
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 
1000 
1100 
1200 
1300 
1400 
1500 
1600 
1700 
1800 
1900 
2000
i
æ
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700
F1
F2 – F1
I
E
√
O
A
U
u
´
Figure 5.3
Formant chart with frequency of F1 (vertical axis) plotted against
distance between F1 and F2 (horizontal axis)

106
ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
are from Peterson and Barney’s (1952) data. The F2 and F3 values are rounded
to the nearest 50.
Although the formant patterns are the ﬁrst and best markers in identifying
vowels, ‘duration’ is also a very important parameter. As we saw in earlier 
chapters, several factors such as speaking rate, voicing of the adjacent consonant,
utterance position, etc. can inﬂuence the duration of vowels. All of these factors
will be examined later in this chapter. However, before we do this, let us look
at the inherent durational differences among the vowels of English (table 5.3).
As we see, in general, tense vowels and diphthongs have longer durations
than lax vowels. There is, however, a very clear exception to this principle: /æ/,
although a lax vowel, has duration greater than some of the tense vowels. The
information regarding the vowel duration becomes critical when we have a pair
of words in which the different vowel sounds do not present a big difference
in F1 and F2 frequencies. For example, if we have a pair of words such as bet
[bEt] and bat [bæt], we may have a difference of 100–150 Hz for the ﬁrst 
formant frequency between these vowels, which is not very big. As for F2 minus
F1, which determines the relative backness, the difference may be around
200–250 Hz. In case these differences are not sufﬁcient to distinguish the two
vowels in question, the unmistakable difference in duration could be used to
make the separation, as /æ/ is signiﬁcantly longer than /E/.
5.3
Diphthongs
Diphthongs are different from monophthongal vowels in that the vocal tract
changes size and shape, due to the tongue moving in order to produce one
vowel quality followed by another, and thus the formants are not horizontal
throughout as they are in monophthongal vowels. The changes in the vocal
tract shape for diphthongs can be observed from the movements of the ﬁrst
Table 5.2
Comparisons between men, women, and children in 10 vowels
Vowel
Men
Women
Children
F1
F2
F3
F1
F2
F3
F1
F2
F3
i
270
2,300
3,000
300
2,800
3,300
370
3,200
3,700
I
400
2,000
2,550
430
2,500
3,100
530
2,750
3,600
E
530
1,850
2,500
600
2,350
3,000
700
2,600
3,550
æ
660
1,700
2,400
860
2,050
2,850
1,000
2,300
3,300
A
730
1,100
2,450
850
1,200
2,800
1,030
1,350
3,200
O
570
850
2,400
590
900
2,700
680
1,050
3,200
U
440
1,000
2,250
470
1,150
2,700
560
1,400
3,300
u
300
850
2,250
370
950
2,650
430
1,150
3,250
√
640
1,200
2,400
760
1,400
2,800
850
1,600
3,350
´
490
1,350
1,700
500
1,650
1,950
560
1,650
2,150

ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
107
three formants. The diphthong /aI/ starts with a low back constriction and
ends with a high front constriction. Accordingly, F2 rises as the constriction moves
from back to front, and F1 falls as the constriction moves from low to high. 
In /aU/, a low back constriction moves to a high back constriction. As the tongue
rises, F1 falls; F2 also falls because some movement of the tongue occurs 
farther back for /U/ than /a/; also, due to lip rounding of /U/, all resonance
frequencies are lowered. Finally, /OI/ starts as a low back vowel and ends as
a high front vowel. As the tongue moves from back to front, F2 rises; as the
tongue moves from low to high, F1 falls. We can observe all the points made
above in the spectrogram of the sentence Brian Boitano bowed [braIn bOItano
baUd] (ﬁgure 5.4).
5.4
Consonants
5.4.1
Stops
Stops are characterized on a spectrographic display by silence (stop gap) or
obvious signal weakening. This is the acoustic interval corresponding to the
articulatory occlusion, and it varies in duration depending on the prosodic 
condition. Because the vocal tract is obstructed, little or no energy is produced.
This is followed by a burst of energy, as the closure is released.
Table 5.3
Duration of English vowels in stressed and unstressed syllables 
(in milliseconds)
Stressed syllable
Unstressed syllable
/i/
118 (119)
75 (78)
/I/
75 (75)
58 (53)
/e/
145 (136)
85 (78)
/E/
103 (106)
73 (60)
/æ/
152 (159)
82 (71)
/√/
99 (103)
—
/@/
—
55 (49)
/u/
122 (126)
75 (75)
/U/
88 (85)
65 (61)
/o/
156 (162)
92 (96)
/O/
150 (148)
79 (72)
/A/
146 (140)
85 (93)
/aI/
178 (172)
120 (114)
/aU/
199 (202)
121 (120)
/OI/
264 (298)
132 (125)
Note: The values given come from the averages of the productions of a list-reading
task from three adult native speakers (from Iowa, Ohio, and Florida). The values in
parentheses next to those of our three subjects are from Crystal and House (1982).
One can easily see the remarkable similarities between the two studies.

108
ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
There are two dimensions that need to be carefully analyzed in distin-
guishing stop sounds. One of them is the separation of fortis from lenis (or, as
more commonly known, voiceless from voiced). Several indicators can help us
to identify the stops with reference to this dimension. These are:
(a)
Duration of the stop gap, i.e. the silent period during the closure phase.
Speciﬁcally, /p, t, k/ show longer closure duration than /b, d, g/.
(b) Presence of a voice bar, i.e. a dark bar found at low frequencies (gener-
ally below 250 Hz) in a spectrogram. Except in intervocalic position, this
is one of the least reliable identifying characteristics of the stop sounds.
As we saw earlier, voicing is frequently absent in English /b, d, g/ in 
initial and ﬁnal positions. Thus, this feature can reliably be used to 
separate /p, t, k/ from /b, d, g/ only in intervocalic positions; /b, d, g/ will
show the voice bar that is indicative of voicing, whereas /p, t, k/ will not.
(c)
Release burst indicated by a strong vertical spike. In general, we observe
a stronger spike for /p, t, k/ than for /b, d, g/. One qualiﬁcation is in
order here for the ﬁnal position: as discussed earlier, ﬁnal stops in English
are normally unreleased. In such cases, we will not observe any release
burst. Velar stops are said to be more prone to non-release than bilabials
or alveolars.
(d) Duration of the previous vowel. This refers to positions other than the
initial position, where there is no vowel before the stop. In other positions,
vowels and/or sonorant consonants are longer before /b, d, g/ than
before /p, t, k/.
(e)
Aspiration. A VOT of more than approximately 30 ms shows up as short
frication noise (scattered marks after the release) before vowel formants
begin, in initial /p, t, k/ of a stressed syllable.
The other dimension in the identiﬁcation of stops is the place of articulation.
While the above criteria are useful in separating voiced (lenis) from voiceless
(fortis), we do not gather much information with respect to the place of articu-
lation. In other words, what should we look for to distinguish a /p/ or a /b/
from a /t/ or a /d/, or from a /k/ or a /g/? The following are helpful in this
respect:
b @ a I n b o I t A n o b a U d
aI
Falling F1
Falling F1
OI
aU
Rising F2
Rising F2
F2–F1 distance smaller
Figure 5.4
Spectrogram of Brian Boitano bowed

ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
109
(a)
Formant transitions. Formant transitions (shifts) in CV sequences reﬂect
changes in vocal tract shaping during stop-to-vowel transition. Vowel-
to-stop (VC) transition is the opposite of the former. Frequency of the 
ﬁrst formant of the vowel increases when stops are at the beginning of 
a syllable (CV), and falls when they are at the end (VC); this is the case
for all stops. While no information for the place of articulation can be 
gathered from F1 transitions, F2 and F3 transitions can tell us a great deal
in this respect. In CV situations, bilabials show upward movement of both
F2 and F3 (more reliable before front vowels than before back vowels); the
mirror image situation is revealed in a VC sequence. For a velar stop, 
F2 and F3 are close together just after the stop is formed (more reliable 
before back vowels; before front vowels, F3 and F4 have common origin).
There will be a downward transition to a vowel with a high F2. In 
cases of a VC, there is a narrowing (coming together) of the second 
and the third formants. The case of alveolar stops is probably the least
straightforward; while we observe a ﬂat transition to a vowel with mid
or high F2, there is a downward transition to a vowel with low F2 in 
CV cases. In VC cases, there is very little movement; small downward 
movement of the second formant and small upward movement of the third
formant are expected.
(b) Locus (starting frequency). This is the point of origin to which the transi-
tion of the second formant appears to be pointing. F2 and F3 loci are described
as an inherent property of the place of articulation for obstruents and nasals,
although formant loci are not necessarily visible in the spectrogram. For
a /b/, this is around 600–800 Hz; for a /d/, it is 1,800 Hz. To identify a
/g/, two loci, at 3,000 Hz and 1,300 Hz, are generally noted.
(c)
Release burst. Bilabials are identiﬁed by bursts with a center frequency
lower than the F2 of the vowel (below 2,000 Hz). They show a pattern 
that is diffuse and weak. Alveolar bursts generally have a center fre-
quency that is higher than the F2 of the vowel (above 2,000 Hz). The pattern
is diffuse and strong. As for velars, they display a compact and strong 
pattern, and the bursts have a center frequency approximating to the 
F2 of the vowel.
(d) VOT (/p, t, k/ only). The length of time from the release of a stop until
voicing begins for the following segment presents consistent differences
depending on the place of articulation of the fortis stop. The time inter-
val includes the spike (the sound that is produced by the separation of
the articulators), a short frication noise after the spike, and the aspiration
following it. As we move the place of articulation from the front to the
back of the mouth, stops tend to have greater VOT. Although this is a 
rather effective acoustic property for classifying the place of articulation,
it should be remembered that it is just a tendency, and that it may be 
possible to ﬁnd an alveolar voiceless stop with a longer VOT than a velar
voiceless stop. As mentioned in chapter 3, the VOT for a syllable-initial
voiceless stop varies somewhat systematically depending on the place of
articulation and other segmental context.

110
ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
If we examine the spectrograms of the words speak, peak, keen, and cake
(ﬁgures 5.5 and 5.6), we can see these points clearly. In speak, the /p/ is not
at the beginning of a stressed syllable, since it is preceded by a /s/; thus we
do not have aspiration in the voiceless bilabial stop. The words peak, keen,
and cake all have voiceless stops at the beginning of a stressed syllable, and
thus are aspirated. However, as one can easily see, the degree of the voice lag
(aspiration) is different in each case; shorter in peak, longer in cake, and the
longest in keen. The reasons for these differences are as follows. Among 
the three, peak has a bilabial stop whose expected lag is lower than that of the
other two words that start with a velar stop. The difference between the two
words that start with velar stops (cake and keen) is due to the type of vowel
that follows the voiceless stop. The aspiration in keen is longer than in cake,
because in the former /k/ is followed by a high vowel (a vowel with lower
sonority), while in the latter the stop is followed by a lower vowel (a vowel
with higher sonority).
Summarizing all the above, the examples conﬁrm the statements made 
earlier: that voiceless stops are not aspirated if they are not at the beginning
of a stressed syllable; when they are aspirated, the degree of aspiration is greater
as we move the place of articulation from front to back (i.e. bilabial, to alveo-
lar, and to velar). When a stop with a given place of articulation is followed
s  
p  
i  
k
Stop gap
Fricative
turbulence noise
F2 and F3 coming together
(approaching velar)
Release burst
Stop gap
Figure 5.5
Spectrogram of speak
p  i k
k  e  k
k  
i  
n
Aspiration of /p/
(a) peak
(b) keen
(c) cake
Aspiration of /k/
Figure 5.6
Spectrograms of peak, keen, and cake

ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
111
by vowels of different height (different degrees of sonority), the amount of lag
varies; a stop before a high vowel has greater aspiration than when it is before
a low vowel. Flaps are different from their alveolar stop counterparts /t/ and
/d/. In the production of stops, the vocal tract is blocked for about 50 ms, 
but in the ﬂap, which is produced by a rapid throw of the tongue against the
alveolar ridge, the duration is very short, about 20–30 ms; as such it is the fastest
consonant.
5.4.2
Fricatives
Fricatives are produced via a narrow constriction in the vocal tract, which 
creates a turbulent noise (or ‘friction’). Such energy appears on a spectrogram
as a scribbly pattern, without regular horizontal or vertical lines. The interval
of the frication noise is greater in sibilants /s, z, S, Z/ than in non-sibilants 
/f, v, T, D, h/, and the amplitude for frication noise is 58–68 dB (decibels) 
for the former, as opposed to 46–52 dB for the latter. The sibilants have places
of articulation at or just behind the alveolar ridge. The airstream is funneled
smoothly through the groove formed on the surface of the tongue blade and
tip. As the air picks up speed it begins to tumble noisily. The tumbling, noisy
air jet generally strikes the edge of the upper incisors, or edge of the lower lip,
and creates additional edge or spoiler turbulence noise. These noises produced
by sibilants are long, strong in amplitude, only a few decibels less than that of
vowels, and marked by a rich, high-frequency noise spectrum.
The non-sibilant front fricatives are made with labio-dental and interdental
constrictions. The tongue tissue held against the teeth for the dental fricatives
creates an abrupt, narrow constriction that generates a weak turbulence noise
whose energy is spread to very high frequencies. The noise is so weak that 
listeners often derive the acoustic clues for identiﬁcation not from the noise
but from the prominent consonant-to-vowel transitions of these sounds.
If, for example, we make a comparison of /f/ as in ﬁn with /T/ as in thin,
we would expect to ﬁnd the following. Neither sound would create the 
frication noise as sibilants do (e.g. /s/ or /S/). Although the fricative noises
are similar in both, the intensity range is lower in the former (3,000–4,000 Hz)
than the latter (7,000–8,000 Hz). What may also help to separate them are the
formants of the neighboring vowels: F4 (if visible) is below 4,000 Hz in /f/ and
above 4,000 Hz for /T/. One additional element may be the greater duration
of the labio-dental than the interdental fricative. Finally, one might also ﬁnd a
little higher F2 locus for the interdental than for the labio-dental. Given all these
small differences, it is not surprising that very few languages demonstrate 
contrast between these sounds.
Although we must use subtle clues to separate labio-dentals from inter-
dentals, the difference between alveolars and palato-alveolars is rather clear.
If we compare the /s/ of sin and /S/ of shin, we can easily pinpoint a very 
clear difference of energy concentration; while the range is something like
4,000–8,000 Hz for the alveolar, it is deﬁnitely lower, 2,000–6,500 Hz, for the
palato-alveolar. The more forward constriction in the vocal tract produces a

112
ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
smaller vibrating body of air in front of the constriction for the alveolar. This
smaller mass of air has a higher resonance frequency than the larger air mass
in front of the palato-alveolar constriction used in /S/.
Voiceless fricatives have longer noise segment duration and higher frication
noise than their voiced counterparts. The lower frication noise of the voiced
fricatives is explained as a result of the total airﬂow available for producing
turbulence at the constriction. Since the glottis opens and closes for vocal cord
vibration, the airstream is interrupted, and the friction noise is not as loud in
voiced fricatives. Noise that occurs at the beginning of voiceless fricatives is
similar to the bursts of /p, t, k/ (i.e. aperiodic high-frequency noise during
maximal closure).
Voiced fricatives have formants produced by pulses from the vocal cords,
as well as more random energy produced by forcing air through a narrow gap.
Since the airstream loses some of its kinetic energy to the vocal cord vibration,
the frication noise in these sounds is not as loud as in their voiceless counter-
parts. As a result, they have fainter formants.
The articulatory constriction for a voiced fricative is not as tight as for a voice-
less fricative, so as to ensure lower supraglottal air pressure while maintaining
a sufﬁciently high transglottal pressure differential to allow the vocal cords to
vibrate. This distinction between the relatively loose articulatory constriction
for voiced fricatives and the relatively tight constriction for voiceless fricatives
is another variable that reduces the amplitude of the fricative noise component
of a voiced fricative in comparison to a voiceless fricative. Whatever the cause
of the reduction in amplitude of the noise component, it contributes to the per-
ception of a voiced fricative (whether it is really voiced or not).
Finally, some comments are in order for /h/, because its status is interpreted
differently in different publications. The turbulent noise for this sound, generated
at the glottis, is often accompanied by friction near the vocal tract constriction
for the adjacent vowel (/h/ is always a single onset). The constriction of the other
fricatives involves the articulators (tongue, teeth, lips); the production of /h/,
however, leaves these articulators free. Although it is normally treated as a frica-
tive, /h/ is physically an aspiration. The signal for this turbulent noise is very
weak, and tends to be voiced (or breathy) intervocalically, as in ahead or behind.
The spectrograms in ﬁgure 5.7 illustrate some of the points made above.
Consider the patterns in (a) a fake, (b) sake, and (c) a shake. The difference
between (a) and (b) (or (c)) is so obvious that the greater frication noise for
sibilants (/s/ or /S/) can be seen effortlessly. When we compare (b) and (c),
we observe the frication noise concentrated at different frequencies; approxi-
mately 4,000–8,000 Hz for the alveolar /s/, and 2,000–6,000 Hz for the palato-
alveolar /S/.
Now, consider the spectrogram for a take (ﬁgure 5.8). This is given to show
the durational differences between stops and fricatives. If we compare the dura-
tion of /t/ in a take with the duration of /s/ in sake, we can verify the greater
duration of fricatives than stops.
Finally, if we consider the spectrograms of high and ahead (ﬁgure 5.9), we
can observe the differences in two different phonetic manifestations of /h/.

ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
113
@ 
f 
e 
k
@ 
S 
e 
k
s 
e 
k
/f/ a non-sibilant
weak turbulence noise
(a) a fake
Sibilants: strong
turbulence noise
(b) sake
(c) a shake
Alveolar: energy
concentration
4,000–8,000 Hz
Palato-alveolar: energy
concentration 2,000–7,000 Hz
Fricative duration greater
than /t/ of take
Figure 5.7
Spectrograms of a fake, sake, and a shake
@ 
t 
e 
k
Stop gap
Stop gap
Stop duration is smaller
than /s/ of sake
Aspiration
Release burst
Figure 5.8
Spectrogram of a take
h 
a 
I
@ 
h 
E 
d
(a) high
(b) ahead
Weak turbulence noise
Breathy (voiced)
intervocalic /h/
Figure 5.9
Spectrograms of high and ahead

114
ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
While it shows as a weak friction in high, it reveals itself as ‘breathy voice’
intervocalically in ahead.
5.4.3
Affricates
Like the stop consonants, affricates /tS/ and /dZ/ require a stop-like closure
period followed by a quick release into a friction noise. If we look at the 
spectrograms of the pair edging and etching (ﬁgure 5.10), we note the silent
period produced by the consonant closure and the noise produced after the
release of the consonant closure. Temporal length of the fricative releases is
shorter than the closure of the stop portions. Also noteworthy is the difference
between the voiceless and voiced members; as expected, the voiceless /tS/ is
longer than the voiced /dZ/.
In chapter 3, we stated that affricates, although phonetically a combination
of a stop and a fricative, function as single units in the sound system of English.
The combined duration of an affricate is shorter than the duration of the cor-
responding stop plus the fricative. This difference can be seen in the spectro-
grams of gray chip [g@e tSIp] vs. great ship [g@et SIp] given in ﬁgure 5.11.
E 
dZ 
I 
è
E 
tS 
I 
è
(a) edging
(b) etching
Figure 5.10
Spectrograms of edging and etching
g @ 
e 
t 
S 
I 
p
g @ 
e 
t S 
I 
p
(a) gray chip
Stop + fricative
(b) great ship
Affricate
Figure 5.11
Spectrograms of gray chip and great ship

ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
115
5.4.4
Approximants
Liquids and glides form the category of approximants. These sounds are made
in such a way that one articulator is close to another without creating enough
narrowing to result in friction. As sonorant consonants, they have formant 
structures but the formants are less pronounced than those of vowels because
of a slight obstruction placed somewhere along the vocal tract. The shared 
characteristics in this group include their low F1 and similar durations for 
the transitions between vowels and the consonant constrictions. Glides (or semi-
vowels, as they are sometimes referred to) reveal patterns very similar to, but
markedly fainter than, high vowels. In /w/, we see that F1 and F2 are very
close (as in /u/). In /j/, F1 and F2 are wide apart, resembling the situation of
/i/ (low F1 and high F2). A glide starts with a vocal tract conﬁguration simi-
lar to the corresponding high vowel, then changes shape for the vowel that
follows it. A glide-to-vowel sequencing is rather different from a vowel-to-vowel
sequencing in that the transition from a glide to a vowel is faster than from a
vowel to a vowel.
Liquids have properties that are similar to both stops and glides (especially
to /w/). They are quite rapid, like stops, but have resonant quality (low F1)
and transition speed like those of glides. Liquids differ from /w/ in frequency
of the third formant; /w/ produces an F3 that is usually so decreased in inten-
sity that it is not visible in a spectrogram. The liquid /@/, on the other hand,
has a third formant frequency that is relatively low (below 2,000 Hz), strong,
and close to the second formant frequency. While it is relatively easy to separ-
ate /@/ from /w/, /w/ and /l/ may appear quite similar, because they have
similar formant values for the ﬁrst three formants. The following two factors
can be used to discriminate between the two sounds. First, the glide /w/ is
formed with practically no constriction at all; the liquid /l/ is formed with a
constriction of the tongue tip. As a result, the energy around F3 for /l/ is much
higher than for /w/. Second, because of different degrees of constriction, the
formants in and out of /w/ are continuous, whereas for /l/, the formants at
the vowel junctures show a slight discontinuity. To separate a /l/ from a /@/,
one has to examine the F3. In /l/, F3 is much higher. In addition to these higher
frequencies, the higher formants of the lateral are considerably reduced in inten-
sity. The difference between the ‘clear’ and the ‘dark’ /l/ lies in the timbre of
their high front/back vowel. In ‘clear /l/’, F1 and F2 are farther apart, as we
would expect in a high front vowel, and closer and lower in ‘dark /l/’, as in
a high back vowel. Postvocalic ﬁnal /l/ may be like a vowel, making no con-
tact, which results in an /u/-like formant structure. However, as we stated in
chapter 3, in American English, /l/ more commonly shows different degrees
of ‘darkness’ rather than the ‘clear’ vs. ‘dark’ contrast occurring in British English.
5.4.5
Nasals
Nasals are formed by an oral closure accompanied by an open nasal passage.
Both airﬂow and acoustic vibration pass through the open velar port into the

116
ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
nasopharynx and nasal cavities. Formants for nasals are not as dark as they
are in vowels (and in approximants). The lower energy of nasals is due to the
fact that the oral tract is completely blocked and the sound waves radiate from
the nose.
Nasals have a prominent low-frequency F1. There are two good reasons for
this. Firstly, the nasal cavity is longer than the oral. Secondly, there is a strong
attenuation of higher frequencies that are absorbed by the soft mucosal tissue
that lines the nasal cavities, and consequently, high-frequency energy gets
‘damped out’. One of the indicators of a nasal sound is a clear discontinuity
between the formants of the nasal and those of adjacent sounds.
All three nasals have a very faint and a very low-frequency F1 (200–450 Hz).
Another visible formant is F3, which is around 2,500 Hz. F2 is generally not vis-
ible. Nasals reveal the abrupt loss of overall energy. The nose is less efﬁcient
than the mouth in radiating the energy to the outside.
With respect to place of articulation, formant transitions associated with nasals
are very much like stops. For /m/, the bilabial nasal, the second formant has
a transition pointing down. For the alveolar /n/, the second formant has a level
transition. The transition for the velar points up, merging with the third formant.
5.5
Putting It Together
We will review below several characteristics associated with certain sounds that
have been discussed by analyzing the spectrograms of eight words: (1) train,
(2) kite, (3) pig, (4) happy, (5) basket, (6) ostrich, (7) scar, and (8) chicken (see
ﬁgures 5.12–5.15).
The eight words are equally divided into two groups in terms of their number
of syllables (four monosyllabics – scar, train, pig, kite – and four disyllabics –
ostrich, basket, happy, chicken). Thus, looking only at the spectrograms and
ignoring the word labels below them, one can separate (1), (2), (3), and (7) as
the former (monosyllabics) because of their one vocalic nucleus formants, and
isolate (4), (5), (6), and (8) as the disyllabics. Among the monosyllabics, scar is
the only one that starts with a sibilant. Although all four words show frication
noise turbulence at the beginning, only (1) and (7) are logical candidates for
this target, as the noise patterns of (2) and (3) are generalized to all frequen-
cies (a typical pattern for aspirated stops, and thus for pig and kite), rather
than the expected concentrated pattern for /s/. This suggests that (1) and (7)
are train and scar (see ﬁgure 5.12). Between the two, (7) is a better candidate
for scar, as the frication noise is concentrated between 4,000 and 8,000 Hz, 
typical for alveolars. There is much more supporting evidence for this
identiﬁcation. The frication noise is followed by a stop gap and the following
release, /k/, with a short lag (expected of an unaspirated stop), which in turn
is followed by a low back vowel (high F1, and a narrow space between F2 and
F1) and the r-coloring of the following vowel (the lowering of the third for-
mant). Turning to (1), train, we observe the following: the palato-alveolar nature
of the frication noise (i.e. affrication of [t@]) is evidenced by the 2,000–8,000 Hz

ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
117
range of the noise pattern. Also, we note that the following long and rather
diphthongal vowel /e/ (fork-like opening of the formants) and the following
faint and very low-frequency F1 nasal ﬁt the expected pattern.
Words (2) and (3) are kite and pig. How do we know which one is which?
While both are CVC words that start with aspirated stops and thus cannot be
differentiated via this feature in the spectrograms, the features for the remain-
ing parts make the choices rather clear. First of all, the lengths of the vowel
nuclei are quite different. In (3), we see a shorter vowel (/I/ of pig). The nucleus
of (2) is longer and diphthongal (/aI/ of kite starts with a low vowel followed
by a high front vowel, and thus, has a fork-like opening). To make things fur-
ther indubitable, one needs to look at the ‘coming together’ of F2 and F3 right
before the stop gap for the coda in (3). As discussed earlier, this is typical of
velar stops (/g/ of pig). Both words are produced with their ﬁnal stops
released (note the release burst after the stop gaps). This explains the visible
voice bar in /g/ of pig. Thus, (2) is kite and (3) is pig (see ﬁgure 5.13).
Turning to disyllabics, we again start with the frication noise. The only word
that starts with a frication noise is chicken, and (8) is the best candidate for
this word, as the noise pattern for /tS/ is expectedly dark and goes down to
2,000 Hz, which is typical for palato-alveolars. Word (4) shows some frication
noise, but the frequencies and the intensity of it are far less than would be
expected of /tS/; indeed, it is typical of /h/, which suggests that (4) is happy.
There are several other indicators that support the identiﬁcation of these two
words: the vowels in the stressed syllables are of very different length, longer
/æ/ in happy, and short /I/ in chicken. The portions immediately following
the ﬁrst syllable are expectedly similar (stop gap and short lag release for 
the unaspirated stops). The differences, however, are clear right after that. The
second syllable of (4) has a longer vowel (/i/ of happy), as opposed to the
short [@] of chicken in (8). To add further support to this identiﬁcation, we 
can look at the faint and very low-frequency F1 for the nasal ending of chicken
(see ﬁgure 5.14).
(1)
(7)
train
Palato–alveolar
noise pattern
scar
Frication noise for alveolar
(4,000–8,000 Hz)
Diphthongal
vowel
Short lag
F2
F1
Figure 5.12
Spectrograms of train and scar

118
ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
The two remaining words, basket and ostrich, will have to be matched with
spectrograms (5) and (6). This is a rather easy decision for several reasons. Word
(6), which has two very obvious frication noises, is ostrich. The ﬁrst one is /s/,
with a typical 4,000–8,000 Hz alveolar pattern, and the second one is /tS/, with
a lower push typical of palato-alveolars. The same word shows some affrica-
tion for [t@] right after /s/. Still in the same word, the stressed ﬁrst syllable
has a longer vowel, which is low back (note the F1 and F2); the second syl-
lable is unstressed (weak intensity and short duration). When we examine (5),
basket, we observe the following: unsurprisingly, no visible voice bar for 
the initial /b/. As discussed in section 5.4.1, this is one of the least reliable
identifying characteristics of the stops /b, d, g/ except in intervocalic position.
The stressed ﬁrst vowel, /æ/, is expectedly long, and the frication of /s/, though
kite
(2)
(3)
Aspirated stop
Release burst
pig
Aspirated stop
F2–F3 coming
together (velar)
Voice bar
Fork-like opening of F1 and
F2 for the diphthong /aI/
Stop gap
Figure 5.13
Spectrograms of kite and pig
(4)
(8)
happy
chicken
Faint and low-
frequency F1 nasal
Weak turbulence
for /h/
Stop gap
Short lag
Stop gap
Short lag
Palato-alveolar
frication noise
Figure 5.14
Spectrograms of happy and chicken

ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
119
not as strong as that of ostrich, is still clear. The following sound, /k/, has 
its stop gap, which is followed by an expected short lag release. The formant
transitions for the following vowel (F2 and F3 are close together just after the
stop, with a downward transition to a vowel with a high F2) clearly indicate
the velar place of articulation. Finally, we note the second syllable with a rather
short vowel followed by a stop coda (see ﬁgure 5.15).
5.6
Context
Although we have talked about the characteristics of different sounds in a 
spectrographic display, as mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, there
are no absolute criteria that could uniquely deﬁne what a sound /X/ is in all
phonetic environments, even for a particular individual. Thus, the lay person’s
assumption that phonemes exhibit ‘invariance’ can hardly be justiﬁed.
Several factors inﬂuence both vowels and consonants. Earlier (see table 5.3),
we saw that the duration of vowels is different in stressed and unstressed 
syllables. Besides this, other variables are important too. One of the frequently
mentioned variables is the inﬂuence of the following consonant, because the
same vowel may be signiﬁcantly longer before a voiced consonant than before
a voiceless consonant.
The effect of the following consonant on the duration of the preceding
vowel is mentioned above. In fact, as we saw in chapter 3, this effect is also
observed in all preceding sonorant segments. If we look at the spectrograms
of the pairs sent – send, and kilt – killed (ﬁgure 5.16), we can observe the dif-
ferences in the durations of the vowels and the sonorant consonants before voiced
and voiceless stops. As we can see, the durations of the vowels and the sonor-
ant consonants are, expectedly, greater before /d/ than /t/.
(5)
(6)
basket
ostrich
F2 and F3 close
together for velar
Short lag for /k/
Alveolar frication noise
Stop gap
Palato-alveolar
frication noise
Alveolar frication noise
Figure 5.15
Spectrograms of basket and ostrich

120
ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
Fricatives exert an even greater inﬂuence over vowels than stops. For ex-
ample, we get the following readings for the same vowel [√] depending on the
nature of the following consonant. We found the following differences with
the change in the following segment:
but [b√t]
(vowel length before a voiceless stop: 104 ms)
bud [b√d]
(vowel length before a voiced stop: 172 ms)
buzz [b√z]
(vowel length before a voiced fricative: 210 ms)
The length of the word, as well as its number of syllables, seems inﬂuential.
For example, while we get a reading of 93 ms for the vowel [I] in pick, it goes
down to 56 ms in picky and to 37 ms in pickiness.
Position of the word in the phrase or in the sentence, the rate of speaking,
the type of word, either topic or comment, all inﬂuence the duration
signiﬁcantly. For example, the vowels of the two words dog [O] and man [æ]
change their duration by between 20 ms and 65 ms in the following sentences:
“The [dOg] ([O]: 161 ms) bit the [mæn] ([æ]: 175 ms)”
“The [mæn] ([æ]: 155 ms) was bitten by the [dOg] ([O]: 226 ms)”
Similarly, in a listing situation, the last item has greater duration. If we com-
pare the following two sentences, we get different durational readings for peaches
and oranges in their two locations:
(a)
I like apples, oranges, and peaches.
(b)
I like apples, peaches, and oranges.
For example, we get an average of 94 ms as the durational reading for the ﬁnal
[z] of oranges in sentence (a), which goes up to a 174-ms reading for the same
sound in sentence (b). Pre-pausal (at the end of phrases, clauses, or sentences)
stressed vowels seem to have the longest duration; this is diametrically
opposed to vowels in function words. As a result, the duration of a vowel in
s 
E 
n 
t
s 
E 
n 
d
k 
I 
l t
k 
I 
l 
d
(a) sent – send
(b) kilt – killed
Figure 5.16
Spectrograms of sent – send and kilt – killed

ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
121
the former position may be up to two or even three times that of the same vowel
in the latter.
Consonants can also be inﬂuenced by the contexts in which they appear. 
We saw earlier that the aspiration of the voiceless stops varied according to
the following segment. Speciﬁcally, there was a longer lag before a sonorant 
consonant (e.g. play [phLe]) than before a vowel (e.g. pay [phE]). As for their
duration, fricatives are the consonants that are more consistently affected by
the context. For example, we get readings of 196–231 ms for the /s/ of sub
[s√b], which goes up to 309–325 ms in ﬁnal position in bus [b√s]. Yet, when 
we place it at the end of the phrase take the bus, /s/ gives us a reading of 
328–365 ms.
Speakers adapt to various circumstances of communication and adjust their
production patterns accordingly. Thus, it is no surprise that speech style and
rate inﬂuence the production, and we see a clear difference between slow, care-
ful speech and fast, colloquial speech. While the former is characterized by a
slower tempo, avoidance of reductions and/or deletions, and an attempt to make
the production as distinct as possible, the latter is replete with deletions and
reductions, and the durations of the components necessarily get shorter. These
contrasting phenomena, which are known as hyperspeech (or “overshooting”)
versus hypospeech (or “undershooting”), should not be conceived of as a binary
split, but rather as a continuum (hence the terms ‘very slow’, ‘slow’, ‘normal
formal’, ‘conversational’, ‘fast’, ‘very fast’). Consequently, the different speech
realizations and different acoustic readings are the results of these varying 
production patterns.
Example: Colorless green ideas sleep furiously (12-syllable sentence)
very slow
2.0
syllables per second
slow
2.6
syllables per second
normal formal
4.8
syllables per second
conversational
6.0
syllables per second
fast
8.0
syllables per second
very fast
12.0
syllables per second
5.7
Practical Applications: Some Examples
As we noted at the beginning of the chapter, spectrographic analysis is a very
useful tool in applied disciplines. The increasingly affordable software on the
market has made its use viable in a clinical context and in foreign language
teaching. The utility of spectrographic analysis comes from the fact that it pro-
vides quantitative and objective data on a wide range of speech parameters
(e.g. nasalization, vowel quality, segmental duration, place and manner of 
articulation, voice onset time), and greatly enhances the scope of auditory-based
perceptual judgments of speech. It is particularly helpful in monitoring
changes during remediation (clinical and/or classroom context).

122
ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
Real-time spectrographic displays have been used in speech training with
individuals who have severe and profound hearing impairments. Although 
some have expressed concerns about the usefulness of spectrograms in speech 
training, citing their complex and abstract nature, several investigators have
pointed out their successful use with hearing-impaired adults (Maki 1980, 1983;
Maki et al. 1981) and children (Ertmer and Stark 1995; Ertmer et al. 1996) with
respect to contrasts such as voiced–voiceless, durational differences, tongue posi-
tion for vowels, and differences in manner of consonant production. Recently,
Ertmer (2004) examined how well children with normal hearing and children
with impaired hearing can recognize spectrographic cues for vowels and con-
sonants, and the ages at which these visual cues are distinguished. Subjects’
training activities involved instruction, highlighting of target spectrographic 
cues, matching of spectrograms by the children, and feedback on correctness.
Results showed that a variety of spectrographic cues were recognized with
greater-than-chance accuracy at each age level and across both hearing statuses.
On average, formant cues were recognized with greater accuracy than conson-
ant manner features, making vowels, diphthongs, and vowel-like approximants
easier to recognize. This saliency, Ertmer suggests, may be the result of a 
combination of greater duration, darker energy traces, and distinctive visual
patterns.
For another example, we can consider problems related to VOT, which 
may be of concern to a variety of populations. Individuals who are suffering
from aphasia (language deﬁcit due to damage to certain regions of the brain,
in this case Broca’s area) seem to be unable to control the timing between the
release of a stop and the onset of voicing. Individuals with apraxia (neuro-
logical disorder of motor programming for speech) tend to have problems in
areas such as timing and coordination that might lead to troubles in VOT 
production. In several studies, dysarthria (a group of speech disorders result-
ing from a disease or damage to neural mechanisms that regulate speech 
movements) patients have been reported to show increased variability in their
VOT productions. VOT deﬁciencies have also been reported in relation to 
hearing impairment.
The signiﬁcance of VOT deﬁciencies is not restricted to the clinical context
and is very important in foreign language teaching and accent reduction con-
texts. As mentioned earlier in this chapter, and in chapter 3, the difference
between English /p, t, k/ and /b, d, g/ is not voiced/voiceless in initial 
position, as /b, d, g/ may also have no voicing before the release of the stop
closure. Thus, the aspiration of /p, t, k/ is very important for a segment to be
perceived as /p/ rather than /b/ (and there is a similar situation for /t/ vs.
/d/ and for /k/ vs. /g/). Learners of English coming from Romance languages
with unaspirated /p, t, k/ (e.g. Spanish, Portuguese) face a big challenge in
learning the English patterns, because their productions may be (and indeed,
in many cases, are) perceived as /b, d, g/ by native speakers of English. 
While aspiration of /p, t, k/ is perceived by the hearer in a binary fashion 
(i.e. all-or-none occurrence), studies on ﬁrst and second language acquisition
production data show that delay of the onset of voicing is typically gradual 

ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
123
in the case of voice lag. Thus, the value of acoustic data becomes ever more
important during the remediation process. In considering the productions of
the client (learner/patient), their progress needs to be constantly evaluated 
via instrumentation. Monitoring the changes and making the learners/patients
aware of this progress, however incomplete, would encourage them, and thus
accelerate the remediation process.
It is frequently pointed out that transcribing vowels accurately is more
difﬁcult than doing the same for consonants. This task is made harder when
we deal with different vowel sounds that are not part of our native inventory,
or different vowel sounds we might encounter in disordered speech. The key
here is to identify the differences between the system to be remedied and the
target system. Although the cardinal vowel system discussed in chapter 1 may
be helpful, this requires a very strong phonetic training if one is to rely on it.
Acoustic analysis provides a viable alternative here. As mentioned earlier, 
vowels can be accurately described by the frequencies of their ﬁrst three (in
most cases, two) formants. Thus, with the help of spectrographic analysis, the
practitioner will be in a position to identify the nature and the extent of the
mismatches between the target system and the system of the patient/student,
and plan the remediation accordingly.
Apart from its utility in identifying different vowel qualities, acoustic ana-
lysis is also a powerful tool for vowel durations, an issue that may be crucial
in both a clinical context and foreign language teaching. For example, as we 
saw earlier, voicing is frequently absent during closure of ﬁnal /b, d, g/. Because
vowels preceding voiced obstruents are lengthened, the ﬁnal consonant will
be perceived as voiced even though no speciﬁc evidence of voicing is present.
When the learner/patient fails to implement this expected lengthening, the prac-
titioner can identify this unambiguously via spectrographic analysis. Also, 
during remediation she or he can carefully monitor changes in vowel dura-
tions via spectrographic data. This can help measure progress by accurately
describing productions that may not be evident perceptually.
Failure to implement voicing contrasts among obstruents is not uncommon
in some aphasic patients. For example, a 63-year-old female Broca’s patient 
(Code and Ball 1982) did not have the voicing contrast involving fricatives (e.g.
prooﬁng vs. proving, pence vs. pens). Analyzing her data spectrographically,
however, the investigators were able to ﬁnd out that her productions for 
such pairs were not homophonous, and that although she did not have the
voiced/voiceless distinctions in target fricatives, she did maintain the contrasts
via the length of the vowel before target fricatives; that is, vowels were (just
as in normal speech) longer before voiced (lenis) targets than before voiceless
(fortis) targets.
The same subject’s data were also instructive with respect to the duration 
of target fricatives. As pointed out earlier, the duration of frication of voice-
less targets is longer than that of voiced ones. The subject in the above-
mentioned study also made a difference (somewhat smaller than in normal
speech) in the duration between voiceless and voiced targets. Thus, out of 
three parameters that are available to contrast /f/ with /v/, /s/ with /z/, 

124
ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
and so on (voicing of the target, vowel length before the target, duration 
of frication), the patient was able to utilize the last two. Without the use of
spectrographic data, the investigators would not have been able to ﬁnd out that
the patient was making the phonemic distinctions and that the disability was
phonetic.
All of the above point to the conclusion that spectrographic analysis 
allows a quantiﬁcation of mismatches between the normative data and the 
client’s productions. In addition to the fact that such quantiﬁcation is 
indispensable for the diagnosis of trouble spots, it greatly enhances, by mon-
itoring changes, the ability of the professional who deals with the remediation
process.
Finally, we can also mention that spectrographic data can help profes-
sionals dealing with voice disorders, training of the singing voice, speaker
identiﬁcation, identiﬁcation of the correlates of speech in stressful conditions,
and intoxicated speech.
A note on free speech analysis software
There are several software packages for speech analysis available free 
of charge via the internet. Some of these are simple to use while others 
are suitable only for those possessing good computing skills. WASP
(www.phon.ucl.ac.uk), and SIL Speech Analyzer (www.sil.org) are easy to use
and may be ideal for beginners. The former takes up very little disk space, while
the latter is capable of delivering more functions, and the display format is 
more ﬂexible. Two more powerful software packages, however, are SFS
(www.phon.ucl.ac.uk) and the widely used PRAAT (www.praat.org). They may
both be somewhat intimidating for beginners; however, e-mail support groups
give good advice for users.
SUMMARY
In this chapter, we examined spectrographic characteristics of speech. Although
precise acoustic makeup of each sound will differ for each individual speaker,
there are core features that will enable us to identify general patterns. In the
investigation of vowels and diphthongs, the formant patterns are the cues 
for recognition. In stops, fricatives, and affricates, which form the group of obstru-
ents, the different degrees of obstruction reveal clear acoustic patterns: a gap
for stops, frication noise for fricatives, and a stop gap followed by a frication
noise for affricates. Sonorant consonants behave rather like vowels in that they
exhibit a voice bar along with formant-like structures. We also saw that the
context in which a particular sound occurs (e.g. adjacent sounds, word posi-
tions, suprasegmentals, speech style and rate, etc.) inﬂuences the acoustic
characteristics. Finally, we brieﬂy looked at some practical applications of
spectrographic analysis in remedial contexts.

ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
125
APPENDIX
Tips on what to look for when looking at certain sound classes on a spectro-
graphic display follow.
Stops
Voiced (lenis) vs. voiceless (fortis)
#____
V___V
____#
Duration of stop gap
v o i c e l e s s
l o n g e r
Voice bar (/b, d, g/)
?
Yes
?
Release burst
s t r o n g e r
f o r
v o i c e l e s s
(if released)
Duration of previous V
NA
l o n g e r   b e f o r e /b, d, g/
Aspiration (VOT of more than 30 ms in initial /p, t, k/ of a stressed syllable)
Place of articulation
•
F2 and F3 transitions (CV) (VC formant transition is the opposite of CV 
transition): /b/ both upward, /d/ third falls and second has only a small
movement, /g/ second and third close together.
•
Locus (starting frequency): /b/ 600–800 Hz, /d/ 1,800 Hz, /g/ (two loci)
300 Hz and 1,300 Hz (F2–F3 relationship is important for velars).
•
Release burst:
Bilabials: burst with a center frequency lower than the F2 of the V (diffuse
and weak);
Alveolars: burst with a center frequency higher than the F2 of the V (diffuse
and strong);
Velars: burst with a center frequency approximating to the F2 of the V 
(compact and strong).
•
Aspiration: velars have greater VOT than alveolars, which in turn have greater
VOT than bilabials.
Fricatives
•
An interval of frication noise (greater in sibilants than non-sibilants).
Voiceless fricatives have greater frication noise than the voiced counterparts.
•
Longer duration (longer than 130 ms) than stops (less than 75 ms) and
affricates (75–130 ms).
•
When voiced, shorter noise segment duration.
Affricates
Stop gap followed by noise segment (frication).

126
ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
Nasals
•
Formants not as loud as they are in vowels (and in approximants).
•
A very faint and very low-frequency F1 (200–300 Hz).
•
F2 around 2,500 Hz, F3 around 3,200 Hz (if visible).
•
Associated formant transitions (in place of articulation) very much like 
stops.
Glides
•
Similar to high vowels: /w/ F1 and F2 are very close (as /u/); /j/ F1 and
F2 are apart.
•
Transition from a glide to a vowel is faster than from a vowel to a vowel,
but slower than from a stop to a vowel. Stop + V (shorter than 50 ms); glide
+ V (60–100 ms); V + V (more than 100 ms).
Liquids
•
Properties like stops (quite rapid) and glides (resonant quality – low F1 and
F2, transition speed); differ from glides in F3 frequency.
•
/@/: lowered F3 (narrowly separated from F2); lowers F3 of surrounding Vs.
F1 around 320 Hz; F2 around 1,100 Hz; F3 around 1,600 Hz.
•
/l/: F2 higher, F3 much higher (higher formants considerably reduced in inten-
sity). F1 around 300–360 Hz; F2 around 1,300 Hz; F3 around 2,500–3,000 Hz.
•
Postvocalic ﬁnal /l/ may be like a V, making no tongue contact (/u/-like
formants). Clear /l/ is /i/-like, dark /l/ is /u/-like.
58–68 dB
Amplitude for frication noise
/f, v, T, D, s, z, S, Z, h/
/f, v/
duration is
greater than
interdent.
/T, D/
F2 locus is higher
than lab.-dent.
SIBILANT
NON-SIBILANT
/s, z, S, Z/
/f, v, T, D, h/
46–52 dB
/s, z/
(4,000–8,000)
/S, Z/
(2,000–6,000)
v-less
/s/
v-d
/z/
v-less
/S/
v-d
/Z/
v-less
/f/
v-d
/v/
v-less
/T/
v-d
/h/
/D/
/h/
Alv.
Pal.-alv.
Lab.-dent.
Interdent.

ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
127
EXERCISES
1.
What differences do you expect to ﬁnd in the spectrograms of the 
following pairs?
Example: (a) court – (b) scored
•
Initial frication noise of /s/ in (b)
•
Initial aspiration of /k/ in (a)
•
Longer vowel before /d/ in (b)
•
Longer duration for ﬁnal /t/ in (a)
•
Possible voice bar in ﬁnal /d/ in (b)
(i)
(a) sip
(b)
zip
(ii)
(a) britches
(b)
bridges
(iii)
(a) hat
(b)
ahead
(iv)
(a) parade
(b)
pilot
(v)
(a) name
(b)
mine
2.
Match the following spectrograms with the targets open, tiger, pack-
age, camel, apple, table. Explain your rationale.
(a)

128
ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
129
3.
Transcribe the following (about “second language varieties of
English”) based on P. Trudgill and J. Hannah, International English,
4th edn. (London: Edward Arnold, 2002).
English is a language which has more non-native speakers than 
native speakers. Besides the fact that it is learned by millions of people
around the world as a foreign language, there are millions of speakers
of English as a second language in many countries. In the Americas, 
English is an important second language in Puerto Rico, and also has 
some second-language presence in Panama. In Europe, it has ofﬁcial 
status in Gibraltar and Malta and is also widely spoken as a second 
language in Cyprus. In Africa, there are large communities of native 
speakers of English in Liberia, South Africa, Zimbabwe and Kenya, 
but there are even larger communities in these countries of second-
language speakers. Elsewhere in Africa, English has ofﬁcial status, and 
is therefore widely used as a second language lingua franca in 
Gambia, Sierra Leone, Ghana, Nigeria, Cameroon, Namibia, 
Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland, Zambia, Malawi and Uganda. It is also 
(f)

130
ACOUSTICS
OF
VOWELS
AND
CONSONANTS
widely used in education and for government purposes in Tanzania 
and Kenya. In the Indian Ocean, Asian and Paciﬁc Ocean areas, 
English is an ofﬁcial language in Mauritius, the Seychelles, Pakistan, 
India, Singapore, Brunei, Hong Kong, the Philippines, Papua New 
Guinea, the Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Fiji, Tonga, Western Samoa, 
American Samoa, the Cook Islands, Guam and elsewhere in 
American administered Micronesia. It is also very widely used as a 
second language in Malaysia, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, the Maldives, 
Nepal and Nauru.

6
Syllables
6.1
Introduction
The patterns of vowels and consonants we have reviewed thus far have 
frequently made references to the phonological unit of syllable. The relevance
of the unit of syllable in phonological description is shown by rules about the
allophonic variations regarding aspiration (i.e. voiceless stops are aspirated at
the beginning of stressed syllables); glottalization or glottal stop replacement
of /t/ (i.e. /t/ may be optionally glottalized or totally replaced by a glottal
stop in syllable-ﬁnal position); lowering of /O/ to /A/ before /@/ (i.e. /O/ can
be optionally replaced by /A/ before /@/, if the vowel and /@/ belong to dif-
ferent syllables); as well as distribution of some sounds, as in the case of /h/
and /è/ (i.e. /h/ is always syllable-initial and never syllable-ﬁnal, and /è/ is
always syllable-ﬁnal and never syllable-initial).
Beyond its relevance for the phonological rules, syllable has an important
role with respect to the phonotactic constraints in languages. This refers to the
system of arrangement of sounds and sound sequences. It is on this basis that
a speaker of English can judge some new form as a possible or impossible word.
For example, both [blIt] and [bmIt] are non-existent as English words. If asked
to choose between the two, a native speaker of English, without a moment’s
hesitation, would go for [blIt]. The reason for this is that [bl] is a possible onset
cluster in English, whereas [bm] is not. This is not to say that no English word
can have a [bm] sequence. Words such as submarine [s√bm@@in] and submis-
sion [s√bmIS@n] are clear demonstrations of the fact that we can have /m/ after
/b/ in English. This, however, is possible only if these two sounds are in 
different syllables. So the rejection of a word such as [bmIt] is strictly based
on a syllable-related generalization.
Although we have made numerous references to syllables and syllable 
position up until this point, we have not dealt with the deﬁnition of syllable,
nor have we dealt with the question of syllabiﬁcation. Before we do this, we
will look at the hierarchical internal structure of syllable. Earlier (in chapter 1),
we suggested a binary split between the onset and the rhyme for syllables. Thus,
a monosyllabic word such as dog [dOg] has the following structure:
six
Applied English Phonology, Second Edition       Mehmet Yavaş 
© 2011 Mehmet Yavaş. ISBN: 978-1-444-33322-0 

132
SYLLABLES
σ = syllable
O = onset
R = rhyme
N = nucleus
C = coda
The justiﬁcation for onset–rhyme separation is not hard to ﬁnd. First of all,
rhyming (i.e. whether two words rhyme) is totally based on the vowel/diph-
thong and anything that follows it (nucleus + optional coda = rhyme); onset is
irrelevant. If, on the other hand, we look at the device of alliteration (i.e. the
repetition of the same consonant sound(s) at the onset position in two words,
as in stem [stEm] and stern [st´n]), we see that, here, it is the onset that counts
and the rhyme is irrelevant. More strong evidence that rhyme is a constituent
comes from the stress rules. In several languages (English included) in which
the stress is sensitive to the structure of syllables, the structure of the rhyme
is the determining factor; onsets do not count.
Also, restrictions between syllabic elements are, overwhelmingly, either within
the onset or within the rhyme. For example, as mentioned above, the restriction
that a stop cannot be followed by a nasal is valid in the onset (across syllables,
this is allowed, e.g. batman, admonish). Similarly, the statement that English
does not allow non-homorganic nasal + stop is valid for coda clusters, because
while a form such as [lImk] is impossible, we can get such non-homorganic
sequences across syllables (e.g. kumquat, pumpkin). Another example of a 
similar phenomenon comes from the sequences of two obstruents with respect
to voicing. While it is not difﬁcult to ﬁnd examples such as cubs [k√bz] and
cups [k√ps] where the sequences of bilabial stops and alveolar fricatives agree
in voicing, we do not ﬁnd words such as [k√pz] and [k√bs] with disagreement
in voicing. This does not mean that there are no words in English where we
put two obstruents with opposite voicing together. Examples such as absurd
[æbs2d], obsolete [Abs@lit], and Hudson [h√ds@n] can be easily multiplied. The
difference between these two groups of words lies in the tautosyllabic (i.e. in
the same syllable) nature of the two obstruents in the former, and the split of
the sequence of stop and fricative by a syllable boundary in the latter. 
Further attesting the existence of rhyme as a constituent, dependencies
between nuclei and codas are commonly found. To give an example from English,
we can look at the /aU/ nucleus and its relationship with its coda:
brown 
[b@aUn]
But
* [b@aUè] / [b@aUm]
spouse
[spaUs]
* [spaUf]
trout 
[t@aUt]
* [t@aUp] / [t@aUk]
rouse 
[@aUz]
* [@aUv]
crowd 
[k@aUd]
* [k@aUg] / [k@aUb]
What these examples demonstrate is that the coda that follows /aU/ has to be
alveolar; this nucleus cannot be followed by labial or velar consonants.
o
N
O
C
O
R
d
g

SYLLABLES
133
Having made the point that onsets and rhymes should be seen as auto-
nomous units, each with its own constraints on its internal structure, we are 
now ready to look at the details (for a different view, which argues against 
the necessity of the rhyme as a unit, see Davis 1988). In the word dog
above, the ﬁnal units of the syllable each contained one segment. However, 
as we will see shortly in greater detail, there are several other possibilities in
English. To give some examples, let us look at the words blue, side, wind, 
and ground.
When we look at these representations, we see that several positions are taken
by sequences of two segments, and that would make it obvious, for example,
that the onset cluster of (a), /bl/, will be longer than the single onset of (b),
/s/. While this is true, the representation, as it is, is not sufﬁcient to make any
distinction between the nucleus of (a) (/u/, a long vowel) and the nucleus of
(c) (/I/, a short vowel). To remedy this situation, we introduce a skeletal tier
(i.e. ‘X’) that reveals the timing slots for each unit. Thus, we represent the 
difference between (a) and (c) in the following manner:
In this revised representation, long vowels and diphthongs will have two 
timing slots (branching), whereas short vowels will have one (non-branching).
Multiple onsets/codas will also be branching. Finally, we give the revised tree
of the CVC word dog,
o
X
X
O
(a)
R
X
b
X
l
N
u
o
N
C
O
(c)
R
X
X
X
w
I
n
d
X
blue
(a)
O
R
N
u
bl
side
(b)
O
s
N
aI
C
R
d
wind
(c)
O
R
N
I
C
nd
R
N
aU
C
nd
w
ground
(d)
O
gr

134
SYLLABLES
which has a non-branching onset [d] and a branching rhyme [Og].
The advantage of the design with skeletal tiers is not only to distinguish branch-
ing from non-branching, which, as we will see shortly, is very important in
stress assignment rules, but also to help us to deal with segments such as affricates
that are phonetically complex but phonologically simple. Consider the following:
Here the clusters are branching (two timing slots) but the phonetically com-
plex affricates are non-branching (one timing slot).
6.2
Number of Syllables
It is generally agreed that speakers of English do not have a great deal of difﬁculty
in identifying the number of syllables in most words. Even in uncommonly
used vocabulary such as consumptiveness, docility, divinatory, and cosmo-
graphical, decisions are rather quick and unanimous; four syllables in the ﬁrst
two words, and ﬁve syllables in the last two.
There are, of course, some words where there are disagreements. They
belong, however, to certain limited groups. Some of these are due to dialectal
differences. For example, the word military has four syllables, [mI.l@.tE.@i], in
American English, while it has three syllables, [mI.l@.t®i] in British English.
Another group of words that may have different numbers of syllables can result
from [@] deletion, as exempliﬁed in veteran [vE.t@.@@n] (three syllables) or
[vE.t@@n] (two syllables). Similarly, management could have three syllables,
[mæ.n@dZ.m@nt], or two, [mændZ.m@nt]. The remaining disputable items, 
generally, all relate to sonorant consonants. In some of these, the number of
syllables will vary depending on whether the nasal consonant is syllabic or not.
drench
N
C
O
R
X
X
X
X
d
E
n
tS
X
chart
N
C
O
R
X
X
X
tS
A
t
X
r
r
o
N
C
O
R
X
X
d
O
g
X

SYLLABLES
135
For example, chasm may be said to have one or two syllables depending on
the status of the ﬁnal nasal. Similarly, Catholicism may be judged as having
four or ﬁve syllables. As with nasals, we can cite words with laterals follow-
ing non-low front vowels. Items such as real, male, and feel may be judged
as having one or two syllables. Finally, /@/ may be the source of disagreement
in words such as ﬁre and hire; these words are monosyllabic for some, but
disyllabic for others.
Cases where there is disagreement are clearly limited and should not 
distract us further from the more important question regarding the deﬁnition
of the unit syllable. Unfortunately, there is no unanimous decision among 
scholars regarding the question as to where the unit syllable belongs; whether
it should be deﬁned acoustically, articulatorily, or auditorily. Our approach in
this book will be based on sonority and the syllables will be described on the
basis of peaks of sonority; the suggestion is that the number of syllables in a
word will be equal to the number of sonority peaks in that word.
6.3
Sonority
Before we start using the concept, we need to deﬁne what sonority is. This, 
in itself, is not an easy task, as it is also far from being uncontroversial. For
pedagogical purposes, we will keep it as straightforward as possible. The 
sonority of a sound is primarily related to the degree of opening of the vocal
tract during its articulation. The more open the vocal tract is for a sound, the
higher its sonority will be. Thus vowels, which are produced with a greater
degree of opening, will be higher on the sonority scale than fricatives or stops,
which are produced either with a narrow opening or with a complete closure
of the articulators. The second, and relatively secondary (ancillary), dimension
is the sound’s propensity for voicing. This becomes relevant when the stric-
ture (degree of opening) is the same for two given sounds; the sound that has
voicing (e.g. voiced fricative) will have a higher degree of sonority than its voice-
less counterpart (e.g. voiceless fricative). Putting all these together, we can say that
low vowels (/æ, A/), which have the maximum degree of opening, will have
the highest sonority; and voiceless stops, which have no opening and no voic-
ing, will have the lowest sonority. The remaining sounds will be in between.
One ﬁnds different hierarchies of sonority in different books and manuals.
However, the differences are in details rather than the basic relative ordering.
In this book, we adopt the following 10-point scale suggested by Hogg and
McCully (1987):
Sounds
Sonority values
Examples
Low vowels
10
/A, æ/
Mid vowels
9
/e, o/
High vowels (and glides)
8
/i, u/
Flaps
7
/r/
Laterals
6
/l/

136
SYLLABLES
Nasals
5
/m, n, è/
Voiced fricatives
4
/v, D, z/
Voiceless fricatives
3
/f, T, s/
Voiced stops
2
/b, d, g/
Voiceless stops
1
/p, t, k/
Having stated the relative sonority of sounds, we are now ready to look 
at the number of syllables in words as peaks of sonority. In auditory terms,
the sonority peak is more prominent than the surrounding segments. Since 
vowels and diphthongs are higher in sonority than other segments, they 
typically occupy the peak positions in syllables. We show this with the following
displays for publicity and condemnation:
The principle of peaks of sonority correctly identiﬁes the number of syllables,
four, in these two cases.
As we saw earlier, in English we can have syllables that do not contain a
vowel. In these cases, the most sonorant consonant will be the syllable peak
(i.e. syllabic consonant):
Since the existence of syllabic consonants is due to the deletion of the reduced
vowel [@], they are conﬁned to unstressed syllables. In stressed syllables, we
always have full vowels that will assume the syllabic peaks; this leaves no chance
for the consonant to be syllabic.
[p 
I 
k  
l]
[s 
√ 
d 
n]
[p √ b l I s @ t i]
10 
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1
[k A n d @ m n e S @ n]

SYLLABLES
137
Although the principle of equating the sonority peaks to the number of 
syllables would hold for thousands of English words, it does not mean that it
is without exceptions. We must acknowledge the fact that some English onset
clusters with /s/ as the ﬁrst consonant (e.g. stop [stAp]), and coda clusters with
/s/ as the last consonant (e.g. box [bAks]), do violate this principle. These cases
will be discussed in greater detail later in this chapter. Before we deal with
them, however, we will look at the issue of syllabiﬁcation.
6.4
Syllabiﬁcation
Although ﬁnding the peaks of sonority aids us greatly in identifying the number
of syllables in a word, it does not tell us much about the syllabiﬁcation, that
is, where the syllable boundaries lie. For example, where do the intervocalic
consonants belong in publicity? How do we assign /b/ and /l/ between the
ﬁrst and the second syllables? What about the /s/? Is it the coda of the second
syllable or the onset of the third?
The principle on which we make the decision in these cases, which is known
as the ‘maximal onset principle’, simply assigns any series of intervocalic con-
sonants to the syllable on the right as long as it does not violate language-speciﬁc
onset patterns. To demonstrate this, let us look at the word publicity again.
This word, unambiguously, has four syllables and the nuclei are clearly
identiﬁable vowels. First, we need to phonetically transcribe the word and 
identify the syllable nuclei.
The next step is to go to the end of the word and start connecting the nucleus
of each syllable with the surrounding consonants. The last syllable has no 
coda, and the nucleus will be attached to the preceding /t/, because [ti] is 
an acceptable sequence in English. After this, we move to the nucleus of the
preceding (third) syllable, which is an [@]; the lack of any coda in this syllable
and the acceptability of a [s@] sequence in English tell us that this will be 
the third syllable of the word. There are two consonants to the left of the nucleus
of the second syllable /I/. Connecting /I/ to the immediately preceding /l/
is no problem, as [lI] is a perfectly normal sequence in English. The next 
consonant to the left, /b/, is also going to be connected with the second 
syllable, because the resulting [bl] is an acceptable onset in the language 
(e.g. blue [blu], block [blOk]). Thus, the resulting syllabiﬁcation of this word
will be:
[p √ . b l I . s @ . t i]
[p √ b l I 
s 
@ 
t i]

138
SYLLABLES
Sometimes, we see the same sequences of sounds syllabiﬁed differently in
different words. We will illustrate this phenomenon in the following two
words, complain and temptation. The syllabiﬁcations of these two words are
given in the following:
Our focus will be the [mp] sequence the two words share. As the syllabiﬁca-
tions above make clear, the same sequence behaves differently in the two words.
While in temptation [tEmp.te.S@n] the [mp] sequence is the double coda of the
ﬁrst syllable, in complain [k@m.plen] the two sounds fall into separate syl-
lables; [m] belongs to the coda of the ﬁrst syllable, and [p] is part of the double
onset of the second syllable. The reason for this difference is what is allowed
as a maximal onset in English. Since [pt] is not a possible onset, [p] has to stay
in the ﬁrst syllable of temptation. In complain, however, [p] is part of the onset
of the second syllable because [pl] is a permissible onset in English.
Dividing the word complain as [k@mp.len] would not have resulted in any
violation of English onsets or codas, because both [k@mp] and [len] are per-
missible in the language. However, doing this would have meant maximizing
the coda. The observed syllabiﬁcation [k@m.plen], on the other hand, follows
the maximization of allowed onsets in English. Assigning intervocalic con-
sonants as onsets of the following syllable rather than coda of the preceding 
syllable forms the basis of the maximal onset principle, and this is derived 
from the fact that onsets are more basic than codas in languages. All languages,
without a single exception, have CV (open) syllables, whereas many lan-
guages lack VC (closed) syllables. To summarize what has been said so far, 
we can say that the principle that guides spoken syllabiﬁcation assigns the 
maximum allowable number of consonants to the syllable on the right.
Before we leave this section, we should emphasize the importance of the 
language-speciﬁc nature of syllabiﬁcation, as the same sequence of sounds 
may be divided differently in different languages. To illustrate this point, let
us look at the following two cases, /bl/ and /sl/, and compare the situation
in English with two other languages. In Turkish there are no onset clusters,
although the sequence [bl] may be found across syllables. For example, the word
abla “older sister” would invariably be divided as [ab.la]. This is very differ-
ent from the [bl] sequence of English in [p√.blI.s@.ti]. For [sl], we can compare
English with Spanish. Although Spanish has onset clusters, these are not
allowed with /s/ as the ﬁrst member. This does not mean that there are no
[sl] sequences in the language. The word [isla] “island” shows that this is pos-
sible with the following syllabiﬁcation: [is.la]. In English, however, since [sl]
is a possible onset, the syllabiﬁcation of a word such as asleep is [@.slip]. These
two examples demonstrate that the way a given sequence of sounds may behave
is strictly dependent on language-speciﬁc patterns. Finally, if we can state 
the obvious from the examples above, we can predict that native speakers of
[t 
E 
m p . t 
e . S 
@ 
n]
[k @ 
m . p l e n]

SYLLABLES
139
Turkish will attempt the syllabiﬁcation of publicity as [p√b.lI.s@.ti], and native 
speakers of Spanish will reveal [@s.lip] for asleep in their attempts to acquire
English as a foreign language.
6.5
English Syllable Phonotactics
While we were talking about the syllabiﬁcation of words that involve the use
of two or more consonants in a row between vowels, the determination
regarding which syllable they should belong to was made with reference to
language-speciﬁc facts. For example, a word such as acne [ækni] will have the
ﬁrst consonant as the coda of the ﬁrst syllable, and the second consonant as
the onset of the second syllable. The obvious reason is that English does not
allow /kn/ as an onset cluster. This will not be the case if we are talking about
Norwegian (e.g. Knut), Hebrew (e.g. Knesset), Russian (e.g. kniga), or German
(e.g. Knabe). It is time now to deal with the speciﬁcs of English syllable structure.
We start with the general formula, which can be stated as:
(C) (C) (C) V (C) (C) (C) {C}
What this characterization says is that a V (vowel or diphthong), which is 
the nucleus, is the only obligatory element in an English syllable (e.g. a [e]).
The surrounding consonants in parentheses are optional elements. Thus, we
can have a V with one, two, or three consonants before it as single, double, or
triple onsets:
CV (e.g. say [se])
CCV (e.g. pray [p@e])
CCCV (e.g. spray [sp@e])
Just as we can add consonants as onsets, we can add them as codas after the
nucleus:
VC (e.g. at [æt])
VCC (e.g. act [ækt])
VCCC (e.g. next [nEkst])
In the general formula given at the outset, there is also a fourth consonant 
in the coda, given in brackets. This is different than the others, because it is
possible only if it belongs to a sufﬁx, that is, if it comes from the following
morpheme, as in bursts [b´sts]. Single and multiple onsets can also be com-
bined with single and multiple codas and create further possibilities:
CVC (e.g. beat [bit])
CCVC (e.g. break [b@ek])
CCCVC (e.g. strike [st@aIk])
CVCC (e.g. binge [bIndZ])

140
SYLLABLES
CVCCC (e.g. text [tEkst])
CCVCC (e.g. print [p@Int])
CCVCCC (e.g. sphinx [sfInks])
CCCVCC (e.g. sprint [sp@Int])
Beyond these, the following are possible if we include sufﬁxes:
CCCVCCC (e.g. sprints [sp@Ints])
CVCCCC (e.g. worlds [w´ldz])
CCVCCCC (e.g. twelfths [twElfTs])
CCCVCCCC is a logical possibility with no commonly found vocabulary.
The picture given above is still a very general one and does not include the
numerous restrictions we have on onsets and codas.
6.5.1
Single onsets
As stated in sections 2.2.2 and 3.4, the only consonant that is not allowed to
take the onset position in English is /è/. Another sound, /Z/, does not start
an English word (save for items such as genre, as well as some foreign names
such as Zhivago) but is capable of occurring in non-word-initial onsets, as in
vision [vI.Z@n] and measure [mE.Z2]. Finally, /D/ deserves a mention for its
restricted occurrence in word-initial position; this sound is found only in
grammatical (function) words (e.g. the, then, there, etc.) word-initially.
6.5.2
Double onsets
Table 6.1 shows the occurring double onsets of English. We can make the 
following observations. Affricates are the only class of consonants that do not
appear in onset clusters. Besides this general statement, there are several other
restrictions for two-member onset clusters:
•
No voiced fricatives can serve as C2. Only /v/ can be a C1, and it can 
combine only with /j/ (e.g. view).
•
No non-lateral approximant (/@, w, j/) can serve as C1; the lateral can only
precede /j/ (only for some speakers).
•
No voiced stop can serve as C2.
•
No fricative other than /f/ can serve as C2, and this can only be preceded
by a /s/ in rarely found vocabulary (e.g. sphere).
•
No stops or nasals are allowed as C2, except after /s/ (e.g. speak, small).
•
/s/ and /S/ are complementary: /s/ does not occur before /@/, and /S/
occurs only before /@/ (e.g. shrimp).
•
/h/ and /m/ can only occur before /j/ (e.g. huge, music).
•
/T/ can precede only /@/ and /w/ (e.g. three, thwart).
•
Labials (C1) do not cluster with a labial approximant.
•
No geminates (i.e. doubled consonant sounds) are allowed.
•
Alveolar stops (C1) do not cluster with /l/.

SYLLABLES
141
We can summarize the situation in the following manner. In general, English
double onsets are either (a) /s/ + C (where C = any consonant that can assume
the position of C2 except /@/; /S/ appears before /@/), and (b) obstruent + approxi-
mant, with the limitations cited above.
While the pattern of C1 as an obstruent and C2 as a sonorant is very com-
mon, we do not have any double onset in which the reverse (C1 = sonorant
and C2 = obstruent) is true. This pattern that we observe for English is also
commonly found in many other languages, and can be accounted for by 
the principle known as ‘sonority sequencing’. We referred to sonority earlier
Table 6.1
English double onsets
p
t
k
f
m
n
l
@
w
j
p
n
4
4
4
b
4
4
4
t
n
4
4
(4)
d
4
4
(4)
k
n
4
4
4
4
g
4
4
4
f
n
4
4
4
v
4
T
4
4
s
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
(4)
S
4
h
4
m
n
4
n
n
(4)
l
n
(4)
Notes: 
4 Double onsets that are allowed in English
(4) Double onsets that are not found for most speakers of American English
n Impossible combination

142
SYLLABLES
for syllable peaks, and now we make reference to it for the sequencing of sounds
with respect to a syllable peak by the Sonority Sequencing Principle (SSP). As
given by Selkirk (1984: 116), SSP states that:
In any syllable, there is a segment constituting a sonority peak that is preceded
and/or followed by a sequence of segments with progressively decreasing sonor-
ity values.
Thus, the expected pattern is that, going from C1 to C2, the sonority level will
rise. Such is the case in the overwhelming majority of English double onsets
(e.g. play [ple], cry [k@aI], quick [kwIk]). The violations of this principle are
/s/ + stop clusters (/sp, st, sk/), in which the sonority level drops, instead of
rises, going from C1 to C2. As we will see with triple onsets as well as with
double and triple codas, /s/ behaves exceptionally. To account for such cases,
several scholars have suggested a special ‘adjunct’ status for /s/ clusters. We
will not go into the details of such a proposal, but sufﬁce it to state that this
exceptional behavior of /s/ is also found in several other languages.
6.5.3
Triple onsets
Triple onsets can be described as an addition of /s/ as C1 to voiceless stop +
approximant double onsets. Thus, we have: C1 = /s/, C2 = voiceless stop, C3 =
approximant. Although the combinations can give us 12 logical possibilities,
only 7 of these occur:
1 @
e.g. spring
4
2 l
e.g. splash
s
p
4 j
e.g. spew
3 w
e.g. * (excluded because /w/ cannot occur after labials)
1@
e.g. string
4
2 l
e.g. * (excluded because no lateral after an alveolar stop)
s
t
4 j
e.g. * (/tj/ non-existent for most speakers)
3 w
e.g. *
1 @
e.g. scrape
4
2 l
e.g. * (very rare, sclerosis)
s
k
4 j
e.g. skewer
3 w
e.g. squeeze
6.5.4
Codas
The only sound that cannot occur in English codas is /h/. Also, /Z/ is some-
what less solid than other consonants; although it is ﬁrm for several speakers,
we can still hear the [dZ] realizations in garage [g@@AdZ] and massage
[m@sAdZ] from some speakers. Two other sounds, /j, w/, are also frequently
included in the list of consonants that cannot occur in codas. While this is 
true, the existence of diphthongs /aI, OI/, and /aU/ weakens the case, as the 

SYLLABLES
143
endings of these diphthongs are very similar, if not identical, to /j/ and /w/
respectively. (This can be attested in alternative phonetic symbols used in some
systems, (/aj, aw, Oj/).)
6.5.5
Double codas
Double non-sufﬁxed English codas can be generalized in the following fashion:
(a)
C1 is a nasal and C2 is an obstruent (no voiced obstruent permitted except
/d, z, dZ/). Nasals (C1) combining with stops (C2) are invariably homorganic.
(b) If C1 is /s/, then C2 is a voiceless stop.
(c)
C1 is a liquid (/l, @/) and C2 is any consonant except for /z, Z, D/. Also
non-existent is the /lg/ cluster.
(d) If C1 is a voiceless non-alveolar stop (/p, k/), then C2 is a voiceless 
alveolar obstruent (/t, s/). Also permitted is the /ft/ cluster.
Possibilities increase considerably if we add to these the clusters created by
the sufﬁxes with /t, d, s, z, T/ (past tense, plural, possessive, ordinals, etc.).
Table 6.2 gives the actually occurring double codas.
As stated earlier, the sonority sequencing principle dictates the opposite of
onset sequencing for codas. This means that optimal codas should have the
sonority level dropping as we move from C1 to C2. Indeed, as table 6.2 shows,
this is the case for the double codas we ﬁnd in non-sufﬁxed (monomorphemic)
forms in English (e.g. arm [A@m], sharp [SA@p], belt [bElt]). Exceptions are (a)
two-stop sequences, which are never homorganic (e.g. apt [æpt], act [ækt]), and
(b) stop + /s/, which always agree in voicing (e.g. lapse [læps], tax [tæks]).
6.5.6
Triple codas
The triple codas of English do not lend themselves to the rather simple formula
we gave for triple onsets. We can say, in more general terms, that with the 
exception of (1), below, which has three obstruents, all the other combinations
consist of a liquid or a nasal (sonorant) followed by two voiceless obstruents.
The following combinations are found in non-sufﬁxed forms:
C1
C2
C3
Examples
1
stop
fricative
stop
/dst/ midst, /kst/ next
2
(a)
nasal
stop
stop
/mpt/ exempt, /èkt/ sacrosanct
(b)
nasal
stop
fricative
/mps/ mumps, /èks/ jinx
(c)
nasal
fricative
stop
/nst/ against, /èst/ amongst
3
(a)
l
stop
stop
/lpt/ sculpt
(b)
l
stop
fricative
/lts/ waltz
(c)
l
fricative
stop
/lst/ whilst
4
(a)
@
stop
stop
/@kt/ infarct, /@pt/ excerpt
(b)
@
stop
fricative
/@ps/ corpse, /@ts/ quartz
(c)
@
fricative
stop
/@st/ ﬁrst
(d)
@
l
stop
/@ld/ world
(e)
@
l
fricative
/@lz/ Charles

144
SYLLABLES
Table 6.2
English double codas
p
b
t
d
k
g
tS
dZ
f
v
T
s
z
S
m
n
l
p
n
4
8
4
b
n
8
8
t
n
8
8
d
n
8
8
k
4
n
4
g
8
n
8
tS
8
n
dZ
8
n
f
4
n
8
8
v
8
n
8
T
8
n
8
D
8
8
s
4
4
4
n
z
8
n
S
8
n
Z
8
m
4
8
8
4
8
n
n
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
n
è
8
4
8
8
l
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
8
4
4
4
n
@
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
8
4
4
4
4
Notes:
4 Non-sufﬁxed double codas
8 Sufﬁxed double codas
n Impossible combination

SYLLABLES
145
We have to acknowledge the fact that midst in (1), against in (2c), and whilst
in (3c) are controversial and may be included in the sufﬁxed category, as we
encounter in some publications. Exactly how relevant the historical reasons for
this are (midst as the superlative form of mid) for the synchronic (i.e. present-
day) description of English is very debatable.
In addition to these, a multiplicity of other triple codas is created via
sufﬁxation, the great majority of which are provided by /t, d/ of the simple
past tense and by /s, z/ of the plural, the possessive, and the third person 
singular of the simple present. Also noteworthy are the possibilities created 
by /T/, the ‘ordinal number morpheme’ (e.g. sixth [sIksT]) and the ending deriv-
ing nouns from adjectives (denominal morpheme) (e.g. warmth [wO@mT]). The
following list gives the possibilities of triple codas via sufﬁxation in terms of
general classes; thus, actually occurring clusters have many more combinations
than the examples cited here:
C1
C2
C3
Examples
1
nasal
obstruent
/t, d, s, z/
laments
2
/s/
stop
/t, d, s, z/
lisped
3
(a)
/l/
obstruent
/t, d, s, z/
gulped
(b)
/l/
nasal
/d, z/
ﬁlmed
4
(a)
/@/
obstruent
/t, d, s, z/
wharfs
(b)
/@/
/l/
/d, z/
curls
(c)
/@/
nasal
/d, z/
turned
5
obstruent
obstruent
obstruent (only /pts, kts, 
lifts
fts, pst, kst/)
It is important to point out that while nasals and liquids serve frequently 
as C1 in triple codas, and the sequences of /lk, mp, sk/ freely occur as double
codas in English, triple codas combining these elements are very restricted. 
Thus, it is a noteworthy fact that English lacks /@lk, @mp, @sk, lmp, nsk/ as
triple codas. Like double codas, clusters of obstruents in triple codas always
agree in voicing (e.g. /spt/ lisped).
Before we leave this section, it is appropriate to point out some modiﬁca-
tions that are commonly observed with respect to deletions in ﬁnal clusters.
When the word ending in a cluster is followed by a word that begins with a
consonant, the ﬁnal member of the cluster is deleted, as shown below:
/nd/
hand made
[hæn med]
(cf. hand out)
spend money
[spEn m√ni]
(cf. spend it)
/st/
next class
[nEks klæs]
(cf. next hour)
just now
[D √s naU]
(cf. just as)
/ft/
left street
[lEf st@it]
(cf. left arm)
This pattern repeats itself in words with sufﬁxes and in compounds, as in the
following:
/nd/
handsome
[hæns@m]
/st/
textless
[tEksl@s]
/ft/
softness
[sAfn@s]

146
SYLLABLES
However, if clusters are created by the addition of grammatical endings, this
simpliﬁcation is much less likely, if at all, to occur. Thus, we normally get the
following non-reduced forms:
/nd/
planned trip
[plænd t@Ip]
/st/
ﬁxed game
[fIkst gem]
/ft/
autographed book
[Ot@g@æft bUk]
Finally, mention should also be made of the creation of normally impermis-
sible clusters because of reduced vowel deletions in connected speech:
Slow speech
Fast speech
Topeka
[t@pik@]
[tpik@]
Canadian
[k@nedi@n]
[knedi@n]
marina
[m@@in@]
[m£in@]
photography
[f@tAg@@ﬁ]
[ftAg@@ﬁ]
potato
[p@teto]
[pteto]
malaria
[m@lE@i@]
[mlE@i@]
fanatics
[f@nætIks]
[fnætIks]
tomorrow
[t@mA@o]
[tmA@o]
Dialectal variations
The following are commonly found in AAVE: word-ﬁnal consonant clusters
ending in a stop may delete the ﬁnal member when both members of the 
cluster are either voiced (e.g. send [sEn], gold [gol]) or voiceless (e.g. act [æk],
ﬁst [fIs]). This process is not restricted to a single morpheme and may apply
across morpheme boundaries (e.g. sipped [sIp], dressed [d@Es]). Also, the
sequencing of ﬁnal ‘/s/ + stop’ may be transposed, as in ask [æks], grasp [g@æps].
Finally, the /t/ of initial /st@/ clusters may move back to /k/ (e.g. street [sk@it]).
In the deep South, this process may be extended to initial /t@/ clusters 
(e.g. tree [k@i]).
6.6
Written Syllabiﬁcation
People who wrote term papers, theses, or dissertations before the advent 
of computers, and thus of word-processing programs, had to deal with the 
problem of written syllabiﬁcation frequently because it was not possible to
arrange words on a given line ending perfectly at the right margin. Decisions
as to where to break the words were not always easy, as the writer could not
simply follow the breaks that she or he would make in spoken language. Thus,
one had two choices: (a) have a page full of written lines with uneven right-
margin appearance, or (b) consult a dictionary and break up the word accord-
ing to the dictionary suggestions. This appears to be a non-issue today due to
the availability of the ‘justiﬁed margin’ option in word processors. By the use

SYLLABLES
147
of this option, we do not have to break any words at the end of a line. If, toward
the end of a line, a word is too long or too short, the program either expands
or contracts the spacing between letters without causing any breaks. However,
as the following examples from printed media demonstrate, the problem is still
with us.
In the past weeks, boat-
ers have reported several
whale carcasses ﬂoating in the
waters off Big Pine Key.
(Miami Herald, May 24, 2003)
. . . Monetary Fund and the Arab
Fund for social and Economic devel-
opment, will have a seat on . . .
(New York Times, May 23, 2003)
Hypocrisy often is waist-deep in Wash-
ington. But the spectacle of people defend-
ing . . .
(Newsweek, May 12, 2003)
. . . According to Perry, dur-
ing the trip Venezia announced . . .
(Atlantic Monthly, April 2003)
. . . never has the Conservative
party that he joined as a youth needed sav-
ing more.
(Economist, December 21, 2002)
. . . one of the weirdest and least rep-
utable landscapes on Earth: the New
Jersey Meadowlands.
(National Geographic, February 2001)
. . . diplomatic campaign by
Saddam Hussein’s gov-
ernment – one that, up till now, has
continued to score success.
(World Press Review, February 2003)
. . . New homes
also are dictated by what we pay for the prop-
erty.
(Miami Herald, May 24, 2003)
. . . Cover each breast with anoth-
er duck breast, skin side up.
(Food and Wine, October 2001)
As you might have easily detected, as hundreds of native speakers I have
tested have, there are obvious discrepancies between the breaks that are in print
and the syllable breaks we use in the spoken language for the words in bold
type above and listed below.

148
SYLLABLES
Written breaks
Spoken syllabiﬁcations
boat.ers
[bo/t2z]
de.vel.op.ment
[dI/vE/l@p/m@nt]
Wash.ing.ton
[wA/SIè/t@n]
de.fend.ing
[di/fEn/dIè]
dur.ing
[dU/@Iè]
sav.ing
[se/vIè]
rep.u.ta.ble
[@E/pju/t@/b@l]
gov.ern.ment
[g√/v2n/m@nt]
prop.er.ty
[p@A/p2/ti]
an.oth.er
[@/n√/D2]
To make matters worse, we ﬁnd some morphologically related words with the
following:
gra.di.ent
[g@e/di/@nt]
grad.u.al
[g@æ/dZu/@l]
pe.nal
[pi/n@l]
pen.al.ty
[pE/n@l/ti]
mi.ner
[maI/n2]
min.er.al
[mI/n@/@@l]
pu.ni.tive
[pju/nI/tIv]
pun.ish
[p√/nIS]
While the native speakers’ spoken syllabiﬁcations are in complete agreement
with the written breaks suggested by the dictionaries for words in the ﬁrst 
column (gradient, penal, miner, and punitive), they are in total disagreement
for the words in the third column. We hear [g@æ/dZu/@l] (not [g@ædZ/u/@l]),
[mI/n@/@@l] (not [mIn/2/@l]), etc.
What is really unfortunate is that dictionary representations are not simply
suggestions for the breaks for written language, but are also claims, in phonetic
transcription, for the spoken syllabiﬁcations of the words. For this reason, and
the reason that this system is taught to elementary schoolchildren, we would
like to make the difference very clear and make practitioners aware of the entirely
different principles used in written syllabiﬁcation. This is an important issue,
because, as we will see in the next chapter, several stress rules of English are
sensitive to syllable structures, and these are entirely based on spoken syllables
and have nothing to do with the conventions of written breaks.
Written syllabiﬁcation seems to follow two principles:
(a)
If a word has preﬁxes and/or sufﬁxes, these cannot be divided.
(b) If the orthographic letter a, e, i, o, u, or y represents a long or short vowel
sound, then the following principles are applied: when one of these 
letters in the written form stands for a long vowel or a diphthong /i, e,
u, o, aI, aU, OI/, the next letter representing the consonant in the ortho-
graphy goes in the following syllable in written language. If, on the other
hand, these orthographic letters stand for a short vowel sound, then the
next letter goes with the preceding syllable. To verify this, we can look 
at pairs such as penal – penalty and miner – mineral. In the ﬁrst word of
the ﬁrst pair, the letter e represents the long vowel /i/ and the written
syllabiﬁcation is pe.nal (which happens to correspond to the spoken 
syllabiﬁcation [pi/n@l]). In the second word of the same pair, the same 

SYLLABLES
149
letter e stands for a short vowel, /E/, and thus the written syllabiﬁcation
is pen.al.ty. Similarly, in the second pair (miner – mineral), the letter i stands
for the diphthong /aI/ in the ﬁrst word (hence the syllabiﬁcation mi.ner,
which corresponds to the spoken [maI.n2]) and for the short vowel /I/
in the second (hence the syllabiﬁcation min.er.al).
We should also point out that the ﬁrst principle is the stronger one in that
even if the orthographic letter stands for a long vowel or a diphthong, the
integrity of a preﬁx or a sufﬁx is maintained. This will be clear if we look at
the word boaters, which is syllabiﬁed as boat.ers in the written language.
Although the orthographic representation of the ﬁrst syllable stands for a long
vowel in speech, [o], the following letter, t, does not go into the following 
syllable in the written representation, and the only reason for this is the
sufﬁxation that this word has. Similarly, in the word saving, the written break
is given as sav.ing, which, despite its total conﬂict with the spoken version
([se/vIè]), has to follow the integrity of the sufﬁx -ing. For an example of a
conﬂict created by the integrity of a preﬁx, we can cite the written syllabiﬁcation
of un.able, as opposed to its preferred spoken syllabiﬁcation [√/ne/b@l].
6.7
Syllable Weight and Ambisyllabicity
Although the ﬁrst principle of written syllabiﬁcation (the integrity of preﬁxes
and sufﬁxes) creates severe clashes between written and spoken syllabiﬁca-
tions, and will not be commented on further, the second principle, which relates
to some orthographic letters and the vowel sounds they stand for, may have
some relevance to speakers’ responses to some indeterminate spoken syl-
labiﬁcations. If we ask for the spoken syllabiﬁcation of the following words
medicine
federal
origin
positive
happen
Canada
ﬁnish
river
funny
punish
we may receive different reactions from native speakers of English.
While several speakers go along with the syllabiﬁcations based on the 
maximum onset principle and give [mE/d@/s@n], [hæ/p@n], [pA/z@/t@v], etc.,
some others may not feel very comfortable with such divisions and may 
suggest the inclusion of the consonants after the vowel in the ﬁrst syllable as
the coda of that syllable. There are some obvious similarities between these
words and the ones we discussed in relation to written syllabiﬁcation above.
This is related to the kind of vowel sounds that are represented by the ortho-
graphic letters a, e, i, o, u. In all these words, the vowel sounds /E, O, æ, I, √/
(from top to bottom of the list of examples) represented by the orthographic
letters in question are in the stressed syllables, and the problem is related to
what happens to the consonant following that vowel. This issue is directly related

150
SYLLABLES
to stress and syllable weight. Although stress will be treated in detail in the
next chapter, we will brieﬂy deal with some points here that are relevant to
the issue we are focusing on.
Syllable weight is an important factor in stress assignment in languages. The
weight of a syllable is determined by its rhyme structure. In English, a syl-
lable is light if it has a non-branching rhyme (a short vowel and no coda in its
rhyme, as in the ﬁrst syllable of around); it is heavy if it has a branching rhyme
(a short vowel followed by a coda (simple or complex), or a long vowel or a
diphthong with or without a following coda). This can be shown as follows:
Rhyme of a light syllable
Rhyme of a heavy syllable
short V: a.mong
short V + coda: net, nest
long V/diph. + (coda): seed, sea, side
o
N
E
C
O
(a)
R
n
t
o
N
E
C
O
(b)
R
n
st
o
N
aI
C
O
(d)
R
s
d
o
N
i
O
(c)
R
s
In (a), (b), and (d), the branching rhymes are obvious; in (c), the syllable is heavy
because it has a branching nucleus.
Having made this digression to explain syllable weight, we can conclude that
heavy syllables attract stress, and essentially, in English, no stressed syllable
may be light. With this information, we are now ready to go back to the prob-
lematic cases we considered above. In medicine, happen, ﬁnish, etc., we have
a conﬂict between the maximal onset principle and stress. While the maximal
onset principle dictates that the ﬁrst syllables of each of these words be light,
the stress that falls on this very syllable contradicts the principle that light syl-
lables cannot receive stress. This is the reason why some speakers are not com-
fortable with the syllabic divisions in these words. In such cases, linguists invoke
the concept of ambisyllabicity, whereby the consonant in question is treated
as behaving both as the coda of the preceding syllable and as the onset of the
following syllable at the same time. To put it succinctly, we can say that a con-
sonant that is (part of) a permissible onset (cluster) is ambisyllabic if it occurs
immediately after a short vowel /I, E, æ, √, U, O/A/ (i.e. lax vowels plus [O/A])
that forms the nucleus of a stressed syllable. We can represent this as follows:
[h æ p @ n]
O
R
o
N
C
n
O
R
o
N
C
h
æ
p

SYLLABLES
151
This is a consequence of the tendency for a stressed rhyme to be heavy 
(i.e. branching).
6.8
Practical Applications
The constraints we have examined in relation to the sequencing of sounds in
syllables via sonority have far-reaching implications in many applied situations,
such as in normal phonological development, in clinical populations, and in
foreign language learning. For example, the process of consonant cluster
reduction, which is commonly observed in all three populations mentioned above,
is far from being haphazard. A target such as play [ple] is much more likely
to be reduced to [pe] than to the alternative [le]. The reason for this is that the
former is the more unmarked (more expected) one because it provides a
higher jump in sonority from the single onset to the nucleus (in [pe] the sonor-
ity index of /p/ = 1, the sonority index of /e/ = 9; thus the resulting sequence
is a change from 1 to 9; [le], on the other hand, would result in a change from
6 to 9 in sonority indices). Since a CV sequence is more natural when the 
contrast between the C and the V is greater, [pe] is the more valuable of the
two logical alternatives. Support for the validity of such a constraint is not 
hard to ﬁnd in developing phonologies. Chin (1996) observed several children
with phonological disorders whose modiﬁcation of target onset clusters was
governed by the principle reviewed above. In one instance, the subject applied
consonant cluster reduction to all targets with #sC clusters (e.g. stove [sov],
snow [so], etc.) while not reducing other target clusters (e.g. play [ple], brush
[bw√s], etc.). Looking at several examples, Chin concluded that the child
applied the reduction process to those targets where the sonority difference
between C1 and C2 was less than 3 (i.e. stove 3 to 1 = −2, snow 3 to 5 = 2).
Targets that had a difference of 3 in sonority from C1 to C2 (play 1 to 6 = 5,
sleep 3 to 6 = 3, brush 2 to 7 = 5) were not subject to reduction.
Another subject revealed the following patterns:
(a)
stop + approximant →stop (twin [dIn], drum [d√m], play [pe])
(b)
fricative + sonorant →fricative (few [fu], swim [sIm], shrub [S√b])
(c)
fricative + stop →stop (spoon [bun], stove [dov], sky [daI])
The child’s modiﬁcation patterns do not allow us to state whether C1 or C2 of
the cluster is deleted, as C1 is deleted in (a) and (b), but C2 is the one that is
deleted in (c). If, however, we analyze the results in terms of sonority rises, we
see that the behavior of the subject is very regular in that he follows the path
resulting in the greatest jump in sonority from the resulting C to the nucleus
V. Thus, while the observed simpliﬁcation of the target drum is [d√m], with a
movement from 2 to 10 in sonority, the alternative, [@√m], would have
resulted in 7 to 10, which is a much smaller jump. Similarly, in sky becoming
[daI], we have a jump from 2 to 10, while the alternative, [saI], would have
given a smaller (3 to 10) jump.

152
SYLLABLES
Sonority-driven modiﬁcation of onset clusters has also been observed in 
aphasic patients. Blumstein (1978), invoking the concept of sonority for the 
erroneous cluster formation in paraphasias, notes that the addition of, for 
example, a liquid in an erroneous production goes to the left of a vowel, thus
forming the sequence ‘obstruent + liquid + vowel’, which is in accordance 
with the sonority sequencing principle. Beland et al. (1990) noted that their 
patient’s deletion of one member of the sequence ‘obstruent + liquid + V’ was
always the liquid, resulting in the maximum jump to ‘obstruent + V’.
Christman (1992) also found sonority to be inﬂuential in the syllable produc-
tion patterns of jargon aphasics. More recently, Romani and Calabrese (1998)
provided further support for sonority-driven patterns by showing their 40-year-
old Italian aphasic patient’s modiﬁcation of #CCV sequences. By producing
‘obstruent + liquid + V’ targets as ‘obstruent + V’, ‘obstruent + /j/ + V’ targets
as ‘obstruent + V’, and ‘nasal + /j/ + V’ targets as ‘nasal + V’, the patient deleted
the segment of higher sonority in the target cluster and produced a sequence
with a maximum rise in sonority from the onset to the nucleus. Telugu-speaking
children with prelingual hearing loss have been reported to have greater difﬁ-
culty in CV syllables in which the sonority jump is small (e.g. ‘glide + V’) than
those in which the sonority jump is bigger (e.g. ‘obstruent + V’) (Duggirala
Vasanta, personal communication).
That such principles are ﬁrmly grounded can also be shown in normally 
developing children. Ohala (1999) examined the productions of CCVC targets
with 16 children ages 1;9–3;2. The prediction was that when the CCVC targets
were reduced to CVC sequences, the deleted member of the double onset would
be the one that had a higher sonority index, because its deletion could provide
the remaining sequence of the single onset to the nucleus with the maximal
rise in sonority. The overall results conﬁrm the predictions in that children pre-
served the least sonorous consonant member of the onset cluster and created
the maximal rise in sonority. Yavas and Someillan (2005) tested the same hypo-
thesis with a group of Spanish–English bilingual children with target #sC
sequences. It was hypothesized that among the possible sequences of English
#sC clusters (‘/s/ + stop’ sky, ‘/s/ + nasal’ snail, ‘/s + l/’ sleep, ‘/s + w/’ swim),
subjects’ success rates would be higher for the targets in which the sonority
jump from C1 to C2 was higher. The results conﬁrmed the hypothesis over-
whelmingly, at least when C2 was a continuant, in that the easiest target was
/sw/ (sonority jump from 3 to 8), followed by /sl/ (sonority jump from 3 to
6). The difference between the clusters in which the C2 was a non-continuant
(i.e. ‘/s/ + stop’ and ‘/s/ + nasal’) did not reveal any signiﬁcance. Further sup-
porting evidence is provided by Yavas and Barlow (2006), and Yavas (2010).
The ease or difﬁculty of acquisition of onset clusters invoking sonority
indices has also been shown in foreign language phonology. Broselow and 
Finer (1991) examined the data from 24 native speakers of Korean and 8 native 
speakers of Japanese with respect to their productions of the target English 
/p@, b@, f@/, /pj, bj, fj/. The hypothesis was that clusters with a greater sonority
jump from C1 to C2 (e.g. /pj/ from 1 to 8) would be less problematic than 
clusters with a smaller sonority difference (e.g. /f@/ from 3 to 7). In general,

SYLLABLES
153
the error rates of the subjects supported the predictions (for more on this in
foreign language phonology, see section 8.4).
If maximum rise in sonority is the most unmarked (expected) sequencing
from the onset to the nucleus, minimum descent in sonority is the most
unmarked (expected) sequencing for a movement from the nucleus to the coda.
The reason for this is that the most common (natural/unmarked) syllable type
is codaless (CV), where there is no descent in sonority. Thus, when we have a
coda, the smaller the descent from the nucleus the more valuable it is. That
this principle is at work can be seen in developing phonologies. Ohala (1999)
examined the coda cluster modiﬁcations of children ages 1;9–3;2 in which CVCC
targets were modiﬁed to CVC. She hypothesized that the member of the coda
cluster to be deleted would be the one that was lower in sonority, so that the
remaining higher-sonority item would provide the minimum descent from the
nucleus. Thus, for example, a sequence such as [ma@p] was expected to reduce
to [ma@] (sonority shift of 10 to 7 from the nucleus to the coda), and not as
[map] (from 10 to 1). The results were supportive of the hypothesis in that 
the expected reductions were made more than 50 percent of the time, and the
unexpected modiﬁcations totaled only around 16 percent.
Evidence for behavior governed by the principles of sonority also comes from
second language phonology data. Hansen (2001) examined the acquisition of
English codas by Mandarin speakers. In dealing with three-member target English
codas, the learners had the greatest difﬁculty with clusters that violate the require-
ment of gradual lowering in sonority from the nucleus to the members of the
cluster. Triple codas such as ‘liquid + stop + fricative’ (e.g. /lps/ alps, /@dz/
words) and ‘nasal + stop + fricative’ (e.g. /nts/ prints, /ndz/ bands) have sonor-
ity descending from V to C1 to C2, but rising from C2 to C3. Learners modiﬁed
such targets much more frequently than the unmarked codas that follow 
gradual sonority fall (e.g. /@st/ ﬁrst, /@ld/ world). Also signiﬁcant were the
resulting two-member codas when subjects reduced the target CCC# sequence
by deleting one of the consonants; all resulting two-member codas obeyed the
demands of the Sonority Sequencing Principle in that C1 was higher in sonor-
ity than C2 (for more on this in foreign language phonology, see section 8.4).
SUMMARY
In this chapter, we looked at the syllable structure of English. First we exam-
ined the hierarchical internal structure of the unit, which has the constituents
‘onset’ and ‘rhyme’, the latter of which can be examined in its components
‘nucleus’ and ‘coda’. We also looked at the syllabiﬁcation rules of the spoken
and written languages, which can be very different in certain cases. In syllable
phonotactics, we dealt with the sequencing restrictions in English and pointed
out various onset and coda consonant cluster patterns. Finally, we looked at
syllable weight, which is determined by the rhyme structure, and ambisyllab-
icity, whereby the same consonant behaves both as a coda of the preceding 
syllable and as the onset of the following syllable at the same time.

154
SYLLABLES
EXERCISES
1.
In section 6.5.6, several patterns for non-sufﬁxed triple codas are 
discussed. Which of these (if any) violate(s) the Sonority Sequencing
Principle? State the example(s) and your rationale.
2.
Do the same as above for sufﬁxed triple codas.
3.
Which of the following would qualify for ambisyllabicity? Circle the
word(s), state your rationale, and give the tree diagram(s).
metric, regime, anecdote, camera, integrity, person, panic, majesty,
Africa, rival, pity, study, radical, legal, action, many, liquid, penalty,
garbage, picnic, spinach
4.
Consider the following:
Short V + CC
Long V/diph. + C
Long V/diph. + CC
(a)
pimp
(b)
wipe
(c)
mind
BUT
* [maImb]
lint
light
grind
* [maIèg]
sink
bike
* [g@aImb]
weep
* [g@aIèg]
seed
beak
While certain combinations are possible, certain others (in c) are not
allowed. State the generalization.
5.
In section 6.5.6, we saw that, because of reduced vowel deletions, 
several normally impermissible consonant clusters can be created
(e.g. photography [ftAg@@ﬁ]). Find ﬁve examples of such clusters.
6.
English ﬁnal consonant clusters are simpliﬁed by deleting the ﬁnal
member of the cluster in certain contexts (e.g. /nd/ in sand piles
[sæn paIlz], /st/ in ﬁrst class [f2s klæs]). The same is not possible in
other contexts (e.g. /nd/ in canned vegetables [kænd vE . . . ], /st/ 
in missed goals [mIst golz]). State the generalization and give three
examples for each possibility.

SYLLABLES
155
7.
Transcribe the following (about “English in America”) from J. Jenkins,
World Englishes (London: Routledge, 2002).
Walter Raleigh’s expedition of 1584 to America was the earliest from 
the British Isles to the New World, though it did not result in a 
permanent settlement. The voyagers landed on the coast of North 
Carolina near Roanoke Island, but fell into conﬂict with the native 
Indian population and then mysteriously disappeared altogether. In 
1607, the ﬁrst permanent colonist arrived and settled in Jamestown, 
Virginia, to be followed in 1620 by a group of Puritans and others on 
the Mayﬂower. The latter group landed further north, settling at 
what is now Plymouth, Massachusetts, in New England. Both settlements
spread rapidly and attracted further migrants during the years that 
followed. Because of their different linguistic backgrounds, there 
were immediately certain differences in the accents of the two groups 
of settlers. Those in Virginia came mainly from the West of England 
and brought with them their characteristic rhotic /r/ and voiced /s/ 
sounds. On the other hand, those who settled in New England were 
mainly from the east of England, where these features were not a part 
of the local accent.

7
Stress and Intonation
7.1
Introduction
Stress is a cover term for the prosodic features of duration, intensity, and pitch;
thus, the prominence of stressed syllables is generally manifested by their 
characteristics of being longer, louder, and higher in pitch than unstressed 
syllables. From the speaker’s point of view, this corresponds to the amount 
of effort expended, while from the hearer’s point of view, it is the perceptual
prominence.
As mentioned in chapter 1, English has variable stress. It is characteristic of
Germanic languages for any syllable in a polysyllabic word to be able to carry
the stress. For example, in the following trisyllabic nouns, article, tomato, and
kangaroo, the stress moves from the ﬁrst to the second and then to the third
syllable, respectively ([A@tIkl], [t@méQo], [kæèg@@ú]).
In addition to variability, English stress is said to be mobile. This can be shown
in morphologically related words in which the stress shifts on to different 
syllables:
democrat [dem@k@æt]
democracy [d@mAk@@si]
democratic [dEm@k@æ´ tIk]
origin [O´@@dZ@n]
original [O@ídZ@n@l]
originality [O@@dZ@næ´ l@Qi]
constitute 
constitutional
constitutionality
[kAnst@tut]
[kAnst@túS@nl]
[kAnst@tuS@næ´ l@Qi]
photograph [fót@g@æf]
photography [f@tAg@@ﬁ]
photographic [fot@g@æ´ fIk]
diplomat [dípl@mæt]
diplomacy [dIplóm@si]
diplomatic [dIpl@mæ´ tIk]
Although the above discussion may suggest a highly variable and unpre-
dictable situation, this does not mean that there are no rules or principles 
underlying the stress patterns of English. It should be noted, however, that these
regularities are tendencies rather than airtight rules. It is a characteristic of English
that the grammatical category or morphological structure of words frequently
affects the stress patterns. The topic under discussion has been treated differ-
ently in different books and manuals. Some have detailed formulations to 
cover several exceptions, others present more practically oriented descriptions
that are more general in nature. Some count syllables and do not make any
seven
Applied English Phonology, Second Edition       Mehmet Yavaş 
© 2011 Mehmet Yavaş. ISBN: 978-1-444-33322-0 

STRESS
AND
INTONATION
157
distinctions among word classes, such as nouns and verbs; others separate word
classes but do not count syllables. Each one of these approaches has certain
beneﬁts and drawbacks. The approach followed in this book will resemble 
several of those described in different respects.
We will ﬁrst look at simple words and then examine the forms with afﬁxes.
There are difﬁculties regarding the description of stress patterns because of excep-
tions that are the results of events in the history of English. While many words
retain their Germanic stress patterns, many others have been acquired through
historical events; one such event is the Norman Conquest, which is responsible
for the plethora of French vocabulary and Romance stress patterns. In addition,
religion and scholarship have had signiﬁcant inﬂuence in securing the original
stress patterns of vocabulary from Greek and Latin.
In some books, in order to deal with certain exceptions, descriptions invoke
some morphological parsing that will not be followed here. This is especially
true for some so-called ‘preﬁxes’. For example, one might encounter the
underlined portions of the following words, award, surprise, proposal, forget, obtain,
admit, intend, compel, treated as preﬁxes. Some of these preﬁxes are of Germanic
origin and others are of Latin origin. However, if we are interested in the descrip-
tion of present-day English, it would be very difﬁcult, if not impossible, to think
that such separations are real for the users of the language because the non-
preﬁx portions of the above, (a)ward, (sur)prise, etc., are not to be treated as
existing roots. Thus, in this book, these forms will be treated as one morpheme.
Before we start our account of English stress, it will be useful to remember
the conditions of a stressable syllable. As we stated in chapter 6, syllable weight
is an important factor in stress assignment in that heavy syllables attract
stress. The weight of a syllable is determined by its rhyme structure. If the rhyme
is non-branching (a short vowel, and no coda), the syllable is light. If, on the
other hand, the rhyme is branching (has a short vowel, except [@], which is weight-
less and cannot carry stress, followed by a coda (simple or complex), or has a
long vowel or a diphthong with or without a following coda), the syllable 
is heavy. It is also useful to deﬁne the terms ult (the last syllable), penult (the
syllable before the ult), and antepenult (the syllable before the penult), which
will be used for the location of the syllables in a word. These can be shown in
the following word, probability:
[p @ A . b @ . b I .
l @ .
t i]
ante-
penult
ult
penult
7.2
Noun and Adjective Stress
There seem to be sufﬁcient commonalities between the stress patterns of
nouns and adjectives that they warrant a single grouping. In disyllabics, the
default stress is on the penult. In a 20,000-monomorphemic-word sample
reported by Hammond (1999: 194), both disyllabic nouns and adjectives reveal
penult stress over 80 percent of the time. More precisely, 81.7 percent (2,986

158
STRESS
AND
INTONATION
out of 3,652) of nouns and 81 percent (1,047 out of 1,294) of disyllabic adjec-
tives followed this pattern. Below are some examples from both categories:
Noun
Adjective
ágent
ábsent
bálance
árid
bállad
cómmon
bóttom
ﬂúent
bóttle
áctive
cábbage
éarly
cárrot
próper
chícken
pérfect
cóokie
sólid
cóuntry
hónest
émpire
réady
dímple
súdden
fáther
búsy
húsband
ámple
spínach
vúlgar
zípper
yéllow
The exceptions to the penult rule fall into two groups. The ﬁrst contains ex-
amples with weightless (unstressable) penults, because they have [@] nuclei, and
thus are stressed on the ﬁnal syllable (ult) by default; for this reason, they might
be considered exceptions:
Noun
Adjective
appéal
banál
ballóon
corrúpt
canóe
enoúgh
Brazíl
remóte
canál
divíne
gazélle
alíve
giráffe
compléte
Japán
inténse
Tibét
seréne
machíne
secúre
paráde
sincére
The second group constitutes the real exceptions because they are stressed on
the ﬁnal syllable (ult) despite the fact that they have stressable penults with
branching rhymes:
typhóon
mundáne
sardíne
obscúre
shampóo
okáy
antíque
robúst
July´
obscéne

STRESS
AND
INTONATION
159
In trisyllabic and longer nouns, we formulate the following: stress penult if
stressable (heavy/branching rhyme); if not stressable, then stress the next left
heavy syllable. We show this with the following examples:
Three syllables
More than three syllables
tomáto
ábdomen
barracúda
aróma
álgebra
aspáragus
diplóma
ánimal
apócalypse
horízon
búffalo
basílica
compúter
cómedy
thermómeter
bonánza
vítamin
harmónica
diréctor
áccident
expériment
agénda
África
astrónomy
enígma
órigin
hippopótamus
The words in the leftmost group are stressed on the penult because their penults
are stressable (the ﬁrst ﬁve qualify for their long vowel or diphthong nuclei,
and the last four because of the closed rhyme). The words in the second tri-
syllabic group receive their stresses on the antepenult because their penults are
not stressable (all with [@] nuclei). The rightmost group consists of words that
have more than three syllables, but the stress rule remains the same. The ﬁrst
word, barracuda, is stressed on the penult, as it contains a stressable penult,
[u]. The remaining words (seven with four syllables, and the last one with ﬁve
syllables) all have unstressable penults ([@] nuclei) and thus are stressed on
the antepenult. As for the frequency of such patterns, Hammond reports that
this regularity accounts for over 90 percent of nouns (42 percent or 859 out of
2,074 trisyllabics have penult stress, and 49.5 percent or 1,027 out of 2,074 are
antepenult-stressed because of unstressable penult). The exceptions, exem-
pliﬁed by the following, are below 10 percent:
clarinét
cavalíer
enginéer
kangaróo
chimpanzée
serenáde
gasolíne
cigarétte
magazíne
warrantée
mayonnáise
These examples, mostly borrowings from French, retain the original ﬁnal
stresses. Most of these exceptional words have unstressable penults, and thus
the rule predicts that the stress would go on the antepenult instead of the ult,
a tendency revealed by several native speakers for the last 4–5 words on 
the list.

160
STRESS
AND
INTONATION
Some other trisyllabic exceptions, on the other hand, receive antepenult stress
despite the fact that they have stressable penults, as shown in:
álien
árduous
gálaxy
mánia
périod
There is another group of words, trisyllabic or longer, that deserves atten-
tion. The words in this group, overwhelmingly coming from place-names, are
stressed on the penult, despite the fact that it is not heavy, as exempliﬁed below:
(a)
Yokoháma
(b)
vendétta
(c)
Calcútta
(d)
Louisiána
Milwáukee
Viénna
Kentúcky
Montána
Granáda
Venezuéla
Indiána
Seáttle
Tallahássee
The stressed penults of these words (a)–(d) do not have branching rhymes (the
rhymes are /A/, /E/, /√/, and /æ/ respectively).
There are some other words, again mostly place-names, which also carry the
stress on their non-heavy penult:
(e)
Morócco
(f)
Cincinnáti
Osáka
Havána
Chicágo
Carácas
Guatemála
Nicarágua
Granáda
Savánnah
cantáta
Alabáma
The penults in words (e) and (f), /A/ and /æ/ respectively, do not constitute
heavy syllables, but are stressed, nevertheless. However, these words are
somewhat different than the violations observed in words (a)–(d), because words
in (e) and (f) do not have any other heavy syllable to the left of the penult
(they all have [@] nuclei). In other words, the stress is on the penult by default.
Trisyllabic adjectives, of which there are far fewer, also show a similar pattern
to that of nouns. Hammond reports that over 90 percent of trisyllabic adjectives
follow the expected path: 75.3 percent (502 out of 666) with penult stress, and
15 percent (100 out of 666) with antepenult stress because of unstressable penult.
7.3
Verb Stress
If nouns and adjectives have the penult as their pivot, verb focus is on the ult.
The general tendency is as follows: stress ult if heavy (branching rhyme); if
not, go to the next left heavy syllable, as shown in the following:

STRESS
AND
INTONATION
161
Heavy ult stressed
Unstressable ult, thus penult stressed
achíeve
bálance
admít
blóssom
agrée
bóther
annoúnce
dístance
confíne
fúrnish
digést
hárvest
inténd
púnish
interfére
fígure
impórt
súrface
predíct
vísit
reply´
díffer
With the above generalization, we can account for over 99 percent of the stresses
of disyllabic words (Hammond reports 47.6 percent, or 987 out of 2,072, with
heavy ult stressed, and 52.3 percent, or 1,085 out of 2,072, as penult-stressed
because of unstressable ult). The few exceptions to the general tendency can
be exempliﬁed by the following, where penult is stressed despite the fact that
the verb has a heavy ult:
cópy
díagram
ádvertise
ánalyze
réscue
múltiply
There are not many trisyllabic verbs; however, they generally are pre-
dictable by the above rule. Hammond’s data state the following distribution:
39.5 percent (151 out of 378) heavy ult-stressed, 40 percent (157 out of 378) 
penult-stressed because of unstressable ult, and 18.5 percent (70 out of 378) 
antepenult-stressed because of unstressable ult and unstressable penult.
Before we conclude this section, it is worth noting that English has dozens
of orthographically identical word-pairs differentiated by stress as nouns
(penult stress) or verbs (ult stress), as exempliﬁed in the following:
abstract
compress
conduct
address
conﬂict
contrast
ally
discharge
extract
combat
implant
increase
convict
project
refund
export
suspect
progress
import
rebel
transfer
insert
subject
reject
insult
retard
escort
permit
protest
refuse

162
STRESS
AND
INTONATION
Although noun–verb shift is accomplished by a shift in stressed syllable in 
some of these (e.g. import, insult), in many others, the difference of stress is
also accompanied by vowel reduction in the unstressed syllable, and thus these
noun–verb pairs, although homographs, are not homophonous. For example:
abstract
N
[æ´ bst@ækt]
V [@bst@æ´ kt]
convict
N
[kAnvIkt]
V
[k@nvíkt]
protest
N
[p@ótEst]
V [p@@test]
refuse
N
[@efjus]
V [@@fjúz]
Finally, not all two-syllable words that are both nouns and verbs follow the
stress-switch rule. Some have the stress on the penult (e.g. accept, silence, triumph,
harvest, promise) and others have it on the ult (e.g. surprise, delay, result) for
both nouns and verbs.
7.4
Secondary Stress
So far our discussion has been around primary stress (or ‘strong stress’). In
texts describing the sound patterns of English, it is commonplace to see men-
tion made of a secondary stressed (or ‘lightly stressed’) syllable. This refers to
situations where, in many words (especially longer words), there is prominence
of more than one syllable. For example, if we consider the words photography
and photographic, we see different patterns; while in the ﬁrst word [f@tAg@@ﬁ],
we have one prominent syllable (second or ‘antepenult’ syllable), we have two
prominent syllables in the morphologically related word [fot@g@æfIk] (ﬁrst and
third, or ‘pre-antepenult’ and ‘penult’). When we have more than one promin-
ent syllable in a word, we speak of a secondary stress, which is exempliﬁed
by the ﬁrst syllable of the word photographic.
In agreement with Ladefoged’s (2001a) account of stress patterns, this book
will likewise treat the difference between the primary stress and the secondary
stress as a difference in pitch instead of stress. In other words, both syllables
(primary and secondary stressed) have prominence, and their difference
results from the superimposition of the pitch pattern; the syllable that is com-
monly known as the primary stressed syllable is the one with the major pitch
change. Thus, both the ﬁrst and the third syllables of photographic have
prominences, but only the third will show the major pitch change, which is
called the tonic accent. Thus, we can say that (a) an English syllable is either
stressed (+stress) or unstressed (−stress); (b) if there is only one prominent 
syllable in the word, then it necessarily is the stressed syllable and has the tonic
accent, while if there is more than one prominent (stressed) syllable, then only
one of them will have the major pitch-changing ‘tonic accent’; and (c) a
stressed syllable necessarily has a full vowel (no vowel reduction can take place
in a stressed syllable); thus, vowel reduction is a question relevant only for
unstressed syllables. We can illustrate these dependencies in the following 
diagram:

STRESS
AND
INTONATION
163
Thus, we have the following combinatory possibilities for English syllables:
Primary stressed syllable: +stress, +tonic accent, +full V.
Secondary stressed syllable: +stress, −tonic accent, +full V.
Unstressed syllable: −stress, −tonic accent, +/−full V.
Let us now look at the two words we have been discussing:
[f@. tA. g@@. ﬁ]
[fò. t@. g@æ´ . f@k]
Stress
−
+
−
−
+
−
+
−
Tonic accent
−
+
−
−
−
−
+
−
Full V
−
+
−
+
+
−
+
−
In photography, we have one prominent syllable, which necessarily carries the
tonic accent. Since it is the stressed syllable, it will also have a full vowel. Among
the remaining three unstressed syllables, only the last one has a full vowel; the
others have reduced vowels. In the second word, photographic, we have two
prominent syllables, the second of which carries the major pitch change (i.e.
tonic accent). As suggested by Ladefoged, this system can easily be converted
into a traditional numerical system. A syllable with three pluses will get 1, two
pluses will get 2, one plus will get 3, and the syllable with no pluses will get
4. Thus, the numbers for photography will be 4 1 4 3, and for photographic
2 4 1 4.
Some students, while not having any problem in detecting the syllable with
the primary stress (syllable with the tonic accent), do have difﬁculties in iden-
tifying the ones with secondary stress. The following generalizations, some more
consistent than others, are usually helpful in detecting the secondary stress:
(a)
The longest sequence of reduced vowels in an English word is predomin-
antly two.
(b) A full vowel will have stress
unless
–
it is in the ﬁnal open syllable;
–
the word has two other more prominent syllables;
–
it is one of the alternating cases of /i, o, u/ with [@] (see section 4.7).
(c)
In general, secondary stress comes before the primary stress (major pitch
change tends to be on the last stressed syllable).
If there is only one syllable before the primary stress, this is usually unaccented
(so as not to place two stressed syllables next to one another) (e.g. divinity
Syllable
+full V
−stress
+stress
+tonic acc.
−tonic acc.
−full V (reduced, i.e. [@])

164
STRESS
AND
INTONATION
[d@.vi.n@.ti], urbanity [2.bô.n@.ti]). However, there are exceptions (e.g. mar-
tini [m`A@.tí.ni], cucumber [kjú.kVm.b2]).
When there are more than two syllables before the primary stress, a secondary
accent will fall two or three syllables back according to the presence of a full
vowel (e.g. gratiﬁcation [g@*.t@.f@.ké.S@n], bibliography [bI.bli.A.g@@.ﬁ]).
We can now analyze the word pronunciation in light of what has been said
so far:
[p@@. n√n. si. e. S@n]
Stress
−
+
−+
−
Tonic accent
−
−
−+
−
Full V
−
+
+ +
−
The second and the fourth syllables are the prominent ones and receive +stress
and consequently +full V; all others receive −stress. The fourth syllable, in addi-
tion, is the major pitch-changing syllable and receives +tonic accent. All others
are −for this feature. Two of the −stress syllables (the ﬁrst and the last) have
reduced vowels, [@], and get −for full V, whereas the third syllable has a + for
full V because of /i/. This word is quite typical in many respects: a long, ﬁve-
syllable word with two prominent syllables; the primary and the secondary
stresses are not next to one another; and the ﬁrst syllable, even if uttered with
a full vowel /o/, will not be eligible for the secondary stress because it is 
alternating with [@].
In some long words (four syllables or more), we may encounter two 
syllables with secondary stresses (e.g. Afghanistan [*f.gô.n@.st*n], recon-
ciliation [@f.k@n.sI.li.é.S@n], excommunicate [fk.sk@.mjú.n@.kèt], expugnatory
[fk.spvg.n@.tc.@i].
Finally, mention should be made of another group of words in relation to
secondary stress. While we generally see secondary stresses in longer words
(three syllables and longer), there are some disyllabic words with both syl-
lables stressed. As shown below, both logical possibilities are entertained:
Primary–secondary (post-tonic secondary stress): cáshèw, cráyòn, própàne,
, fránchìse, émpìre, áspèct, áccènt, éncòre, ássèt, 
.
Secondary–primary
(pre-tonic secondary stress): bàmbóo, sàrdíne, hòtél, 
, tàbóo, tràpéze, sùpréme, ràccóon
7.5
Afﬁxes
If the basic rules of stress looked rather untidy and replete with exceptions,
the rules accompanying afﬁxes can easily be said to overshadow the mono-
morphemic roots. Since the addition of preﬁxes does not change word stress,
our presentation will be on the varying effects of sufﬁxes on word stress. 
We can classify the sufﬁxes as:
typhóon
hygìene
cyclòne

STRESS
AND
INTONATION
165
(a)
stress-bearing (attracting) sufﬁxes;
(b) stress-shifting (ﬁxing) sufﬁxes;
(c)
stress-neutral sufﬁxes.
The common element between groups (a) and (b), when added to a root, 
is that they change the location of the stress from its original position. Stress-
bearing sufﬁxes attract the stress to themselves, while stress-shifting sufﬁxes
move the stress to some other syllable. Groups (b) and (c) have the common
element of not carrying stress.
7.5.1
Stress-bearing (attracting) sufﬁxes
As stated above, these sufﬁxes attract stress. Below are some common deriva-
tional sufﬁxes:
-ade
lémon – lemonáde
-aire
míllion – millionaíre
-ation
réalize – realizátion
-ee
ábsent – absentée (exception: commíttee)
-eer
móuntain – mountainéer
-ese
Japán – Japanése
-esque
pícture – picturésque
-ette
kítchen – kitchenétte
-itis
lárynx – laryngítis
-iﬁc
hónor – honoríﬁc
Expectedly, these stress-bearing sufﬁxes always constitute heavy syllables.
The items above with sufﬁxes should not be confused with the same/similar-
looking monomorphemic forms such as brigade, jamboree, grotesque, brunette, 
bursitis, etc.
7.5.2
Stress-neutral sufﬁxes
These sufﬁxes never make any difference to the stress pattern of the resulting
word. Such sufﬁxes include all eight inﬂectional sufﬁxes (plural; possessive;
third person singular present tense -s; progressive -ing; past -ed; past parti-
ciple -en/-ed; comparative -er; and superlative -est), and several derivational ones:
-al
arríve – arríval
-ant
ascénd – ascéndant
-cy
célibate – célibacy
-dom
frée – fréedom
-er
pláy – pláyer
-ess
líon – líoness
-ful
gráce – gráceful
-hood
nátion – nátionhood

166
STRESS
AND
INTONATION
-ish
gréen – gréenish
-ism
álcohol – álcoholism
-ist
húman – húmanist
-ive
submít – submíssive
-ize
spécial – spécialize
-less
bóttom – bóttomless
-ly
fríend – fríendly
-ment
aménd – améndment
-ness
fránk – fránkness
-ship
fríend – fríendship
-some
búrden – búrdensome
-wise
clóck – clóckwise
-th
grów – grówth
-ty
cértain – cértainty
-y
sílk – sílky
We should point out that the last item, adjective-forming sufﬁx -y, should 
not be treated in the same way as the noun-forming -y, which shifts the 
stress to the antepenultimate, as in homophone – homophony, photograph –
photography, etc.
While the above-listed sufﬁxes do not normally change the location of the
stress, when several unstressed syllables are piled up to the right of the stress,
we see that the stress moves to the antepenult.
móment – mómentary
but
momentárily
7.5.3
Stress-shifting (ﬁxing) sufﬁxes
A multiplicity of derivational sufﬁxes, when added to a root, shift the stress
from its original position to the syllable immediately preceding the sufﬁx. Below
are some of the common ones in this group:
-ean
Áristotle – Aristotélian
-ial
súbstance – substántial
-ian
líbrary – librárian
-ical
geómetry – geométrical
-icide
ínsect – insécticide
-ic
périod – periódic (exceptions: Árabic, lúnatic)
-ify
pérson – persónify
-ious
lábor – labórious
-ity
húmid – humídity
-ometer
spéed – speedómeter
-ual
cóntext – contéxtual
-ous
móment – moméntous
-y
hómonym – homónymy
We need to point out that if the original stress is on the last syllable of the root
(the syllable immediately before the sufﬁx), no change in location of the stress

STRESS
AND
INTONATION
167
will result, because it is already where it should be (e.g. divérse – divérsify,
absúrd – absúrdity, obése – obésity).
There is also a group of sufﬁxes that put the stress on the syllable immedi-
ately before them if that syllable is heavy (i.e. has branching rhyme). The sufﬁx
-al in refusal, recital, and accidental is an example of this phenomenon. The
stress falls on the syllable that is immediately before the sufﬁx, because that
syllable is heavy (long vowel, diphthong, and closed syllable, respectively).
However, if the syllable in question is not heavy, then the stress moves one
more syllable to the left (e.g. séasonal, práctical). The same is observable in the
sufﬁx -ency of emérgency and consístency on the one hand, and présidency
and cómpetency on the other. While in the ﬁrst two words the stress is on the
syllable immediately before the sufﬁx (closed syllable), it falls on the syllable
one more position to the left in the last two words because the syllable before
the sufﬁx is light.
It is worth pointing out that there are some other endings that seem to 
vacillate between the different sufﬁx types, of which -able is a good example.
This sufﬁx behaves like stress-neutral sufﬁxes in most cases, as in quéstion –
quéstionable, adóre – adórable, mánage – mánageable. However, in several 
disyllabic stems with ﬁnal stress, it shifts the stress one syllable left (to stem-
initial), as in admíre – ádmirable, compáre – cómparable, prefér – préferable
(however, note the more recent tendency to stress-neutral behavior, e.g. com-
párable, admírable). To complicate things further, -able may also shift the stress
one syllable to the right, as in démonstrate – demónstrable.
Another interesting case is the -ive sufﬁx. When added to a monosyllabic
root, the stress, expectedly, is on the root (-ive cannot bear stress) as in áct –
áctive. However, in words with three or more syllables, we may see the stress
falling on the syllable before it (e.g. decísive, offénsive), or moving one more
to the left (e.g. négative, sédative), or even to one further left (e.g. génerative,
méditative). There are attempts to separate cases such as decisive, offensive,
etc. from others by stating that in these the roots are preceded by preﬁxes. Such
explanations, although historically justiﬁable, are very dubious synchronic-
ally, and will not be followed here.
We can also point out that the classiﬁcation has nothing to do with the 
morphological division of inﬂectional and derivational sufﬁxes. While the
eight inﬂectional sufﬁxes:
-s (third per. sing. present)
“she looks here”
(cf. “you look here”)
-s (plural)
“two cats”
(cf. “one cat”)
-s (possessive)
“cat’s tail”
(cf. “a cat tail”)
-ed (past tense)
“she looked here”
(cf. “you look here”)
-en, -ed (past participle)
“she has eaten”
(cf. “eat your food”)
-ing (progressive)
“she is eating”
(cf. “eat your food”)
-er (comparative)
“she is shorter than you”
(cf. “a short book”)
-est (superlative)
“she is the shortest”
(cf. “a short book”)
do not have any effect on the stress (i.e. the addition of these sufﬁxes does 
not change the location of the stress), derivational sufﬁxes have no such 

168
STRESS
AND
INTONATION
predictability. As we saw in several examples above, while they may stay 
neutral to the stress, e.g. bottom – bottomless [bAQ@m] – [bAQ@ml@s], they can
shift the stress, e.g. geography – geographic [dZiAg@@ﬁ] – [dZi@g@ôf@k], or even
carry the stress themselves, e.g. lemon – lemonade [lem@n] – [lEm@néd].
7.6
Stress in Compounds
A compound is composed of more than one root morpheme (mostly two free
morphemes) but functions like a single word in syntactic and semantic terms.
The practice in the written language is not consistent; a compound can be 
written as a single word (e.g. blueprint), or with a hyphen in between (e.g. 
fail-safe), or with a space between the elements (e.g. ﬂower girl). Although there
are no consistent rules of choice among these, there seems to be a tendency for
the ones with a primary stress on the ﬁrst element to be written as one word
or with a hyphen in between, and the ones that receive the main stress on the
second element to be written with a space in between.
Noun compounds
Compounds that function as nouns are by far the most common, and account
for 90 percent of all compounds. In this category, the most common formula-
tion is ‘noun + noun’ (e.g. phónecard, mátchbox, téapot, póstman). Other noun
compounds may have one of the following combinations:
‘adjective + noun’ (e.g. whíte house)
‘verb + noun’ (e.g. stóp watch)
‘particle/adverb + noun’ (e.g. óverdose, únderwear)
All noun compounds receive the stress on their ﬁrst element. Exceptions to this
rule almost always involve names (e.g. Lake Érie, Mount Sínai, Great Brítain).
Adjective compounds
The stress, as in the previous group, is on the ﬁrst element. We ﬁnd the fol-
lowing combinations:
‘noun + adjective’ (e.g. nátionwide, séasick, bédridden)
‘adjective + adjective’ (e.g. réd hot)
‘preposition + adjective’ (e.g. óverripe)
Verb compounds
The following combinations can give us compounds that function like verbs:
‘noun + verb’ (e.g. báby-sit, spóon-feed, cár wash)
‘adjective + verb’ (e.g. 
)
dry-clean

STRESS
AND
INTONATION
169
‘verb + verb’ (e.g. dróp-kick)
‘particle/adverb + verb’ (e.g. undertáke, oversléep)
While the stress patterns of the ﬁrst three combinations in this group of com-
pounds are like those of the previous groups (stress on the ﬁrst element), it
shifts to the second element for the last combination.
Compounds with more than two elements are almost always stressed on the
ﬁrst element (e.g. ﬂy´-by-night, forgét-me-not, jáck-in-the-box, móther-in-law).
Complex compounds
These compounds, which are formed by joining a noun compound to another
noun, have the stress on the ﬁrst element.
A complex compound can itself join a noun to create a longer complex com-
pound, keeping the stress on the ﬁrst element (e.g. hígh school student essay,
assémbly line worker dispute).
7.7
Differences between American and British English
There are several words that receive different stresses between American and
British English, which lend themselves to some groupings.
(a)
The ﬁrst group consists of two-syllable nouns of French origin. These words
are stressed on the ﬁnal syllable in American English (AE), while they receive
the stress on the ﬁrst (penult) syllable in British English (BE):
brochúre
ballét
café
chatéau
cliché
cornét
crochét
V
N
noun
(c) 
‘verb + noun’   ‘píck up truck’
(a) ‘noun + noun’  ‘assémbly line worker’
N
N
noun
adj.
N
noun
(b) ‘adjective + noun’  ‘hígh school student’

170
STRESS
AND
INTONATION
debrís
ﬁllét
frontíer
garáge
plateáu
premíer
salón
soufﬂé
toupée
vermóuth
valét
(b)
Another group of nouns does exactly the reverse (ﬁnal stress in BE, 
initial stress in AE):
wéekend
pótluck
príncess
récess
résearch
áddress
ínquiry
móustache
There are also some other nouns that are longer and receive initial stress in
AE, but ﬁnal stress in BE:
ártisan
Pórtuguese
cígarette
mágazine
cóntroversy (also with second-syllable stress in BE: ‘contróversy’)
(c)
Two-syllable verbs ending in -ate are generally stressed initially in AE,
but ﬁnally in BE:
cástrate
crémate
díctate
dónate
frústrate
g ´yrate
mígrate
púlsate
rótate
tránslate
stágnate
vácate
víbrate

STRESS
AND
INTONATION
171
phónate
lócate
mútate
However, in conﬂáte, creáte, debáte, deﬂáte, eláte, reláte, abáte, inﬂáte, negáte,
AE, like BE, places the stress on the ﬁnal syllable.
The following two groups of words have one thing in common in that one vari-
ety has, in addition to the primary stress, a secondary stress while the other
variety has a reduced vowel in the equivalent syllable.
(d)
Forms ending in [E@i] (spelt -ary/-ery) and [O@i] (spelt -ory) receive a 
secondary stress on the penult in AE, whereas the same syllable has a reduced
vowel in BE. For example, the word secondary is [sék@ndf@i] in AE, but
[sek@nd@®i] in BE, which can turn into [sek@nd®i] by way of deleting the
reduced vowel, and thus reducing the number of syllables to three. The 
following list consists of such items:
nécessàry
cémetèry
állegòry
árbitràry
conféctionèry
cátegòry
díctionàry
d´ysentèry
dórmitòry
Fébruàry
mónastèry
excúlpatòry
imáginàry
státionèry
mándatòry
líteràry
obsérvatòry
mílitàry
térritòry
órdinàry
*láboratòry
prímàry
prómissòry
sécretàry
inhíbitòry
témporàry
antícipatòry
*córollàry
refórmatòry
mómentàry
compénsatòry
légendàry
explóratòry
sédentàry
consérvatòry
córonàry
sánitàry
vísionàry
mónetàry
contémporàry
* = In addition to not having the secondary stress, these items have the primary
stress on the second (not ﬁrst) syllable in BE.
However, if the primary stress is immediately before -ary/-ery/-ory, as in salary,
bravery, ivory, lottery, elementary, anniversary, documentary, complimentary,
and inﬁrmary, there is no secondary stress in AE either.
A similar pattern to the above list (secondary in AE, reduced vowel in BE)
is obtained in words ending in -mony:

172
STRESS
AND
INTONATION
ácrimòny 
[æ´ k@Imcni] (AE)
[æ´ k®Im@ni] (BE)
álimòny
céremòny
mátrimòny
téstimòny
(e)
The other group of words (all ending in -ile) that behaves differently in
the two varieties shows the reverse (i.e. reduced vowel in AE, but secondary
stress in BE):
ágile 
[æ´ dZ@l] (AE)
[æ´ dZàIl] (BE)
dócile
fértile
frágile
fútile
hóstile
móbile
míssile
stérile
vérsatile
vírile
However, prófìle, réptìle, sénìle with [aI] have secondary stress in both AE 
and BE.
The above-mentioned differences between AE and BE do not mean that other
varieties have to choose between these two; they may differ in their stress pat-
terns without necessarily copying either of them. For example, words ending
in -ate, -ize are stressed on the ﬁnal syllable in Indian English, Hong Kong English,
and Singapore English. Thus, we get alternáte, educáte, homogeníze, terroríze
(Wells 1982). Non-reduced vowels and non-initial stress on words of more than
one syllable (e.g. economic, faculty, necessary) are found in Indian English and
Singapore English (Wells 1982). Sufﬁxes tend to be stressed and function
words, which are reduced (e.g. of [@v]) in other varieties, are not reduced 
in Indian English (Trudgill and Hannah 2002). Also noteworthy is the general
tendency toward fewer vowel reductions in varieties of English spoken in Hawaii,
Hong Kong, Singapore, and India, as well as in the Caribbean and African vari-
eties, which results in more of a ‘syllable-timed’ rhythm.
7.8
Intonation
Earlier, in chapter 1, we deﬁned intonation as pitch variations that occur over
a phrase or sentence. Intonation contours can be described in terms of tone groups
or intonational phrases. A tone group is the part of a sentence over which an
intonation contour extends. Within a tone group, each stressed syllable has a

STRESS
AND
INTONATION
173
minor pitch increase, but there is one syllable in which this pitch increase is
more signiﬁcant. The syllable that carries the major pitch change is called the
tonic syllable. For example, in the following sentence:
the elements marked with a ´ are stressed, but the major pitch increase is on teacher,
which is marked with an asterisk. Since in the usual cases in English, the 
utterance-initial position is reserved for shared (old) information, and the new
information is placed in utterance-ﬁnal position, the most common pattern is
to put the tonic accent on the last stressed lexical item (noun, verb, adjective,
adverb).
One should note, however, that this is merely a tendency, as we may easily
ﬁnd cases where the tonic accent is brought forward.
In (2b) the tonic accent on somewhat is a result of emphasis (contrast). Not all
cases of placing the tonic accent earlier than the last stressed lexical item involve
contrast/emphasis, as exempliﬁed in (3):
(3)
I have *a party to plan
*letters to write
It is important to note that a tone group is a unit of information rather than a
syntactically deﬁnable unit. Thus, the way the speaker shapes his or her utter-
ance(s) depends on what he or she considers to be the important point(s) in
the sentence. In (3), the speaker has the lexical item party/letters that has 
the greater importance. Likewise, while the neutral expression of (4a) will 
assign the tonic accent to the last lexical word vegetable (talking about the 
category/characterization of spinach),
(4a)
Spinach is a *vegetable
we would be likely to bring the tonic accent on to spinach in a discussion of
vegetables and considering what would ﬁt into that group:
(4b)
*Spinach is a vegetable
Before we leave this issue, it will be useful to mention some other cases that
are also exceptions to the tonic accent falling on the last lexical item. The ﬁrst
(2a)  He was somewhat *discouraged
(2b)  He was *somewhat discouraged
(1) The ´boy ´gave the ´book to his *teacher

174
STRESS
AND
INTONATION
one of these relates to the tone group that has an intransitive verb or verb phrase
whose subject is non-human:
(5a)
Our *town is on an upswing
(5b)
The *bird ﬂew away (cf.: the man *swore)
The second involves certain types of adverbials in ﬁnal position. Sentential 
adverbials (i.e. those that modify the whole sentence) and adverbials of time
usually do not take the tonic accent:
(6a)
I don’t watch *TV typically (cf. contrastive: I don’t watch TV *typically)
(6b)
It wasn’t a very nice *day unfortunately
The sentences we have considered so far in (1)–(6) all are examples of
‘falling intonation contour’, which is quite typical of utterances that express
ﬁnality. It may be useful, however, to make a distinction between ‘full’ (or ‘long’)
fall versus ‘low’ (or ‘short’) fall. A full fall is unmarked for declaratives where
there is clear ﬁnality in the statement (i.e. there is nothing more to be said).
This pattern is common in expressing emotional involvement:
(with genuine enthusiasm)
A falling contour is also typical of wh-questions (questions that start with a
wh- word such as what, which, where):
(9)
Which way did she go?
While a full (or ‘long’) fall shows a deﬁnitive, involved mood, a short 
(or ‘low’) fall is, generally, an indication of a detached mood in the speaker. 
It displays a rather neutral, perfunctory attitude:
If falling contour is indicative of ‘ﬁnality’ or ‘completion’, rising intonation
represents ‘non-deﬁniteness’, ‘lack of assurance’, or ‘incompletion’. This pitch
pattern is addressee-oriented, and the degree of ‘rise’ is matched to the degree
of uncertainty or incompleteness. Accordingly, we can describe this pattern as:
(a)
‘high’ (or ‘long’) rise, or
(b)
‘low’ (or ‘short’) rise.
(10) Whatever you say. (i.e. ‘I agree with it’)
(8) I’m so glad.
(7) I am leaving the house right now.

STRESS
AND
INTONATION
175
High (or ‘long’) rise is a more marked pattern, which is indicative of an attitude
of puzzlement or unbelieving:
•
In yes–no questions (typical order, or with statement order), such as:
the speaker has the attitude of asking “are you sure you know what you
are saying?” or “this is hard to believe”.
A low rise, on the other hand, is more common and is used in a variety of 
situations:
•
In yes–no questions (typical order or with statement order), such as:
•
Echo questions, such as:
•
Repetition questions, such as:
Note that this is different from (9), where the question is information-
seeking.
•
Open-choice alternative questions, such as:
Note the falling contour for the ‘closed choice’ alternative:
paper or magazine?
(15) Would you like a paper or magazine? (something to read?)
(14) What are you doing? (I haven’t heard you)
(13) Where will I work? I haven’t thought of that yet.
(12a) Has your uncle left already?
(12b) Your uncle has left already?
(11a) Is this a joke?
(11b) This is a joke?

176
STRESS
AND
INTONATION
•
Certain tag questions that signal uncertainty, such as:
display rising intonation. However, if the sentence is uttered when elicit-
ing agreement or conﬁrmation, then it will end in a falling contour. In this
case it is indeed a rhetorical question, as no answer is sought.
•
Items in a list prior to the last item, such as:
•
Questions that display readiness to present some new information, such as:
If this is uttered as a neutral ‘information-seeking’ question, it will end in
a falling pitch.
Other than the falling and rising intonation discussed thus far, there are two
other patterns that are combinatory. A falling–rising intonation is indicative of
an agreement with reservation:
The speaker accepts that it can be done the way the hearer suggested and at
the same time expresses some reservation or hesitation (i.e. “I don’t think you
should”).
The opposite, a rising–falling intonation, which is the dramatic equivalent of
a simple ‘fall’, reveals strong feelings of approval or disapproval:
Finally, mention should be made of a level intonation, which marks a bored
or sarcastic attitude:
(21) A: John will be at the party.
 
B: Great.
(20a) That’s wonderful. (cf. “That’s wonderful” with simple fall)
(20b) You can’t do that. (cf. “You can’t do that” with simple fall)
(19) You can do it that way.
(18) Do you know when the ﬁrst kidney transplant was?
(17) I need to buy a shirt, a jacket, and a tie.
(16) She usually comes at ten, doesn’t she?

STRESS
AND
INTONATION
177
Putting all these together, we can clearly interpret the messages intended by
the speaker:
7.9
Variations among the Varieties
Finally, a brief mention should be made of some variations among the varieties
of English. Among the more signiﬁcant patterns, we can cite the following. 
In Hawaii, the typical terminal high rise of yes–no questions is replaced by 
an earlier rise followed by a fall (e.g. “Would you like some tea?”). In Welsh
English, tag questions are manifested with a ‘rise–fall’ pattern that gives a more
emphatic impression.
A noteworthy difference within American English is the frequency of rising
pitches in Southern AE, as in (pitch going up at the accent marks):
We played gámes and went for híkes and had the most wónderful tíme.
(Bolinger 1998: 55)
Such rises are indicative of the speaker asking for reassurances that he or 
she is being paid attention to. This pattern is even extended to more routine
utterances, such as answering “where are you from?” with “from Texas”
(Bolinger 1998: 55). The same tendency has also been noted for Australian 
English.
The main difference between American English and British English is the
latter’s less frequent use of high initial pitches and a more frequent use of ﬁnal
ones in yes–no questions. While in AE the following is expected:
“Would you like some coffee?”
(22b) All right   (long fall)
enthusiastic acceptance
(22a) 
All right   (short fall)
“I agree with it” (factual)
(22c) 
All right   (sharp rise)
“No, that is not acceptable”
(22e) 
All right   (fall–rise)
“Yes, but I am doubtful”
(with reservation)
(22d) All right   (low rise)
“I am listening, go on”, “Is it all right?”
(22f) 
All right   (rise–fall)
more dramatic than (22b), great
enthusiasm, emphatic
(22g) All right   (level)
“How uninspiring!”

178
STRESS
AND
INTONATION
in BE, we encounter
or with no ﬁnal rise
Since intonation conveys affect and attitude, differences among the varieties
may result in wrong impressions. For example, the typical AE rising inton-
ation in yes–no questions may be interpreted by the British as too businesslike,
while, on the other hand, Americans may ﬁnd the British version “over-cordial”
and “unduly concerned” (Bolinger 1998).
Bailey (1983: 16–17) gives the following example to contrast four varieties
of English:
And he labels each one for the impression it creates on an outsider as 
(1) condescending, (2) insultingly incredulous, (3) repetitive, (4) unaccountably 
surprised. (For a detailed study of intonation in English and comparisons with
several languages, the reader is referred to Bolinger 1989.)
SUMMARY
In this chapter, we looked at some basic patterns in English stress and inton-
ation. Although English stress is variable and mobile, there appear to be some
signiﬁcant generalizations about its predictability. The so-called ‘front weight’,
i.e. stressing the penultimate syllable, seems to be the norm in disyllabic nouns
and adjectives (over 80 percent of cases). In nouns and adjectives of three or
more syllables, the focus still remains on the penult. However, if the penult con-
tains fewer than two timing units, then the stress falls on the next left syllable
that has two timing units. For verbs (regardless of the number of syllables) the
(2) Irish E.
“Is your mother feeling all right?”
(1) British E.
“Is your mother feeling all right?”
(3) Northern US
“Is your mother feeling all right?”
(4) Southern US
“Is your mother feeling all right?”
“Would you like some coffee?”
“Would you like some coffee?”

STRESS
AND
INTONATION
179
stress focus is the ult. However, if the ult has fewer than two timing units, then
the stress falls on the next left syllable that has two timing units. In complex
forms, afﬁxes have varying effects on stress; some attract stress to themselves,
some cause stress to shift, while the third group is neutral to stress. In longer
words, it is also common to ﬁnd a lightly stressed (secondary stressed) syl-
lable. Such syllables are prominent, like the main stressed syllables, without
an effect of major pitch change, and their existence is in large part predictable.
We also considered intonation, which is pitch variation over a phrase or a
sentence. We noted that the arrangements of tone groups or intonational
phrases have a lot to do with what the intentions of the speaker are, and 
can vary accordingly. At the same time, however, we stated certain general
principles regarding different intonation patterns. Falling intonation patterns
(including rising–falling) are assertive and conclusive, and the degree of ﬁnal-
ity varies with the degree of the fall (i.e. a sharper, fuller fall indicates a greater
degree). On the other hand, rising contours (including falling–rising) are con-
tinuative and non-deﬁnitive. Finally, we looked at some signiﬁcant differences
between stress patterns in American English and British English, as well as 
intonational variations among different varieties of English.

180
STRESS
AND
INTONATION
EXERCISES
1.
In the following we observe schwa deletion in fast speech for words
(a)–(k); the same is not possible in words (l)–(v). State the general-
ization. Pay special attention to morphologically related words such
as (f) and (s), (g) and (v), (h) and (u), (i) and (t), (j) and (q), (k) and (r).
Careful speech
Fast speech
(a)
camera
[kæm@@@]
[kæm@@]
(b)
veteran
[vEt@@@n]
[vEt@@n]
(c)
aspirin
[æsp@@@n]
[æsp@@n]
(d)
temperature
[tEmp@@@tS2]
[tEmp@@tS2]
(e)
reasonable
[@iz@n@bl]
[@izn@bl]
(f)
imaginative
[ImædZ@n@tIv]
[ImædZn@tIv]
(g)
principal
[p@Ins@p@l]
[p@Insp@l]
(h)
management
[mæn@dZm@nt]
[mændZm@nt]
(i)
testament
[tEst@m@nt]
[tEstm@nt]
(j)
general
[dZEn@@@l]
[dZEn@@l]
(k)
opera
[Ap@@@]
[Ap@@]
(l)
famous
[fem@s]
[fem@s] not [fems]
(m)
vegetarian
[vEdZ@tE@i@n]
[vEdZ@tE@i@n] not [vEdZtE@i@n]
(n)
motivate
[mot@vet]
[mot@vet] not [motvet]
(o)
pathology
[pæTAl@dZi]
[pæTAl@dZi] not [pæTAldZi]
(p)
facilitate
[f@sIl@tet]
[f@sIl@tet] not [f@sIltet]
(q)
generality
[dZEn@@æl@ti]
[dZEn@@æl@ti] not [dZEn@æl@ti]
(r)
operatic
[Ap@@ætIk]
[Ap@@ætIk] not [Ap@ætIk]
(s)
imagination
[@mædZ@neS@n]
[@mædZ@neS@n] not 
[@mædZneS@n]
(t)
testimony
[tEst@moni]
[tEst@moni] not [tEstmoni]
(u)
managerial
[mæn@dZE@i@l]
[mæn@dZE@i@l] not [mændZE@i@l]
(v)
principality
[p@Ins@pæl@ti]
[p@Ins@pæl@ti] not [p@Inspæl@ti]
2.
Analyze the stress patterns of the following words by using the three
parameters (stress, tonic accent, and full vowel), and give the tradi-
tional numbers.
Example:
mineralogy
[mI.n@.@A.l@.dZi]
Stress
+ −+ −
−
Tonic accent
−−+ −
−
Full vowel
+ −+ −
+
2
4 1 4
3

STRESS
AND
INTONATION
181
(a)
choreography
(b)
discretional
(c)
mythical
[
]
[
]
[
]
St.
T.a.
F.V
(d)
gratiﬁcation
(e)
autograph
(f)
modality
(g)
conciliation
(h)
punishable
(i)
phonological
(j)
profundity
(k)
consumptiveness
(l)
resumption
(m) diagnosis
(n)
neutralize
(o)
resignation
(p)
eccentricity
(q)
recessional
(r)
protestation
(s)
assassination
(t)
agriculture
(u)
macaroni
3.
In light of what you have seen regarding intonation patterns in 
section 7.8, determine where the tonic accent will be in the following
(in their neutral, non-contrastive readings).
(a)
A:
Are you coming to the movie?
B:
I have exams to grade.
(b)
The dog barked.
(c)
The building’s falling down.
(d)
I go to Boston, usually.
4.
Match the intonation patterns of the following with the six types 
indicated below.

182
STRESS
AND
INTONATION
(a) low rise, (b) high (long) rise, (c) low fall, (d) long (full) fall, (e) fall–rise,
(f) rise–fall
(i)
I am so happy for you.
____
(ii)
Would you like to have coffee or tea? (open choice reading)
____
(iii)
Would you like to have coffee or tea? (closed choice)
____
(iv)
Where will the meeting be held? (information seeking)
____
(v)
Where will the meeting be held? (I couldn’t hear you)
____
(vi)
What am I doing? I am trying to ﬁx the TV.
____
(vii)
Her predictions came true. (clear ﬁnality)
____
(viii)
Who was at the meeting?
____
(ix)
Whatever you say.
____
(x)
We should look for him, shouldn’t we?
____
(xi)
You can take the old route. (agree with reservation)
____
(xii)
Are you out of your mind?
____
(xiii)
Did you wash the car yet?
____
(xiv)
I would have done it the same way, wouldn’t you?
____
5.
Transcribe the following (about “English in America”, continued) from
J. Jenkins, World Englishes (London: Routledge, 2002).
During the seventeenth century, English spread to southern parts of 
America and the Caribbean as a result of the slave trade. Slaves were 
transported from West Africa and exchanged, on the American coast 
and in the Caribbean, for sugar and rum. The Englishes which
developed among the slaves and between them and their captors were 
initially contact pidgin languages but, with their use as mother tongues
following the birth of the next generation, they developed into creoles.
Then, in the eighteenth century, there was large-scale immigration 
from Northern Ireland, initially to the coastal area around Philadelphia,
but quickly moving south and west. After the Declaration of 
American Independence in 1776, many loyalists (the British settlers 
who had supported the British government) left for Canada.

8
Structural Factors in
Second Language Phonology
8.1
Introduction
A foreign accent is created when there are phonological mismatches between
the learner’s native language (L1) and the target language (L2) that is acquired.
People with different native languages have remarkably different productions
in their pronunciations in a given foreign language. It is common to hear 
comments such as “Spanish speakers say it as ____, but Japanese speakers say
it as ____”, and so on. Such clear differences are not restricted to languages
that are unrelated to one another such as Spanish and Japanese, but also are
observable between speakers of languages that are closely related. For example,
as will be clear later in this chapter, it is a rather simple task to differentiate
between a speaker of Portuguese and a speaker of Spanish by their pronunci-
ations of English. The reason for this is that the mismatches existing between
Spanish (L1) and English (L2) are very different from the ones existing between
Portuguese (L1) and English (L2), and result in different resolutions of the
conﬂicts, which create different foreign accents.
Learners’ renditions of English targets are governed in part by their native
language sound patterns. The terms ‘interference’ or ‘transfer’ have long been
used to designate the inﬂuence of the native language on the target patterns.
Mismatches between the target and the native language may take different forms.
One common situation is represented by the lack of the target sound in the
native language. For example, the interdental fricatives of English, /T/ and /D/,
are absent in many of the world’s languages; these are usually substituted 
for by /s, z/ or /t, d/ respectively. Another frequently attested mismatch between
L1 and L2 is created by under-differentiation of the phonemic distinctions 
of the target language. For example, as noted earlier, the English contrast between
/tS/ and /t/ (e.g. chip – tip) is not patterned in the same way in Portuguese;
rather, these two sounds are the allophones of one and the same phoneme, /t/.
The Portuguese production of the phoneme /t/ is [tS] before /i/. Thus, it is
only to be expected that speakers of Portuguese pronounce the target word
teacher [titS2] as [tSitS2] via a Portuguese ﬁlter.
eight
Applied English Phonology, Second Edition       Mehmet Yavaş 
© 2011 Mehmet Yavaş. ISBN: 978-1-444-33322-0 

184
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
The foreign accent is not always due to a complete lack of the target
phoneme, nor is it always because of the under-differentiation of target
phonemic distinctions. Rather, the culprit is often the phonetic differences between
identically deﬁned targets and native sounds. For example, liquids present a
good case for this. The phonetic quality of the non-lateral liquid of American
English is very different than other r-sounds (taps, trills) found in a great many
languages. Another such example is provided by the lateral liquids across lan-
guages. Differences between the so-called ‘clear’ and ‘dark’ laterals are easily
observable, as shown by the cognate word animal in English [ænIm@l] (with
a ﬁnal ‘dark l’) and Spanish [animal] (with ﬁnal ‘clear l’). While the substitu-
tions of these phonetically different sounds between the native and the target
languages may not create a breakdown in communication by changing the word
meaning (e.g. tip – chip), they do create a very recognizable foreign accent.
Mismatches in phonotactic (sequential) patterns also create signiﬁcant prob-
lems. For example, while English allows up to triple onsets and triple codas,
a language such as Japanese has no clusters. Such a mismatch between these
two languages expectedly creates tremendous problems for Japanese speakers
learning English. In addition, the number of onset or coda members is not the
only problem; often the problem is created because of the type(s) of sound(s)
and/or combinations demanded by the L2 not matching with what is allowed
by the L1. For example, while double onsets are allowed both in English and
Spanish, the variety of the combinations in English is much larger. Predictably,
such a situation creates difﬁculties for the speakers of Spanish. Speciﬁc ex-
amples regarding the above points will be given in the following section on 
contrastive patterns.
Besides the segmental and sequential mismatches discussed above, there may
be suprasegmental (prosodic) mismatches that make foreign accent obvious.
The effects of rhythmic differences between the two languages considered, involv-
ing stress and intonation, are well known. It is also worth mentioning that the
stress-timed versus syllable-timed nature of two languages produces noticeable
non-native productions.
The observation of such clashes between L1 and L2 resulting in foreign accent
created a huge industry of contrastive phonological studies in the 1950s and
1960s, which provided invaluable material for teachers and remediators.
In the following section, we will present a number of mini contrastive
phonological structures with English as the target language and different 
languages as native languages, and point to the insights that can be gained from
such analyses. It is important to stress the ‘mini’ character of these analyses,
as each of these comparisons could be a book-length project that could be dealt
with in a semester. Our aim here is simply to make the case in a thought-
provoking manner and to stimulate the student and/or practitioner to make
more detailed investigations.
The difference between contrastive phonologies and contrastive analyses in
other domains (e.g. syntax) lies in a speaker’s ability to communicate. While
it is common to observe native language interference in syntax (e.g. “I have
twenty-ﬁve years”, instead of the native English “I am twenty-ﬁve years old”,

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
185
uttered by a Spanish or Portuguese speaker, is clearly a direct translation from
L1), problems in several aspects of the syntactic domain may not be apparent
all the time. For example, if a learner does not have sufﬁcient knowledge of
the differences in the uses of the ‘simple past’ and the ‘past perfect’, she or he
can paraphrase things and get by with the use of the ‘simple past’ alone. To
give another example, we can look at the modal verbs of ‘obligation’. While English
possesses a plethora of forms (e.g. must, have to, should, ought to) with cer-
tain nuances, several other languages deal with the corresponding situations
with one or, at the most, two forms. Thus, when speakers of such languages
learn English, they encounter a problem. A learner who does not master the
nuances among multiple English forms (let us say that she or he has limited
competence for ought to) can get by perfectly without using ought to once;
nobody will stop and remind him or her that ought to was required in one of
the utterances he or she made and that he or she therefore sounded non-native.
When we look at the phonology of L2, however, we realize that such evasions
are not possible. A learner who has a problem with the interdental fricatives
of English cannot simply utilize a strategy of avoiding in his or her speech words
containing /T/ or /D/. The frequency of /D/ in grammatical morphemes such
as the deﬁnite article, the, the demonstrative pronouns (e.g. this, that, etc.), the
case forms of the personal pronouns (e.g. them), and some common adverbs
(e.g. then, thus) is more than enough to create a disastrous situation.
All the above make a special case for contrastive phonology in that, unlike
in other domains of language, in interlanguage phonology the learner is in an
exposed state, with nowhere to hide his or her limitations. Thus, the mismatches
that exist between the native and the target languages are very relevant for
professionals who deal with remediation. Such factors are especially relevant
when we deal with post-pubescent learners for whom the effects of foreign accent
are much more obvious and more lasting. I will not go into details of the age
factor in L2 phonology learning, but simply present a display (ﬁgure 8.1) from
Scovel (1988), which reveals the differences between pre-pubescent and post-
pubescent learners unambiguously.
8.2
Mini Contrastive Analyses
In this section we will look at some contrastive situations that exist between
the target language (i.e. English) and ten different ﬁrst languages. As stated
earlier, these are not exhaustive descriptions but rather summary statements.
To clarify the purpose of the section, our ﬁrst example, Spanish–English, will
be a little more detailed; the remaining examples from nine other languages
will be presented in a briefer manner.
8.2.1
Spanish–English
We start our description by giving the phonemic inventory of the L1 conson-
ants and vowels.

186
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
Consonants of Spanish
Bilabial
Labio-dental
Dental
Alveolar
Palatal
Velar
Glottal
Stop
p b
t d
k g
Fricative
f
s
x
h
Affricate
tS
Nasal
m
n
ê
Liquid
l r Q
¥
Glide
j
w
Vowels of Spanish
Front
Central
Back
High
i
u
Mid
e
o
Low
a
Before we go into the mismatches, we should mention some facts about
Spanish. While the status of the vowels is rather consistent across varieties of
Spanish, consonants show considerable variation. For example, /T/, which is
not included in the above table, is used only in dialects in Spain. Voiceless velar
and glottal fricatives are encircled to indicate that either one or the other, 
not both, occurs in a given variety. Also noteworthy is the fact that the palatal
lateral liquid /¥/, which is in contrast with the alveolar lateral /l/ in some
varieties, is gradually being lost.
The inventory of the L1 (Spanish) given above is useful for depicting the 
target English phonemes that are missing. Accordingly, we can easily see that
the targets /v, T, D, z, S, Z, dZ, è/ will be problematic for learners, as Spanish
Native
Lexical and
syntactic
performance
High-level
phonological
performance –
sounding like
a native speaker
Performance
in the second
language
Clearly
non-native
Birth
Chronological age of
language learner
Puberty
Adulthood
The
critical
period
Figure 8.1
Contrasts in success between phonological learning and other
linguistic skills, viewed chronologically
(Source: T. Scovel (1988) A Time to Speak: A Psycholinguistic Inquiry into Critical Period
for Human Speech. Reproduced by permission of the author.)

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
187
does not have these phonemes (phonetically [è] occurs in cinco, but in
Spanish, unlike in English, it does not contrast with other phonemes). That these
predictions are correct can be shown by the following frequently attested
examples, where the missing targets are replaced by the closest sounds that are
available in the native L1 inventory, resulting in several phonemic violations.
/T/ →[t/s] (e.g. thin/tin →[tIn], or [sIn])
/D/ →[d/z] (e.g. they/day →[de])
/v/ →[b] (e.g. vowel/bowel →[baUl])
/z/ →[s] (e.g. zeal/seal →[sil])
/S/ →[tS] (e.g. shop/chop →[tSAp])
It should be mentioned that one of the target English sounds above, [D], is 
different from the others; this sound is phonetically present in both languages
but has different phonemic mappings. As mentioned earlier (chapter 2), it is 
a separate phoneme in English and contrasts with /d/ (e.g. they vs. day); in
Spanish, however, [d] and [D] are allophones of the same phoneme.
Although the inventory is capable of showing the above-mentioned problems,
it is rather limited in scope, as different allophonic rules of identically described
phonemes in two languages are also responsible for foreign accents. For example,
despite the fact that the two languages in question have the same number of
stop phonemes, these are far from being problem-free. Voiceless stops are always
unaspirated in Spanish, whereas they are contextually (at the beginning of a
stressed syllable) aspirated in English. Thus, in their production of English,
Spanish speakers are expected to produce unaspirated stops in, for example,
ton, pay, car. Also, voiced stops, /b, d, g/, of Spanish have fricative allo-
phones, [ã, D, ƒ] respectively. Stop variants occur after pauses, after nasals, 
and after /l/; the fricative variants occur in other environments. Thus,
Spanish speakers may produce fricatives for target voiced stops in adore, aboard,
and so on.
Distributional restrictions are also the cause of problems in L2 phonology.
Spanish has rather severe restrictions with respect to ﬁnal consonants. Since
the language allows only /s, n, r, l/ (and maybe /d/) to occur in ﬁnal posi-
tion, we might encounter several instances of ﬁnal consonant deletion because
English can demand that all consonants (except /h/) occur in this position.
Similarly, since the only nasal that can occur ﬁnally is /n/ in Spanish, a target
such as from with a bilabial nasal may be realized with a ﬁnal [n] instead.
Another source of a foreign accent is salient phonetic dissimilarities in 
certain sounds between the two languages. This is nowhere more obvious than
in a comparison of the liquids. While both Spanish and English have lateral
and non-lateral liquids and can employ them in the same word positions, their
clearly identiﬁable phonetic differences in the two languages produce easily
detectable foreign accents. The alveolar lateral is always realized as ‘clear l’ 
(i.e. non-velarized) in Spanish, whereas the American English counterpart is
produced mostly as shades of ‘dark l’ (i.e. velarized). The non-lateral liquids
(i.e. r-sounds) of the two languages also exemplify considerable phonetic 

188
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
dissimilarity. The American English r is a retroﬂex approximant, while the two
r-sounds of Spanish are a trill and a ﬂap. Thus, we have the following mismatch:
Spanish
English
[@] ___________ /@/
/Q/ ___________ [Q]
/r/ ___________ [r]
We can summarize the above in the following overlay of the L1 inventory onto
the target English inventory (Spanish phonemes that have no relevance to the
mismatches, such as /¥, x, ê/, are not considered here):
The following symbolizations are used throughout the comparisons between
the target language (English) and the various ﬁrst languages:
missing target phoneme in L1;
sound existing only as an allophone of another phoneme in L1;
different allophonic/distributional patterns in L1 and L2;
salient phonetic difference between the target and the L1 counterpart.
The comparison of the vowel systems also makes certain problematic
aspects rather obvious. Although there are no distributional problems in vowels
(i.e. Spanish vowels can occur in all word positions), Spanish has a far smaller
number (ﬁve) of vowels than English, and this proves to be an important and
frequent source of insufﬁcient separation (i.e. under-differentiation) of target
phonemic distinctions. The frequently attested lack of contrasts (i.e. homophonies)
that results includes /i/ – /I/ (e.g. greed – grid), /u/ – /U/ (e.g. fool – full),
/√/ – /A/ (e.g. buddy – body), /E/ – /æ/ (e.g. mess – mass). The following
chart summarizes these potential confusions:
I
i
i
E
æ
√
e
e
A
a
o
u
u
U
o
O
p
     m
     w
b
t
s
    n
d
z
k
f
v
h
g
T
dZ
D
tS
è
j
S
Z
w
l
r

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
189
The following conventions are used throughout the comparisons with vowel
systems of L1 and L2:
Circling of vowels indicates that these target contrasts are overlooked by
learners coming from a speciﬁc L1.
i a p
Bold-type vowel symbols indicate the expected native language vowels
used in the rendition of targets.
It should be pointed out that the use of identical phonetic symbols for the
bold-type L1 vowel does not imply that it is phonetically identical to any of
the L2 (English) targets. For example, we use /i/ and /I/ for the English high
front vowels. Spanish speakers’ rendition of /i/ does not mean that they are
successful for English /i/ and unsuccessful for /I/. Spanish substitution of /i/
is not identical to either English vowel. In almost all the languages we com-
pare, the symbols /i, e, o, u/ indicate phonetically simple (not long and diph-
thongized) vowels. Similarly, the use of other symbols (e.g. /¡, ™/) does not
make a claim that the phonetic qualities of these vowels are identical to those
of English. The reader should keep these facts in mind when examining the
vowel charts throughout.
The diphthongs are not expected to create problems for Spanish speakers as
the language has a wide variety of diphthongs including all of those occurring
in English.
Phonotactics (i.e. sequential patterning) is another aspect to consider in the
comparison. In the present case, we see that Spanish and English are rather
disparate:
Syllable structure
(L1) Spanish
(L2) English
(C) (C) V (C) (C*)
(C) (C) (C) V (C) (C) (C) (C**)
* possible only if syllable-ﬁnal within word as stop/sonorant + /s/
** possible only if an afﬁx
While English allows triple onsets and triple codas, the maximum number of
consonants in Spanish in these positions is two. The number of consonants in
clusters can tell only part of the whole story. The disparities are greater once
we examine the other relevant dimension, namely the possible combinations.
For example, English has a wide variety of double codas (see chapter 6),
whereas Spanish has very limited combinations (stop/sonorant + /s/) only 
in word-internal position. There are differences for the double onsets too. The
variety of combinations Spanish allows is limited to stop//f/ + liquid; any 
English target cluster other than these (there is a multiplicity of cases) can 
create signiﬁcant trouble for Spanish speakers learning English.
Finally, mention should be made of the suprasegmental effects. Firstly, we
can mention the stress-timed (English) versus syllable-timed (Spanish) differ-
ence. A rather obvious consequence of this difference is seen in rhythm
because of the lack of vowel reductions, which are mandatory in English. Another

190
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
aspect of the prosodic differences is related to different stress patterns. Such
mismatches are especially dangerous in the case of cognates. Learners may (and
indeed do) fall into the ‘same/similar form and meaning’ trap between the two
languages. This is especially true when Spanish words have the stress on the
ﬁnal syllable, which English avoids. Here are some examples of such conﬂicts:
•
disyllabics:
ult in Spanish vs. penult in English: color, labor, honor, fatal,
accion/action;
•
trisyllabics:
ult in Spanish vs. antepenult in English: animal, general, 
cultural, natural;
ult in Spanish vs. penult in English: decision, informal, pro-
fesor/professor;
•
four syllables: ult in Spanish vs. penult in English: artiﬁcial, horizontal, 
education/educacion;
ult in Spanish vs. antepenult in English: particular, original,
opinion (or on pre-antepenult in English because the 
antepenult has an [@], which is unstressable: calculador/
calculator, operador/operator, navegador/navigator).
The following summarizes the major trouble spots:
•
entirely missing targets: /v/ →[b], /T/ →[t], /D/ →[d], /S/ →[tS], 
/z/ →[s];
•
distribution: only /s, n, l, Q/ occur ﬁnally in L1;
•
aspiration of target /p, t, k/;
•
fricative variants of L1 voiced stops intervocalically (e.g. adore →[aDOQ]);
•
signiﬁcant phonetic violations: liquids;
•
consonant clusters;
•
insufﬁcient separation of several target vowel contrasts;
•
stress;
•
rhythm.
8.2.2
Turkish–English
The overlay of the native language consonantal system onto the target English
inventory results in the following:
p
     m
      w
b
t
s
    n
    l
f
v
T
D
d
z
k
h
g
dZ
tS
è
j
S
Z
w
r

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
191
From the consonantal inventory, we can easily see potential troubles for the
missing English targets /T, D, w, è/, which manifest themselves in thin →[tin],
they →[de]. Although there is also no /è/ in the consonantal inventory of
Turkish, [è] is phonetically present in Turkish before velar stops, as in Ankara
[aèkaQa], banka “bank” [baèka]. Also, while [v] is used for the missing target
/w/ (e.g. well →[vEl]) this problem is not present intervocalically, as /v/ has
a [w] allophone in this position.
Non-continuant obstruents (i.e. stops and affricates) have voicing contrasts
in initial and medial positions; in ﬁnal position, however, we ﬁnd only the voice-
less members of these pairs. This is the source of substitutions, for example,
in bag →[bEk], bid →[bit]. The progressive ending -ing [Iè] creates a prob-
lem, which can be accounted for in two steps. Since [è] in Turkish requires the
presence of a following velar stop, and the velar stop in ﬁnal position cannot
be anything other than the voiceless variant, the rendition of -ing [Iè] is [Ièk],
as in going [goIèk].
Signiﬁcant phonetic differences are relevant to liquids, especially for the non-
lateral target retroﬂex approximant. The Turkish r-sound is an alveolar tap, /Q/.
In addition, it is produced voiceless (and with friction) in ﬁnal position 
(e.g. [kaX] “snow”). The alveolar lateral has both the ‘clear’ and the ‘dark’ 
variants, although their distributions are different from those of English and
create mismatches. All word-initial laterals and all coda laterals after front 
vowels are ‘clear’ (cf. English ‘dark’ realizations in lawn and sell).
The conﬂicts in vowels involve several insufﬁcient separations of contrast-
ing English pairs /i/ – /I/ (e.g. peach – pitch), /E/ – /æ/ (e.g. mess – mass),
/√/ – /A/ (e.g. buddy – body), /u/ – /U/ (e.g. fool – full), which are sum-
marized in the following chart:
Other Turkish vowels not relevant for mismatches are /y, ø, µ/.
The syllable structure of Turkish can be described as (C) V (C) (C). There
are no initial clusters. The language does allow certain double codas, which
can be described as “C1 = sonorant and C2 = obstruent, or C1 = fricative and
C2 = stop”. Because of great differences between these clusters and those of
English, all target onset clusters, all triple codas, and several double codas ex-
pectedly create problems.
Coming from a syllable-timed language, Turkish speakers are expected to
have difﬁculties with English vowel reductions and with rhythm. In addition,
I
i
i
E
æ
√
e
A
a
o
u
u
U
o
O

192
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
the stress patterns of the two languages are signiﬁcantly different and prove
to be sources of difﬁculty.
The following summarizes the major trouble spots:
•
missing target phonemes: /T/ →[t], /D/ →[d], /w/ →[v] (except in V_V),
/è/→[n] (except before a velar stop);
•
ﬁnal devoicing of non-continuant obstruents /b, d, g, dZ/;
•
signiﬁcant phonetic differences: liquids, especially the non-lateral;
•
under-differentiation of certain target vowel contrasts;
•
onset and coda clusters;
•
stress;
•
rhythm.
8.2.3
Greek–English
The overlay of the L1 consonants onto the English targets results in the fol-
lowing picture:
Other Greek phonemes not relevant for mismatches are /x, ƒ/.
Starting with the targets missing in the L1 inventory, we note the lack of
palato-alveolar fricatives /S/ and /Z/; these tend to be replaced by the 
alveolar fricatives with their combinations with [j] as [sj] and [zj] respectively.
Also lacking in Greek are the palato-alveolar affricates /tS/ and /dZ/, which
are replaced by the closest native alveolars, /ts/ and /dz/, respectively.
Although circled as a missing target phoneme, /è/ is a little different from
the others, because [è] is an allophone of /n/ in Greek occurring before velar
obstruents. Thus, problems are expected only in its occurrences in English with
no adjacent velar stops.
Voiceless stops in Greek are always unaspirated. Thus, problems are
expected for the English targets in the beginning of stressed syllables.
As far as the salient phonetic differences are concerned, we need to high-
light the liquids. The Greek alveolar lateral is always ‘clear’ and exempliﬁes a
salient phonetic difference; the r-sound in Greek is also noticeably different,
as it is an alveolar ﬂap or trill. A minor difference can be cited between the
/t/ and /d/ phonemes in the two languages; while these two are alveolars in
English, they are dentals in Greek.
p
     m
      w
b
t
s
    n
     l
f
v
T
D
d
z
k
h
g
dZ
tS
è
j
S
Z
w
r

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
193
Positional/distributional restrictions are also sources of difﬁculty. All Greek
consonants can occur initially and medially, and all except /d, T, D/ (among
the relevant ones) occur ﬁnally. Thus, English targets with the above three in
ﬁnal position may cause problems.
Glides /w, j/ can create problems between the two languages, as Greek 
learners of English tend to hear and pronounce these glides as high vowels /u/
and /i/ respectively. While there is sufﬁcient phonetic similarity between the
glides and the corresponding high vowels, pronouncing them as vowels will
give the impression to the English native speaker that there are separate syllables.
Vowel mismatches create the following insufﬁcient separations for the target
distinctions:
Greek has no diphthongs, but two vowel sounds can occur in sequence, and
thus learners can handle the target English diphthongs.
Major problems with phonotactics are associated with the ﬁnal clusters, which
are non-existent in Greek. Thus, in addition to some simple codas pointed out
earlier, Greek speakers will have problems with all the complex codas of
English.
Greek is another syllable-timed language in our list, and expectedly has 
no vowel reduction. This results in considerable difﬁculties in learning the rhythm
of English. In addition, different lexical stresses in the two languages are
sources of problems.
The following summarizes the major trouble spots:
•
missing target phonemes: /S, Z, tS, dZ/;
•
aspiration;
•
distributional restrictions: /T, D, d/;
•
salient phonetic differences: approximants;
•
insufﬁcient separation of target vowels;
•
stress;
•
rhythm.
8.2.4
French–English
The overlay of the native phonemes onto the target English inventory gives us
the following picture:
I
i
i
E
æ
√
e
e
A
a
o
u
u
U
o
O

194
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
French consonants that are not relevant for the discussion are /ê, Á/.
Missing target phonemes include the interdentals /T/ and /D/ (which are
rendered as [s] and [z] respectively, giving rise to mispronunciations such as think
[sIèk], that [zæt]) and affricates /tS/ and /dZ/ (which are rendered as [S] and
[Z] respectively). The status of /è/ is different in that while it does not occur
in native French words, one does ﬁnd it in ﬁnal position in borrowed words.
Allophonic differences may be observed in /p, t, k/ regarding aspiration.
As in other Romance languages, voiceless stops are unaspirated in French, 
leading to mispronunciations of English targets.
Salient phonetic differences belong, once again, to the realm of liquids. The
lateral in French is always ‘clear’, and the non-lateral is either an alveolar trill,
/r/, or the uvular fricative/approximant, /‰/, and these are consistently used
to substitute for the English liquid targets. The sounds /t, d/ present minor
phonetic differences, as these are dental in French.
The mismatches and the under-differentiations regarding the target vowel
contrasts are highlighted in the following diagram:
French vowels that are not relevant are /y, ø, œ/ and the nasal vowels 
/E˜, A˜, O˜, œ˜ /.
The syllable structure of French, which can be described as (C) (C) V (C) (C),
allows a maximum of double onsets and codas. In addition, the combinations
allowed by these double onsets (basically, C1 = /f, v/ or stop, C2 = liquid), and
codas (basically C1 = liquid, C2 = stop) are more limited than those of English.
Thus, some problems are expected in these mismatches.
Although French is classiﬁed as a syllable-timed language, it does not have
the typical ‘staccato’ (or ‘machine-gun’) rhythm, and has reduced vowels.
I
i
E
æ
√
e
e
A
a
u
u
U
o
O
i
p
     m
     w
b
t
s
   n
    l
k
f
v
T
D
d
z
h
g
tS
è
j
S
Z
w
dZ
r

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
195
Despite this, the rhythm is quite different than that of English. In an English
rhythm group, the ﬁrst syllable is stressed and its pitch is higher than the other
unstressed syllables. In French, on the other hand, the ﬁnal syllable of each
rhythmic group is lengthened and its pitch is leveled to half way before it 
is lowered. Thus, learners have considerable problems with English stress 
and rhythm.
The following summarizes the major trouble spots:
•
missing target phonemes: /T, D, tS, dZ, (è)/;
•
aspiration;
•
salient phonetic differences: liquids;
•
certain onset and coda clusters;
•
insufﬁcient separation of several target vowel contrasts;
•
stress;
•
rhythm.
8.2.5
German–English
The overlay of the native phonemes onto the target English inventory reveals
the following:
Other German consonants are /X, ç, t s, pf/.
Missing targets include /T, D, dZ, w/, which are commonly rendered as 
[s, z, tS, v] respectively.
Voiced obstruents /b, d, g, v, z, Z/, although shared by the two languages,
do present problems in ﬁnal position, as they are rendered voiceless in German.
Salient phonetic differences, once again, are related to the liquids. The
German lateral is ‘clear’, and the r-sound is a uvular fricative. It is also 
worth mentioning that /‰/ is normally an approximant intervocalically; 
after voiceless obstruents it is voiceless (e.g. trat [tXat] “kicked”); post-
vocalically before a consonant or word-ﬁnally, it is vocalized to [å]. All these 
variations are sources of the problems learners face when dealing with the 
target English retroﬂex approximant /@/. It may also be worth mentioning 
a slightly different phonetic realization of German /j/ in that it is produced
with friction.
p
     m
       w
b
t
s
   n
    l
k
f
v
h
T
D
d
z
g
dZ
tS
è
j
S
Z
w
r

196
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
Vowel mismatches are depicted in the following chart:
Other German vowels are /y, Y, ø, œ, E:, a:/.
The German tense vowels /i, e, o, u/ are longer but lack the diphthongal
characteristics of the ones in English. This presents a slight phonetic mismatch.
German syllable structure, which can be described as (C) (C) (C) V (C) (C)
(C), is as complex as that of English, although the speciﬁc combinations
allowed may not be identical. Thus, any difﬁculty that may be observed will
be due not to the number of consonants but rather to mismatches of the 
combinations of the types of sounds.
Being stress-timed languages, English and German share many characteristics
in stress and rhythm. Thus, these areas are not expected to create problems for
learners.
The following summarizes the major trouble spots:
•
missing target phonemes: /T, D, dZ, w/;
•
distributional restrictions: voiced obstruents;
•
salient phonetic differences: liquids;
•
insufﬁcient separation of target vowel distinctions.
8.2.6
Arabic–English
The overlay of the Arabic consonantal phonemes onto the target English
inventory reveals the following:
Other Arabic consonants are /x, ƒ, Ó, ¿/ and the pharyngealized (emphatic)
consonants /t¿, d¿, s¿, l¿, ¿¿/.
p
     m
     w
b
t
s
  n
   l
f
v
T
D
k
h
d
z
tS
è
j
S
Z
w
g
dZ
r
I
i
E
æ
√
e
A
a
u
U
o
O

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
197
Missing target phonemes /p, g, v, T, D, Z, tS, (dZ)/ are responsible for the
following phonemic clashes:
/p/ →[b] pan – [ban]
/f/ →[v] fan – [van]
/T/ →[s]/[t] thin – [sin] [tin]
/D/ →[z]/[d] breathe – [breeze] [breed]
/tS/ →[S] chin – [shin]
The occurrence of /T/ and /D/ in classical Arabic complicates the problem,
giving the impression that the learner should not have problems with these
targets in English, because she or he has been exposed to these sounds in the
study of Arabic. This, however, does not translate into reality and learners have
serious problems with respect to English interdentals.
The sound /dZ/, although present in some dialects of Arabic, was lost in
Egyptian Arabic; also noteworthy is the questionable status of /Z/.
The case of /è/ is similar to those of Turkish and Greek, in that this sound
occurs as an allophone of /n/ before a velar stop, but cannot stand alone. Thus,
while ﬁnger [fIèg2] may not be problematic, because [è] is followed by a velar
stop, sing [sIè] and singer [sIè2] will be (i.e. the expected productions are [sIèg]
and [sIèg2]).
The two voiceless stops of Arabic /t, k/ are unaspirated and are expected
to be problematic.
Salient phonetic differences are related to liquids once again. The Arabic 
lateral is ‘clear’, and the r-sound is an alveolar apical trill. In addition, both
liquids of Arabic have voiceless allophones pre-pausally following voiceless
obstruents. All these result in obvious foreign accents in their English productions.
Slight phonetic differences are observed in /t, d/ because they are dental in Arabic.
Mismatches and the resulting insufﬁcient separation of English vowel con-
trasts are depicted in the following:
Arabic syllable structure, (C) V (C) (C), clashes considerably with that of
English. Having no onset clusters and allowing only very limited double
codas result in an epenthetic vowel to break up complex English targets.
Although Arabic is a stress-timed language, vowel reductions do not follow
English patterns, and this results in some differences in rhythm.
I
i
i
E
æ
√
e
A
a
u
u
U
o
O

198
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
Word stress is fairly regular in Arabic; it falls on the ﬁnal heavy syllable (one
with either a long vowel or a VCC rhyme) of a morpheme. This is responsible
for the commonly observed errors (stress on the ﬁnal syllable as opposed to
the native English pattern of initial stress) in difﬁcult, expert, narrowest, insti-
tute, where the ﬁrst three words have VCC rhymes, and the last word has a
long vowel in the ﬁnal syllable.
The following is a summary of the major trouble spots:
•
missing target phonemes: /p, g, v, T, D, Z, tS, (dZ), (è)/;
•
aspiration;
•
salient phonetic differences: liquids;
•
insufﬁcient separation of several target vowel contrasts;
•
onset and coda clusters;
•
stress;
•
rhythm.
8.2.7
Russian–English
The overlay of the native language phonemes onto the target English inven-
tory reveals the following:
Other Russian consonants are /pj, bj, tj, dj, kj, gj, fj, vj, sj, zj, x, xj, ts, mj, nj, rj, lj/.
Missing target phonemes in L1 include /T, D, dZ, è, w/, which have the 
substitutes [t, d, tS, è, v], respectively.
Notable distributional and/or allophonic mismatches concern the following:
•
All voiced obstruents are devoiced in ﬁnal position, resulting in commonly
observed homophonies neutralizing the target contrasts, such as bag –
back, cab – cap, bed – bet, save – safe, in favor of the voiceless member.
•
Voiceless stops, /p, t, k/, unlike in English, are unaspirated and provide
another source for observable foreign accent.
•
While the lateral liquid is quite similar to that of English (i.e. ‘dark’), we
have a different situation with the non-lateral. The Russian r-sound is an
alveolar trill and this gives rise to a distinct foreign accent. There are some
cases that provide minor phonetic differences. Among these are /t, d, n/,
p
     m
      w
b
t
s
   n
   l
f
v
T
D
d
z
k
h
g
tS
è
j
S
Z
w
dZ
r

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
199
which are dental in Russian, and /tS/, which is slightly more palatalized
in Russian.
As the list of Russian phonemes below the diagram demonstrates, Russian
has several palatalized consonants, and learners may use the palatalized sound
when English targets occur in environments conducive to palatalization, such as
before a high front vowel or /j/.
Similar to the situation mentioned for Turkish, /è/ targets in ﬁnal position
undergo a two-step process. First is the insertion of the velar support, /g/, and
then the subsequent devoicing of it to [k], yielding productions such as going [goIèk].
The clashes in the vowel systems of L1 and L2 result in the following under-
differentiations of the target distinctions:
The limited ﬁve-vowel system of Russian is reduced to three, [i, a, @] in
unstressed syllables. Although both English and Russian are stress-timed 
languages, vowel reductions work differently; in Russian, [@] never occurs 
immediately before the stressed vowel, and this results in non-reduction in many
pretonic syllables of English target words. Also, Russian words contain only
one stress; thus learners will tend to stress only the syllable with the tonic accent.
The syllable structure of Russian, which can be described as (C) (C) (C) V
(C) (C) (C), is comparable in its complexity to that of English, and thus, this
area is not expected to be problematic for the learners.
The following summarizes the major trouble spots:
•
missing target phonemes: /T, D, dZ, è, w/;
•
aspiration;
•
ﬁnal devoicing of the obstruents;
•
salient phonetic differences: non-lateral liquid;
•
insufﬁcient separation of target vowel contrasts;
•
stress;
•
rhythm.
8.2.8
Korean–English
The overlay of the L1 consonant phonemes onto the target English inventory
results in the following:
I
i
i
E
æ
√
e
e
A
a
o
u
u
U
o
O

200
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
Other Korean phonemes are /ph, p′, th, t′, kh, k′, tSh, tS′, s′/.
Target phonemes that are completely missing in L1 include /f, v, T, D, dZ/,
and they are rendered as [p, b, t, d, tS] respectively in target English words.
Although /b, d, g/ are not in the Korean phonemic inventory, [b, d, g] are
present as allophones of /p, t, k/ between two voiced sounds. As a result, we
expect difﬁculties in English /b, d, g/ targets when they are not in between
two voiced sounds (e.g. book, cab, dog). Equally problematic are the /p, t, k/
targets when between two voiced sounds, as exempliﬁed in the following 
erroneous productions: apart [@bA@t], attack [@dæk], mocha [mog@].
As mentioned in chapter 2, [z] and [S] exist in Korean as allophones of /s/.
We repeat the distributional requirements here for convenience:
Consequently, we expect the target sea shells [si SElz] to be rendered as [Si sEls].
Liquids present both phonemic and phonetic problems. The Korean r-sound
is a ﬂap and is in complementary distribution with the lateral; [Q] occurs 
intervocalically and [l] elsewhere, thus giving rise to failures to distinguish
between target pairs such as feeling – fearing, soul – sore.
The mismatches between the vowel systems of L1 and L2 result in the fol-
lowing under-differentiations:
I
i
E
æ
√
e
e
æ
A
a
u
o
u
U
o
O
i
[S] before [i]
[z] after nasal
[s] elsewhere
/s/
p
  m
  w
b
t
s
   n
   l
f
v
T
D
d
z
k
h
g
dZ
tS
è
j
S
Z
w
r

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
201
Other Korean vowels are /y, ø, µ/.
The syllable structure of Korean, which is described as (C) V (C) (C), is much
simpler than that of English. Although the above formulation allows double
codas, the actual combinations are very limited. As a result, the wide variety
of double and triple onsets and codas in target English words are broken up
by vowel insertions.
Korean stress patterns are quite different from those of English, mainly mani-
fested as the rise in pitch on the initial syllable of the word or phrase. In addition
to the mismatches in stress, Korean, as a typical syllable-timed language, does
not have vowel reductions and this results in a clearly different rhythm.
The following summarizes the major trouble spots:
•
missing target phonemes: /f, v, T, D, dZ/;
•
sounds existing as allophones;
•
salient phonetic differences;
•
insufﬁcient separation of target vowel contrasts;
•
onset and coda clusters;
•
stress;
•
rhythm.
8.2.9
Portuguese–English
The overlay of the L1 consonant phonemes onto the target English inventory
results in the following:
Other Portuguese phonemes are /¥, ê/.
Missing target phonemes in L1 include /T, D, tS, dZ, è/. Of these, the ﬁrst
two have the substitutes [t, d] respectively. The sounds [tS] and [dZ] exist 
in Portuguese as the allophones of /t/ and /d/ respectively before /i/. 
Thus, we can expect problems when the targets /t/ and /d/ occur before /i/,
as in teacher, difﬁcult, where the common renditions are [tS] and [dZ], respec-
tively, for the initial sounds. The sound [è] is phonetically present before a 
velar stop.
As in other Romance languages, Portuguese voiceless stops are unaspirated
and create problems for learners in dealing with English aspirated targets. In
p
   m
   w
b
t
s
   n
   l
f
v
T
D
d
z
k
h
g
dZ
tS
è
j
S
Z
w
r

202
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
addition, no obstruent of Portuguese, except /s/, can occur in syllable-/word-
ﬁnal position. Consequently, English words with such demands receive an
epenthetic vowel.
Nasals do not occur in ﬁnal position either. The result is the nasalization of
the previous vowel in English targets (e.g. from [fQã]).
Liquids present both phonetic and distributional challenges. The lateral, 
/l/, is phonetically not very different from that of English (i.e. it is ‘dark’); 
in syllable-ﬁnal position, however, it is very much vocalized and becomes 
a [w] (e.g. Brazil [braziw]). The target word from a brand name of an 
analgesic Advil puts together three pattern clashes between L1 and L2. The
typical rendition of this word as [adZiviw] is easily explainable: since /d/ 
is not allowed in syllable-ﬁnal position, an epenthetic vowel [i] is inserted; 
now that /d/ is followed by an [i] it turns into the appropriate allophone 
[dZ]; the ﬁnal [w] is accounted for by the above-mentioned allophonic rule 
of the lateral.
The two r-sounds of Portuguese, alveolar tap [Q] and velar/uvular fricative
[x/X], are phonetically very different than that of English /@/. Substitutions of
English targets vary depending on the word position dictated by L1 (i.e. [x/X]
in initial position, [Q] otherwise).
Glides /w, j/ create problems similar to those we observed in Greek–English
mismatches; they are produced as high vowels /u/ and /i/ respectively, and
give the impression of separate syllables.
The vowel mismatches between the two languages are shown below.
The syllable structure of Portuguese, which can be described as (C) (C) 
V (C), can match English demands in a limited fashion. A ﬁnal single coda is
possible only if the consonant is /s/ or a liquid. Also, the double onsets can
only have the following structure: C1 = stop or /f/, C2 = liquid. Any other English
target onset predictably suffers a modiﬁcation.
Portuguese stress tends to go on the penult; thus anything different
demanded by English may prove difﬁcult for learners.
Although Portuguese leans more toward the ‘stress-timed’ pattern (Brazilian
Portuguese less than European Portuguese), it does not have the same vowel
reductions as those of English. This, coupled with the different lexical stress,
results in difﬁculties in target rhythmic patterns.
I
i
i
E
æ
√
e
A
a
u
u
U
o
O

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
203
The following summarizes the major trouble spots:
•
missing target phonemes /T, D, tS, dZ, è/;
•
different allophonic/distributional restrictions;
•
aspiration;
•
salient phonetic differences: non-lateral liquid;
•
insufﬁcient separation of target vowel contrasts;
•
onset/coda clusters;
•
stress;
•
rhythm.
8.2.10
Persian (Farsi)–English
The overlay of the L1 consonant phonemes onto the target English inventory
results in the following:
Missing target phonemes in L1 include /T, D/, which are substituted for by
[t, d] respectively. Persian also lacks /w/; although several manuals suggest
the rendition as [v], it actually is a frictionless approximant [V].
The r-sound presents a salient phonetic difference, as it is an alveolar trill
/r/ in Persian, with its allophones of a voiceless trill [r] in ﬁnal position, 
and the tap [Q] intervocalically. The result is a clear foreign-accented English
target /@/.
Vowel mismatches creating under-differentiations are shown in the following:
I
i
i
e
æ
E
æ
√
e
A
a
u
o
u
U
o
O
p
  m
   w
b
t
s
   n
   l
f
v
T
D
d
z
k
h
g
dZ
tS
è
j
S
Z
w
r

204
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
As in many other languages, the Persian vowels replacing the targets do not
have the English distinctions of tense/lax; rather, the quality of the vowels is
in between.
The syllable structure of Persian, which can be described as (C) V (C) (C), is
responsible for the difﬁculties experienced with the target double and triple
onsets of English. Epenthetic (prothetic in the case of s-clusters) vowels are used
to break up the impermissible clusters. Triple codas are problematic, as they
do not exist in L1. Also, although Persian allows double codas, the combina-
tions are more limited than those demanded by English; thus learners may 
experience difﬁculties with certain targets.
Since Persian stress is generally on the ult, there is considerable difﬁculty
with English stress patterns. Combined with the difﬁculties in lexical stress,
the syllable-timed characteristic of Persian, which does not allow any vowel
reduction, may lead to a very different rhythmic pattern than that of English.
The following summarizes the major trouble spots:
•
missing target phonemes: /T, D, w/;
•
salient phonetic differences: r-sounds;
•
insufﬁcient separation of target vowel contrasts;
•
onset and coda clusters;
•
stress;
•
rhythm.
The comparisons between English as L2 and several languages as L1 we have
looked at repeatedly highlighted certain problematic areas for learners. Table 8.1
summarizes these important targets that create phonemic as well as some signiﬁc-
ant phonetic clashes (the 15 languages include the 10 we looked at and another 5).
8.3
Differential Treatment of Mismatches
In the previous sections we observed, besides many phonetic mismatches, 
several examples of phonemic mismatches between a learner’s L1 and L2.
Although the difﬁculties resulting from these mismatches are real, there 
seem to be differences in quality among them, and consequently, degrees of
difﬁculty created by different types of mismatches.
One type of phonemic mismatch between two systems was a result of a situ-
ation in which the two sounds that were in contrast in L2 were non-existent
in L1. This was exempliﬁed by the /T/ – /D/ contrast of English (e.g. ether
[iT2] vs. either [iD2]). As we saw above, many languages, including Arabic,
French, German, Korean, Turkish, Persian, Portuguese, and Russian, lack these
completely, and the likely substitutions created violations of target contrasts.
The second mismatch that resulted in phonemic violations occurred when
two sounds that were in contrast in L2 were present as the allophones of a 
single phoneme in L1. As mentioned earlier, the English contrast between /t/
and /tS/ (e.g. tip [tIp] vs. chip [tSIp]) is under-differentiated by learners whose

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
205
L1 is Portuguese, because the two sounds are allophones of the same phoneme
in their L1, as shown in the following:
The ﬁrst situation involves acquiring new phoneme(s), and the second type
is a creation of a phonemic split from an existing allophonic variation in 
the native language. While one may be inclined to think that acquiring new
phoneme(s) will be more difﬁcult than rearranging the two existing sounds 
from allophones of the same phoneme to separate phonemes, research has 
proven otherwise. It has been shown that learning becomes more difﬁcult 
when the structures or sounds are similar in L1 and L2 than when they are
dissimilar (Oller and Ziahosseyni 1970; Flege 1987, 1990; Major and Kim 1999).
[tS]
[t]
/tS/
/t/
/t/
Portuguese
English
Table 8.1
Signiﬁcant phonemic and phonetic conﬂicts between English and several
other languages
T D →t d /s z
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
v →b
4
4
4
4
w vs. v
4
4
4
4
4
4
Onset/coda CC
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Fin. C. devoic.
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
i vs. I
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
u vs. U
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
E vs. æ
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
√vs. A
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Aspiration
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
@
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Stress
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Rhythm
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Portuguese
Arabic
French
German
Greek
Hindi
Italian
Japanese
Korean
Mandarin
Persian
Russian
Spanish
Turkish
Vietnamese

206
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
8.3.1
Basic vs. derived context
The level of difﬁculty of going to a phonemic split for L2 from an existing 
allophonic variation in L1 has a correlation with various contexts. In a 
thorough examination of this issue, Eckman et al. (2003) state that whenever
there is a conﬂict between L1 and L2 in the above manner (i.e. two sounds are
in contrast in L2 but are the allophones of a single phoneme in L1), the target
language phonemic contrast will be acquired ﬁrst in basic (tautomorphemic)
contexts, then in derived (heteromorphemic) contexts. Going back to the
Portuguese–English mismatch regarding the /t/ – /tS/ contrast of English, the
expected rendition of target English words tea and betting in the earlier stages
of learning will be [tSi] and [bEtSIè] respectively, which fails in regard to the
target contrast. Eckman et al. describe this as “stage I” (“no contrast”), where
the native language allophonic rule applies in both the basic context (i.e. tauto-
morphemic situation where the affected sound /t/ becoming [tS], and the 
relevant environment – following vowel /i/ – are in the same morpheme), and
in a derived context (in heteromorphemic context). Eckman et al. predict the
next stage (“stage II”) will show a partial contrast in the way the native rule
applies only in the derived (heteromorphemic) context (i.e. the sound affected,
/t/ becoming [tS] before high vowels taking place in betting realized as
[bEtSIè], while tea is realized as [ti] and not as *[tSi]). The last stage (“stage
III”) is the one where the target contrast is acquired in both the basic and the
derived context (i.e. in both tautomorphemic and heteromorphemic contexts).
Thus, the following implicational relationship holds: if a target pattern is
acquired in a heteromorphemic context, it implies that the same is acquired in a 
tautomorphemic context, but not vice versa.
This excludes a situation where the learner is successful in a derived con-
text (e.g. betting pronounced as [bEtIè]) but will fail in the basic context 
(e.g. tea pronounced as [tSi]). This hypothesis receives support from studies
where the acquisition patterns reﬂect such an order (i.e. learning is earlier in
basic contexts than in derived contexts).
8.3.2
Deﬂected contrast
Eckman et al. point out some situations where some phonemic mismatches
between L1 and L2 result in an intersection of two interlanguage substitutions,
and that one of these substitutions is systematically blocked. The rendition of
English interdentals /T, D/ by Portuguese speakers provides a good case for
this. The typical substitution for the /T/ target is [t] by the learners (e.g. thank
realized as [tænk]). As we saw earlier, Portuguese also under-differentiates 
the English /t/ – /tS/ contrast. Since [t] and [tS] are the allophones of a 
single phoneme in Portuguese, learners pronounce the target tip and chip
homophonously. While the learners realize the English target /t/ as [tS] before
a high front vowel, they do not reveal the same tendency when the target 
word has /T/ before a high front vowel. Thus, a word like think [TIèk] is 

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
207
not expected to be rendered as [tSIèk], but rather as [tIèk]. In other words 
learners distinguish the fate of two different [t] sounds. While the native 
allophonic rule converts the /t/ into [tS] before high front vowels, the [t] sound
that is the substitute for the target /T/ does not follow the same path. In this
way, learners distinguish the three target language phonemes /T/, /t/, and
/tS/, and prevent the neutralization of any contrast. Eckman et al. state that
their studies with Korean and Japanese speakers also conﬁrm this tendency by
maintaining the target contrasts.
8.3.3
Hypercontrast
Language learners may also be found to have difﬁculties with a newly acquired
contrast and substitute the wrong member of the phonemic pair. Eckman 
et al. call this phenomenon ‘hypercontrast’ and state that it results from over-
generalization or hypercorrection. It is suggested that hypercontrasts are 
motivated by speakers’ awareness of past errors they have made via L1 inter-
ference. For example, Spanish speakers have difﬁculties in acquiring the
English /d/ vs. /D/ contrast, as they are the allophones of a single phoneme
in their L1. Once they acquire the contrast, however, they may produce 
incorrect [d] for correct [D] intervocalically. Another example would be the 
following: a newly learned item with a /d/ target in initial position, which is
in accordance with the L1 pattern, may be produced incorrectly as [D].
8.4
Markedness
The different types of phonemic mismatches discussed above may be helpful
in sorting out different degrees of difﬁculty that learners experience in the 
acquisition of L2 phonology. They are, however, far from depicting the whole
picture. The reason for this is the varying nature of structural elements with
respect to their markedness. Markedness of a structure is derived from its 
common occurrence in languages. Simply stated, a structure (constraint) A is
more marked than another structure B if cross-linguistically the presence of A
in a language implies the presence of B, but not vice versa (Eckman 1977, 1985;
Eckman and Iverson 1994). Accordingly, two structures A and B, of which 
the ﬁrst is more marked than the second, will present different degrees of
difﬁculty for L2 learners. The classic example frequently discussed consists 
of the following two identically characterized situations provided by the 
mismatches of (a) German–English and (b) English–French, with respect to
voiced–voiceless contrast in obstruents. The voiced and voiceless stop series
/b, d, g/ and /p, t, k/ are part of the inventory of both English and German.
While both languages contrast the voiced and voiceless series in word-initial
and word-medial positions, the ﬁnal position contrast is available only in
English (e.g. back – bag); German neutralizes the contrast in favor of the voice-
less member, and does not allow the voiced member in this position. The 

208
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
mismatch created in this position can easily predict the difﬁculty that German
speakers have in learning English ﬁnal voiced stops, with commonly observed
substitutions such as cab [kæb] →[kæp], bed [bEd] →[bEt], and so on.
The second situation that can be described identically is a contrast existing
in all word positions in L2 but neutralized in one of the word positions in L1.
For this, we will consider the /S/ vs. /Z/ contrast in English and in French.
While both languages contrast the two sounds in medial and ﬁnal positions,
the initial contrast is available only in French. The prediction from this dis-
crepancy is that speakers of English learning French will have difﬁculties for
the above-mentioned contrast in word-initial position similar to that of
German speakers’ difﬁculties for the ﬁnal voiced stops of English.
/Z/
Voiced stops
Init.
Med.
Final
Init.
Med.
Final
L1 (English)
−
+
+
L1 (German)
+
+
−
L2 (French)
+
+
+
L2 (English)
+
+
+
Both cases reveal descriptively identical situations in that L2 has no restrictions
of occurrence of the target in any word positions, while L1 has a positional
restriction (i.e. English does not have /Z/ in initial position, and German does
not have voiced stops in ﬁnal position). Professionals who have observed 
these two identically describable mismatches would quickly point out that the
difﬁculties experienced in these two situations are very different, and acquisi-
tion of the English ﬁnal voiced stops by German speakers is a much greater
challenge than acquisition of French initial /Z/ by speakers of English.
Although both situations described deal with the voicing contrast in obstru-
ents (/S/ – /Z/ in fricatives, /p, t, k/ – /b, d, g/ in stops), acquiring the 
voicing contrast in ﬁnal position is a more marked phenomenon than doing
the same in initial position. Cross-linguistically, voicing contrast in ﬁnal posi-
tion implies the contrast in initial position, but the reverse is not known to be
true. Accordingly, the difﬁculty of acquiring the voiced stops is a result of the
more marked nature of voicing contrast in ﬁnal position. Thus, while simple
contrastive analysis can make predictions on the basis of the mismatches
between L1 and L2, it cannot go beyond that. It is only by referring to the 
relative markedness of the structures that we can account for the variable 
performance of learners for seemingly identical situations.
Digging further into the markedness relations, we can discover other factors
that are relevant for remediation. For example, it has been observed that 
learners have greater difﬁculty in acquiring the voicing contrast with velars
(i.e. /k/ vs. /g/) than with alveolars (i.e. /t/ vs. /d/); bilabials are the least
difﬁcult. That is, the tendency to neutralize the contrast by devoicing is greater
as the place of articulation moves further back. There is an aerodynamic 
explanation for such differences based on the place of articulation. The larger
the supraglottal area for a stop, the better it can accommodate glottal ﬂow for
some time before oral pressure exceeds subglottal pressure and stops the vocal
cord vibration. Since the cavity size gets increasingly smaller as we move from

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
209
bilabial /b/ to alveolar /d/ and then to velar /g/, the velar has the least chance
of maintaining the glottal ﬂow and, thus, is more quickly devoiced.
It has also been suggested (Yavas 1997) that the height of the vowel preceding
the ﬁnal voiced stop may be an important factor for ﬁnal devoicing. Speciﬁ-
cally, increasing the height (i.e. decreasing the sonority index) of the vowel 
creates a more favorable environment for the devoicing of the ﬁnal voiced 
stop target. The reason offered for this is that high vowels (i.e. lower sonority
vowels), by raising the tongue and creating more constriction than other 
vowels, cause higher supraglottal pressure and are more prone to devoicing
(Jaeger 1978). This vulnerability to devoicing seems to be carried over to the
following ﬁnal voiced stop. Thus, putting everything together, we might ﬁnd
a variable success rate, for example, for the following different combinations
with different degrees of markedness:
pig [pIg] (velar stop preceded by a high V)
Most marked
bag [bæg] (velar stop preceded by a low V)
bib [bIb] (bilabial stop preceded by a high V)
cab [kæb] (bilabial stop preceded by a low V)
Least marked
Another example to show the insufﬁciency of simple contrastive analysis and
the necessity of the markedness considerations comes from the coda consonants.
While CV is a universally unmarked syllable structure in languages (i.e. no known
language lacks CV syllables), any addition to it adds a degree of markedness.
A CVC syllable, while not a highly marked structure, may be completely absent
from a language, or alternatively may have some restrictions regarding what
class of consonants can occupy the coda position. For example, in a language
such as Japanese, only /n/ is permitted as a single coda. A simple contrastive
analysis will predict that any single coda other than a nasal (i.e. obstruent, liquid)
in an English target word would be problematic for a Japanese speaker. While
this prediction is accurate in a general sense, the degree of difﬁculty experi-
enced by learners in different classes of sounds is signiﬁcantly different; for
example, obstruent codas present much greater difﬁculties than liquid codas.
This situation, while inexplicable via contrastive analysis, is actually quite
expected if we take into account the relative markedness of certain groups of
sounds in coda position. Universally, obstruents are more marked (i.e. less
expected) as singleton codas. In a language with CVC syllables, the coda posi-
tion is most usually occupied by sonorants. There are two patterns that are
observed in languages that allow CVC syllables: (a) obstruent and sonorant codas
(e.g. English), and (b) only sonorant codas (e.g. Japanese). There is no language
that has obstruent codas but lacks sonorant codas; this indicates that sonorants
are more natural (unmarked) as codas than are obstruents. Actual examples
from L2 learning situations support this view strongly. For example, for
speakers of languages in which some obstruents and sonorants are permitted
as codas, such as Korean, Japanese, Cantonese (Eckman and Iverson 1994), 
and Portuguese (Baptista and DaSilva Filho 1997), the difﬁculty encountered
in learning single codas of English reﬂects the same hierarchy of difﬁculty, 
i.e. obstruents are more difﬁcult than sonorants.
↑⏐
↓

210
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
Patterns of acquisition of English liquids are also quite revealing with
respect to markedness conditions. English makes a contrast between /l/ and
/@/ in all word positions. A language such as Mandarin restricts its contrasts
between the liquids to the onset position; there are no syllabic liquids, and only
/r/ is found in coda position. A simple contrastive analysis will predict that
Mandarin speakers will be successful in onset position, and the liquid targets
of English in other positions will be difﬁcult. Paolillo (1995) examined the 
rendition of English liquids in ﬁve different environments: word-initial (e.g.
rain, leaf), postconsonantal (e.g. play, free), intervocalic (e.g. around, polar), 
syllabic nucleus (e.g. razor, apple), and postvocalic (e.g. fall, cart), and found
that there was a hierarchy of environments for successful rendition of the 
contrasts between the target English liquids. In descending order of favorable
environments, it was word-initial, syllabic, intervocalic, postconsonantal, and
postvocalic. If learners were not successful in one environment, it implied that
they were not successful in the environment(s) that came after in the order.
For example, if a learner had a problem in the intervocalic environment, 
she or he would have a problem in the postconsonantal and postvocalic 
environments. The explanation comes from the relative markedness of liquids
in different environments, which relates to relative acoustic salience in each 
of these environments. Speciﬁcally, the relative salience is higher in initial or
syllabic position than in other transitory positions or in clusters. This example
shows that learners’ difﬁculties cannot be explained by a simple contrastive
analysis mismatch between L1 and L2, and the relative markedness of the 
targets in different environments should be considered.
For another example of the invaluable insights we can gain from marked-
ness, we turn our attention to the aspirated vs. unaspirated stop mismatches
between English and several other languages, which are a signiﬁcant source
of trouble. While English has aspirated stops in syllable-initial position, stops
in languages such as Spanish, Portuguese, and so on are not aspirated. Thus,
it is commonplace that speakers coming from these languages experience
difﬁculties in their attempts to learn English; they replace the aspirated target
stops [ph, t h, kh] with their unaspirated versions [p, t, k]. While a contrastive
analysis between L1 and L2 can predict that these mismatches will create difﬁ-
culties, it cannot say anything about the varying degrees of difﬁculty among 
different targets. Several studies (Laeufer 1996; Port and Rotunno 1978;
Thurnburg and Ryalls 1998; Major 1987; Yavas 1996, 2002) found that learners
experience less difﬁculty in acquiring the aspirated stops as we go from 
bilabial to alveolar and to velar. In other words, we are dealing with the 
relative markedness among [ph, t h, kh], the ﬁrst being the most marked and the
last being the least marked. The reason for the varying degrees of ease or difﬁculty
(markedness) is related to the degree of abruptness of the pressure drop upon
the release of a stop. The more sudden (abrupt) the pressure drop is, the sooner
the voicing of the next segment (vowel or liquid) starts. In the case of differ-
ent places of articulation, differences in the mobility between the articulators
involved in occlusion are responsible for the different degrees of abruptness
of the pressure drop. The tongue dorsum separates more slowly (i.e. less

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
211
abruptly from the velum for the velar /k/ than the tongue tip from the 
alveolar ridge /t/, or the lips /p/). The slower, thus longer, release delays the
proper pressure differential to begin voicing for the following segment, hence
the longer lag (aspiration) for velars than for alveolars and labials.
It has also been suggested (Weismer 1979; Flege 1991; Klatt 1975; Yavas 2002)
that the sonority of the following segment may inﬂuence the degree of aspir-
ation of the stop. An initial stop seems to have a longer lag before a segment that
has a narrower opening (i.e. lower sonority index), such as a high vowel, than
before another that has a more open articulation (i.e. high sonority index), such as
a low vowel. The reason for this is that lower-sonority items (e.g. high vowels)
have a more obstructed cavity than high-sonority items (e.g. low vowels). Since
the high tongue position that is assumed during the stop closure in anticipa-
tion of a subsequent high vowel would result in a less abrupt pressure drop,
a stop produced as such will have a longer lag than before a low vowel.
Putting all these together, we can show the relative markedness of the 
following:
Least marked
kit
(velar with a high vowel)
cat
(velar with a low vowel)
tit
(alveolar with a high vowel)
tat
(alveolar with a low vowel)
pit
(bilabial with a high vowel)
Most marked
pat
(bilabial with a low vowel)
Our ﬁnal example with respect to markedness comes from a sequential rela-
tionship and looks at English double onsets in which the ﬁrst member is /s/.
The possibilities can be described as (a) /s/ + stop (e.g. speak, stop, skip), 
(b) /s/ + nasal (e.g. small, snail), (c) /s/ + lateral (e.g. sleep), and (d) /s/ + glide
(e.g. swim). Several languages that allow double onsets do not have the above
combinations, and Spanish is one such language. Thus, it is expected that Spanish
speakers will have difﬁculties with the initial sC (where C = consonant) tar-
gets in learning English and, indeed, they do. What is interesting, however, is
that the difﬁculties experienced by the learners are not the same with respect
to the different combinations of s-clusters (a), (b), (c), and (d) listed above. A
decreasing degree of difﬁculty has been observed for (a) – (d) in the learning
of English: /s/ + stop being the hardest, and /s + w/ being the least difﬁcult.
While a contrastive analysis between the two languages could predict that
English initial sC clusters will be difﬁcult for Spanish speakers (because
Spanish does not have them), it will have no means of going beyond that to
account for the different degrees of difﬁculty observed. Here, again, the expla-
nation will come from the relative markedness of the targets. As mentioned in
chapter 6, the relative naturalness of clusters is closely linked to the principle
of sonority sequencing, which dictates that the sonority values should rise as
we move from the margin of the syllable to the peak (nucleus). Among the 
targets in question, one of them, (a) /s/ + stop, violates this principle, because
the ﬁrst member of the onset cluster, /s/, a voiceless fricative, has a higher
↑⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
↓

212
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
sonority value, 3, than the second member, /p, t, k/, which has 1. Thus, as we
move from C1 to C2, a ‘fall’, rather than the expected ‘rise’, in sonority takes
place. Since this is a highly unexpected (marked) combination in universal 
terms, it is not surprising that it proves to be a very difﬁcult target to acquire.
The remaining targets, (b) /s/ + nasal, (c) /s/ + lateral, and (d) /s + w/, all 
satisfy the sonority sequencing generalization, because there is a ‘rise’ in
sonority as we move from C1 to C2 (/s/ + nasal: 3 to 5; /s/ + lateral: 3 to 6; 
/s + w/: 3 to 8). As we noted earlier, there was a decreasing degree of difﬁ-
culty among these three targets, and this also is explainable with reference to
their relative naturalness. The fact that laterals are higher in sonority than 
nasals, and glides are higher than laterals, results in different degrees of sharp-
ness in the sonority jumps between C1 and C2, and this seems to be responsible
for the greater ease of /sw/ (sonority difference of 5) than /sl/ (sonority 
difference of 3). Similarly, /sl/ has a bigger difference than /s/ + nasal (sonority
difference of 2) and thus, expectedly, provides less difﬁculty.
It is also worth mentioning that speakers coming from languages that do not
permit any onset clusters reveal different modiﬁcation patterns with respect
to different types of English clusters in contact situations. Error patterns of 
speakers of Egyptian Arabic, Sindhi, and Bengali (Broselow 1993) show that
sonority sequencing-violating /s/ + stop clusters are modiﬁed with a prothetic
vowel, while the ones that do not violate the sonority sequencing receive an
epenthetic vowel, which results in a speedier, native-like pattern:
Egyptian Arabic
street
→[istirit]
sweater →[siwetar]
study →[istadi]
slide
→[silajd]
Sindhi
school
→[Iskul]
please →[piliz]
spelling →[IspelIng]
slipper →[siliper]
Bengali
stamp →[istamp]
glass →[gelas]
school →[iskul]
slate
→[selet]
While, for reasons of space, we will not go on to other examples that
demonstrate the importance of markedness, similar examples can easily be 
multiplied for many other phonological structures. The important message that
comes out of all these is to alert remediators about the indispensable nature of
such information. The more one can see the highly structured nature of events,
the better remediator one can become.
8.5
Ontogeny Phylogeny Model (OPM)
All the above clearly demonstrates that interlanguage phonology is governed by
the following three components: L1, L2, and universal principles (markedness).

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
213
Although all these factors inﬂuence the productions of learners, the role of 
each may be different at different stages of interlanguage development. The
Ontogeny Phylogeny Model (hereafter OPM) proposed by Major (2001) deals
with just that and states that in the earlier stages of L2 acquisition, L1 inter-
ference is the dominant factor; the role of universals is minimal. Gradually, the
inﬂuence of L2 and universals increases, and the role of L1 decreases. In later
stages of acquisition, the only element on the rise is the inﬂuence of L2, with
concurrent decline of the role of L1 and universals, as shown in ﬁgure 8.2.
Although this general account may be sufﬁcient for the normal phenomena,
Major carefully points out that the proportions of the three components will
vary, depending on the phenomena under scrutiny. For example, in the simi-
lar phenomena, L2 increases in a slower fashion than above and the effects of
L1 also decrease slowly. The increase and later decrease of universals are slower
as well. To give an example for a similar phenomenon, we can think of the
relationship between alveolar stops of English /t, d/ and their slightly fronted
counterparts, dental stops in Spanish and Portuguese. Since such minimal 
distinctions are less likely to be noticed by the learner, a Spanish speaker would
be likely to retain the L1 interference longer here in his or her attempts at the
target English alveolar stops than, let us say, for his or her substitutions of the
alveolar trill for the English target retroﬂex approximant. Major’s account of
the similar phenomena is given in ﬁgure 8.3.
In the acquisition of the marked phenomena, earlier stages are again domin-
ated by L1 inﬂuence, and the acquisition of L2 is again slower than for the 
normal phenomena. However, the effects of L1 and universals are different in
subsequent stages; the effects of L1 decrease faster here and we see a rapid
increase in the effects of universals. In later stages, the decrease in L1 and 
universals is reminiscent of the similar phenomena, i.e. slow. Major shows this
as given in ﬁgure 8.4.
Major also points out that his OPM model can account for the stylistic vari-
ation in interlanguage phonological production. Accordingly, as style becomes
Influence of
factors (%)
100
80
60
40
20
0
1
2
3
Stages in acquisition
4
5
L1
L2
U
Figure 8.2
The Ontogeny Phylogeny Model: normal phenomena
(Source: from R. C. Major (2001) Foreign Accent: The Ontogeny and Phylogeny of Second
Language Phonology. Reproduced by permission of Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.)

214
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
more formal, L2 increases, L1 decreases, and universals increase then decrease.
While this statement is generally true, we are also reminded that, depending
on the stage of the learner, the proportion of the different components can vary
from speaker to speaker for the same style.
8.6
Optimality Theory (OT)
Explanations regarding the interaction of the differential effects of the inter-
language components over time, and the changing nature of the learner’s 
language, have also been analyzed by a recent theoretical approach called
Optimality Theory (OT). In the following, we will brieﬂy describe the prin-
ciples of OT and then give a few examples of its application to L2 phonology.
OT views language as a system of conﬂicting universal constraints, and dif-
ferent phonological systems as a result of different rankings of these constraints.
In other words, languages have different phonologies, because
(a)
languages differ in the importance they attach to various constraints 
(constraint hierarchy), and
Influence of
factors (%)
100
80
60
40
20
0
1
2
3
Stages in acquisition
4
7
6
5
L1
L2 Similar
U
Figure 8.3
The Ontogeny Phylogeny Model: similar phenomena
(Source: from R. C. Major (2001) Foreign Accent: The Ontogeny and Phylogeny of Second
Language Phonology. Reproduced by permission of Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.)
Influence of
factors (%)
100
80
60
40
20
0
1
2
3
Stages in acquisition
4
7
6
5
L1
L2 Marked
U
Figure 8.4
The Ontogeny Phylogeny Model: marked phenomena
(Source: from R. C. Major (2001) Foreign Accent: The Ontogeny and Phylogeny of Second
Language Phonology. Reproduced by permission of Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.)

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
215
(b) constraints may be contradictory, and thus be violated; if two constraints
are contradictory, the one that is ranked higher will have priority.
OT has two levels known as the ‘input’ (underlying form), and ‘output’ 
(surface phonetic form). The theory assumes that the possible output forms for
a given input are produced by a mechanism called GEN (the ‘Generator’) and
then evaluated by a mechanism called EVAL. An evaluation for the optimal
phonetic output is made by screening the candidates through the constraints,
and the candidate that violates the fewest constraints is chosen as the correct
output. This can be shown in the following diagram (Archangeli 1999):
Constraints are of two conﬂicting types:
(a)
markedness constraints, which capture the generalizations on linguistic
structures that commonly or uncommonly occur in languages (‘unmarked’
vs. ‘marked’). Unmarked structures are universal and innate and do not
have to be learned, while marked features are speciﬁc to languages and
have to be learned. Sample markedness constraints include “NO CODA.
Syllables must not have codas”; “*COMPLEX. No clusters”; “*V NASAL.
Vowels must not be nasals”.
(b) faithfulness constraints, which require that input and output match, so that
properties of the input correspond in identity to those of the output. These
are of three kinds:
MAX-IO: requires that input segments must correspond to output segments
(i.e., the input is maximally represented in the output); thus there
should be no deletion.
DEP-IO: requires that output segments must match input segments 
(i.e. the output must be entirely dependent on the input); thus, there
should be no insertion.
IDENT-IO(F): requires that the input representations of place, manner, and
voice features should appear in the output; thus, there should be no 
feature change or substitution.
In all grammars, the constraints are conﬂicting (Kager 1999), and thus it is not
possible to satisfy all constraints simultaneously. The conﬂict between constraints
is resolved by ranking the constraints in a language-speciﬁc fashion (constraint
hierarchy). For example, one of the markedness constraints, *COMPLEX
ONSET, which dictates “no onset clusters”, is ranked higher in Turkish, which
has no onset clusters, than in English, which allows onset clusters. The optimal
output (phonetic form) will be the one that incurs the least serious violations
output
Input
candidate set
CON
GEN
EVAL

216
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
of a set of ranked constraints. Consequently, any output candidate that 
violates higher ranked constraints will not be the one that will survive.
The expression of ‘domination’ (or ‘precedence’) among the constraints is given
in OT by a left-to-right ordering, with the highest ranked constraint being on
the left. In prose, the ranking is expressed with the use of double arrowheads:
A >> B (constraint A outranks constraint B). We will illustrate these in the 
following sample tableau, a two-dimensional table in which the constraints 
are listed across the top line and the candidates down the side.
/plet/ “plate”
MAX
DEP
*COMPLEX
+ (a) plet
*
(b) pet
*!
(c) p@let
*!
The input that is evaluated is placed at the top left corner. A * in a cell indi-
cates that the form of that row violates the constraint in that column, while *!
indicates that such a violation is fatal and thus eliminates that form from fur-
ther consideration. The optimal (winning) form is marked with a little hand,
+. In this tableau, the optimal output is the faithful [plet], because the only
constraint it violates is the low-ranked markedness constraint *COMPLEX. The
second candidate, [pet], violates MAX, which prohibits deletion, and the third
candidate, [p@let], violates DEP, which prohibits insertion. Both of these con-
straints are higher ranked than *COMPLEX, but the relative ranking of MAX
and DEP does not seem crucial.
If, on the other hand, the output is [pet], as commonly attested in child speech
via a cluster reduction process, then we will have the following:
/plet/ “plate”
*COMPLEX
DEP
MAX
(a) plet
*!
+ (b) pet
*
(c) p@let
*!
*COMPLEX >> DEP >> MAX
Here, *COMPLEX is the highest ranking constraint and thus is placed in 
the leftmost position. Candidate (a) violates the highest ranking and is thus 
eliminated from further consideration. Between the two remaining faithfulness
constraints, DEP (no insertion) and MAX (no deletion), the ranking will be in
that order. Candidate (c), [p@let], violates DEP by inserting a vowel, and won’t

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
217
be selected. Candidate (b) violates the lowest-ranked MAX by deleting a con-
sonant from the input, and thus is the choice.
L2 phonology and OT
In the following, we will give examples from OT approaches to some of the
observed phenomena in L2 phonology. Our ﬁrst example comes from a seg-
mental substitution of the English /T/ as [s] or [t] in languages that lack the
interdental fricative (Lombardi 2003). What is interesting here is that some 
languages use [s] and others utilize [t] despite the fact that all ﬁrst languages
have both segments. The idea advanced by Lombardi is that languages that
use the substitute [s] (e.g. German, French, Japanese) do so because of native
language transfer, whereas others that use the substitute [t] (e.g. Turkish,
Persian, Russian) do so because of a universal markedness constraint (frica-
tives are more marked than stops, thus *[continuant] >> *[stop]). Also relevant
is the markedness constraint *T, which conspires against the occurrence of 
interdentals in inventories. Finally, the relevant faithfulness constraint for this
substitution is IDENT-manner, which is deﬁned by the manner features [stop],
[continuant], and [strident]. The explanation lies in the ranking of the manner
faithfulness constraint relative to the markedness constraints. We have the 
following tableaux for the two different substitutions. First, we look at the 
situation where /T/ is replaced by [t]:
Here, the markedness constraints are higher than the IDENT-manner, and the
candidate that violates the lower-ranked constraint is chosen.
Second, we look at /T/ being replaced by [s]:
/T/
*T
IDENT-manner
*cont
*stop
T
*!
*
+ s
*
t
*!
*
*T >> IDENT-manner >> *cont >> *stop
/T/
*T
*cont
*stop
IDENT-manner
T
*!
*
s
*!
+ t
*
*
*T >> *cont >> *stop >> IDENT-manner

218
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
Because of the re-ranking of the faithfulness constraint (IDENT-manner), [s]
violates a lower-ranking markedness constraint and is the substitute.
Our second example will be on the native language transfer effects on com-
plex onsets. Turkish does not allow complex onsets. When Turkish speakers
learn English, target complex onsets are rendered with an epenthetic vowel 
(e.g., group [grup] →[gurup], speak [spik] →[sipik]). The situation can be
described in the following way:
/spik/
*COMPLEX
MAX
DEP
IDENT-VH
(a) spik
*!
(b) pik
*!
+ (c) sipik
*
(d) supik
*
*
The leftmost constraint, *COMPLEX, is a markedness constraint against 
having onset clusters. The second and third are faithfulness constraints that
disallow consonant deletion and vowel insertion. The last one relates to the
vowel harmony. Candidate (a) violates the highest ranking, *COMPLEX, and
is eliminated from further consideration. The remaining three avoid violating
*COMPLEX; however, they do this at the expense of other constraints.
Candidate (b) violates MAX (no deletion) and candidates (c) and (d) violate
DEP (no insertion). In Turkish, DEP is more violable than MAX, and thus is
placed lower in the hierarchy. The epenthetic vowel in Turkish is chosen from
the set of four high vowels, /i, y, µ , u/, following the vowel harmony rules
that call for agreement with the other vowel, /i/, in backness (thus, /µ/ and
/u/ are eliminated) and in rounding (thus, /y/ is eliminated). Consequently,
/i/ is inserted and candidate (c) is the surviving one.
Our ﬁnal example comes from ﬁnal obstruent devoicing. As mentioned earlier
in this chapter, this is a common process seen in the speech of many learners
of English coming from a variety of languages such as German, Russian,
Turkish, Dutch, and Bulgarian, to name a few. In such cases, the explanation
is based on native language interference, as these languages do not allow voiced
obstruents in ﬁnal position. Final devoicing, however, has also been observed
in learners of English whose language does not allow any obstruents (voiced
or voiceless) in ﬁnal position. Broselow et al. (1998) analyze such a situation
in Mandarin L1 speakers learning English. While English allows both voiced
and voiceless stops in ﬁnal position, Mandarin lacks both in this position. When
Mandarin speakers learn English, the clash created by the above-mentioned
mismatch is resolved by a variety of different strategies including epenthesis
(e.g. bag →[bæg@]), deletion (e.g. bag →[bæ]), and ﬁnal devoicing (e.g. bag

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
219
→[bæk]). The last option is an unexpected one because there is no such rule
in the native language. Thus, the outcome is not a result of interference, nor
is it coming from the target language.
Broselow et al. analyze the situation with the following two markedness 
constraints:
•
NO VOICED OBS CODA: syllable codas may not contain voiced obstruents;
•
NO OBS CODA: syllables may not contain obstruent codas;
and the three faithfulness constraints:
•
MAX (no deletion of consonants);
•
DEP (no vowel insertions); and
•
IDENT (VOI): an output segment should be identical in voicing to the cor-
responding input segment.
Initially, the constraint ranking for Mandarin, which does not allow any
obstruent codas, will be: NO OBS CODA, NO VOICED OBS CODA >> MAX,
DEP, IDENT (VOI).
The learners who devoice the target ﬁnal stops (instead of deleting the 
stop, or inserting a vowel after the stop) produce an unmarked form that is
not compatible with either Mandarin or English. Broselow et al. suggest that
these learners have re-ranked NO OBS CODA relative to NO VOICED OBS
CODA by moving the latter lowest in the hierarchy. The situation is charac-
terized in the following tableau:
/vIg/
NO VOICED 
MAX (C)
IDENT 
NO OBS 
OBS CODA
DEP (V)
(VOI)
CODA
+ (a) vIk
*
*
(b) vIg
*!
*
(c) vI
*!
(d) vi.g@
*!
By re-ranking the constraints in this way, Mandarin speakers who devoice 
target English voiced stops are in a situation comparable to German speakers
who produce all English target ﬁnal stops (voiced and voiceless) as voiceless.
8.7
Perception
Learners’ production is partially based on how they perceive the target sounds.
Literature on L2 phonology learning was heavily focused on production until

220
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
two decades ago. Since then, however, we have witnessed a surge in studies
on the importance of perception in shaping interlanguage productions. The rela-
tionship between perception and production is a complicated one. Questions
such as “What determines the perception of foreign sounds?” and “How do
things change with the experience in L2?” have been the subject of several 
studies. In the following, we will brieﬂy look at three widely discussed models
that offer explanations in L2 sound perception.
Native Language Magnet theory (NLM)
This theory, developed by Kuhl (1991, 1993, 2000), aims at explaining the devel-
opment of speech perception from infancy to adulthood. Its main focus is on
the dependence of perception on a given representation, and its consequence
for production. NLM proposes that native language categories are prototypes,
which are sounds “that are identiﬁed by adult speakers of a given language
as ideal representatives of a given phonemic category” (Kuhl et al. 1992). Each
one of these occupies a speciﬁc location in a space deﬁned by certain phonetic
properties (e.g. vowels by formant frequencies). These prototypes act as per-
ceptual magnets that warp the perceptual space. Once these language-speciﬁc
magnets are developed, infants lose the ability to discriminate sounds that 
they previously could, because the magnets distort perceptual space, making
certain phonetic boundaries disappear; hence the perceptual reorganization from
language-general to language-speciﬁc patterns of perception.
This seems to account for the facts relating to the changing abilities of small
children in sound discrimination. Very young infants are capable of hearing
all differences among the sounds in human languages, whereas adults display
a reduced discrimination sensitivity outside their native language. Exposure
to language produces a change in perceived distances in the acoustic space 
underlying phonetic distinctions. Infants’ precocious adaptation to the native
language’s sound categories and adults’ difﬁculty in discriminating non-native
phonemic contrasts have been shown in several studies. Werker et al. (1981)
found that English-speaking adults had difﬁculty discriminating two Hindi 
dental and retroﬂex stops (/9/ vs. /t./) that Hindi-speaking adults predictably
discriminated well. Yet English-learning infants at 6 to 8 months old discrim-
inated both Hindi contrasts. Werker and Tees (1994) showed that English 
learners declined in their ability to discriminate between the Nthlakampx
(Thompson Salish) velar and uvular ejectives (/k’i/ vs. /q’i/) as well as the
above-mentioned Hindi contrasts. For both contrasts in the two foreign lan-
guages, 6- to 8-month-olds generally performed to criterion, while only about 
60 percent of 8- to 10-month-olds succeeded, and very few 10- to 12-month-olds
did so; thus, it was concluded that the decline was virtually complete by 10 to
12 months, except for infants learning those two languages.
Since perceptual mappings differ for speakers of different languages, the per-
ception of one’s primary language is completely different from that required
by other languages. For NLM, the presence of a L1 language-speciﬁc percep-
tual ﬁlter makes L2 learning difﬁcult, as later learning is shaped by the initial

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
221
mappings. Foreign sounds are drawn to the native prototypes as a function of
their distance from them in the phonetic space. More distant foreign sounds
either assimilate to another prototype if they are closer to it, or do not assimi-
late if there is no nearby prototype. Two foreign sounds that are the same dis-
tance in the phonetic space from a native prototype are predicted to assimilate
to it equally so long as one is not closer to another prototype.
NLM makes certain testable predictions in the degree of discriminability of
foreign sounds in relation to native prototypes: it is predicted that assimilations
to more well-separated prototypes will be more successful than to less well-
separated ones (Kingston 2003). For example, the prototypes of high rounded
vowels that contrast in backness, such as /y/ vs. /u/, are farther apart than mid
rounded vowels, /ö/ vs. /o/, because vowels are more dispersed higher in the
vowel space. As a result, foreign vowels that assimilate to the high vowels would
be predicted to be more discriminable than those that assimilate to mid vowels.
Despite these interesting claims, several shortcomings of NLM have been
pointed out in the literature. For example, as noted by Mack (2003), the per-
ceptual magnet effect does not seem able to account for the fact that some 
early bilinguals have two distinct VOT systems, whereas others with apparently
similar dual-language experience, and hence presumably similar amounts of
exposure to prototypical and non-prototypical vowels, do not. Therefore, it might
be necessary to posit the existence of learner-speciﬁc prototypes. In that case,
one would need to identify which learner-speciﬁc variables determine how a
prototype is formed, which obviously is a momentous task.
It has also been shown that the perceptual magnet effect may not be robust
across listener groups (Frieda et al. 1999), as well as that discrimination of un-
familiar phonetic contrasts can be improved even in adults through extensive
natural experience, intensive laboratory training, or experimental manipulations
that reduce task memory demands (Logan et al. 1991; Lively et al. 1993; Pisoni
et al. 1982). Finally, there are several cases of children older than 12 months
moving to a new country and acquiring native phonology.
Perceptual Assimilation Model (PAM)
This model, developed by Best (1995), aims to explain learner behavior in 
acquiring L2 sounds by accounting for the perception of the relationship
between L1 and L2 sounds. The central premise is that listeners tend to assimi-
late non-native sounds to the native sounds that they perceive as most 
similar. In deﬁning ‘perceptual similarity’, PAM draws from articulatory
phonology (Browman and Goldstein 1986, 1989, 1992) in that it suggests 
that what listeners detect in speech is information regarding the articulatory
gestures that generated the signal. Gestures are deﬁned by the articulatory 
organs, constriction degree, and constriction locations. Categorizable L2 phon-
etic segments are perceptually assimilated to L1 phonological categories on 
the basis of their gestural similarity to L1 phonetic segments, unless they are
uncategorizable (assimilated as an unrecognizable speech sound that gives rise
to a new category) or unassimilable (heard as a non-speech sound).

222
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
PAM places emphasis on the perception (assimilation) of L2 contrasts by L2
learners, rather than on the perception of single L2 sounds. When non-native
contrasting sounds are both categorizable, perceptual assimilation to the
native system is predicted to show different degrees of difﬁculty. The non-native
sounds may be phonetically similar to two different native phonemes and per-
ceptually assimilated to separate L1 categories, which is termed ‘two category
assimilation’ (TC). In such cases, the discrimination is expected to be excellent.
If both non-native sounds are assimilated to a single L1 category, this will 
create a ‘single category assimilation’ (SC), which is predicted to be difﬁcult
to discriminate. SC assimilations are further taxonomized into those in which
both foreign sounds assimilate equally to the single native category and those
in which one assimilates far more than the other. In the latter case, the two
foreign sounds differ in ‘category goodness’ (CG) with respect to the native
category, and they are predicted to be discriminable to the extent that they do
so. The members of such CG assimilations are still less discriminable than the
members of TC assimilations, because they both assimilate to just one native
category. Thus, we have a continuum that predicts listeners’ success in dis-
tinguishing different foreign sounds: TC > CG > SC, with CG cases varying
between TC and SC depending on whether the CG differences between the 
foreign sounds are larger or smaller.
Support for PAM’s predictions are frequently found in the literature. The
American English /w/ and /j/ appear to be assimilated to the corresponding
Japanese /w/ and /j/. This is a case of TC assimilation. The English /@/ and
/l/ assimilating to a single Japanese /r/ is a case of SC assimilation (Best and
Strange 1992). Polka (1991) reported that English listeners tended to assimilate
Farsi voiced velar versus uvular stops (/g/-/G/) as a CG contrast, and
Nthlakampx velar versus uvular ejectives (/k’/ – /q’/) as an SC contrast, with
a tendency toward better discrimination of the former distinction, which is in
accordance with PAM’s predictions.
As pointed out by Mack (2003), however, it is not clear what predictions PAM
would make about the formation of two phonetic systems when simultaneous
acquisition of two languages or very early acquisition of an L2 occurs, as the
cases the model has been primarily applied to are those in which exposure to
an L2 system occurs when an L1 system has already been well established.
In addition, the model, which is primarily concerned with the role of L1 in
the perception of foreign sounds, is essentially static, and it does not include
any means by which an existing L1 phonemic system might be altered by 
exposure to non-native segmental contrasts.
Speech Learning Model (SLM)
Flege’s (1995) Speech Learning Model also treats phonological acquisition
with a view of phonetic approximation and interference based on perceptual
judgments. This model is concerned with ‘ultimate attainment’, and thus
focuses on long-term bilinguals and not on beginning L2 learners. SLM is built
on the ideas of categorical perception and equivalence classiﬁcation in the 

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
223
determination of how a learner will react to and ultimately acquire sounds 
in an L2. The phonetic perception of an L2 sound involves a comparison of 
the L2 sound with all sounds in the learner’s L1 system. SLM claims that the
two phonetic subsystems (L1 and L2) are cognitively represented in a single
phonological space and mutually inﬂuence one another. Learners relate L2 sounds
to L1 positional allophones, and L2 perceptual failure occurs when the L1 phono-
logical system ﬁlters out the distinctive features of L2 sounds. L1 and L2 
phonetic segments can be related along a continuum; sounds are classiﬁed as
‘new’, ‘similar’, or ‘identical’ on the basis of the difference between L2 sounds
and existing L1 sounds, and the model predicts how the learner will react. The
different categorizations are made in terms of acoustic similarity or perceived
cross-language similarity. If L2 sounds are categorized as ‘similar’, their
assimilation to the existing L1 phonetic categories will be through a process of
equivalence classiﬁcation, and will be produced as the L1 sound (never as an
authentic L2 sound). New categories will be formed for less similar and ‘new’
L2 sounds.
Applied to perception of L2 contrasts, SLM makes the following predictions:
‘identical’ sounds will present no problem for the learner, as all necessary 
knowledge is already available in the L1 (cf. PAM’s TC). If two contrasting 
sounds of L2 are designated ‘similar’ and both are assimilated to the same L1
category, discrimination will be difﬁcult (cf. PAM’s SC or CG). For example,
as we noted in section 8.2, the /A/ – /√/ contrast of English (e.g. body [bAdi]
vs. buddy [b√di]) creates lots of problems for speakers of several languages
(e.g. Spanish, Turkish, Greek, French, Arabic, and Russian, to name a few),
because these sounds are perceptually assimilated to [a] in L1s, and result in
discrimination difﬁculties of the contrast, as well as the accented production
of both English vowels. If, on the other hand, there is great dissimilarity
between L2 and L1 sounds, the sound will be judged ‘new’ (cf. ‘uncategoriz-
able’ in PAM), and it will not be assimilated to any L1 category. For example,
English speakers learning French as a second language could produce French
/y/ (a ‘new’ vowel for English speakers) more accurately than French /u/,
because French /y/ is perceptually more distant from the closest English
vowel than is French /u/, which has a near (but not identical) counterpart 
in English /u/.
SLM holds the view that there is no critical period after which the learner
will be unable to acquire an L2 sound system; that is, adults can retain the cap-
ability for accurate perception of L2 contrasts. However, it is also stated that L2
development is constrained by age of learning. It is predicted that learners are
more likely to have native-like perception with early age of learning (pre-puberty).
The later the age of learning, the less likely a learner is to hear the differences
between L1 and L2 sounds, because the learner’s L1 categories will be more
developed and are likely to impede the formation of new categories for L2
sounds. The model also states that L2 development is further constrained by
the amount of L1 use. It predicts an inverse relationship between frequent use
of L1 and attainment of native-level L2 perception. That is, L2 learners who
use their L1 frequently will be less likely to have native-level L2 perception.

224
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
Although SLM states that accurate L2 segmental production cannot occur
unless there is accurate perception, Flege (1995) does not claim that all foreign
accent is perceptually motivated. For example, it is acknowledged that the 
typical Spanish-accented English production of [Eskul] for school can only be
accounted for with reference to phonotactic constraints.
There have been several studies in the literature that showed considerable
support for SLM (Bohn and Flege 1990; Flege et al. 1994, 1997; Fox et al. 1995;
Rochet 1995). A more recent study (Aoyama et al. 2004) examined the role 
of the L1 and the perceived phonetic (dis)similarity between L1 (Japanese) 
and L2 (English) sounds in the production of English /@/ and /l/ by Japanese 
speakers. Since English /l/ is perceptually more similar to Japanese /r/ than
English /@/, it was hypothesized that Japanese learners of English would have
greater difﬁculty in acquiring the L2 (English) lateral liquid than the non-
lateral liquid. The study looked at L2 perception and production of English
liquids by Japanese children and adults at two intervals separated by one 
year. The results, in general, supported the hypothesis. While Japanese chil-
dren’s perception of English /l–@/ and /@–w/ contrasts showed signiﬁcant
improvement after a year, the adults did not show any improvement over time.
Also, the children showed greater improvement over time in the production
of English /@/ than English /l/. For /l/, neither the children nor the adults
showed signiﬁcant improvement. These ﬁndings support SLM’s predictions in
that they show better acquisition of the more dissimilar L2 sound (English /@/)
than the similar one (English /l/). Also, age-related differences in the rate 
of acquisition were apparent, as only the children showed signiﬁcant gains 
over time.
There are, however, several studies whose ﬁndings are at odds with SLM’s
claims. For example, Zampini (1998; Zampini and Green 2001), examining VOTs
of /p/ and /b/ in Spanish and English, found that students enrolled in an
advanced undergraduate course in Spanish phonetics showed signiﬁcant
changes toward Spanish-like categories (toward more short lag for English /p/)
in both production and perception, but there was very little relationship
between production and perception. Sheldon and Strange (1982) found that
Japanese learners of English /@/ and /l/ performed better in production than
in perception, a ﬁnding that is certainly at odds with SLM’s claim that accur-
ate L2 segmental production cannot occur unless there is accurate perception.
De Jonge (1996) examined the production and perception of /@/ and /l/ for
Japanese speakers and of /b/ and /p/ for Arabic speakers. She found that while
Arabic speakers mastered the contrast at early stages of proﬁciency, Japanese
speakers did not even at high levels of proﬁciency. She used her results to 
evaluate SLM’s (and PAM’s) claims and found that neither of them could 
fully account for the data. There is also a problem with SLM’s claim on 
‘new category’. For example, French front rounded vowel /y/, which is a 
‘new category’, would be perceptually differentiated accurately from both
back rounded and front unrounded French vowels, as well as from English
vowels. However, some studies (Strange et al. 2004, 2005; Levy 2004) showed
conﬂicting ﬁndings on perception of this vowel by American listeners.

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
225
The three models that have been looked at here (NLM, PAM, and SLM) cap-
ture the important insight that non-native contrasts are not uniformly poorly
perceived. Instead, the difﬁculty with which a particular non-native contrast
is perceived by listeners from a particular L1 background depends on the rela-
tionship between the sounds of the L1 and L2 in question. We also see that the
perception–production relationship is a complicated one. Learners can have
highly accurate perceptual abilities, but relatively inaccurate production ones.
Alternatively, they may have more target-like production abilities than their
perceptual ones. The different cues and skills used in perception and produc-
tion are real challenges in understanding the learner’s knowledge.
SUMMARY
In this chapter we looked at several important variables that are inﬂuential in
shaping the phonological productions of L2 learners. We saw that contrastive
phonological information can accurately pinpoint several difﬁculties that are
encountered by learners of speciﬁc languages. Beyond the simple contrastive
patterns, however, lie deeper principles that can account for different degrees
of difﬁculty related to phonemic contrasts. Target contrasts are incorporated
into the interlanguage phonology progressively; learners seem to have greater
facility in creating a phonemic contrast of the target language in basic (tauto-
morphemic) contexts than in derived (heteromorphemic) contexts. Also observed
is that whenever we have two intersecting interlanguage substitutions, one of
these is systematically blocked (i.e. deﬂected contrast), and hypercontrasts are
results of overgeneralization.
Native language patterns that are in conﬂict with those of the target language
alone are not sufﬁcient to account for all of the learners’ difﬁculties; marked-
ness of the L2 structures also plays an important role in shaping the interlan-
guage phonology. Major’s Ontogeny and Phylogeny Model, dealing with the
three components of interlanguage phonology – L1, L2, and universals – has
different predictions about the relative weight of these factors in the acquisi-
tion of different phenomena. Similar phenomena and marked phenomena 
are acquired more slowly than normal phenomena. In the earlier stages of 
acquisition, the patterns are basically governed by the effects of L1 for all 
phenomena, the effects of universals are minimal, and the gradual decrease of
L1 inﬂuence is slower in similar phenomena than in others. In later stages, the
inﬂuences of L1 and universals decrease more slowly in similar and marked
phenomena than in normal phenomena.
We also looked at Optimality Theory, a model that deals with the role of
markedness and language transfer effects, and their interaction. OT assumes
that interlanguage grammars are natural, dynamic systems in the process of
accommodating new inputs, and that L1 inﬂuence and markedness effects are
merely a consequence of the system’s design.
Finally, in addition to these phonological approaches to acquisition, we con-
sidered the role of perception in production and looked at perceptual models,

226
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
which concentrate more on phonetic approximation and interference based on
perceptual judgments.
All the above are indicative of the fact that the learning of L2 phonology is
a highly structured process, and thus attempts at remediation should consider
as many of these factors as possible. The capabilities of practices of remedi-
ators (language teachers, speech therapists) will deﬁnitely be enhanced by the
inclusion of a greater number of linguistically based courses in their training.

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
227
EXERCISES
1.
First, transcribe the following word-pairs, and then, with the con-
trastive information you had in this chapter, identify the languages
whose native speakers would have problems related to these target
English word-pairs.
cheap – chip
sieve – save
age – edge
bend – band
band – bond
fool – full
backs – box
look – Luke
feast – ﬁst
wait – wet
slept – slapped
2.
Now, do the same for the following target pairs in contrast.
glass – grass
peach – beach
pour – four
went – vent
feel – veal
vowel – bowel
dense – dens
three – tree
thick – sick
those – doze
leaf – leave
rope – robe
stow – stove
curved – curbed
math – mat
forth – force
soothe – sued
clothed – closed
sin – sing
cart – card
thin – chin
lamp – ramp

228
STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
sift – shift
sink – zinc
cheer – sheer
surge – search
dug – duck
3.
Now, do the same for the following triplets.
huck – hock – hawk
panned – punned – pond
bag – bug – bog
bid – bead – bed
stack – stuck – stock
4.
Although contrastive phonological information is indispensable for the
prediction of learners’ difﬁculties, it is not sufﬁcient in many cases,
because for certain phenomena, constraints based on universal marked-
ness have been shown to be inﬂuential in explaining the degree of
difﬁculty of targets. Order the following targets in terms of difﬁculty
(from most difﬁcult to least difﬁcult), and state the rationale.
(a)
single-coda consonants:
deal, deer, deem, beat, beach
(b)
liquids:
/l/ full, elect, lamp, ﬂy, belt
/@/ green, boring, tire, room, card
(c)
/s/+ C onsets:
slow, sticker, swing, small
(d)
aspiration:
pig, keep, park, course, torn, tease
(e)
ﬁnal voiced stops:
lab, bid, rod, rag, rib, wig
5.
Japanese lacks English target /T/ and learners replace it with a [s]
(e.g. thank [sæèk]). Also, [S] is an allophone of /s/ in Japanese before
/i/. This results in renditions such as sip [SIp]. While we have these
two patterns (/s/ as [S] before /i/, and /T/ as [s]), Japanese speakers’

STRUCTURAL
FACTORS
IN
SECOND
LANGUAGE
PHONOLOGY
229
rendition of English think is [sIèk] and not [SIèk]. Does this support
or counter the case made for deﬂected contrast in section 8.3.2? State
your reasoning.
6.
Transcribe the following (on “American English”) from T. McArthur,
The English Languages (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1998, pp. 220–7).
(a)
The American I have heard up to the present is a tongue as dis-
tinct from English as Patagonian.
(Rudyard Kipling, 1889)
(b)
The rich have always liked to assume the costumes of the poor.
Take the American language. It is more than a million words wide,
and new terms are constantly added to its inﬁnite variety. Yet,
as the decade starts, the US vocabulary seems to have shrunk to
child size.
(Stefan Kanfer, 1980)
(c)
I mean that almost everyone who touches upon American
speech assumes that it is inferior to British speech. Just as the
Englishman, having endured for a time the society of his equals,
goes on to bask in the sunshine of aristocracy, so the American,
when he has used the American language for business or for famil-
iar intercourse, may then, for higher or more serious purposes,
go on to the aristocratic or royal language of Great Britain.
(Fred Newton Scott, 1917)

9
Spelling and Pronunciation
9.1
Irregularity of English Spelling
In chapter 2, we saw that the ideal alphabetic system should have a one-
to-one relationship between the graphemes and the phonemes of a language.
In other words, the ideal writing system should be phonemic in representa-
tion. As pointed out in chapter 1, however, this ideal one-to-one relationship
is violated very frequently in English; the same phoneme can be represented
by different letters (e.g. /i/ 
, e
, 
), the same letter may represent
different phonemes (e.g. a in 
, 
, 
, 
), and phonemes may be
represented by a combination of letters (e.g. th for /T/ or /D/ as in thin and
this respectively, gh for /f/ as in enough).
The reasons for such discrepancies, embedded in the history of English, 
are many-fold. To start with, Christian missionaries used a 23-letter alphabet
for the 35 or so phonemes of Old English, which forced the deviation from a
one-to-one principle.
After the Norman Conquest of England in the eleventh century, French scribes
introduced several new spelling conventions. Accordingly, the following
changes occurred: Old English cw was replaced by qu (e.g. quick), h was replaced
by gh (e.g. might), c was replaced by ch (e.g. church), u was replaced by ou
(e.g. house). Thus, by the beginning of the ﬁfteenth century, the spelling of English
had become a mixture of Old English and the changes made by French scribes.
Some of the discrepancies were due to changes in pronunciation that took
place after the spelling system was established. For example, /l/ before a /d/
in ‘modal verbs’ such as would, could, and should, which was pronounced,
but then disappeared from the pronunciation, is retained in other words (e.g.
cold, hold). Velar stops, /k, g/, disappeared from the pronunciation before a
nasal in syllable-initial position (e.g. knee, knife, gnat, gnaw); however, they
are retained if the two sounds are in different syllables (e.g. acne [æk.ni], agnos-
tic [æg.nA.stIk]). Also noteworthy is the disappearance of /l/ before /f/, /k/,
/m/ when simultaneously preceded by a standing for a low vowel /æ, A, O/:
a __ /f/ (e.g. calf, half), but not in self; a __ /k/ (e.g. walk, talk), but not in
silk, elk; a __ /m/ (e.g. calm, almond), but not in ﬁlm, helm. Also, the deletion
above
father
any
gate
scene
either
each
nine
Applied English Phonology, Second Edition       Mehmet Yavaş 
© 2011 Mehmet Yavaş. ISBN: 978-1-444-33322-0 

SPELLING
AND
PRONUNCIATION
231
of ﬁnal [@] from Old English (OE) to Middle English (ME) gave us the so-called
‘silent e’, as in nose, name, and so on.
The fricative system underwent signiﬁcant changes; OE had only voiceless
fricative phonemes /f, T, s/ (and /x/, which was lost from OE to ME). The
sounds [v, D, z], which appeared as allophones of the voiceless ones, became
phonemic in ME. The sound /Z/ arose in the seventeenth century from 
the palatalization of the [zj] cluster (e.g. vision [vIzj@n] →[vIZ@n]). Mention
also should be made of [è], which was an allophone of /n/ before velars. 
Later in the sixteenth century /g/ was dropped after [è] in certain positions
and gave rise to the phonemic contrast between /n/ and /è/ (e.g. sin [sIn] –
sing [sIè]).
The Great Vowel Shift, which took place from the Middle English period
through the eighteenth century, introduced a very signiﬁcant reorganization
of the vowel system by means of a series of modiﬁcations. Brieﬂy stated, earlier
long vowels were raised (e.g., geese [gE:s] →[gis]), and vowels already produced
with high tongue position became diphthongs (e.g. tide [tid] →[taId], loud [lud]
→[laUd]). Since these changes occurred after the introduction of printing, no
corresponding shift in spelling was made. Also, the fact that many printers came
from the continent (for example, Dutch printers introduced the Dutch spelling
of word-initial /g/ as gh, as in ghost), as well as there being a lack of stand-
ardization (there was no spelling authority), contributed to the problem.
Borrowings from French (e.g. bizarre, bouquet, beige, debris), Italian (e.g. motto,
mezzanine, stucco, grotto), Spanish (e.g. junta, galleon, marijuana), German (e.g.
schnapps, Gestalt, poltergeist), Portuguese (e.g. macaque, verandah), Russian
(e.g. czar, intelligentsia), and Hungarian (e.g. goulash, czardas) retained their
original spelling and created more irregularities. Not all borrowed items, 
however, came with their original spelling. In some cases, they were introduced
with ‘transliteration’ (e.g. items from Greek such as pneumonia and mnemonic).
Since these violate English phonotactic rules, they are pronounced without the
ﬁrst consonant.
In some cases, problems arose because of the zealotry of some academics 
in making the spelling reﬂect Latin and Greek etymology. For example, the
words debt and doubt came to English from French dette and doute, respec-
tively, without a b. The so-called ‘silent b’ was inserted to make the words 
resemble the original Latin debitum and dubitare, respectively.
Finally, for some words, confusion resulted because of sheer carelessness.
For example, French coronelle, from which English colonel is derived, is
adapted from Italian colonello. When the word entered the English vocabu-
lary in the sixteenth century, it was spelled with an r. The confusion was resolved
by the combination of Italian spelling and French pronunciation.
9.2
Phoneme–Grapheme Correspondences in English
When dealing with the correspondences between graphemes and phonemes
we start with the list of phonemes, and the graphemes used to represent them.

232
SPELLING
AND
PRONUNCIATION
9.2.1
Consonants
Phoneme
Grapheme
Examples
/p/
p
pull, leap
pp
supper, apply
gh
hiccough
pe
tape
/b/
b
bed, lab
bb
rubber, lobby
bh
Bhutan
/t/
t
table, bet
tt
attack, attend
th
thyme, Thames
ed
talked, walked
/d/
d
day, bed
dd
ladder, addict
ed
robbed, pulled
/k/
c
care, car
cc
accord, acclaim
ck
sack, back
ch
character, chorus
cq
acquire, acquaint
k
keep, broker
qu
liquor
q
Iraq
que
mosque
/g/
g
give, bag
gg
mugged, egg
gh
ghost, ghetto
gu
guard
/f/
f
fence, thief
ff
offer
gh
rough
ph
phoneme
pph
sapphire
/v/
v
vowel
vv
ﬂivver
f
of
ph
Stephen
/T/
th
thin
tth
Matthew
/D/
th
they

SPELLING
AND
PRONUNCIATION
233
/s/
s
sell
ss
boss
sc
scene
c
cell
se
horse
ce
juice
st
listen
ps
psychic
cc
ﬂaccid
/z/
z
zero
zz
puzzle
s
is
ss
scissors
x
xerox
/S/
sh
share
ce
ocean
ch
Chicago
ci
special
s
sure
sci
conscience
sch
schnapps
sc
crescendo
se
nauseous
si
tension
ss
tissue
ti
nation
/Z/
g
massage
s
measure
si
vision
z
azure
/tS/
ch
chip
tch
watch
c
cello
cz
Czech
t
nature
ti
question
/dZ/
j
jail
d
gradual
dg
ridge
g
magic
gg
exaggerate
/l/
l
lake
ll
sell

234
SPELLING
AND
PRONUNCIATION
/@/
r
rain
rr
borrow
wr
wrong
rh
Rhode Island
/m/
m
mark
mm
summer
mb
climb
mn
hymn
/n/
n
name
kn
knee
gn
gnaw
pn
pnemonia
mn
mnemonic
nn
tanner
/è/
ng
king
n
sink
ngue
tongue
/w/
w
week
u
queen
/j/
y
year
ll
tortilla
i
union
/h/
h
house
j
fajita
wh
who
If we look at the correspondences in the reverse direction, that is, from
grapheme to phoneme, the relationships are less diverse. First of all, several
letters in the following list have regular phoneme correspondences. The ones
given in bold type also have this regular correspondence in double letters.
Letter
Phoneme
Example
b/bb
/b/
bay, rubber
d/dd
/d/
day, ladder
f/ff
/f/
fame, sufﬁcient
j
/dZ/
joy, jail (Spanish borrowings are exceptions, e.g. junta)
m/mm
/m/
moon, summer
n/nn
/n/
noon, innocent
p/pp
/p/
pay, appear
r/rr
/@/
rain, carrot
t/tt
/t/
table, attack
v
/v/
vote, avid
y
/j/
yes, beyond
z/zz
/z/
zero, buzz

SPELLING
AND
PRONUNCIATION
235
Two letters, c and g, each have two corresponding phonemes:
c
/k/
cat, cool
/s/
cell, ceiling
(also, as /tS/ in some borrowings, e.g. cello)
g
/g/
get, bag
/dZ/
gem, rage
(also, as /Z/ in French borrowings, e.g. prestige)
The letter s is the most proliﬁc consonant, with the following correspondences:
s/ss
/s/
sip, assist
/S/
tension, pressure
It also has the following correspondences as a single letter:
s
/z/
raise
/Z/
vision
The letter x is the only consonant that stands for a sequence of two phonemes;
it represents /gz/ if the vowel following is in the tonic syllable (e.g. exact, exag-
gerate). If the stress falls on the vowel before x, then it corresponds to /ks/ (e.g.
sex, excellent, execute; a couple of words, exit, exile, may have either /ks/ or /gz/).
Two double letters, gg and cc, have two corresponding values each:
gg
/g/
egg
/dZ/
exaggerate
cc
/k/
account
/ks/
accent
The following ﬁve single letters have regular phoneme correspondence as well
as being silent:
b
/b/
book, rub
silent
lamb, bomb
h
/h/
he, home
silent
hour, honest (words of Romance origin)
k
/k/
kitchen, cake
silent
knife, know
l
/l/
lake, ball
silent
would, should
w
/w/
we, wake
silent
answer, wrong

236
SPELLING
AND
PRONUNCIATION
Finally, we should mention that there are some isolated irregularities, as m is
silent in mnemonic, n is silent in autumn (but pronounced in autumnal), and
d is silent in handsome, sandwich.
Besides the single and double occurrence of one letter, English spelling
makes use of some combinations of consonant letters, with the following
phoneme correspondences:
ck
/k/
sick
tch
/tS/
watch
ph
/f/
phoneme (cf. /p/ + /h/ in successive syllables, e.g. uphill)
sh
/S/
shirt
The following two-consonant letter combinations have two different values:
ch
/tS/
change
/k/
character
In words and place-names of French origin, ch stands for /S/ (e.g. chef,
Chicago).
gh
/f/
enough
silent
daughter
In a few words, gh stands for /g/, as in ghost, ghetto.
ght
/t/
right
ng
/è/
sing
/èg/
ﬁnger
th
/T/
thin
/D/
this
In a few words, th stands for /t/ (e.g. Thomas, thyme).
9.2.2
Vowels
The phoneme-to-grapheme correspondences for the vowels are as follows:
Phoneme
Grapheme
Example
/i/
e
be
ea
meat
ee
free
ae
Caesar
a
karaoke
ay
quay
y
silly
ie
niece

SPELLING
AND
PRONUNCIATION
237
ue
Portuguese
ei
deceive
i
machine
eo
people
ey
key
oe
amoeba
/I/
i
miss
y
mystic
u
busy
e
exam
o
women
ee
been
ei
counterfeit
ie
sieve
ui
build
/e/
ay
say
ai
wait
a
name
ei
weigh
ea
great
ey
they
ee
matinee
et
ballet
ie
lingerie
au
gauge
/E/
e
set
ea
heavy
a
many
ai
said
ie
friend
ue
guess
ae
aesthetic
ay
says
eo
leopard
u
bury
/æ/
a
sat
i
meringue
al
salmon
au
laugh
/√/
u
bus
o
son
ou
couple
oo
blood
oe
does
a
about

238
SPELLING
AND
PRONUNCIATION
/A/
ea
heart
o
hot
a
father
ach
yacht
ow
knowledge
e
sergeant
/O/
a
talk
o
order
aw
saw
au
cause
al
walk
oa
broad
oo
door
ou
ought
/o/
ew
sew
o
no
oa
soak
oe
foe
ou
though
oo
brooch
eau
plateau
ow
blow
ough
furlough
eo
yeoman
/U/
oo
good
u
put
ou
should
o
woman
/u/
ui
fruit
ue
true
wo
two
oo
mood
ou
soup
o
who
oe
shoe
eu
neutral
au
beautiful
ew
grew
ieu
lieutenant
ioux
Sioux
/aI/
y
sky
i
site
is
isle
ie
died
uy
buy

SPELLING
AND
PRONUNCIATION
239
ui
guide
e
eye
ai
aisle
ay
kayak
ei
height
/aU/
ow
vowel
ou
about
/OI/
oy
boy
oi
avoid
eu
Freud
uoy
buoy
As in the case of the consonants, if we look at the grapheme-to-phoneme rela-
tionship of the vowels, we can ﬁnd more regular correspondences. The ﬁve vowel
letters and their sound values in monosyllabic words are given as follows:
Letter
Phoneme
Example
a
(1) /e/
sale
(2) /æ/
bad
e
(1) /i/
cede
(2) /E/
bet
i
(1) /aI/
dine
(2) /I/
sit
o
(1) /o/
nose
(2) /A/
dot
u
(1) /ju/
mute
(2) /√/
but
If the ‘vowel letter’ in a monosyllabic word is followed by a consonant, which
is then followed by the letter e at the end of the word, the sound value for the
vowel letter is the one given in (1) (the well-known ‘silent e’ rule taught in
schools); otherwise, the sound value is the one given in (2).
The situation is more complicated in polysyllabic words. For example, how
do we know the sound values of a in mutation and of u in reduction? Both in
[mjuteS@n] and in [@@d√kS@n] the stress is on the syllable before the sufﬁx. The
rule is ﬁrst to ignore the ending -ion, and then to count the consonants that
follow the vowel letter in question. In mutation, the vowel letter a is followed
by a single consonant, and thus the sound value will be the one given in (1),
namely /e/ as in [mjuteS@n]. In reduction, the vowel u is followed by two con-
sonants and thus the sound value is the one given in (2), namely /√/ as in
[@@d√kS@n]. Although this is quite workable, and indeed valid for many words
with a sufﬁx with the letter i followed by a vowel and then by anything else

240
SPELLING
AND
PRONUNCIATION
(e.g. -ial, -ious, -iary), it is not problem-free. Speciﬁcally, there are problems
with the letter i in the root. While in submission and addiction, the non-sufﬁxal
i is followed by two consonant letters and has the predicted value (2), namely
/I/, in revision and provision, it is followed by one consonant letter, but does
not have the predicted sound value of (1), /aI/, as the pronunciations are
[@@vIZ@n] and [p@@vIZ@n]. Unlike the examples discussed here, in some of 
the examples we looked at earlier, we saw that the vowel letters represented
the two possible sounds (i.e. long/short vowels), which cannot be accounted
for by the number of following consonants. For example, in pairs such as 
/e/ – 
/æ/, 
/aI/ – 
/I/, the ﬁrst words have
the bold-type focal vowel letter representing the long vowel/diphthong,
which is in accordance with expectations because the vowel letter is followed
by a single consonant. The second words in these pairs, however, employ 
short vowels despite the fact that they are followed by a single consonant, and,
according to expectations, should employ long vowels.
Besides the single vowel letters, English uses several vowel-letter combin-
ations for certain sound correspondences. The alphabet, which was borrowed
from the Romans, provides ﬁve vowel letters, i, e, a, o, u, which were
sufﬁcient for Latin. However, English has many more vowels, and thus 
several vowel-letter combinations, called ‘digraphs’, are utilized to meet this
demand. The values of the vowel-letter combinations do not change in
stressed/unstressed syllables (most common values are given ﬁrst, and then
the secondary values are listed):
Letter combination
Phoneme(s)
au
/O/ cause; also /æ/ laugh
(rarely at the end of words)
ea
/i/ meat; also /e/ great and /E/ heavy
(rarely at the end of words)
eu
/ju/ or /u/ neutral
ie
/aI/ died or /i/ niece; also /E/ friend
(rarely at the beginning of words)
oa
/o/ soak; also /O/ broad
(rarely at the beginning of words)
oi
/OI/ avoid
oo
/u/ mood; also /√/ blood and /U/ good
ui
/ju/ or /u/ suit, fruit; also /I/ build
ou
/aU/ about; also /√/ couple, /O/ ought,
/o/ though and /u/ soup
We should also mention the letters y and w, which have sound correspond-
ences related to consonants and vowels. We saw earlier that, as syllable onsets
mineral
mine
gratitude
grateful

SPELLING
AND
PRONUNCIATION
241
(e.g. in yesterday and week), they stand for the glides /j/ and /w/, respectively.
The letter y, after a vowel letter, as in ay, ey, uy, oy, stands for /e/ (e.g. day),
/i/ (e.g. key), /aI/ (e.g. buy), /OI/ (e.g. boy). The letter w, in the same posi-
tion, represents /O/ (e.g. saw), /o/ (e.g. sew), and /aU/ (e.g. vowel). The let-
ter y, occurring in ﬁnal position after a consonant, represents /i/ (e.g. happy,
baby) or /aI/ (e.g. ﬂy, sky), and usually changes to i when a sufﬁx is added
(e.g. defy – deﬁant; duty – dutiful; happy – happiness; lively – livelihood). This
change does not apply with a sufﬁx starting with i (to avoid two i’s. Thus, we
get baby – babyish, lobby – lobbyist, defy – defying). Finally, when an -s sufﬁx
is added, y turns into -ie (e.g. deny – denies; ﬂy – ﬂies). This rule has the fol-
lowing two exceptions: (a) y as part of an oy, ay, ey combination (e.g. employ
– employs; obey – obeys), and (b) -s as the possessive sufﬁx (e.g. Tommy’s,
anybody’s).
9.3
Morphological Basis of English Spelling
Despite all these apparent variations and discrepancies, which violate one-to-
one phoneme–grapheme correspondences, English spelling reveals some useful
lexical and morphophonemic information. For example, although preﬁxes and
sufﬁxes often change their pronunciation from one word to another depend-
ing on the phonological environment (allomorphy), their spelling is generally
kept constant. For example, the -ed of the past tense is pronounced differently
in tempted [tEm(p)t@d], sipped [sIpt], and jogged [dZAgd]. In this case, a given
morpheme (i.e. ‘past’) is represented with a single spelling, despite the fact 
that it is pronounced differently in different environments. Since these different
pronunciations can be predicted by a few phonological rules, only a single
spelling is needed in the orthography.
Sometimes the orthographic representation is half way between the mor-
phophonemic representation and the surface phonetic one. Such is the case 
with the spelling of the regular plural morpheme. The orthographic s is pro-
nounced as [s] (e.g. cats) or [z] (e.g. dogs) depending on the environment, while
es is pronounced as [@z/Iz] (e.g. boxes). Thus, we have two different spellings
for the same morpheme.
Roots and stems also maintain their spelling from word to word, despite their
differences in pronunciation due to full or reduced vowel alternations corre-
lated with stress, as in:
telegraph [tEl@g@æf]
–
telegraphy [t@lEg@@ﬁ]
agile [ædZ@l]
–
agility [@dZIl@ti]
senile [sinaIl]
–
senility [s@nIl@ti]
plural [plU@@l]
–
plurality [pl@@æl@ti]
and as in words in which vowels alternate in stressed syllables of morphologically
related pairs, where the long vowel/diphthong is shortened when it comes three
syllables from the end of the word:

242
SPELLING
AND
PRONUNCIATION
e – æ
sane [sen]
sanity [sæn@ti]
i – E
meter [miQ2]
metrical [mEt@@k@l]
aI – I
mine [maIn]
mineral [mIn@@@l]
o – A
verbose [v2bos]
verbosity [v2bAs@ti]
u – √
consume [k@nsum]
consumption [k@ns√mpS@n]
aU – √
pronounce [p@@naUns]
pronunciation [p@@n√nsieS@n]
Preﬁxes borrowed from Latin behave differently than others in that their 
ﬁnal consonant assimilates to the initial consonant of the stem. For example,
the adjectival negative preﬁx in- changes to im- before p, b, m (consonant 
letters that represent bilabial consonants /p, b, m/), as in im-balanced, 
impossible, im-mature, while remaining in- otherwise. There are other examples
given in manuals, for example ad- “toward” is characterized as assimilated 
in ab-breviate, af-fect, al-lege, ap-point, ar-rive; the preﬁx con- “together” is seen
as assimilated in com-bat, col-lect, cor-rect; and the preﬁx sub- “under” (e.g.
sub-merge) is considered assimilated in suf-fer, sug-gest, sup-port, and so on.
While this way of looking at things may be accurate historically, I do not think
one should put faith in its transparency in present-day usage, and such words
should be treated as indivisible.
The morphological base of English orthography also surfaces in certain con-
sonant letters’ alternating behavior (silent or pronounced). For example, a post-
vocalic g before ﬁnal nasals /n/ and /m/ is silent in sign and paradigm ([saIn],
[pæ@@daIm]), but is pronounced in derivatives of these words in signature and
paradigmatic. Similarly, word-ﬁnal b after m is silent in bomb and limb, but
is pronounced in related bombardment and limbic. Finally, word-ﬁnal n after
m is silent, as in damn and autumn, but is pronounced in related damnation
and autumnal.
Morphology–orthography correspondence sometimes takes the form of
“same pronunciation but different spelling”. The sufﬁx morpheme [@bl],
which makes a root into an adjective, is orthographically represented as either
-able or -ible. The orthographic representation is largely predictable on the basis
of the sound value of pre-sufﬁxal (root-ﬁnal) consonant letters c and g; if these
letters are pronounced as /k/ and /g/ respectively, then the ending is always
-able (e.g. applicable, eradicable, navigable); if, on the other hand, they are pro-
nounced as /s/ and /dZ/ respectively, then the spelling of the sufﬁx, com-
monly but not always, is -ible, as in eligible, invincible, reducible. This is not
applicable to cases in which there is a ‘silent e’ between c and the sufﬁx; in
these cases, the spelling of the sufﬁx is -able, as in serviceable and changeable.
An additional prediction can be made on the basis of whether the root 
takes the sufﬁx -ation or -ion, -ition, -ive. If the former is the case (e.g. consider
– consideration; apply – application; irritate – irritation), then the spelling of [@bl]
is -able. If, on the other hand, the latter is the case (e.g. depress – depression,
defense – defensive, digest – digestion – digestive), then the spelling of [@bl] mostly
is -ible, as in depressible, defensible, and digestible. (Exceptions to this principle
are found, e.g. support – supportive becomes supportable not *supportible, adopt –
adoption – adoptable not *adoptible.)

SPELLING
AND
PRONUNCIATION
243
9.4
American English vs. British English
There are several differences in the spelling conventions used between
American English and British English. The following illustrates some of the more
noted ones:
(a)
Nouns ending in or in AE are spelled as our in BE (e.g. armor, behavior,
color, tumor, humor, favor, harbor, honor, labor, parlor, vapor, odor,
rigor, rumor, splendor, vigor). The following nouns, however, are spelt
the same way in the two varieties: error, collector, glamour, terror.
(b) In several words, there is a transposition of r and e between the two vari-
eties (the ending is -er in AE and -re in BE):
AE
BE
center
centre
ﬁber
ﬁbre
somber
sombre
goiter
goitre
theater
theatre
meter
metre (unit of length), meter (instrument)
(c)
Several words that have only -ize in AE may also have -ise in BE:
AE
BE
capitalize
capitalise
dramatize
dramatise
naturalize
naturalise
realize
realise
organize
organise
(d) Sometimes the AE unstressed preﬁx in- (e.g. inquire, insure) has the cor-
responding en- in BE (e.g. enquire, ensure). This is not observed in all
instances; both varieties agree, for example, in encamp, enchant, endorse,
enclose, enable, endanger, enliven, enlist. (Both inquire and insure also
exist in BE, but with different meanings from enquire and ensure.)
(e)
Several words have the change of s (AE) to c (BE); thus, -ense of nouns
such as defense, license, offense are realized -ence in BE.
(f)
In several words a simple letter representation corresponds to digraphs
(two-letter combinations) in BE:
AE
BE
anemia
anaemia
anesthetic
anaesthetic
archeology
archaeology
cesarian
caesarian
encyclopedia
encyclopaedia
ether
aether

244
SPELLING
AND
PRONUNCIATION
leukemia
leukaemia
medieval
mediaeval
pediatrics
paediatrics
diarrhea
diarrhoea
maneuver
manoeuvre
fetus
foetus
estrogen
oestrogen
(g)
The ending -og of AE is -ogue in BE:
AE
BE
analog
analogue
catalog
catalogue
dialog
dialogue
epilog
epilogue
monolog
monologue
travelog
travelogue
(h) While, on the one hand, we observe consonant doubling in AE at the end
of verbs such as appall, enthrall, instill, fulﬁll, there is a correspondence
of single versus double consonants in the other direction in the unstressed
syllables (there is a drop of the redundant consonant letter in AE):
AE
BE
counselor
counsellor
kidnaper
kidnapper
traveler
traveller
worshiping
worshipping
jeweler
jeweller
panelist
panellist
(i)
There are several words of different types that are spelt differently in the
two varieties:
AE
BE
airplane
aeroplane
check
cheque
draft
draught
curb
kerb
story
storey
mask
masque
mustache
moustache
plow
plough
skeptical
sceptical
sulfur
sulphur
tidbit
titbit
tire
tyre
ax
axe
pajamas
pyjamas

SPELLING
AND
PRONUNCIATION
245
(j)
The following creative spelling is noted especially in newspaper headlines
and in advertising in AE:
Xmas
= Christmas
kool
= cool
Xing
= crossing
donut
= doughnut
hi
= high
lo
= low
nite
= night
kwik
= quick
rite
= right
u
= you
thru
= through
SUMMARY
In this chapter, we looked at English spelling and its relationship with phono-
logical patterns. Due to several historical factors, the present-day spelling of
English possesses many discrepancies when measured by the ideal (one
phoneme to one grapheme) alphabetic writing system. This, undoubtedly,
makes the task of spellers difﬁcult. However, it does not mean that we should
judge the system totally defective, because its abstract lexical and morpholo-
gical status serves as a useful tool for readers to create the connections.

246
SPELLING
AND
PRONUNCIATION
EXERCISES
1.
The words in the following pairs are spelt differently; some pairs are
pronounced the same (i.e. they are homophonous), and others are not.
Identify each pair as either the same (S) or different (D), and provide
the phonetic transcription(s).
Example:
plain – plane (S)
[plen]
price – prize (D)
[p@aIs] – [p@aIz]
(a)
key – quay
(b)
gorilla – guerrilla
(c)
person – parson
(d)
proﬁt – prophet
(e)
rout – route
(f)
draught – draft
(g)
genes – jeans
(h)
colonel – kernel
(i)
raiser – razor
(j)
patron – pattern
(k)
temper – tamper
(l)
cymbal – symbol
(m)
local – locale
(n)
discreet – discrete
(o)
review – revue
(p)
critic – critique
2.
Identify the vowel changes in the stressed syllables (spelt identically)
of the following morphologically related words.
Example:
gradient – gradual
letter a [e] / [æ]
derive – derivative
provoke – provocative
punitive – punishment
harmonious – harmonic
deduce – deduction
satire – satiric
serene – serenity
major – majesty
wild – wilderness
3.
Find an appropriate morphologically related word for the similar vowel
changes (represented by the same orthographic letter).

SPELLING
AND
PRONUNCIATION
247
Example:
letter e
[i] / [E]
austere – austerity
(a)
letter a [e] / [æ]
profane – ____________
____________ – gratitude
collate – ____________
____________ – sanity
(b)
letter e [i] / [E]
meter – ____________
____________ – supremacy
succeed – ____________
____________ – discretion
(c)
letter i [aI] / [I]
decide – ____________
____________ – titular
divine – ____________
____________ – linear
(d)
letter o [o] / [O/A]
cone – ____________
____________ – codify
protest – ____________
____________ – vocative
(e)
letter u [u] / [√]
duke – ____________
____________ – consumption
resume – ____________
____________ – assumption
4.
Transcribe the following citations (on “American English”) from 
T. McArthur, The English Languages (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1998, pp. 220–7).
(a)
The foreign language which has most affected English in our own
time is contemporary American. . . . The colloquial speech of the
American is becoming, largely as a result of the foreign ingre-
dients in the melting-pot, more and more remote from the spo-
ken English of the educated Englishman, but, at the same time,
the more slangy element in our language is being constantly rein-
forced by words and phrases taken from American, especially
the type of American which is printed in the cinema caption.
(Ernest Weekley, UK, 1928)

248
SPELLING
AND
PRONUNCIATION
(b)
It was the British empire, on which the sun never set, that ori-
ginally spread English around the world, along with the tea 
breaks, cuffed trousers and the stiff upper lip. But when the 
imperial sun ﬁnally did set after World War II, the American 
language followed American power into the vacuum.
(Otto Friedrich et al., USA, 1986)
(c)
Whose English language is it, anyway? From the tone of the new
‘BBC News and Current Affairs Stylebook and Editorial Guide’,
you’d think the Brits invented it. With unmistakable disdain, the
broadcastocrats in London call what we speak ‘American’. As a
user of Murkin English, I rise to the defense.
(William Saﬁre, USA, 1993)

Recommended Readings
Topics covered in this book, with varying approaches and in varying depth,
have been dealt with in several books and manuals. The following list is
intended to help the reader gain further understanding of the issues discussed
here.
CHAPTER 1: PHONETICS
Clark and Yallop (1995), chapter 2
Ladefoged (2001a), chapter 1
Wolfram and Johnson (1982), chapter 1
CHAPTER 2: PHONOLOGY
Carr (1999), chapter 5
Katamba (1989), chapter 2
McMahon (2002), chapter 5
Wolfram and Johnson (1982), chapter 2
CHAPTER 3: ENGLISH CONSONANTS
Bowen (1975), chapters 3, 6, and 8
Celce-Murcia et al. (1996), chapter 3
Kreidler (2004), chapter 3
Ladefoged (2001a), chapter 3
Pennington (1996), chapter 2
Roach (1991), chapters 4, 6, and 7
Applied English Phonology, Second Edition       Mehmet Yavaş 
© 2011 Mehmet Yavaş. ISBN: 978-1-444-33322-0 

250
RECOMMENDED
READINGS
CHAPTER 4: ENGLISH VOWELS
Bowen (1975), chapters 2, 4, and 8
Celce-Murcia et al. (1996), chapter 4
Davenport and Hannahs (1998), chapter 4
Giegerich (1992), chapter 3
Kreidler (2004), chapter 4
Pennington (1996), chapter 3
CHAPTER 5: ACOUSTICS OF VOWELS AND CONSONANTS
Kent and Read (1992), chapters 5–7
Ladefoged (2001a), chapter 8
Ladefoged (2001b), chapters 4–6
Lance and Howie (1994), pp. 267–344
Pickett (1980), chapters 5–9
Rogers (1991), chapter 9
CHAPTER 6: SYLLABLES
Carr (1999), chapter 7
Giegerich (1992), chapter 6
Hammond (1999), chapters 3 and 4
Kreidler (2004), chapter 6
Roach (1991), chapter 8
Yavas (1998), chapter 9
CHAPTER 7: STRESS AND INTONATION
Bolinger (1989)
Carr (1999), chapter 8
Celce-Murcia et al. (1996), chapter 5
Hammond (1999), chapters 6 and 7
Kreidler (2004), chapters 9–11
Ladefoged (2001a), chapter 5
CHAPTER 8: STRUCTURAL FACTORS IN SECOND LANGUAGE PHONOLOGY
Avery and Ehrlich (1992), chapters 7 and 8
Hansen Edwards and Zampini (2008), chapters 3, 4, 5, and 8
Kenworthy (1987), part II

RECOMMENDED
READINGS
251
Major (2001), chapters 2–4
Scovel (1988), chapter 3
CHAPTER 9: SPELLING AND PRONUNCIATION
Carney (1997)
Celce-Murcia et al. (1996), chapter 9
Hall (1961), chapter 3
Kenworthy (1987), chapter 5
Pennington (1996), chapter 5
Wolfram and Johnson (1982), chapter 13

Appendix: List of 
Sound Files
Sound File 1
Chapter 1, exercise 15
Sound File 2
Chapter 2, exercise 13
Sound File 3
Chapter 3, sentences with items of exercise 1
(a)
What do you have on tap today?
Don’t forget to tab your books.
How would you rate this movie?
I heard there was a police raid on that building.
(b)
Sculpting requires many different tools.
What was your favorite candy when you were a kid?
(c)
Have you ever tried curried crab?
I prefer a big dog over a small one any day.
(d)
Can’t you tell he’s somewhat of a glutton?
All of a sudden, it started raining.
(e)
They’ve been having a lot of bad thunder over there.
The wet thatch needs to be replaced soon.
(f)
We need better lighting in here.
This program is not compatible with your computer.
(g)
Though this watch is old, it carries great sentimental value.
There was a gentle wind out by the pier last night.
(h)
Have you seen the new Batman movie?
For this one, make sure that you use hot water.
(i)
Fish use their gills to breathe.
It was all gone.
I’m not too keen on the idea.
Who doesn’t like to have a new car?
(j)
Keep this bottle in a cool place.
We are going to the cove for the weekend.
Cave diving is a unique way to explore nature.
Applied English Phonology, Second Edition       Mehmet Yavaş 
© 2011 Mehmet Yavaş. ISBN: 978-1-444-33322-0 

APPENDIX: LIST
OF
SOUND
FILES
253
(k)
I hope Nadal wins the game.
I saw him wince at the sight of her special meatloaf.
For the other two bags, you have to pay extra.
He saves one-third of his salary every month.
(l)
Miss Sue is in Miami on vacation.
These big gloves belong to my dad.
He cited ten names.
(m)
The best things in life really are free.
You need a lot of stealth to work in this organization.
(n)
Their shooting-guard is on ﬁre tonight.
It is very comforting to hear that.
(o)
He was absolutely smitten with her.
I don’t like this sudden change.
(p)
I would like to play the piano.
His twin brother is coming tomorrow.
I always buy this brand of cream.
(q)
Kids like to tickle each other.
Everyone knows things are bigger in Texas.
Sound File 4
Chapter 3, sentences with items of exercise 5
It’s going to take a lot to keep him here.
Whoever said looking good meant spending a lot.
I can go to the store for you if you like.
Lamb meat is very prevalent in the cuisines of the Mediterranean.
She seems to have inherited her mom’s green thumb.
Citizen Kane is considered to be one of the greatest ﬁlms of all time.
Did you know that prison inmates sometimes marry their pen-pals?
After the students ﬁnish their ﬁnals, they’ll be home free.
The ﬂoor is wet, so don’t run there.
Don’t blame me that you can’t ﬁnd your keys.
I heard he’s staying in Greece until the rumors die out.
Sound File 5
Chapter 3, exercise 8
Sound File 6
Chapter 4, sentences with the weak forms in section 4.10
The boy bought a book.
You said that you liked it.
It’s good but late.
The boys and girls played together nicely.
You did it that time better than ever.
Put his name on the list.
Put her name on the list.
Put your name on the list.
Will he read?

254
APPENDIX: LIST
OF
SOUND
FILES
I told him to come.
Do you eat this?
Leave them alone.
Leave us alone.
I want an iPod.
Is it this way or that way?
He’s just arrived.
I’m at home.
This is for me.
He went to school.
I’m back from work.
Can I have a cup of coffee?
Sure, you can have some coffee.
Do you think the ﬁrst comedian was as funny as the last?
Do you eat this?
We had done that.
John has gone home.
I can do it.
I will be there.
He would like to come.
I should go.
I must go right away.
He could do it.
The kids have done it.
I’m going.
The students are going.
He was there.
They were just leaving.
Sound File 7
Chapter 4, words in exercises 4, 5, and 6
Sound File 8
Chapter 4, exercise 8
Sound File 9
Chapter 5, exercise 3
Sound File 10
Chapter 6, section 6.5.6, sentences with deletions in ﬁnal clusters
1
(a)
Some of the best gifts are handmade.
(b)
Please consult your hand-out for the updated schedule.
2
(a)
Some people like to spend money like drunken sailors.
(b)
Maybe they should spend it on a reality check.
3
(a)
I will be happy to answer any questions at the beginning of next class.
(b)
The next hour we will be focusing on stress in tone languages.
4
(a)
Did somebody come in just now?
(b)
I think she’s just as likely to go for the pink bicycle.

APPENDIX: LIST
OF
SOUND
FILES
255
5
(a)
Our hotel was on Left Street.
(b)
Is your left arm stronger than your right?
Sound File 11
Chapter 6, exercise 7
Sound File 12
Chapter 7, examples with items of sections 7.5.1 and 7.5.3
Sound File 13
Chapter 7, sentences 1–22 in section 7.8
Sound File 14
Chapter 7, words in exercise 2
Sound File 15
Chapter 7, sentences in exercise 4
Sound File 16
Chapter 7, exercise 5
Sound File 17
Chapter 8, sample words and sentences related to the contrasts given in table 8.1
/p/ vs. /æ/
dead – dad, wreck – rack, leather – lather, pest – past, ﬂesh – ﬂash
The gem fell in the jam.
I cannot bend this steel band.
/2/ vs. /a/
come – calm, none – non, cup – cop, bucks – box, shut – shot
Give this cup to the cop.
I hope that’s not a nut.
/u/ vs. /1/
shoed – should, who’d – hood, fool – full, pool – pull
Did he pull you into the pool?
Please take a look at Luke.
/i/ vs. /I/
each – itch, peak – pick, green – grin, bean – bin, least – list
These shoes should ﬁt your feet.
Does he still steal?
He dropped the whole ream / rim?
Who beat / bit James?
/w/ vs. /v/
wail – veil, went – vent, rowing – roving, row – rove, grow – grove

256
APPENDIX: LIST
OF
SOUND
FILES
It would be wiser to clean the visor.
Roses grow in that grove.
You will ﬁnd it in the west / vest.
/b/ vs. /t/
thank – tank, thick – tick, myths – mitts, bath – bat, heath – heat
He taught what he thought.
My team / theme won the ﬁrst place.
/b/ vs. /s/
think – sink, thaw – saw, faithless – faceless, bath – bass, forth – force
I don’t think it will sink.
We’ll have to saw / thaw this ice.
Sound File 18
Chapter 8, exercise 6
Sound File 19
Chapter 9, exercise 4

Glossary
affricate
A consonant that is articulated via a complete oral closure followed by a slow
release with a friction noise, as in the ﬁrst and the last sounds of church.
alliteration
The repeated use of the same initial consonant sound in a string of words.
allomorph
Any of the forms that are the members of the same morpheme (with the
same meaning). The forms [s], [z], and [@z] are the allomorphs of the plural morpheme
(e.g. cats [kæts], dogs [dOgz], and bushes [bUS@z]).
allophone
Any of the phonetically similar sounds that are the realization of a single
phoneme in varying contexts. For example, [ph] and [p] are the allophones of the
phoneme /p/; the former occurs at the beginning of a stressed syllable (e.g. pay [phe])
and the other elsewhere (e.g. sport [spO@t]).
alveolar
A consonant articulated in the region behind the upper front teeth (e.g. 
/t, s, n/).
ambisyllabic
A consonant belonging to two syllables: /n/ in phoneme [fonim].
antepenult
The third syllable from the end of the word (e.g. 
).
approximant
An articulation in which one articulator is close to another but not so
close as to create a turbulent airstream (friction). In English, liquids, /l, @/, and glides,
/j, w/, are approximants.
aspiration
A puff of air following the release of a voiceless stop at the beginning of
a stressed syllable (e.g. pet [phEt]).
assimilation
A process whereby a speech sound is inﬂuenced by the surrounding
sound(s) to make them more similar (e.g. voicing assimilation of the plural: cats [kæts],
but dogs [dOgz]).
bilabial
A sound produced with both lips (e.g. /p, b, m/).
breathy voice (also murmur)
A phonation type in which the vocal cords are only slightly
apart.
cardinal vowels
A system of conventional, arbitrarily chosen vowel qualities in terms
of which actually occurring vowels may be identiﬁed.
citation form
The form of a word when pronounced in isolation.
click
A stop sound produced with a velaric ingressive airstream mechanism.
closed syllable
A syllable that ends in one or more consonant sounds (i.e. a syllable
with a coda (e.g. the ﬁrst syllable of Atlanta, and the last syllable of geminate)).
coda
Whatever comes after the nucleus of the syllable (e.g. /t/ in cat).
CON
A component of Optimality Theory that provides the criteria (i.e. violable con-
straints) used to decide between candidates.
an.te.pe.nult
Applied English Phonology, Second Edition       Mehmet Yavaş 
© 2011 Mehmet Yavaş. ISBN: 978-1-444-33322-0 

258
GLOSSARY
consonant cluster
Two or more adjacent tautosyllabic (in the same syllable) consonants
(e.g. sprints has one three-consonant cluster at the beginning and one at the end).
content word
A word that contributes to the lexical meaning of an utterance; usually
stressed (lexical morphemes such as nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs of time, 
manner, and place).
contraction
Deletion of the vocalic portion of auxiliary verbs and negations that 
creates the shortened forms (e.g. I will →I’ll, will not →won’t).
contrastive
Of a relation between two segments that can occur in the same environ-
ment to produce different meanings. From pig and big, we conclude that their initial
sounds are contrastive.
creaky voice
(also laryngealization)
A type of phonation in which the arytenoid 
cartilages hold the posterior end of the vocal cords together so that they can vibrate
only at the other end.
diphthong
A complex vowel sound in which the tongue moves from one position to
another in the mouth (e.g. /aI/ in buy).
ejective
A stop sound produced with an egressive glottalic airstream.
elision
A process in which a consonant is left out in order to make the articulation
easier (e.g. ﬁfth is pronounced [fIT] instead of [fIfT]).
epenthesis
The insertion of one or more sounds in the middle of a word (e.g. prince
is pronounced with an epenthetic [t], [p@Ints]).
EVAL
A component of Optimality Theory that chooses the optimal candidate based
on the constraints.
formant
A concentration of acoustic energy within a particular frequency band.
frequency
The quantity representing the number of complete cycles performed by a
given sound wave per unit time, commonly expressed in Hertz (Hz).
fricative
A consonant produced with a partial obstruction of the airstream in which the
air is pushed through a narrow constriction, resulting in a friction noise (e.g. /f, s, T/).
function word
A word that contributes little to the lexical meaning of an utterance;
usually unstressed in a sentence (e.g. grammatical morphemes, such as prepositions,
determiners, auxiliary verbs, and so on).
geminate
A sequence of two identical segments (e.g. geminate /n/ in Italian nonno).
In English, it can occur only at morpheme boundaries (e.g. unknown).
GEN
A component of Optimality Theory that generates the list of possible outputs or
candidates.
glide (or semi-vowel)
A vowel-like speech sound that functions as a consonant 
(e.g. English /j, w/).
glottalic airstream mechanism
Upward/downward movement of pharynx air by 
the action of the glottis; stops produced this way are called ejectives (upward) and
implosives (downward).
glottis
The space between the vocal cords.
heterosyllabic
Belonging to separate syllables (e.g. /b/ and /m/ are heterosyllabic in
submarine).
homophones
Words that sound the same but are spelled differently (e.g. right – write,
scene – seen).
homorganic
Of sounds, having the same place of articulation (e.g. the last two sounds
of limp and tent).
implosive
A stop made with an ingressive glottalic airstream.
intonation
The pattern of pitch changes in a phrase or a sentence.
IPA
International Phonetics Association; also stands for the International Phonetic
Alphabet.

GLOSSARY
259
labialization
The presence of some degree of lip rounding (e.g. English /S, Z/).
labio-dental
An articulation involving the lower lip and the upper front teeth (e.g. 
/f, v/).
labio-velar
An articulation with the two lips approaching one another, and the back
of the tongue raised toward the velum (e.g. /w/).
lateral
An articulation in which there is an obstruction in the midline but the
airstream ﬂows over the sides of the tongue (e.g. /l/).
lateral plosion
The release of a stop by lowering the sides of the tongue, as at the end
of ladle.
liquids
Laterals and various kinds of r-sounds.
minimal pair
A set of two words that differ in one phoneme (e.g. chip – tip).
morpheme
The smallest meaningful unit in language. Cat has one morpheme, cats has
two, unfaithful has three, and unfaithfulness has four morphemes.
murmur
See breathy voice.
nasal
A sound produced with a lowered velum so that, when the closure in the mouth
is released, the air rushes out through the nose as well as through the mouth (e.g.
the initial and ﬁnal sounds of moon).
nasal plosion
The release of a stop by lowering the velum, so that the air escapes through
the nose (e.g. the end of sudden).
Northern Cities Shift
A change shift in the sound of some vowels in the dialect region
of American English known as the inland North.
nucleus
The most prominent part (peak) of a syllable; most often a vowel or a 
diphthong.
obstruent
A sound that is articulated with an obstruction in the vocal tract, which is
enough to produce friction noise (e.g. stops, fricatives, and affricates).
onset
The components of a syllable preceding the rhyme (e.g. /bl/ of blue).
open syllable
A syllable with no consonant sound at the end (e.g. bee).
Optimality Theory (OT)
A linguistic model proposing that the observed forms of 
language arise from the interaction between conﬂicting constraints.
palatalization
A secondary articulation involving the raising of the front of the
tongue toward the palate.
palato-alveolar
An articulation between the tongue blade and the back of the 
alveolar ridge (e.g. /S, dZ/).
penult
The next-to-last syllable in a word (e.g. pho.no.lo.gy).
pharyngealization
A secondary articulation in which the root of the tongue is
retracted into the pharynx.
phonetics
The study of speech sounds.
phonology
The description of patterns of sounds in a language.
phonotactics
A set of constraints of the possible sequences of phonemes within a 
syllable or a word.
pitch
The perceptual correlate of the frequency of a sound. The higher the frequency
of vocal cord vibration, the higher the pitch.
prosody
See suprasegmentals.
pulmonic airstream mechanism
The movement of lung air by the respiratory muscles.
reduced vowel
A vowel that is pronounced with a centralized schwa ([@]) quality (e.g.
the ﬁrst vowel of photography and the second vowel of photograph).
resonance
The way in which the body of air in the vocal tract will vibrate when set
in motion.
retroﬂex
An articulation involving the tip of the tongue and the back of the alveolar
ridge.

260
GLOSSARY
rhotic
Referring to a dialect in which /r/ is pronounced in any position of occurrence.
rhyme
The part of a syllable that follows the onset (e.g. /Int/ in print).
secondary articulation
Any articulation that accompanies another (primary) articu-
lation and that involves a less radical constriction than the primary articulation, such
as palatalization or labialization.
segment
An individual sound, consonant, or vowel.
semi-vowel
See glide.
sibilant
A fricative or an affricate that is produced with a high-frequency energy, 
usually by means of a groove in the tongue (e.g. /s, z, S, Z, tS, dZ/).
sociophonetics
Phonetic realizations that vary as a function of a range of social 
factors, such as age, gender, ethnicity, class, and individual identity.
sonorant
A sound that is not an obstruent (nasals, liquids, glides, vowels).
Southern Shift
A change shift in the sounds of some vowels throughout the Southern
states, the mid-Atlantic states, and the Southern mountain states.
spectrogram
A picture of a sound showing how the component frequencies change
with time.
stop
A consonant sound that is produced with a complete closure in some part of the
vocal tract, followed by an abrupt release (e.g. /p, d, k/).
stress
Emphasis on a particular syllable established by loudness, greater duration, and
higher pitch.
stress-timing
The rhythm in which stressed syllables occur at approximately equal 
intervals.
suprasegmentals
Phonetic features that apply to units greater than segments (i.e. 
syllables, phrases, sentences), such as stress, length, tone, and intonation.
syllabic consonant
A consonant that, in a particular case, functions as a syllabic
nucleus (e.g. /n/ in button).
syllable-timing
The rhythm in which each syllable has equal weight and duration.
tautosyllabic
Refers to segments that belong to the same syllable. For example, /mp/
in temptation is tautosyllabic, but is not in complain.
tone
A particular pitch that affects the meaning of a word.
tonic syllable
The syllable that carries the major pitch change.
ult
The last syllable in a word (e.g. 
).
uvular
An articulation involving the back of the tongue and the uvula.
velar
An articulation involving the back of the tongue and the velum (e.g. /k, g, è/).
velaric airstream mechanism
Movement of the mouth air by action of the tongue, as
in clicks.
velarization
Raising the back of the tongue toward the velum, as in the dark /l/ 
(e.g. full).
voice bar
A dark area near the baseline in a spectrogram, indicating voicing in a 
consonant.
voiced
Refers to sounds made with the vocal cords vibrating (e.g. /b, d, m, w, z/).
voiceless
Refers to sounds made without vocal cord vibration (e.g. /p, s, k, S, T/).
voice onset time
The interval between the release of a stop and the start of voicing
for the following segment.
weak form
The common, unstressed form of a function word (e.g. [D@t] for that).
ra.di.o

References
Aoyama, K., Flege, J. E., Guion, S. G., Akahane-Yamada, R., and Yamada, T. (2004).
Perceived phonetic dissimilarity and L2 speech learning: the case of Japanese /r/ and
English /l/ and /r/. Journal of Phonetics 32: 233–50.
Archangeli, D. (1999). Introducing Optimality Theory. Annual Review of Anthropology 28:
531–52.
Avery, P. and Ehrlich, S. (1992). Teaching American English Pronunciation. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Bailey, C.-J. N. (1983). A concise but comprehensive approach to intonation for learners
of English. Arbeiten aus Anglistik und Amerikanistik 8 (3): 3–27.
Ball, M. and Lowry, O. (2001). Methods in Clinical Phonetics. London: Whurr.
Baptista, B. and DaSilva Filho, J. (1997). The inﬂuence of markedness and syllable 
contact on the production of English ﬁnal consonants by EFL learners. In J. Leather
and A. James (eds.), New Sounds 97: Proceedings of the Third International Symposium
on the Acquisition of Second Language Speech (pp. 26–34). Klagenfurt: University of
Klagenfurt.
Beland, R., Caplan, D., and Nespoulous, J. L. (1990). The role of abstract phonological
representation in word production: evidence from phonemic paraphasias. Journal of
Neurolinguistics 5: 125–64.
Best, C. T. (1995). A direct realist perspective on cross-language speech perception. 
In W. Strange (ed.), Speech Perception and Linguistic Experience: Theoretical and
Methodological Issues in Cross-Language Speech Research (pp. 167–200). Timonium, MD:
York Press.
Best, C. T. and Strange, W. (1992). Effects of phonological and phonetic factors on 
cross-language perception on approximants. Journal of Phonetics 20: 305–30.
Blumstein, S. (1978). Segment structure and the syllable in aphasia. In A. Bell and 
J. B. Hooper (eds.), Syllables and Segments (pp. 189–200). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Bohn, O. S. and Flege, J. E. (1990). Perception and production of a new vowel category
by adult second language learners. In J. Leather and A. James (eds.), New Sounds 90:
Proceedings of the Amsterdam Symposium on the Acquisition of Second Language Speech
(pp. 37–56). Amsterdam: University of Amsterdam.
Bolinger, D. (1989). Intonation and its Uses. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Bolinger, D. (1998). Intonation in American English. In D. Hirst and A. DiCristo (eds.),
Intonation Systems (pp. 45–55). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bowen, J. D. (1975). Patterns of English Pronunciation. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Applied English Phonology, Second Edition       Mehmet Yavaş 
© 2011 Mehmet Yavaş. ISBN: 978-1-444-33322-0 

262
REFERENCES
Broselow, E. (1993). Transfer and universals in second language epenthesis. In 
S. Gass and L. Selinker (eds.), Language Transfer in Language Learning (pp. 71–86).
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Broselow, E. and Finer, D. (1991). Parameter setting in second language phonology and
syntax. Second Language Research 7: 35–59.
Broselow, E., Chen, S., and Wang, C. (1998). The emergence of the unmarked. Studies
in Second Language Acquisition 20 (2): 261–80.
Browman, C. P. and Goldstein, L. (1986). Towards an articulatory phonology.
Phonology Yearbook 3: 219–52.
Browman, C. P. and Goldstein, L. (1989). Articulatory gestures as phonological units.
Phonology 6: 151–206.
Browman, C. P. and Goldstein, L. (1992). Articulatory phonology: an overview.
Phonetica 49: 155–80.
Bucholtz, M. B. (1998). Geek the Girl: language, femininity, and female nerds. In N. Warner,
J. Ahlers, L. Bilmes, M. Oliver, S. Wertheim, and M. Chen (eds.), Gender and Belief
Systems: Proceedings of the Fourth Berkeley Women and Language Conference (pp. 119–31).
Berkeley: Berkeley Women and Language Group.
Bucholtz, M. B. (1999). Why be normal? Language and identity practices in a commun-
ity of nerd girls. Language in Society 28 (2): 203–23.
Camarata, S. and Gandour, J. (1984). On describing idiosyncratic phonologic systems.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 49: 262–6.
Carney, E. (1994). A Survey of English Spelling. London: Routledge.
Carney, E. (1997). English Spelling. London: Routledge.
Carr, P. (1999). English Phonetics and Phonology. Oxford: Blackwell.
Catford, J. C. (1977). Fundamental Problems in Phonetics. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
Celce-Murcia, M., Brinton, D. M., and Goodwin, J. M. (1996). Teaching Pronunciation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chin, S. (1996). The role of sonority hierarchy in delayed phonological systems. 
In T. W. Powell (ed.), Pathologies of Speech and Language: Contributions of Clinical
Phonetics and Linguistics (pp. 109–17). New Orleans: International Clinical Phonetics
and Linguistics Association.
Christman, S. S. (1992). Uncovering phonological regularity in neologisms: contributions
of sonority theory. Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics 6: 219–47.
Clark, J. and Yallop, C. (1995). An Introduction to Phonetics and Phonology. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Code, C. and Ball, M. J. (1982). Fricative production in Broca’s aphasia: a spectrographic
analysis. Journal of Phonetics 10: 325–31.
Crystal, D. (1995). The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Crystal, T. H. and House, A. S. (1982). Segmental durations in connected speech 
signals: preliminary results. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 72: 705–16.
Dauer, R. M. (1983). Stress-timing and syllable-timing re-analyzed. Journal of Phonetics
11: 51–62.
Davenport, M. and Hannahs, S. J. (1998). Introducing Phonetics and Phonology. London:
Arnold.
Davis, S. (1988). Topics in Syllable Geometry. New York: Garland.
de Jonge, C. E. (1996). Interlanguage phonology: perception and production.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Dissertation Abstracts International. Publications
number/order number: AAI9539993.

REFERENCES
263
Dubois, S. and Horvath, B. (1998). Let’s tink about dat: interdental fricatives in Cajun
English. Language Variation and Change 10: 245–61.
Dubois, S. and Horvath, B. (1999). When the music changes, you can change too: 
gender and language change in Cajun English. Language Variation and Change 11: 
287–313.
Eckman, F. (1977). Markedness and the contrastive analysis hypothesis. Language
Learning 27: 315–30.
Eckman, F. (1985). Some theoretical and pedagogical implications of the markedness
differential hypothesis. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 13: 23–41.
Eckman, F. and Iverson, G. (1994). Pronunciation difﬁculties in ESL: coda consonants
in English interlanguage. In M. Yavas (ed.), First and Second Language Phonology
(pp. 251–65). San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing.
Eckman, F., Elreyes, A., and Iverson, G. (2003). Some principles of second language phono-
logy. Second Language Research 19 (3): 169–208.
Ertmer, D. J. (2004). How well can children recognize speech features in spectrograms?
Comparisons by age and hearing status. Journal of Speech, Language and Hearing
Research 47: 484–95.
Ertmer, D. J. and Stark, R. E. (1995). Eliciting prespeech vocalization in a young child
with profound hearing impairment: usefulness of real-time spectrographic displays.
American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology 4: 22–38.
Ertmer, D. J., Stark, R. E., and Karlan, G. R. (1996). Real-time spectrographic displays
in vowel production training with children who have profound hearing loss.
American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology 5: 4–16.
Flege, J. E. (1987). The production of ‘new’ and ‘similar’ phones in a foreign language:
evidence for the effect of equivalence classiﬁcation. Journal of Phonetics 15: 47–65.
Flege, J. E. (1990). English vowel production by Dutch talkers: more evidence for the
‘similar’ vs. ‘new’ distinction. In J. Leather and A. James (eds.), New Sounds 90:
Proceedings of the Amsterdam Symposium on the Acquisition of Second Language Speech
(pp. 255–93). Amsterdam: University of Amsterdam.
Flege, J. E. (1991). Age of learning affects the authenticity of voice-onset time (VOT) in
stop consonants produced in second language learning. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 89: 395–411.
Flege, J. E. (1995). Second language speech learning: theory, ﬁndings, and problems. In
W. Strange (ed.), Speech Perception and Linguistic Experience: Issues in Cross-Linguistic
Research (pp. 233–77). Timonium, MD: York Press.
Flege, J. E., Munro, M. J., and Fox, R. A. (1994). Auditory and categorical effects on cross
language vowel perception. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 95: 3623–41.
Flege, J. E., Bohn, O. S., and Jang, S. (1997). Effects of experience on non-native speakers’
production and perception of English vowels. Journal of Phonetics 25: 437–70.
Fox, R. A., Flege, J. E., and Munro, M. J. (1995). The perception of English and Spanish
vowels by native English and Spanish listeners: a multidimensional scaling analysis.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 97: 2540–51.
Frieda, E. M., Walley, A. C., Flege, J. E., and Sloane, M. E. (1999). Adults’ perception 
of native and nonnative vowels: implications for the perceptual magnet effect.
Perceptual Psychophysics 61: 561–77.
Fromkin, V. A. (1973). Speech Errors as Linguistic Evidence. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Fry, D. B. (1955). Duration and intensity as physical correlates of linguistic stress. Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America 27: 765–8.
Fry, D. B. (1979). The Physics of Speech. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Giegerich, H. (1992). English Phonology. Boston, MA: Cambridge University Press.

264
REFERENCES
Hall, R. A. (1961). Sounds and Spelling in English. New York: Chilton Books.
Hammond, M. (1999). The Phonology of English. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hansen, J. (2001). Linguistic constraints on the acquisition of English syllable codas by
native speakers of Mandarin Chinese. Applied Linguistics 22: 338–65.
Hansen Edwards, J. G. and Zampini, M. L. (eds.) (2008). Phonology and Second Language
Acquisition. Amsterdam/Philadelphia; John Benjamins.
Hogg, R. and McCully, C. (1987). Metrical Phonology: A Coursebook. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Jaeger, J. J. (1978). Speech aerodynamics and phonological universals. Proceedings of the
Berkeley Linguistics Society 4: 311–29.
Jenkins, J. (2002). World Englishes. London: Routledge.
Kager, R. (1999). Optimality Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Katamba, F. (1989). An Introduction to Phonology. London: Longman.
Kent, R. D. and Read, C. (1992). The Acoustic Analysis of Speech. San Diego, CA: Singular
Publishing.
Kenworthy, J. (1987). Teaching English Pronunciation. London: Longman.
Kingston, J. (2003). Learning foreign vowels. Language and Speech 46 (2–3): 295–349.
Klatt, D. (1975). Voice onset time, frication and aspiration in word-initial consonant clus-
ters. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 18: 686–706.
Kreidler, C. (2004). The Pronunciation of English (2nd edn.). Oxford: Blackwell.
Kuhl, P. K. (1991). Human adults and human infants show a ‘perceptual magnet effect’
for the prototypes of speech categories, monkeys do not. Perception and Psychophysics
50 (2): 93–107.
Kuhl, P. K. (1993). Early linguistic experience and phonetic perception: implications for
theories of developmental speech perception. Journal of Phonetics 21: 125–39.
Kuhl, P. K. (2000). Language, mind, and brain: experience alters perception. In 
M. S. Gazzaniga (ed.), The New Cognitive Neurosciences (2nd edn.) (pp. 99–115). 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kuhl, P. K., Williams, K. A., Lacerda, F., Stevens, K. N., and Lindblom, B. (1992). Linguistic
experience alters phonetic perception in infants by 6 months of age. Science 255: 606–8.
Labov, W. (1972). Language in the Inner City: Studies in the Black English Vernacular.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Ladefoged, P. (2001a). A Course in Phonetics (4th edn.). Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle.
Ladefoged, P. (2001b). Vowels and Consonants. Oxford: Blackwell.
Laeufer, C. (1996). The acquisition of complex phonological contrast: voice timing pat-
terns of English initial stops by French native speakers. Phonetica 53: 86–110.
Lance, D. M. and Howie, S. M. (1994). Spectrographic analysis of English phonemes 
and allophones. In J. K. Kenyon, American Pronunciation (pp. 267–452). Ann Arbor, 
MI: Whurr.
Levy, E. (2004). Effects of language experience and consonantal context on perception
of French front rounded vowels by adult American English learners of French.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. City University of New York – Graduate School
and University Center.
Lively, S. E., Logan, J. S., and Pisoni, D. B. (1993). Training Japanese listeners to identify
English /r/ and /l/. II: the role of phonetic environment and talker variability in
learning new perceptual categories. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 94: 1242–55.
Logan, J. S., Lively, S. E., and Pisoni, D. B. (1991). Training Japanese listeners to identify
English /r/ and /l/: a ﬁrst report. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 89: 874–86.
Lombardi, L. (2003). Second language data and constraints on manner: explaining 
substitutions for the English interdentals. Second Language Research 19 (3): 225–50.

REFERENCES
265
McArthur, T. (1998). The English Languages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McMahon, A. (2002). An Introduction to English Phonology. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Mack, M. (2003). The phonetic systems of bilinguals. In M. T. Banich and M. Mack (eds.),
Mind, Brain, and Language: Multidisciplinary Perspectives (pp. 309–50). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Maddieson, I. (1984). Patterns of Sounds. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Major, R. C. (1987). English voiceless stop production by speakers of Brazilian
Portuguese. Journal of Phonetics 15: 197–202.
Major, R. C. (2001). Foreign Accent: The Ontogeny and Phylogeny of Second Language Phonology.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Major, R. C. and Kim, E. (1999). The similarity differential rate hypothesis. Language
Learning 46: 465–96.
Maki, J. E. (1980). Visual feedback as an aid to speech therapy. In J. Subtelney (ed.),
Speech Assessment and Speech Improvement for the Hearing-Impaired (pp. 167–76).
Washington, DC: A. G. Bell Associates.
Maki, J. E. (1983). Application of the speech spectrographic display in develop-
ing articulatory skills in hearing-impaired adults. In I. Hochberg, H. Levitt, and 
M. J. Osberger (eds.), Speech of the Hearing-Impaired: Research, Training, and Personnel
Preparation (pp. 297–312). Baltimore, MD: University Park Press.
Maki, J. E., Streff-Gustafson, M. S., Conklin, J. M., and Humphrey-Whitehead, B. K. (1981).
The speech spectrographic display: interpretation of visual patterns by hearing-
impaired adults. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 46: 379–87.
Mendoza-Denton, N. (1996). Language ideology and gang afﬁliation among California
Latina girls. In M. Bucholtz, A. C. Liang, L. A. Sutton, and C. Hines (eds.), Cultural
Performances: Proceedings of the Third Berkeley Women and Language Conference (pp. 478–86).
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Munson, B., McDonald, E. C., Deboe, N. L., and White, A. R. (2006). The acoustic and
perceptual bases of judgements of women and men’s sexual orientation from read
speech. Journal of Phonetics 34: 202–40.
Ohala, D. K. (1999). The inﬂuence of sonority on children’s cluster reductions. Journal
of Communication Disorders 32: 397–422.
Oller, J. W. and Ziahosseyni, S. M. (1970). The contrastive analysis hypothesis and spelling
errors. Language Learning 20: 183–9.
Paolillo, J. (1995). Markedness in the acquisition of English /r/ and /l/. In F. Eckman,
D. Highland, P. Lee, J. Mileham, and R. Weber (eds.), Second Language Acquisition Theory
and Pedagogy (pp. 275–91). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Pennington, M. C. (1996). Phonology in English Language Teaching. London: Longman.
Peterson, G. E. and Barney, H. E. (1952). Control methods used in a study of vowels.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 24: 175–84.
Pickett, J. M. (1980). The Sounds of Speech Communication: A Primer of Acoustic Phonetics
and Speech Perception. Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Pierrehumbert, J. B., Bent, T., Munson, B., Bradlow, A. R., and Bailey, J. M. (2004). 
The inﬂuence of sexual orientation on vowel production. Journal of the Acoustical 
Society of America 116: 1905–8.
Pisoni, D. B., Aslin, R. N., Perey, A. J., and Hennessy, B. L. (1982). Some effects of 
laboratory training on identiﬁcation and discrimination of voicing contrasts in stop
consonants. Journal of Experimental Psychology 8: 297–314.
Polka, L. (1991). Cross-language speech perception in adults: phonemic, phonetic and
acoustic contributions. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 89: 2961–77.

266
REFERENCES
Port, R. F. and Rotunno, R. (1978). The relation between voice-onset time and vowel
duration. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 66: 654–62.
Roach, P. (1991). English Phonetics and Phonology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rochet, B. (1995). Perception and production of second language speech sounds by 
adults. In W. Strange (ed.), Speech Perception and Linguistic Experience: Theoretical and
Methodological Issues (pp. 379–410). Timonium, MD: York Press.
Rogers, H. (1991). Theoretical and Practical Phonetics. Toronto: Copp Clark Pitman.
Romani, C. and Calabrese, A. (1998). Syllabic constraints in the phonological errors of
an aphasic patient. Brain and Language 64: 83–121.
Scovel, T. (1988). A Time to Speak: A Psycholinguistic Inquiry into Critical Period for Human
Speech. New York: Harper & Row.
Selkirk, E. (1984). On major class features and syllable theory. In M. Aranoff and 
R. T. Oehrle (eds.), Language and Sound Structure: Studies in Phonology Presented to
Morris Halle by his Teacher and Students (pp. 107–36). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sheldon, A. and Strange, W. (1982). The acquisition of /r/ and /l/ by Japanese 
learners of English: evidence that speech production can precede perception. Applied
Psycholinguistics 3: 243–61.
Strand, E. A. and Johnson, K. (1996). Gradient and visual speaker normalization in the
perception of fricatives. In D. Gibbon (ed.), Natural Language Processing and Speech
Technology (pp. 14–26). Berlin: Mouton.
Strange, W., Bohn, O. S., Trent, S. A., and Nishi, K. (2004). Acoustic and perceptual 
similarity of North German and American English vowels. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 115: 1791–1807.
Strange, W., Bohn, O. S., Nishi, K., and Trent, S. A. (2005). Contextual variation in the
acoustic and perceptual similarity of North German and American English vowels.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 118: 1751–62.
Thurnburg, D. and Ryalls, J. (1998). Voice onset time in Spanish–English bilinguals: early
versus late learners of English. Journal of Communication Disorders 31: 215–29.
Trudgill, P. and Hannah, J. (2002). International English (4th edn.). London: Edward Arnold.
Weismer, G. (1979). Sensitivity of voice-onset time (VOT) to certain segmental features
in speech production. Journal of Phonetics 7: 197–204.
Wells, J. C. (1982). Accents of English. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Werker, J. F. and Tees, R. C. (1984). Cross-language speech perception: evidence for 
perceptual reorgnization during the ﬁrst year of life. Infant Behaviour and Development 7:
49–63.
Werker, J. F., Gilbert, J. H., Humphrey, K., and Tees, R. C. (1981). Developmental aspects
of cross-language speech perception. Child Development 52: 349–55.
Wolfram, W. and Johnson, R. (1982). Phonological Analysis: Focus on American English.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Yavas, M. (1996). Differences in voice onset time in early and later Spanish–English 
bilinguals. In J. Jensen and A. Roca (eds.), Spanish in Contact: Issues in Bilingualism
(pp. 151–61). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Yavas, M. (1997). The effects of vowel height and place of articulation in interlanguage
ﬁnal stop devoicing. International Review of Applied Linguistics 35: 115–25.
Yavas, M. (1998). Phonology: Development and Disorders. San Diego, CA: Singular
Publishing.
Yavas, M. (2002). Voice onset time in bilingual phonological development. In 
F. Windsor, M. L. Kelly, and N. Hewlett (eds.), Investigations in Clinical Phonetics and
Linguistics (pp. 341–50). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

REFERENCES
267
Yavas, M. (2010). Acquisition of /s/-clusters in Spanish–English bilingual children with
phonological disorders. Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics 24 (3): 188–98.
Yavas, M. and J. Barlow (2006). Acquisition of #sC-clusters in Spanish–English bilin-
gual children. Journal of Multilingual Communication Disorders 4 (3): 182–93.
Yavas, M. and M. Someillan (2005). Patterns of acquisition of /s/-clusters in
Spanish–English bilinguals. Journal of Multilingual Communication Disorders 3: 50–5.
Yavas, M., Ben-David, A., Gerrits, E., Kristoffersen, K. E., and Simonsen, H. G. (2008).
Sonority and cross-linguistic acquisition of initial s-clusters. Clinical Linguistics and
Phonetics 22 (6): 421–41.
Zampini, M. L. (1998). The relationship between the production and perception of L2
Spanish stops. Texas Papers in Foreign Language Education 3: 85–100.
Zampini, M. L. and Green, K. P. (2001). The voicing contrast in English and Spanish:
the relationship between production and perception. In J. Nicol (ed.), Two Languages,
One Mind: Language Processing in the Bilingual (pp. 23–48). Oxford: Blackwell.

Bernoulli principle 1.3.2
bilabial 1.3.3
branching rhyme 7.1
breathy voice 1.3.5, 1.4.1, 5.4.2
British English spelling 9.4
British English stress patterns 7.7
bunched r-sound 1.3.3
cardinal vowels 1.5
central vowels 1.3.6, 4.4
classroom context 2.6
clicks 1.4.4
clinical context 2.6
coda 1.6, 6.1
double 6.5.5
single 6.5.4
triple 6.5.6
complementary distribution 2.2.2, 2.3
compound adjectives 7.6
compound nouns 7.6
compound verbs 7.6
consonant cluster 6.5.2, 6.5.3
continuant 1.3.4
contrast 2.2.1
contrastive patterns 8.2
creaky voice 1.4.1
Cree–English contrasts 2.3
cricoid cartilage 1.3.2
Czech–English contrasts 2.3
dark 1.3.5
deﬂected contrast 8.3.2
Index
The index lists the technical terms and names in the book, together with the number
of the section(s) in which they are introduced or discussed.
acoustic phonetics 1.1
Adam’s apple 1.3.2
afﬁx 7.5
affricate 1.3.4, 1.4.2, 3.3, 5.4.3
airstream 1.3.4
airstream mechanism
glottalic 1.4.4
pulmonic 1.4.4
velaric 1.4.4
alliteration 6.1
allomorph 2.5
allophone 2.2.2, 2.3
alveolar 1.3.3
alveolar ridge 1.3.1
ambisyllabicity 6.7
amplitude 5.1
antepenult 7.1–7.3
aperiodic 5.1
apex 1.3.1
aphasia 5.7
apical 1.3.3
approximant 1.3.4, 3.5, 5.4.4
apraxia 5.7
Arabic–English contrasts 2.3, 8.2.6
articulatory phonetics 1.1
arytenoid cartilages 1.3.2
aspiration 1.3.5, 3.1
assimilation 2.3
auditory phonetics 1.1
back vowels 1.3.6, 4.5
basic context 8.3.1
Applied English Phonology, Second Edition       Mehmet Yavaş 
© 2011 Mehmet Yavaş. ISBN: 978-1-444-33322-0 

INDEX
269
dental 1.3.3
dento-labial 1.4.2
derived context 8.3.1
dialectal variation 3.1–3.5
diphthongs 1.3.6, 4.2, 4.6, 5.3
dorsum 1.3.1
dysarthria 5.7
echo questions 7.8
ejectives 1.4.4
epiglottis 1.3.1
esophagus 1.3.1
faithfulness constraints 8.6
fall
full (long) 7.8
short (low) 7.8
falling intonation 7.8
falling-rising 7.8
ﬁnal devoicing 3.1
ﬂap 1.4.2, 3.1
foreign accent 8.1
formants 5.2–5.5
frequency 5.1–5.5
transition 5.4.1
fortis 3.1–3.3
free variation 2.4
French–English contrasts 8.2.4
fricative 1.3.4, 1.4.2, 3.2, 5.4.2
friction 5.4.2
front vowels 1.3.6, 4.3
full vowels 4.9
fundamental frequency 5.1
German–English contrasts 2.3, 8.2.5
glides 1.3.4, 1.4.2, 3.5, 5.4.4
glottal 1.3.3
glottalization 1.4.4
glottalic airstream mechanism 1.4.4
glottal stop 3.1
glottis 1.3.2
grapheme 2.6
Great Vowel Shift 9.1
Greek–English contrasts 2.3, 8.2.3
hard palate 1.3.1
hearing impairment 5.7
Hebrew–English contrasts 2.3
heteromorphemic 8.3.1
high vowels 1.3.6
historical linguistics 2.6
homorganic 2.5
hypercontrast 8.3.3
hyperspeech 5.6
hypospeech 5.6
implosives 1.4.4
initial devoicing 3.1
intensity 5.1
interdental 1.3.3
International Phonetic Alphabet 1.2
intervocalic 2.3
intonation 1.6, 7.8
intrusive r 3.5
Italian 2.5
Italian–English contrasts 2.3
Korean–English contrasts 2.3, 8.2.8
labial 1.3.3
labialization 1.4.3
labio-alveolar 1.4.2
labio-dental 1.3.3
labio-velar 1.3.3
lamina 1.3.1
laminal 1.3.3
laryngealization 1.4.1
larynx 1.3.1
lateral 1.3.4
lateral plosion 3.1
lax vowels 1.3.6, 4.2.2
length 1.6, 4.2.4
lenis 3.1–3.3
lips 1.3.1
liquids 1.3.4, 1.4.2, 3.5, 5.4.4
locus 5.4.1
loudness 5.1
low vowels 1.3.6
Malayalam–English contrasts 2.3
manners of articulation 1.3.4
markedness 8.4
markedness constraints 8.6
maximal onset principle 6.4
mid vowels 1.3.6
minimal pair 2.2.1, 2.3
monophthong 1.3.6
morphophonology 2.5
murmur 1.3.5, 1.4.1
mutual exclusivity 2.2.2, 2.3

270
INDEX
nasal 1.3.4, 1.4.2, 3.4, 5.4.5
assimilation 2.5
cavity 1.3.4
plosion 3.1
nasalized vowels 4.2.3
Native Language Magnet (NLM) 8.7
near-minimal pair 2.2.1
non-rhotic dialect 3.5
Northern Cities Shift 4.6
nucleus 1.6, 6.1
obstruents 1.3.4
onset 1.6, 6.1
double 6.5.2
single 6.5.1
triple 6.5.3
Ontogeny Phylogeny Model 8.5
Optimality Theory 8.6
orthography 2.6
overlapping distribution 2.2.1, 2.3
palatal 1.3.3
palatalization 1.4.3
palato-alveolar 1.3.3
partial devoicing 1.3.5
peak of syllable 6.3
penult 7.1–7.3
Perceptual Assimilation Model 8.7
periodic 5.1
Persian–English contrasts 8.2.10
pharyngealization 1.4.3
pharynx 1.3.1
phoneme 2.2, 2.3, 2.6
phoneme–grapheme correspondence
9.2
phonemic 2.2.2
analysis 2.3
motivation 2.5
phonetics 1.1
similarity 2.2.2, 2.3
transcription 1.2
phonotactics 8.2.1
pitch 1.6
place of articulation 1.3.1, 1.3.3, 3.1
polysyllabic words 7.4
Portuguese–English contrasts 2.3, 8.2.9
possessive sufﬁx 3.2
practical applications 2.6, 5.7, 6.8
preglottalized 3.1
primary stress 7.3, 7.4
progressive assimilation 2.3
psycholinguistics 2.6
pulmonic airstream mechanism 1.4.4
r-coloring 4.2.5
Received Pronunciation (RP) 4.8
reduced forms 4.10
reduced vowels 4.9
regressive assimilation 2.3
release burst 5.4.1
remediation 2.6
resonance 5.2
retroﬂex 1.3.3
rhotic dialect 3.5
rhyme 1.6, 6.1
rhythm 1.6
rise, high (long/sharp) 7.8
rise, low (short) 7.8
rising-falling 7.8
rising intonation 7.8
root of the tongue 1.3.1
Russian–English contrasts 2.3, 8.2.7
semivowel 1.3.4
sibilant 1.3.4, 3.2
simple vowels 4.2
Sindhi–English contrasts 2.3
skeletal tier 6.1
sociolinguistics 2.6
sociophonetic variation 3.6, 4.7
soft palate 1.3.1
sonorants 1.3.4
sonority 6.3, 6.8
sonority scale 6.3
Sonority Sequencing Principle (SSP) 6.5.2
Southern Shift 4.6
Spanish 2.5
Spanish–English contrasts 2.3, 8.2.1
spectrogram 5.1–5.6
Speech Learning Model (SLM) 8.7
spelling and morphology 9.3
spelling in British English 9.4
spoonerisms 3.3
states of glottis 1.4.1
stop 1.3.4, 1.4.2, 3.1, 5.4.1
stop gap 5.4.1
stress 1.6, 7.1–7.6
in adjectives 7.2
in British English 7.7
in compounds 7.6

INDEX
271
in nouns 7.2
in verbs 7.3
stress-bearing sufﬁxes 7.5.1
stress-neutral sufﬁxes 7.5.2
stress-shifting sufﬁxes 7.5.3
stress-timed languages 1.6
stress, secondary 7.4
suprasegmentals 1.6
syllabic liquids 3.5
syllabic nasals 3.4
syllabiﬁcation
spoken 6.4
written 6.6
syllable 1.6, 6.1
closed 6.7
heavy 6.7
light 6.7
open 6.7
syllable phonotactics 6.5
syllable-timed languages 1.6
syllable weight 6.7
tag question 7.8
tap 1.4.2
tautomorphemic 8.3.1
tautosyllabic 6.1
teeth 1.3.1
tense vowels 1.3.6, 4.2.2
thyroid cartilage 1.3.2
tone group 7.8
tone languages 1.6
tongue
back of 1.3.1
blade of 1.3.1
front of 1.3.1
tip of 1.3.1
tonic accent 7.4
trachea 1.3.1
trill 1.4.2
Turkish–English contrasts 8.2.2
ult 7.1–7.3
uvula 1.3.1
uvular 1.4.2
velar 1.3.3
velaric airstream mechanism 1.4.4
velarization 1.4.3, 3.5
velopharyngeal snort 1.4.2
velum 1.3.1
vibration 1.3.2
vocal cords 1.3.2
vocal fry 1.4.1
vocal tract 1.3.1
voice
bar 5.4.1
lag 1.3.5
lead 1.3.5
voiced 1.3.2
voiceless 1.3.2
voice onset time (VOT) 1.3.5, 5.4.1
voicing 1.3.2, 3.1
vowels 1.3.6, 4.2, 5.2
before /l/ 4.2.6
before /@/ 4.2.5
wh-questions 7.8
yes–no questions

Answer Key
to the Exercises of
Applied English
Phonology
by
Mehmet Yavau
Applied English Phonology, Second Edition       Mehmet Yavaş 
© 2011 Mehmet Yavaş. ISBN: 978-1-444-33322-0 

2
ANSWER
KEY
CHAPTER 1: PHONETICS
1.
Examine the following transcriptions. If you agree, do nothing; if the 
transcription is erroneous, correct it.
injured [IndZ2d]
gelatin [dZEl@tIn]
measure [mEZ2]
inches [IntS@z]
caution [kOS@n]
topical [tAp@k@l]
telephone [tEl@fon]
syllable [sIl@b@l]
2.
How many sound segments are there in each of the following words?
homophone
7
equestrian
10
broach
4
writer
4
thatched
4
middle
4
knack
3
photographer
9
lesson
5
imagination
10
3.
State whether the place of articulation is the same (S) or different (D) in the
initial consonants of each pair. In either case, state the place of articulation.
Example:
now – pneumonia
Same; alveolar
sun – sugar
Different; alveolar vs. palato-alveolar
(a)
goose – gerrymander
Different; velar vs. palato-alveolar
(b)
simple – shackle
Different; alveolar vs. palato-alveolar
(c)
curious – cereal
Different; velar vs. alveolar
(d)
phonetic – ﬁctional
Same; labio-dental
(e)
manners – wicker
Different; bilabial vs. labio-velar
(f)
normal – location
Same; alveolar
(g)
wander – yesterday
Different; labio-velar vs. palatal
(h)
those – Thursday
Same; interdental
(i)
scissors – zipper
Same; alveolar
(j)
temperate – chestnut
Different; alveolar vs. palato-alveolar
(k)
chromosome – chief
Different; velar vs. palato-alveolar
(l)
baker – delegate
Different; bilabial vs. alveolar
(m)
happened – usual
Different; glottal vs. palatal
(n)
neuron – market
Different; alveolar vs. bilabial
(o)
painting – broccoli
Same; bilabial
4.
State whether the manner of articulation is the same (S) or different (D) in the
ﬁnal consonants of each pair. In either case, state the manner of articulation.

ANSWER
KEY
3
Example:
bomb – ten
Same; nasal
rough – zip
Different; fricative vs. stop
(a)
album – broken
Same; nasal
(b)
ideal – keepsake
Different; liquid vs. stop
(c)
prologue – conﬁne
Different; stop vs. nasal
(d)
aqueous – sociable
Different; fricative vs. liquid
(e)
variable – watch
Different; liquid vs. affricate
(f)
waste – adage
Different; stop vs. affricate
(g)
barometer – ﬁnish
Different; liquid vs. fricative
(h)
inch – gauge
Same; affricate
(i)
ﬁord – equip
Same; stop
(j)
barb – relief
Different; stop vs. fricative
(k)
alive – ﬁftieth
Same; fricative
(l)
laughing – hydraulic
Different; nasal vs. stop
(m)
opulence – paramedic
Different; fricative vs. stop
(n)
outrage – swivel
Different; affricate vs. liquid
(o)
dominion – eminent
Different; nasal vs. stop
5.
State whether the vowels in the underlined portions are the same or different
in the following words. In either case, state the phonetic description of
the vowels, together with the phonetic symbols.
Example: keel – city
Same; /i/ high, front, tense
mess – mass
Different; /E/ mid, front – /æ/ low, front
(a)
primary – nutrition
Different; /E/ mid, front, lax – /u/ high,
back, round, tense
(b)
heal – electricity
Different; /i/ high, front, tense – /I/
high, front, lax
(c)
beau – aperture
Different; /o/ mid, back, round, tense –
/æ/ low, front, lax
(d)
anywhere – phantasm
Different; /i/ high, front, tense – /æ/
low, front, lax
(e)
exposure – coaster
Same; /o/ mid, back, round, tense
(f)
explicable – explicate
Same; /I/ high, front, lax
(g)
wave – irrigate
Same; /e/ mid, front, tense
(h)
measure – finger
Different; /E/ mid, front, lax – /I/ high,
front, lax
(i)
butter – tough
Same; /√/ low central
(j)
cholesterol – bottom
Different; /@/ mid central – /A/ low back
(k)
nymph – jump
Different; /I/ high, front, lax – /√/ low 
central
(l)
abate – caught
Different; /e/ mid, front, tense – /O/ mid,
back, round

4
ANSWER
KEY
(m)
hydrogen – hydrolysis
Different; /@/ mid central – /A/ low back
(n)
pawn – harsh
Different; /O/ mid back round – /A/ low
back
6.
Circle the words that:
(a)
start with a fricative
foreign, theater, tidings, hospital, cassette, shroud
(b)
end in a sibilant
wishes, twelfth, clutch, indicates, admonish, furtive
(c)
have an approximant
winter, university, captive, ripe, little, mute
(d)
contain a back vowel
putter, boost, roast, fraud, matter, hospital
(e)
start with a voiced obstruent
government, pottery, taxonomy, jury, phonograph, sister
(f)
contain a lax vowel
auction, redeem, ledger, cram, boat, loom
(g)
end in an alveolar
went, atom, rigor, column, multiple, garnish
7.
Give the phonetic symbols for the following English sounds.
(a)
voiceless stops
/p, t, k/
(b)
voiced fricatives
/v, D, z, Z/
(c)
approximants
/l, @, j, w/
(d)
alveolar obstruents
/t, d, s, z/
(e)
nasals
/m, n, è/
(f)
voiced obstruents
/b, d, g, v, D, z, Z, dZ/
Now give the phonetic symbols for the following sounds that are not found
in English.
(g)
alveolar affricates
/ts, dz/
(h)
voiceless velar and uvular fricatives
/x, X/
(i)
bilabial and palatal fricatives
/F, ã, ç, Ô/
(j)
non-lateral liquids
/r, Q, R/
(k)
palatal and uvular stops
/c, J, q, G/
8.
The sounds in the underlined portions of the following pairs of words
share some phonetic properties and are different in some other properties.

ANSWER
KEY
5
Give the phonetic symbol for each sound and state the shared feature(s)
and difference(s).
Example: [p] “park” – “phone” [f] Shared: voiceless, obstruent
Difference(s): [p] bilabial, stop
[f] labio-dental, fricative
(a)
telephone – television
Shared: labio-dental fricative
Different: [f] voiceless, [v] voiced
(b)
atop – wiser
Shared: alveolar
Different: [t] voiceless stop, [z] voiced fricative
(c)
bitter – easy
Shared: high front, unrounded
Different: [I] lax, [i] tense
(d)
mister – enemy
Shared: nasal
Different: [m] bilabial, [n] alveolar
(e)
shipment – justice
Shared: palato-alveolar
Different: [S] voiceless fricative, [dZ] voiced
affricate
(f)
wait – root
Shared: tense
Different: [e] mid front unrounded, [u] high
back round
(g)
lime – window
Shared: voiced
Different: [m] bilabial nasal, [w] labio-velar
glide
(h)
alone – elevate
Shared: voiced alveolar
Different: [n] nasal, [l] liquid
(i)
feather – fought
Shared: mid
Different: [E] front lax unrounded, [O] back
round
(j)
limp – soccer
Shared: voiceless stop
Different: [p] bilabial, [k] velar
9.
The following groups consist of sounds that share a phonetic feature plus
one sound that does not belong to this group. Circle the sound that does
not belong to the group, and identify the feature shared by the remain-
ing sounds of the group.
Example:
/l, d, s, t, k, z/
/k/ is a velar, the rest are alveolars
(a)
/f, S, tS, z, T, Z, D/
/tS/ is an affricate, the rest are fricatives
(b)
/t, z, n, m, d, l, s/
/m/ is a bilabial, the rest are alveolars
(c)
/I, E, U, u, æ, √/
/u/ is tense, the rest are lax
(d)
/n, g, v, s, z, @, m/
/s/ is voiceless, the rest are voiced
(e)
/m, w, è, p, b/
/p/ is voiceless, the rest are voiced
(f)
/i, I, æ, A, e, E/
/A/ is back, the rest are front

6
ANSWER
KEY
10.
Fill in the boxes with the appropriate label for the ﬁnal sounds of each 
word.
11.
Do the same for the initial sounds of the same words.
12.
Fill in the boxes for the ﬁrst vowels of the following words.
park
ocean
make
ember
hamper
fought
hypocrite
chew
Tongue 
Low
Mid
Mid
Mid
Low
Mid
High
High
height
Frontness/
Back
Back
Front
Front
Front
Back
Front
Back
backness
Lip 
Unrd.
Rd.
Unrd.
Unrd.
Unrd.
Rd.
Unrd.
Rd.
position
Tenseness/
Tense
Tense
Tense
Lax
Lax
Tense
Lax
Tense
laxness
sipped
latex
triumph
bridge
rough
fought
dogs
palm
Upper 
Alv. 
Alv. 
Alv. 
Upper 
Hard 
Upper Alv. 
Upper 
articulator
ridge
ridge
ridge
lip
palate
teeth
ridge
lip
Lower 
Tip of 
Tip of 
Tip of 
Lower 
Tip of 
Lower Tip of
Lower 
articulator
tongue
tongue
tongue
lip
tongue
lip
tongue
lip
Voicing
Vs.
Vd.
Vs.
Vd.
Vd.
Vs.
Vd.
Vs.
Manner of 
Fric.
Liquid
Stop
Stop
Liquid
Fric.
Stop
Stop
articulation
sipped
latex
triumph
bridge
rough
fought
dogs
palm
Upper 
Alv. 
Alv. 
Upper 
Alv. 
Upper Alv. 
Alv. 
Upper 
articulator
ridge
ridge
teeth
ridge/
teeth
ridge
ridge
lip
hrd.
palate
Lower 
Tip of 
Tip of 
Lower 
Blade of 
Lower Tip of 
Tip of
Lower 
articulator
tongue
tongue
lip
tongue
lip
tongue
tongue
lip
Voicing
Vs.
Vs.
Vs.
Vd.
Vs.
Vs.
Vd.
Vd.
Manner of 
Stop
Fric.
Fric.
Affric.
Fric.
Stop
Fric.
Nasal
articulation

ANSWER
KEY
7
13.
Circle the correct alternative(s).
(a)
Tensing the vocal cords makes them vibrate faster / slower, so that
the pitch increases / decreases.
(b)
In the production of stops / fricatives / glides / affricates, the air is
blocked from going out through the nose and the mouth.
(c)
In the production of stops / liquids / fricatives / nasals, the con-
striction of the vocal tract is such that a noisy airstream is formed.
(d)
In the production of palato-alveolar sounds, the tip / front / blade
/ back of the tongue goes to the forward part of the hard palate /
soft palate / uvula.
(e)
In the production of labio-dental / bilabial / labio-velar / velar sounds,
the two lips approach one another, and the back of the tongue is raised
toward the soft palate.
14.
Transcribe the following and state how many sonorant consonants,
obstruents, and voiced consonants the sentence has. (Instructor’s discre-
tion: the numbers may be different in fast speech and in slow speech.)
“Don’t talk unless you can improve silence.”
Jorge Luis Borges
dont:Ak @nlEs juk@n Imp@uv saIl@ns
Sonorant C: 8
Obstruent C: 9
Voiced C: 11
15.
Transcribe the following (about “the spread of English”) from P. Trudgill
and J. Hannah, International English, 4th edn. (London: Edward Arnold, 2002).
The English language developed out of Germanic dialects that were 
D@ Iègl@S læègw@dZ d@vEl@pt aUt @v dZ2mænIk daI@lEks Dæt w2
brought to Britain, during the course of the 5th and 6th centuries, by Jutes  
b@Ot t@ b@Ity dU@Iè D@ kO@s @v D@ fIT @n sIksT sEntS@@iz baI dZuts  
(from modern Jutland, Denmark), Angles (from modern Schleswig,  
f@@m mAd2n dZ√tlænd dEnmA@k æèg@lz f@@m mAd2n SlEsvIk  
Denmark/Germany), and Frisians (from modern Friesland, Netherlands/
dEnmA@k dZ´m@ni @n f@iZ@nz f@@m mAd2n f@izl@nd nED2l@ndz 
Germany). By medieval times, this Germanic language had replaced the  
dZ´m@ni. baI mEdiv@l taImz DIs dZ´mæn@k læègw@dZ hæd @@plest D@
original Celtic language of Britain in nearly all of England as well as in  
@@IdZ@n@l kEltIk læègw@dZ @v b@Ity @n ni@li Ol @v Iègl@nd @z wEl @z @n 
southern and eastern Scotland. Until the 1600s, however, English remained 
s√D2n @n ist2n skAtl@nd. @ntIl D@ sIkstin h√nd@@dz haUEv2 Iègl@S @@mend 
a language spoken by a relatively small  number of people and was conﬁned  
@ læègw@dZ spok@n baI @ @El@tIvli smOl n√mb2 @v pip@l @n w@z k@nfaInd  

8
ANSWER
KEY
geographically to the island of Great Britain. Indeed, even much of Britain  
dZi@g@æf@kli t@ D@ aIl@nd @v g@et b@Ity. @ndid iv@n m√tS @v b@Ity
remained non-English-speaking. The original Celtic language of Britain 
@@mend nAn Iègl@S spikIè. D@ @@IdZ@n@l kEltIk læègw@dZ @v b@Ity
survived in the form of Welsh in nearly all of Wales and as Cornish in 
s2vaIvd @n D@ fO@m @v wElS @n ni@li Al @v welz @n æz kO@n@S @n 
much of Cornwall. The Highlands and islands of western and northern 
m√tS @v kO@nwOl. D@ haIl@ndz @n aIl@ndz @v wEst2n @n nO@D2n 
Scotland spoke Gaelic, another Celtic language which had been brought  
skAtl@nd spok gelIk @n√D2 kEltIk læègw@dZ wItS hæd bIn b@Ot 
across from Ireland in pre-medieval times. And the populations of the  
@k@As f@@m aI@l@nd @n p@i mEdiv@l taImz. ænd D@ pApj@leS@nz @v D@
Northern Isles – Orkney and Shetland – still spoke the Scandinavian 
nO@D2n aIlz O@kni @n SEtl@nd stIl spok D@ skænd@nevi@n  
language, Norn, which they had inherited from their Viking ancestors.
læègw@dZ nO@n wItS De hæd InhE@@t@d f@@m DE@ vaIkIè ænsEst2z.
CHAPTER 2: PHONOLOGY
1.
Circle the correct alternative(s).
(a)
If two languages have the same sounds, then they (sometimes / always
/ often / never) have different phonologies.
(b)
If the phonetic difference between two sounds serves as the basis for
distinguishing words, then the difference is (distinctive / phonemic
/ non-predictable / allophonic / predictable).
(c)
Occurrences of the allophones of a single phoneme are (always / some-
times / often / never) predictable.
(d)
Allophones of a single phoneme are (sometimes / often / always /
never) phonetically similar.
(e)
If two phonetically similar sounds are in complementary distribution,
then they are (sometimes / often / always / never) allophones of the
same phoneme.
(f)
If two sounds are in free variation, then they are (sometimes /
always / never) allophones of the same phoneme.
(g)
Speakers of a language tend to be (more / less / equally) consciously
aware of phonemes than of allophones.
(h)
Two sounds that appear in a minimal pair (sometimes / always /
never) belong to distinct phonemes.
(i)
If two sounds are not phonemically distinct, their distribution over-
laps / does not overlap.
2.
Create two minimal pairs with each given word in different word 
positions. (Answers may vary. Here are some suggestions.)

ANSWER
KEY
9
Initial
Medial
Final
Example:
/t/
tea: pea, sea
charter: charmer, charger
seat: seed, seal
/p/
pack: back, tack
mapping: matting, mashing
ape: ate, aim
/m/ mate: bait, hate
slimming: slipping, slitting
room: root, rouge
/s/
seek: leak, beak
leasing: leashing, leaping
class: clap, clam
/S/
sheet: feet, beat
mashed: mapped, mast
bash: bat, bass
[fish]
/l/
lash: sash, gash
rolling: roping, roaming
coal: comb, cope
/f/
feel: peel, real
reﬁned: remind, rewind
staff: stack, stab
/n/
knee: bee, fee
sneak: speak, sleek
bone: boat, bowl
/d/
dash: bash, cash budding: butting, bumming
bed: bet, beg
/g/
gain: rain, pain
plugging: plucking, plumbing wig: win, wit
/@/
rain: mane, cane roaring: roaming, rolling
four: fall, fog
/z/
zip: tip, sip
buzzing: budding, bugging
seize: seek, seen
3.
Create three words with contrasts by supplying different vowels (diph-
thongs) in the following consonantal frames. (Answers may vary. Here
are some suggestions.)
Example:
[b t]: beat, bait, bet
(a)
[s l]: seal, sell, soul
(b)
[pl ]: plea, plow, play
(c)
[sp k]: speak, spoke, spike
(d)
[m T]: math, moth, myth
(e)
[l n]: lean, loan, lawn
(f)
[k n]: cone, keen, kin
(g)
[d m]: dim, dumb, dam
(h)
[t k]: take, took, tick
(i)
[g@ nd]: grind, ground, groaned
4.
Identify the sounds in contrast in the following minimal pairs.
Example:
eke – ache /i/ – /e/
(a)
ceased – cyst /i/ – /I/
(b)
sinned – send /I/ – /E/
(c)
gym – jam /I/ – /æ/
(d)
phase – fuzz /e/ – /√/
(e)
laugh – life /æ/ – /aI/
(f)
rot – wrote /A/ – /o/
(g)
how – hi /aU/ – /aI/
(h)
limp – lymph /p/ – /f/
(i)
white – right /w/ – /@/
(j)
miff – myth /f/ – /T/
(k)
rough – rush /f/ – /S/
(l)
phi – high /f/ – /h/
(m)
thigh – shy /T/ – /S/
(n)
wit – witch /t/ – /tS/

10
ANSWER
KEY
5.
Identify the sounds that are alternating in the following morphophone-
mically related pairs.
(a)
profane / profanity
[e/æ]
(b)
serene / serenity
[i/E]
(c)
pedagogue / pedagogy
[g/dZ]
(d)
receive / receptive
[i/E]
(e)
mine / mineral
[aI/I]
(f)
verbose / verbosity
[o/A]
(g)
consume / consumption
[u/√]
(h)
public / publicity
[k/s]
(i)
sign / signature
[aI/I]
6.
Examine the distribution of [s] and [S] in the speech of T, aged 4 years
and 3 months (4;3), a child with phonological disorders, and determine
whether their distribution is:
(a)
complementary
(b)
contrastive
minimal pair – [fæs@n]
[fæS@n]
State your evidence.
sail [Sel]
pushy [pUSi]
seek [Sik]
save [Sev]
Sam [Sæm]
gas [gæs]
grass [g@æs]
fasten [fæs@n]
crash [k@æs]
ship [SIp]
Irish [aI@Is]
fashion [fæS@n]
7.
Examine the following data from B (4;1), a child with phonological dis-
orders. The /@/ targets show three different realizations: [@], [w], or ‘zero’
(i.e. deleted). What kind of distribution do these realizations reveal? State
your rationale.
rich [@ItS]
raise [@ez]
red [@Ed]
more [mo]
door [do]
deer [di]
wrong [@Oè]
correct [kOwEk]
mirror [mIw@]
rain [@en]
room [@um]
parrot [pæw@t]
roller [@Ol@]
parade [p@wed]
Henry [hEn@i]
[ø] word-ﬁnal
/@/
[w] intervocalic
[@] elsewhere

ANSWER
KEY
11
8.
(a)
Examine the following data from Maasai, a Nilotic language spoken
in Kenya and Tanzania, and determine the phonemic status of [t], [d], and
[D] (i.e. whether they belong to one, two, or three phonemes). State your
evidence.
[∫aDa]
“dangerous”
[endorop]
“bribe him”
[tasat]
“disabled”
[tisila]
“sift it”
[taru∫ini]
“binoculars”
[oltuli]
“buttock”
[iltoi]
“barrel”
[∂alut]
“mischievous”
[endaraDa]
“ﬁght each other”
[indai]
“‘you’ plural”
[endulelei]
“apple”
[eègiruDoDo]
“fright”
[em∫iDir]
“female wart hog”
[en∂araDa]
“thunder”
[d] after nasal
/t/
[D] intervocalic
[t] elsewhere
(b)
Note that the same three sounds are also found in English. Are their
distributions in the two languages the same or different? Explain. 
They are different. Whereas Maasai has a complementary distribution of
[t], [d], and [D], English has a contrastive distribution: ten, den, then.
(c)
In learning each other’s language (English speaker learning Maasai
– Maasai speaker learning English), who do you think will have greater
difﬁculty with respect to the three sounds in question? Why?
The Maasai speaker learning English will. The sounds have meaning 
difference in English, but not in Maasai. An English speaker can make
errors with these sounds when learning Maasai and it will not change the
meaning.
9.
(a)
Examine the following data from Hindi and determine the phonemic
status of [t], [th], and [d] (i.e. whether they belong to one, two, or three
phonemes). State your evidence.
[tantrik]
“tantra”
[than]
“a bolt of cloth”
[dan]
“donate”
[bath]
“words”
[tal]
“beat”
[thal]
“plate”
[pathak]
“one who studies”
[bad]
“later”
[dal]
“lentil”
[phatak]
“a gate”
[thal], [tal], [dal] = minimal pairs. Three phonemes.

12
ANSWER
KEY
(b)
Note that the same three sounds are also found in English. Are their
distributions the same or different in the two languages? Explain.
They are different.
[th] beginning of a stressed syllable
/t/
[t] elsewhere
/d/
[d]
(c)
In learning each other’s language (English speaker learning Hindi –
Hindi speaker learning English), who do you think will have greater
difﬁculty with respect to the three sounds in question? Why?
The English speaker learning Hindi will. Hindi makes meaning contrasts
out of the allophonic variations of English.
10.
Examine the following data from German and determine the phonemic
status of [ç] and [x] (that is, whether they are allophones of the same
phoneme or belong to separate phonemes). State your evidence.
[abmax@]
“to remove”
[Eçt@]
“to ban”
[axt]
“eight”
[E:nliç]
“like, resembling”
[blE:ç@n]
“small blister”
[drOliç]
“amusing”
[Elç]
“elk”
[fraxt]
“carriage”
[fruxt]
“fruit”
[glaIç]
“equal”
[knoplaUx]
“garlic”
[mEçtiç]
“powerful”
[ho:x]
“high”
[lax@n]
“to laugh”
[lox]
“hole”
[fEçt@n]
“to fence”
/ç/ becomes the velar [x] when preceded by a back vowel.
[x] after back vowel
/ç/
[ç] elsewhere
11.
Examine the following data from Persian (Farsi) and determine the
phonemic status of [r], [R], and [Q] (that is, whether they belong to one,
two, or three phonemes). State your evidence.
[aQam]
“calm”
[aQezu]
“wish”
[kæQim]
“giving”
[ræhim]
“giver”
[SiR]
“lion”
[pæniR]
“cheese”
[ziQe]
“cumin”
[zærd]
“yellow”
[farsi]
“Persian”
[musaﬁR] “traveler”
[kæbiR]
“grand”
[bæQe]
“sheep”

ANSWER
KEY
13
[nærm]
“soft”
[ræht]
“laundry”
[ræSid]
“strong”
[modeR]
“mother”
[sefeR]
“trip”
[pæQiveS]
“angel 
looking”
[R] word-ﬁnal
/r/
[Q] intervocalic
[r] elsewhere
12.
Transcribe the following and state how many voiceless consonants, front
vowels, and low vowels there are in (a) and how many approximants, back
vowels, and liquids in (b).
(a)
“As I grow older, I pay less attention to what men say. I just watch
what they do.”
Andrew Carnegie
æzaI g@o old2 aI pe lEs @tEnS@n t@ wAt mEn se aI dZ√st wAtS wAt De du
Voiceless C: 11
Front V: 7
Low V: 4
(b)
“War does not determine who is right – only who is left.”
Bertrand Russell
wO@ d@z nAt d@t´m@n hu Iz @aIt onli hu Iz lEft
Approximants: 5
Back V: 5
Liquids: 4
13.
Transcribe the following (about “the spread of English”, continued) 
from P. Trudgill and J. Hannah, International English, 4th edn. (London:
Edward Arnold, 2002).
It was not until the 17th century that the English language began the 
It w@z nAt @ntIl D@ sEv@ntinT sEntS@@i Dæt D@ Iègl@S læègw@dZ b@gæn D@
geographical and demographic expansion which has led to the situation 
dZi@g@æf@k@l @n dEm@g@æﬁk @kspænS@n wItS hæz lEd t@ D@ sItSueS@n 
in which it ﬁnds itself today, with more non-native speakers than any other   
@n wItS It faInz ItsElf t@de wIT mO@ nAn net@v spik2z Dæn Eni √D2
language in the world, and more native speakers than any other language  
læègw@dZ @n D@ w´ld ænd mO@ net@v spik2z Dæn Eni √D2 læègw@dZ
except Chinese. This expansion began in the late 1600s, with the  
@ksEpt tSaIniz. DIs @kspænS@n b@gæn @n D@ let sIkstin h√nd@@dz wIT D@
arrival of English-speakers in the Americas – North America (the modern
@@aIv@l @v Iègl@S spik2z @n D@ @mE@@k@z nO@T @mE@@k@ D@ mAd2n 

14
ANSWER
KEY
United States and Canada), Bermuda, the Bahamas, and the Caribbean – 
junaIt@d stets @n kæn@d@ b2mjud@ D@ b@hAm@z @n D@ k@@Ibi@n 
and the importation of English from Scotland, into the northern areas of 
@n D@ ImpO@teS@n @v Iègl@S f@@m skAtl@nd Int@ D@ nO@D2n E@i@z @v 
Ireland. Subsequently, during the 1700s, English also began to  
aI@l@nd. s√bs@kwEntli dU@Iè D@ sEv@ntin h√nd@@dz Iègl@S Also b@gæn t@
penetrate into southern Ireland, and it was during this time, too, that  
pEn@t@et Int@ s√D2n aI@l@nd @n It w@z dU@Iè DIs taIm tu Dæt 
Cornish ﬁnally disappeared from Cornwall, and Norn from Orkney and 
kO@n@S faIn@li dIs@pi@d f@@m kO@nwOl @n nO@n f@@m O@kni @n 
Shetland. During the 1800s, English began making serious inroads into  
SEtl@nd. dU@Iè D@ etin h√nd@Edz Iègl@S b@gæn mekIè si@i@s In@odz Int@
Wales, so that today only twenty percent of the population of that country
welz so Dæt t@de onli twEnti p´sEnt @v D@ pApjuleS@n @v Dæt k√nt@i 
are native Welsh speakers; and in the Highlands and islands of Scotland, 
A@ net@v wElS spik2z ænd @n D@ haIlændz @n aIl@ndz @v skAtl@nd 
English also began to replace Gaelic, which today has around 70,000 
Iègl@S Also b@gæn t@ @@ples gelIk wItS t@de hæz @@aUnd sEv@nti TaUz@nd 
native speakers.
net@v spik2z.
CHAPTER 3: ENGLISH CONSONANTS
1.
Complete the following statements and give examples (in phonetic tran-
scription). Your examples should be different from the ones provided in
the chapter and from the ones in the sound ﬁles.
(a)
Vowels/diphthongs are longer before voiced stops than before voice-
less stops.
e.g. bæ:g/bæk
bI:d/bIt
(b)
Voiceless (fortis) stops are aspirated when at the beginning of a
stressed syllable.
e.g. phæt
t hek
khId
(c)
Stops are unreleased when followed by another stop.
e.g. sIp”t
sAb”d
gUd”g´l
(d)
Stops are nasally released when followed by a homorganic nasal.
e.g. b√ty
mædn@s
sædnuz
(e)
Alveolar stops become dental when followed by an interdental.
e.g. bæ3TIèz
g@e9TIèz
hæ3DIs

ANSWER
KEY
15
(f)
Alveolar stops are ﬂapped when intervocalic, second syllable not
stressed.
e.g. IQ@li
OQ@m
noQ@bl
(g)
/t/ is deleted when after /n/, in unstressed syllable.
e.g. @Enl
@En2
dEn@d
(h)
/t/ may be replaced by a glottal stop when in syllable-ﬁnal position.
e.g. bæ?mæn
@?lænt@
æ?l@s
(i)
Velar stops are more front when before a front vowel.
e.g. kA@/ki
gus/gis
gAlf/gIv
(j)
Velar stops are rounded when before a round vowel.
e.g. gus/gis
kup/kip
kom/kin
(k)
Vowels, nasals, and /l/ are longer before voiced fricatives than
before voiceless fricatives.
e.g. b√z/b√s
fEnz/fEns
SElv/SElf
(l)
Stops, fricatives, and nasals are long when followed by the same sound.
e.g. bæd:Og
DIs:tAp
tEn:emz
(m) Alveolar sonorants become dental when followed by an interdental.
e.g. tE6T
bæ6D@fIlm
wE6D@
bI6DE@
(n)
Non-velar nasals become labio-dental when followed by a labio-dental.
e.g. EÂf@sIs
IÂvaIt
(o)
Nasals may be syllabic when preceded by an obstruent.
e.g. s√dy
b√ty
kæzm
(p)
Approximants /j/, /w/, /@/, /l/ are devoiced when preceded by a
voiceless obstruent.
e.g. pre
sLip
sWit
tWIl
(q)
Approximants /@/ and /l/ may be syllabic when preceded by a 
consonant.
e.g. kEnl
tSænl
æpl
pIkl
2.
/t/ is probably the most versatile of all stops of English, as it can undergo
several processes such as becoming dental, preglottalization, glottal stop
replacement, deletion, ﬂapping, aspiration, etc. Examine the following list

16
ANSWER
KEY
of words and indicate the various possibilities for the /t/ targets together
with the phonetic transcription.
Example:
entity [EntIti]
t-deletion: [EnIti], ﬂapping [EntIQi], t-deletion and 
ﬂapping [EnIQi]
mentality
[mEntælIQi]
ﬂapping
scientist
[saI@ntIst”]
unreleased
stunting
[st√nIè]
deletion
betting
[bEQIè]
ﬂapping
attest
[@thEst”]
aspiration, unreleased
trustable
[th@√st@bl]
aspiration, affrication
tractor
[th@ækt2]
aspiration, affrication
don’t think
[don9TIèk]
dental
mortality
[mO@thæl@Qi]
aspiration, ﬂapping
quarter
[kwO@Q2]
ﬂapping
battle
[bæQl]
ﬂapping
at large
[æ?lA@dZ]
glottal stop
3.
Transcribe the following and discuss the release of the stops.
(a)
skip town [skIp”taUn]
unreleased /p/ non-homorganic
(b)
sheep dog [Sip”dOg]
unreleased /p/ non-homorganic
(c)
great dane [g@et”den]
unreleased /t/
(d)
drip blood [d@Ip”bl√d]
unreleased /p/ non-homorganic
(e)
light bulb [laIt”b√lb]
unreleased /t/ non-homorganic
(f)
fake gun [fek”g√n]
unreleased /k/
(g)
ship mate [SIpmet]
nasal plosion
(h)
club member [kl√bmEmb2]
nasal plosion
(i)
cat tail [kæt:el]
long /t/ homorganic
4.
Circle the items that qualify for lateral plosion. State the generalization.
puddle, bottle, goggle, apple, head lice, deep lake, red light, pickle
The /l/ is preceded by a homorganic stop.
5.
Transcribe the following. Pay special attention to the nasals.
keep him here
[kipmhi@]
looking good
[lUkIègUd]
I can go
[aIk@ègo]
lamb meat
[læm:it]
green thumb
[g@i6T√m]

ANSWER
KEY
17
Citizen Kane
[sIt@z@èken]
pen-pal
[pEmpæl]
home free
[hoÂf@i]
run there
[@√6DE@]
blame me
[blem:i]
in Greece
[Ièg@is]
6.
If the following were to undergo spoonerisms, what would be the likely
and unlikely results, and why?
red jeep [@Ed dZip] →[dZEd @ip], not [d@Ed Zip]
just right [dZ√st @aIt] →[@√st dZaIt], not [Z√st d@aIt]
cheap rate [tSip @et] →[@ip tSet], not [Sip t@et]
An affricate is a single unit, so it does not split up.
7.
Transcribe the following and state the number of syllables, high vowels,
and voiceless fricatives in (a) and the number of sibilants, diphthongs, and
final consonant clusters in (b).
(a)
“Setting an example is not the main means of influencing others; it is
the only means.”
Albert Einstein
sEQIè @n Egzæmp@l Iz nAt De men minz @v Influ@nsIè √D2z / IQIz Di
onli minz.
Syllables: 24
High V: 11
Voiceless fricatives: 3
(b)
“I have not failed. I have found 10,000 ways that won’t work.”
Thomas A. Edison
aIv nAt feld / aIv faUnd tEn øaUz@nd wez Dæt wont wEk
Sibilants: 4
Diphthongs: 4
Final CC: 6
8.
Transcribe the following (about “the spread of English”, continued) from
P. Trudgill and J. Hannah, International English, 4th edn. (London: Edward
Arnold, 2002).
It was also during the 1800s that the development of Southern Hemisphere 
It w@z Also dU@Iè D@ etin h√nd@@dz Dæt D@ d@vEl@pm@nt @v s√D2n hEm@sﬁ@
varieties of English began. During the early 19th century, large-scale 
v@@aI@tiz @v Iègl@S b@gæn. dU@Iè D@ ´li naIntinT sEntS@@i lA@dZ skel 

18
ANSWER
KEY
colonization of Australia began to take place and, at a slightly later date, 
kAl@naIzeS@n @v Ost@elj@ b@gæn t@ tek ples @n æt @ slaItli let2 det 
New Zealand, South Africa, and the Falkland Islands also began to be 
nu zil@nd saUT æf@@k@ @n D@ fAlkl@nd aIl@ndz Also b@gæn t@ bi 
colonized from the British Isles. The South Atlantic islands of St Helena 
kAl@naIzd f@@m D@ b@ItIS aIlz. D@ saUT ætlæntIk aIl@ndz @v sent h@lEn@ 
and Tristan da Cunha also acquired English-speaking populations during 
@n t@Ist@n d@ kunj@ Also @kwaI@d Iègl@S spikIè pApjuleS@nz dU@Iè
the 1800s, as did Pitcairn Island and, subsequently, Norfolk Island in  
D@ etin h√nd@@dz æz dId pItkE@n aIl@nd @n s√bs@kwEntli nO@f@k aIl@nd In 
the South Paciﬁc. Not surprisingly, these patterns of expansion, settlement  
D@ saUT p@sIfIk. nAt s@p@aIzIèli Diz pæt2nz @v @kspænS@n sEtlm@nt 
and colonization have had an effect on the relationships, similarities and 
@n kAl@naIzeS@n hæv hæd @n @fEkt An D@ @@leS@nSIps sIm@lE@@tiz @n 
differences between the varieties of English which have grown up in 
dIf@@ns@z b@twin D@ v@@aI@tiz @v Iègl@S wItS hæv g@on √p @n 
different parts of the world. For example, there are very many similarities 
dIf@@nt pA@ts @v D@ w´ld. fO@ @kzæmpl DE@ A@ vE@i mEni sIm@lE@@tiz 
between Scottish and northern Irish English. North American English and 
b@twin skAt@S @n nO@D2n aI@@S Iègl@S. nO@T @mE@Ik@n Iègl@S @n 
the English of southern Ireland also have many points of similarity. And
D@ Iègl@S @v s√D2n aI@l@nd Also hæv mEni poInts @v sIm@lE@@ti. ænd
the English varieties of the Southern Hemisphere (Australia, New Zealand,
D@ Iègl@S v@@aI@tiz @v D@ s√D2n hEm@sﬁ@ Ost@elj@ nu zil@nd
South Africa, Falklands), which were transplanted relatively recently 
saUT æf@@k@ fAlkl@ndz wItS w2 t@ænzplænt@d @El@tIvli @is@ntli
from the British Isles, are very similar to those of the south-east of
f@√m D@ b@ItIS aIlz A@ vE@i sIm@l2 t@ Doz @v D@ saUT ist @v
England, from where most emigrants to Australasia and South Africa 
Iègl@nd f@√m wE@ most Em@g@@nts t@ Ost@@leZ@ @n saUT æf@@k@
came. They are quite naturally much less different from the English of 
kem. De A@ kwaIt nætS@@li m√tS lEs dIf@@nt f@@m D@ Iègl@S @v 
England than are the varieties spoken in the Americas, which were 
Iègl@nd Dæn A@ D@ v@@aI@tiz spok@n @n D@ @mE@@k@z wItS w2
settled much earlier.
sEtld m√tS ´li2.
CHAPTER 4: ENGLISH VOWELS
1.
In some words, the sequence represented by orthographical or has the phon-
etic realization [O@], which may be shifted to [A@]. In which of the follow-
ing words would this be possible? Explain your reasoning.
forge, ignore, divorce, bore, horoscope, Oregon, explore, tomorrow, lord
The vowel and /@/ are not tautosyllabic.

ANSWER
KEY
19
2.
As we saw in section 4.9, [@] has a special relationship with /i, o, u/ whereby
the pronunciation of the word can be with an [@] as well as with one of
these vowels. Examine the following words and state which one(s) would
qualify for this alternation.
devoid, satisfactory, photography, progress (v), episcopal, calculate, 
statutory, reserve, meaning, gratefully, supremely, obscene, consumer,
vocation
3.
Circle the words that contain:
[i]:
audible, hitter, lisp, pity, foreign, Nancy, horrible, slowly, leave, heed, 
crease, Greek, tweet, teal, gleam, weather, live heart, gene, deal
[I]:
seen, pitch, sneaker, feast, knit, cheap, sing, ﬁst, greed, simmer, 
evening, each, eat, isle, slick, sigh, grit, cider, spirit, hill, until
[e]:
sense, aide, starved, sensational, amaze, enough, nation, revolver, 
nervous, forgiven, lace, freight, bacon, phase, brave, pendant, habitat, 
basket
[E]:
locate, perceive, slapped, said, maid, adept, laughed, check, came, 
tread, grained, gel, gene, edge, debt, serene, pretty, lens, element
[æ]:
panda, peptic, cabin, delta, cobra, bandit, camel, alone, inept, coma, 
acted, dragon, Asia, games, slap, axe, racket, clad, alabaster, avoid
[A]:
hopper, dole, hotter, father, tranquil, market, polar, bargain, magnify,
organizer, vanity, old, lone, bold rock, shock, follow, clock
[o]: 
could, groan, brook, ﬂowed, boiling, cook, told, boat, crook, poised, 
posed, bowling, Joan, bold, coal, broad, clock, town, groan, hormone
[U]:
should, most, coin, could, poled, good, stood, broke, soul, hoop, 
cooled, wood, booking, pool, hood, full, room, google, look, took,
bully
[u]:
goodness, groom, foot, cooled, woman, root, broom, shook, school, 
coiled, couch, under, renew, stew, ponder, fudge, surrender, who, 
fool
[aI]:
imply, ironic, point, arrive, halve, advice, save, thyself, fatherly, breath, 
decide, lake, sprite, sigh, brisket, hindrance, animation, grind, cider
[OI]:
spoiling, beside, guile, pointless, boil, Norwegian, soil, voyages, 
ofﬁcial, soy, continent, honey, poised, loin, corrupt, tonsils
[aU]:
bought, laundry, bound, owl, vowed, old, nose, cow, ploy, toad, 
Joan, foul, drowsy, chowder, trout, tower, hound, follow, hazardous, 
acoustic, town
4.
Circle the words that have both [√] and [@].
undone, luckily, abundance, Monday, rushing, redundant, trouble, 
Paris, plaza, suspend, crumble, sudden, grovel, rupture, jungle, stutter

20
ANSWER
KEY
5.
Circle the words that have both [√] and [2].
mustard, award, wonderful, support, guarded, thunder, serpent, walker,
tremor, barley, harbor, rubber, custard, under, others, usher, flutter,
runner, dumpster
6.
Which words have:
(a)
both [´] and [@]
(b)
both [´] and [2]
(c)
only [´]
(d)
only [2]
(e)
only [@]
Example:
bourbon: a
cursor b, person a, career d, abort e,verses a, whisper d, suburb d, carat
e,  convert (v) a, surprise d, heard c, Herbert b, under d, shivered d, 
birthday c, worker b, serviced c, murder b
7.
Transcribe the following and state the number of fricatives, alveolar 
consonants, and tense vowels in (a), and the number of lax vowels, voiced
consonants, and voiceless obstruents in (b).
(a)
“I don’t know the key to success, but the key to failure is trying to
please everybody.”
Bill Cosby
aI don:o D@ ki t@ s@ksEs, b√t D@ ki t@ felj2 Iz t@aIIè t@ pliz Ev@ib√di
Fricatives: 8
Alveolar C: 14
Tense V: 8
(b)
“If a million people say a foolish thing, it is still a foolish thing.”
Anatole France
If @ mIlj@n pipl se @ fulIS TIè It Iz stIl @ fulIS TIè
Fricatives: 10
Alveolar C: 11
Tense V: 8
8.
Transcribe the following (about “English as a world language”) from 
D. Crystal, The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1995).
The movement of English around the world began with the pioneering 
D@ muvm@nt @v Iègl@S @@aUnd D@ w´ld b@gæn wIT D@ paI@ni@Iè

ANSWER
KEY
21
voyages to the Americas, Asia, and the Antipodes, continued with the  
vOI@dZ@z t@ D@ @mE@@k@z eZ@ @n D@ æntIp@diz k@ntInjud wIT D@
19th century colonial developments in Africa and the South Paciﬁc, and  
naIntinT sEntS@@i k@loni@l d@vEl@pm@nts In æf@@k@ @n D@ saUT p@sIfIk @n 
took a signiﬁcant further step when it was adopted in the 20th century 
tUk @ sIgnIf@k@nt f´D2 stEp wEn It w@z @dApt@d In D@ twEnti@T sEntS@@i 
as an ofﬁcial or semi-ofﬁcial language by many newly independent states.  
æz @n @fIS@l O@ sEmi @fIS@l læègw@dZ baI mEni nuli Ind@pEnd@nt stets.  
English is now the dominant or ofﬁcial language in over 60 countries, and 
Iègl@S Iz naU D@ dAm@n@nt O@ @fIS@l læègw@dZ In ov2 sIksti k√nt@iz @n  
is represented in every continent. It is this spread of representation which
Iz @Ep@izEnt@d In Ev@i kAnt@n@nt. It Iz DIs sp@Ed @v @Ep@izEnteS@n wItS
makes the application of the term ‘world language’ a reality. The 
meks D@ æpl@keS@n @v D@ t´m w´ld læègw@dZ @ @iæl@Qi. D@ 
present-day world status of English is primarily the result of two factors:  
p@Ez@nt de w´ld stæt@s @v Iègl@S Iz p@aImE@@li D@ @@z√lt @v tu fækt2z 
the expansion of British colonial power, which peaked towards the end 
Di IkspænS@n @v b@ItIS k@loni@l paU2 wItS pikt twO@dz Di End 
of the 19th century, and the emergence of the United States as the leading  
@v D@ naIntinT sEntS@@i @n D@ @m´dZ@ns @v D@ junaIt@d stets æz D@ lidIè
economic power of the 20th century. It is the latter factor which continues 
Ek@nAmIk paU2 @v D@ twEnti@T sEntS@@i. It Iz D@ læt2 fækt2 wItS k@ntInjuz
to explain the position of the English language today. The USA contains 
tu @ksplen D@ p@zIS@n @v D@ Iègl@S læègw@dZ t@de. D@ ju Es e k@ntenz 
nearly four times as many English-mother-tongue speakers as the next most 
ni@li fO@ taImz æz mEni Iègl@S m√D2 t√è spik2z æz D@ nEkst most 
important nation (UK), and these two countries comprise 70 percent of 
ImpO@t@nt neS@n ju ke @n Diz tu k√nt@iz k@mp@aIz sEv@nti p´sEnt @v 
all English-mother-tongue speakers in the world.
Al Iègl@S m√D2 t√è spik2z In D@ w´ld.
CHAPTER 5: ACOUSTICS OF VOWELS AND CONSONANTS
1.
What differences do you expect to ﬁnd in the spectrograms of the follow-
ing pairs?
Example:
(a) court – (b) scored
•
Initial frication noise of /s/ in (b)
•
Initial aspiration of /k/ in (a)
•
Longer vowel before /d/ in (b)
•
Longer duration for ﬁnal /t/ in (a)
•
Possible voice bar in ﬁnal /d/ in (b)

22
ANSWER
KEY
(i)
(a) sip
(b) zip
[s] – longer duration, greater frication noise
[z] – possible voice bar
(ii)
(a) britches
(b) bridges
[tS] – longer duration
[dZ] – possible voice bar
(iii)
(a) hat
(b) ahead
hat – one syllable, longer and lower vowel
ahead – two syllables, shorter mid vowel
Initial voiceless friction for [h] in hat; breathy intervocalic [h] in ahead
[t] – longer duration, [d] – shorter duration and partial voicing
(iv)
(a) parade
(b) pilot
parade – very short [@] then diphthongal [e], lower F3 for [@], shorter 
closure and partially voiced [d]
pilot – distinct diphthong then short [@], higher F3 for [l], longer 
closure and voiceless [t]
(v)
(a) name
(b) mine
name – diphthongal mid [e], formant transition from alveolar to
bilabial
mine – clear low to high diphthong [aI], formant transition from
bilabial to alveolar
2.
Match the following spectrograms with the targets open, tiger, package,
camel, apple, table. Explain your rationale.
open
(c)
long back diphthongal vowel, short vowel for [@]
unaspirated stop
faint nasal
tiger
(b)
aspirated stop
diphthong
voice bar for voiced stop and merging F2 and F3 for velar
weak /@/, lowering of F3 of vowel
package (a) aspirated stop
low front vowel
stop gap and unaspirated stop
affricate, frication noise, palato-alveolar place of articulation

ANSWER
KEY
23
camel
(e)
aspirated stop
faint nasal
weak /l/
apple
(d)
rather long vowel
unaspirated stop
weak /l/
table
(f)
aspirated stop
diphthongal front vowel
voice bar for voiced stop
weak /l/
3.
Transcribe the following (about “second language varieties of English”)
based on P. Trudgill and J. Hannah, International English, 4th edn.
(London: Edward Arnold, 2002).
English is a language which has more non-native speakers than native 
Iègl@S Iz @ læègw@dZ wItS hæz mO@ nAn net@v spik2z Dæn net@v 
speakers. Besides the fact that it is learned by millions of people around  
spik2z. b@saIdz D@ fækt Dæt It Iz l´nd baI mIlj@nz @v pip@l @@aUnd  
the world as a foreign language, there are millions of speakers of English 
D@ w´ld æz @ fO@@n læègw@dZ DE@ A@ mIlj@nz @v spik2z @v Iègl@S
as a second language in many countries. In the Americas, English is an  
æz @ sEk@nd læègw@dZ @n mEni k√nt@iz. In D@ @mE@@k@z Iègl@S Iz @n 
important second language in Puerto Rico, and also has some second-
ImpO@t@nt sEk@nd læègw@dZ In pwE@to @iko @n Also hæz s√m sEk@nd 
language presence in Panama. In Europe, it has ofﬁcial status in Gibraltar 
læègw@dZ p@Ez@ns @n pæn@m@. In ju@@p It hæz @fIS@l stæt@s @n dZ@b@Alt2
and Malta and is also widely spoken as a second language in Cyprus. In  
@n mAlt@ @n Iz Also waIdli spok@n æz @ sEk@nd læègw@dZ @n saIp@@s. In 
Africa, there are large communities of native speakers of English in Liberia, 
æf@@k@ DE@ A@ lA@dZ k@mjun@tiz @v net@v spik2z @v Iègl@S @n laIbi@ij@
South Africa, Zimbabwe and Kenya, but there are even larger communities
saUT æf@@k@ zImbAbwe @n kEnj@ b√t DE@ A@ iv@n lA@dZ2 k@mjun@tiz 
in these countries of second-language speakers. Elsewhere in Africa, 
@n Diz k√nt@iz @v sEk@nd læègw@dZ spik2z. ElswE@ @n æf@@k@
English has ofﬁcial status, and is therefore widely used as a second 
Iègl@S hæz @fIS@l stæt@s @n Iz DE@fO@ waIdli juzd æz @ sEk@nd 
language lingua franca in Gambia, Sierra Leone, Ghana, Nigeria, 
læègw@dZ lIègw@ f@æèk@ In gæmbij@ siE@@ lion gAn@ naIdZi@ij@
Cameroon, Namibia, Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland, Zambia, Malawi and 
kæm@@un nAmibij@ bAtswAn@ l@soTo swAzilænd zAmbij@ m@lAwi @n 
Uganda. It is also widely used in education and for government purposes 
jugAnd@. It Iz Also waIdli juzd @n EdZjukeS@n @n fO@ g√v´nm@nt p´p@s@z 

24
ANSWER
KEY
in Tanzania and Kenya. In the Indian Ocean, Asian and Paciﬁc Ocean areas, 
@n tænz@nij@ @n kEnj@. In D@ Indij@n oS@n eZ@n @n p@sIf@k oS@n E@ij@z 
English is an ofﬁcial language in Mauritius, the Seychelles, Pakistan, India,
Iègl@S Iz @n @fIS@l læègw@dZ @n mO@IS@s D@ seSElz pæk@stæn Indij@
Singapore, Brunei, Hong Kong, the Philippines, Papua New Guinea, the 
sIè@pO@ b@unei hOè kOè D@ fIl@pinz pApu@ nu gIni D@
Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Fiji, Tonga, Western Samoa, American Samoa, 
sAl@m@n aIl@ndz vænuAtu ﬁdZi toègA wEst2n s@mo@ @mE@@k@n s@mo@
the Cook Islands, Guam and elsewhere in American administered  
D@ kUk aIl@ndz gwAm @n ElswE@ @n @mE@@k@n ædmIn@st2d 
Micronesia. It is also very widely used as a second language in Malaysia, 
maIk@oniZ@. It Iz Also vE@i waIdli juzd æz @ sEk@nd læègw@dZ @n m@leZ@ 
Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, the Maldives, Nepal and Nauru.
bæègl@dES s@i lAèk@ D@ mAldivz n@pAl @n nAu@u.
CHAPTER 6: SYLLABLES
1.
In section 6.5.6, several patterns for non-sufﬁxed triple codas are discussed.
Which of these (if any) violate(s) the Sonority Sequencing Principle? State
the example(s) and your rationale.
stop–fricative–stop
1,2 →3,4 →1,2
nasal–stop–fricative
5 →1,2 →3,4
lateral–stop–fricative
6 →1,2 →3,4
ﬂap–stop–fricative
7 →1,2 →3,4
The SSP states that the sonority will drop as the coda progresses. All of
these have rises and dips within the coda.
2.
Do the same as above for sufﬁxed triple codas.
nasal–obstruent–/t, d, s, z/
potential to violate
(/nts/)
/s/–stop–/t, d, s, z/
potential to violate
(/sps/)
/l/–obstruent–/t, d, s, z/
potential to violate
(/lps/)
/@/–obstruent–/t, d, s, z/
potential to violate
(/@dz/)
obstruent–obstruent–obstruent
potential to violate
(/pst/)
3.
Which of the following would qualify for ambisyllabicity? Circle the
word(s), state your rationale, and give the tree diagram(s).
metric, regime, anecdote, camera, integrity, person, panic, majesty, Africa,
rival, pity, study, radical, legal, action, many, liquid, penalty, garbage, picnic,
spinach

ANSWER
KEY
25
σ
O
R
m E t r I/@ k
N C
t
E
m
σ
O
R
N C
k
I/@
r
g
σ
O
R
æ n @/I k d o t
N C
n
k
æ
σ
O
R
N C
o
t
d
@/I
σ
O
R
N C
σ
O
R
k æ m @ r @
N C
m
æ
k
σ
O
R
r
@
σ
O
R
N
@
N
σ
O
R
p E n @ l t i
N C
n
E
N C
l
@
p
σ
O
R
t
σ
O
R
i
N
σ
O
R
p I t i
N C
t
I
p
i
σ
O
R
N
σ
O
R
m E n i
N C
n
E
m
i
σ
O
R
N
σ
O
R
l I k w @/I d
N C
k
w
I
N C
d
@/I
l
σ
O
R
σ
O
R
s t √ d i
N C
d
√
t
s
i
σ
O
R
N
σ
O
R
I n t E g r @/I t i
N C
n
I
σ
O
R
N
@/I
σ
O
R
N
i
r
E
t
σ
O
R
N C
t
σ
O
R
p æ n I/@ k
N C
n
æ
p
σ
O
R
N C
k
I/@
σ
O
R
m æ dZ @ s t i
N C
dZ
æ
m
σ
O
R
N
i
t
@
s
σ
O
R
N C
σ
O
R
æ f r I/@ k @
N C
f
æ
σ
O
R
N
@
k
I/@
σ
O
R
N
r
σ
O
R
r æ d I/@ k @ l
N C
d
æ
r
σ
O
R
N
I/@
k
σ
O
R
@
l
N C
σ
O
R
s p I n @/I T
N C
n
I
N C
T
@/I
p
s
σ
O
R

26
ANSWER
KEY
A consonant that is part of a permissible onset is ambisyllabic if it occurs
after a short stressed vowel.
4.
Consider the following:
Short V + CC
Long V/diph. + C
Long V/diph. + CC
(a)
pimp
(b)
wipe
(c)
mind
BUT
* [maImb]
lint
light
grind
* [maIèg]
sink
bike
* [g@aImb]
weep
* [g@aIèg]
seed
beak
While certain combinations are possible, certain others (in c) are not
allowed. State the generalization.
After a short vowel, double codas should have homorganicity (same place
of articulation). After long vowels and diphthongs, stop consonants of all
places of articulation are possible as simple codas. Double codas after long
vowels or diphthongs are possible only if they are alveolars.
5.
In section 6.5.6, we saw that, because of reduced vowel deletions, several
normally impermissible consonant clusters can be created (e.g. photography
[ftAg@@ﬁ]). Find ﬁve examples of such clusters.
potato →[pteto]
marina →[mmin@]
malaria →[mlE@i@]
fanatics →[fnætIks]
tomorrow →[tmA@o]
6.
English ﬁnal consonant clusters are simpliﬁed by deleting the ﬁnal mem-
ber of the cluster in certain contexts (e.g. /nd/ in sand piles [sæn paIlz],
/st/ in ﬁrst class [f´s klæs]). The same is not possible in other contexts
(e.g. /nd/ in canned vegetables [kænd vE . . . ], /st/ in missed goals
[mIst golz]). State the generalization and give three examples for each 
possibility.
When the word ending in a cluster not created by the addition of a gram-
matical ending is followed by a word that begins with a consonant, the
ﬁnal member of the cluster is deleted.
hand made →[hæn med]
planned trip →[plænd t@Ip]
next class →[nEks klæs]
ﬁxed game →[fIkst gem]
left street →[lEf st@it]
autographed book →[Ot@g@æft bUk]

ANSWER
KEY
27
7.
Transcribe the following (about “English in America”) from J. Jenkins, World
Englishes (London: Routledge, 2002).
Walter Raleigh’s expedition of 1584 to America was the earliest from the 
wAlt2 @æliz EkspEdIS@n @v fIftin eti fO@ tu @mE@@k@ w@z D@ ´li@st f@√m D@
British Isles to the New World, though it did not result in a permanent 
b@ItIS aIlz tu D@ nu w´ld Do It dId nAt @@z√lt In @ p´m@n@nt  
settlement. The voyagers landed on the coast of North Carolina near 
sEt@lm@nt. D@ vOIj@dZ2z lænd@d An D@ kost @v nO@T kE@@laIn@ ni@
Roanoke Island, but fell into conﬂict with the native Indian population 
@o@nok aIl@nd b√t fEl Int@ kAnﬂIkt wIT D@ net@v Indi@n pApjuleS@n  
and then mysteriously disappeared altogether. In 1607, the ﬁrst permanent 
@n DEn mIsti@i@sli dIs@pi@d Alt@gED2. In sIkstin o sEv@n D@ f´st p´m@n@nt 
colonist arrived and settled in Jamestown, Virginia, to be followed in 1620  
kAl@nIst @@aIvd @n sEt@ld In dZemztaUn v´dZInj@ t@ bi fAlod In sIkstin twEnti  
by a group of Puritans and others on the Mayﬂower. The latter group landed 
baI @ g@up @v pju@@t@nz @n √D2z An D@ meﬂaU2. D@ læt2 g@up lænd@d 
further north, settling at what is now Plymouth, Massachusetts, in New 
f´D2 nO@T sEt@lIè æt w√t Iz naU plIm@T mæs@tSus@ts In nu  
England. Both settlements spread rapidly and attracted further migrants  
Iègl@nd. boT sEt@lm@nts sp@Ed @æp@dli @n @t@ækt@d f´D2 maIg@@nts 
during the years that followed. Because of their different linguistic 
dU@Iè D@ ji@z Dæt fAlod. b@k√z @v DE@ dIf@@nt lIègwIst@k 
backgrounds, there were immediately certain differences in the accents of 
bækg@aUndz DE@ w2 Imidi@tli s´@t@n dIf@@ns@z In D@ æksEnts @v
the two groups of settlers. Those in Virginia came mainly from the West 
D@ tu g@ups @v sEtl2z. Doz In v´dZInj@ kem menli f@√m D@ wEst 
of England and brought with them their characteristic rhotic /r/ and 
@v Iègl@nd @n b@Ot wIT DEm DE@ kE@@kt@@Ist@k @ot@k A@ @n 
voiced /s/ sounds. On the other hand, those who settled in New England
vOIst s saUndz. An D@ √D2 hænd Doz hu sEt@ld In nu Iègl@nd 
were mainly from the east of England, where these features were not a 
w2 menli f@√m D@ ist @v Iègl@nd wE@ Diz ﬁtS2z w2 nAt @
part of the local accent.
pA@t @v D@ lok@l æksEnt.
CHAPTER 7: STRESS AND INTONATION
1.
In the following we observe schwa deletion in fast speech for words
(a)–(k); the same is not possible in words (l)–(v). State the generalization.
Pay special attention to morphologically related words such as (f) and (s),
(g) and (v), (h) and (u), (i) and (t), (j) and (q), (k) and (r).
Careful speech
Fast speech
(a)
camera
[kæm@@@]
[kæm@@]
(b)
veteran
[vEt@@@n]
[vEt@@n]

28
ANSWER
KEY
(c)
aspirin
[æsp@@@n]
[æsp@@n]
(d)
temperature
[tEmp@@@tS2]
[tEmp@@tS2]
(e)
reasonable
[@iz@n@bl]
[@izn@bl]
(f)
imaginative
[ImædZ@n@tIv]
[ImædZn@tIv]
(g)
principal
[p@Ins@p@l]
[p@Insp@l]
(h)
management
[mæn@dZm@nt]
[mændZm@nt]
(i)
testament
[tEst@m@nt]
[tEstm@nt]
(j)
general
[dZEn@@@l]
[dZEn@@l]
(k)
opera
[Ap@@@]
[Ap@@]
(l)
famous
[fem@s]
[fem@s] not [fems]
(m)
vegetarian
[vEdZ@tE@i@n]
[vEdZ@tE@i@n] not [vEdZtE@i@n]
(n)
motivate
[mot@vet]
[mot@vet] not [motvet]
(o)
pathology
[pæTAl@dZi]
[pæTAl@dZi] not [pæTAldZi]
(p)
facilitate
[f@sIl@tet]
[f@sIl@tet] not [f@sIltet]
(q)
generality
[dZEn@@æl@ti]
[dZEn@@æl@ti] not [dZEn@æl@ti]
(r)
operatic
[Ap@@ætIk]
[Ap@@ætIk] not [Ap@ætIk]
(s)
imagination
[@mædZ@neS@n]
[@mædZ@neS@n] not [@mædZneS@n]
(t)
testimony
[tEst@moni]
[tEst@moni] not [tEstmoni]
(u)
managerial
[mæn@dZE@i@l]
[mæn@dZE@i@l] not [mændZE@i@l]
(v)
principality
[p@Ins@pæl@ti]
[p@Ins@pæl@ti] not [p@Inspæl@ti]
In English fast speech, a schwa is deleted from a word when it is preceded
by a stressed vowel and followed by another schwa.
2.
Analyze the stress patterns of the following words by using the three 
parameters (stress, tonic accent, and full vowel), and give the traditional 
numbers.
Example:
mineralogy
[mI.n@.@A.l@.dZi]
Stress
+
−
+ −
−
Tonic accent
−
−
+ −
−
Full vowel
+
−
+ −
+
2
4
1 4
3
(a)
choreography
(b)
discretional
(c)
mythical
[kO@iAg@@ﬁ]
[d@sk@ES@n@l]
[mIT@k@l]
St.
+ −+ −−
−
+ −
−
+ −−
T.a.
−−+ −−
−
+ −
−
+ −−
F.V
+ ++ −+
−
+ −
−
+ −−
2 3 1 4 3
4
1 4
4
1 4 4

ANSWER
KEY
29
(d)
gratiﬁcation
(e)
autograph
(f)
modality
[g@æt@f@keS@n]
[Ot@g@æf]
[modæl@ti]
St.
+ −−+ −
+−
+
+ + −−
T.a.
−−−+ −
+−
−
−+ −−
F.V
+ −−+ −
+−
+
+ + −+
2 4 4 1 4
1 4
2
2 1 4 3
(g)
conciliation
(h)
punishable
(i)
phonological
[k@nsIlieS@n]
[p√nIS@b@l]
[fon@lAdZ@k@l]
St.
−+ −+ −
+ −−−
+ −+ −
−
T.a.
−−−+ −
+ −−−
−−+ −
−
F.V
−+ ++ −
+ + −−
+ −+ −
−
4 2 31 4
1 3 4 4
2 4 1 4
4
(j)
profundity
(k)
consumptiveness
(l)
resumption
[p@of√nd@ti]
[k@ns√mpt@vn@s]
[@iz√mpS@n]
St.
−
+
−−
−
+
−
−
−
+
−
T.a.
−
+
−−
−
+
−
−
−
+
−
F.V
+
+
−+
−
+
−
−
+
+
−
*3/41
4 3
4
1
4
4
*3/4 1
4
(m)
diagnosis
(n)
neutralize
(o)
resignation
[daI@gnosIs]
[nut@@laIz]
[@Ez@gneS@n]
St.
+ −+
−
+ −
+
+ −+ −
T.a.
−−+
−
+ −
−
−−+ −
F.V
+ −+
+
+ −
+
+ −+ −
2 4 1 *3/4
1 4
2
2 4
1 4
(p)
eccentricity
(q)
recessional
(r)
protestation
[Eks@nt@Is@ti]
[@isES@n@l]
[p@At@steS@n]
St.
+ −
+ −−
−
+ −−
+
−+ −
T.a.
−−
+ −−
−
+ −−
−
−+ −
F.V
+ −
+ −+
+
+ −−
+
−+ −
2 4
1 4 3
*3/4 1 4 4
2
4 1 4
(s)
assassination
(t)
agriculture
(u)
macaroni
[@sæs@neS@n]
[æg@@k√ltS@@]
[mæk@@oni]
St.
−+
−+ −
+ −+ −
+
−+ −
T.a.
−−
−+ −
+ −−−
−
−+ −
F.V
−+
−+ −
+ −+ −
+
−+ +
4 2
4 1 4
1 4 2 4
2
4 1 3
* Will be 3 (−Stress, +F.V) when considered with a non-reduced V; will 
be 4 (−Stress, −F.V) when considered with a [@].

30
ANSWER
KEY
3.
In light of what you have seen regarding intonation patterns in section 7.8,
determine where the tonic accent will be in the following (in their neutral,
non-contrastive readings).
(a)
A:
Are you coming to the *movie?
B:
I have *exams to grade.
(b)
The *dog barked.
(c)
The *building’s falling down.
(d)
I go to *Boston, usually.
4.
Match the intonation patterns of the following with the six types indicated below.
(a) low rise, (b) high (long) rise, (c) low fall, (d) long (full) fall, (e) fall–rise,
(f) rise–fall
(i)
I am so happy for you.
d
(ii)
Would you like to have coffee or tea? (open choice reading)
a
(iii)
Would you like to have coffee or tea? (closed choice)
c
(iv)
Where will the meeting be held? (information seeking)
d
(v)
Where will the meeting be held? (I couldn’t hear you)
a
(vi)
What am I doing? I am trying to ﬁx the TV.
a
(vii)
Her predictions came true. (clear ﬁnality)
d
(viii)
Who was at the meeting?
d
(ix)
Whatever you say.
c
(x)
We should look for him, shouldn’t we?
f
(xi)
You can take the old route. (agree with reservation)
e
(xii)
Are you out of your mind?
b
(xiii)
Did you wash the car yet?
a
(xiv)
I would have done it the same way, wouldn’t you?
f
5.
Transcribe the following (about “English in America”, continued) from 
J. Jenkins, World Englishes (London: Routledge, 2002).
During the seventeenth century, English spread to southern parts of  
dU@Iè D@ sEv@ntinT sEntS@@i Iègl@S sp@Ed tu s√D2n pA@ts @v  
America and the Caribbean as a result of the slave trade. Slaves were 
@mE@@k@ @n D@ k@@Ibi@n æz @ @@z√lt @v D@ slev t@ed. slevz w´
transported from West Africa and exchanged, on the American coast and 
t@ænspO@t@d f@@m wEst æf@@k@ @n EkstSendZd An D@ @mE@@k@n kost @n 
in the Caribbean, for sugar and rum. The Englishes which developed among
In D@ k@@Ibi@n fO@ SUg2 @n @√m. D@ Iègl@S@z wItS d@vEl@pt @m√è
the slaves and between them and their captors were initially contact 
D@ slevz @n b@twin DEm @n DE@ kæpt2z w´ InIS@li kAntækt 
pidgin languages but, with their use as mother tongues following the birth  

ANSWER
KEY
31
pIdZ@n læègw@dZ@z b√t wIT DE@ jus æz m√D2 t√èz fAloIè D@ b´T
of the next generation, they developed into creoles. Then, in the 
@v D@ nEkst dZEn@@eS@n De d@vEl@pt Intu k@iolz. DEn In D@
eighteenth century, there was large-scale immigration from Northern 
etinT sEntS@@i DE@ w@z lA@dZ skel Im@g@eS@n f@@m nO@D2n 
Ireland, initially to the coastal area around Philadelphia, but quickly 
aI@l@nd InIS@li tu D@ kost@l E@i@ @@aUnd fIl@dElﬁ@ b√t kwIkli 
moving south and west. After the Declaration of American Independence  
muvIè saUT @n wEst. æft2 D@ dEkl@@eS@n @v @mE@@k@n Ind@pEnd@ns 
in 1776, many loyalists (the British settlers who had supported  
In sEv@ntin sEv@nti sIks mEni lOI@lIsts D@ b@It@S sEtl2z hu hæd s@pO@t@d 
the British government) left for Canada.
D@ b@It@S g√v@@nm@nt lEft fO@ kæn@d@.
CHAPTER 8: STRUCTURAL FACTORS IN SECOND LANGUAGE PHONOLOGY
1.
First, transcribe the following word-pairs, and then, with the contrastive
information you had in this chapter, identify the languages whose native
speakers would have problems related to these target English word-pairs.
cheap – chip: /tSip/ – /tSIp/
Arabic, Russian, Korean, Portuguese,
Spanish, Turkish, Greek, French, Persian
sieve – save: /siv/ – /sev/
Arabic
age – edge: /edZ/ – /EdZ/
Spanish, Greek, French, Arabic, Russian,
Korean, Persian
bend – band: /bEnd/ – /bænd/
Spanish, Turkish, Greek, French,
German, Arabic, Russian
band – bond: /bænd/ – /bAnd/
Spanish, Turkish, Greek, Arabic, Russian
fool – full: /ful/ – /fUl/
Arabic, Russian, Spanish, Turkish, Greek,
French, Korean, Portuguese, Persian
backs – box: /bæks/ – /bAks/
Arabic, Russian, Spanish, Turkish, Greek
look – Luke: /lUk/ – /luk/
Arabic, Russian, Spanish, Turkish, Greek,
French, Korean, Portuguese, Persian
feast – ﬁst: /ﬁst/ – /fIst/
Arabic, Russian, Spanish, Turkish, Greek,
French, Korean, Portuguese, Persian
wait – wet: /wet/ – /wEt/
Arabic, Spanish, Greek, Russian, Korean, Persian
slept – slapped: /slEpt/ – /slæpt/
Spanish, Turkish, Greek, French,
German, Arabic, Russian, Korean, Portuguese, Persian
2.
Now, do the same for the following target pairs in contrast.
glass – grass: /glæs/ – /g@æs/
Korean
peach – beach: /pitS/ – /bitS/
Arabic, Korean
pour – four: /pO@/ – /fO@/
Korean
went – vent: /wEnt/ – /vEnt/
Turkish, German, Russian, Persian

32
ANSWER
KEY
feel – veal: /ﬁl/ – /vil/
Spanish, Arabic
vowel – bowel: /vaUl/ – /baUl/
Spanish, Korean
dense – dens: /dEns/ – /dEnz/
Spanish
three – tree: /T@i/ – /t@i/
Persian, Spanish, Turkish, Greek, Arabic,
Russian, Korean, Portuguese
thick – sick: /TIk/ – /sIk/
Spanish, Greek, French, German, Arabic
those – doze: /Doz/ – /doz/
Spanish, Turkish, Persian, Greek, Arabic,
Russian, Korean, Portuguese
leaf – leave: /lif/ – /liv/
Spanish, German, Arabic, Korean
rope – robe: /@op/ – /@ob/
German, Arabic, Russian, Korean
stow – stove: /sto/ – /stov/
Spanish, German, Korean, Persian
curved – curbed: /k´vd/ – /k´bd/
Spanish, Korean
math – mat: /mæT/ – /mæt/
Spanish, Turkish, Arabic, Russian, Korean,
Portuguese
forth – force: /fO@T/ – /fO@s/
Spanish, German, French, Arabic
soothe – sued: /suD/ – /sud/
Spanish, Turkish, Arabic, Russian, Korean,
Portuguese, Persian
clothed – closed: /kloDd/ – /klozd/
Spanish, French, German, Arabic
sin – sing: /sIn/ – /sIè/
Turkish, Greek, French, Arabic, Russian,
Portuguese
cart – card: /kA@t/ – /kA@d/
German, Turkish, Russian
thin – chin: /TIn/ – /tSIn/
Spanish, Greek, Portuguese
lamp – ramp: /læmp/ – /@æmp/
Korean
sift – shift: /sIft/ – /SIft/
Arabic, Korean
sink – zinc: /sIèk/ – /zIèk/
Spanish
cheer – sheer: /tSi@/ – /Si@/
Spanish, Greek, French, Arabic, Korean
surge – search: /s´dZ/ – /s´tS/
German, Russian, Korean
dug – duck: /d√g/ – /d√k/
German, Turkish, Russian
3.
Now, do the same for the following triplets.
huck – hock – hawk: /h√k/ – /hOk/ – /hAk/
Portuguese, Persian,
French, German, Arabic, Russian, Korean, Spanish, Turkish, Greek
panned – punned – pond: /pænd/ – /p√nd/ – /pOnd/
Spanish,
Turkish, Greek, French, Arabic, Russian, Korean, Portuguese, Persian
bag – bug – bog: /bæg/ – /b√g/ – /bAg/
Persian, French, German, Arabic,
Russian, Portuguese, Spanish, Turkish, Greek, Korean
bid – bead – bed: /bId/ – /bid/ – /bEd/
Russian, Portuguese, Persian,
Spanish, Turkish, Greek, Arabic, Korean
stack – stuck – stock: /stæk/ – /st√k/ – /stAk/
French, German, Arabic,
Russian, Korean, Spanish, Turkish, Greek, Portuguese, Persian
4.
Although contrastive phonological information is indispensable for the pre-
diction of learners’ difﬁculties, it is not sufﬁcient in many cases, because
for certain phenomena, constraints based on universal markedness have

ANSWER
KEY
33
been shown to be inﬂuential in explaining the degree of difﬁculty of tar-
gets. Order the following targets in terms of difﬁculty (from most difﬁcult
to least difﬁcult), and state the rationale.
(a)
single-coda consonants:
deal, deer, deem, beat, beach
beat, beach, deem, deal, deer
The higher-sonority codas are easier than low-sonority codas.
(b)
liquids:
/l/
full, elect, lamp, ﬂy, belt
/@/
green, boring, tire, room, card
full, belt, ﬂy, elect, lamp
tire, card, green, boring, room
Postvocalic, postconsonantal, intervocalic, then initial.
(c)
/s/ + C onsets:
slow, sticker, swing, small
sticker, small, slow, swing
The higher the sonority jump from C1 to C2, the less difﬁcult the cluster is.
(d)
aspiration:
pig, keep, park, course, torn, tease
park, pig, torn, tease, course, keep
Aspiration is less difﬁcult as the place of articulation moves further back
(bilabial, to alveolar, to velar). Also, if the following vowel is high, rather
than low, it facilitates the aspiration.
(e)
ﬁnal voiced stops:
lab, bid, rod, rag, rib, wig
wig, rag, bid, rod, rib, lab
Velars are the most vulnerable for devoicing, followed by alveolars and
then bilabials. Also, the higher the preceding vowel, the more difﬁcult the
production of the target voiced stop.
5.
Japanese lacks English target /T/ and learners replace it with a [s] (e.g.
thank [sæèk]). Also, [S] is an allophone of /s/ in Japanese before /i/. This
results in renditions such as sip [SIp]. While we have these two patterns
(/s/ as [S] before /i/, and /T/ as [s]), Japanese speakers’ rendition of 
English think is [sIèk] and not [SIèk]. Does this support or counter the case
made for deﬂected contrast in section 8.3.2? State your reasoning.
This supports the case of deﬂected contrast because learners distinguish
the three target phonemes /s/, /S/, /T/ and prevents the neutralization
of any contrast.

34
ANSWER
KEY
6.
Transcribe the following (on “American English”) from T. McArthur, 
The English Languages (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998, 
pp. 220–7).
(a)
The American I have heard up to the present is a tongue as distinct
from English as Patagonian.
(Rudyard Kipling, 1889)
Di @mE@@k@n aI hæv h´d √p tu D@ p@Ez@nt Iz @ t√è æz d@stIèkt f@@m
Iègl@S æz pæt@goni@n.
(b)
The rich have always liked to assume the costumes of the poor. Take
the American language. It is more than a million words wide, and new
terms are constantly added to its inﬁnite variety. Yet, as the decade
starts, the US vocabulary seems to have shrunk to child size.
(Stefan Kanfer, 1980)
D@ @ItS hæv Alwez laIkt tu @sum D@ kAstjumz @v D@ pu@. tek D@
@mE@@k@n læègw@dZ. It Iz mO@ Dæn @ mIlj@n w´dz waId @n nu t´mz
A@ kAnst@ntli æd@d tu Its Inf@n@t v@@aI@ti. jEt æz D@ dEked stA@ts D@ ju
Es vokæbjulE@i simz tu hæv S@√èk tu tSaIld saIz.
(c)
I mean that almost everyone who touches upon American speech
assumes that it is inferior to British speech. Just as the Englishman,
having endured for a time the society of his equals, goes on to bask
in the sunshine of aristocracy, so the American, when he has used the
American language for business or for familiar intercourse, may then,
for higher or more serious purposes, go on to the aristocratic or royal
language of Great Britain.
(Fred Newton Scott, 1917)
aI min Dæt Almost Ev@iw√n hu t√tS@z @pAn @mE@@k@n spitS @sumz Dæt
It Iz Inﬁ@i2 tu b@It@S spitS. dZ√st æz D@ Iègl@Sm@n hævIè @ndu@d fO@
@ taIm D@ s@saI@ti @v hIz ikw@lz goz An tu bæsk In D@ s√nSaIn @v
æ@@stAk@@si so D@ @mE@@k@n wEn hi hæz juzd D@ @mE@@k@n læègw@dZ
fO@ bIzn@s 2 fO@ f@mIlj2 Int2kO@s me DEn fO@ haIj2 O@ mO@ si@i@s
p´p@s@z go An tu D@ @@Ist@k@ætIk O@ @OIj@l læègw@dZ @v g@et b@It@n.
CHAPTER 9: SPELLING AND PRONUNCIATION
1.
The words in the following pairs are spelt differently; some pairs are 
pronounced the same (i.e. they are homophonous), and others are not.
Identify each pair as either the same (S) or different (D), and provide the 
phonetic transcription(s).
Example:
plain – plane (S)
[plen]
price – prize (D)
[p@aIs] – [p@aIz]

ANSWER
KEY
35
(a)
key – quay D: [ki] – [kwe] or [ke]
(b)
gorilla – guerrilla S: [g@@Il@]
(c)
person – parson D: [p´s@n] – [pA@s@n]
(d)
proﬁt – prophet S: [p@Af@t]
(e)
rout – route D: [@ut] – [@aUt]
(f)
draught – draft S: [d@æft]
(g)
genes – jeans S: [dZinz]
(h)
colonel – kernel S: [k´n@l]
(i)
raiser – razor S: [@ez2]
(j)
patron – pattern D: [pet@@n] – [pæt2n]
(k)
temper – tamper D: [tEmp2] – [tæmp2]
(l)
cymbal – symbol S: [sImb@l]
(m)
local – locale D: [lok@l] – [lokæl]
(n)
discreet – discrete S: [d@sk@it]
(o)
review – revue S: [@@vju]
(p)
critic – critique D: [k@It@k] – [k@@tik]
2.
Identify the vowel changes in the stressed syllables (spelt identically) of
the following morphologically related words.
Example:
gradient – gradual
letter a [e] / [æ]
derive – derivative
i
[aI]/[I]
provoke – provocative
o
[o]/[A]
punitive – punishment
u
[u]/[√]
harmonious – harmonic
o
[o]/[A]
deduce – deduction
u
[u]/[√]
satire – satiric
a
[æ]/[I]
serene – serenity
e
[i]/[E]
major – majesty
a
[e]/[æ]
wild – wilderness
i
[aI]/[I]
3.
Find an appropriate morphologically related word for the similar vowel
changes (represented by the same orthographic letter).
Example: letter e [i] / [E] austere – austerity
(a)
letter a [e] / [æ]
profane – profanity
grateful – gratitude
collate – collateral
sane – sanity
(b)
letter e [i] / [E]
meter – metrical
supreme – supremacy
succeed – success
discreet – discretion

36
ANSWER
KEY
(c)
letter i [aI] / [I]
decide – decision
title – titular
divine – divinity
line – linear
(d)
letter o [o] / [O/A]
cone – conic
code – codify
protest – protestant
vocal – vocative
(e)
letter u [u] / [√]
duke – duchess
consume – consumption
resume – resumption
assume – assumption
4.
Transcribe the following citations (on “American English”) from T. McArthur,
The English Languages (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998, 
pp. 220–7).
(a)
The foreign language which has most affected English in our own
time is contemporary American. . . . The colloquial speech of the
American is becoming, largely as a result of the foreign ingredients
in the melting-pot, more and more remote from the spoken English
of the educated Englishman, but, at the same time, the more slangy
element in our language is being constantly reinforced by words and
phrases taken from American, especially the type of American which
is printed in the cinema caption.
(Ernest Weekley, UK, 1928)
D@ fO@@n læègw@dZ wItS hæz most @fEkt@d Iègl@S In aU@ on taIm Iz
k@ntEmp@@E@i @mE@@k@n. D@ k@lokwi@l spitS @v D@ @mE@@k@n Iz
b@k√mIè lA@dZli æz @ @@z√lt @v D@ fO@@n Ièg@idi@nts In D@ mEltIè pAt
mO@ @n mO@ @@mot f@@m D@ spok@n Iègl@S @v D@ EdZjuket@d Iègl@Sm@n
b√t æt D@ sem taIm D@ mO@ slæègi El@m@nt In aU@ læègw@dZ Iz biIè
kAnst@ntli @i@nfO@st baI w´dz @n f@ez@z tek@n f@@m @mE@@k@n IspES@li
D@ taIp @v @mE@@k@n wItS Iz p@Int@d In D@ sIn@m@ kæpS@n.
(b)
It was the British Empire, on which the sun never set, that originally
spread English around the world, along with the tea breaks, cuffed
trousers and the stiff upper lip. But when the imperial sun ﬁnally did
set after World War II, the American language followed American
power into the vacuum.
(Otto Friedrich et al., USA, 1986)
It w@z D@ b@It@S EmpaI@ An wItS D@ s√n nEv2 sEt Dæt @@IdZ@n@li sp@Ed
Iègl@S @@aUnd D@ w´ld @lOè wIT D@ ti b@eks k√ft t@aUz2z @n D@ stIf √p2
lIp. b√t wEn D@ Impi@i@l s√n faIn@li dId sEt æft2 w´ld wO@ tu D@
@mE@@k@n læègw@dZ fAlod @mE@@k@n paU2 Intu D@ vækjum.

ANSWER
KEY
37
(c)
Whose English language is it, anyway? From the tone of the new 
‘BBC News and Current Affairs Stylebook and Editorial Guide’,
you’d think the Brits invented it. With unmistakable disdain, the
broadcastocrats in London call what we speak ‘American’. As a user
of Murkin English, I rise to the defense.
(William Saﬁre, USA, 1993)
huz Iègl@S læègw@dZ Iz It Eniwe. f@√m D@ ton @v D@ nu bi bi si nuz
@n k√@@nt @fE@z staIlbUk @n Ed@tO@i@l gaId jud TIèk D@ b@Its InvEnt@d
It. wIT √nmIstek@b@l dIsden D@ b@Odkæst@k@æts In l√nd@n kAl w√t wi
spik @mE@@k@n. æz @ juz2 @v m´k@n Iègl@S aI @aIz tu D@ d@fEns.

