

Acquisitions Editor: Peter Sabatini
Product Manager: Paula C. Williams
Marketing Manager: Allison Powell
Designer: Teresa Mallon
Compositor: Aptara, Inc.
 
Copyright © 2012 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, a Wolters Kluwer
business
 
 
351 West Camden Street
Baltimore, MD 21201
Two Commerce Square
2001 Market Street
Philadelphia, PA 19103
 
Printed in China
 
All rights reserved. This book is protected by copyright. No part of this
book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
including as photocopies or scanned-in or other electronic copies, or
utilized by any information storage and retrieval system without written
permission from the copyright owner, except for brief quotations
embodied in critical articles and reviews. Materials appearing in this
book prepared by individuals as part of their official duties as U.S.
government employees are not covered by the above-mentioned
copyright. To request permission, please contact Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins at Two Commerce Square, 2001 Market Street, Philadelphia,
PA 19103, via e-mail at permissions@lww.com, or via Web site at
lww.com (products and services).
 
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
 
Fuller, Donald (Donald R.), author.
    Applied anatomy and physiology for speech-language pathology and
audiology / Donald Fuller, Ph.D., CCC-SLP, Jane Pimentel, Ph.D.,
CCC-SLP, Barbara M. Peregoy, Au. D., CCC-A.
          p. ; cm.
     Includes bibliographical references and index. ISBN 978-0-7817-
8837-3 (hardback : alkaline paper)
     1. Communicative disorders—Pathophysiology. 2. Human anatomy.
3. Human physiology. I. Pimentel, Jane, author. II. Peregoy, Barbara M.,
author. III. Title.
     [DNLM: 1. Language Disorders—physiopathology. 2. Hearing
Disorders—physiopathology. 
3. 
Nervous 
System—anatomy 
&
histology. 4. Respiratory System—anatomy & histology. 5. Speech—
physiology. 6. Speech-Language Pathology—methods. WL 340.2]
     RC423.F824 2010
     616.8†5[H11032]5—dc22
 
2010044328
 
DISCLAIMER
 
Care has been taken to confirm the accuracy of the information present
and to describe generally accepted practices. However, the authors,
editors, and publisher are not responsible for errors or omissions or for
any consequences from application of the information in this book and
make no warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the currency,
completeness, or accuracy of the contents of the publication. Application
of this information in a particular situation remains the professional
responsibility of the practitioner; the clinical treatments described and
recommended may not be considered absolute and universal
recommendations.
 

The authors, editors, and publisher have exerted every effort to ensure
that drug selection and dosage set forth in this text are in accordance
with the current recommendations and practice at the time of
publication. However, in view of ongoing research, changes in
government regulations, and the constant flow of information relating to
drug therapy and drug reactions, the reader is urged to check the
package insert for each drug for any change in indications and dosage
and for added warnings and precautions. This is particularly important
when the recommended agent is a new or infrequently employed drug.
Some drugs and medical devices presented in this publication have
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) clearance for limited use in
restricted research settings. It is the responsibility of the health care
providers to ascertain the FDA status of each drug or device planned for
use in their clinical practice.
To purchase additional copies of this book, call our customer service
department at (800) 638-3030 or fax orders to (301) 223-2320.
International customers should call (301) 223-2300.
 
Visit 
Lippincott 
Williams 
& 
Wilkins 
on 
the 
Internet:
http://www.lww.com. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins customer service
representatives are available from 8:30 am to 6:00 pm, EST.
 

To my wife, Zhe Qu (“Joyce”), and our daughter, Ersi Nie (“Sisi”), two
intellectually superior women who understand the importance of life-
long learning; and to our younger children—Destiny, Richard, and
Aidan—may the love of learning be just as important to them. Finally, to
my mother, Hannah Louise Bridges, and father, Roy Fuller, Sr., both
now deceased, who instilled within me the need to never stop learning.
Donald R. Fuller
To my husband, Paul, for his limitless patience and support and to my
late mother, Ramona, for her incredible enthusiasm for my professional
pursuits.
Jane T. Pimentel
To my husband, Bob, for his patience and for encouraging me to
continue when I wanted to quit; to my sons, Stephen and William, for
understanding when I told them, “I can’t right now, I have a deadline”;
and to my big brother, Steve, for teaching me by example that life’s
challenges are “do-able” even if you just pick your way down the
mountain.
Barbara M. Peregoy

 
Jillian G. Barrett, Ph.D., CCC-A, FAAA
Private Practice
Danville, California
James Feuerstein, Ph.D., CCC-A, FAAA
Professor of Audiology
Department of Communication Sciences & Disorders
Nazareth College
Rochester, New York
Eric W. Healy, Ph.D.
Associate Professor
Department of Speech and Hearing Science
The Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio
Rajinder Koul, Ph.D., CCC-SLP
Professor and Chair, Associate Dean (Research)
Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center
Lubbock, Texas
Thomas Littman, Ph.D., CCC-A
Audiologist
Factoria Hearing Center
Bellevue, Washington
Beverly Miller, M.A., CCC-SLP
Assistant Professor
Department of Communication Disorders
Marshall University
Huntington, West Virginia
Amy T. Neel, Ph.D., CCC-SLP

Associate Professor
Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences
University of New Mexico
Albuquerque, New Mexico
Shawn L. Nissen, Ph.D., CCC-SLP
Associate Professor
Department of Communication Disorders
Brigham Young University
Provo, Utah
Sarah Poissant, Ph.D., CCC-A
Associate Professor
Department of Communication Disorders
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, Massachusetts
Tracie Rice, Au.D., CCC-A
Clinical Director
Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders
Western Carolina University
Cullowhee, North Carolina
Howard Rothman, Ph.D.
Professor Emeritus
University of Florida
Gainesville, Florida
 
Charles L. Madison, Ph.D., CCC-SLP
Professor
Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences
Washington State University
Spokane, Washington

 
“Why do we need to know all of this anatomy?”
It’s a question for the ages. Every instructor who has ever taught
anatomy and physiology of the speech and hearing mechanism has heard
that question at least once—if not several times—in his or her career.
Too often, and for various reasons, anatomy and physiology is taught
separately from the disorders in the typical communication disorders
curriculum. For those of us who are “purists,” there is a belief that the
foundational courses for the profession should be taught before the
applied courses are introduced. This is reinforced by the classifi cation
of anatomy and physiology as one of the “basic human communication
processes.” The assumption for many is that applied coursework is not
appropriate until the underlying basic processes are understood. For
others, the logistical nightmare of trying to coordinate anatomy and
physiology with the disorders within a 3-, 4-, or even 5-credit course has
precluded the introduction of applied information with the information
pertaining to anatomy and physiology. The problem is exacerbated by
the fact that the most commonly used textbooks on anatomy and
physiology of the speech and hearing mechanism provide very little, if
any, applied information. Other than the occasional “clinical
application” box or short paragraph, one would be hard pressed to fi nd
any substantive information about how anatomy and physiology is used
clinically to govern the decision-making process regarding diagnosis or
potential intervention strategies.
The reality is that for whatever reason we choose not to integrate
anatomy and physiology with their clinical relevance, students are not
provided the “big picture.” At least while they are taking the course,
most students do not fully comprehend how anatomy and physiology fi
ts into this big picture. Most of us try to provide clinically relevant

examples while we are teaching the course, but too often, the few
examples we provide are simply not enough. The industrious student
may take the initiative and seek out that information independently.
Most students, however, wait until they take the applied courses and
hope that at that point they will begin to see the big picture. From these
students who no doubt make up the majority, those often said words are
uttered:
“Why do we need to know all of this anatomy?”
Throughout the many years we have taught anatomy and
physiology of speech and hearing, we must have heard that question a
thousand times. Even in light of our attempts to provide clinically
relevant examples to illustrate the importance of understanding the
anatomy and physiology, that question kept rearing its ugly head. We
are happy to report that the vast majority of students who have taken an
anatomy course under us went on to make the connection later in their
studies. However, we have always had the nagging feeling that students
needed to make that connection much sooner in their undergraduate
careers.
We have never been overly enamored with the textbooks in
anatomy and physiology that have been published over the years. Some
of them were too technical or advanced for the typical undergraduate
student, bogging the student down in detail after detail to the point that
comprehension was minimal. Other textbooks were too simplistic, not
providing enough detail to be meaningful to the student. With the
exception of one or two, most textbooks provided very little in the way
of ancillary materials. All of them provided too little information about
the clinical relevance of anatomy and physiology. The more and more
we taught anatomy and physiology over the years, the more we thought
about what we would like to see in an anatomy textbook: a good balance
in terms of the complexity of the information provided; ancillary
materials to assist the student in further understanding the material; and
most importantly, a good, healthy dose of applied clinical information to
assist the student in making the critical connection between
anatomy/physiology and its clinical application. Such a textbook, and a
course built around it, would hopefully eliminate the need for students to
ask:
“Why do we need to know all of this anatomy?”

Enter 
the 
American 
Speech-Language-Hearing 
Association
(ASHA). When ASHA introduced its new standards for certification in
January 2005, we saw it as an opportunity. With the new certification
standards being knowledge- and skills-based as opposed to course-
based, we realized that professional programs were freed from counting
academic credits in various areas such as basic human communication
processes, professional courses, etc. Instead, programs could concentrate
on ensuring that students acquire certain knowledge and skills outcomes.
Such a shift in focus allows professional programs to redesign their
curricula to meet knowledge and skills outcomes instead of counting
academic credits. Other than the general requirement that graduates have
75 semester hours credit of coursework in the profession (with 36 of
those credits being earned at the graduate level), there are no longer
specific academic credit requirements. An obvious benefit of this is that
the need to separate the anatomy and physiology from the clinical
application no longer exists. Both could be taught in parallel since
professional programs are no longer required to “bean count” the
academic credits.
This textbook represents the culmination of the ideas we have had
for the last 20 years. First, a conscious attempt was made to present the
anatomy and physiology of speech and hearing in a manner that is not
too complex, but also not too simplistic. The critical information is here.
The terminology is here. The detail is also here. The writing style is
what possibly separates this textbook from the other texts available on
the market. An attempt was made to write in a style that invites the
reader on a tour of anatomy and physiology.
Second, ancillary materials are available to assist the student in
understanding the anatomy and physiology and also to assist the
instructor in presenting the material. In our opinion, the artwork (both
drawings and photographs) in this textbook is superior by comparison
with the artwork in other textbooks on the market. Case studies, clinical
“tie-in” boxes, a large glossary, references to research, study questions,
and terminology “hint” boxes are used liberally to assist the reader’s
comprehension. A companion Web site is also available; this includes a
library of images and other pedagogical materials to further reinforce the
concepts learned. This textbook is possibly the fi rst one in our
profession to link the information contained within to the pertinent

knowledge outcomes of ASHA’s certification standards (see the section
Addressing Knowledge and Skills [KASA] Outcomes later).
Third, and most importantly, this textbook includes chapters on
pathology and its relationship to anatomy and physiology. Each major
part of this book (articulatory/resonance system, auditory/vestibular
system, nervous system, phonatory system, and respiratory system)
consists of two chapters. The first chapter in each unit provides the
relevant information pertaining to anatomy and physiology. The second
chapter in each unit provides an in-depth discussion of pathology and its
relationship to the anatomy and physiology. Although these chapters do
not provide an exhaustive list of all the possible pathologies, sufficient
detail is provided about a large number of organic and nonorganic
disorders to allow the student to see the big picture. This textbook is
organized in such a manner that it can be used in a stand-alone anatomy
and physiology course or as the primary text in a combined
undergraduate anatomy/pathology course.
Speaking of the organization of this textbook, one may note that it
differs from the other anatomy textbooks. After an introductory section
on terminology and basic concepts, most other textbooks present the
anatomy and physiology in the following order: respiratory system,
phonatory system, articulatory/resonance system, nervous system, and
auditory system. This textbook organizes the anatomy/physiology
information in a slightly altered sequence: nervous system, respiratory
system, phonatory system, articulatory/resonance system, and fi nally
the auditory/vestibular system. The rationale for this sequence is that
since the nervous system underlies all other processes in speech and
hearing, it should be presented fi rst. It should be presented first also
because information presented in later chapters (e.g., physiology of
muscles) is dependent upon the student’s understanding of the
neurological bases. Once the student has been introduced to the nervous
system, the traditional sequence of respiration, phonation, and
articulation/resonance is presented. As a somewhat independent system,
the auditory/vestibular system is presented last.
We have told our students over the years, “If you understand the
anatomy and physiology, you’re more than half-way to understanding
the pathology.” Many of these students have come back to us years later
and affirmed that observation. These same former students have almost

invariably mentioned that it would have been more helpful had they
made that connection earlier in their academic careers. Hopefully, this
textbook represents a successful attempt to align the basic science of
anatomy and physiology with the applied art and science of
communication disorders. We will know that this attempt was successful
if we no longer hear students ask:
“Why do we need to know all of this anatomy?”
Additional Resources
 
Applied Anatomy and Physiology for Speech–Language Pathology and
Audiology includes additional resources for both instructors and students
that 
are 
available 
on 
the 
book’s 
companion 
Web 
site 
at
http://thePoint.lww.com/Fuller.
INSTRUCTOR RESOURCES
 
Approved adopting instructors will be given access to the following
additional resources:
 Test bank
 Answers to Part Questions that are within the textbook
 Image bank to assist in creating Powerpoint slides
 Acland Human Anatomy videos related to speech and hearing
STUDENT RESOURCES
 Interactive student quiz bank
 Animations on the workings of anatomical and physiological structures
of the body as they relate to speech and hearing
 Acland Human Anatomy videos related to speech and hearing
In addition, purchasers of the textbook can access the searchable Full
Text On-line by going to the Applied Anatomy and Physiology for
Speech–Language 
Pathology 
and 
Audiology 
Web 
site 
at
http://thePoint.lww.com/Fuller. See the inside front cover of this
textbook for more details, including the passcode you will need to gain

access to the Web site.
Donald R. Fuller
Jane T. Pimentel
Barbara M. Peregoy
February 2011

 
This textbook may be the first of its kind to indicate which knowledge
outcomes of the Knowledge and Skills Acquisition (KASA) form are
addressed through the content found within its pages. On January 1,
2005, the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA)
revised its certifi cation standards. These are standards every student
must meet to earn the Certifi cate of Clinical Competence (CCC). The
old standards were based upon the student taking certain courses in
specific domains. For example, the Basic Human Communication
Sciences domain required that the student earn 15 semester credit hours
in such courses as anatomy and physiology of speech and hearing;
phonetics; speech and language development; and speech and hearing
science. The new standards are no longer primarily based upon the
student earning a set number of academic credits but instead are
primarily competency-based. Now, the student must demonstrate
competence in certain knowledge and skills.
Table P-1 indicates the KASA knowledge outcomes that are
addressed in this textbook. Up to 25 knowledge outcomes may be
addressed by this textbook, depending on how the textbook is used. It
should be noted that the items in this table are numbered consecutively
from 1 to 25; these numerals were arbitrarily assigned by the authors of
this textbook solely for the purpose of organization and reference, and
do not correspond to any numbering system developed by ASHA.

 
The reader will note right away that a horizontal line separates the
fi rst eight knowledge outcomes from the remaining outcomes. If this
textbook is used as the primary source of information for a stand-alone
course in anatomy and physiology of the speech and hearing
mechanism, then only knowledge outcomes 1 through 8 are applicable.
However, if this textbook is used as the primary source of information in
a course having greater content than simply anatomy and physiology
(e.g., the anatomy and physiology are presented within a larger course
on organic speech, language, and hearing disorders), all 25 knowledge
outcomes are applicable.
Table P-1 also provides information as to the relative extent a
particular knowledge outcome is being addressed. It should be
emphasized that these are relative percentages based upon the expected
amount of information that would be provided in an anatomy and
physiology and/or an organic disorders course and the amount of

information that would be provided elsewhere in a typical
communication disorders curriculum. To illustrate, the relative extent to
which a stand-alone anatomy and physiology course would address the
biological basis of the basic human communication processes (outcome
1) has been estimated at 80%. In other words, one would expect that
approximately 80% of the information provided within a typical
communication disorders curriculum related to outcome 1 would come
from a basic, stand-alone course in anatomy and physiology of the
speech and hearing mechanism. The remaining 20% is typically
addressed in disorders courses, where a review of the anatomy and
physiology may be provided as part of the course. For outcomes 17, 18,
and 24, relative percentages are provided separately for speech–
language pathology and audiology majors. For example, this textbook
provides approximately 80% of the information in a typical
communication disorders curriculum related to etiologies of hearing
disorders for speech–language pathology majors, but only 50% of the
same information for audiology majors because they’d more likely
receive more extensive information in other courses within their major.
Once again, it should be emphasized that these are relative percentages.
The actual extent to which this textbook addresses the knowledge
outcomes in Table P-1 will likely differ from academic program to
academic program. It is up to the individual program to determine that
extent.
Finally, Table P-1 indicates the chapter or chapters in which the
individual knowledge outcomes are addressed. This column is provided
as a means of cross-referencing the content of the textbook to the specifi
c knowledge outcomes. The reader will note that in some instances the
chapter number has been boldfaced in the table. Chapter numbers that
are boldfaced provide the greatest amount of information relative to the
knowledge outcome in question. When no chapter number is boldfaced
for a corresponding KASA outcome, the information provided in this
textbook for that outcome should be considered minimal. Relative
percentages are provided in Table P-1 to guide academic programs as
they determine how the KASA outcomes are to be addressed within
their own unique curriculum.

 
Reviewers and Contributor
 
Preface
 
Addressing Knowledge and Skills (KASA) Outcomes
 
 
 PART 1
Terminology, Nomenclature, and Basic Concepts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1 An Overview of this Textbook
CHAPTER 2 Understanding Orientation and Nomenclature
CHAPTER 3 The Structural Organization of Humans
PART 1 SUMMARY
PART 1 REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
 PART 2
Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathology of the Nervous System

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 4 Anatomy and Physiology of the Nervous System
CHAPTER 5 Pathologies Associated with the Nervous System
PART 2 SUMMARY
PART 2 REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
 PART 3
Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathology of the Respiratory System
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 6 Anatomy and Physiology of the Respiratory System
CHAPTER 7 Pathologies Associated with the Respiratory System
PART 3 SUMMARY
PART 3 REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
 PART 4
Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathology of the Phonatory System
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 8 Anatomy and Physiology of the Phonatory System
CHAPTER 9 Pathologies Associated with the Phonatory System
CHARLES L. MADISON
PART 4 SUMMARY
PART 4 REVIEW QUESTIONS

 
 PART 5
Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathology of the Articulatory/Resonance
System
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
10
Anatomy and Physiology of the Articulatory/Resonance
System
CHAPTER
11
Pathologies Associated with the Articulatory/Resonance
System
PART 5 SUMMARY
PART 5 REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
 PART 6
Anatomy, Physiology, and Pathology of the Auditory/Vestibular
System
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER
12
Anatomy and Physiology of the Auditory/Vestibular System
CHAPTER
13
Pathologies Associated with the Auditory/Vestibular System
PART 6 SUMMARY
PART 6 REVIEW QUESTIONS
Appendix
Terms and Affixes to Assist You in Learning the Meanings
of Anatomical and Physiological Words
TERMS AND PREFIXES USED TO DESCRIBE

MOVEMENT
TERMS 
AND 
AFFIXES 
USED 
TO 
DENOTE
ANATOMICAL STRUCTURES OR THEIR PARTS
TERMS AND PREFIXES USED TO DESCRIBE COLOR,
FORM, GENERAL LOCATION, RELATIVE SIZE, OR
SHAPE
TERMS AND AFFIXES USED IN REFERENCE TO
BONES, CARTILAGES, CAVITIES, MEMBRANES, OR
SPACES
TERMS AND AFFIXES USED IN REFERENCE TO THE
NERVOUS SYSTEM
TERMS AND PREFIXES USED IN REFERENCE TO
THE AUDITORY/VESTIBULAR SYSTEM
MISCELLANEOUS TERMS AND AFFIXES USED IN
ANATOMY, PHYSIOLOGY, AND PATHOLOGY
Glossary
 
References
 
Index
 

 

 
“Why do we have to learn all of this anatomy and physiology?”
It is a question for the ages. Speech–language pathology and audiology
students have asked this question practically since the beginning of the
professions. Although many come to appreciate the relationship between
speech perception and production and the concomitant anatomy and
physiology, there oftentimes seems to be a disconnect between the two
for most clinicians in training. It is not until much later in their
education that the link is solidified in the minds of these future
professionals.
The answer is simple, yet complex at the same time. To understand
what may be pathological, one must first know what is “normal” or
“typical.” Many of the so-called organic disorders of speech, language,
and hearing have an etiology that points toward aberrations in the
anatomy and/or physiology of the speech or hearing mechanism. An
anatomical or physiological etiology will likely provide the clinician
with clues as to the expected signs and symptoms associated with a
given disorder, and may also indicate what course of intervention to
take.
The complexity of the answer lies in the complexity of the human
body. There are literally hundreds of anatomical structures (e.g., bones,
cartilages, muscles, organs, and nerves) involved in the speech
perception and production processes. Likewise, many laws, principles,
and theories of physical science are involved in the physiology of speech
and hearing. The prospect of learning all of the terminology and
concepts related to speech perception and production can be

overwhelming to many students. However, the learning process can
seem more manageable (and for many students downright fun!) if one
understands that there is actually a method to the madness. More
information will be provided about this method in a later section of this
chapter.
The authors of this textbook have a combined experience in
anatomy and physiology reaching into decades. Hundreds of students
have passed through our classes in anatomy and physiology of speech
and hearing. Although we have used clinical examples to some degree in
our classes, most of the class time involved the presentation of
anatomical and physiological concepts and nomenclature. We suspect
this is true for most academic programs in communication disorders.
Because of this, many students simply cannot see a clear
relationship between anatomy and physiology and disorders of speech
and hearing. The anticipation is that students will come to understand
the relationship when coursework in the disorders is taken. The problem
with this is that by the time most students take the disorders courses,
they have forgotten the anatomy and physiology because a solid link
was never established early on. This textbook attempts to alleviate this
problem by offering not only the concepts and nomenclature associated
with the anatomy and physiology of the speech and hearing mechanism
but also in-depth information about a variety of disorders of speech and
hearing so that you can understand the link between the two early in
your educational experience.
A Quick Tour of this Textbook
 
Traditionally, speech perception and production have been described
according 
to 
several 
components: 
articulatory/resonance,
auditory/vestibular, neural, phonatory, and respiratory. This textbook
will not deviate from organizing the anatomy and physiology of speech
and hearing according to this well-established scheme. However, we
refer to each of these components as a system. By definition, a system is
a group of independent but interrelated elements comprising a unified
whole. The processes of articulation/resonance, hearing, pho-nation, and
respiration are indeed anatomically independent from each other, but

they are also composed of interrelated elements that come together for a
specific purpose—that purpose being speech perception and production.
Although the nervous system is not involved mechanically in speech
perception and production in the way the other systems are, without the
nervous system the processes of speech perception and production
would not be possible. We view the nervous system as the overriding
system that coordinates and controls all other systems.
Because we refer to these components of speech perception and
production as systems, you should not confuse them with the systems
that comprise the human body. Depending on the anatomist, the human
body may be organized into as few as nine and as many as twelve body
systems. Some of these body systems include the circulatory (or
vascular) system, digestive system, muscular system, nervous system,
reproductive system, respiratory system, and skeletal system. As Table
1-1 illustrates, the systems that are mechanically involved in speech
perception 
and 
production 
(i.e., 
the 
articulatory/resonance,
auditory/vestibular, phonatory, and respiratory systems) are in turn
composed of structures from several body systems. Right away, you
may note that the muscular, nervous, skeletal, and vascular body
systems are all components of every system that is mechanically related
to speech perception and production. Using the auditory/vestibular
system to illustrate, the contribution of the muscular system comes in
the form of several muscles such as the stapedius and tensor tympani
muscles. 
The 
nervous 
system 
contributes 
by 
way 
of 
the
vestibulocochlear nerve and the auditory pathway. The skeletal system
is represented by bones (e.g., the ossicles: malleus, incus, and stapes)
and cartilages (e.g., the ear canal and pinna). Finally, the vascular
system contributes several arteries and veins to the auditory/vestibular
system to provide nutrients and to take away waste products.
It is interesting to note that not only is respiration considered a
body system but is also considered a system of speech production.
Defined as a body system, the respiratory system typically includes only
the trachea, bronchial tree, and lungs. When viewed as a system of
speech production, respiration also draws upon the muscular, nervous,
skeletal, and vascular systems. This points up the fact that when one
refers to body systems, one is generally referring to an anatomical
organization of the human body. It becomes apparent that when one

considers the physiology of the human body, the body systems overlap
considerably. Therefore, although this textbook will describe the
articulatory/resonance, auditory/vestibular, nervous, phonatory, and
respiratory systems in terms of their anatomy, these systems of speech
perception and production are organized primarily according to their
physiological function.


 
Although this textbook will not deviate from the established
organizational scheme of articulatory/resonance, auditory/vestibular,
nervous, phonatory, and respiratory systems, these systems of speech
perception and production will be presented in a slightly different order
than they typically appear in most anatomy textbooks. Traditionally, the
nervous system tends to be presented after the three systems of speech
production 
(respiration, 
phonation, 
and 
articulation/resonance).
However, we feel that since the nervous system coordinates and controls
all of the other systems of speech perception and production, it should
be presented first. Therefore, the nervous system is presented in this
textbook in Part II. Following the nervous system will be the three
systems involved in speech production. Part III will present the
respiratory system, Part IV will present the phonatory system, and Part
V will present the articulatory and resonance systems. Finally, the
auditory/vestibular system will be presented last, in Part VI. It should be
noted that although the auditory system is of primary interest to speech
perception, information about the vestibular system is also provided
because the audiologist or speech–language pathologist is very likely to
encounter patients who exhibit disturbances in balance and equilibrium.
Part I consists of three chapters. The purpose of the present chapter
is to orient you to the general organization and intended use of this
textbook. Chapter 2 provides basic information to orient you to the
anatomical position; planes of reference; terminology describing spatial
relationships between and among structures; and other nomenclature
related to anatomy, physiology, and pathology. Chapter 3 provides you
with basic information concerning the organization of the human
organism: cells, tissues, organs, and systems. Upon completion of the
first part, you will have the basic building blocks to assist in
understanding the information presented in the remaining parts. For the
remaining parts of this textbook, not only will anatomy and physiology
be presented but information about the relationship between anatomy
and physiology and many disorders of speech, language, and hearing
will also be presented. For Parts II through VI, the anatomy and
physiology of each of the five systems mentioned earlier will be
presented first in a stand-alone chapter (Chapters 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12).
Following each chapter on anatomy and physiology, a separate chapter

will include information relative to certain disorders affecting those
systems (Chapters 5, 7, 9, 11, and 13). It is hoped that taken together,
the two chapters within each part will provide you with that elusive link
between anatomy and physiology and the disorders that may occur when
abnormal structures or conditions exist.
A Quick Overview of Speech Perception and Production
 
As mentioned previously in this chapter, the processes of speech
perception and production are quite complex, enlisting the participation
of literally hundreds of anatomical structures such as bones, cartilages,
muscles, organs, and nerves. In addition, the various anatomical parts
are bound together by different types of connective tissue such as fascia,
ligaments, membranes, and tendons. In general, the various systems
involved in speech perception and production require that you know the
entire human body except for the upper and lower extremities (i.e., arms,
legs, hands, feet, fingers, and toes).
To illustrate, speech perception involves the auditory and nervous
systems. Acoustic energy in the form of sound waves (whether speech
or environmental sounds) are collected by the pinna and directed into the
ear canal. At the terminus of the ear canal resides the tympanic
membrane (eardrum), which converts the acoustic energy into
mechanical energy. The mechanical energy is then transmitted through
the middle ear cavity by way of the ossicular chain (the malleus, incus,
and stapes). To protect the inner ear from being excessively driven, the
acoustic reflex may enter the picture. This reflex is accomplished
through the contraction of muscles. As mechanical energy is transmitted
through the middle ear, the stapes acts upon the oval window of the
cochlea, which is in the inner ear. Housed within a chamber of the
cochlea is the essential organ of hearing (the organ of Corti) that
contains fluid and is also surrounded by two other chambers filled with
fluid. The rocking action of the stapes causes the fluid inside these
chambers to vibrate. Vibration of the fluid within the cochlea sets up a
receptor potential from the organ of Corti. Sensory nerve impulses then
travel to fibers of the cochlear portion of cranial nerve VIII (the
vestibulocochlear or auditory nerve), where the impulses are then

relayed through the auditory pathway. The auditory pathway includes
portions of the lower brain stem, upper brainstem (i.e., the midbrain),
and cerebral cortex. It is at the cerebral cortex where sound is finally
perceived and interpreted. Separate from the acoustic and vestibular
functions of the hearing mechanism, the Eustachian tube assists in
regulating air pressure within the middle ear cavity. When air pressure
within the middle ear cavity becomes negative in relation to atmospheric
pressure, the Eustachian tube opens to equalize pressure. This is
accomplished in part through muscle contraction. In total, a very large
number of anatomical structures make up the auditory/vestibular system.
These include bones, cartilages, ligaments, membranes, muscles,
neurons, organs, and tendons.
By the same token, the process of speech production is equally
complex. This process requires coordinated activity of the nervous,
respiratory, phonatory, and articulatory/resonance systems. To an extent,
the auditory system is also involved, as it is used by individuals who can
hear as a means of acquiring speech and language. Further, once speech
and language have been acquired, the auditory system is used by persons
with normal hearing to monitor their own speech.
Proper timing of the events that make up speech production is
essential. Neural impulses will regulate the various aspects of speech
production such as respiration, phonation, and articulation/resonance,
and will also provide the brain with sensory information related to tactile
and kinesthetic feedback during the speech production process.
Respiration will serve as the energy source for speech production.
Expired air will be used to set the vocal folds into vibration to produce
voicing. Neural impulses will cause certain muscles to contract, thereby
resulting in respiration. The process of inhalation—whether for the
purpose of speech production or not—is always active; that is, muscle
contraction is always necessary to effect this process. On the other hand,
normal exhalation is passive (i.e., no muscle contraction), while
exhalation for vocal activity is typically active. Once the vocal folds are
adducted (i.e., brought together or “closed”) by muscles of the larynx,
the air trapped below the closed vocal folds must be pressurized by
active muscle action in the abdomen and thorax. The vocal folds must
also be abducted (i.e., separated or “opened”) for the production of
voiceless speech sounds and to replenish air during vocal activity. The

abductor muscles of the larynx are needed for this action. In turn, neural
impulses are needed to contract the abductor and adductor muscles of
the larynx.
Upon adduction of the vocal folds, exhaled air coming up from the
lungs gets trapped below the vocal folds, creating air pressure (referred
to as subglottic pressure). Subglottic pressure will eventually force an
opening between the vocal folds, setting them into vibration as the air
passes through (a process referred to as phonation). During phonation,
only a buzzing sound is produced. This buzzing sound is then shaped
and molded (i.e., articulated and resonated) as it proceeds up through the
pharynx and into the oral and/or nasal cavities. When oral speech sounds
are produced, the soft palate will raise and seal off the nasal cavity from
the oral cavity so that all of the resonating sound passes through the oral
cavity and out through the lips. When the nasal speech sounds (i.e., /m/,
/n/, and /η/) are produced, the soft palate will lower, creating an opening
between the oral and nasal cavities so that part of the vocal tone can
resonate within the nasal cavity. Action of the soft palate is mediated
through muscle activity. The tongue is the primary structure involved in
articulation and resonance. All vowel sounds and most of the consonant
sounds of English are created by placement and/ or movement of the
tongue. The tongue consists of muscle tissue. For some speech sounds,
there may be rounding of the lips (e.g., the /w/ sound). Shaping of the
lips is accomplished by muscle action. Once again, muscle activity is
accomplished via neural impulses from the nervous system.
The entire speech production mechanism is over-laid either upon or
within the skeletal system. For example, the thoracic region is primarily
associated with respiration and consists of the ribs, sternum, and
thoracic vertebrae of the spinal column. In addition, the bones of the
pectoral (i.e., shoulder) and pelvic (i.e., hip) girdles serve as a point of
attachment for many of the muscles involved in respiration. The trachea
(a structure made of cartilage) and the lungs (which are organs) are also
involved in the respiratory process.
In terms of the phonatory system, the primary structure is the
larynx, which is composed of a series of cartilages interconnected by
membranes and ligaments. The hyoid bone serves as the superior
attachment for the larynx as well as the skeletal base for many of the
muscles of the tongue. The pharynx, soft palate, and tongue consist of

connective tissue, muscles, and mucous membrane. Many of the bones
of the skull serve as points of attachment for muscles involved in
articulation and resonance. The bones of the cranium house the brain.
In all, it should be apparent to you that a study of the anatomy and
physiology of speech and hearing will require extensive knowledge of
the human body and its components. In the parts that follow, each of the
various systems (nervous, respiratory, phonatory, articulatory/resonance,
and auditory/vestibular) will be provided in greater detail. You will learn
the various components that make up each of the systems (e.g., bones,
cartilages, muscles, organs, and nerves) and will also gain knowledge of
the normal physiology of the various systems individually, as well as the
physiology of the various systems collectively as they are used for the
purpose of speech perception and production. However, before engaging
in the study of the various systems involved in speech perception and
production, you should have a solid understanding of the basic
terminology and concepts that are used in the study of anatomy,
physiology, and pathology. The remaining chapters of this part provide
you with a basic foundation of terminology and concepts related to
anatomy, physiology, and pathology so that learning of the various
systems will be facilitated. We now turn our attention specifically to the
nomenclature of anatomy, physiology, and pathology.

 
Knowledge Outcomes for ASHA Certification for Chapter 2
   Demonstrate knowledge of the biological basis of the basic
human communication processes (III-B)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the neurological basis of the basic
human communication processes (III-B)
 
Learning Objectives
 
   You will be able to recite the definitions of biology, anatomy,
physiology, and pathology.
   You will describe the anatomical position, planes of reference,
and spatial terminology used to denote the position and
orientation of anatomical structures of interest to speech
perception and production.
   You will determine the meaning of unfamiliar terminology by
analyzing the meaning of the root and any affixes that may be
attached.
 
Basic Concepts, Terminology, and Nomenclature
 
ANATOMY, PHYSIOLOGY, AND PATHOLOGY

Anatomy and physiology are both branches of biology. You may recall
from a high school biological science course that biology is the scientific
study of living organisms. A living organism is anything that exhibits
the properties of life, including but not limited to:
 
   Cell structure—the cell is the basic unit of the organism, and in
many organisms can create more complex structures like tissues
and organs.
   Metabolism—the organism captures energy to be used to
maintain itself.
   Reproduction—the production of offspring to perpetuate the
species.
   Mutation—random changes in the structure or composition of
the organism.
   Death— eventually, the organism will die.
 
Living organisms can range from single-celled creatures (e.g.,
bacteria) to more complex structures such as plants and animals. The
human being, of course, is a complex animal, and therefore is a living
organism.
Anatomy and physiology both fall under the umbrella of biology.
Anatomy is the scientific study of the structure and organization of
living organisms. The term comes from the Greek words “anatomia” and
“anatemnein,” meaning to cut up or cut open. Years ago, in order to
study the structure and organization of the human body it would have
had to have been dissected. Since not too many human beings want to be
cut up so that someone else can study them, anatomical studies were
accomplished through the use of cadavers (an acronym of the Latin
phrase “caro data vermibus,” which translated means “ flesh given to
worms”), deceased human bodies that have been donated to science for
the purpose of study. Although cadavers are still used today to study the
anatomical structure of the human body, modern technology such as
positron emission tomography allows us to study these structures
without dissecting the body. The advantage of imaging technology is
that anatomy can be studied on living human beings.
Physiology is the study of the functions of living organisms and
their parts. Physiology cannot be studied using a cadaver since a

deceased organism does not function. Instead, physiology must be
studied by using a living human being, by using an animal that is similar
in structure to a human being, or by using a model of the particular
anatomical part of interest to the scientist. Taken together, anatomy and
physiology are biological sciences that examine the living organism in
terms of its parts and the functions of those parts and of the organism as
a whole.
Pathology is the scientific study of the nature of diseases and of the
structural and functional changes that are imposed upon the living
organism as a result. In other words, pathology is concerned with
conditions or processes that are outside the realm of typical or normal,
whether the aberration is associated with anatomical structure or
physiological function. One should note that a good understanding of
pathology and its effect on the organism cannot be fully realized until
the individual has an equally good understanding of the anatomy and
physiology of the organism.
ORIENTATION TO THE HUMAN BODY
The Anatomical Position
 
To understand the human body and the spatial relationships among the
various bones, cartilages, muscles, organs, nerves, and other structures,
one must have a general point of reference. In the study of anatomy, this
point of reference is known as the anatomical position. You should
always remember that the anatomical position is in reference to the body
being observed (whether a living human or a cadaver), not the observer.
For illustrative purposes, a cadaver will be the body being observed.
Thus, when one refers to the left side of the body, it is the left side of the
cadaver’s body. If the cadaver is facing the observer, its left side will be
on the right side to the observer. If you always remember that spatial
terminology is used in reference to the cadaver, you will have little
difficulty in understanding the terminology associated with positioning
and orientation.
The anatomical position is illustrated in Figure 2-1. Note that the
body being observed is standing upright, facing the observer, with its

eyes straight ahead, arms at its side with the palms of the hands and toes
of the feet facing forward. All of the terminology that will be used in
this textbook, including terms associated with planes of reference and
spatial orientation, will be in reference to the anatomical position.
Planes of Reference
 
The internal structures of the human body can be viewed from several
different perspectives. For example, one can look at a particular organ
from any angle, or the organ can be dissected in a horizontal, vertical, or
other plane. When anatomical structures are photographed or drawn, it is
important to note the plane of reference in which the structure is being
presented. An anatomical structure may look quite different depending
on its plane of reference. As you view the photographs and drawings in
this textbook (and in other media as well), it is important that the figure
caption be read and the plane of reference be noted.
 
Figure 2-1  The anatomical position used as the general point of
reference for describing the spatial orientation of the various parts

of the body. (Reprinted with permission from Cohen, B.J. (2008).
Memmler’s the human body in health and disease (11th ed.).
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
There are three planes of reference that will be used throughout this
textbook; these are illustrated in Figure 2-2 and defined in Table 2-1.
These planes of reference include coronal, sagittal, and transverse. The
coronal plane of reference is a vertical plane that separates the body or
body part into anterior (front) and posterior (back) sections. It is called
the coronal plane in reference to the coronal suture, a suture of the skull
immediately above the forehead, running from temple to temple and
separating the frontal bone of the skull from the parietal bones. This
plane of reference is also sometimes referred to as the frontal plane.
The sagittal plane is also a vertically oriented plane of reference,
although the orientation is a bit different than the coronal plane. In the
case of the sagittal plane, the body or body part is separated into a left
and a right portion. This plane is named in reference to the sagittal
suture that runs lengthwise down the center of the top of the skull, where
the two parietal bones articulate with each other. If one were to divide
the body or a body part right down the middle so that there is a left and
right portion of relatively equal size, this is referred to as the midsagittal
plane. The term parasagittal is often used in reference to any section
that is parallel to the midsagittal plane.
 
Figure 2-2  The planes of reference used to indicate the angle at

which the observer is viewing the anatomy. (Reprinted with
permission from Cohen, B.J. (2008). Memmler’s the human body in
health and disease (11th ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.)
 
Finally, the transverse plane is a horizontal plane of reference that
separates the body or body part into an upper and a lower portion. When
a magician performs the trick where the assistant lies down in a box and
is supposedly cut in half, essentially the assistant is being divided in a
transverse plane. It should be noted that in neuroanatomy, the term
horizontal plane is used more often than transverse plane.
Other Terminology Associated with Spatial Orientation
 
Now that the anatomical position and planes of reference have been
established, your attention is directed toward more specific terminology
that is associated with the spatial relationships that exist between and
among the various structures of the body. Although not an exhaustive
list, Table 2-1 provides a “survival list” of terms that will help you
understand the relationships various body parts have to each other.
Figure 2-3 also illustrates some of the more commonly used terms to
describe spatial position and orientation. It is imperative that you
become comfortable using these terms. Learning these terms is half the
battle when it comes to understanding the relationships between and
among the various anatomical structures of the human body.
The terms and affixes in Table 2-1 are presented in alphabetic
order. However, one should note that many of the terms describing
spatial position or orientation come in pairs, in which the two terms have
opposite meanings. These include:
 
   Anterior/posterior (i.e., front/back)
   Caudal/cranial or rostral (i.e., closer to the tail/ closer to the
head)
   Central/peripheral (i.e., located centrally/located in the
periphery)
   Contra-/ipsi- (i.e., opposite side/same side)

   Deep/superficial (i.e., away from the body surface/toward the
body surface)
   Distal/proximal (i.e., away from the point of origin/toward the
point of origin)
   Dorsal/ventral (i.e., toward the back/toward the belly)
   Ecto-/endo- (i.e., outer/inner)
   External/internal (i.e., outside/inside)
   Extra-/intra- (i.e., outside/inside)
   Extrinsic/intrinsic (i.e., coming from the outside/ coming from
within)
   Inferior/superior (i.e., below/above)
   Infra-/supra- (i.e., below/above)
   Lateral/medial (i.e., toward the side/toward the middle)
   Post-/pre- (i.e., after/before)
   Prone/supine (i.e., face down/face up)
 
It should also be noted that Table 2-1 contains several prefixes.
These are placed at the beginning of root words to indicate direction,
position, or spatial orientation. For example, take the prefixes “infra-”
and “supra-.” When placed in front of the root word hyoid, they literally
mean “below the hyoid” and “above the hyoid,” respectively. In Chapter
8, you will be presented the anatomy and physiology of the phonatory
system. In that chapter, a discussion will center on the extrinsic muscles
of the larynx (note the term extrinsic here, which is defined in Table 2-1
as “external or coming from the outside”). Muscles of the larynx are
classified as either intrinsic or extrinsic. The extrinsic muscles are
subdivided into suprahyoid and infrahyoid muscles. All of these muscles
make an attachment to the hyoid bone (hence the root word hyoid). The
suprahyoid muscles come from anatomical structures located above the
hyoid bone, whereas infrahyoid muscles come from anatomical
structures located below the hyoid.
As a second example, consider the prefixes “pre-” and “post-.”
When used in conjunction with the term central and in reference to gyri
(convolutions of the cerebrum), these terms denote two very important
gyri of the brain. The precentral gyrus is the primary motor area and the
postcentral gyrus is the primary somatosensory area. In this example,
the root word central is in reference to the central sulcus, a narrow

trough that separates the frontal lobe from the parietal lobe. The
precentral gyrus is located immediately anterior to the central sulcus,
whereas the postcentral gyrus is located immediately posterior to the
central sulcus.
 

 
In the chapters that follow, the position of a particular body part
may be described in reference to its spatial relationship to another body
part. As you read these chapters and attempt to make sense of the
anatomy, it is important to note the spatial terminology that is being
used. These are not trivial terms. To the contrary, these terms allow you
to pinpoint the exact location or orientation of a body part. You cannot
have a complete understanding of anatomy without knowing where the
various parts are located, especially in reference to other body parts.
A METHOD TO THE MADNESS
At the beginning of this chapter, it was mentioned that although the
prospect of learning all of the anatomy and physiology of speech and
hearing may cause anxiety on your part, there is a method to the
madness that can make the learning process much easier than it first
appears. There is no getting around it; to become a competent clinician
you must learn the anatomy and physiology of speech perception and
production. In part, this will involve committing a huge body of
terminology to memory. How can one be expected to remember the vast
nomenclature associated with anatomy and physiology? If you take each
individual term and attempt to commit it to memory without really
thinking about what the term really means, then the process of
memorizing the vast amount of terminology will indeed be nearly

impossible. However, if you analyze each term by considering the root
and any affixes that may be attached, the learning process can be a lot
less taxing.
In addition to the terminology presented in Table 2-1, you are
referred to the appendix at the end of this book. The appendix contains
seven tables that present terms and affixes that are used extensively in
describing the anatomy, physiology, and pathology of the speech and
hearing mechanisms. Although you would certainly be in a better
position if you committed to memory the vocabulary and affixes found
within these tables, the tables are provided primarily as a reference for
you as you encounter the vast nomenclature of anatomy and physiology
throughout the remainder of this textbook. Many of the terms and
affixes presented in the appendix will also be included in the individual
chapters that follow. It is hoped that by presenting the terminology
numerous times throughout the book, you will be more likely to learn
the nomenclature.
 
Figure 2-3  An illustration of the more commonly used terms for
describing spatial position and orientation. A. Distal vs. proximal;
lateral vs. medial; rostral (cranial) vs. caudal. B. Anterior vs.
posterior; dorsal vs. ventral. C. Superior vs. inferior (note that the

hyoid bone and thyroid cartilage are superior to the cricoid
cartilage, and the trachea is inferior to the cricoid). D. Deep vs.
superficial (note that the levator scapulae and splenius capitis are
deep to the trapezius). (A and B: Modified with permission from
Cohen, B.J. (2008). Memmler’s the human body in health and
disease (11th ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. C:
Reprinted with permission from Cohen, B.J. (2008). Memmler’s the
human body in health and disease (11th ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins. D: Reprinted with permission from
Scheuman, D.W. (2006). The balanced body: A guide to deep
tissue and neuromuscular therapy (3rd ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.)
 
How to Use the Appendix
 
As mentioned above, the appendix is organized into seven tables. Each
table presents vocabulary and affixes that are related in terms of what
they describe. These include:
 
   Table A-1: Terms and affixes associated with movement
   Table A-2: Terms and affixes associated with anatomical
structures or their parts
   Table A-3: Terms and affixes associated with color, form,
general location, relative size, or shape
   Table A-4: Terms and affixes associated with bones, cartilages,
cavities, membranes, or spaces
   Table A-5: Terms and affixes associated with the nervous system
   Table A-6: Terms and affixes associated with the
auditory/vestibular system
   Table A-7: Miscellaneous terms and affixes used in anatomy,
physiology, and pathology
 
With the exception of Table A-1 (which provides definitions only),
the tables in the appendix provide definitions of the terms and affixes as
well as an example of the use of each term or affix. The paragraphs that

follow also provide more detailed information as to how knowledge of
these terms and affixes can assist you in developing a deeper
understanding of the anatomy, physiology, and pathology of the speech
and hearing mechanisms.
Table A-1 presents terms and prefixes that are used to describe
movement. In terms of muscle activity, the terms extension and flexion
are used to denote how muscle contraction affects the movement of the
body part being acted upon. The terms abduction and adduction are also
very important. Although a single anatomical structure can abduct or
adduct, these terms are used most often to describe the movement of two
structures. For example, humans have two vocal folds. When the vocal
folds are abducted (moved away from midline), the glottis—a
variablesized aperture between the vocal folds—opens so that air can
flow in and out of the lungs. When the vocal folds are adducted (moved
toward midline), they come together so that expired air can be used to
vibrate them to produce voicing.
The terms depressor, levator, and tensor are also used to describe
the action that occurs when muscles contract and act upon an anatomical
structure. These terms are sometimes used as part of the name of a
muscle, and therefore describe the action that particular muscle makes.
For example, the tensor tympani muscle tenses the eardrum (tympanic
membrane) by pulling inward on the malleus, to which the eardrum is
attached. The depressor anguli oris is a muscle of the lips that pulls the
corner of the mouth downward, as in frowning. Finally, the levator veli
palatini muscle elevates or raises the soft palate (i.e., the velum, where
according to Table A-2 the term veli palatini comes).
In reference to pathology, the prefixes “hyper-” and “hypo-” are
often used to describe movement disorders. For example, a hyperkinetic
movement disorder means that the patient exhibits involuntary,
excessive, extraneous movements. By the same token, a patient with a
hypokinetic movement disorder exhibits paucity of movement (i.e., the
movements tend to be difficult to initiate and are very slow).
Table A-2 provides terms and affixes whose meanings are related
to specific body parts. For example, upon first encountering the
omohyoid muscle, you may scratch your head in wonder. However, if
the term was analyzed into its components “omo-” and hyoid, one would
be able to discern very quickly that the omohyoid muscle runs from the

shoulder area to the hyoid bone. Similarly, by understanding the root
terms and affixes, one can readily understand that cranial nerve III, the
oculomotor nerve, is responsible for movements of the eyeball (“oculo-”
meaning eye, and motor referring to activity resulting in movement).
What does sternocleidomastoid mean? By knowing the terminology in
Table A-2, you can determine that it is a muscle that has three
attachments. “Sterno-” refers to the sternum, “-cleido-” refers to the
clavicle, and mastoid refers to the mastoid process, which is the rounded
part of the base of the skull right behind the ear. Therefore, the
sternocleidomastoid is a muscle that attaches to the sternum, clavicle,
and mastoid process.
Table A-3 provides terms and prefixes associated with general
location, size, shape, color, or general form. For example, the serratus
posterior superior muscle can be found in the upper part (superior) of
the back (posterior) and has a jagged or sawtooth (serratus) appearance.
In Chapter 8, while learning about the cricoid cartilage (one of the
cartilages of the larynx), you will encounter the term posterior quadrate
lamina. From Table 2-1, you know that posterior refers to the back.
Table A-3 defines quadrate as something that is somewhat square- or
rectangular-shaped. Finally, according to Table A-4 lamina is a thin
plate or flat layer of bone or cartilage. Taken together, you will correctly
deduce that the posterior quadrate lamina is the back plate of the cricoid
cartilage that is somewhat square-shaped.
Table A-4 includes terms and affixes that are used in reference to
bones, cartilages, membranes, or cavities. For example, “cerato-” refers
to a horn of some sort. The thyroid cartilage has two sets of cornua
(horns) along its posterior margin. The superior cornua articulate with
the greater cornua of the hyoid bone. The inferior cornua of the thyroid
cartilage articulate with the cricoid cartilage, forming the cricothyroid
joint. This joint is held in place by a series of ligaments known as the
ceratocricoid ligaments. The term ceratocricoid refers to the two parts
that make up the joint—the inferior cornua of the thyroid cartilage and
the cricoid cartilage. Similarly, the mental symphysis refers to the fusion
of the two halves of the mandible (jaw). During fetal development, the
two halves of the mandible fuse to form a singular bone. The point
where the two halves meet is the mentum, which is the protruding part of
the chin. A symphysis is a union of two structures, in this case the two

halves of the mandible.
Table A-5 provides terms and affixes associated primarily with the
nervous system, and Table A-6 provides terms and prefixes associated
with the auditory/vestibular system. (It should be noted here that
although the respiratory, phonatory, and articulatory/resonance systems
have their own unique nomenclature, many of the terms and affixes
provided in Table 2-1 in this chapter and Tables A-1 through A-4 in the
appendix are also used to describe structures and functions pertaining to
these systems.)
In reference to the nervous system, the terms afferent and efferent
are often used to describe nerves and nerve pathways. Afferent nerves
are also known as sensory nerves because the impulses originate in the
periphery (where the sense organs are located) and then are sent toward
the central nervous system for interpretation. On the other hand, the
impulses of efferent (or motor) nerves originate in the central nervous
system and then proceed to the various muscles and viscera located in
the periphery. The purpose of these nerves is to effect movement.
Many of the structures of the brain have peculiar names: caudate
nucleus, corpus striatum, olives, and pyramids to name a few. Once
again, by analyzing these names you can remember something about
each of them. Caudate means tail (see Table A-5 of the appendix). A
nucleus is a collection of gray matter—nerve cell bodies. Therefore, the
caudate nucleus is a mass of gray matter that has a head and a long
slender tail. Corpus means body. Striatum refers to a striped appearance.
The corpus striatum then is a series of bodies deep within the brain that
has a striped appearance. Finally, the olives (technically, the olivary
complex) and pyramids can be seen on the ventral surface of the
medulla oblongata. They each get their name from their general shape.
To carry this thought out a bit further, when one encounters the term
pyramidal motor tract, one should not be alarmed. The astute observer
will note that another term for motor is efferent. The pyramidal motor
tract is a tract of efferent nerve fibers that passes through the pyramids
on the way to the spinal cord, which is immediately below the medulla
oblongata. In fact, the pyramidal motor tract is the primary motor tract,
as opposed to the extrapyramidal motor tract, which is a secondary
motor tract whose nerve fibers also pass down to the spinal cord, but do
not make a stop at the pyramids along the way. Remember from Table

2-1, “extra-” means situated to the outside, so extrapyramidal means
“situated to the outside of the pyramids.”
In regard to the auditory/vestibular system (see Table A-6), terms
and prefixes can also be analyzed to provide meaning to the
nomenclature. For example, incudostapedial refers to the incus and
stapes, and in fact, the incudostapedial joint is formed by the articulation
of the incus with the stapes. As another example, a pathological
condition of the middle ear, otitis media, can easily be remembered if
the term is analyzed into its individual parts: “ot-” means ear; “itis-”
means inflammation; and media refers to the middle. Therefore, otitis
media is an inflammation of the middle ear cavity.
The last table in the appendix (Table A-7) provides a list of
miscellaneous terms and affixes that can also be used to assist you in
retaining the nomenclature of anatomy, physiology, and pathology.
Although many of the terms and affixes in this table are pertinent to
anatomy and physiology, a large number of them are used in reference
to pathology. Once again, the terms and affixes presented in this table
can be considered a “survival set” of vocabulary for you. For example, a
tracheotomy is a procedure in which an incision is made in the anterior
wall of the trachea through the outer neck to assist the patient in
breathing (usually due to some type of upper airway obstruction). You
know from Table A-2 that “tracheo-” refers to the trachea or windpipe.
Table A-7 shows that “-otomy” means an operation involving cutting.
As a second example, Table A-7 provides the definition for malacia (a
softening or loss of consistency of tissues or organs). From Table A-4,
you can see that “chondro-” is a prefix meaning cartilage. Therefore,
chondromalacia is a pathological condition in which a cartilage is too
soft or underdeveloped.
As a final word, it should be noted that the terms presented in Table
2-1 of this chapter and Tables A-1 through A-7 in the appendix are not
an exhaustive list but are presented as a starter set for you. You are
encouraged to consult a dictionary when an unfamiliar term is
encountered. Pay particular attention to the root and any affixes that may
be attached. Clues often exist to assist you in learning the nomenclature.
Also, it should be emphasized that many of the terms presented in this
chapter were placed in a particular table because of the primary context
in which the term is used. There are many terms and affixes in these

tables that could just as well be presented in another table. For example,
the prefixes “ary-,” “crico-,” and “thyro-” were all placed in Table A-2
because they refer to specific parts of the human body (i.e., the arytenoid
cartilages, cricoid cartilage, and thyroid cartilage, respectively).
However, all of them could just as easily have been placed in Table A-4
because they are associated with cartilages. You are discouraged from
relying too heavily on how these terms and affixes are organized in the
tables. Instead, your focus should be simply on the terminology.
It should be readily apparent from all of these examples that the
process of learning anatomy, physiology, and pathology is not as
difficult as one may first imagine. Learning anatomy and physiology
should not be an exercise in rote memorization of terms. Instead, by
focusing more on the meanings of a relatively small, finite set of terms
and affixes, you have nearly the entire world of anatomy, physiology,
and pathology within grasp. As you proceed through the remaining
chapters of this textbook and encounter terminology that is unfamiliar to
you, the last thing you should do is panic. Step back, think of the
meanings of the root and affixes, and the meaning of the unfamiliar term
may very well present itself.
Now that you have an understanding of the basic nomenclature in
terms of the anatomical position, planes of reference, spatial
terminology, and more specific vocabulary related to anatomy,
physiology, and pathology, it is time to turn your attention to the
structural organization of human beings.

 
Knowledge Outcomes for ASHA Certification for Chapter 3
  Demonstrate knowledge of the biological basis of the basic
human communication processes (III-B)
  Demonstrate knowledge of the neurological basis of the basic
human communication processes (III-B)
  Demonstrate knowledge of the biological basis of swallowing
processes (III-B)
 
Learning Objectives
 
  You will define cell types and organelles.
  You will describe the four tissue types and subclassifications.
  You will discuss the organ systems most pertinent for speech and
swallow function.
 

 
 
The complexity of human communication is largely what sets human
beings apart from other vertebrate species. Thought, language, and
speech are all necessary for effective verbal communication. Speech, our
primary mode of expressive communication, is the sequential production
of sounds to represent our thoughts resulting in a comprehensible
auditory signal for a listener to perceive. Furthermore, the ability to
produce speech relies on the coordination of multiple speech processes:
respiration, phonation, and articulation/resonance. In order to better
understand these speech processes, they can be broken down by
reducing them to their structural makeup. For example, the process of
respiration relies on the thoracic skeletal framework of the ribcage and
vertebral column upon which the muscles attach to enact the movement
necessary to breathe for speech. In addition, each speech process
includes organs, such as lungs, and each organ has a predominant tissue
type. Tissues are defined by their cellular makeup. Thus, the cell is our

most basic component of life.
Cells
 
There are more than 100 trillion cells in the human body. Some cells
live the life span of the body such as those in the central nervous system;
some live a moderate amount of time such as blood cells, and some cells
are continuously dying and being replaced such as those that comprise
the epithelium—otherwise known as skin.
A cell possesses five characteristics, making it a living organism.
These characteristics are (1) irritability, (2) growth, (3) spontaneous
movement, (4) metabolism, and (5) reproduction. Irritability refers to the
cell’s ability to respond to stimulation. A cell, in most cases, goes
through a life process of birth, development, and death; this is
considered growth. Spontaneous movement is characterized by
movement that originates and occurs within the cell; that is,
intracellular movement. Metabolism refers to the cell’s capability to
take in raw products, break down these products, and utilize the “food”
in the form of usable energy to carry out its life support roles. Lastly,
cells have the ability to reproduce themselves.
Cells are formed out of protoplasm which is the basic living
substance that comprises all cells. This protoplasm subdivides into the
cell nucleus and the surrounding cytoplasm, the fluid outside the
nucleus (see Figure 3-1). The outr membrane surrounding the cell is
referred to as the plasma membrane. It is composed of a double layer
of molecules that exhibits selective permeability; that is, some materials
are allowed to enter or exit the cell whereas other materials are
prohibited. Essentially, the plasma membrane controls the exchange of
molecules and ions between the cell and its external environment (i.e.,
extracellular space). Further explanation and illustration of this double-
layered membrane is presented in Chapter 4. The nucleus is considered
the “control center” of the cell. It is usually found toward the center of
the cell and is separated from other cellular material by the nuclear
membrane. The nucleus contains the genetic material of the cell in the
form of threadlike structures termed chromosomes, which are double
strands of deoxyribonucleic acid. The most prominent structure within

the nucleus is the nucleolus, the genetic control center for ribosome
synthesis.
Inside each cell are a number of structures called organelles (“cell
organs”) found within the cytoplasm (see Figure 3-1). Each organelle
performs a specific task necessary for the functioning and survival of the
cell. For example, mitochondria provide energy and serve as a power
source for the cell. The Golgi apparatus serves to store materials and is
responsible for packaging substances for intracellular transport. The
endoplasmic reticulum (granular or agranular) synthesizes, stores, and
releases various substances such as fatty acids, protein, and calcium.
Lysosomes break down and digest bacterial and cellular debris that have
been ingested by the cell; they are considered the “garbage can” of the
cell. Microtubules and microfilaments assist with cell movement as
well as provide for intracellular transport of substances. Centrioles are
fused sets of microtubules that participate in nuclear and cell division
(i.e., reproduction). Refer to Table 3-1 for further descriptions of these
organelles.

 
Figure 3.1  A generic human cell illustrating the plasma
membrane, cilia, nucleus, and organelles found within the
cytoplasm. (Reprinted with permission from Cohen, B.J. (2008).
Memmler’s the human body in health and disease (11th ed.).
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Cells can be classified into four types specialized for specific
functions: epithelial cells, muscle cells, connective tissue cells, and
nerve cells or neurons. Epithelial cells are specialized for the selective
secretion and absorption of molecules and ions; they cover surfaces and
form selective barriers. Muscle cells, synonymous with muscle fibers,
are specialized for the production of mechanical forces, which produce
movement. Connective tissue cells are specialized for the formation and
secretion of various types of extracellular connecting and supporting
elements—connecting, anchoring, and supporting structures of the body.

Nerve cells (i.e., neurons) are specialized for the initiation and
conduction of electrochemical information traveling over distances; they
are the basic functional unit of the nervous system. Aggregates of cells
form the four different tissue types. It is important for groups of cells to
join and cooperate for the good of the organism as a whole. Thus,
groups of cells similar in structure, function, and embryonic origin band
together with varying amounts of extracellular material to form tissues.
An organization of these tissue types and subclassifications is presented
in Table 3-2.
 
Tissues
 
EPITHELIAL TISSUE
Epithelial tissue refers to “tissue upon tissue”; thus, by definition this
tissue lines the surface of the body and those passages communicating
with the external environment (e.g., the ear canal) and the cavities of our
body. Epithelium has very little extracellular material, so the cells lie
adjacent to one another. This tissue is often described on the basis of cell
shape and number of cell layers. Epithelial cells can be flat or plate-like
(i.e., squamous), cube-shaped (i.e., cuboidal), or oblong (i.e., columnar).

In addition, epithelial cells may have cilia (short, hairlike structures)
protruding from their surface to provide a transport mechanism to move
materials over the surface of the cells (e.g., respiratory tract). Tissue is
made up of these different cell shapes organized in one or more layers.
Where transport of material occurs, the cells are arranged in one layer;
this is referred to as “simple.” Multiple cell layers are referred to as
“stratified” or “compound.” Hence, the terms can be combined to
describe both cell shape and layers—for example, simple columnar or
stratified squamous (see Figure 3-2).
Epithelial tissue can also be classified into three groups based on
location. Epithelial tissue proper is tissue forming the skin (i.e.,
epidermis) and the internal membranes continuous with the skin. This
tissue comprises various layers and shapes of cells that line the
digestive, respiratory, urinary, and reproductive tracts and tubes.
Endothelial tissue makes up the linings of blood and lymph vessels.
Simple squamous cells comprise this tissue because of the necessity to
have extremely smooth surfaces to reduce the possibility of fragmenting
blood cells. It should be noted here that arteries and veins also require
elastic tissue (a type of connective tissue) and smooth muscle (a type of
muscle tissue). Lastly, mesothelial tissue lines the internal body
cavities. Mesothelial tissue is often referred to as serous membrane
because the cells secrete a serous fluid or serum, which has a thin,
watery constitution. There are a total of four body cavities that are lined
with serous membrane (see Figure 3-3). Three are located in the thorax:
the pericardial cavity housing the heart and the two pleural cavities
housing each lung. The fourth cavity, in the abdomen, is the peritoneal
cavity housing the viscera (i.e., abdominal organs). The pleural cavities
will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 6.

 

 
Figure 3.2  Examples of epithelial tissue of different shapes and
layers. Note the close adjacency of the cells and the lack of
extracellular material. A. Simple cuboidal. B. Stratified squamous.
C. Pseudostratified ciliated columnar. (Reprinted with permission
from Porth, C.M., & Matfin, G. (2008). Pathophysiology: Concepts
of altered health states (8th ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams
& Wilkins.)
 
CONNECTIVE TISSUE
Tissues which combine or hold together structures, support the body,
and aid in body maintenance are referred to as connective tissues. In
contrast to epithelial tissue, there are fewer cells making up connective
tissue but much more extracellular substance. The extracellular
components of connective tissue are collectively called matrix. Matrix
is formed by protein fibers such as collagen, nonprotein molecules such
as ground substance, and fluid. Connective tissue can be classified
according to the make-up of its extracellular matrix as connective tissue
proper or specialized connective tissue (see Table 3-2).
Connective tissue proper is further classified into loose or dense
connective tissue. Loose connective tissue fills spaces and is considered
the “packing material of the body.” Loosely packed fibers are distributed
throughout the body to bind parts together. Just deep to the skin are two
loose connective tissue types: areolar, which forms the “bed” for the
skin, and adipose, which includes a number of fat-storing cells. Dense
connective tissue is characterized by an abundance of tightly packed
extracellular fibers, either collagen or elastic. Collagen is a fibrous
protein with great strength; therefore, these tissues are able to tolerate
high degrees of tension. Furthermore, there are three types of dense
connective tissues: tendons, ligaments, and fascia. Tendons are tough,

nonelastic cords that are associated with muscle as they attach muscle to
bone, muscle to cartilage, or muscle to another muscle. Broad tendinous
sheets are called aponeuroses. Ligaments are also tough cords but, in
contrast to tendons, they have an abundance of elastic fibers and they
join bone to bone, bone to cartilage, or cartilage to cartilage; thus, they
are a critical part of joints. Finally, fascia makes up fibrous tissue
underlying the skin or covers and separates muscle into functional
groups.
 
Figure 3.3  Body cavities. (Reprinted with permission from Nath,
J.L. (2005). Using medical terminology: A practical approach.
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Cartilage and bone make up specialized connective tissue; their
hardness is imposed by solid or rigid extracellular substance. Cartilage is
characterized by its rigidity, flexibility, and varying amounts of
elasticity depending on the type of cartilage. Cartilage is further
subdivided into hyaline, elastic or fibrous. Hyaline cartilage is the most
abundant type of cartilage in the human body. It has a bluish-white
translucent appearance and is found primarily in places where strong
support is needed with some flexibility as well. Hyaline makes up most
of the embryonic skeleton, which later turns to bone. In regard to

structures critical for speech production, hyaline cartilage is found in the
rib cage, the larynx, and the nose. Figure 3-4 illustrates the nasal
septum; the most anterior part comprises hyaline cartilage. Elastic
cartilage appears yellow and opaque and is extremely flexible. This
cartilage is the basis of the outer ear, comprising the pinna and the
cartilaginous portion of the external auditory meatus (i.e., ear canal; see
Figure 3-5). The epiglottis and small cartilages of the larynx (i.e.,
corniculates and cuneiforms) also comprise elastic cartilage. Fibrous
cartilage has a coarse appearance as fibers are arranged in thick parallel
bundles. This cartilage is slightly compressible and can withstand great
amounts of pressure; therefore, it is found in regions that support body
weight such as the inter-vertebral discs (see Figure 3-6) and some joints
of the body such as the temporomandibular joint (which will be
described more fully in Chapter 10).
 
Figure 3.4  The nasal septum; the most anterior portion comprises
hyaline cartilage. (Reprinted with permission from Anatomical
Chart Company.)
 
Bone is a specialized connective tissue that provides the framework
for other tissues of the body. Bone is unique in that the collagen and
matrix are intermixed with minerals (i.e., calcium phosphate and

calcium carbonate salts) that impart rigidity and hardness. Each bone has
a dense, outer, compact layer surrounded by a fibrous membrane termed
periosteum. Each bone also has a porous, inner, spongy layer where
bone marrow is found for the production of red and white blood cells.
 
Figure 3.5  The external ear; note that the pinna and external ear
canal are made up of elastic cartilage. (Reprinted with permission
from Anatomical Chart Company.)
 

 
Figure 3.6  A segment of the vertebral column; note that the
intervertebral discs are made up of fibrous cartilage. (Reprinted
with permission from Anatomical Chart Company.)
 
The adult, human skeleton has approximately 206 bones,
depending how they are counted, and is broadly divided into the axial
and appendicular skeleton (see Figure 3-7). The axial skeleton is most
relevant to speech and hearing anatomy as it consists of the skull which
includes the ossicles (bones of the middle ear) and the facial bones, as
well as the hyoid bone, the ribcage, and the vertebral column. The
appendicular skeleton refers to the pectoral girdle (shoulder) and bones
of the arms and hands (upper extremities) as well as the pelvic girdle
(hip) and bones of the legs and feet (lower extremities). It should be
noted that both the pectoral girdle and pelvic girdle are connection
points for muscles involved in breathing. These will be described more
completely in Chapter 6.
Bones join other bones at joints, as do some cartilages. These joints
are held together by ligaments. Joints may be described on the basis of
their anatomy or their function (see Table 3-3). Anatomically, fibrous
joints are united by fibrous connective tissue. These joints are
considered synarthrodial as they are only slightly movable or totally
immovable. Cranial sutures that join the bones of the cranium are one
example of a class of fibrous joints that are immovable. Cartilaginous
joints are considered amphiarthrodial or as joints that yield. These
joints utilize either hyaline or fibrocartilage to unite bone to bone. If
hyaline is the cartilage involved, the joint is referred to as a
synchondrosis joint. An example of this type of joint pertinent to
speech is found within the ribcage between the bony ribs and the
sternum via the costal cartilages (see Figure 3-8). A synchondrosis joint
allows for some movement given the flexibility inherent in hyaline
cartilage. This is imperative to breathing as the ribcage must be able to
expand in order to inhale and, conversely, get smaller to exhale. The
most common joint is the synovial joint that is considered diarthrodial,
which means freely moving. The synovial joint is anatomically more
complex than fibrous or cartilaginous joints.

 
Figure 3.7  Adult, human skeleton with the axial skeleton
highlighted. (Reprinted with permission from Cohen, B.J. (2008).
Memmler’s the human body in health and disease (11th ed.).
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

 
Figure 3.8  Anterior view of the ribcage illustrating the
costalsternal joint and the manubriosternal joint. (Modified with
permission from Hendrickson, T. (2009). Massage and manual
therapy for orthopedic conditions (2nd ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The synovial joint itself is enclosed by a fibrous capsule called the
articular capsule that is lined by a membrane called the synovial
membrane. The synovial membrane secretes synovial fluid which (1)
lubricates the joint, (2) provides nourishment to the articular cartilages
(which are hyaline), and (3) protects the joint from impact and friction.
There are six types of synovial joints which are classified according to
the shape of their articulating surfaces: plane, saddle, hinge, pivot, ball-
and-socket, and ellipsoid (or condyloid). An example of a saddle joint,
which allows for all types of movement except rotation, is the
malleoincudal joint, which joins two of the ossicles in the middle ear,
the malleus and the incus (see Figure 3-9). Table 3-3 provides examples
of amphiarthrodial, diarthrodial, and synarthrodial joints.

 
 
Figure 3.9  The three ossicles of the middle ear. The malleoincudal
joint is a saddle joint, a type of synovial joint. (Reprinted with
permission from Anatomical Chart Company.)
 
MUSCLE TISSUE
Muscle cells, which are also called muscle fibers, come together to form
muscle tissue. Muscle tissue has the important property of contractility
—the ability to change shape, becoming shorter and thicker thus
enabling movement of bones and other structures. Muscle tissue is
described in terms of its anatomy, being striated or nonstriated, and

function, being voluntary or involuntary. There are three types of muscle
tissues: cardiac, smooth, and striated or striped (see Figure 3-10).
Cardiac muscle forms the walls of the heart and is responsible for
pumping blood; it is under involuntary control. Each cardiac muscle cell
has one nucleus, appears striated, and branches to connect with adjacent
cells. This branching is significant in regard to the type of
communication that occurs between cardiac cells, allowing for
continuous heart muscle contraction.
Smooth muscle forms the muscular portion of the visceral organs
(e.g., lower esophagus, stomach, intesines) and is also found within
blood vessels. Smooth muscle controls the size, shape, and movements
of these visceral organs. It is nonstriated and is under involuntary
control (i.e., it contracts without the individual having conscious control
over it).
 
Figure 3.10  Three types of muscle tissues: cardiac, smooth, and
striated (skeletal). (Reprinted with permission from Anatomical
Chart Company.)
 
Striated muscle tissue is also referred to as skeletal muscle. Skeletal
muscle is easiest to envision as it connects to our skeletal framework

and contraction results in body movement. Skeletal muscle can contract
to about one-half its original length. The larger the diameter of the
muscle, the greater its strength. As the name implies, cells making up
skeletal muscle tissue appear striated and its function is under voluntary
control. Skeletal muscle is the predominant type of muscle involved
with speech production. Speech production is, indeed, a voluntary
behavior and is mediated by the contraction and relaxation of skeletal
muscles.
Skeletal muscle is attached to bone or cartilage and occasionally
inserts into another muscle (i.e., muscles of the tongue) or to the
epidermis (e.g., eyelids, lips). Muscle is attached via a tendon to the
periosteum of the bone or the perichondrium of the cartilage. Muscle
may also be attached via an aponeurosis (a broad tendinous sheet).
The microscopic structure of skeletal muscle is very organized with
the help of connective tissue. Muscle consists of bundles of muscle
fibers (recall that a muscle fiber is a muscle cell). Each bundle is termed
a fasciculus. Each muscle fiber in the fasciculus is surrounded by a thin
layer of delicate connective tissue called endomysium. Each fasciculus
is, in turn, surrounded by a sheath of fibrous connective tissue called
perimysium, which serves to separate groups of muscle fibers from
each other to enable muscle to function as a unit. A group of fasciculi is
encased in a coarser connective tissue called epimysium. Finally, the
entire outer surface of each muscle is enclosed with fascia, a dense
connective tissue which is continuous with the connective tissue of the
tendons and periosteum or perichondrium. Figure 3-11 illustrates this
organization.
NERVOUS TISSUE
Nervous tissue consists of nerve cells (i.e., neurons) and support cells
called glial cells. This tissue is found in the brain, spinal cord, and
peripheral nervous system, and relays information to and from the head,
neck, and body. Nervous tissue is specialized to transmit information
across distances. This information is passed on through both chemical
(e.g., neurotransmitters) and electrical (e.g., action potentials) means.
Neurons are composed of four parts—dendrites, cell body (i.e., soma),
axon, and terminal (see Figure 3-12). In general, the dendrites receive

electrical signals and conduct them toward the cell body. The cell body
houses the nucleus and a number of organelles critical to the function of
the neuron. The axon projects off the cell body and is key in transmitting
the electrical signal (i.e., impulse) in one direction, down the axon
toward the terminal. The terminal, if adequately stimulated, then releases
a chemical to carry the message to the next neuron in line. In the case of
muscle in the periphery, the neuron releases a chemical that directs the
muscle to contract.
Neurons are classified according to number of processes (i.e.,
axons and dendrites), function, and speed of information transfer.
Neurons with multiple dendrites and a single axon are called multipolar
neurons; these are the most commonly seen in illustrations of neurons.
The majority of the neurons in the brain are multipolar, often having a
motoric function. Those with a single dendrite and a single axon are
bipolar neurons and those with only a single axon emerging from the
cell body are unipolar neurons. Bipolar neurons are found in systems
involved with special senses. For example, the cells of the sensory
cochlea and the vestibular ganglia are bipolar. Unipolar neurons are
found in the dorsal root ganglia next to the spinal cord. Neurons function
in sensory, motor, or integrative (i.e., association neurons) capacities.
Speed of transfer is dependent on the covering of the axon (i.e., myelin)
and the diameter of the axon.
Axons are also referred to as nerve fibers. Nerve fibers are
classified as Type A, Type B, or Type C based on their diameter. Type
A fibers transfer information most rapidly, as they are large diameter,
myelinated axons. Type B fibers have a medium diameter and are
slightly myelinated resulting in a slower speed of information transfer as
compared with Type A. Finally, Type C fibers are relatively slow as
they are small in diameter and are nonmyelinated. Speech processes rely
on Type A nerve fibers for rapid sensory input to the brain and for rapid
motor impulses to the muscles of respiration, phonation, and
articulation/resonance.
An example of Type A nerve fibers is the motor neurons that
inform muscles whether to contract and how much to contract; this
occurs at the neuromuscular junction. The neuromuscular junction is
the point of communication and information transfer between the
terminal branches of an axon and the muscle fibers it innervates. This

junction is also referred to as the myoneural junction as “myo-” refers to
muscle and “neural” refers to the nerve fiber. This point of information
transfer between the nerve fiber and its muscle fibers is a synapse.
Synapses also take place between neurons but here the synapse is
specific to the neuron and the muscle. The terminal branches from a
single neuron synapse with many muscle fibers. A motor unit is one
motor neuron and all the muscle fibers it innervates.
Similar to muscle, nerves of the peripheral nervous system have an
organization imposed by their connective tissue coverings (see Figure 3-
11). A delicate connective tissue called endoneurium surrounds the
individual nerve fibers (i.e., axons). These nerve fibers run in bundles
called fascicles; each fascicle is encased in perineurium. Fascicles, in
turn, are bundled in groupings that form a nerve which is wrapped by
epineurium. These connective tissue coverings allow a peripheral
nerve, such as the hypoglossal cranial nerve, to function as a unit with a
specific responsibility. For instance, the hypoglossal cranial nerve
provides impulses to muscles of the tongue for movement.
Organs
 
Organs are the result of a combination of two or more tissue types that
come together to form a functional unit. A functional unit refers to
tissues working together to perform a specific function. Examples
pertinent to speech production and swallowing include the lungs, which
function to provide breath support for speech. The larynx is also an
organ that provides airway protection during swallow and provides a
critical sound source, that is, the voice. The tongue is an organ that
provides movement necessary for mastication (i.e., chewing) and for
sound production and resonation. An organ usually has a predominant
tissue type. In the case of the tongue, muscle tissue is predominant, with
supporting connective tissue (e.g., the hyoid bone for attachment),
vascular tissue (blood supply), and nervous tissue (e.g., motor neurons
to innervate tongue muscles). In the case of the larynx, connective tissue
(by way of the cartilages that comprise it) is the predominant tissue type.

 
Figure 3.11   A. Microscopic structure of striated muscle
illustrating connective tissue coverings enlarged from a section of
the superior longitudinal tongue muscle. B. Tongue muscles. C.
Microscopic structure of peripheral nerves illustrating connective
tissue coverings of the nerve innervating the superior longitudinal

tongue muscle. (A: Reprinted with permission from Moore, K.L.,
Agur, A.M., & Dalley, A, F. (2010). Essential clinical anatomy
(4th ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. B: Reprinted
with permission from Anatomical Chart Company. C: Reprinted
with permission from Moore, K.L, Agur, A.M., & Dalley, A.F.
(2009). Clinically oriented anatomy (6th ed.). Baltimore:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
 
Figure 3.12  A single nerve cell highlighting four key components.
(Reprinted with permission from Smeltzer, S.C., Bare, B.G.,
Hinkle, J., & Cheever, K.H. (2009). Brunner and Suddarth’s
textbook of medical surgical nursing (12th ed.). Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
 
Systems
 
Two or more organs combine to form a functional unit called a system.
There are 9 to 12 systems in the human body, depending on the
anatomist. The most important body systems for speech production and
swallowing function are the following six: circulatory (or vascular);
digestive; muscular; nervous; respiratory; and skeletal (see Table 3-4).
The circulatory system includes the blood vessels, the blood itself, and
the cardiac muscle that comprises the heart. The skeletal system includes
the human body’s bony framework inclusive of cartilage and the

connecting elements of joints, ligaments, and tendons. The muscular
system includes the striated muscle of the body, which attaches to the
skeletal framework. The respiratory system includes organs and
structures of both the upper and lower respiratory airways. Thus, the
nasal and oral cavities, the pharynx (throat), the larynx (as a
passageway), the trachea, the bronchi and all their branches, and the
lungs themselves are included. The digestive system is included for its
pertinence in swallowing function; it includes again the oral cavity, the
pharynx, the larynx (as a protective mechanism), the esophagus, and the
lower digestive tract (e.g., stomach, intestines). Structures of the oral
cavity (e.g., teeth, tongue, soft palate) are also involved in articulation
and resonance, and the larynx is the primary organ of phonation.
 
Speech Processes
 
The mechanism for speech production requires the coordinated effort of
multiple systems functioning together to produce speech. As mentioned
previously, these speech processes are respiration, phonation, and
articulatin/resonance. Each process is supported by the various organ
systems just discussed. Each of these processes will be presented in
detail in the coming chapters. Following is a brief description of each.

RESPIRATION
The respiratory system is necessary to provide the power behind our
speech signal (see Figure 3-13A). The breath we take in is converted to
energy to produce both the voiced and unvoiced sounds for speech.
Furthermore, control over our breath stream influences pitch, loudness,
and timing of our speech. Necessary to understanding the respiratory
system is the bony and cartilaginous framework of the ribcage including
the ribs, the sternum, and the vertebral column. Upon this framework are
the muscles critical for expanding or contracting the size of the lungs for
inspiration and expiration, respectively. The anatomy and physiology of
the respiratory system is presented in detail in Chapter 6.
PHONATION
The phonatory system provides the sound source for voicing (see Figure
3-13B). All speech processes interact but the interaction here between
the respiratory and phonatory system is especially evident. It is the
power generated by the breath rising from the respiratory system along
with the movement and the properties of the muscles and connective
tissues of the vocal folds that is responsible for producing voice.
Necessary to understanding the function of the phonatory system is the
largely cartilaginous framework of the larynx along with the hyoid bone
and the muscles and connecting structures that allow the larynx to
function as a unit. The anatomy and physiology of the phonatory system
is presented in detail in Chapter 8.
ARTICULATION/RESONANCE
The articulatory/resonance system modifies the sound produced at the
larynx into the sounds that are heard and perceived as speech (see Figure
3-13C). This is done by changing the configuration of the vocal tract.
The vocal tract includes the nasal and oral cavities and the pharynx. For
example, resonance is significantly affected when the back and upper
part of the pharynx is opened to the nasal cavity. In this case, the sounds
produced have a nasal resonance to them; such is the case for the sounds

/m/, /n/, and /η/. Necessary to understanding the function of the
resonatory system is learning the bony framework of the cranial and
facial bones (i.e., the skull) and the bony processes that project and serve
as attachment points for muscle. In regard to resonance, many muscle
groups are involved including muscles of the pharynx, muscles of the
velum or soft palate, muscles of the tongue, and muscles of the mouth
and cheeks.
 
Figure 3.13  lllustration of the three speech system. A. Respiratory
speech 
sysytem. 
B. 
Phonatory 
speech 
system. 
C.
Articulatory/responance speech system. (Reprinted with permission
from Cohen, B.j. (2008). Memmler's the human body in health and
disease (11th ed.). Baltimaore: Lippincott Willams & Wilkin.)
 
The articulatory system acts as both a sound source and a resonator
of sound. Articulation refers to movement; in this case, movement and
placement of the articulators. The articulators include the lips and
tongue and their interaction with the hard palate, teeth, and velum. It is
the process of articulation that the layperson commonly thinks of as
speech. While critical, articulation alone cannot produce speech.
Consider an individual without a larynx as in the case of someone who
had laryngeal cancer (i.e., a laryngectomee). Without the power of the
respiratory system (the individual with the laryngectomee must breathe
directly in and out of the trachea through an opening in the neck) and the
voice source from the phonatory system, effective speech cannot be

produced. Again, knowledge of the bony framework of the skull is
necessary to understanding the functioning of this system. In addition,
many of the same muscle groups involved in resonance are involved in
articulation. These include muscles of the mouth and the tongue.
Because of this overlap of anatomical structures the processes of
articulation and resonance are often considered together as is the case in
this textbook. The anatomy and physiology of the articulatory system is
presented in detail in Chapter 10 along with the resonatory system.
Summary
 
In order for you to understand the systems involved with speech and
swallowing these systems are reduced to the basic components of cells
and tissues. Cells of a particular type come together to comprise tissues
of the same name: epithelial, connective, muscle, and nervous. Each of
these tissue types has subclassifications based on location and/or
function. These tissues then come together to form an organ; an organ
has a predominant tissue type with other tissues for support and life
functioning. Finally, the organs come together in functional groupings to
form systems. There are a number of these systems; those most pertinent
to speech and swallowing are circulatory (or vascular); digestive;
muscular; nervous; respiratory; and skeletal systems. These systems are
called upon to support the processes of speech. Speech processes are
also referred to as speech systems. The process of respiration relies on
the respiratory system, the process of phonation relies on the phonatory
system, the process of resonance relies on the resonatory system, and the
process of articulation relies on the articulatory system. These systems
are the focus of the three units of this textbook that immediately follow
the next unit on the nervous system.
PART I SUMMARY
In Chapter 2, you were presented the basic nomenclature associated with
the study of human anatomy, physiology, and pathology. First, a
definition was provided for the anatomical position, the general point of

reference for all terminology associated with spatial orientation and
positioning. Second, you were exposed to the planes of reference and
more specific terminology associated with spatial relationships among
the various body parts. Finally, as preparation for the remaining chapters
of this textbook, you were provided with information pertaining to how
you can understand unfamiliar terminology by analyzing specific terms
into their roots and affixes.
In Chapter 3, you were provided basic information about the
organization of the human organism. To understand the systems
involved with speech and swallowing, these systems are reduced to the
basic components of cells and tissues. Cells of a particular type come
together to comprise tissues of the same name: epithelial, connective,
muscle, and nervous. Each of these tissue types has subclassifications
based on location and/or function. These tissues then come together to
form an organ; an organ has a predominant tissue type with other tissues
for support and life functioning. Finally, the organs come together in
functional groupings to form systems. There are a number of these
systems. Those most pertinent to speech and swallowing are circulatory
(or vascular); digestive; muscular; nervous; respiratory; and skeletal.
These systems are called upon to support the processes of speech.
Speech processes are also referred to as speech systems. The process of
respiration relies on the respiratory system, the process of phonation
relies on the phonatory system, the process of resonance relies on the
resonatory system, and the process of articulation relies on the
articulatory system.
PART I REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.   Refer back to Table 1-1 in Chapter 1. Describe specifically how the
body systems on the right side of the table contribute to the systems
of speech perception and production (i.e., auditory,
articulation/resonance, phonation, and respiration) on the left side of
the table. In other words, name a few specific structures from each of
the body systems that can be found in each of the systems of speech
perception and production, other than the ones provided in the table
as examples.

2.   Without returning to Chapter 2, assume the anatomical position and
describe it as accurately as possible.
3.   Without returning to Chapter 2, name and describe as accurately as
possible the three planes of reference.
4.   Use your knowledge of terminology to decipher the general meaning
of each of the following terms.
 Hypothalamus
 Epidural space
 Pneumotachygraph
 Laryngoplasty
 Tympanosclerosis
 Subclavius
 Suprasternal notch
 Cricotracheal ligament
 Chondro-osseous junction
 Subglottic pressure
5.   Describe the four tissue types discussed in Chapter 3 and give one
specific example of each.
6.   Name the three types of muscle tissue. Of the three, which is
involved predominantly in speech production? What does this
indicate about the process of speech production?
7.   Both muscle and nerves are organized by connective tissue
coverings. List the names for some of these coverings for both muscle
and nerves using the prefixes endo-, epi- and peri-. What do these
prefixes mean?
8.   Indicate the speech system that is being described:
  Speech sound production source for speech
  Energy source for speech
  Sound modifier for speech
  Voice source for speech
  Source of speech reception and interpretation
9.   With the limited information you’ve been provided up to this point,
try to describe one situation in which damage to any of the body
systems (e.g., circulatory, digestive, muscular, nervous, respiratory,
skeletal) may have a negative impact on speech perception or
production.

 

 
Knowledge Outcomes for ASHA Certification for Chapter 4
   Demonstrate knowledge of the neurological basis of the basic
human communication processes (III-B)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the neurological basis of
swallowing processes (III-B)
 
Learning Objectives
 
   You will be able to outline nervous system organization.
   You will be able to explain the neurodevelopment of the central
nervous system.
   You will be able to list surface anatomy of the brain including
gyri and sulci most pertinent to speech, language, and hearing.
   You will be able to describe the supporting systems of the central
nervous system including meninges, ventricles, cerebrospinal
fluid and blood supply.
   You will be able to explain the basic microscopic nervous system
anatomy and will demonstrate preliminary understanding of
neural function.

 
 
 
Clinical Teaser
Sisi, an elderly woman age 82, enjoyed a quiet evening with her spouse
and retired to bed early. Sometime in the early hours of the morning
(around 2:00 AM), she awoke thinking she needed to use the bathroom.
As she swung her legs over the edge of the bed she noticed her right leg
seemed particularly heavy. She attempted to assist her leg with her right
arm but realized she could no longer move her right arm. She laid back
down and tried to go back to sleep in hopes that these symptoms would
resolve. The symptoms did not resolve and some time later, with some
alarm, she used her left arm to wake her husband. When she tried to tell
him what was happening, she found she could not speak although it
seemed to her that her thoughts were quite clear. Her husband
immediately called 911 and the para-medics were on the scene as
promptly as possible given that they lived in a rural area of Washington.

After initial assessment, Life Flight was called and Sisi was taken to an
urban center for evaluation and treatment.
On admission to the emergency room, around 7:00 AM, the
physician conducted a basic neurology exam and sent her off for a
computed tomography (CT) scan. No evidence of hemorrhage was
found, so the physician administered tissue plasminogen activator to
break up what was inferred to be a clot or plug in the arterial circulation
of the brain. The neurologist diagnosed this at this early stage as a
thromboembolic stroke minimally involving the frontal cortex of the left
cerebral hemisphere. Sisi was admitted to the hospital for observation
with referral to the speech–language pathologist for evaluation the
following day.
The speech–language pathologist conducted a brief speech–
language examination at bedside across all language modalities and
speech functions. A cranial nerve exam revealed a right facial droop
(cranial nerve VII—the facial) and a slight slurring of any speech she
did have (cranial nerve XII—the hypoglossal) with no other significant
cranial nerve involvement regarding speech production. Verbal output
was limited to automatic speech (e.g., counting, reciting the days of the
week) and vocalizations. Written output was extremely limited although
she did attempt to write her name albeit illegibly. Sisi’s writing was
further confounded by the fact that she is right-handed and she had right
hemiparesis 
of 
the 
upper 
(and 
lower) 
extremities. 
Auditory
comprehension and reading comprehension were determined to be
language strengths.
Note any terms or concepts in the above case study that are
unfamiliar to you. As you read the first chapter of this part, pay
particular attention to the anatomy and physiology pertinent to this case.
We will return to this case at the conclusion of this part.
 
Introduction
 
The nervous system of a human is both simple in its organization and
amazing in its complexity. In a simple model of speech production, we
can see that the nervous system directs all the activity that occurs; it

does this by both receiving information from the external (the world
around us) and internal (our body) environments. This applies equally to
swallowing. 
Without 
the 
nervous 
system, 
nothing 
happens.
Understanding nervous system organization along with key terminology
will assist you in mastering the basics of the neuroanatomy and
neurophysiology of the human nervous system.
The central nervous system (CNS) is made up of the brain and
spinal cord and all the structures and spaces within. The brain itself has
over 100 billion neurons and has been likened to the consistency of jello
but is probably more like tofu in substance (Firlik, 2006). The brain
constitutes about 2% of an individual’s weight, yet it is a demanding
oxygen consumer as it requires 20% of the body’s blood supply. In fact,
it could be argued that the functions of the rest of the body’s organs are
devoted to keeping the brain alive (Goodman, 2003). In turn, the brain
makes our reality conscious and allows us to respond in thought,
planning, and action.
TERMINOLOGY
The importance of understanding critical terms in neuroanatomy and
neurophysiology cannot be stressed enough, as these terms form the
foundation to build upon and provide the critical information necessary
to apply reasoning to determine the location and function of structures
and systems. The terms presented in Table 4-1 provide a foundation for
understanding the information presented in this chapter. You are
strongly encouraged to attend to these terms, as they will arise
repeatedly in this chapter.

 
ANATOMICAL ORIENTATION
In Chapter 2, you were introduced to anatomical directional terms and
planes or views of anatomy. A few of these terms take on a different
meaning when referring to the CNS. During development of the CNS,
the front end of the encephalon (brain) undergoes elaboration and takes
a sharp turn, which alters spatial orientation and thus the anatomical
terms used to refer to the CNS above the spinal cord. As illustrated in
Figure 4-1, above the diencephalon (central region of the brain), the
term rostral means toward the nose, caudal toward the back of the head,
ventral toward the jaw, and dorsal toward the top of the skull. This is a
little different as compared with the spinal cord extending down the
vertebral canal where rostral means toward the head, caudal toward the
tail (e.g., tail bone), ventral toward the belly, and dorsal toward the back.
Directional terms can be combined in different ways to very
specifically describe a location. It may be helpful to review the
definitions of these terms in Chapter 2. The directional terms that may
be combined include medial, lateral, superficial, deep, and, as just
discussed, dorsal, ventral, rostral, and caudal. For example, consider the
thalamus, which is a mass of gray matter located in the center of the
brain. This mass of gray matter is comprised of a number of nuclei.
Many of these nuclei are named for their location relative to the

thalamus itself. For example, the nucleus responsible for acting as a
relay station for body sensations of pain, temperature, and touch is the
ventrolateral nucleus found on the bottom (ventral) side (lateral) of the
thalamus.
Anatomical planes of reference are also worthy of a brief review, as
these different planes are used repeatedly in the study of neuroanatomy.
A coronal (frontal) section is perpendicular to midline and splits a
structure into front and back. A horizontal section is literally taken
“across the horizon” resulting in top and bottom sections of the
structure. A sagittal section is parallel to midline and splits a structure
into left and right parts. Sagittal sections can be right at midline (i.e.,
midsagittal) or off midline (i.e., parasagittal). Figure 4-2 illustrates a
lateral view and a coronal, a horizontal, and a midsagittal section of the
brain with various structures labeled for future reference in the chapter.
Each time you view a figure illustrating an anatomical plane, take the
time to determine the specific plane being viewed as well as gain your
directional bearings (e.g., where is rostral?) prior to locating specific
structures in the figure.
 
Figure 4-1 Illustration of the use of directional terms in regard to
the central nervous system.
 

 
Figure 4-2 Different anatomical views and sections of the brain.
(A) Lateral view of the left cerebral hemisphere. (B) Coronal
section illustrating gray and white matter. (C) Horizontal section
illustrating gray and white matter (IC, internal capsule). (D)
Midsagittal view of the right cerebral hemisphere (CC, corpus
callosum). (A. Reprinted with permission from Bear, M.F.,
Connors, B.W., Paradiso, M.A. (2007). Neuroscience: Exploring
the brain (3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins. B. Reprinted with permission from Bear, M.F., Connors,
B.W., Paradiso, M.A. (2007). Neuroscience: Exploring the brain

(3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. C.
Reprinted with permission from Premkumar, K. (2004). The
massage connection anatomy and physiology. Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. D. Reprinted with permission from
Bear, M.F., Connors, B.W., Paradiso, M.A. (2007). Neuroscience:
Exploring the brain (3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams
& Wilkins.)
 
Neurodevelopment
 
There are four general stages of nervous system growth: induction,
proliferation, migration, and differentiation. The nervous system
develops from ectodermal tissue (i.e., the outermost layer of the three
germ layers). This ectoderm changes around the 18th day of gestation
through a critical event known as induction. Induction refers to the
interaction of ectoderm with the underlying mesoderm causing a
commitment of tissue to become neural tissue; this new tissue is termed
neuroectoderm. Following induction, the nerve cells increase their rate
of production and proliferate. Nuclear movement of these cells occurs
via migration where the cells travel from where they originated to the
region of the nervous system where they will end up. Differentiation
refers to cell specialization and the formation of the parts of the neuron
and early synaptic patterns.
Once induction occurs, the development of the nervous system is
rapid. At 21 days, a neural plate develops and, as this plate thickens via
cell proliferation, it folds upon itself and a neural tube is created by 25
days growing rostrally and caudally like a zipper going in both
directions (see Figure 4-3). This neural tube develops into all the
neurons and glial cells in the CNS. Pinched off from this neural tube is
the neuroectoderm, now called the neural crest, that will develop into
the neurons and glial cells comprising the peripheral nervous system
(PNS).
Through this rapid period of growth, the CNS further differentiates
into vesicles with spaces (i.e., lumen) surrounded by walls (nervous

tissue). As illustrated in Figure 4-3, by 28 days, three vesicles are
formed: prosencephalon, mesencephalon, and rhombencephalon.
These vesicles further differentiate 1 week later with the pros-
encephalon dividing into the telencephalon and the diencephalon and
the rhombencephalon further dividing into the metencephalon and the
myelencephalon. The mesencephalon remains and the lumen becomes
the ventricular spaces discussed later in this chapter.
The spinal cord is also undergoing development, dividing into two
plates (see Figure 4-4). The alar plate is found dorsally and develops
into nervous tissue serving sensory purposes, whereas the basal plate is
found ventrally and develops into nervous tissue for motor functions. A
dividing point between these two plates is the sulcus limitans; lateral to
the sulcus limitans is the area devoted to development of nervous tissue
supporting autonomic functions.
ORGANIZATION
The nervous system is divided into two parts, the CNS and the PNS as
schematized in Figure 4-5. These two parts are separated by the
meninges, which are connective tissue coverings of the CNS. The PNS
is connected to the CNS via nerves: cranial nerves at the brainstem
and spinal nerves at the spinal cord. These nerves take information to
and from the CNS in regard to our head and neck (i.e., cranial nerves)
and our body (i.e., spinal nerves).
 
Figure 4-3 Neurodevelopment of the central nervous system. (A)
The three primary vesicles of the neural tube. (B) The five
secondary vesicles of the neural tube that further develop into the

structures of the brain. The optic discs of the diencephalon develop
into the retina of the eyes. (Reprinted with permission from Bear,
M.F., Connors, B.W., Paradiso, M.A. (2006). Neuroscience
exploring the brain (3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams
& Wilkins.)
 
 
Figure 4-4 Neurodevelopment of the spinal cord. The alar plate
and the basal plate become sensory and motor regions of the mature
spinal cord. (Reprinted with permission from Bear, M.F., Connors,
B.W., Paradiso, M.A. (2006). Neuroscience exploring the brain
(3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The developed human brain has five divisions: the telencephalon,
diencephalon, mesencephalon, metencephalon, and myelencephalon.
The organizational flowchart (see Figure 4-5) under each encephalon
area shows the general brain structures for that region. For example, the
telencephalon includes the left and right cerebral hemispheres and all
cortical and subcortical structures, that is, both gray and white matter.
The diencephalon is the thalamic region and the mesencephalon is
composed of those structures making up the midbrain. The
metencephalon includes part of the brainstem (i.e., pons) and the
cerebellum, whereas the myelencephalon is the most caudal portion of
the brain—the medulla oblongata. The medulla is continuous with the
spinal cord.

 
Figure 4-5 The organization of the nervous system. The meninges
divide the central nervous system from the peripheral nervous
system.
 
The spinal cord is necessary for the control of our body’s
sensations and movements. The spinal cord is connected to the brain at
the brainstem in the region of the foramen magnum. The spinal cord is
organized into two axes: longitudinal and transverse (or segmental)
axes. The longitudinal axis runs up and down the spinal cord carrying
information via tracts. The segmental axis runs perpendicular to the
longitudinal axis at each segment of the spinal cord and receives or
sends out information via the spinal nerves. The spinal cord is further
organized by segments that correspond to the sections of the vertebral
column: cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal.
The PNS is also further subdivided. The two components of the
PNS are the visceral nervous system and the somatic nervous system.
The visceral nervous system is considered involuntary and carries

information to organs, glands, and blood vessels to regulate arousal and
body functions; this is our autonomic nervous system (ANS), which is
further 
subdivided 
into 
the 
sympathetic 
division 
and 
the
parasympathetic division (see Figure 4-5). The ANS carries afferent
information regarding visceral function (e.g., oxygen content of blood)
and sends efferent commands (e.g., secretion from glands). The
sympathetic division expends energy during body responses in stressful
situations such as in fight or flight scenarios. The projections from this
system arise from the thoracic and lumbar spinal cord. On the other
hand, the parasympathetic nervous system conserves body energy and
works to maintain the internal balance of our body systems (i.e.,
homeostasis). Many projections from the parasympathetic division arise
from the brainstem as well as from the sacral region of the spinal cord.
Thus, a number of the cranial nerves have parasympathetic components;
this will be returned to later in the chapter. The neurons of the ANS,
regardless of division, are made up of a two-neuron chain. The first
neuron has its cell body in the CNS (either spinal cord or brainstem) and
is called the preganglionic neuron. The preganglionic neuron synapses at
the ganglia found in the PNS. The ganglia for the sympathetic division
are quite near the spinal cord, whereas the parasympathetic division’s
ganglia are located near the organ to be innervated.
The somatic nervous system has both motor and sensory functions
carrying information to and from skeletal muscle via the cranial nerves
and the spinal nerves. The motor or efferent fibers innervate the skeletal
muscles of the body; these include those responsible for speech and
hearing function. The sensory or afferent fibers transmit head, neck, and
body sensations for touch, pain, temperature, and body position.
Why You Need to Know
 
These sensory and motor systems work together to perform functions
such as speech production. Although we may look at speech production
as primarily a result of motor movement (e.g., moving our tongue to
shape sounds, moving our vocal folds to produce voice), our brains must
receive sensory information to plan and produce speech. Exactly how
body sensation contributes to speech production is not well understood.
Minimally, it appears that sensory feedback regarding where

articulatory structures are (i.e., proprioception) is necessary for optimal
speech production. As an example, consider the effects Novocain can
have on your ability to clearly articulate following a dentist
appointment.
 
Gross Anatomy
 
Gross anatomy refers to what can be identified with the naked eye. In
the case of the CNS, this gross anatomy will include the surface features
of the brain and spinal cord as well as the internal anatomy of the same.
The following section of the chapter presents the gross anatomy most
relevant to speech, language, and hearing function for the five divisions
of the CNS.
TELENCEPHALON
The telencephalon is made up of two symmetrical cerebral hemispheres,
a right and a left. In each hemisphere are four lobes that correspond to
the bones of the skull. These are the frontal, parietal, temporal, and
occipital; sometimes a fifth lobe is named—the limbic lobe (see Figure
4-6). Each lobe has surface features and outer “bark” (i.e., the cortex)
and structures deep to the cortex including both gray and white matter.
The lobes are separated from one another on the surface by grooves or
sulci.
Most obvious upon inspection of the brain are the grooves and
mounds of the cortex. The cortical mounds are called gyri and the
cortical grooves are referred to as sulci (sulcus if singular) or, if they are
large, fissures. Each of these gyri and sulci has a particular name and is
associated with one of the lobes (see Table 4-2). For our purposes, those
areas of the cortex most significant to speech, language, and hearing are
illustrated in Figures 4-6A and 4-6B and are presented here. The largest
of these grooves is the longitudinal fissure (refer back to Figure 4-2B),
which divides the cerebrum into right and left halves: the right cerebral
hemisphere and the left cerebral hemisphere. Furthermore, the
longitudinal fissure is deep extending all the way down to the corpus

callosum (a major tract). Another prominent groove is the central
sulcus; it divides the frontal lobe from the parietal lobe in each
hemisphere. The precentral sulcus is found immediately anterior to the
gyrus of the same name in the frontal lobe, whereas the post-central
sulcus is found immediately posterior to the gyrus of the same name in
the parietal lobe. The lateral sulcus (also known as the Sylvian fissure)
is also deep, separating the frontal and parietal lobes from the temporal
lobe. The temporal lobe is demarked with anatomically labeled sulci, the
superior temporal sulcus is found toward the top and the middle
temporal sulcus is found in the middle of the temporal lobe. The most
prominent sulcus of the occipital lobe is the calcarine sulcus, which is
located centrally on the medial aspect of the lobe (see Figure 4-6B). The
parietal lobe is separated from the occipital lobe by the aptly named
parietal–occipital sulcus. The limbic lobe also has prominent sulci.
These are seen on a midsagittal view (see Figure 4-6B) and include the
callosal sulcus running the length of the corpus callosum along its
superior border and the cingu-late sulcus found superior to the gyrus of
the same name.

 
Figure 4-6 Two views of the cerebral cortex. (A) Lateral view of
the left cerebral hemisphere illustrating the lobes of the brain and
prominent sulci and gyri. (B) Midsagittal view of the right cerebral
hemisphere with the brainstem and cerebellum removed to reveal
the limbic lobe and prominent sulci and gyri. (Reprinted with
permission from Bear, M.F., Connors, B.W., Paradiso, M.A.
(2006). Neuroscience exploring the brain (3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

 
Similar to sulci, particular gyri are found in the lobes of the
cerebral hemispheres; these also have names (see Table 4-2). Processing
of neural information occurs at the gyri for various functions, which will
be elucidated later in the chapter. For now, the primary focus is on the
location of these various gyri as seen in Figure 4-6A. The precentral
gyrus is the mound of gray matter anterior to the central sulcus
extending from the longitudinal fissure superiorly to the lateral fissure
inferiorly. The inferior frontal gyrus is located anterior to the inferior
end of the precentral gyrus and the middle frontal gyrus is located
anterior to the precentral gyrus. These three gyri, found in the frontal
lobe, are involved with motor function. More anterior areas of the
frontal lobe are involved with cognitive processes (e.g., attention,
memory, and reasoning) and our personality. These areas include the
orbital gyrus found immediately superior to our eye orbits inside the
cranium and the superior frontal gyrus located above the orbital gyrus;
these two areas together make up the bulk of the prefrontal cortex that
we will return to later.
The parietal lobe is responsible for the conscious reception and
integration of various sensations. Immediately behind the central sulcus
is the postcentral gyrus. Like the precentral gyrus, it extends from the

longitudinal fissure down to the lateral fissure. Two complex areas
associated with the parietal lobe critical to language function are the
supramarginal gyrus and the angular gyrus. The supramarginal gyrus is
found superior to the posterior end of the lateral fissure (see Figure 4-
6A) with the angular gyrus inferior to it.
The temporal lobe is critical for auditory function and language
comprehension. Heschl’s gyrus is found at the very superior aspect of
the superior temporal gyrus; this is the primary auditory cortex where
signals from the cochleae in the inner ears end up. The remainder of the
superior temporal gyrus is known as Wernicke’s area, an area specific to
language comprehension.
A midsagittal view of the occipital lobe reveals the cuneus gyri and
the lingual gyri surrounding the calcarine fissure (see Figure 4-6B). The
occipital gyri make up the remainder of the lobe given the lateral view
(see Figure 4-6A).
Why You Need to Know
 
The cerebral hemispheres are largely mirror images of one another with
the same sulci and gyri; however, functions differ across the
hemispheres especially in regard to the way the hemispheres process
information. A good example of this is our auditory processing. Auditory
processing occurs in both the left and right cerebral hemisphere
temporal lobes (superior and middle temporal gyri) communicating with
one another via the corpus callosum. In general, the left cerebral
hemisphere processes speech and language, whereas the right cerebral
hemisphere processes speech prosody (e.g., melody, rate, and stress),
environmental sounds, and certain musical elements. For instance,
Gazzaniga, Ivry, and Mangun (1998) found that when listening to a
lyrical song, the perception of the words is a left hemisphere function
while perception of the song’s melody is a right hemisphere function. Of
course, it is important to note that the hemispheres communicate with
one another and share functions to some extent.
 
Finally, the limbic lobe has three gyri associated with it: the
cingulate, the parahippocampal, and the uncus. The cingulate gyrus is
large, surrounding the corpus callosum at its anterior, superior, and

posterior aspects. The parahippocampal gyrus is nearly continuous
with the cingulate gyrus at its posterior inferior site (see Figure 4-6B).
The parahippocampal gyrus continues inferiorly and anteriorly on the
medial aspect of the temporal lobe. At its most anterior end, this gyrus
folds back on itself at a point called the uncus. Two important nuclei of
the limbic system are deep to these gyri; the hippocampus is deep to the
parahippocampal gyrus and the amygdala is deep to the uncus.
A part of the cerebral cortex hidden from external view is the
insular cortex. The insula can be viewed when portions of the frontal
and temporal lobe are pulled away from each other as can be seen in
Figure 4-7. Those cortical areas that overlie the insular cortex are
referred to as opercular regions associated with the various lobes.
Hence, there is a frontal operculum, a temporal operculum, and a
parietal operculum.
At this point, we move from a presentation of the external anatomy
of the telencephalon to the internal anatomy which includes both nuclei
and tracts. The most prominent subcortical nuclei are clusters of gray
matter collectively referred to as the basal ganglia. Here is one of those
instances when the use of “ganglia” is technically in error as we are
referring to a collection of neuronal cell bodies deep to the
telencephalon (part of the CNS); thus, the appropriate terminology is
nuclei. Indeed, it is more appropriate to refer to the basal ganglia as
basal nuclei but old terminology dies hard. Nonetheless, the individual
nuclei making up the telencephalic basal ganglia are the putamen, the
globus pallidus, and the cau-date nucleus; these are paired nuclei
found in each cerebral hemisphere. The putamen and the caudate
nucleus together are collectively called the striatum. Figure 4-8 shows
these nuclei via a lateral transparent drawing of the cerebral hemisphere.
In neuroimaging studies (e.g., CT scans or magnetic resonance imaging
[MRI]) or gross dissections, the basal ganglia are best viewed with
coronal or horizontal slices because they are deep to the cerebral cortex
(see Figures 4-2B and 4-2C). Two other prominent nuclei lie deep to the
temporal lobes and are part of the limbic system; these are the
hippocampus and the amygdala; again, one in each hemisphere. The
hippocampus is an outgrowth of the medial wall of the temporal lobe,
folding back on itself and roughly resembling a seahorse in shape; it is
deep to the parahippocampal gyrus. The almond-shaped amygdala is

found rostral to the hippocampus and deep to the uncus in the anterior
medial portion of the temporal lobe. These structures of the basal
ganglia and limbic system communicate with one another and/or other
areas of the brain by way of tracts or fibers.
 
Figure 4-7 Lateral view of the right cerebral hemisphere with the
lateral fissure opened to reveal the insular cortex. (Reprinted with
permission from Bear, M.F., Connors, B.W., Paradiso, M.A.
(2007). Neuroscience: Exploring the brain (3rd ed.). Baltimore,
MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

 
Figure 4-8 Transparent view of the left cerebral hemisphere to
illustrate the location of the subcortical basal nuclei. (Reprinted
with permission from Bhatnagar, S.C. (2008). Neuroscience for the
study of communicative disorders (3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Collectively, the white matter fiber systems in the cerebral
hemispheres are called medullary centers. The three medullary centers
are commissural fiber tracts, projection fiber tracts, and association
fiber tracts. You will recall that tracts are bundles of axons found in the
CNS; furthermore, these tracts connect nuclei with each other and
provide a means of information transfer throughout the CNS.
Commissural fiber tracts connect the hemispheres of the brain and can
be roughly visualized as horizontal connections; there are three of these.
The largest is the corpus callosum, which is large enough to require
labeling of distinct regions. From rostral to caudal, these are the rostrum,
genu, body, and splenium (refer back to Figure 4-2D). Much smaller
commissural tracts include the anterior commissure found ventral to the
rostrum of the corpus callosum and the hippocampal commissure
connecting the left hemisphere hippocampus with the right hemisphere
hippocampus in the temporal lobes.

Projection fiber tracts establish connections between higher and
lower parts of the CNS and can be roughly visualized as vertical
connections. The telencephalic projection tract is the internal capsule.
The internal capsule carries motor and sensory information to and from
the cerebral cortex as well as information traveling between the nuclei of
the basal ganglia and the thalamus. It is an incredibly busy expressway
of multidirectional information flow with particular information
traveling in specific lanes. As expected, there are different areas of the
internal capsule—the anterior limb, the genu, and the posterior limb
(refer back to Figure 4-2C). Similar to the basal ganglia, areas of the
internal capsule are usually viewed via coronal or horizontal planes.
Association fiber tracts connect different cortical areas within the
same hemisphere. These tracts can be very short or very long. Notable
examples of long association tracts are the arcuate fasciculus
connecting the frontal lobe speech and language centers with the
temporal lobe language centers and the uncinate fasciculus connecting
the orbital gyri of the frontal lobe with the anterior region of the
temporal lobe.
DIENCEPHALON
The diencephalon is found deep in the center of the brain extending
down to the ventral medial surface. The thalamus and all other
anatomical regions with “thalamus” in their name are part of the
diencephalon. This includes the epithalamus, subthalamus, and
hypothalamus. In addition, the mammillary bodies, part of the limbic
system, are included here. The thalamus is often viewed on a midsagittal
brain section as can be seen in Figure 4-2D. Only one-half of the
thalamus is seen in this view, as the thalamus has a right and left half
that correspond to the cerebral hemispheres. The halves are connected
by the inter-thalamic adhesion (or massa intermedia). The thalamus
itself is made up of multiple nuclei coming together to form a gray mass
that resembles a small egg sitting in the center of the brain. Some of the
more significant of these nuclei for speech, language, and hearing
include 
the 
anterior 
nucleus, 
the 
ventrolateral 
nucleus, 
the
ventroposterior medial nucleus, the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN),
and the medial geniculate nucleus (MGN). Figure 4-9 illustrates these

thalamic nuclei and their connections to other areas of the nervous
system; we will return to these later in the discussion of brain function.
The hypothalamus can also be viewed in Figure 4-2D and is anterior and
ventral to the thalamus. The hypothalamus is composed of multiple
nuclei and directly influences endocrine function via its attachment to
the pituitary gland by way of the infundibulum (i.e., pituitary stalk;
refer back to Figure 4-2D). Finally, the mamillary bodies, of which there
are two, are seen superficially on the ventral surface of the brain; a tract
runs between these bodies to the anterior nuclei of the thalamus.
 
Figure 4-9 The nuclei of the thalamus. Those nuclei discussed in
the chapter are labeled here along with their afferent input and
efferent output. (Reprinted with permission from Bhatnagar, S.C.
(2008). Neuroscience for the study of communicative disorders (3rd
ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
METENCEPHALON (CEREBELLAR COMPONENT)
The cerebellum comprises part of the metencephalon and is posteriorly
oriented in the cranium just ventral to the occipital lobes. The
cerebellum resembles cauliflower when viewed from a midsagittal
section with a finely convoluted cortex and intricate weaving of internal

white matter (refer back to Figure 4-2D). The cerebellum is divided into
right and left lateral hemispheres complete with lobes, cortex, fissures,
subcortical nuclei, and tracts (i.e., gray and white matter). The
hemispheres are separated at midline by the vermis, the central area of
the cerebellar cortex. The cerebellar hemispheres are divided into three
lobes: the posterior lobe, the anterior lobe, and the flocculonodular
lobe. The primary fissure separates the anterior from the posterior lobe
(see Figure 4-10). The flocculonodular lobe comprises the inferior
aspect of the cerebellum with the nodular portion at midline (i.e.,
vermis) and the floccular portion on the sides. The flocculonodular lobe
receives afferent information from the vestibular system and is
important in assisting in controlling eye movements and postural
adjustments secondary to head position and gravity.
A set of deep cerebellar nuclei receives input and sends output via
the white matter. As seen in Figure 4-11, the fastigial nucleus is found
most medially and the dentate nucleus is found most laterally, one in
each hemisphere of the cerebellum. Between these nuclei lie the
emboliform nucleus and globose nucleus, collectively referred to as
the interposed nuclei.
Tracts travel in and out of the cerebellum by way of the cerebellar
peduncles (see Figure 4-12A). There are three pairs of cerebellar
peduncles—the superior, the middle, and the inferior—which connect to
the brainstem. Importantly, the cerebellum receives much more neural
information that it sends out (by a ratio of approximately 40:1). This
large ratio of input to output relates directly to the function of the
cerebellum. The cerebellum is responsible for analyzing and
synthesizing large amounts of sensory information (input) and then,
based on that synthesis, sending out neural impulses to adjust
movements by way of motor control centers. The vast majority of neural
information comes into the cerebellum through the inferior and middle
cerebellar peduncles with the superior cerebellar peduncle reserved
primarily for transmitting neural information from the cerebellum.

 
Figure 4-10 External views of the cerebellum. (A) The cerebellum
viewed from above (i.e., a rostral direction). (B) The cerebellum
viewed from below (i.e., a caudal direction). Major landmarks are
labeled. (Reprinted with permission from Bhatnagar, S.C. (2008).
Neuro-science for the study of communicative disorders (3rd ed.).
Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

 
Figure 4-11 Transparent view of the cerebellum to illustrate the
deep cerebellar nuclei. (Reprinted with permission from Campbell,
W.W. (2005). DeJong’s the neurologic examination (6th ed.).
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
BRAINSTEM (“M-ENCEPHALON”)
The mesencephalon, part of the metencephalon, and the myelencephalon
together make up what is known as the brainstem. Figure 4-12 shows a
dorsal and ventral view of the external features of the brainstem. The
mesencephalon is the midbrain and is the most rostral of the brainstem
components being in very close proximity to the thalamus. The midbrain
has a number of surface features—the superior colliculi and inferior
colliculi, collectively referred to as the corpora quadrigemina, on the
dorsal surface and the cerebral peduncles on the ventral surface. The
colliculi are bumps or swellings that overlie nuclei involved with
hearing and vision, whereas the peduncles are home to critical motor
pathways. The cerebral aqueduct, part of the ventricular system,
courses through the midbrain. The pons (part of the metencephalon) is
found in the middle of the brainstem and acts as a bridge to the

cerebellum (the other part of the metencephalon). Ventrally, the pons
has a midline pontine sulcus which cradles the basilar artery; dorsally,
the pons gives rise to the largest of the cerebellar peduncles, the middle
cerebellar peduncle. The rostral aspect of the fourth ventricle is
associated with the dorsal aspect of the pons. Finally, the
myelencephalon or medulla oblongata makes up the most caudal aspect
of the brainstem and is continuous with the spinal cord. The ventral
aspect of the medulla hosts connection points for a number of cranial
nerves critical for speech, hearing, and swal-lowing. Also on the ventral
surface are areas called the pyramids and pyramidal decussation; these
regions overlie tracts that carry motor information to cranial and spinal
nerves for muscle movement—key for speech production to be
discussed later. The dorsal aspect of the medulla houses the caudal
portion of the fourth ventricle.
Spinal Cord
 
The spinal cord is the most caudal part of the CNS extending 42 to 45
cm in length from the foramen magnum down the vertebral canal
terminating around the first lumbar vertebra (see Figure 4-13). As
mentioned previously, the spinal cord is continuous with the medulla at
its most rostral connection but tapers off at its most inferior end as the
conus medullaris. Caudal to this region, a mass of spinal nerves are
found which are collectively called the cauda equina (horse’s tail).
SEGMENTAL (i.e., HORIZONTAL) AXIS
The spinal cord is organized into five segments paired with the
corresponding vertebrae, listed here from superior to inferior: cervical,
thoracic, lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal segments. Each segment, in
turn, has pairs of spinal nerves numbered and named for the segment
they are associated with for a total of 31 pairs of spinal nerves.
Specifically, the cervical segment has 8 pairs of spinal nerves (i.e., C1 to
C8), the thoracic segment has 12 pairs of spinal nerves (i.e., T1 to T12),
the lumbar segment has 5 pairs of spinal nerves (i.e., L1 to L5), the
sacral segment also has 5 pairs of spinal nerves (i.e., S1 to S5), and

finally the coccygeal segment has just 1 pair of spinal nerves (i.e., CO1).
All spinal nerves are “mixed” nerves, that is, they carry both sensory
and motor information. The sensory component enters the dorsal root of
the spinal nerve with its neuronal cell bodies housed in the dorsal root
ganglion outside the spinal cord. Alternatively, the motor component of
the spinal nerve emerges from the ventral root with its neuronal cell
bodies in the ventral horn of the gray matter of the spinal cord as
pictured in Figure 4-14 and discussed next.
 
Figure 4-12 External views of the brainstem. (A) Dorsal view of

the brainstem with major structures labeled. (B) Ventral view of the
brainstem with major structures labeled. Note the number of cranial
nerve rootlets on the ventral aspect of the brainstem. (Reprinted
with permission from Bhatnagar, S.C. (2008). Neuroscience for the
study of communicative disorders (3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
 
Figure 4-13 Lateral view of the spinal cord showing the five
segments and their corresponding spinal nerves. (Reprinted with

permission from Cohen, B.J. (2010). Medical terminology (6th ed.).
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
A transverse section of the spinal cord illustrates the division of
gray and white matter (see Figure 4-14). The posterior aspects of the
gray matter are the dorsal horns, whereas the anterior aspects of the gray
matter are the ventral horns. Consistent with neurodevelopment of the
spinal cord, the dorsal region is involved with sensory functions and the
ventral region is involved with motor functions. The amount of gray
matter in the ventral horns is related to the amount of skeletal muscle
innervated at that level. For instance, at the cervical and lumbar
segments, there is more gray matter to serve the innervation
requirements for the muscles of the arms and legs, respectively. Gray
matter surrounding the central canal is involved with ANS functions.
This holds true for the white matter as well. Referring to Figure 4-14,
there are three white matter areas that are named for their anatomical
location in the spinal cord and for the fact that tracts run up (i.e.,
ascending tracts) and down (i.e., descending tracts) these “columns.”
These columns make up the longitudinal axis of the spinal cord and have
specific names. They are referred to as the dorsal fasciculus (i.e.,
bundle), lateral fasciculus, and ventral fasciculus. There is more white
matter as you move up the spinal cord because more neural information
is traveling there.
LONGITUDINAL AXIS
Numerous tracts run up and down the spinal cord, bringing sensory (i.e.,
afferent) information in and sending motor (i.e., efferent) information
out. Sensory information is brought to the spinal cord or brainstem for
reflex reactions, to the cerebellum for integration and adjustments to our
movement patterns, or, primarily, to higher cortical centers for
conscious perception. Motor tracts transmit neural commands to skeletal
muscle for movement. For the most part, these tracts are specific to body
sensations (e.g., touch, pain, and temperature) and body movements
(e.g., gross and fine motor movement) not specific to speech, language,
and hearing. An exception is the tracts and nerves involved with

respiratory function to be discussed in the physiology section of this
chapter.
Supporting Systems
 
The CNS could not function without the support of other systems to
provide oxygen, nutrients, waste removal, and protection. Protective
coverings are provided by the meninges. Oxygen and glucose are
brought to the nervous tissue by the blood system. The ventricular
system produces cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for cushioning and nutrient
support both within and enveloping the CNS.
MENINGES
 
The meninges, shown in Figure 4-15, are connective tissue coverings
that surround the CNS; these are the dura mater (“tough mother”), the
arachnoid mater (“web”) and the pia mater (“tender mother”). The
two-layered dura mater, a dense, fibrous connective tissue (tough and
inelastic), is the most superficial of these with its outer periosteal layer
adhering to the inside of the cranium and its inner meningeal layer
immediately below. Between these two layers of dura are sinuses or
spaces for venous blood drainage and CSF reabsorption into the blood
stream. In addition, the inner meningeal layer of the dura mater has three
dural extensions: (1) the falx cerebri which extends into the
longitudinal fissure, (2) the falx cerebelli which partially separates the
cerebellar hemispheres, and (3) the tentorium cerebelli, a horizontally
oriented extension separating the occipital lobe of the cerebrum from the
cerebellum (see Figure 4-16). The dura limits excessive movement of
the brain within the skull. The dura surrounding the spinal cord is single
layered with only the meningeal layer present (i.e., the periosteal layer
remains within the cranium as the meningeal layer passes through the
foramen magnum and down the spinal cord).

 
Figure 4-14 Three-dimensional transverse section of the spinal
cord showing gray and white matter and components of a typical
spinal nerve. (Reprinted with permission from Premkumar, K.
(2004). The massage connection anatomy and physiology.
Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
 
Figure 4-15 A cross section illustrating the three meningeal layers
surrounding the central nervous system—the dura mater, the
arachnoid, and the pia mater. (Reprinted with permission from

Bear, M.F., Connors, B.W., Paradiso, M.A. (2006). Neuroscience
exploring the brain (3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams
& Wilkins.)
 
The arachnoid layer is in direct contact with the dura but is much
thinner and more elastic than the dura. The arachnoid is an avascular,
continuous, fibrous, and elastic connective tissue membrane running
over the sulci of the cerebrum. It can be likened to taking a piece of
Saran Wrap® and stretching it over the cerebral cortex and spinal cord
making sure it adheres to the gyri but not pressing down into the sulci or
spaces. Cisterns exist where the arachnoid bridges over larger spaces.
The arachnoid pierces through the dura at the dural sinuses; these are
called arachnoid granulations (or singularly arachnoid villi; see Figure
4-17). This is where CSF diffuses into the venous blood. An important
space lies immediately below the arachnoid called the subarachnoid
space. In this space, CSF flows and cerebral arteries travel (refer back to
Figure 4-15).
 
Figure 4-16 Dural extensions with associated dural sinuses in a

medial view of the left half of the head. Arteries supplying blood to
the brain are also labeled. (Reprinted with permission from Moore,
K.L., Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2009). Clinically oriented anatomy
(6th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The pia mater is the third meningeal layer, adhering closely to the
cortical tissue running down into sulci and fissures following the
contour of the brain and spinal cord. The pia is a very delicate and thin
collagenous connective tissue membrane. The pia serves as a protective
barrier and is involved in the production of CSF. A sleeve of pia
encapsulates blood vessels as they travel from the subarachnoid space to
pierce the cerebral cortex.
 
Figure 4-17 Close-up view of the superior sagittal sinus (CSF,
cerebrospinal fluid). (Reprinted with permission from Anatomical
Chart Company.)
 

 
Figure 4-18 Transparent lateral view of the left cerebral
hemisphere showing the ventricular system. (Reprinted with
permission from Anatomical Chart Company.)
 
VENTRICULAR SYSTEM
The 
ventricles 
and 
associated 
canals 
and 
passageways 
are
developmentally derived from the cavity or lumen of the neural tube.
The ventricles are spaces that are lined with ependymal cells (a type of
epithelial tissue) and filled with CSF. There are four ventricles: two
lateral ventricles (one in each cerebral hemisphere), one third ventricle,
and one fourth ventricle. As seen in Figure 4-18, the ventricles
communicate with each other through passages. The lateral ventricles
are connected to the third ventricle by the interventricular foramen
and the third ventricle is connected to the fourth ventricle by the cerebral
aqueduct.
Each ventricle has a unique configuration. The two lateral
ventricles are symmetrical and are found deep in the telencephalon.
Each of these ventricles has horns that extend into the lobes—anterior
horn in the frontal lobe, posterior horn in the occipital lobe, and inferior
horn in the temporal lobe. The parietal lobe houses the body of the
lateral ventricles with the corpus callosum forming the roof of the body.

A membranous partition, the septum pellucidum, forms the medial wall
of the lateral ventricles. The single third ventricle looks like a slit-like
cleft between the two halves of the thalamus and may be interrupted by
the interthalamic adhesion. The fourth ventricle is found between the
cerebellum and the pons and medulla and resembles a diamond shape.
The caudal end of the fourth ventricle is continuous with the central
canal that runs the length of the spinal cord. The fourth ventricle also
has the openings from the ventricles to the subarachnoid space via three
apertures. One median aperture (also referred to as the foramen of
Magendie) and two lateral apertures (also referred to as the foramen of
Luschka) allow for CSF to flow into the subarachnoid space to surround
and cushion the brain and spinal cord.
CSF is produced by choroid plexus found in the walls of the
ventricles. Production is continuous, with approximately 130 ml being
produced each 3 to 4 hours. The choroid plexus consists of an
intertwined mass of pia, capillaries, and ependymal cells and, on
dissection, looks like soft and delicate strands of red-colored tissue. As
schematized in Figure 4-19, the CSF then flows through the ventricles,
out the median and lateral apertures into the cisterna magna and
pontine cisterns (part of the subarachnoid space) and flows superiorly
toward the superior sagittal sinus via arterial pulsations with an ebb
and flow. Some CSF flows inferiorly to the lumbar cistern around the
spinal cord. A small amount of CSF flows into the central canal of the
spinal cord from the fourth ventricle. The absorption of the majority of
the CSF occurs through the arachnoid granulations into the venous
blood found in the dural sinuses. A blockage in this system of
production to absorption can result in a condition called hydrocephalus,
which will be discussed in Chapter 5.

 
Figure 4-19 Flowchart of the flow of cerebrospinal fluid beginning
at the lateral ventricles and ending in the dural sinuses.
 
BLOOD SUPPLY
Nervous tissue is incapable of storing essential nutrients yet has the
highest metabolic rate of any tissue in the human body. Metabolism is
aerobic which means nervous tissue requires a constant supply of
oxygen via the blood stream. The brain itself comprises about 2% of an
individual’s body weight yet requires around 20% of available oxygen.
Without this constant supply of oxygen by way of the blood stream, the
brain ceases to function and dies. In fact, if blood circulation is disrupted
for only 10 seconds, a loss of consciousness occurs; extend that time to
3 to 4 minutes and brain damage occurs.
Recall that arteries bring oxygenated blood from the heart and
veins return deoxygenated blood to the heart. This is a continuous
system with oxygen exchanged in the capillary beds. This occurs for the
entire nervous system, but the focus of this section of the chapter is on
the arterial blood supply to the brain as this is most pertinent to speech,
language, and hearing.
Why You Need to Know
 

Nervous tissue is incapable of storing oxygen; for that reason, the brain
is fully reliant on the blood supply to bring a continuous supply of
oxygen. When that oxygen supply is disrupted, an ischemic event occurs.
If the disruption of oxygen is of short duration and any behavioral
symptoms resolve quickly, this is termed a transient ischemic attack. A
stroke, or cerebro-vascular accident (CVA) occurs when a disruption of
oxygen extends over a longer period of time due to a clot or plug (e.g.,
plaque build-up) in the arteries of the brain. This results in nervous
tissue dying and the resultant behavioral symptoms associated with that
tissue death such as body weakness and slurred speech.
 
Origin of Blood to the Brain
 
The blood to the brain comes from two systems: (1) the internal carotid
arteries and (2) the vertebral basilar arteries. Both of these systems
originate with blood from the aorta (see Figure 4-20). The subclavian
arteries arise from the aorta and, in turn, give rise to the vertebral
arteries. The vertebral arteries ascend through the transverse foramen of
the upper six cervical vertebrae and enter the base of the skull at the
foramen magnum. Here, they join together to form the basilar artery,
which lies on the ventral aspect of the pons. The common carotid
arteries also extend off the aorta and bifurcate (i.e., split in two) into the
external carotid artery and internal carotid artery. The internal
carotid arteries ascend the anterior lateral neck to the base of the skull
where they enter the cranium through the carotid canal in the petrous
portion of the temporal bone. These systems join at the large
anastomoses called the circle of Willis (i.e., arterial circle) found on the
ventral aspect of the brain superficial to the midbrain. This is an
uninterrupted circle of blood vessels that the two internal carotid arteries
and the one basilar artery feed into. Three small communicating arteries
(one anterior communicating and two posterior communicating) and
proximal parts of two cerebral arteries complete the circle (see Figure 4-
21). This arterial circle provides a safety mechanism for the blood
supply to the brain as blockage below the circle (e.g., internal carotid
arteriosclerosis) can be compensated for by the other arteries that feed
into the circle.

 
Figure 4-20 Origin of the blood supply to the brain. (Reprinted
with permission from Anatomical Chart Company.)
 

 
Figure 4-21 A ventral view of the circle of Willis (arterial circle)
and arteries arising from it, and the vertebral basilar system that
supplies blood to the brain and spinal cord. (Reprinted with
permission from Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of
anatomy (12th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.)
 
Cerebral Arteries
 
Three pairs of cerebral arteries arise from the circle of Willis to supply
blood to the telencephalon. These are the anterior cerebral arteries

(ACAs), middle cerebral arteries (MCAs), and posterior cerebral arteries
(PCAs). Although all of these arteries are critical to brain function, the
MCAs are especially important as they supply blood to cortical areas
critical for speech, language, and hearing. The MCAs are the largest of
these paired cerebral arteries and originate at the termination of the
internal carotid arteries as they come into the circle of Willis. The
MCAs then turn laterally to course through the lateral sulci. As they
course through, the MCAs give off small arterial branches referred to as
the lenticulostriate arteries to supply blood to parts of the basal ganglia
and parts of the internal capsule. The MCAs emerge from the lateral
sulcus to fan out and supply the majority of the lateral surface of the
cerebral hemispheres via a multitude of branches as seen in Figure 4-22.
Most of these branches are logically named according to the part of the
cortex they supply blood to such as the orbito-frontal branch or the
posterior temporal branch as seen in the figure. All the branches off the
MCA supply critical areas for language and cognition. The ACAs and
PCAs also give rise to multiple branches. The cortical region that is at
the distal reaches of the arterial branches is referred to as the watershed
area (see Figure 4-22). The overlap of blood supply that occurs in the
watershed area is called collateral circulation.
Cerebellum, Brainstem, and Spinal Cord Arteries
 
Arterial branches arise from the vertebral basilar system to supply blood
to the cerebellum, brainstem, and spinal cord (refer back to Figure 4-21).
Direct from the vertebral arteries arises a singular anterior spinal artery
that runs along the ventral midline of the spinal cord and two posterior
spinal arteries found on the other side of the spinal cord. In addition, the
vertebral arteries give rise to the paired posterior inferior cerebellar
arteries. Branches off the basilar artery also supply blood to the
cerebellum in addition to the brainstem. The paired anterior inferior
cerebellar arteries emerge from the most caudal aspect of the basilar
artery, whereas the paired superior cerebellar arteries emerge from the
basilar artery just before it joins the circle of Willis. At the junction of
the basilar artery with the circle of Willis, the PCAs, mentioned earlier,
also arise; these supply blood to the midbrain. The basilar artery also
gives rise to a number of small pontine arteries to supply this part of the

brainstem. Although not associated with brainstem blood supply, the
basilar artery gives rise to the labyrinthine arteries that pass laterally
through the internal auditory canal to supply blood to structures of the
inner ear for hearing and balance function.
 
Figure 4-22 Lateral view of the left cerebral hemisphere showing
the branches of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) and the
watershed area (the border zone between arterial distributions).
(Reprinted 
with 
permission 
from 
Haines, 
D.E. 
(2004).
Neuroanatomy: An atlas of structures, sections, and systems (6th
ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Venous System
 
The deoxygenated blood needs a way out of the brain to return to the
heart. This occurs through the drainage of this venous blood toward the
midline of the brain through two sets of veins: (1) deep veins and (2)
superficial veins. The deep veins drain into the inferior sagittal sinus and
then into the straight sinus. The superficial veins drain into the superior
sagittal sinus. Blood from all of these sinuses converge to travel

inferiorly to the internal jugular veins (see Figure 4-23).
 
Figure 4-23 Medial view of the right cerebral hemisphere with
brainstem and cerebellum removed showing cerebral sinuses for
the drainage of venous blood with select veins labeled. (Reprinted
with permission from Haines, D.E. (2004). Neuroanatomy: An
atlas of structures, sections, and systems (6th ed.). Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Why You Need to Know
 
Imaging the blood flow of the cerebral hemispheres is an important tool
for scientists and clinicians to provide insight into normal and abnormal
brain function. Techniques that either directly or indirectly measure
blood flow include regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF), positron
emission tomography (PET), single photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT), and functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI). The underlying assumption of these techniques is that active
brain areas require more blood flow due to the increased metabolism of
the nervous tissue at that site. These imaging techniques allow us to

view which brain areas are responsible for particular activities such as
speech. Both PET and SPECT are considered techniques involving
nuclear medicine as radioactive isotopes (through injection or
inhalation) are used to trace brain function. PET measures blood flow
through the mapping of glucose and oxygen metabolism at the level of
the neuron. This metabolism denotes physiological functioning and has
been used to study language and cognitive functions in addition to
speech. SPECT is similar to PET but has less specificity. For a detailed
reading of brain imaging techniques, you are referred to Bhatnager
(2008).
 
Microscopic Neuroanatomy
 
The singular cells that comprise the nervous system cannot be seen with
the naked eye; these are the neurons (i.e., nerve cell) and glial cells (i.e.,
neuroglia) introduced in Chapter 3. There are multiple types of neurons
and multiple types of glial cells. The anatomical structure of these
different types of cells relate to their function.
 
Figure 4-24 A neuron (nerve cell) with its functional components
labeled. (Reprinted with permission from Bhatnagar, S.C. (2008).
Neuroscience for the study of communicative disorders (3rd ed.).
Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)

 
Neurons are composed of four parts: dendrites, cell body (i.e.,
soma), axon, and terminal (see Figure 4-24). The diameter of the cell
body varies from 4 microns to 100 microns (1 micron = 1/1000 mm) and
is filled with cytoplasm and organelles. The organelles found in the cell
body were covered in Chapter 3; these include the mitochondria, golgi
complex, lysosomes, Nissl substance, microtubules, and microfilaments.
Also in the cell body is the nucleus and, within that, the nucleolus—the
genetic center of the cell. Some of these organelles extend into the
neuron’s axon and terminal. Extending out from the cell body are
dendrites, often viewed as branches of a tree with buds on these
branches representing dendritic spines. The dendrites offer expanded
surface area for communication between neurons to occur. The singular
axon ranges from microns to several feet in length. The connection point
of the axon with the cell body is called the axon hillock. The distal end
of the axon has multiple terminal branches and is often referred to as the
presynaptic ending. The branches of the terminal that resemble the arms
of an octopus are collectively called telodendria. In turn, the end points
of each teledendrite are termed terminal boutons; the terminal boutons
house neurotransmitters that are the chemical messengers of the
nervous system. The entire neuron is encased in a double-layered plasma
membrane with channels that allow certain ions to pass; this is called
selective permeability. These channels, however, are only available for
exchange of ions at certain points called the nodes of Ranvier—
intervening spaces between myelin segments on an axon where the axon
communicates with the extra-cellular space.
Glial cells are found in both the CNS and PNS and outnumber the
neurons by a ratio of 5:1. Those found in the CNS are oligodendroglia,
microglia, and astrocytes (see Figure 4-25). Oligodendroglia are found
in white matter as they form and maintain myelin in the CNS. In fact,
each individual oligodendroglia cell is responsible for providing myelin
for dozens of axons! Microglia are scattered throughout the CNS often
near and around blood vessels and, as the name implies, have a
multitude of fine, small processes. Microglia are most active following
trauma to the CNS where they will come in and “clean up” neuronal
debris, a process referred to as phagocytosis, and leaving what is

referred to as a glial scar. The star-shaped astrocytes are also involved
with phagocytosis after trauma but have many other functions as well.
Notably, astrocytes are intricately involved with the blood–brain
barrier with their processes extending to surround capillaries.
 
Figure 4-25 The different types of glial cells. (Reprinted with
permission from Bhatnagar, S.C. (2008). Neuroscience for the
study of communicative disorders (3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The only glial cell found in the PNS is the Schwann cell. Schwann
cells form myelin that surrounds the axons that make up our spinal
nerves and our cranial nerves. Each Schwann cell wraps around a
segment of an axon in a jelly roll fashion. Myelin serves as an insulator
for faster conduction and separates the axon from the extracellular tissue
fluid except at the nodes of Ranvier. The nodes of Ranvier, then, are the
gaps that exist between adjacent Schwann cells in the PNS or
oligodendroglia cells in the CNS in a myelinated axon. This turns out to
be critical for neuronal impulse conduction, which will be discussed
later in the chapter. Finally, ependymal cells are also found in the CNS
lining the ventricles and central canal and contributing to the choroid
plexus. Clearly, glial cells support and assist the neurons in both the

CNS and PNS in accomplishing their functions.
Why You Need to Know
 
Brain tumors (i.e., neoplasms) are often due to the abnormal growth of
glial cells. The general name for these brain tumors is gliomas but,
more 
specifically, 
include 
astrocytomas, 
ependymomas, 
and
oligodendrogliomas. Of particular interest to current and future
audiologists is the inaccurately named acoustic neuroma (another term
for neoplasm), which results from the pathological overproduction of
Schwann cells surrounding the vestibulocochlear (VIII) nerve. The more
accurate name for this tumor is a vestibular schwannoma as the tumor
most often surrounds the vestibular portion of cranial nerve VIII.
 
Neurons are classified according to their number of processes (i.e.,
axons and dendrites), function, and speed of information transfer.
Neurons with multiple dendrites and a single axon are called multipolar
neurons; these are the most commonly seen in illustrations of neurons as
illustrated in Figure 4-24. The majority of the neurons in the brain are
multipolar, often part of a motor system. Those with a single dendrite
and a single axon are bipolar neurons and are found in systems involved
with special senses such as the visual and auditory systems. Those
neurons with only a single axon emerging from the cell body are
unipolar neurons. Unipolar neurons are found in the dorsal root ganglia
next to the spinal cord and are involved in the transmission of sensory
information from the body. Figure 4-26 illustrates these three types of
neurons. Speed of information transfer is dependent on the myelin
covering of the axon and the diameter of the axon. Axons are also
referred to as nerve fibers.
Nerve fibers are classified as Type A, Type B, or Type C based on
their diameter. Type A fibers transfer information most rapidly as they
are large diameter, myelinated axons. Type B fibers have a medium
diameter and are more finely myelinated resulting in a slower speed of
information transfer as compared with Type A; they are involved in
smooth muscle innervation. Type C fibers are relatively slow as they are
small in diameter and are nonmyelinated; they are involved in the
transmission of pain impulses.

An example of Type A nerve fibers are the motor neurons that
inform skeletal muscles whether to contract and how much to contract;
this occurs at the neuromuscular junction. The neuromuscular junction
is the point of communication and information transfer between the
terminal branches of an axon and the muscle fibers it innervates. This
junction is also referred to as the myoneural junction as “myo” refers to
muscle and “neural” refers to the nerve fiber. This point of information
transfer between the nerve fiber and the muscle fibers is a synapse.
Synapses also take place between neurons, but here, the synapse is
specific to the neuron and the muscle. The terminal branches from a
single neuron synapse with many muscle fibers. A motor unit is one
motor neuron and all the muscle fibers it innervates (see Figure 4-27).
 
Figure 4-26 Classification of neurons based on their number of
processes. (Reprinted with permission from Bhatnagar, S.C.
(2008). Neuroscience for the study of communicative disorders (3rd
ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

 
Figure 4-27 A motor unit—a single alpha motor neuron and all the
muscle fibers (muscle cells) it innervates. (Reprinted with
permission from Bear, M.F., Connors, B.W., Paradiso, M.A.
(2007). Neuroscience: Exploring the brain (3rd ed.). Baltimore,
MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Nerves of the PNS have an organization imposed by their
connective tissue coverings as illustrated in Chapter 3 (see Figure 3-11).
A delicate connective tissue called endoneurium surrounds the
individual nerve fibers (i.e., axons). These nerve fibers run in bundles
called fascicles; each fascicle is encased in perineurium. Fascicles, in
turn, are bundled in groupings that form a nerve encased in epineurium.
These connective tissue coverings allow a peripheral nerve, such as the
hypoglossal cranial nerve, to function as a unit with a specific
responsibility. For instance, the hypoglossal cranial nerve provides
impulses to muscles of the tongue for movement.
Physiology of the Nervous System
 
The chapter, up to this point, has been primarily concerned with the
anatomy, or structure, of the different parts of the nervous system with
much new terminology and labels. Now your attention is turned more
fully to neurophysiology. First, the means in which neurons
communicate with one another will be presented. Then, the general
functions of the brain areas will be covered. The bulk of this section of
the chapter involves a discussion of cranial nerves which will be guided

by a systems approach focusing, again, on those systems most closely
tied to speech, language, and hearing functions. These are the visual
system, the auditory/vestibular system, and the speech system. Finally,
neurophysiology as it relates to swallowing function will be addressed.
ELECTROCHEMICAL COMMUNICATION
Neurons “speak” to one another through two means: electrical changes
(measured in millivolts) and chemical changes. These changes relate to
moving an “at-rest” neuron to one that is actively engaged with the
transmission of a message, more properly called impulse conduction. To
understand how this works, the “at-rest” neuron should be explained. As
mentioned previously, each neuron is encased in a double-walled plasma
membrane that has channels to allow certain ions to come in and certain
ions to go out—selective permeability. An at-rest neuron has a particular
charge with the interior of the cell being more negative relative to the
outside of the cell (see Figure 4-28). This at-rest charge is approximately
−70 mv and is referred to as the resting membrane potential (RMP).
Thus, an “at-rest” neuron is a polarized cell; this polarization is
maintained by concentration gradients (of chemicals), electrical
gradients (opposite charges attract), and the sodium–potassium pump
(SPP). This pump exchanges internal sodium (Na+) for external
potassium (K+) to assist in maintaining the concentration gradient of
these two ions, which is necessary for the at-rest charge. Specifically,
the at-rest neuron has much more sodium (Na+) outside the cell than
inside (Na+ has a positive charge) and the plasma membrane channels
are closed to Na+. Inside the at-rest neuron are other ions such as
potassium (K+) and chloride (Cl−). Even though there are positive ions
inside the at-rest neuron, it is the uneven distribution of the ions and
their electrical charges that maintain the RMP. All neuronal signals
involve changing this membrane potential.

 
Figure 4-28 An at-rest neuron in its polarized state with the
intracellular fluid more negative than the extracellular fluid.
(Reprinted with permission from Bhatnagar, S.C. (2008).
Neuroscience for the study of communicative disorders (3rd ed.).
Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The membrane potential (electrical charge) can become either more
positive or more negative. The positive change is referred to as
depolarization and makes it easier for the neuron to initiate an impulse
(called “firing”), whereas a change in the negative direction is referred
to as hyperpolarization and makes it harder for the neuron to fire.
Thus, an impulse is characterized by a sudden depolarization in a section
of a neuron. Depolarization can occur at any location on a neuron—a
dendrite, a cell body, an axon—however, the initiation of an impulse
(“firing” of a neuron) occurs at the axon because its membrane houses
Na+ channels specialized to open when voltage changes occur. These are
called voltage-gated channels.
Action Potential
 
An action potential, the mechanism used by the nervous system to
communicate over distances, results from transient changes in
membrane permeability. When a segment of an axon is depolarized
enough, that is, reaches threshold, Na+ channels open and Na+ rushes
into the cell due to the electrical and chemical concentration gradients
(see Figure 4-29). This results in depolarization of the next segment of
the axon continuing down the length of the axon until this wave of

depolarization reaches the axon terminal—this is the action potential. If
threshold is attained, an action potential occurs; if threshold is not
reached, an action potential does not occur; this is referred to as the all
or none principle. The movement of the action potential down the axon
is called propagation. Propagation occurs in one direction only,
traveling down myelinated axons at fast speeds up to 120 m/second, due
to saltatory conduction. Saltatory means “to jump”; thus, the impulse
transmitted down the axon “jumps” over sections of myelin. In reality,
what is actually occurring is that the changes in membrane potential (in
the case of action potentials—depolarization) can only occur at the
nodes of Ranvier where the ion channels in the plasma membrane can
communicate with the extracellular space; the rest of the axon is
insulated by myelin. Nonetheless, the action potential moves down the
axon without decrement, that is, the amplitude of voltage change down
the length of the axon does not decrease. Immediately following an
action potential, for a brief period of time, the cell will not respond to a
stimulus to fire or responds only if the stimulus is especially strong; this
is termed the absolute refractory period and the relative refractory
period, respectively (see Figure 4-30). The voltage change (in
millivolts) and the time involved (in milliseconds) in a single action
potential at a segment of an axon is illustrated in Figure 4-30. Following
are the key characteristics of an action potential:
   Initiated by membrane depolarization
   Threshold usually 10 to 15 mV depolarized relative to RMP
   All or none principle
   Conducted without decrement
   Refractory period

 
Figure 4-29 A schematic illustration of the propagation of an
impulse (action potential) in a segment of an axon from resting
potential, to depolarization, to repolarization (Na+ = sodium; K+ =
potassium).
 

 
Figure 4-30 A graph depicting the membrane potential changes in
millivolts across time during the generation of an action potential
(RMP, resting membrane potential).
 

 
Figure 4-31 An illustration of a synapse between neurons.
(Reprinted with permission from Bear, M.F., Connors, B.W.,
Paradiso, M.A. (2006). Neuroscience exploring the brain (3rd ed.).
Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The initial stimulus for depolarization of a cell is either an external
stimulus to our sensory systems or internal stimulus from chemicals
called neurotransmitters. External stimuli such as pressure to the tongue
tip, light to the retina, or movement of cochlear hair cells act as triggers
to initiate enough depolarization to result in an action potential. In the
case of neuron to neuron or neuron to muscle communication, the initial
stimulus is the chemical transmitted by the neuron terminal. This is the
chemical part of the electrochemical communication system.
Synapse

 
A synapse is an anatomically specialized junction between two neurons
or between a neuron and the muscle fibers it innervates. There are
multiple neuronal locations where synapses occur, with the most
frequent being between an axon and a dendrite, termed axodendritic. At
a synapse, the activity of the first neuron influences the excitability of
the next neuron. Neurons conducting neural information toward the
synapse are called presynaptic cells and neurons conducting neural
information away from the synapse are called postsynaptic cells (see
Figure 4-31). A presynaptic cell produces either an inhibitory or
excitatory response in the postsynaptic cell based on the chemical
messenger sent across the synaptic cleft. These chemical messengers are
called neurotransmitters.
 
There are a number of chemicals that act as neurotransmitters; the
focus here will be on those that are stored in and released from the
synaptic vesicles in the terminal boutons of the axon. These are small
molecules (see Table 4-3). Small molecule neurotransmitters have fast
responses and short-lasting effects; these include glutamate, gamma-
aminobutyric acid, acetylcholine (ACh), dopamine, norepinephrine, and
serotonin. ACh is responsible for the fast synaptic transmission that
happens at the neuromuscular junction. Large molecules (i.e.,
neuropeptides) have also been found to act as neurotransmitters. The

reader is referred to Bear, Connors, and Paradiso (2007) for a detailed
discussion of current thinking in regard to neurotransmitters. A
presynaptic neuron may have more than one neurotransmitter type and a
postsynaptic neuron will have more than one receptor type to receive the
neurotransmitter.
The steps involved in neurotransmitter release are listed below:
   Depolarization (action potential) in presynaptic cell results in calcium
(Ca2+) channels opening at the axon terminal
   Ca2+ influx into the presynaptic cell occurs
   Ca2+ mobilizes synaptic vesicles
   Synaptic vesicles fuse to presynaptic terminal bouton membrane
   Exocytosis occurs
   Neurotransmitter substance diffuses across the synaptic cleft
   Neurotransmitter attaches to receptor sites on postsynaptic membrane
   Neurotransmitter affects the chemical gates of the postsynaptic
membrane, changing membrane permeability
Calcium (Ca2+) plays a key role, infusing into the presynaptic
terminal bouton to mobilize the synaptic vesicles. The vesicles then fuse
to the plasma membrane and open to release their contents (i.e., a
neurotransmitter such as dopamine) into the extra-cellular space, a
process referred to as exocytosis. The neurotransmitter traverses the
synaptic cleft to attach to a receptor site, if one is available for it, on the
postsynaptic membrane. Here, the neurotransmitter affects the ion
channels changing the permeability of the membrane at the localized
area. These channels are referred to as chemically gated channels as they
respond to the neurotransmitter chemical. Changes in membrane
potential at receptor sites are called graded potentials and can be added
up (i.e., summed) in two ways: temporally and spatially.
These localized or graded potentials can have an excitatory or an
inhibitory effect on the postsynaptic neuron. Excitatory postsynaptic
potentials (EPSPs) have a localized depolarizing effect, increasing the
likelihood that the postsynaptic neuron will initiate an action potential.
For example, the neurotransmitter glutamate would result in an EPSP.
Inhibitory post-synaptic potentials (IPSPs) have the opposite effect.
An IPSP results in a localized hyperpolarizing of the membrane,
decreasing the likelihood for the initiation of an action potential. The
neuron can be thought of as a mini processor of information as it

integrates the type of message the neurotransmitters are communicating
via the receptor sites (i.e., IPSPs and/or EPSPs). Furthermore, the
integration of EPSPs necessary to result in a firing of an action potential
is referred to as summation, either over time (i.e., temporal) or area (i.e.,
spatial). Temporal summation is the combining of rapid, sequential
excitatory potentials generated at the same synapse, whereas spatial
summation refers to the combining of excitatory potentials generated at
different synapses on the same cell.
This electrical–chemical communication system of graded
potentials at the sensory receptors or synapse site and the subsequent
generation of action potentials results in the transmission of coded
neural messages throughout the entire nervous system. Different parts of
the nervous system are specialized to communicate specific types of
neural information. The various functions of the different areas of the
CNS and the PNS (in regard to cranial nerves especially) are covered
next.
Functional Neuroanatomy
 
The study of brain anatomy and its correlates to behavior has been going
on for some time. Franz Joseph Gall, an Austrian medical student,
proposed one of the early examples of this in the early 19th century. He
believed bumps on the skull reflected underlying mounds of brain tissue
that correlated with different aspects of personality and other behavioral
traits. This was called phrenology. The notion of correlating brain
regions with particular language behaviors (localization theory) was
scientifically corroborated by the observations of Paul Broca (1824–
1880) and later, Carl Wernicke (1848–1904). Broca identified a frontal
lobe area in the left hemisphere of the brain that, when lesioned, resulted
in significant deficits of expressive language. Wernicke observed
specific difficulties with the comprehension of language when the
superior aspect of the left hemisphere temporal lobe was damaged.
There are distinct types of cerebral cortex in the human brain
related to its evolution. The neocortex is the “newest” of the cortical
areas (making up more than 90% of the cortical area) and has six layers.
This vertical organization relates specifically to the type of neuron found

in that cellular layer. The six layers are: (I) molecular, (II) external
granular, (III) external pyramidal, (IV) internal granular, (V) internal
pyramidal, and (VI) multiform layer. Flow of neural information occurs
in both the horizontal and the vertical direction across these layers
connecting cells to other cortical areas or to subcortical structures. The
remainder of the telencephalic cortex, older in regard to evolution, is the
two-layered olfactory cortex and the single-layered hippocampal cortex.
It is the neo-cortex that sets humans apart from other mammalian
species; in fact, when clinicians and scientists refer to the “cortex,” they
are most often referring to the neo-cortex. The cellular makeup (i.e.,
cytoarchitecture) across regions of the cerebral cortex has been well
studied.
CEREBRAL FUNCTION
Brodmann investigated the cytoarchitecture of the cerebral hemispheres
at the turn of the 20th century and discovered multiple areas with
different cellular anatomy that could be related to various human
behaviors. He numbered approximately 50 different areas; this
cytoarchitectural map and numbering system is often referred to in
neurological fields. Table 4-2 lists select Brodmann areas for the
cortical regions most involved with speech, language, and hearing.
Figure 4-32 illustrates this map on both a left hemisphere lateral view
and the medial surface of the left hemisphere with select numbers
emphasized for their clinical importance to the speech and hearing field.
Another way to view the functional neuroanatomy of the brain is in
regard to cortical regions associated with particular functions.
The cerebral cortex can be subdivided into primary areas,
association areas (which are further subdivided into unimodal and
multimodal association areas), and limbic areas (see Figure 4-32).
Primary areas have a one-to-one correlation to motor and sensory
functions and receive projections from the thalamic nuclei associated
with motor and sensory functions. If a primary area is stimulated (as in
the case of cortical mapping studies) or is damaged, then predictable
motor and/or sensory behaviors or deficits, respectively, will be seen.
Primary areas include the precentral gyrus of the frontal lobe, Brod-
mann area 4, commonly referred to as the motor strip or primary motor

cortex. The motor cortex gives rise to projection tracts to the brainstem
and spinal cord for volitional movement of muscles of the head, neck,
and body. Caudal to the motor strip is the postcentral gyrus of the
parietal lobe, Brodmann areas 3, 1, 2, commonly called the sensory strip
or primary somatosensory cortex. This area receives sensory
information (i.e., touch, vibration, pain, and temperature) via tracts that
travel from the brainstem and spinal cord transmitting conscious
sensations from sensory receptors in the head, neck, and body. The
special senses of hearing and vision have their own primary cortical
regions. Heschls’ gyrus, located on the most superior aspect of the
superior temporal gyrus in the temporal lobe, was numbered by
Brodmann as area 41 and 42, and functions as the primary auditory
cortex (Heschl’s gyrus) where sound is consciously perceived. The
primary visual cortex, Brodmann area 17, is found surrounding the
calcarine fissure primarily on the medial aspect of the occipital lobe.
Note that each of the four lobes of the cerebral hemispheres has one
primary cortical region.

 
Figure 4-32 Brodmann’s cytoarchitectural map. Brodmann
numbers associated with cortical areas most pertinent to speech,
language, and hearing are circled. Primary, unimodal association,
and multimodal association cortical areas are labeled on the lateral
view of the left cerebral hemisphere (P-T-O, parietal–temporal–
occipital). (Reprinted with permission from Kiernan, J.A. (1998).
Barr: The human nervous system: An anatomical viewpoint (7th
ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

Single-function, or unimodal, association areas are adjacent to each
of the primary cortical areas and are involved with the same functions
and receive or give projections to the corresponding primary area. When
stimulated or damaged, these areas reflect behaviors that are related to
their sensory or motor function but in a less specific and localized way
as compared with their primary counterparts. Five uni-modal association
areas are shown in Figure 4-32. The premotor cortex, Brodmann area 6,
is found rostral to the motor strip and provides projections to the motor
strip. The inferior frontal gyrus, Brod-mann areas 44 and 45, is found at
the inferior end and just anterior to area 6. This area is commonly
referred to as Broca’s area and provides projections to area 4 regarding
movement for speech. The somatosensory association area, Brodmann
numbers 5 and 7, is immediately caudal to the sensory strip and receives
projections from the same. The auditory association cortex is especially
important for language and hearing function. This is Brodmann area 22,
commonly referred to as Wernicke’s area. The auditory association
cortex is critical for applying meaning to what we hear and receives
projections directly from the primary auditory cortex. The visual
association cortex takes up the remainder of the occipital lobe; these are
Brodmann areas 18 and 19. The visual association cortex receives
projections from the primary visual cortex and works to perceive,
interpret, and attach meaning to the visual stimuli in our environment.
Primary and unimodal association areas take up much of the surface area
of the cerebral cortex; what remains are the multi-modal association
cortices.
The two multimodal association areas receive multiple inputs from
the single-function association areas described earlier. The parietal–
temporal–occipital (P-T-O) region is located at the confluence of those
lobes and includes Brodmann areas 39 and 40. The P-T-O is surrounded
by sensory areas and provides for the integration and association of
multiple sensory inputs. The other complex, multimodal association
cortex can be found at the most anterior aspect of the brain and is
referred to as the prefrontal cortex. The prefrontal cortex is expansive,
corresponding to Brod-mann areas 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 46. The
prefrontal cortex receives converging inputs from multiple areas of the
brain and thalamus. This area of the brain is responsible for higher
cognitive processes such as reasoning and executive function (i.e.,

planning, organization, monitoring, and controlling of behavior). The
prefrontal cortex is also home to our personality.
Limbic areas of the brain include cortical areas (cingulate gyrus,
parahippocampal gyrus, and uncus) in addition to the subcortical nuclei
of the hippocampus and amygdala. The paired mammillary bodies are
also considered part of the limbic system and can be found on the
exposed ventral surface of the diencephalon. These structures, along
with the tracts that connect them, make up the limbic system. The limbic
system is responsible for regulating emotional and motivational aspects
of behavior. It is also critically involved in memory, especially as it
relates to new learning.
Why You Need to Know
 
The importance of the hippocampus in memory function was made
evident by a famous case—H.M. H.M. underwent surgery for epilepsy in
1953 to remove nervous tissue from both medial temporal lobes (where
the hippocampi and their connections are housed). Subsequent to the
surgery, H.M. could not form any new memories. For example, H.M.
could not recall a conversation he had just had or could not recall a
magazine he had just looked at. His memories from before the surgery
were intact and he was able to learn new motor activities (although he
was not able to consciously recollect doing so).
 
As presented earlier in this chapter, all of these areas of the cortex,
whether primary, association, or limbic, require tracts to communicate
with one another and with subcortical structures such as the thalamus.
Neural impulses travel along the tracts to communicate across
hemispheres (commissural), within hemispheres (association), and at
lower brain centers (projection). For example, the left prefrontal cortex
communicates with the right prefrontal cortex by way of the corpus
callosum, a commissural tract. The left hemisphere primary auditory
cortex communicates with Wernicke’s area by way of short association
fibers, and the somatosensory cortex receives thalamic input via tracts
traveling through the internal capsule, a projection fiber system.
NEURAL SYSTEMS

Neural systems refer to the different neural circuitry patterns of the
peripheral and central nervous systems working together to achieve a
specific function. This section of the chapter focuses on those neural
systems key to speech, language, and hearing function. These consist of
the visual system, the auditory/vestibular system, and the motor speech
system. Also included is the neural circuitry involved in swallow
function.
Cranial Nerves
 
A key part of the neural circuitry for the systems most involved in
speech and hearing are the cranial nerves (CNs). Cranial nerves do for
the head and neck what the spinal nerves do for the rest of the body: (1)
they provide motor and sensory innervation to muscles and structures of
the head and neck, (2) they are involved with the innervation of our
special senses— most notably vision and audition, and (3) they play an
important role in the ANS such as pupil dilation and saliva production.
There are 12 pairs of cranial nerves with all but two pairs (CN I and CN
II) entering or exiting the brainstem. The cranial nerves are numbered
using Roman numerals I to XII. They are named for their function (e.g.,
olfactory), or the part of the head/neck they innervate (e.g., optic), or by
virtue of the nerve’s anatomy (e.g., trigeminal—having three parts).
Table 4-4 lists each cranial nerve name and number, associated system,
general function, and general location of neural cell bodies. The cranial
nerves will be discussed in more detail as they relate to each system
presented.

 
Visual System
 
The visual system is obviously important to language function in regard
to reading comprehension and oral reading as well as perceiving and
interpreting the non-verbal visual signals relied upon to supplement a
communicator’s message. Vision begins peripherally with light acting as
the stimulus entering the eye and ends centrally with the processing of
visual information in the single-modality association cortex and even
beyond, to multimodal association areas of the brain.
A brief review of the structure of the eyeball will serve to assist in
understanding the input from the visual fields to our retinas. The
different parts of the eyeball are labeled in Figure 4-33. The cornea is
the transparent covering of the eye that bends and focuses the incoming

light rays. The sclera is the lateral continuation of the cornea and is often
referred to as “the white of our eye.” The lens of the eye inverts the
visual image projection onto the retina. The iris is the colored ring that
surrounds and controls the size of the pupil, the opening through which
light enters. The choroid layer is deep to the sclera and provides
vascularization to the eye. The most inner layer of the eye is the retina,
which we will return to shortly.
The eye maintains its spherical shape via a liquid filling; the
anterior cavity of the eye is filled with aqueous humor (a watery
substance) and the posterior cavity is filled with vitreous humor (a jelly-
like substance). Furthermore, the anterior cavity has two chambers: an
anterior chamber between the cornea and iris and the posterior chamber
between the iris and the lens. The canal of Schlemm connects these two
chambers for regular drainage of the aqueous humor into the venous
system; this is a critical system that regulates intraocular pressure.
Glaucoma is a condition of increased intraocular pressure that results
from problems with either overproduction of the aqueous humor or
dysfunction of this canal.
 
Figure 4-33 Anatomical structures of the eyeball. (Reprinted with
permission from Bhatnagar, S.C. (2008). Neuroscience for the
study of communicative disorders (3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD:

Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Returning to the retina, it is here that the nervous system’s
involvement in vision begins. The retina develops from diencephalic
tissue; therefore, it acts in a way like a “mini-brain.” The retina is
multilayered with three nuclear layers and two synaptic layers (see
Bhatnagar, 2008, or Nolte, 1999, for a detailed discussion of the retinal
layers). The focus here is on the outer nuclear layer of the retina that
houses the sensory receptors for vision—the rods and cones. Returning
to Figure 4-33, it can be seen that the retina is interrupted by the optic
disc—a “hole” in the back of our eye. The optic disc is the exit point for
the axons making up cranial nerve II (the optic nerve) as well as the
entry point for blood vessels supplying the eye. Due to the lack of
sensory receptors at the disc, any image falling there will not be
perceived and, hence, we have a blind spot. Interestingly, this blind spot
goes unnoticed, as our brain makes up for the missing information
through perceptual processes in the visual cortex at the occipital lobe.
Another key feature of the retina is the fovea. At the fovea, intervening
neural layers are shifted to the side so that light focuses directly on the
sensory receptors there for increased resolution.
The rods and cones are referred to as photoreceptors. Rods are
sensitive to light and are found in most abundance lateral to the fovea.
There are around 100 million rods in each retina. Rods assist us greatly
in “night vision,” helping us to see shades of gray and perceive
movement and shapes. The retina also contains cones, found in greatest
abundance at the fovea; nonetheless, cones are much less in number as
compared with rods. There are around 6 million cones, the
photoreceptors responsible for perceiving form and color. Thus, cones
are responsible for visual acuity. Light is transferred to neural
information by the photoreceptors and passed on to axons making up the
optic nerve via the nuclear and synaptic layers of the retina. The optic
nerve transmits this neural information toward the CNS.

 
Figure 4-34 Primary visual pathway showing the information from
the visual fields coming to the retinas and the projection from the
retinas to the primary visual cortex in the occipital lobes.
(Reprinted with permission from Bear, M.F., Connors, B.W.,
Paradiso, M.A. (2007). Neuroscience: Exploring the brain (3rd
ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The primary visual pathway is our system for sight and begins
with the optic nerve as illustrated in Figure 4-34. The optic nerve from
each eye transmits visual information from left and right visual fields
(what you see with your eyes straight forward) toward the optic chiasm.
At the chiasm, the outer fibers of the optic nerves stay ipsilateral while
the inner fibers cross, or decussate, to the contralateral hemisphere. It is
at the optic chiasm that fibers get “sorted out” so that the fibers carrying
information from the right visual field are destined for the left
hemisphere and the fibers carrying information from the left visual field
are destined for the right hemisphere. The significance of this crossing
over will be elucidated in Chapter 5 during the discussion of lesion
effects on the visual system following a neurological trauma such as
stroke. From the chiasm, the fibers continue back as the optic tract to
synapse at the LGN of the thalamus. Fibers fan out from the thalamus as

they project back toward the occipital lobe as the optic radiations.
Finally, synapses occur at the primary visual cortex, Brod-mann area 17,
at the occipital cortex surrounding the calcarine fissure. The surrounding
single-function association areas, 18 and 19, further process visual
information.
Small secondary visual pathways exist that send axons to the
hypothalamus and midbrain. Those going to the hypothalamus play a
role in the sleep– wake cycle by relaying information regarding the
amount of light in our environment. Other axons diverge from the optic
tract to synapse with the nuclei of the superior colliculi found in the
midbrain. Visual reflexes important to maintain the position of our eyes
and control the fixation of the eyes to keep objects focused on the fovea
for the best resolution are part of this system.
Our eyes move in synergy to draw attention to visual fields and
focus light on our fovea. The cranial nerves responsible for these eye
movements are the oculomotor (III), trochlear (IV), and abducens (VI)
and are shown in Figure 4-35. Each of these cranial nerves innervates
muscles associated with a particular eyeball movement. The oculomotor
is responsible for moving our eyes upward, downward, inward, and
medially. Importantly, CN III also innervates the muscle responsible for
elevating the eyelid (i.e., levator palpebrae superioris). Damage to this
cranial nerve, then, results in a droopy eyelid, called ptosis. The
oculomotor nucleus for CN III is located centrally in the midbrain and
its nerve fibers exit from the ventral surface of the brainstem (see Figure
4-36 for a view of all the brainstem nuclei associated with the cranial
nerves). The trochlear cranial nerve enables our eyes to move downward
and outward. The trochlear nerve is engaged when we walk downstairs.
The motor nucleus for the trochlear is found just caudal to the
oculomotor nucleus at the junction of the midbrain and pons. CN IV’s
fibers emerge from the dorsal surface of the brainstem where they
immediately decus-sate to curve around the brainstem and join the other
cranial nerves on the ventral side. The abducens cranial nerve innervates
muscles associated with moving the eye laterally (i.e., abduction—away
from midline). This is easily tested by visually tracking an object from
one side of the visual field to the other. The abducens motor nucleus is
found in the caudal pons with its fibers emerging from the ventral
surface of the brainstem.

 
Figure 4-35 Ventral aspect of the brain showing cranial nerve
locations. (Reprinted with permission from Cohen, B.J., Taylor, J.J.
(2009). Memmler’s the human body in health and disease (11th
ed.). Baltimore, MD: Wolters Kluwer Health.)
 
Cranial nerve III, the oculomotor, also has an ANS component. It is
part of the parasympathetic system innervating smooth muscle to adjust
the lens of the eye for accommodation—to focus and adjust for moving
targets and distances. It is also involved in pupil constriction; this is
tested by the pupillary light reflex. Any ANS component of a cranial
nerve has its own nuclei in the brainstem and CN III is no exception.
The Edinger–Westphal nucleus, found next to the motor nucleus of CN
III, gives rise to parasympathetic fibers that exit as part of the
oculomotor nerve. These cranial nerves will be returned to in the next
section of the chapter, as they are related to the vestibular system as
well.
Why You Need to Know

 
Lesions involving the visual system have varying effects. Damage to the
primary visual tract, including the optic nerve, may result in various
visual field deficits depending on the extent and site of damage. Damage
to the cranial nerves involved in eyeball movement may result in
diplopia (i.e., double vision) or strabismus (i.e., tilting of the eye), what
has commonly been referred to as “lazy eye.”
 
Auditory and Vestibular Systems
 
A case does not need to be made in regard to the auditory system’s
involvement in speech, language, and, of course, hearing. The sense of
hearing supports our functioning and enjoyment of life. In regard to
speech and language, the ability to perceive and understand the acoustic
signal generated by the vocal tract provides crucial feedback for
learning. Separate chapters (see Chapters 12 and 13) in this text explain
the auditory and vestibular system in detail as well as the pathologies
associated with damage to those systems. Here, the focus is on cranial
nerve VIII, the vestibulocochlear nerve, and the tracts associated with
the auditory and vestibular systems. Cranial nerve VIII divides into two
branches in the periphery as its name implies: the vestibular branch and
the cochlear branch. We will look first at the auditory component of this
system, which includes the cochlear branch of the eighth cranial nerve.

 
Figure 4-36 Dorsal view of the brainstem with the nuclei
associated with cranial nerves pictured. Nuclei receiving afferent
projections are illustrated on the left half of the diagram and nuclei
giving rise to efferent projections are illustrated on the right half of
the diagram. It should be noted that all of these nuclei are paired
(i.e., one in each half of the brainstem). For ease of illustration,
only one of each nucleus (except the trochlear) is pictured.
(Reprinted with permission from Bhatnagar, S.C. (2008).
Neuroscience for the study of communicative disorders (3rd ed.).
Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

Auditory (Cochlear) Component
 
The auditory pathway begins at the peripheral sensory receptors for
hearing, the hair cells of the cochlea. These are analogous in some ways
to the rods and cones of the retina. The stereocilia (thread-like
processes) residing on top of the hair cells bend and deflect secondary to
basilar membrane movement (and other components of the organ of
Corti), thereby generating action potentials. Details regarding the
transduction of mechanical vibrations (i.e., the movements) of the hair
cells into neural information are covered in Chapter 12. Processes of
these hair cells go to the cell body found in the spiral ganglion of the
cochlea. Axons from here project through the modiolus in the center of
the cochlea and proceed through the internal auditory canal (found in the
petrous portion of the temporal bone) to the brainstem. Figure 4-37
diagrams the auditory pathway from the brainstem up to primary
auditory cortex. Cranial nerve VIII enters the brainstem adjacent to the
inferior cerebellar peduncle at the ponsmedullary junction where fibers
from the cochlear component will synapse at the ipsilateral cochlear
nuclear complex—here starts the auditory brainstem. The cochlear
complex is composed of a total of four nuclei, one dorsal and one
ventral on each side of the brainstem (refer back to Figure 4-36). From
here, the auditory pathway becomes more complex due to multiple
nuclei for synapses and multiple opportunities for axons to decussate
prior to continuing their ascent. Nonetheless, there are four main relay
nuclei between the cochlea and the cortex. These are the cochlear nuclei
already mentioned followed by the superior olivary nucleus, the
inferior colliculi, and the MGN of the thalamus.

 
Figure 4-37 Auditory pathway from the cochlea to the primary
auditory cortex. (Reprinted with permission from Bear, M.F.,
Connors, B.W., Paradiso, M.A. (2007). Neuroscience: Exploring
the brain (3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.)
 
Figure 4-37 illustrates the auditory pathway and possible crossover
points for axons. Fibers of the cochlear branch of CN VIII bifurcate and
synapse at the cochlear nuclei. The fibers then travel to synapse at either
the ipsilateral superior olive or the contralateral superior olive via the
trapezoid body; hence, some fibers decussate at this point. From there,
fibers ascend in a tract called the lateral lemniscus; the cell bodies
along this tract form the nuclei of the lateral lemniscus. Here, some
fibers cross over to the other side as well. The fibers then ascend to
synapse in the midbrain at the inferior colliculi (recall that the superior
colliculi are related to vision). From here, the fibers travel via the
brachium of the inferior colliculus to synapse at the MGN of the
thalamus (recall that the lateral geniculate nuclei are associated with the

visual system). Finally, the fibers travel via the auditory radiations
(similar to the optic radiations) to synapse at the primary auditory
cortex, Brodmann area 41.
The auditory system is considered redundant with its multiple
synapses and decussations. Thus, auditory information from one ear is
ultimately shared with each cerebral cortex. Despite this intermixing of
auditory signals, there remains what is called a contralateral effect. That
is, a majority of auditory information reaching the primary auditory
cortex originates in the contralateral ear.
There is now evidence to support the presence of descending,
efferent auditory pathways which appear to act as a feedback
mechanism. Chapter 12 presents more information specific to the
efferent olivocochlear pathway. These descending tracts serve to
inhibit the reception of sound providing for auditory sharpening of the
acoustic signal.
Vestibular Component
 
The sensory receptors for the vestibular component of the eighth cranial
nerve are the hair cells found in the semicircular canals, the utricle and
the saccule. The semicircular canals, more specifically the crista
ampullaris within the canals, are involved in the perception of angular
movements of the head in space (i.e., dynamic equilibrium), whereas the
macula within the utricle and saccule of the vestibule are involved in
perceiving the position of the head relative to gravity (i.e., static
equilibrium). A more thorough discussion of the vestibular apparatus’
anatomy and physiology can be found in Chapter 12. The cell bodies for
these hair cells are located in the vestibular ganglion found between the
vestibular apparatus and the internal auditory canal. The axons making
up the central projections for the cell bodies continues as CN VIII’s
vestibular component to enter the brainstem at the pons-medullary
junction.
The fibers from the vestibular component of the eighth cranial
nerve synapse at the vestibular nuclei; in turn, projections from these
nuclei travel either in an ascending or descending direction as tracts (see
Figure 4-38). Indicative to the importance of equilibrium and balance,
there are a total of eight vestibular nuclei in the rostral medulla, four on

each side of the brainstem. Axons from these nuclei give rise to a tract
called the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF). The ascending fibers
of the MLF synapse at the cranial nerve nuclei for those nerves
innervating eye movement. Recall from the previous section that these
are the oculomotor (CN III), trochlear (CN IV), and abducens (CN VI)
nuclei. Thus, the ascending MLF is critical for eye movement reflexes
secondary to changes in head position.
 
Figure 4-38 Dorsal view of the brainstem showing tracts associated
with the vestibular system, including the ascending and descending
medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) (CN, cranial nerve).
(Reprinted with permission from Bhatnagar, S.C. (2008).
Neuroscience for the study of communicative disorders (3rd ed.).
Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Why You Need to Know
 
The vestibuloocular reflex allows eye direction to stay stable in space to

aid visual focus. In fact, the semicircular canals of our inner ears
developed in parallel with the muscles that control the movements of our
eyes; these two systems work together for this reflex. You can
demonstrate this reflex to yourself by shaking your head while reading
this text; although your head is moving your eyes will adjust via
reflexive movements. Alternatively, if you shake the text back and forth
while reading, it will be much more difficult, if not impossible, to read.
This is because your semicircular canals cannot receive any afferent
information from the textbook to make the necessary eye movement
adjustments!
 
The descending fibers of the MLF make up the medial and lateral
vestibulospinal tracts. The lateral vestibulospinal tract is critical for
vestibular reflex reactions (e.g., extensor or antigravity muscles) to
maintain body balance and make the appropriate posture adjustments.
For example, if you spin until you feel dizzy and then stop, the
staggering that follows is a result of exaggerated lateral vestibulospinal
tract activity (Nolte, 1999). The medial vestibulospinal tract is
responsible for stabilizing head position as we move and to coordinate
head position with eye movements as described earlier.
In addition to the ascending and descending tracts described earlier,
a number of fibers from the vestibular nuclei travel directly to the
cerebellum. These projections travel via the inferior cerebellar peduncle
to synapse in the older parts of the cerebellum (i.e., flocculonodular
lobe, vermis, and fastigial nucleus) to provide information regarding
head position. The cerebellum, in turn, sends projections back out to the
vestibular nuclei to influence muscle adjustments required for the
maintenance of balance.
Motor Speech System
 
Why You Need to Know
 
The motor speech system involves peripheral and central nervous system
mechanisms to literally “produce speech.” Although the label “motor
speech” emphasizes the motor aspect of speech production, the sensory

mechanisms are critical to providing the feedback necessary to
coordinate and modulate our musculoskeletal system to produce
intelligible and natural sounding speech. The term “motor speech” is
apt because it is routinely used to describe communication disorders
secondary to disruption in these systems.
 
Half of our cranial nerves are involved with speech production.
These are the trigeminal (CN V), facial (CN VII), glossopharyngeal
(CN IX), vagus (CN X), spinal accessory (CN XI), and hypoglossal
(CN XII). As seen in Table 4-4, the majority of these cranial nerves have
sensory and motor components. Three of them, the facial,
glossopharyngeal, and vagus, also serve the ANS. The last two, spinal
accessory and hypoglossal, are motor only.
An idea or “thought” that initiates speech production comes from
our cognitive systems that are housed in the multimodal association
cortices of our brain. Language is intricately tied to cognition. For
example, associating and accessing memories (prefrontal cortex) to
word retrieval (P-T-O cortex) requires multiple regions of the brain to
work together in a coordinated, parallel fashion. Of course, this whole
process of formulating an idea and converting it into language often
begins with sensation of the world around us. For example, a particular
smell may evoke an image of your grandmother and inspire you to say
something about her. This “idea” is then conveyed, via tracts, to
language centers of the brain—Wernicke’s area (Brod-mann area 22)
and Broca’s area (Brodmann area 44, 45). Recall that these areas are
single-function, or uni-modal, association cortices. Broca’s area, along
with other premotor cortices, basal nuclei, cerebellum, and sensory strip
send projections to the motor cortex (Brodmann area 4) to direct
volitional motor activity. We now turn to the tracts that will bring the
messages to the cranial nerves and spinal nerves involved in speech
production.
Corticospinal and Corticobulbar Tracts
 
Motor fibers that direct movements of our body, head, and neck
originate in the motor cortex (i.e., precentral gyrus). The fibers that run
from the cortex to the spinal cord to innervate efferent fibers of the

motor component of the spinal nerves make up the corticospinal tract.
The emphasis here is on the fibers that run from the motor cortex to the
motor nuclei housed in the brainstem that give rise to the cranial nerves
referred to as the corticobulbar tract. These two tracts together
(corticospinal and corticobulbar) are often referred to as the pyramidal
tracts. The name pyramidal comes from the fact that these tracts arise
from the pyramidal cells (the largest of these are Betz cells), named for
their shape, in cortical layer V of the cerebral cortex. In addition, the
majority of the corticospinal tract decussates at the denoted area of the
pyramids in the caudal medulla. This accounts for contralateral control
of body movement, that is, the left hemisphere motor cortex controls
right body movement and vice versa. Nonetheless, by using the more
anatomical names for these tracts, the tracts’ origination and destination
becomes transparent. Specifically, the corticospinal tract begins at the
cortex (“cortico-”) and ends at the spinal cord (“-spinal”), whereas the
corticobulbar tract begins at the cortex and ends at the “bulb” (“-
bulbar”) which refers to the medulla due to its shape.
Why You Need to Know
 
Clinicians use the terms upper motor neuron (UMN) and lower motor
neuron (LMN) when speaking of the effects of a disruption of the motor
system. Basically, UMNs refer to neurons of the corticospinal and
corticobulbar tracts and LMNs refer to the neurons of the cranial and
spinal nerves including their origination in the brainstem and spinal
cord, respectively.
 
Neural information for respiratory control involves a complex array
of neural signals beginning at the motor cortex (i.e., precentral gyrus)
and traveling via the corticospinal tract. Neural information flows from
the cortex down through the internal capsule, the ventral midbrain (i.e.,
cerebral peduncle) and through the medulla (i.e., pyramids) to innervate
neuronal cell bodies in the anterior horns of the cervical, thoracic, and
lumbar regions of the spinal cord for volitional respiratory control. It
should be noted that the majority (around 85%) of the corticospinal
fibers decussate (crossover) at the pyramidal decussation in the caudal
medulla. Again, this means that the majority of neural information

directing volitional movement in one half of our body is mediated by the
motor signals arising in the contralateral hemisphere. Specifically,
corticospinal projections arising from the left hemisphere innervate
movement on the right side of the body, whereas projections arising
from the right hemisphere innervate movement for the left half of the
body.
The corticospinal tract is significant for speech production in regard
to respiratory function. Volitional respiratory control occurs during
breathing activities such as meditative breathing or voluntarily taking a
deep breath; whenever you have conscious control over your breathing,
this is volitional. Involuntary, or automatic, respiration is the norm of
course. Automatic respiratory control requires constant input from
nuclei in the pons and medulla that send projections to the same ventral
horn cells in the cervical and thoracic regions of the spinal cord. From
these ventral horns, neural projections are sent out via the ventral spinal
roots to innervate muscles of respiration. Most notable is spinal nerve
C4, part of the phrenic nerve, which innervates the diaphragm muscle,
our primary and critical muscle for inspiration.

 
Figure 4-39 A coronal section of the motor homunculus showing
the topographical representation of the right half of the body in the
primary motor cortex of the left cerebral hemisphere. The same
representation exists in the right cerebral hemisphere for the left
half of the body. A sensory homunculus, not pictured here,
represents the body for conscious sensation at the primary sensory
cortex. (Reprinted with permission from Bear, M.F., Connors,
B.W., Paradiso, M.A. (2006). Neuroscience exploring the brain
(3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

The corticobulbar tract sends neural commands to the cranial nerve
motor nuclei in the brainstem responsible for innervating muscles of the
head and neck. Here, we are concerned with motor speech function, but
these same neural mechanisms and muscles are involved with swallow
function. The corticobulbar tract begins at the lateral aspect of the motor
cortex. The motor cortex has a topographical organization referred to as
the motor homunculus (see Figure 4-39) that very specifically indicates
the cortical region, giving rise to neurons controlling particular parts of
our face and neck including the vocal tract (i.e., oral cavity, nasal cavity,
pharynx, and larynx). Fibers from the motor cortex converge and travel
via the anterior limb of the internal capsule, continue to descend through
the cerebral peduncle (ventral midbrain) giving off fibers to both sides
of the brainstem to innervate the motor nuclei of cranial nerves V
(pons), VII (pons), IX (medulla), X (medulla), XI (medulla), and XII
(medulla). Note that four of the six cranial nerves involved with speech
house their cell bodies in the medulla with the facial motor nuclei close
by at the junction of the pons and medulla (refer back to Figure 4-36). It
should be emphasized that the corticobulbar tract from one hemisphere
provides neural information to cranial nerve nuclei in both the left and
right halves of the brainstem. This “double coverage” serves as an
important safety mechanism should one cerebral hemisphere be
compromised by neurological insult (e.g., tumor or stroke). An
exception to this double coverage rule is discussed later with regard to
the facial and hypoglossal motor nuclei.
Trigeminal Nerve
 
Cranial nerve V, the trigeminal, is the largest of the cranial nerves. It
emerges from the lateral ventral aspect of the pons (refer back to Figure
4-35) and has both sensory and motor functions. The trigeminal is
responsible for transmitting sensory information regarding touch,
pressure, pain, and temperature from the head, face, and teeth including
senses from the mucous membranes of the oral and nasal cavities. Next
time you get a toothache, you can thank the trigeminal nerve. This
cranial nerve also transmits proprioceptive information from facial and
lingual musculature. Proprioception refers to an internal awareness of
muscle movement, position, and posture. Motor function of the

trigeminal is primarily responsible for jaw movement: innervating the
muscles that open and close the jaw and lateralize movement for
chewing or mastication. Refer to Chapter 10 for a thorough discussion
of the musculoskeletal anatomy associated with jaw movement. In
addition, the trigeminal innervates one velar (i.e., soft palate) muscle—
the tensor veli palatini—and one middle ear muscle— the tensor
tympani.
The trigeminal has three branches (“tri-” means “three”). The
ophthalmic branch is sensory only and transmits information from the
forehead, upper eyelid, eyeball, and mucous membranes of the nasal
cavity. The maxillary branch is also sensory only, transmitting
information from the upper lip, lateral nose, upper cheek, mucous
membranes of the nasal cavity, the roof of the mouth (i.e., hard palate),
and the upper teeth and jaw. The mandibular branch is sensory and
motor, transmitting sensory information from the lower lip, chin,
posterior cheek and temple, external ear, lower jaw and teeth, inside of
the cheeks, floor of the mouth and tactile, pain, and temperature
information from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue. However, the
mandibular branch does not transmit any taste sensation: that is left to
other cranial nerves. As mentioned earlier, motor impulses travel by way
of the mandibular branch to muscles of mastication (e.g., masseter,
temporalis, mylohyoid), the middle ear (tensor tympani), and velum
(tensor veli palatini).
The trigeminal has three brainstem nuclei for sensation associated
with it (refer back to Figure 4-36). Fibers from the sensory component
of CN V synapse here upon entry into the brainstem; the nuclei where
the synapse occurs depends on the sensory information a given fiber is
carrying. The mesencephalic nucleus, as the name implies, extends into
the midbrain and receives proprioceptive information. The main
sensory nucleus, found in the pons, receives tactile sense information.
The spinal trigeminal nucleus, located in the pons and medulla and
extending into the cervical spinal cord (as the name indicates), primarily
receives information regarding pain and temperature. In this way,
sensory information from the head is already being organized but has
not reached conscious sensation yet, as that happens in the cortex.
The sensory fibers that arise from the sensory nuclei of the
trigeminal ascend to the cortex by way of the thalamus. Fibers from the

main sensory nuclei ascend ipsilaterally as part of the medial lemniscus
pathway or contralaterally as the dorsal trigeminal tract to synapse in the
ventral posterior medial (VPM) nucleus of the thalamus. Following
another synapse, the fibers that arise from the VPM ascend via the
internal capsule to the postcentral gyrus (Brodmann areas 3, 1, 2), where
conscious sensation occurs for tactile sensation from the head. Fibers
from the spinal trigeminal nucleus ascend contralaterally either as the
spinal trigeminal tract (and merge with Lissauer’s tract) or along with
the spinothalamic tract (coming from the spinal cord) to synapse again
in the thalamus at the VPM. From here, fibers follow the same route
through the internal capsule to the cortex for conscious sensation of pain
and temperature. Similar to the motor representation at the primary
motor cortex, a sensory homunculus exists for the somatosensory
cortex. Sensations from the head and face are received at the inferior
lateral aspect of the sensory strip.
Keeping with one trigeminal motor branch, there is one trigeminal
motor nucleus (refer back to Figure 4-36). The motor nucleus of CN V
is centrally located in the pons. This motor nucleus receives both
ipsilateral and contralateral input (recall “double coverage”) from the
motor cortex via the corticobulbar tract. A synapse occurs at the motor
nucleus and fibers emerge from the lateral aspect of the ventral pons as
the motor component of CN V’s mandibular branch.
Facial Nerve
 
Cranial nerve VII, the facial, innervates the muscles of facial expression,
among other functions. It emerges from the ventral junction of the pons
and medulla just lateral to the abducens nerve (refer back to Figure 4-
35) and has components serving all three functions: sensory, motor, and
autonomic. Its sensory component is smaller than its motor component
but is critical for our enjoyment of life, as it picks up taste sensation
from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue. Motorically, CN VII supplies
innervation to the many muscles involved with lip movement for speech
(see Chapter 10 for detailed information regarding these muscles) such
as the orbicularis oris. In addition, this cranial nerve innervates eyelid
depressors, so we can sleep and blink to protect the eye and maintain
moisture (recall that CN III, the oculomotor, inner-vates muscles

elevating the eyelid). In addition, the facial nerve innervates the tiny
stapedius muscle (within the middle ear), which responds to loud noise
by dampening excessive movement of the ossicles (see Chapter 12 for
more information regarding the stapedial reflex). The autonomic
component is part of the parasympathetic nervous system and provides
stimulation to glands that produce saliva.
The facial cranial nerve has three brainstem nuclei associated with
it, one for sensation, one for motor function, and one for autonomic
function (refer back to Figure 4-36). Fibers carrying sensation for taste
enter the brainstem to synapse in the nucleus solitarius. The nucleus
solitarius, located in the medulla, is a shared nucleus that receives input
from afferent fibers of cranial nerves IX and X as well. Fibers from this
nucleus ascend to synapse at the VPM nucleus of the thalamus in the
same manner as sensations carried by the trigeminal. From here,
projections travel via the internal capsule to the gustatory cortex
located at the anterior insular cortex and the frontal operculum overlying
it. Association fibers from here project to the orbital cortex to integrate
taste information with olfaction.
The motor nucleus of cranial nerve VII is housed in the rostral
medulla (see Figure 4-36). Unique to the facial motor nucleus is that the
lower half of the nucleus receives input from only the contralateral
corticobulbar tract. This lower half has the cell bodies that give rise to
the axons innervating muscles of facial expression for the lower half of
the face. This is an exception to the “double coverage” safety
mechanism, which means that if a lesion occurs (e.g., stroke, tumor)
affecting the corticobulbar fibers in one hemisphere, the effects will be
seen in the contralateral lower face. This is most clearly manifested as a
droopy half of the lower face with marked impairments in raising that
lip corner. The motor nucleus that sends projections out to innervate
muscles of the upper face receives corticobulbar input from both
hemispheres as expected.
Cranial nerves that have ANS components have dedicated nuclei
for the particular ANS function. Specifically for the facial cranial nerve,
the superior salivary nucleus contains the cell bodies that give rise to its
parasympathetic component. This nucleus is found in the rostral medulla
adjacent to the motor nucleus of CN VII. Its fibers travel with cranial
nerve VII to innervate sublingual and submandibular glands for the

production of saliva.
Glossopharyngeal Nerve
 
Cranial nerve IX, the glossopharyngeal, is involved with the tongue and
pharynx as its name implies. It emerges from the lateral ventral aspect of
the medulla below cranial nerve VIII (refer back to Figure 4-35) and has
all three functions: sensory, motor, and autonomic. It provides sensory
information from the upper throat (i.e., pharynx) and completes the
special sense of taste by transmitting information from the posterior one-
third of the tongue (recall that the facial cranial nerve does the job for
the anterior two-thirds). You are able to gag or to be consciously aware
of a nasty sore throat, thanks to CN IX! The glossopharyngeal’s motor
component innervates some pharyngeal (e.g., stylopharyngeus) and
lingual (e.g., palatoglossus) muscles (see Chapter 10). Similar to the
facial cranial nerve, the glossopharyngeal’s autonomic component is
part of the parasympathetic nervous system and provides stimulation to
the parotid glands that produce saliva.
A 
brainstem 
nucleus 
is 
associated 
with 
each 
of 
the
glossopharyngeal functions. Fibers carrying sensory information
synapse, along with facial nerve sensory fibers, at the nucleus solitarius
already described (refer back to Figure 4-36). Fibers from this nucleus
ascend to the thalamus to synapse at the VPM nucleus for taste, tactile,
pain, and temperature sensations. The fibers then continue on via the
internal capsule to terminate at the tongue and pharyngeal regions of the
sensory homunculus of the postcentral gyrus for most of these conscious
sensations. Projections associated with taste go to the gustatory cortex as
described earlier. Efferent projections that comprise the motor
component of the glossopharyngeal nerve arise from the rostral end of a
shared brainstem nucleus found in the medulla called the nucleus
ambiguous (see Figure 4-36). The ANS fibers of the glossopharyngeal
nerve that innervate the parotid gland arise from the inferior salivary
nucleus.
Vagus Nerve
 
Cranial nerve X, the vagus, is best known to speech clinicians and

speech scientists for its prominent role in voice production, yet, as
elucidated later, the vagus is involved with numerous functions in
addition to voice. The vagus is a large, prominent cranial nerve
emerging from the lateral aspect of the medulla just caudal to the
glossopharyngeal nerve (refer back to Figure 4-35). Like the
glossopharyngeal nerve, it has all three functions: sensory, motor, and
autonomic. The sensory functions are many; those most relevant to
speech and swallowing are listed here. The vagus transmits sensation
from the mucosal surfaces of the lower pharynx, larynx, trachea and
bronchi, esophagus, and stomach. In addition, it conveys information
from a small number of taste buds around the epiglottis. This is thought
to have a protective effect from ingesting toxic substances, as these taste
buds pick up bitterness.
As alluded to above, cranial nerve X innervates all of the intrinsic
muscles of the larynx (e.g., lateral and posterior cricoarytenoids,
interarytenoids); these are the muscles that have both their origin and
insertion within the larynx itself. Chapter 8 provides detailed coverage
of these muscles. The vagus also inner-vates all the pharyngeal muscles
with the exception of one, and all the velar muscles with the exception
of one. The stylopharyngeus (a pharyngeal muscle) is innervated by the
glossopharyngeal cranial nerve and, as mentioned previously, the tensor
veli palatini (velar muscle) is innervated by the trigeminal cranial nerve.
The vagus is a critical part of the para-sympathetic division of the ANS,
innervating glands, cardiac muscle, and the smooth muscle of blood
vessels, trachea, bronchi, esophagus, stomach, and intestines. Thus, the
vagus is involved with breathing, cardiac function, and digestive
function—critical indeed!
The vagus (which means “wanderer”) wanders throughout the body
by way of multiple branches; three of these branches are particularly
relevant to speech production as they innervate the muscles of the
velum, pharynx, and larynx. The pharyngeal branch provides motor
innervation to the velar muscles (with the exception of the tensor veli
palatini) and the pharyngeal constrictor muscles. The superior laryngeal
nerve is a branch of the vagus that further divides into external and
internal laryngeal branches. The external branch of the superior
laryngeal nerve provides motor innervation to muscles of the inferior
pharynx (i.e., inferior constrictor muscle and cricopharyngeus) and to

one intrinsic laryngeal muscle—the cricothyroid. As you will learn later
(see Chapter 8), the cricothyroid muscle is our primary muscle for
changing the pitch of our voice. The internal branch of the superior
laryngeal nerve carries sensory information from the larynx above the
vocal folds and from the tongue base and epiglottis. The recurrent
laryngeal nerve (RLN) is the primary cranial nerve branch involved
with voice. The name “recurrent” is apt secondary to the fact that the
nerve on the left side extends down toward the heart prior to looping
under the aortic arch and then ascending back up to innervate muscles
on the left side of the larynx. The RLN on the right side extends down
and loops under the subclavian artery. Understandably, the RLN is at
risk for being damaged during thoracic surgery or secondary to thoracic
trauma. The RLN transmits sensation from the larynx below the vocal
folds as well as from the superior esophagus. Importantly, it is this
branch of CN X—the RLN—that innervates all the intrinsic laryngeal
muscles with the exception of the cricothyroid.
The three different brainstem nuclei associated with the vagus are
found in the medulla. Afferent fibers bringing in the variety of
sensations the vagus is responsible for go to different nuclei depending
on the sensation. The fibers carrying taste information join the afferent
fibers from cranial nerves VII and IX to synapse in the nucleus
solitarius. As mentioned earlier, these fibers then ascend to synapse in
the VPM nucleus of the thalamus. Projections for taste sensation from
the thalamus travel to the gustatory center at the insular cortex and
frontal operculum for the conscious sensation of taste. The many fibers
carrying sensation from the viscera (e.g., organs of the thorax and
abdomen) also go to the nucleus solitarius. The fibers transmitting pain,
temperature, and touch from the inferior pharynx, larynx, esophagus,
and regions of the outer ear join afferent fibers from cranial nerve V to
synapse in the spinal trigeminal nucleus. Fibers then ascend to the VPM
nucleus of the thalamus and on to the postcentral gyrus as previously
described.
Two brainstem nuclei give rise to CN X’s efferent projections. The
nucleus ambiguous (refer back to Figure 4-36) is a shared nucleus as
mentioned earlier, giving rise also to efferent fibers of cranial nerves IX
(glossopharyngeal) and XI (spinal accessory). The fibers from this
nucleus innervate those skeletal muscles of the velum, pharynx, and

larynx served by the branches of the vagus described earlier. The dorsal
vagal nucleus (see Figure 4-36) is the major parasym-pathetic nucleus of
the brain. Fibers from this nucleus provide parasympathetic innervation
to the thoracic and abdominal viscera.
Spinal Accessory Nerve
 
Cranial nerve XI is named spinal accessory because it has a spinal
component that innervates muscles of the neck and shoulders and a
cranial component that provides assistance to the vagus nerve. The
spinal accessory cranial nerve has only a motor function. The cranial
root is the most caudally located of the cranial nerves, emerging from
the lateral aspect of the ventral medulla very near the spinal cord (refer
back to Figure 4-35). It serves to assist the pharyngeal and recurrent
branches of the vagus in innervating muscles of the velum, pharynx, and
larynx with the exception of the palatoglossus muscle. The spinal root
arises from the anterior horns of the cervical spinal cord (C1 to C5) to
innervate the muscles that turn our head (e.g., sternocleidomastoid) and
shrug our shoulders (e.g., trapezius).
Hypoglossal Nerve
 
Cranial nerve XII, the hypoglossal, is responsible for tongue movement;
therefore, it is critical in both speech and swallow function. The
hypoglossal also has only a motor component. It emerges from the
ventral medulla medial to the other medullary cranial nerves (see Figure
4-35). It provides motor innervation to all the intrinsic and extrinsic
muscles of the tongue except for the palatoglossus (CN IX’s
responsibility). In addition, the hypoglossal nerve also innervates some
of the extrinsic laryngeal muscles (also referred to as the strap muscles
of the neck), especially those involved with lowering the larynx (i.e., the
infrahyoid muscles).
Given its singular function, all efferent fibers that comprise cranial
nerve XII arise from a single nucleus. The hypoglossal nucleus is found
in the medulla adjacent to midline (refer back to Figure 4-36). This
motor nucleus receives the majority of its input from the contralateral
cerebral hemisphere via the corticobulbar tract. This, again, is an

exception to the “double coverage” rule. This means that a lesion to one
cerebral hemisphere can result in significant weakness in the
contralateral side of the tongue. For example, a right cerebral
hemisphere lesion involving the lateral precentral gyrus (see Figure 4-
39) would affect the left side of the tongue.
Swallow Function
 
The neural circuitry responsible for swallowing has much overlap with
the circuitry for motor speech function, although the reflexive nature of
swallowing dictates control by the swallow center located in the
medulla. Nonetheless, the cranial nerves discussed earlier along with
their afferent and efferent innervations are all critical. Thus, the cranial
nerves involved with swallow function include the trigeminal (V), facial
(VII), glossopharyngeal (IX), vagus (X), spinal accessory (XI), and
hypoglossal (XII). A brief presentation of swallow physiology will assist
the reader in understanding the importance of these cranial nerves and
the structures they innervate. Swallowing, or deglutition, occurs in four
stages: (1) oral preparatory stage, (2) oral stage, (3) pharyngeal
stage, and (4) esophageal stage (see Chapter 10).
The oral preparatory stage involves preparing the food and/or drink
for swallow. This includes the introduction of food to the oral cavity
requiring active involvement of the lips and the manipulation of that
food once in the oral cavity requiring additional involvement of the jaw
and tongue. Chewing, or mastication, manipulates the food into a bolus
— a cohesive mass of food in preparation of the swallow. Cranial nerves
involved with this stage of the swallow are indicated in Table 4-5 and
include the trigeminal (jaw movement), facial (lip seal and cheek
tension), and hypoglossal (tongue movement). In addition, the velum is
depressed while all this food preparation is going on so nasal breathing
can occur. This requires the involvement of the glossopharyngeal, vagus
(pharyngeal branch), and spinal accessory cranial nerves. As you can
imagine, the time for this stage varies widely and is dependent on how
much the food is enjoyed and how quickly the food is ingested.

 
The oral stage of the swallow starts the moment the bolus begins to
move from the anterior to the posterior oral cavity. This stage is quite
quick in the normal swallow, averaging about one second; this is
referred to as oral transit time. Cranial nerves involved with tongue
movement are primary during this stage (see Table 4-5). Of course, that
means the hypoglossal cranial nerve is heavily involved with assistance
from the trigeminal to maintain elevation of the jaw.
The pharyngeal stage of the swallow is largely reflexive and
considered involuntary. That is, what we think of as the swallow is
automatically initiated once the bolus reaches the posterior oral cavity
(near the region of the posterior faucial pillars; see Chapter 10).
Certainly, a swallow can be voluntarily initiated as well; although you
may be surprised that swallowing suddenly becomes more difficult
when thinking about it, especially when swallowing your saliva in
multiple successions (give this a try). This stage of the swallow involves
moving the bolus from the posterior oral cavity into the esophagus.
Multiple synchronous events must happen for this swallow reflex to
occur. The velum must elevate to close off the nasal cavity requiring
innervation of velar muscles from the trigeminal, vagus, and spinal
accessory cranial nerves (see Table 4-5). The tongue must continue to be
active in propelling the bolus toward the esophagus requiring
hypoglossal involvement. Pharyngeal muscles must be active as well,
narrowing and constricting the pharynx to assist bolus movement; this

requires innervation from the glossopharyngeal, vagus, and spinal
accessory cranial nerves. At the same time, the larynx must move up and
forward and the vocal folds must close, all to protect the airway from
bolus entry (i.e., aspiration), requiring major activity from the RLN
(recall this is an important branch of cranial nerve X) to close the vocal
folds and to draw the epiglottis down and back to cover the opening to
the larynx. The hypoglossal cranial nerve is also involved here, as it
innervates neck muscles that elevate the larynx.
The cricopharyngeus, along with fibers from the inferior constrictor
muscle, make up the sphincter muscle found at the opening to the
esophagus, collectively called the upper esophageal sphincter or UES.
The UES relaxes or opens during the pharyngeal phase to accommodate
the incoming bolus. The specific innervation of the UES continues to be
studied. The glossopharyngeal nerve, pharyngeal and recurrent branch
of the vagus nerve, and the spinal accessory nerve are all involved. Once
initiated, the swallow occurs quickly. This timing is referred to as
pharyngeal transit time (PTT).
The pharyngeal stage of the swallow is mediated by the swallow
reflex center in the brainstem. Sensations are transmitted from the
posterior oral cavity to the reticular swallowing center in the pons and
medulla. This swallow center then sends input to the motor nuclei of
cranial nerves V, VII, IX, X, XI, and XII as well as to the respiratory
centers of the medulla to coordinate the reflexive muscle activity for the
swallow with a brief cessation of breathing. Once the bolus passes into
the esophagus, the pharyngeal stage is completed and breathing resumes.
The esophageal stage of the swallow is involuntary and involves
the transport of the bolus from the superior esophagus to the stomach.
The movement of the bolus occurs through peristaltic, or wavelike,
action of the esophagus requiring 10 to 20 seconds depending on the
consistency of the food being swallowed. The parasympathetic
component of the vagus is involved with esophageal innervation below
the level of the cricopharyngeus muscle (i.e., superior opening of the
esophagus).
The special senses of taste and smell influence the swallow through
the subjective, conscious experience of taste and the stimulation of
saliva production. Taste, or gustation, has been discussed in the previous
section by covering the specific functions of each cranial nerve. By way

of review, cranial nerves VII, IX, and, to a much lesser degree, X have
afferent fibers from taste buds to the nucleus solitarius in the brainstem.
From here, fibers travel to the VPM nucleus of the thalamus and on to
the gustatory center of the insular cortex. The insular cortex also
receives projections from the olfactory system. The olfactory system
includes the last cranial nerve to be discussed, cranial nerve I—the
olfactory nerve.
The olfactory nerve is responsible for the sense of smell. It has only
this sensory function and is one of two cranial nerves that does not enter
or emerge from the brainstem (can you recall the other?). The olfactory
nerve’s cell bodies are located in the olfactory bulbs (refer back to
Figure 4-35) on the ventral surface of the frontal lobe. The sensory
receptors for smell are found in the epithelium of the nasal cavities. The
actual nerve is made up of the unmyelinated short axons projecting
through the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone (see Chapter 10) to
the olfac-tory bulb. Projections from here travel caudally to multiple
areas including the anterior medial temporal poles (primary olfactory
cortex) with secondary projections to the limbic system, orbital gyri,
insular cortex, and hypothalamus. The limbic system connects smell to
emotion and aggressive responses; the orbital gyri of the frontal lobe
connects smell to odor discrimination; the insula connects smell to taste
(recall that the gustatory center is there); and the hypothalamus connects
smell to hunger and thirst signals.
Summary
 
A foundation was laid in this chapter for you to appreciate the
importance of the nervous system in the production of speech, in the
sensory ability to hear, and in the reception and expression of language.
The chapter began by stressing, again, the necessity to understand and
use terminology, in this case neurological terms. The organization of the
nervous system into its mature form begins in neurodevelopment with
the ultimate differentiation into the cortical and subcortical components
of the telencephalon, the different thalamic regions of the diencephalon,
the three areas of the brainstem (mesencephalon, metencephalon, and
myelencephalon), and the connections to the cerebellum and the spinal

cord. The somatic and autonomic divisions of the PNS are also involved
with functions important to the speech and hearing professional, most
notably the cranial nerves and the cervical spinal nerves. These nerves,
with their sensory, motor, and autonomic components, are responsible
for the special senses of audition, balance, vision, smell, and taste. They
also serve to pick up sensations and provide motor commands for
structures and muscles involved in respiration, phonation, resonation,
articulation, and swallowing.

 
Knowledge Outcomes for ASHA Certification for Chapter 5
   Demonstrate knowledge of the etiologies of fluency disorders
(III-C)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the characteristics of fluency
disorders (III-C)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the etiologies of voice and resonance
disorders (III-C)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the characteristics of voice and
resonance disorders (III-C)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the etiologies of receptive and
expressive language disorders (III-C)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the characteristics of receptive and
expressive language disorders (III-C)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the etiologies of swallowing
disorders (III-C)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the characteristics of swallowing
disorders (III-C)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the etiologies of cognitive aspects of
communication (III-C)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the characteristics of the cognitive
aspects of communication (III-C)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the prevention related to cognitive
aspects of communication (III-C)
 

Learning Objectives
 
   You will be able to relate lesion site(s) with probable
communication disorder(s).
   You will be able to describe the medical etiologies associated
with neurogenic communication disorders.
   You will be able to define aphasia and differentiate the types of
aphasia.
   You will be able to compare and contrast cognitive-
communicative impairments associated with traumatic brain
injury and dementia.
   You will be able to define the motor speech disorders
(dysarthrias and apraxia of speech) and differentiate the types of
dysarthria.
 
 
 
Introduction
 

This chapter now applies your knowledge from Chapter 4. To
understand neurological disorders, it is necessary to understand the
neurological systems and how a lesion to those systems results in
various symptoms. The term lesion is rather generic, as it applies to any
disruption to the nervous system as a result of any etiology. As a student
of the nervous system, you will soon realize that the behaviors seen with
a given disorder are quite closely associated with the site of lesion in the
nervous system (Duffy, 2005). The notion of lesion site and its
correlation to symptomatology will be returned to in the discussion of
the various communication disorders associated with neuropathology.
Each of the communication disorders discussed in this chapter has a list
of symptoms associated with it. A symptom is a deviation from normal
function; a collection of symptoms is called a syndrome. These
communication disorders include: aphasia, cognitive-communicative
disorders, apraxia of speech (AOS), and dysarthria. Prior to
discussing the disorders of most pertinence to the field of speech–
language pathology, an overview of the many medical etiologies that
give rise to these communication disorders is presented. Brookshire
(2003) reminds us that clinicians who wish to treat individuals with
neurogenic communication disorders must have at least a basic
knowledge of the anatomy and physiology of the nervous system and
what can go wrong with it.
Neuropathologies
 
A number of traumas, disorders, and diseases of the nervous system may
result in a communication disorder. Various signs (i.e., objective data
reported by a physician) and symptoms are associated with disruption to
the nervous system (Brookshire, 2003). The signs and symptoms reflect
the location of the lesion rather than the cause. Nonetheless, the etiology
of nervous system breakdown is important as it directs medical
management and future outcomes. As you can imagine, there are many
neurologic problems that can result in symptoms specific to a
communication disorder. This chapter will highlight those that are most
often seen by speech–language pathologists.

NERVE CELLS AND GLIAL CELLS
Recall that the neuron, or nerve cell, is the basic functional unit of the
nervous system. Therefore, all disruptions involving the nervous system
impact the neuron. Nonetheless, certain pathologies specifically target
certain types of neurons (e.g., motor neurons) or parts of the neuron
(e.g., myelin sheath composed of oligodendroglia in the central nervous
system [CNS]). Three presented here are the degenerative disorders of
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), multiple sclerosis (MS), and
Parkinson’s disease (PD). In addition, various neoplasms or tumors
can occur that affect nervous system function.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is commonly referred to as “Lou
Gehrig’s disease,” named after the famous baseball player who suffered
from it. ALS is a disease of the motor neurons (see Figure 5-1). More
specifically, the motor cell bodies in the anterior horns of the spinal
cord, the cranial nerve nuclei, and the precentral gyrus are affected, as
are the motor neurons comprising the corticospinal and corticobulbar
tracts. This results in both upper motor neuron (UMN) and lower motor
neuron (LMN) symptoms. Thus, symptoms are motor and progressive in
nature. Early symptoms may manifest in limb weakness or in weakness
of the muscles of the head and neck resulting in speech and swallowing
problems. Onset of the disease is in adulthood and life span ranges, on
average, from 1 to 5 years with death usually due to respiratory failure
(Duffy, 2005).
Multiple sclerosis is primarily a disease of the white matter. In MS,
the myelin sheath degenerates but the axon remains intact as illustrated
in Figure 5-2. Recall that myelin in the CNS is made up of a particular
type of glial cell, the oligodendroglia. Although neuronal transmission
can still occur, it does so in a disrupted manner. The process of
demyelination and glial cell proliferation happens concurrently
(Bhatnagar, 2008). This results in the forming of plaques in the white
matter of the CNS with a predilection for the brainstem, periventricular
white matter, spinal cord, and optic nerves (Duffy, 2005). Symptoms
reflect the area of lesion, thus both sensory and motor systems may be
affected. MS strikes young adults usually between 20 and 40 years of
age. The exact cause is unknown, but MS is thought to be among the
auto-immune disorders. There are multiple types of MS based on disease

progression: (1) benign with sudden onset but complete or near
complete 
remission; 
(2) 
relapsing–remitting 
with 
periods 
of
exacerbation followed by incomplete or nearly full remission; (3)
chronic progressive with slow onset and continuous symptoms
worsening; and (4) malignant with severe, rapid progression (Cobble,
Dietz, Grigsby, & Kennedy, 1993; Kraft, Freal, Coryell, Hanan, &
Chitnis, 1981; both as cited in Yorkston, Miller, & Strand, 1995).
 
Figure 5-1 A normal motor unit and a motor unit affected by
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). (Reprinted with permission
from Anatomical Chart Company.)
 
Parkinson’s disease is named for James Parkinson, a British
physician who first described it back in 1817. This disease involves the
basal ganglia. More specifically, PD is a result of the degeneration of
dopamine producing neurons in the substantia nigra. Dopamine is a
neurotransmitter that plays a large role in the transmission of neural
information regarding movement. Figure 5-3 illustrates that the
substantia nigra, located in the midbrain, is functionally a part of the
basal ganglia circuit with tracts connecting it to the striatum. In the case
of basal ganglia function, dopamine is an inhibitor and works
synergistically with acetylcholine (Ach) in the striatum to regulate
movement. Cardinal symptoms of PD include bradykinesia (i.e.,

slowness of movement), rigidity, and resting tremor. Diagnosis of PD is
usually made later in life, 60 years and older although younger people
can get the disease (see Why You Need to Know box).
 
Figure 5-2 Demyelination of an axon due to multiple sclerosis.
(Reprinted with permission from Smeltzer, S.C., Bare, B.G. (2000).
Textbook of medical-surgical nursing (9th ed.). Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

 
Figure 5-3 An illustration of the dopaminergic connections of the
substantia nigra in the midbrain to the rest of the basal ganglia.
(Reprinted with permission from Bear, M.F., Connors, B.W.,
Paradiso, M.A. (2007). Neuroscience: Exploring the brain (3rd
ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Why You Need to Know
 
Parkinson’s disease is medically treated and managed through
medication such as leva-dopa (L-dopa) used to synthetically replace the
diminishing dopamine in the substantia nigra. When the medication is
working as it should, the patient is “on;” when it is not, the patient is
“off.” Following is an excerpt from actor Michael J. Fox’s (2002)
memoir called Lucky Man describing this “on/off” phenomenon:
When I’m “off,” the disease has complete authority over my physical
being. I’m utterly in its possession. Sometimes there are flashes of
function, and I can be effective at performing basic physical tasks,
certainly feeding and dressing myself (though I’ll lean toward loafers
and pullover sweaters), as well as any chore calling for more brute
forces than manual dexterity. In my very worst “off” times I experience
the full panoply of classic Parkinsonian symptoms: rigidity, shuffling,
tremors, lack of balance, diminished small motor control, and the

insidious cluster of symptoms that makes communication—written as
well as spoken—difficult and sometimes impossible. (p. 214)
 
Neoplasms refer to tumors (an abnormal proliferation of cells) of
the CNS. Tumors that originate within the CNS are almost always of
glial cell origin (called gliomas), a common type being astrocytomas.
These types of tumors are usually benign, meaning they rarely travel
away, or metastasize, beyond their place of origin. Alternatively, tumors
originating in other areas of the body may well metastasize to the CNS.
As can be seen in Figure 5-4, tumor growth in the CNS displaces
surrounding nervous tissue resulting in elevated intracranial pressure.
Symptoms will reflect the location of the tumor and may include double
vision, 
cognitive 
impairment, 
nausea, 
seizures, 
and 
headache
(Bhatnagar, 2008). Gliomas are named for the cell that gives rise to
them; in addition to astrocytomas, there are oligodendrogliomas and
ependymomas. Acoustic neuromas are tumors that arise from the
Schwann cells that comprise the myelin surrounding the eighth cranial
nerve. Lastly, although not glial in origin, tissue from the dura mater can
give rise to meningiomas.
 
Figure 5-4 Intracerebral tumor resulting in displacement of
nervous tissue. Note the mass effect on the ventricle and the
herniation of tissue at the brainstem. (Reprinted with permission
from Smeltzer, S.C., Bare, B.G. (2000). Textbook of medical-
surgical nursing (9th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.)
 

DISRUPTION OF SUPPORTING SYSTEMS
Recall that the blood supply, meningeal coverings, and ventricular
system all act to support the work of the CNS. These systems do not
communicate neural information but are critical to the neuron’s ability to
do so. Disease and injury can disrupt these support systems and result in
damage to the nervous tissue.
Inflammation of the meninges is called meningitis which
specifically affects the pia mater and the arachnoid mater, collectively
referred to as the leptomeninges. This includes the subarachnoid space
and the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) traveling in it. Meningitis is caused by
the entry of microorganisms by way of the blood stream into the CSF.
These microorganisms are typically bacterial or viral. Bacterial
meningitis is treated with intravenously administered antibiotics,
whereas the treatment for viral meningitis is directed more at the
symptoms than the cause because viruses do not respond to antibiotic
treatment. The onset of meningitis is rapid, over the course of a few
days, with symptoms including headache, fever, vomiting, lethargy, stiff
neck, and confusion. Otitis media, left untreated, is one of many
potential causes of meningitis (see Chapter 13 for a detailed discussion
of otitis media). Several different bacteria (e.g., pneumococcal,
haemophilus influenzae type B) are responsible for meningitis with
meningococcal bacteria being the leading cause of bacterial meningitis
in children 2 to 18 years of age (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2007).
Why You Need to Know
 
Through the practice of immunization, bacterial meningitis has been
significantly reduced. Just 20 years ago, Haemophilus influenzae type B
(Hib) bacteria was the most common form of life- threatening bacterial
meningitis in children younger than 5 years. In 1991, the Hib vaccine
was approved for infants 2 months of age. A physician training in
pediatrics today will likely never see a case of Hib meningitis. The
current incidence of Hib disease is 1.3/100,000 children; 3% to 6% of
those cases are fatal and up to 20% of surviving patients have
permanent hearing loss or other long-term sequelae. Menactra is a new

vaccine that offers protections against the meningococcal bacteria. This
vaccine is recommended for children at their routine preadolescent visit
(11 to 12 years old) and college freshman living in dorms.
“Meningococcal infections can be treated with drugs such as penicillin.
Still, about one of every ten people who get the disease dies from it and
many others are affected for life. This is why preventing the disease
through the use of vaccine is important for people at highest risk”
(Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 2007).
 
The meninges can also be impacted by physical trauma to the head
via penetration through the meninges to the brain. This is referred to as
open head injury and will be discussed later.
The ventricular system includes the choroid plexus, the ventricles,
the associated foramen, the subarachnoid space, and the CSF that flows
through it all. Any disruption of this system results in a buildup of CSF
and associated increase in intracranial pressure. Disruptions can take
two forms: a blockage somewhere in the flow of CSF or an inadequate
drainage of the CSF into the venous sinuses. Both of these problems
result in hydrocephalus.
There 
are 
two 
types 
of 
hydrocephalus. 
Communicating
hydrocephalus refers to a breakdown of the drainage mechanism of the
CSF into the sinuses, whereas noncommunicating hydrocephalus results
from an obstruction to CSF flow from the ventricles to the subarachnoid
space (Bhatnagar, 2008). The most common site of occlusion is at the
cerebral aqueduct and is typically caused by surrounding brain tissue
edema or the presence of tumors (Brookshire, 2003). Regardless of the
cause, hydrocephalus results in increased CSF pressure, thereby
enlarging the ventricles and shifting the surrounding brain tissue out of
the way. Communicating hydrocephalus is also referred to as “normal
pressure hydrocephalus” (Bradley, 2002) because it is not accompanied
by increased intracranial pressure. Infantile hydrocephalus results in
enlarged head size. In infants, the cranial sutures (see Chapter 10) are
not yet fused, so the increased intracranial pressure results in an
expansion of the cranium. Hydrocephalus is often surgically treated
quite successfully. The typical treatment for noncommunicating
hydrocephalus is the placement of an intraventricular shunt that drains
excess CSF from the ventricular system to the patient’s neck or

abdomen as seen in Figure 5-5.
Blood supply to the brain is an absolutely critical supporting
system. The most common vascular disease interrupting this blood
supply and resulting in communication disorders is stroke or
cerebrovascular accident. Stroke occurs when there is a sudden
disruption of blood supply to the brain, thus cutting off oxygen and
glucose to the nervous tissue. This decrease in oxygen is called
ischemia. If the blood supply is returned fairly rapidly (i.e., within
hours) and there are no residual symptoms, this is referred to as a
transient ischemic attack (or event) (TIA). If the loss of blood supply
lasts too long, the resulting effect is an area of infarct. In regard to the
CNS, an infarct is a localized area of dead nervous tissue.
Figure 5-6 illustrates various examples of cardiovascular disease
that can lead to stroke. There are different types of strokes related to
their etiologies— ischemic stroke and hemorrhagic stroke. Ischemic
stroke is further subdivided as thrombotic or embolic in nature.
Thrombosis refers to the gradual buildup of material, typically plaque on
arterial walls that ultimately occludes the artery. This is often a result of
atherosclerosis, which refers to the process whereby fatty deposits,
cholesterol, calcium, and other substances build up within the walls of
an artery (American Heart Association, 2007). This buildup first creates
a severe narrowing of the artery lumen (called stenosis) prior to total
occlusion (see Figure 5-6B). Figure 5-6C pictures a thrombus as a result
of such plaque buildup on an arterial wall. Illustrated in Figure 5-6D is
an embolus, which refers to material traveling in the blood stream until
it gets to an artery or capillary too narrow to pass through. Varied
embolic material exists such as blood clots due to heart disease or a
breaking off of plaque buildup in the carotid or vertebral arteries.
Infarcts due to ischemia account for roughly 80% of strokes, the
remaining 20% are due to hemorrhage.
Most simply, hemorrhage refers to a burst blood vessel (see Figure
5-6E). Here, we are concerned with a burst blood vessel in the CNS. The
impact of this bleeding is twofold: (1) the nervous tissue beyond the
point of hemorrhage does not receive its oxygen and glucose and (2) the
pooling of blood puts pressure on surrounding nervous tissue and shifts
it out of the way; this is referred to as a mass effect. Hemorrhages are
labeled according to where they occur; three locations of hemorrhage are

shown in Figure 5-7. Hemorrhages can occur within the meningeal
layers, that is, epidural, subdural, and subarachnoid. Those associated
with the dura are typically caused by blows to the head as in traumatic
brain injury (TBI). Hemorrhages can also occur subcortically; these are
called intracerebral (or parenchymal) hemorrhages. Frequent sites of
intracerebral hemorrhage include the thalamus, basal ganglia,
cerebellum, or brainstem (Duffy, 2005). A common precursor to this
type of hemorrhage is chronic high blood pressure (hypertension).
Another antecedent to hemorrhage is the presence of an aneurysm (see
Figure 5-8). An aneurysm is a weakening of the arterial walls so that
they begin ballooning out over time. A ruptured aneurysm is often the
cause of subarachnoidhemorrhage (Duffy, 2005). Lastly, abnormally
formed capillary beds (arteries and veins) called arteriovenous
malformations can result in weakened vessel walls and become
enlarged to the point of rupture.
 
Figure 5-5 A. Shunt placement for infantile hydrocephalus. B.
Shown are normal ventricles and enlarged ventricles as a result of
hydrocephalus. (A. Reprinted with permission from Bear, M.F.,
Connors, B.W., Paradiso, M.A. (2007). Neuroscience: Exploring

the brain (3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins. B. Reprinted with permission from Anatomical Chart
Company.)
 
Why You Need to Know
 
Risk factors for stroke fall into treatable and untreatable categories.
Untreatable risk factors include the greatest risk factor, age. Males and
females have similar rates of stroke once women are postmenopause.
Family history and race play a role especially in blood clotting
disorders. Race also influences dietary habits. Medical conditions such
as a previous stroke or heart attack also increase risk. Treatable risk
factors are those variables that can be changed or controlled; changing
certain behaviors can help to prevent stroke from occurring. These
include treating medical conditions such as high blood pressure,
cardiac arrhythmia, and the occurrence of TIAs. Lifestyle factors that
increase stroke risk include smoking, type II diabetes, hyperlipidemia
(too much fatty tissue in the blood stream), and obesity (Reinmuth,
1994).
 

 
Figure 5-6 A normal, healthy artery and cutaways of arteries
illustrating cardiovascular disease. A. Normal, healthy artery. B.
Buildup of plaque within an artery. C. Thrombosis. D. Embolus. E.
Hemorrhage.
 
 

Figure 5-7 Three sites of hemorrhage affecting the brain.
(Reprinted with permission from LifeART image copyright ©
2010. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. All rights reserved.)
 
 
Figure 5-8 An aneurysm of the middle cerebral artery. (Reprinted
with permission from Anatomical Chart Company.)
 
CEREBRAL HEMISPHERES
A number of neuropathologies cross neural systems and affect multiple
nervous system functions. Three of these will be discussed here:
encephalitis, TBI, and dementia. In all cases, cognitive and limbic
system functions are especially vulnerable to disorder.
Generalized brain tissue inflammation most often due to viral
causes is termed encephalitis. This viral infection of the brain tissue
causes swelling, especially in the temporal lobes. A common viral cause

is the Herpes simplex virus, but there are a number of other viruses that
may result in encephalitis. Symptoms are similar to meningitis including
severe headache, confusion, and fever sometimes accompanied by
drowsiness, irritability (in children), and seizures. Medical treatment for
encephalitis involves the administration of antiviral agents if the cause is
Herpes simplex; otherwise, the treatment is primarily symptomatic.
Survivors of encephalitis may have neurological deficits in the areas of
cognition, motor abilities, vision, and epilepsy as well as associated
behavioral and emotional changes.
Brain damage refers to any type of injury to the brain from any
cause and at any age, whereas TBI refers to brain damage as a result of
physical trauma. There are two categories of TBI: open (penetrating)
head injury and closed (nonpenetrating) head injury (see Table 5-1).
Open head injury results from a penetrating wound to the head that
pierces through the protective meningeal layers and impacts brain tissue.
Examples of this type of injury include gunshot wounds or depressed
skull fractures. The effects of penetrating head injuries are largely focal,
but the physical force of the trauma to the brain also sets up impact-
induced shock waves that propagate through nervous tissue (Kirkpatrick
& DiMaio, 1978).
 
Closed head injuries (CHIs) are the result of blunt trauma to the
head along with linear and rotational acceleration of the brain within the
skull. This movement results in the stretching of axons and blood
vessels (Strich, 1961) as well as the back and forth movement of the
brain within the cranial cavity. As a result, lesions due to CHI can be

focal or diffuse. Focal damage is most likely to occur when the brain is
in motion due to the mechanical forces associated with the brain shifting
forward into the anterior and middle cranial fossa (see Chapter 10;
Adams, Graham, Murray, & Scott, 1982).
Concussion, contusion, hematoma, and ischemic brain damage are
among the discrete effects of CHI. A concussion is the most minor of
brain injuries. It results in an alteration of consciousness for a short
period of time and may be accompanied by a disturbance of vision or
equilibrium. A contusion is a more serious consequence of head injury
caused by the impact of the brain and skull during trauma. Contusions
result from minor hemorrhages or tearing of blood vessels at the site of
impact and are generally associated with blows or falls. The most
vulnerable areas for contusion are the orbitofrontal, anterotemporal, and
lateral temporal cortices (Sohlberg & Mateer, 2001). The TBI term coup
refers to the contusion at the site of impact, and the term contrecoup
refers to the contusion opposite the site of impact as illustrated in Figure
5-9. For example, if the site of impact is the left hemisphere
orbitofrontal cortex, the expected contrecoup contusion would be the
right hemisphere posterior occipital lobe. Another discreet lesion as a
result of TBI is a hematoma, an accumulation of blood. Hematomas are
named for their location such as “epidural” or “subdural.” Lastly, areas
of brain tissue can be affected by ischemia with the most susceptible
areas being boundary zones between the anterior cerebral artery (ACA)
distribution and the middle cerebral artery (MCA) distribution.
 

Figure 5-9 Coup and contrecoup focal areas of contusion in head
injury. (Reprinted with permission from LifeART image copyright
© 2010. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. All rights reserved.)
 
Although there are a number of discreet or focal lesions that may
occur as a result of TBI, the diffuse lesions may have the most lasting
impact on function. Diffuse lesions refer to damage to the brain that is
not localized to one particular region. These lesions are the result of
damage to the nerve fibers (i.e., axons) or the generalized effect of
hypoxia. The damage and shearing of CNS white matter is referred to as
diffuse axonal injury (DAI). Hypoxia refers to decreased oxygenation of
neural tissue resulting from systemic hypotension (low blood pressure),
increased intracranial pressure, or secondary to seizure activity or
cardiopulmonary compromise (e.g., heart attack). Patients typically
present with a mixed type of damage, that is, both focal and diffuse,
although one type usually predominates.
Why You Need to Know
 
Computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
are the primary neuroimaging tools used for diagnostic purposes in
clinical settings. In addition, newer technologies are built upon these
imaging techniques. CT scans make use of a series of x-ray images or
slices allowing for different cross sections of the live brain, or body, to
be viewed. Although CT scans do not produce pretty pictures, they are
incredibly useful in detecting abnormalities such as an infarct following
a stroke or the occur-rence of a hemorrhage. Alternatively, MRIs
produce an image that has much better resolution, or picture, using an
imaging technique that draws upon magnetic properties of hydrogen
atoms in our body to, again, view sections of the live brain or body. In
the case of TBI, the x-rays used with CT are preferable to detect skull
fractures while MRI is preferable to detect DAI.
 
Dementia is a disorder characterized by a progressive decline in
cognitive abilities that typically strikes in later years. Difficulty with
memory is typically one of the earliest and most devastatingly affected
of the cognitive processes. In addition to memory, an individual must

evidence other deficits including at least one of the following: apraxia,
agnosia, aphasia, or executive function impairment. In turn, these
multiple deficits impact the individual’s ability to carry out social and
occupational roles (American Psychiatric Association, 1994). Dementias
can be grouped as cortical dementias or subcortical dementias according
to the primary locale of brain damage. Dementia of the Alzheimer’s type
is classified as a cortical dementia and accounts for approximately 50%
of the cases seen (Katzman & Bick, 2000). It is progressive and
irreversible. Life expectancy after diagnosis ranges from 3 to 23 years
with an average of 8 years (Lubinski, 2005).
 
Figure 5-10 Microscopic brain tissue changes in Alzheimer’s
disease. A. Amyloid plaques. B. Neurofibrillary tangles. (Reprinted
with permission from Anatomical Chart Company.)
 
Alzheimer’s dementia results in progressive atrophy of the cerebral
cortex due to the breakdown of neurons at the cellular level.
Predominate pathologies at the cellular level include the presence of
neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles which are shown in Figure
5-10. Neuritic, or amyloid, plaques are a result of clumps of beta-
amyloid protein fragments that congregate in the extracellular space
throughout the CNS. These plaques are thought to stimulate free radical
production and, in turn, cause neuronal cell death (Cummings, Vinters,
Cole, & Khachaturian, 1998). The tangles refer to intracellular twisted
strands of tau protein. Tau protein functions in normal cells to promote
axonal growth and development (Cummings et al., 1998). Even though
AD is classified as a cortical dementia affecting neurons in the medial

temporal lobe and widespread association cortices, these histologic
changes also occur subcortically, particularly in the hippocampus.
Neuronal cell death in certain nuclei leads to a disruption of
neurotransmitter production particularly affecting the cholinergic
system. ACh is the neurotransmitter of the cholinergic mechanism. ACh
in the CNS is involved with learning and memory. This has become a
promising area of neuropharmacological research and therapy (Massey,
2005). This combination of neuronal cell death and ACh depletion leads
to the dementia syndrome of the Alzheimer’s type.
More recent research has explored the role of genes in causation of
Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Genetics is a predominant factor in early-
onset AD, also referred to as familial AD, which typically affects
individuals from 30 to 60 years of age. The genetic difference is due to a
mutation of specific genes resulting in an individual having a 50/50
chance of getting the disease if their parent had it. The genetic mutation
causes abnormal proteins to be formed in a cell; in the case of AD, more
beta-amyloid protein is formed and, as indicated earlier, this protein is
part of the plaques leading to cell breakdown. More common, however,
is late-onset AD, occurring after the age of 60. Genetics still play a role
but not nearly as strong. In this case, genetic variants increase the risk
of developing the disease. This risk is related to a gene called the
apolipoprotein E gene (APOE); there are three forms of this gene with
APOE €4 most directly related to increasing the risk of developing AD.
Better understanding of the role of genes in AD is a priority of research.
For more on the role of genes and other causative factors associated with
this devastating disease, access the information provided by the National
Institutes of Health (www.nih.org).
Why You Need to Know
 
The exact cause, and therefore prevention, of AD is unknown at this
time. However, research has discovered associated risk factors. Like
heart disease and stroke, there are untreatable risk factors such as age
and genetics. Treatable risk factors include overall cardiovascular
health (e.g., cholesterol levels, blood pressure) and diabetes control.
Nonmedical variables under our control include educational level,
social engagement, cognitive stimulation (e.g., doing puzzles, reading

the newspaper, going to museums), and aerobic exercise to increase
oxygen to the brain. Although it is not known whether any of these
activities will actually prevent the onset and progression of AD, it
certainly will not hurt and will definitely help decrease risk of other
health conditions such as heart disease or depression.
 
Pick’s disease is another type of cortical dementia and is grouped
under a broader heading of dementias called frontotemporal
dementias. Pick’s disease is named for the neurologist, Arnold Pick,
who first identified the pathology back in 1892. Thus, the abnormal cells
involved with this disease are referred to as Pick cells; these cells
include abnormal deposits of the tau protein which are referred to as
Pick bodies. Interestingly, in this dementia, the affected areas of the
cortex remain localized to the frontal and anterior temporal lobes, which
is different from the diffuse cortical atrophy associated with dementia of
the Alzheimer’s type. Because of this localized damage, early symptoms
are associated with emotion and language functions.
A type of dementia that can be cortical, subcortical, or a
combination is that resulting from vascular disease. In fact, this type of
dementia is referred to as vascular dementia or multi-infarct dementia.
This type of progressive cognitive loss is a result of multiple “mini-
strokes” throughout the brain having a cumulative effect on function.
Dementias of the subcortical classification are associated with
degenerative diseases of the basal ganglia. Huntington’s disease affects
the telencephalic basal ganglia and results in devastating movement
disorders and, ultimately, dementia. As already discussed, Parkinson’s
disease (PD) is primarily a movement disorder but, in some cases, the
disease can also be accompanied by an associated dementia.
All of the neuropathologies just reviewed may result in a
communication disorder. These communication disorders may be due to
a breakdown or damage to cortical language regions (e.g., aphasia), to
various motor nuclei and tracts (e.g., apraxia or dysarthria), or to
widespread cortical and subcortical mechanisms supporting cognitive
and limbic functions (e.g., cognitive-communicative impairments). It
should be noted here that an individual may present with multiple
communication disorders at a given time. The next section of the chapter
presents each of these disorders by making reference to typical

neuropathologies resulting in the disorder, defining the disorder, and
explaining its subtypes.
Neurologic Communication Disorders
 
APHASIA
Aphasia refers to language impairment as a result of brain damage to the
language dominant hemisphere, almost always the left hemisphere. The
language problems are primarily in form (phonology, morphology, and
syntax) and in content (semantics) for both expression and reception.
The pragmatic function of language is largely intact for individuals with
aphasia, as many skills that govern and regulate language use are housed
in the right hemisphere of the brain. The brain damage is typically due
to an ischemic stroke to the language-dominant hemisphere. However,
aphasia can also be the result of any lesion affecting the perisylvian
region, referred to as the language zone (see Figure 5-11). Stroke due to
hemorrhage, tumors such as gliomas, or focal lesions due to TBI can
also result in aphasia.
A stroke can occur anywhere within the CNS, but the middle
cerebral artery (MCA) is particularly at risk for embolic ischemic
strokes. This is due to the MCA being almost a direct continuation of the
internal carotid system and, therefore, any plaque or clots moving in the
blood stream up toward the brain tend to travel this path prior to
becoming lodged and occluding an artery. Recall that the arterial
distribution of the MCA includes the majority of the lateral cortex of the
frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes for both right and left hemispheres.
In the language-dominant hemisphere, such a stroke results in language
impairment. The type of impairment depends on where along the arterial
distribution the stroke occurs.

 
Figure 5-11 The perisylvian language zone. (Reprinted with
permission from Anatomical Chart Company.)
 
Aphasia can be further defined as an acquired language impairment
affecting both expressive and receptive abilities. Expressive modalities
of language include verbal (i.e., spoken) and graphic (i.e., written)
expression. Receptive modalities of language include auditory and
reading comprehension. In addition, the interpretation and use of
gestures for communication are affected. All of these language
modalities are affected to some degree in aphasia, although the severity
across modalities is influenced by the size and site of the lesion (i.e.,
brain damage). In fact, aphasias are classified into subtypes based on
effects to the various modalities. For example, an individual with an
ischemic stroke involving the left hemisphere inferior frontal gyrus
would likely evidence signifi-cant deficits in expression and less severe
deficits in comprehension. Conversely, a stroke affecting the left
hemisphere superior temporal gyrus would likely result in significant
deficits in comprehension but better verbal expression skills.
Nonetheless, both scenarios would show problems across all modalities.
The most basic way to classify the aphasias is into nonfluent and
fluent types. These types are correlated to a general site of lesion and
broadly differentiated by symptomatology (see Table 5-2). Persons
presenting with nonfluent aphasias have lesions to the inferior frontal
lobe involving Broca’s area, the anterior insular cortex, and surrounding

tissues. These individuals have concomitant motor symptoms of
contralateral hemiparesis of the limbs; typically right-side hemiparesis,
as the left hemisphere is language dominant in the vast majority of
people. In addition, due to unilateral upper motor neuron (UUMN)
involvement, a contralateral lower facial droop and tongue weakness is
expected. Persons with fluent aphasias have lesions involving the
superior temporal lobe often extending into the inferior parietal lobe.
These individuals do not show motor impairment but may have visual
field deficits consistent with a lesion involving the optic radiations of the
primary visual pathway.
 
Nonfluent versus fluent distinctions are made based on
characteristics of verbal output. A nonfluent speaker uses language the
way a text message via a cell phone may be written—with the fewest
words, grammatical markings, and punctuation to get the message
across. Hence, a nonfluent speaker has more content (e.g., nouns and
verbs) than functor words (e.g., conjunctions, prepositions, and articles)
present in their speech. This symptom of aphasia is referred to as
agrammatism, which literally means “without grammar.” As the
nonfluent label implies, their speech is effortful with many hesitations,
revisions, and interrupted melody. These speakers are usually quite
aware of their errors, which may in turn increase frustration or decrease
their willingness to attempt to speak. Alternatively, fluent speakers
sound good. Their speech is produced without effort and has appropriate

melodic contours. Grammatical markings are present although their use
may be in error; this symptom is called paragrammatism. Inferred
from verbal output and lesion site, the symptom that most impacts the
communication of fluent speakers is their decreased comprehension.
They may manifest this by behaviors such as failing to respond
appropriately to verbal input, being unable to follow commands, giving
quizzical facial expressions, and/ or making requests for repetition. Also
evident is their decreased ability to monitor their own speech and make
self-corrections. Table 5-2 provides a summary list of the expected
language characteristics associated with the nonfluent and fluent
classifications.
Multiple types of aphasia fall under these broad categories of
nonfluent and fluent. Traditionalists in aphasia use a classification
scheme developed by Geschwind and others out of the Boston School of
Medicine (Goodglass, 1993). This scheme further classifies aphasia into
syndromes (a collection of symptoms) based on (1) lesion site, (2)
fluency, (3) speech, (4) word retrieval, (5) repetition, and (6)
comprehension (Brookshire, 2003). Symptom patterns across these
categories result in the classification. The different aphasia syndromes
broken down according to their fluent or nonfluent verbal output are
Nonfluent: Broca’s aphasia, transcortical motor aphasia, and global
aphasia; Fluent: Wernicke’s aphasia, conduction aphasia, transcortical
sensory aphasia, and anomic aphasia. Each type is briefly discussed
next, but you are referred to texts devoted to aphasia for further
discussion of this classification scheme and the use of these labels to
describe aphasia (e.g., Brookshire, 2003; Goodglass, 1993)
Nonfluent Aphasias
 
Broca’s aphasia is named for the physician, Paul Broca, who first
documented speech and language deficits due to brain damage involving
the language dominant hemisphere. This syndrome results from a lesion
to Brodmann areas 44 and 45. Verbal output is nonfluent and
agrammatic with effortful and halting speech, most likely due to a motor
programming disorder called apraxia of speech (AOS) that often
cooccurs with Broca’s aphasia (AOS will be discussed later in this
chapter). Word retrieval is considered fair for content words but often

masked by speech difficulty. Speech repetition (i.e., immediately
repeating a word or phrase) is marked by misarticulated and halting
speech. Writing abilities may be the stronger output modality, as graphic
language abilities will not be compromised by AOS but the dominant
writing hand may be motorically involved. Auditory and reading
comprehension is fair to good as compared with expressive abilities.
Transcortical motor aphasia is the result of white matter tracts
being disconnected from cortical language centers in the frontal lobe;
hence, this is often referred to as anterior isolation syndrome
(Brookshire, 2003). Lesions are to the anterior superior frontal lobe,
Brodmann areas 8 and 9. Individuals with this type of aphasia are
nonfluent speakers who lack initiation exemplified by severely impaired
spontaneous speech (LaPointe, 1994). Speech abilities and word
retrieval are variable while repetition abilities are remarkably strong.
Comprehension is good relative to expression.
Global aphasia, as the name implies, is a result of a large,
widespread lesion to the perisylvian language zone as a result of
blockage at the proximal MCA. Individuals with this type of aphasia are
nonfluent and may have severely limited verbal output called verbal
stereotypes (e.g., “where where,” “da wanni,” “nuts”), overlearned or
automatic phrases (“one, two, three …”) or expletives. Written output is
also extremely limited. Word retrieval is poor as is their ability to repeat.
In keeping with the global nature of the deficit, comprehension is also
poor.
Fluent Aphasias
 
Wernicke’s aphasia, a type of fluent aphasia, was named for Karl
Wernicke, an early localization-ist, who, like Paul Broca, found
particular language symptoms associated with damage to the brain. In
contrast to Broca’s area, Wernicke’s area is located in the posterior
superior temporal gyrus of the language dominant hemisphere,
Brodmann area 22. Damage to this region results in fluent, yet empty,
verbal productions with unintended word substitutions. These
substitutions are called verbal (or semantic) paraphasias, and may or
may not be related to the target word (e.g., television/computer vs.
fork/computer). Word retrieval is poor as is repetition with the presence

of these paraphasias. In fact, individuals with Wernicke’s aphasia may
produce words not found in their language called neologisms. A string
of neologisms along with inappropriate use of real words is referred to
as jargon. As expected, comprehension is poor; therefore, awareness of
these errors is often not present. This decreased awareness may result in
effusive output of speech, referred to as press of speech or logorrhea.
Similar to the transcortical motor aphasia described earlier,
transcortical sensory aphasia results from damage to white matter tracts
cut off from posterior language zones and has been referred to as a
posterior isolation syndrome. Site of lesion is associated with the
posterior superior parietal lobe, Brodmann area 7 or around the complex
association areas of the parietal–temporal–occipital (P-T-O) lobes.
Verbal output is fluent but empty with variable speech; they may
evidence verbal paraphasias. Word retrieval is poor but repetition skills
are remarkably intact. Comprehension is poor.
Conduction aphasia is most likely a result of a lesion impacting the
arcuate fasciculus, the tract connecting Wernicke’s to Broca’s area.
Verbal output is fluent and good but may include literal (or phonemic)
paraphasias. In literal paraphasia, an individual unintentionally
substitutes phonemes in the target word or transposes phonemes in the
target word (e.g., domtutor for computer or comtuper for computer). The
production of literal paraphasias impacts a fair ability to retrieve words.
Interestingly, repetition is significantly impacted because of the
disconnection between the comprehension and formulation/production
centers for language. That is, problems with repetition are due to the
disconnection rather than comprehension as these individuals have
relatively intact comprehension abilities.
Anomic aphasia is the mildest of the aphasia syndromes and is
associated with “… lesion sites that are remote from each other”
(Goodglass, 1993, p. 214). Goodglass indicates possible lesion sites
resulting in anomic aphasia to include the frontal lobe, the angular
gyrus, or the inferior temporal gyrus, with each of these sites resulting in
slightly different versions of anomia. Verbal output is fluent, but word
retrieval is only fair with verbal paraphasias evident. This impaired word
retrieval is also apparent in writing. Repetition and comprehension is
fair to good relative to verbal expression.

 
Table 5-3 highlights a language characteristic of each syndrome
that assists in making an accurate classification. That said, it should be
noted that even experienced diagnosticians often cannot classify an
individual’s aphasia into a syndrome type. In fact, the accuracy of
identified syndrome is quite dependent on the rigor of the classification
criteria used and ranges from 30% to 80% accuracy (Goodglass, Kaplan,
& Barresi, 2001).
COGNITIVE-COMMUNICATIVE DISORDERS
 
“Cognitive-communicative disorders encompass difficulty with any
aspect of communication that is affected by disruption of cognition”
(American 
Speech-Language-Hearing 
Association, 
2005, 
p.1).
Disrupted cognitive processes that can impact communication abilities
include attention, memory, reasoning, and executive function. The
neurologic underpinnings for these functions rely on complex
association areas, that is, the prefrontal cortex and P-T-O cortex and
their connections to one another and the limbic system. Thus, any
pathology that impacts these systems can result in a cognitive-
communicative disorder. These pathologies include stroke, TBI,
dementia, anoxia, meningitis, encephalitis, tumors, and hydrocephalus.
Although many types of trauma or disease may result in disrupted
cognition, the expected pattern of disruption differs. Following is a
discussion of the cognitive deficits associated with communicative

breakdown due to right hemisphere brain damage, TBI, and dementia.
Right Hemisphere Syndrome
Similar to aphasia, right hemisphere syndrome (RHS) results from a
collection of symptoms displayed following damage to a cerebral
hemisphere. In this case, the damage is to the nondominant hemisphere
for language, most often the right hemisphere. In most of the patients
seen, the damage is due to stroke. However, right hemisphere damage
can be incurred due to other causes such as focal brain injury, tumor, or
other disease processes.
Much has been written about hemispheric differences. For
example, analytical and logic-oriented people have been referred to as
“left hemisphere thinkers,” whereas more creative and intuitive people
have been called “right hemisphere thinkers.” This tendency to
categorize people according to hemispheric dominance is associated
with their style of thinking. Although oversimplified, there is some truth
to this notion. The left hemisphere is associated with more linear
processing, perceiving detail, and being heavily involved in linguistic
encoding and decoding and the motor planning for speech.
Alternatively, the right hemisphere processes information more
holistically with parallel processing, enabling us to see the gestalt or
“big picture.” Thus, the right hemisphere excels in the simultaneous
integration of information and is heavily involved in visual perception
and spatial relationships. As the famed author Carl Sagan (1977)
reminds us, we need both hemispheres to function optimally as human
beings:
 
There is no way to tell whether the patterns extracted by
the right hemisphere are real or imagined without subjecting
them to left hemisphere scrutiny. On the other hand, mere
critical thinking, without creative insights, without the search
for new patterns, is sterile and doomed. To solve complex
patterns in changing circumstances requires the activity of
both hemispheres: the path to the future lies through the
corpus callosum. (p. 191)

 
 
Individuals with RHS have been described as having language
without communication (Burns, 1985). These individuals have most of
their linguistic abilities intact, masking what can be more subtle
cognitive deficits. The problems associated with damage to the
nondominant hemisphere for language, most typically the right
hemisphere, fall under the broad categories of visuospatial deficits,
affect and prosody, and higher cognitive functions. The cognitive
functions impacted are most likely grounded in difficulties with
attention and integration (Myers, 1999). Myers has characterized a
“typical” individual with RHS as displaying the following: (1) adequate
superficial conversation; (2) flat voice or affect; and (3) communication
partner perceptions of inattention, insensitivity, and poor pragmatics or
use of language (e.g., eye contact, turn taking).
Visuospatial Deficits
 
One of the most interesting deficits seen following right hemisphere
damage is that of neglect. Neglect is defined as the failure to report,
respond, or orient to novel or meaningful stimuli contralateral to the side
of lesion; hence, left hemispatial neglect may be present with right
cerebral hemisphere damage. What makes this complex disorder
fascinating is the interplay of multiple perceptual and cognitive systems
including attentional mechanisms, intention, awareness, and internal
mental representations (Brookshire, 2003). The most severe neglect has
been associated with lesions to the right parietal lobe especially
posterior inferior lesions (Mesulam, 1981), but the frontal lobes are also
implicated. Individuals present with many behavioral symptoms of
neglect including (1) failure to respond to stimuli in the left hemispace
(i.e., to the left of body midline); (2) attending only to the right side
during activities of daily living such as dressing the right half of their
body or only eating food from the right side of their plate; and (3) motor
behaviors such as bumping into doorways and walls to their left (Myers,
1999). Neglect can also directly affect the communicative acts of writing
and reading with writing oriented on the right side of the page or reading
only the words presented to right of midline.

A number of other perception-based impairments can be part of
RHS. Constructional impairments reflect difficulty in drawing,
copying, or utilizing objects in constructing figures and products.
Constructions evidence distortion and disorganization and may reflect
impairments in attention, perception, and neglect. Prosopagnosia refers
to an inability to recognize familiar faces and is associated with right
temporal occipital lesions with long-term difficul-ties associated with
bilateral lesions (Benson, 1989). Denial of illness, termed anosognosia,
is a common sequela of right hemisphere damage and is correlated with
parietal lobe damage. The extent of denial varies among patients,
ranging from indifference toward their deficits to complete denial of
ownership of their very own limbs (Brookshire, 2003).
Affect and Prosody
 
Individuals with RHS may exhibit symptoms of flat affect exhibited in
decreased facial expression as well as lack of prosodic contours in their
speech. Interestingly, these problems are not only expressive but also
receptive. That is, individuals with RHS also exhibit difficulties
“reading” facial cues, body language, and the prosodic features of
others’ speech. Hence, many adults with RHS have difficulty using and
appreciating emotion in daily life situations (Brookshire, 2003).
Emotional competence involves both mood and affect. Mood is the inner
emotional state, whereas affect is the external manifestation of mood.
The limbic system is clearly involved with emotion and mood, but the
ability to appropriately express emotion (via affect) and to interpret
others’ emotions seems to be mediated by the nondominant hemisphere
for language, that is, the right hemisphere for most adults (Tucker &
Frederick, 1989).
The prosodic disturbances often seen are referred to as aprosodia
—deficits in the ability to both understand and produce prosodic
features. Prosody is part of speech production. It includes the perceptual
features of pitch, loudness, and duration in speech. Acoustically, the
speech signal is altered in frequency, intensity, and timing, respectively.
These alterations come together to provide the contour or intonation of
speech that, in turn, signals meaning. The combination of aprosodia and
disturbed emotional expression and interpretation is a part of the matrix

of RHS.
Higher Cognitive Functions
 
Individuals with RHS exhibit impairment in attention and integration. In
fact, Myers (1999) postulates that difficulties in attention and integration
may be at the root of many of the symptoms individuals with RHS
manifest.
The right hemisphere is dominant for arousal mechanisms that
direct us to attend to important stimuli in our environment. For example,
the frontal eye fields (represented in Brodmann area 8 in the superior
frontal lobe) are involved in orienting the movement of the eyes and
head to the contralateral space (Bhatnagar, 2008). Following right
hemisphere damage, many individuals evidence problems with focusing,
sustaining, and shifting (i.e., alternating and dividing) attention. Because
attention is a fundamental cognitive process that supports other
cognitive and language tasks, the impact of deficits here can be seen in
issues of neglect, emotion, reading, writing, and pragmatics.
The diminished ability to pull together relevant details while
ignoring irrelevant details to integrate information and draw inferences
is a distinguishing feature of RHS. The impact of this lack of integration
on discourse abilities was noted in 1979 when Myers described the
discourse of individuals with right hemisphere damage as “… wending
[italics added] their way through a maze of disassociated detail,
seemingly incapable of filtering out unnecessary information” (cited in
Myers, 2005, p. 1147). She further described the communication deficits
of individuals with RHS, when they exist, as being irrelevant and often
peppered with excessive information and literal responses to questions
and events. Further research has determined that these individuals are
able to make simple inferences, but difficulty is seen with generating
inference in less predictable and novel situations.
Pragmatics refers to the social use of language and follows
conventional rules in a given society. These rules include use of
personal space, appropriate turn taking and eye contact, and maintaining
topic and appropriate topic switching. Pragmatic problems are not
always present following right hemisphere damage (Lehman-Blake,
Duffy, Myers, & Tompkins, 2002). When they are, these individuals

exhibit problem behaviors such as decreased eye contact, giving up their
conversational turn, inappropriately terminating conversations, and
engaging in excessive and ego-oriented speech (Kennedy, Strand,
Burton, & Peterson, 1994; Prutting & Kirchner, 1987). Nonetheless, as
Lehman-Blake et al. (2002), Kennedy et al. (1994), and Brookshire
(2003) remind us, pragmatic impairments may or may not be present.
Therefore, it is important to (1) understand the individual’s pragmatic
style prior to injury and (2) undertake a careful analysis of pragmatic
skills.
Traumatic Brain Injury
The deficits seen following TBI are as widespread and varied as the
injury itself. Recall from a previous section that TBI is a result of a
combination of focal and diffuse damage to the brain due to some
outside force. The damage can be further complicated by the body’s
reaction to the trauma (e.g., intracranial pressure) and other secondary
factors (e.g., anoxia). Although focal effects of TBI can result in the
communication disorders of aphasia, dysarthria, and those associated
with RHS, the focus here will be on the cognitive sequelae most often
noted with TBI. Alternatively, other pathologies can result in similar
cognitive symptomatology as in TBI. These include meningitis,
encephalitis, and anoxic events (e.g., near drowning or excessive
bleeding). Attention, memory, and executive functions are nearly always
affected with associated problems in speed of processing, reasoning, and
problem solving. Although not focused on here, personality changes and
behavioral symptoms (e.g., impulsivity) are also common following
TBI. Attention, memory, and executive functions share neural systems
and are especially vulnerable to injury in TBI (Sohlberg & Mateer,
1989). These are the anterior frontal and temporal brain regions
mentioned earlier. Recall, however, that these areas connect to other
brain regions via tracts. For example, connections between limbic
system structures such as the cingulate gyrus and subcortical systems
such as the thalamus have been implicated in higher level attentional
mechanisms (Mateer & Ojemann, 1983).
Medical recovery following TBI occurs in more of a stepwise
fashion as compared with vascular disease such as stroke (Brookshire,

2003). Recovery following TBI has a predictable course, but time to
move through stages of recovery varies and is dependent on a number of
variables such as severity of injury and secondary effects. A common
scale utilized to make gross judgments of recovery level is the Rancho
Los Amigos Levels of Cognitive Functioning Scale, traditionally an
eight-point descriptive scale (revised to include two advanced levels of
recovery) to determine functional severity based on behavioral
symptoms and to denote amount of assistance required to function
(Bushnik, 2000; see Table 5-4).
Why You Need to Know
 
The best way to “treat” TBI is to prevent it from happening or at least
decrease the impact of injury. One way to do this is to put laws in place
that require the use of protective equipment such as child safety seats,
seat belts, and compulsory helmet use for motorcycle and bicycle riders.
Improving highway safety and imposing speed limits also prevents or
lessens the impact of TBI. Special playground surfaces help as well.
When a brain injury does occur, improved emergency technology and
paramedic skill along with swift medical response such as helicopter
transport work to lessen the effects of the injury.
 
Attention, or the ability to concentrate, refers to one’s ability to
scan, select out, and respond to relevant stimuli in the environment and
maintain this behavior over time. Ability to focus, screen out
distractions, and sustain attention is foundational to other cognitive
processes. For example, if you do not attend to new information in the
classroom you will not be able to encode (“store”) that information for
future retrieval. As alluded to, there are different attentional
components. Some of these components are more foundational (e.g.,
focused, sustained, and selective attention), while others require control
and manipulation (e.g., alternating and divided attention) (Sohlberg &
Mateer, 2001; see Table 5-5). The interested reader is referred to
Sohlberg and Mateer (1989, 2001) for a detailed explanation of their
clinical model of attention.

 
Memory relates closely to attention and can be defined as stored
knowledge and the processes for making and manipulating that stored
knowledge (Bayles, 2006). Various memory models have been
postulated based on stages of memory or content of memory. In the
stage model, memory is thought of as having different levels. Attention
to the stimuli to be remembered is the first step. Encoding is the next
step which refers to the “… level of analysis performed on material to be
remembered” (Sohlberg & Mateer, 2001, p. 163). This analysis may be
phonological in the case of verbal material or graphic in the case of
visual material. Transferring new information for retention and later
access is referred to as storage. Retrieval refers to the ability to search,
find, and activate existing memories. Different types of memory exist

and are stored.
 
These stored memories are referred to as retrospective (or long-
term) memories and can be described based on the content recalled.
Declarative memory refers to memory for consciously recalled facts
(also referred to as explicit memory). There are three types of declarative
memory: episodic memory, semantic memory, and lexical memory.
Memories of events that are time and place specific are episodic
memories, such as recalling your dinner experience last night (e.g.,
when you ate, who was there, what you had). Semantic memories are the
long-term storage of concepts and general world knowledge. These
types of memories are made throughout life experiences and cannot be
equated with a specific time or place, for example, “knowing” that a
garden is composed of plants cared for by people. Lexical memory
refers to memory for words such as word meaning, spelling, and
pronunciation (Bayles, 2006).
Nondeclarative memory refers to unconscious recall (also referred
to as implicit memory). Two types of non-declarative memory are

procedural memory and priming. Procedural memory can be roughly
equated with “motor memory,” as it refers to one’s ability to carry out
overlearned motor sequences such as driving a stick shift, planting a
flower, or carrying out computer command sequences without thinking.
Priming refers to the notion that previous exposure to information
readies the brain to recall associated information.
Some types of memory are interdependent on executive functions,
to be discussed in the next section. One is prospective memory or
“remembering to remember,” that is, remembering to carry out a task in
the future. The second type is called metamemory and can be thought
of as “memory about memory” or having knowledge and making
judgments about one’s own memory abilities. This type of memory is
called upon when learning new information as personal judgments are
made regarding acquisition of knowledge. For example, this type of
memory is used when studying for an exam. Another type of memory
that requires executive functions is working memory. Working memory
takes information from the senses (e.g., auditory, visual) and relates that
to stored semantic memories that are retrieved for comparison purposes.
In addition, working memory is involved in making judgments about the
worthiness of encoding incoming sensory information to store long
term. The location of memory in the brain is widespread and dependent
on specific type of memory. Table 5-6 lists areas of the brain associated
with various types of memory.
Executive functions allow us to put our thoughts and desires into
action. Consider the job of a good company executive; that executive
generates plans and actions to reach certain company goals. To do that
the executive delegates tasks and oversees, or monitors and controls,
progress toward goals, making adjustments when necessary. Executive
functioning can be viewed as having an umbrella function over the other
cognitive processes of attention, memory, and reasoning. Components of
executive function include anticipation and goal selection, organization
and planning, initiation, awareness and self-monitoring, and use of
feedback to make adjustments to plans.

 
 
Dementia
Individuals suffering from dementia, of many types, will demonstrate
communication difficulties grounded in their cognitive decline. The
various disease processes noted earlier (e.g., Alzheimer’s, Pick’s
disease, multi-infarct) result in dementia and the associated cognitive-
communicative impairment. A popular scale for grossly rating cognitive
decline following dementia diagnosis is the Global Deterioration Scale

(Reisberg, Ferris, de Leon, & Crook, 1982); Table 5-7 presents the
levels for this scale.
The earliest symptoms of AD are changes in personality (e.g.,
becoming defensive) and memory. Early impairments are reflected in a
breakdown of episodic memories and executive functioning especially at
the level of working memory. Working memory requires sustained
attention and is a component of executive functioning (Sohlberg &
Mateer, 2001). Individuals with dementia have difficulty holding on to
what was just heard or seen to make these judgments and/or encode
information into long-term memories (Bayles, 2006).
Santo Pietro and Ostuni (2003) present the characteristics of
communication loss across the stages of Alzheimer’s type dementia in
regard to memory, understanding, speech and language skills, and social
skills. The following is summarized from their work.
The communication deficits during the early stage of dementia are
relatively mild and reflect the memory problems already mentioned.
Individuals lose their orientation to time, their ability to retrieve recent
memories, or their ability to use short-term memory to hold on to a short
list or a phone number. Conversation may seem abrupt or they may
become argumentative. This may be due to decreased abilities to
comprehend more complex or rapidly presented information. They may
lose their train of thought and have difficulties keeping up with
conversation. Word retrieval is affected, but at this stage, they are often
aware of errors and make attempts at self-correction.
Communication during the middle stage is quite affected and
difficulties are immediately obvious. Orientation is impacted for both
time and place; however, they still know who they are. Memory
problems become more apparent in conversation with more egocentrism
and less perspective taking, less questioning, less initiation, and rare
self-correction. Auditory and reading comprehension is impacted
although they retain the ability to read extra-linguistic cues (e.g., facial
expressions). Individuals at this stage also retain the mechanics of
reading such as in oral reading and demonstrate the ability to
comprehend at the single word or the short phrase level in a meaningful
context (Bourgeios & Hopper, 2005).
Communication is devastated in the late stage of Alzheimer’s type
dementia. All orientation is lost: person, place, and time. They cannot

form new memories nor even recognize family members. Awareness of
the rules of social engagement is lost as is a desire to communicate. In
fact, at this stage, the patient may lose speech production and
comprehension altogether and appear to be mute.
Primary 
progressive 
aphasia 
(PPA) 
is 
a 
subtype 
of
frontotemporal dementia, labeled as such because of the areas of the
brain that are degenerating. PPA differs from the clinical picture seen
with Alzheimer’s dementia, as it manifests itself in progressive decline
of language abilities followed by a decline in cognition. The term
aphasia applies because the initiating symptoms are in language. It
differs from aphasia associated with stroke or other focal lesions due to
its (1) insidious onset; (2) focal affect on the language-dominant
hemisphere; (3) progressive worsening of symptoms; and (4) ultimate
cognitive involvement. In addition to the progressive aphasia,
progressive AOS has also been noted with certain individuals (Duffy,
2005). AOS is a motor speech disorder that will be discussed in the next
section.
MOTOR SPEECH DISORDERS
A myriad of speech disorders are associated with lesions involving the
motor centers and pathways of the central and peripheral nervous
systems. Recall from Chapter 4 the many structures, tracts, and nerves
responsible for planning and executing motor actions. Centrally, these
include the premotor cortex, the anterior insular cortex, the precentral
gyrus, the corticospinal and corticobulbar tracts, the basal ganglia, the
cerebellum and associated tracts, the brainstem (i.e., cranial nerve motor
nuclei), and the spinal cord (i.e., anterior horns). Peripherally, recall the
motor component of the cervical spinal nerves and the cranial nerves
involved with motor execution. These are the trigeminal (V), facial
(VII), glossopharyngeal (IX), vagus (X), spinal accessory (XI), and
hypoglossal (XII). Any neuropathology that affects these systems has
the potential to result in a motor speech disorder; thus, stroke, tumor,
degenerative disease, or TBI may result in a motor speech disorder.
Motor speech disorders are defined as “… speech disorders
resulting from neurologic impairments affecting the motor planning,
programming, neuromuscular control, or execution of speech” (Duffy,

2005, p. 6). There are two motor speech disorders: AOS and dysarthria.
Duffy defines AOS as a “… motor speech disorder characterized by a
disturbance in motor planning or programming of sequential movement
for volitional speech production” (p. 5) and dysarthria as a “… speech
disorder characterized by disturbances in speech muscle control due to
paralysis, paresis, weakness, slowness, incoordination, and/or altered
muscle tone” (p. 5). These same motor problems resulting in speech
difficulties are often also manifested in other parts of the body. For
example, an individual with uncoordinated speech may also show
uncoordinated body movements. Thus, individuals with these disorders
look like they have motor problems.
Apraxia of Speech
AOS is rarely found in isolation; rather, it is typically concomitant with
aphasia. This makes sense when one thinks of the lesion sites associated
with AOS. Lesions resulting in this motor speech disorder are always in
the language-dominant hemisphere but not necessarily localized to one
particular region. Nonetheless, AOS is most often seen following lesions
to the third frontal convolution, or Broca’s area, with the anterior insular
cortex often implicated as well (Miller, 2002). This is consistent with the
speech description of those with nonfluent aphasia described earlier in
this chapter. Second, the supplementary motor area is important for
planning and programming of volitional movements (Duffy, 2005).
Other areas of lesion have also been implicated in AOS such as
subcortical lesions involving the basal ganglia or regions of the parietal
lobe including the somatosensory cortex and the supramarginal gyrus
(Square-Storer & Apeldoorn, 1991). These areas are responsible for the
integration of sensory information, a prerequisite for skilled motor
activity (Duffy, 2005).
The process of motor planning and programming can be looked at
as a sort of bridge between language formulation and motor execution
(Halpern, 2000). A problem in language formulation is aphasia; a
problem in motor execution is dysarthria; a problem with the bridge is
AOS. This bridge seems to require a “… transformation of the abstract
phonemes to a neural code that is compatible with the operations of the
motor system” (Duffy, 2005, p. 309). This transformation is responsible

for “… connecting the inner language processes into the endless number
of speech utterances” (Halpern, 2000, p. 218). A breakdown in this
motor process results in interesting speech symptoms.
Individuals with AOS have speech output that reflects a
concentrated effort to sequentially and volitionally produce phonemes
for intelligible speech. Wertz, LaPointe, and Rosenbek (1984) describe
this speech as consisting of “islands” of fluent, intelligible speech
interrupted by periods of effortful, off-target groping for the speech
sounds. These islands of fluent speech are usually automatic phrases that
are produced without thinking. For example, a client may be struggling
to say a target word when all of a sudden he says “gosh, this is just so
hard!” perfectly clear. However, when asked to repeat that utterance, he
is unable to do so without hesitation and effort.
Speech output secondary to AOS can be described in regard to
articulatory disturbance and prosodic disturbance. Symptoms evident in
articulation include inconsistent trial and error responding, increased
difficulty with increased utterance length and complexity, and frequent
speech sound substitutions. Symptoms resulting in the disrupted
prosodic contours of speech include slow speech rate, hesitations, and
difficulty initiating speech (known as articulatory groping).
Dysarthria
 
Dysarthria is actually a syndrome or a collection of motor speech
symptoms reflective of the disturbed motor system. Darley, Aronson,
and Brown (1975) completed a seminal study and subsequently
published a now classic text categorizing and describing six types of
dysarthria that are very specifically related to site of lesion (a seventh
type was described years later). It is important to note that it is the site of
lesion rather than the etiology of the lesion that determines the type of
dysarthria. For example, a brainstem stroke, ALS, or an acoustic
neuroma can all result in symptoms associated with flaccid dysarthria.
The original six types of dysarthria are flaccid, spastic, ataxic,
hypokinetic, hyperkinetic, and mixed. The seventh type, a relatively
mild dysarthria, is named for its lesion site—unilateral upper motor
neuron (UUMN) dysarthria. Unlike AOS, dysarthria reflects impairment
in the ability to execute motor movement for speech production. Also

unlike AOS, dysarthria often affects all speech processes—respiration,
phonation, resonation, articulation, and prosody— whereas AOS
primarily impacts articulation and prosody. Speech characteristics
associated with the disrupted processes for dysarthria are highlighted in
Table 5-8. Each of the subtypes of dysarthria, along with its correlated
lesion site, is described next.
UUMN dysarthria results from lesions to the UMNs and is the
mildest of the dysarthrias. More specifically, the lesion involves
disruption to the tracts carrying neural information to the brainstem and
spinal cord. Symptoms of UUMN are seen contralateral to the site of
lesion and are manifested in lower facial weakness and tongue
weakness. For this reason, articulation is most often impacted. However,
lesions to UMNs may also result in damage to tracts that are important
for posture, muscle tone, and reflexes (Duffy, 2005). Because of the site
of lesion, these individuals often present with aphasia and/or AOS. In
fact, interventions for those communication disorders are a priority over
a mild dysarthria.

 
Spastic dysarthria results when bilateral lesions to the UMNs
occur. Bilateral lesions result in significant dysarthria and are also called
pseudobulbar palsy. This is because the lesion occurs above the level
of the brainstem (i.e., the bulbar region). These bilateral lesions result in
lack of inhibitory neural information reaching the cell bodies that give
rise to the LMNs in the brainstem and spinal cord. This, in turn, results
in muscle weakness, too much muscle tone (i.e., hypertonia) with
limited range of movement, and exaggerated reflexes. The pathology
involved is often bilateral strokes or TBI, but other etiologies (e.g.,
degenerative disease) account for some cases.
Lesions affecting the LMNs result in flaccid dysarthria. Recall that

LMNs include motor neuron cell bodies (located in the brainstem or the
spinal cord), the peripheral nerves (cranial nerves or spinal nerves), the
neuromuscular junction, and, end with the muscle fibers innervated.
Lesions occurring anywhere along the LMN can result in flaccid
dysarthria; thus, etiologies vary. These include, but are not limited to,
brainstem stroke, TBI or other induced trauma (e.g., surgeries), ALS,
myasthenia gravis (a disorder of the neuromuscular junction), and
muscular dystrophies. In contrast to spastic dysarthria, there is decreased
muscle tone (i.e., hypotonia), muscle weakness, and atrophy of the
affected muscles. The extent and severity of speech systems affected are
contingent on site of lesion. If a lesion occurs peripherally, closer to the
innervation of the targeted muscle, then the symptoms will reflect that
interruption. For example, if the recurrent laryngeal branch of the vagus
nerve is damaged during thoracic surgery, symptoms will be specific to
the phonatory system. Alternatively, symptoms are more pervasive and
severe when a lesion occurs higher up (i.e., at or near the brainstem),
thus impacting multiple cranial nerves. In this case, all speech systems
will likely be affected.
Ataxic dysarthria results from damage to the cerebellum and/or the
tracts associated with it. Degenerative disease, stroke, TBI, and tumor
are the most common causes of lesion. Recall that the cerebellum is
responsible for coordinating movement through the control of range,
force, direction, and timing of movements. When this is disrupted,
movements become uncoordinated and lack synergy. In fact, the
resulting dysarthria is often described as “drunken speech.” This lack of
coordination crosses all speech systems, especially impacting the
prosodic features of speech.
Hypokinetic dysarthria is caused by damage to the basal ganglia
system, specifically involving the substantia nigra. This is the dysarthria
associated with the degenerative disorder of Parkinson’s disease (PD).
The name refers to the decreased (hypo) movement (kinetic), or
bradykinesia, seen in PD. Additional motor symptoms include muscle
rigidity, resting tremor, and difficulty initiating movement. It is common
to see individuals with PD presenting with stooped posture, decreased
facial expression (i.e., masked facies), and a shuffle in their walk (i.e.,
festinating gait). Most speech processes are affected with notable
symptoms in phonation and articulation.

Hyperkinetic dysarthria is classified into two types of dysarthria
that are both a result of involuntary movements but named for the speed
of these movements. Dysarthria associated with slow, writhing
movement is called slow hyperkinetic dysarthria such as with dystonia.
These uncontrolled movements slowly build to a peak and are sustained
before subsiding. Quick hyperkinetic dysarthria is associated with
chorea. In contrast to dystonic movement patterns, choreic movements
are fast, only briefly sustained if at all, and unpredictable. Pathologies
affecting the basal ganglia and associated circuitry in the cerebral
hemispheres are responsible for hyperkinetic dysarthrias. These
pathologies include congenital cerebral palsy of the athetoid type
resulting in dystonia and degenerative Huntington’s disease resulting in
chorea. However, often times the pathology underlying these disruptive
movement disorders is unknown (Duffy, 2005).
Mixed dysarthrias, as the name implies, result from a combination
of two or more of the above types. This most often occurs with
degenerative disorders such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) or
multiple sclerosis (MS) or when trauma affects multiple locales of the
nervous system such as with traumatic brain injury (TBI) or multiple
strokes. The speech systems affected will vary dependent on the
combination of dysarthria types.
Swallowing Disorders
 
Swallowing impairments are referred to as dysphagia. Dysphagia has
multiple etiologies; here, the focus is on swallowing difficulties due to
acquired neurologic disorders. It is appropriate that a discussion of
dysphagia follows motor speech disorders, especially dysarthria,
because these disorders often co-occur. This is due to the impact of the
associated pathology on the motor system and the resultant affects on
the muscles across the different stages of the swallow. The pathologies
resulting in neurogenic dysphagia are similar to those mentioned
earlier and include stroke, TBI, tumors, and degenerative diseases
(Corbin-Lewis, Liss, & Sciortino, 2005). Unlike the dysarthrias, a clear
correlation between lesion site and expected symptoms does not exist
for neurogenic dysphagia. Instead, the swallowing impairment is

described based on the disrupted stage(s) of the swallow (these stages
were described in Chapter 4).
Lesions resulting in decreased or disordered movement of the
facial, labial, and lingual musculature results in oral preparatory and
oral stage impairments. Lesions involving the LMNs of the facial,
trigeminal, and hypoglossal cranial nerves will obviously result in
problems at these stages of swallow. However, lesions to higher cortical
centers, such as the UMNs, the cerebellum and its tracts, or the basal
ganglia and their tracts, can also result in problems in these stages.
Pathologies associated with these lesions are consistent with that already
mentioned. Notable symptoms include drooling, reduced mastication
and bolus formation, pocketing of food, and difficulty propelling the
bolus posteriorly to initiate the swallow. Oral transit delay can result in
food and drink passing inadvertently into the hypopharynx, entering the
laryngeal vestibule, and possibly penetrating the vocal folds (see
Chapter 8) with resultant aspiration. Aspiration is defined as food, drink,
or saliva that enters the airway (i.e., trachea) below the level of the true
vocal folds.
The pharyngeal stage is highly automatized and requires rapid
integration of multiple movements for a safe swallow to occur. The
velum elevates to close the nasopharyngeal port at the same time as the
larynx moves up and forward and the epiglottis moves down and back.
A lesion impacting the movements required for this stage of the swallow
is of priority concern as the result can be aspiration. Pathologies
affecting this stage are those that result in large, multiple, or diffuse
nervous system lesions such as multiple strokes, TBI, and degenerative
diseases (Corbin-Lewis et al., 2005). Symptoms associated with
problems in this stage include a delayed trigger of the swallow reflex
and food and drink getting hung up (called residue) in the valleculae and
pyriform sinuses. The individual with problems in this stage will often
cough or choke or, more seriously, not feel anything penetrate the
airway. When the later happens, it is referred to as silent aspiration.
The esophageal stage of the swallow requires intact function of the
upper esophageal sphincter to allow the bolus to enter and proper
motility of the skeletal and smooth muscle of the esophagus to propel
food to the stomach. Problems with this stage are primarily under the
purview of the gastroenterologist. Texts devoted to swallowing disorders

review the various disorders that influence esophageal function (e.g.,
Corbin-Lewis et al., 2005; Crary & Groher, 2003; Logemann, 1998).
Dysphagia can also be the result of limited cognition due to
neuropathology. Swallowing concerns are especially prevalent in the
later stages of dementia. Although these individuals may have adequate
function across stages of the swallow, their cognitive deficits impact
remembering to chew and remembering to swallow! This can even be a
problem earlier in the course of the disease, as they may not even
remember to eat. All of this can result in malnutrition and dehydration
for the individual which, in turn, impacts cognitive functioning as
evidenced by increased confusion and lethargy.
A stagnate bolus of food in the oral cavity impacts a safe swallow.
If chewing is not adequate, a bolus too large for safe passage into the
esophagus may enter the airway and result in aspiration and/or
penetration—an episode of choking. Likewise, holding a masticated
bolus in the oral cavity for a prolonged period of time increases the risk
of aspiration or penetration as well. Imagine someone laying down for
their afternoon nap following lunch or a snack. As you can imagine,
mealtime assistance with reminders to chew and swallow as well as
follow-up oral hygiene is absolutely critical for these individuals.
Individuals with end-stage dementia pose unique challenges in
regard to dysphagia management. At this stage, individuals may refuse
food by turning away, gagging, or spitting food out. The choice to
provide nutrition and hydration support through tube feeding or going
with a palliative care approach needs to be decided upon. At this time,
the speech– language pathologist serves an important role in educating
staff and family regarding options and outcomes. Although it may sound
unkind to withhold nutritional support, persons with advanced dementia
on tube feedings have been found to not fare any better than those
without tube feedings in regard to aspiration risk (Finucane, Christmas,
& Travis, 1999). Alternatively, palliative care refers to providing food
and/or drink that are accepted by the individual such as using ice chips
on the lips for comfort.
Summary
 

This chapter presented the many communication disorders that result
from neurologic disturbance. The neuropathologies that can result in
communication breakdowns are also many and varied including
cardiovascular 
incidents, 
trauma, 
and 
disease. 
The 
resultant
communication disorders can be in language (e.g., aphasia), cognition
(e.g., disorders secondary to right hemisphere damage, TBI, or
dementia), speech (e.g., AOS, dysarthria), or any combination. Key to
this discussion of the various neurogenic communication disorders is
understanding the neurological substrates associated with the various
disorders. Referring back to Chapter 4 of this part will greatly assist you
in connecting neuropathology to neuroanatomy and physiology.
Conversely, understanding various neurological disorders assists in
meaningful application of the detailed information presented in Chapter
4.
Clinical Teaser—Follow-Up
At the beginning of this part, you were asked to note any terms or
concepts in the case study that were unfamiliar to you. As you read
Chapter 4, you were to pay particular attention to the anatomy and
physiology pertinent to this case. Now we return to the case for further
discussion.
Following the format of Chapter 5, we can interpret this case
regarding etiology, neuropathology, and resulting communication
disorder(s). Sisi suffered an ischemic stroke affecting the frontal branch
of the middle cerebral artery. Based on site of lesion and symptoms,
brain areas damaged included the left precentral gyrus (Brodmann area
4), the third frontal convolution (Brodmann areas 44, 45), and the
anterior insular cortex. The lesion may have extended into subcortical
white matter as well. Information from the speech–language evaluation
leads to the conclusion that Sisi evidences unilateral upper motor neuron
dysarthria and nonfluent aphasia. More information is required to
determine if apraxia of speech (AOS) is present. What information from
Chapters 4 and 5 assisted you in drawing these conclusions? What
information do you need to (1) further classify this aphasia as a
particular syndrome and (2) determine if AOS is present? Lastly, would
you expect swallowing ability to be affected and if so, which stage(s)?
 

PART 2 SUMMARY
Part 2 (Chapters 4 and 5) presented information critical to understand
the basic functions of the nervous system and what can go wrong with it
to result in a communication disorder. The understanding of the nervous
system and its pathologies prepares the reader for the subsequent
chapters of this book. The brain is the overseer of body function via the
conversion of thought to action and sensation to integration in general
and for speech production specifically. Thus, muscles of the speech and
swallowing 
mechanism—respiratory, 
phonatory, 
resonatory, 
and
articulatory—all receive innervation via spinal and cranial nerves which,
in turn, receive neural commands from higher cortical centers and
pathways. Also, sensory receptors send neural information, via spinal
and cranial nerves, to the central nervous system. This sensory feedback
includes auditory information and both conscious and unconscious
information regarding muscle position. Thus, it can be appreciated that
the nervous system allows for a continuous feed forward and feedback
mechanism for speech and swallowing through messages sent to muscle
for movement and messages received at the brain for thought and
response. Damage can occur to the nervous system in a number of ways:
by disease or by injury such as stroke or traumatic brain injury. This
damage may, in turn, result in disorders of communication. The
communication disorder is a result of where damage occurs in the
nervous system and can take the form of an acquired language disorder
(e.g., aphasia), a motor speech disorder (e.g., dysarthria or apraxia of
speech), or a cognitive-communicative disorder. There are different
types of aphasia (e.g., Broca’s aphasia) and different types of dysarthria
(e.g., flaccid dysarthria) depending on lesion site. There are also
different manifestations of cognitive-communication disorders which
are variably described based on lesion site (e.g., right hemisphere
damage), type of injury (e.g., traumatic brain injury) or disease (e.g.,
dementia). This part concludes with a brief description of the impact of
neurological damage on swallowing function across the stages of the
swallow as well as the impact dementia has on eating and swallowing.
PART 2 REVIEW QUESTIONS

1.  Describe the components of the fully developed central nervous
system using neurodevelopmental (i.e., “-encephalon”) terminology.
2.  Name two gyri and sulci associated with each of the four lobes of the
cerebrum: frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital.
3.  Describe the flow of cerebrospinal fluid beginning with the lateral
ventricles and ending with the dural sinuses.
4.  How do glial cells differ from neurons? Name four types of glial cells
and describe each one’s function.
5.  List the steps for an action potential beginning with a stimulus to the
presynaptic neuron, resulting in depolarization.
6.  Define IPSP and EPSP. What is the difference between the two?
7.  What communication disorder is most likely to result from a lesion to
the following areas of the central nervous system: brainstem,
Brodmann area 22, hippocampus, orbital gyri, and cerebellum?
8. What communication disorder is most likely to result from the
following medical etiologies: right hemisphere stroke; left
hemisphere stroke; amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Alzheimer’s
dementia; Parkinson’s disease; and encephalitis?
9.  Differentiate nonfluent aphasia from fluent aphasia.
10.  Name the three cognitive functions that are especially vulnerable to
traumatic brain injury.
11.  Contrast declarative with nondeclarative memory.
12.  Name three symptoms of middle stage Alzheimer’s type dementia
that can impact communication.
13.  Describe several ways in which dysarthria differs from apraxia of
speech.
14.  List the seven types of dysarthria and indicate the probable site of
lesion for each type.

 

 
Knowledge Outcomes for ASHA Certification for Chapter 6
   Demonstrate knowledge of the biological basis of the basic
human communication processes (III-B)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the neurological basis of the basic
human communication processes (III-B)
 
Learning Objectives
 
   You will be able to describe the framework that supports the
respiratory system.
   You will be able to describe the lungs and their linkage to the
thoracic cavity.
   You will be able to discuss the muscles that mediate inspiration
and expiration.
   You will be able to define the basic concepts involved in
respiration, including but not limited to airflow, Boyle’s law,
elastic recoil, gravity, pressure, torque, and volume.
   You will be able to explain the mechanics of quiet, vegetative
breathing.
   You will be able to discuss the differences in respiratory
mechanics between quiet, vegetative breathing and breathing to
support vocal activity.
 

 
 
Clinical Teaser
Richard is a 35-year-old teacher who comes to your speech and
language clinic complaining of an inability to produce a strong, clear
voice. It seems that every time he attempts to speak, he just does not
seem to have enough breath to speak in a clear voice for any more than a

few seconds at a time. He suspects he has asthma, but denies that there
is a family history of the disorder. Richard claims to be healthy
otherwise. When you ask him, he admits that he has been smoking for
approximately 10 years—perhaps, a pack to a pack and a half each day.
He also relates to you that his condition seems to be worse after his
three-times-weekly exercises. Finally, through further inquiry, you learn
that Richard has had chronic gastroesophageal reflux disease for well
over 15 years. You note that he presents a pronounced stridor upon
inhalation.
Being well versed in the anatomy and physiology of the respiratory
system, you suspect that a number of things could be causing the
problem. Immediately coming to mind are asthma, emphysema,
neuropathology, and paradoxical vocal fold movement (PVFM)
disorder. You suggest to your client that he get a complete medical work
up from his personal physician.
Your client does indeed follow up with your suggestion. His
primary care physician conducts a general health checkup. All medical
signs do not appear to support a diagnosis of asthma. Because of
Richard’s history of cigarette smoking, the doctor suspects that perhaps
he is in the initial stages of emphysema. The doctor refers the patient to
a pulmonary specialist for further evaluation.
The pulmonary specialist conducts a thorough assessment of
Richard, including respiratory measures (e.g., vital capacity [VC], flow-
volume loop testing) and endoscopy. An endoscopic examination
reveals no subglottic inflammation typically seen in asthma patients. In
fact, all testing seems to reveal normal structure and function of the
respiratory system. Not able to provide a definitive diagnosis, the
pulmonary specialist refers Richard to an otolaryngologist.
Taking into consideration the information that has been obtained to
this point, the otolaryngologist has Richard engage in vigorous exercise
for 20 minutes before conducting an endoscopic examination. The
doctor notices right away that Richard’s stridor is more pronounced. The
doctor begins the endoscopic exam, which immediately reveals an
abnormal adduction of the vocal folds during inhalation with a small
posterior, triangular glottal chink. Further testing supports a diagnosis of
PVFM disorder.
Note any terms or concepts in the foregoing case study that are

unfamiliar to you. As you read the first chapter of this part, pay
particular attention to the anatomy and physiology pertinent to this case,
then try to relate that information to the discussion of respiratory
pathologies presented in Chapter 7.
 
Introduction
 
Now that you have a basic understanding of the nervous system—the
battery that drives the entire speech and hearing mechanisms—it is time
to take a closer look at the three systems that comprise the human vocal
mechanism. These three are the respiratory, phonatory, and
articulatory/resonance systems. The anatomy and physiology of the
phonatory system will be discussed in Chapter 8, and the
articulatory/resonance system will be presented in Chapter 10. Your
attention is turned toward the respiratory system in this chapter.
As discussed in Chapter 4, the nervous system can be envisioned as
the apparatus that overrides the entire vocal mechanism. In other words,
each of the three systems that comprises the vocal mechanism is able to
function and contribute to the process of speech production because of
the influence of the nervous system (see Figure 6-1). The greatest
contribution the nervous system makes to the vocal mechanism is
through the innervation of voluntary muscles that comprise each of the
systems of speech production. However, the nervous system may also
influence the vocal mechanism through the autonomic nervous system.
The respiratory system can be thought of as the power source for
speech production. It is through our expired air that energy is created to
cause phonation of the vocal folds, thereby producing a complex tone
that is further modified as it passes through the vocal tract. In other
words, the respiratory system provides input to the phonatory system by
way of expired air from the lungs. In turn, the phonatory system is
responsible for producing the vocal tone (this will be discussed at length
in Chapter 8), which is then modified through the processes of
articulation and resonance (see Chapter 10) to produce speech sounds
such as consonants and vowels. The net result of these activities is
speech production.

 
Figure 6-1 A schematic overview of the speech production
mechanism.
 
The remainder of this chapter will be devoted to a thorough
discussion of the anatomy and physiology of the respiratory system. It is
expected that upon reading this chapter, you will be well versed in the
structure and mechanics of respiration.
Anatomy of the Respiratory System
 
In describing the anatomy of the respiratory system, it may be helpful to
use the analogy of building a house. First, a foundation is laid and the
house’s framework is erected. Once the framework is in place,
electricians and plumbers will install the electrical and plumbing
systems. Then, carpenters will fill the wall, floor, and ceiling spaces
with insulation. Finally, the inner and outer walls of the house will be
constructed. In many instances, the builder may install appliances prior
to completion of the house.
Take the framework first. In anatomy, the framework is the skeletal
system. The skeletal system is composed of bones, cartilages, and
connective tissue such as membranes, ligaments, and tendons. Nerves
and blood vessels can be viewed as the electrical and plumbing systems.
The house’s insulation corresponds to muscles; that is, muscles are an

integral part of the skeletal system in much the same way that insulation
is an integral part of the house’s framework. Finally, the mucous
membranes that cover the muscles, nerves, and blood vessels are
analogous to the walls of the house. Any organs that may be part of a
particular system (e.g., the lungs as part of the respiratory system) can
be thought of as the house’s appliances.
Keeping this analogy in mind, the anatomy of the respiratory
system will be presented in a logical order. First, the framework will be
discussed (i.e., bones, cartilages, membranes, ligaments, and tendons).
Then, muscles that are an important component of the system will be
presented. Following the muscles, mucous membranes and organs will
be described in detail. Finally, a brief discussion will be provided about
the neural underpinnings of the respiratory system (structures of the
circulatory system will not be discussed).
THE FRAMEWORK FOR THE RESPIRATORY
SYSTEM
The framework of the respiratory system includes five structures: the
vertebral (or spinal) column, the rib cage, the pectoral girdle, the pelvic
girdle, and the trachea and bronchial tree. These five structures will be
examined more closely in the paragraphs that follow.

 
Figure 6-2 The human vertebral column with individual vertebrae
numbered. A. Anterior view. B. Lateral view. (Reprinted with
permission from Cohen, B.J., Taylor, J.J. (2009). Memmler’s the
human body in health and disease (11th ed.). Baltimore, MD:
Wolters Kluwer Health.)
 
The Vertebral (Spinal) Column
 
The vertebral—or spinal—column makes up the axis of the human body
(see Figure 6-2). It is composed of 32 or 33 individual bones stacked
upon each other vertically. An individual bone is referred to as a

vertebra. In the upper regions of the vertebral column (i.e., the cervical,
thoracic, and lumbar regions), the vertebrae for the most part do not
actually make contact as they are stacked upon each other; instead,
cartilaginous discs (called intervertebral discs) reside between adjacent
vertebrae throughout most of the length of the vertebral column. These
discs are nonexistent in the fused vertebral structures known as the
sacrum and coccyx, which are the lowermost regions of the vertebral
column.
 
Figure 6-3 Landmarks on a typical human vertebra (superior
view). (Reprinted with permission from Cohen, B.J., Taylor, J.J.
(2009). Memmler’s the human body in health and disease (11th
ed.). Baltimore, MD: Wolters Kluwer Health.)
 
Figure 6-3 shows the landmarks of a typical vertebra. Anteriorly, a
vertebra has a corpus or body. Proceeding posteriorly from the corpus
are two legs or pedicles. The two pedicles are joined together by laminae
that form the neural arch. The pedicles and neural arch create an inner
chamber immediately posterior to the corpus. This chamber is called the
vertebral foramen. When the majority of vertebrae are stacked vertically,

this foramen becomes a passageway from the base of the skull to the
lower back. The spinal cord resides within this passageway. At the
juncture where each pedicle meets a lamina, a somewhat laterally
directed process emerges, one on the right-hand side and one on the left.
These are called transverse processes. Finally, proceeding posteriorly
from the point where the two lamina meet is another process called the
spinous process. When one runs a finger down the center of their back,
they will feel bumps along its length. These are the spinous processes.
The vertebrae are bound together by a series of anterior and posterior
longitudinal ligaments, as well as several accessory ligaments, thereby
forming the vertebral column.
In a typical adult, the vertebral column is approximately 72 to 75
cm in length. It is divided into regions and the individual vertebrae are
coded according to their sequence in any given region. Proceeding at the
base of the skull and moving toward the tail-bone, these regions are the
cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal regions.
 
Figure 6-4 Articulation of the atlas (C1) with the axis (C2).
(Reprinted with permission from Anatomical Chart Company.)
 
The cervical region is found in the neck. It consists of seven
vertebrae coded C1 through C7. C1 and C2 also have names. C1 is
known as the atlas because it articulates with the skull. Similar to the

mythological character of the same name, the atlas can be envisioned as
holding the weight of the world (i.e., the skull) on its shoulders. C2 is
also referred to as the axis because of its articulation with C1. The axis
has a special process known as the dens or odontoid process, upon
which the atlas rests and rotates (see Figure 6-4). This action allows us
to turn our head from side to side. In addition to the landmarks
mentioned earlier for a typical vertebra, the cervical vertebrae have a
distinguishing characteristic. On the proximal end of the transverse
processes are small holes called transverse foramina (C7 may or may
not have these). The purpose of these foramina is to provide a
passageway for some nerves and blood vessels as they pass through the
neck region. Incidentally, an interesting fact about cervical vertebrae is
that most mammals have the same number. This means that a giraffe and
a human have the same number of cervical vertebrae, although
obviously the giraffe’s are much larger (as much as 8½ inches in
length!).
The thoracic region of the vertebral column consists of 12 vertebrae
coded T1 through T12. As one proceeds from T1 to T12, the individual
vertebrae become larger. In addition to the typical landmarks, the
thoracic vertebrae are unique in that they house the articular facets for
the ribs. These facets can be found along the posterolateral aspects of the
corpus and the transverse processes.
The lumbar region consists of five vertebrae that are very large in
size by comparison to the other vertebrae. The large size is necessary to
support the individual’s weight. The lumbar vertebrae are coded L1
through L5. Other than their large size, the lumbar vertebrae have no
uniquely distinguishing landmarks.
The sacral and coccygeal regions consist of a number of fused
vertebrae. The sacrum is composed of five vertebrae whose discs have
ossified. The overall shape of the sacrum is somewhat like a wedge. The
sacrum contains four pairs of sacral foramina. These allow nerves and
blood vessels to pass from the pelvic region into the lower extremities.
The coccyx is the terminal region of the vertebral column and consists
of three or four fused vertebrae. Collectively, the coccygeal vertebrae
resemble a rattlesnake’s rattle.
The Rib Cage and Sternum

 
The primary organs of respiration are the lungs. The two lungs are
housed within the rib cage, also referred to as the thoracic cavity. The
rib cage is composed of 12 pairs of ribs arranged vertically (see Figure
6-5). The uppermost ribs and the lowermost ribs are somewhat smaller
than the ribs in the middle of the rib cage. This gives the rib cage a
barrel-like appearance. Anatomists refer to the individual ribs by
number along with a letter “R” to indicate “rib.” For example, the first
pair of ribs is labeled R1 and the last pair of ribs is labeled R12.
Figure 6-6 is an illustration of a typical rib. The key landmarks of a
typical rib are the shaft (the length of the rib), neck and head (the
posterior terminal end of the rib that articulates with thoracic vertebrae),
and costal groove (a depression running along the length of the shaft on
the undersurface of the rib, where blood vessels and nerves are housed).
Finally, the costal angle (also known as the “angle of the rib”) is the
abrupt change in curvature of the rib as it is bent in two directions,
causing it to appear twisted upon its axis.
Posteriorly, all 12 pairs of ribs articulate with the vertebral column.
One would think that because there are 12 pairs of ribs and likewise 12
thoracic vertebrae, each rib would articulate with its corresponding
vertebra. However, the articulations are not that simple. Table 6-1
summarizes the articulations of the ribs with the thoracic vertebrae. The
posterior articulations are between the head of the ribs and the corpora
(the plural of corpus) of the thoracic vertebrae, and between the neck of
the ribs and the transverse processes of the thoracic vertebrae (with the
exception of R11 and R12, which do not articulate with the transverse
processes). The head of each rib is held in place by the articular capsule,
radiate ligament, and interarticular ligament. The neck of each rib is held
in place by the articular capsule, anterior costotransverse ligament,
posterior costotransverse ligament, ligament of the neck of the rib, and
ligament of the tubercle of the rib. The joints formed by these
articulations are arthrodial or slightly gliding joints. Because of this
arrangement, the lateral rib cage can rotate upward and outward or
downward and inward, somewhat analogous to raising and lowering the
handle on a water bucket. This increases and decreases the transverse
volume of the thorax.

 
Figure 6-5 The human rib cage. A. Anterior view. B. Posterior
view. (Reprinted with permission from LifeART image copyright
© 2010. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. All rights reserved.)
 
 

Figure 6-6 Landmarks on a typical human rib. (Reprinted with
permission from Tank, P.W., Gest, T.R. (2008). Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins atlas of anatomy. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Unlike their posterior attachments, not all of the ribs have an
anterior articulation. R1 through R10 articulate anteriorly with the
sternum, more commonly known as the breastbone (see Figure 6-7).
The sternum is an elongated bone that has three parts. From superior to
inferior, these parts are the manubrium, corpus, and xiphoid (or
ensiform) process. Landmarks on the manubrium include the
suprasternal (or jugular) notch and the clavicular notches. The
suprasternal notch is on the superior surface of the manubrium and can
be felt by pressing down on the bone at the midline base of the neck.
The clavicular notches are on the superior-lateral surfaces of the
manubrium and are the point of articulation of the sternum with the
clavicles (or collarbones). The corpus of the sternum is the anterior point
of articulation for most of the ribs, as described more fully later. The
xiphoid process does not have a direct articulation with any of the ribs.
It is a delicate structure that should never be depressed during artificial
resuscitation.

 

 
Figure 6-7 Landmarks on a human sternum. (Reprinted with
permission from Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of
anatomy (12th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.)
 
Why You Need to Know
 
If pressure is placed directly upon the bony xiphoid process, it can break
off of the body of the sternum. Being somewhat spearheaded in shape,
the xiphoid process could be driven into the liver, resulting in a rupture
of this vital organ that may prove fatal.
 
The ribs themselves do not actually come in contact with the

sternum; rather, the articulations between ribs and sternum are
accomplished by a series of cartilages that extend from the anterior
terminals of the ribs. R1 through R7 have direct articulations with the
sternum, that is, each rib has its own cartilage that makes contact with
the sternum. Because of this, R1 through R7 are referred to as
vertebrosternal (or “true”) ribs because they have direct articulations
with the vertebral column and the sternum. R8 through R10 also have
articulations with the sternum, but these attachments are more indirect.
The cartilages for these ribs merge and join with the cartilage of R7
before making a single articulation with the sternum. Because of this, R8
through R10 are referred to as vertebrochondral or “false” ribs.
Finally, R11 and R12 do not have an anterior attachment at all. Because
their only articulation is with the vertebral column, they are referred to
as vertebral or “floating” ribs. In terms of the specific location of the
articulations for R1 through R10, R1 articulates with the lateral surface
of the manubrium immediately inferior to the clavicular notch. R2’s
articulation is at the juncture between the manubrium and corpus of the
sternum. Finally, the remaining ribs articulate with the sternum along
the lateral edge of its corpus. All costal articulations with the sternum
are held in place by a series of radiate sternocostal ligaments.
Two types of joints are formed by the articulations of the ribs with
the sternum. The joint formed by the articulation of R1 with the
manubrium is a synchondrosis, which means that the joint ossifies with
age. The joints formed between R2 through R10 and the sternum are
synovial, which allow a variety of movements. Considering the synovial
action of the ribs’ anterior articulations, the anterior rib cage can move
upward and outward or downward and inward, similarly to raising and
lowering the handle on an old water well pump. This action creates
slight increases and decreases in the anteroposterior dimension of the
thorax. It should be noted that this anterior action occurs simultaneously
with the action of the lateral rib cage by virtue of the ribs’ posterior
articulations with the vertebral column.
The Pectoral Girdle
 
The pectoral girdle refers to the bony structure in the chest region that
provides support for the upper extremities (see Figure 6-8). Two bones

comprise the pectoral girdle: the clavicle and the scapula. The clavicle
was mentioned briefly earlier. It is also known as the collarbone. There
are two clavicles: each one articulates medially with the manubrium of
the sternum at the clavicular notch. The lateral articulation of the
clavicle is with the scapula (or shoulder blade), more specifically at the
acromion which is its most lateral point. Therefore, each clavicle runs
horizontally along the shoulder from the sternum to the scapula. The two
scapulae are somewhat triangular in shape and lie dorsal to the upper
seven or eight ribs. The scapulae are literally suspended in place by their
articulations with the clavicles. Besides the acromion, each scapula has
another important landmark—the glenoid fossa. The glenoid fossa is a
crater-like depression in which the head of the humerus (the upper bone
of the arm) rests. Being inquisitive, you no doubt wonder what the
pectoral girdle has to do with respiration. The answer is that several
muscles that play a part in respiration have their origin somewhere on
the pectoral girdle. The same is true of the pelvic girdle.
 
Figure 6-8 The pectoral girdle showing the articulation of the
clavicle with the scapula. (Reprinted with permission from Tank,
P.W., Gest, T.R. (2008). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins atlas of
anatomy. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

The Pelvic Girdle
 
The pelvic girdle (see Figure 6-9) is to the lower extremities as the
pectoral girdle is to the upper extremities. It consists of a pair of coxal
bones. Each coxal bone has three parts: the ilium, the ischium, and the
pubis. The pubis from each coxal bone merges anteriorly at the pubic
symphysis. This joint is generally immovable but will “soften” in
females during late pregnancy to allow the baby’s head to pass through.
The sacrum of the vertebral column articulates with the ilium
posteriorly, forming the sacroiliac joint. The sacrum and coccyx together
with the coxal bones is referred to as the bony pelvis. The acetabulum,
a crater-like depression along the lateral aspect of the ischium, is the
point of articulation with the femur—the large, upper leg bone. Finally,
running obliquely from the anterior superior iliac spine to the pubic
symphysis on either side are the inguinal ligaments. These ligaments
separate the contents of the lower abdomen from the lower extremities.
The Trachea and Bronchial Tree
 
The trachea (or windpipe) is a singular tube composed of a series of
vertically arranged rings of cartilage that extends from the level of C6 to
T5 (see Figure 6-10). Its superior articulation is with the cricoid
cartilage, which is the base of the larynx. This articulation is held
together by the cricotracheal ligament. To articulate with the cricoid
cartilage, the first tracheal ring must be large by comparison with the
other tracheal rings. At its inferior terminal, the trachea bifurcates at the
carina, forming two main stem bronchi—one bronchus proceeds to the
left lung while the other proceeds to the right.

 
Figure 6-9 The pelvic girdle showing the spatial relationships of
the coxal bones, sacrum, and coccyx. (Reprinted with permission
from Tank, P.W., Gest, T.R. (2008). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
atlas of anatomy. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
 

Figure 6-10 Anterior view of the human trachea. (Reprinted with
permission from Premkumar, K. (2004). The massage connection
anatomy and physiology. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.)
 
In all, the trachea is composed of approximately 16 to 20
horseshoe-shaped rings of hyaline cartilage. The rings are incomplete
posteriorly; this posterior region is filled by fibrous tissue and smooth
muscle fibers. The esophagus runs immediately behind and parallel to
the trachea. The cartilaginous rings do not actually touch each other, as
they are stacked vertically. A small space exists between adjacent rings.
The spaces are filled with a fibroelastic membrane called the
intratracheal membrane. This membrane is actually double layered.
At each ring, the two layers separate. One layer covers the interior of the
trachea, while the other covers the outside. Between the rings, the two
layers come together to form a single unit. Superficial to the inner layer
of the intratracheal membrane (i.e., inside the trachea) is a mucous
membrane consisting of pseudostratified ciliated, columnar epithelial
cells. Goblet cells are also located here; their purpose is to secrete
mucous. The cilia within the mucous membrane continuously push the
mucous (and any foreign material it may trap) upward toward the
larynx. Finally, phagocytic cells assist by ingesting bacteria and other
undesirable organisms to prevent infection. With the cartilaginous rings
and intratracheal membrane taken together, the net result is a tube that is
approximately 11 to 12 cm in length and 2 to 2½ cm in diameter.
Why You Need to Know
 
The word “phagocytic” comes from the Greek term “phagein” which
literally means to eat. Phagocytic cells ingest and destroy foreign matter
such as microorganisms. As such, they could be considered the immune
system’s first line of defense against disease within the respiratory
system.
 
As mentioned earlier, the trachea terminates inferiorly by
bifurcating into two main stem bronchi. The bronchi will divide two
more times into lobar (or secondary) bronchi and then again into

segmental (or tertiary) bronchi. The three generations of bronchi form
what is known as the bronchial tree (see Figure 6-11). Only a part of the
main stem bronchi lay outside the lungs. The main stem bronchi pierce
the lung tissue at the hilum so that all further parts of the bronchial tree
are housed entirely within the lungs.
 
Figure 6-11 Anterior view of the human bronchial tree. (Reprinted
with permission from Anatomical Chart Company.)
 
The two main stem bronchi are approximately half the diameter of
the trachea. The right bronchus is somewhat larger than the left
bronchus in diameter, but it is also shorter in length. The two main stem
bronchi are similar in structure to the trachea, except that they are not
quite as cartilaginous and instead consist of more smooth muscle tissue.
The right bronchus divides into three lobar bronchi, whereas the left
bronchus divides into two.

Why You Need to Know
 
For people with the affliction, asthma is an immune system response to
certain stimuli (e.g., cold air, physical exertion, allergens) that affects
the bronchi. Spasms within the bronchi lead to inflammation of their
internal membranes. The inflammation creates an obstruction that
results in greater resistance to inspired air. This pathological condition
will be discussed in greater detail in Chapter 7.
 
Each lobar bronchus supplies a specific lobe of the lungs. Being the
astute student you are, you quickly deduce that the right lung has three
lobes while the left lung has two. Within each lung, the lobes are further
divided into smaller regions called segments. The lobar bronchi divide
into the same number of segmental bronchi as there are segments in that
lung (i.e., the three lobar bronchi of the right lung will further divide
into 10 segmental bronchi, whereas the lobar bronchi of the left lung
will divide into eight segmental bronchi).
The segmental bronchi will continue to divide approximately 20
times until the last generations are microscopic in size. As the bronchi
continue to divide, there will be less and less cartilage and more and
more smooth muscle. The last generation of bronchi gives way to the
bronchioles, which in turn give way to the terminal bronchioles. Finally,
the terminal bronchioles give way to the alveolar ducts, which open into
the air sacs where the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide takes
place at the alveoli pulmoni.
THE MUSCLES OF RESPIRATION
We turn our attention now to the muscles of respiration. A cycle of
respiration has two phases: inspiration (i.e., breathing in) and expiration
(i.e., breathing out). For each of these phases of respiration, there is a
series of muscles whose action facilitates that particular phase.
Therefore, for discussion purposes, the muscles of respiration are
categorized as either muscles of inspiration or muscles of expiration.
That said, it must be emphasized that sometimes there is not a clear
dichotomy between muscles that are inspiratory and muscles that are
expiratory. As you will see, a small number of muscles are involved in

both inspiration and expiration. For example, a small number of muscles
within the rib cage can be either inspiratory or expiratory in their
function. Similarly, the muscles we typically classify as abdominal wall
muscles (and therefore expiratory) are often active during inspiration.
In describing muscles—whether they are muscles of respiration,
phonation, or articulation/resonance—the origin and insertion are
usually highlighted as well as the action of the muscle. To act upon a
body part, a muscle must have two attachments (usually to bone or
cartilage). The point of attachment that remains relatively constant
during muscle contraction is the origin and is usually the proximal
structure. The insertion is usually the distal attachment and is associated
with the body part that moves during contraction. In some cases, the
action of a single muscle may be noteworthy because of its importance,
but in most instances, it is the action of several muscles as a group that
causes a particular body part to move. As the muscles are being
discussed in the sections that follow, these characteristics will be
described more fully. It should be noted that in the vast majority of cases
muscles are paired, even though the discussion may refer to them in the
singular case. If the discussion does not mention that a particular muscle
is unpaired, you should assume that the muscle is paired.
The Muscles of Inspiration
 
The majority of muscles involved in respiration assist in regulating
inspiration. These muscles are found throughout the thoracic region as
well as the neck. To assist you in remembering the muscles, the muscles
of inspiration have been organized into two groups: (1) primary muscles
and (2) secondary muscles. The secondary muscles are subclassified
according to their general location: (1) ventral thorax; (2) dorsal thorax;
and (3) neck. The origins, insertions, and actions of the muscles of
inspiration are summarized in Table 6-2.
Primary Muscles of Inspiration
 
Three muscles perform the greatest work during inspiration. They are
the diaphragm, external intercostals, and internal intercostals. Of these,
the diaphragm is unpaired, while the external and internal intercostals

are paired.
 

 
Figure 6-12 A superior view of the human diaphragm with
pertinent landmarks. (Reprinted with permission from Agur, A.M.,
Dalley, A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th ed.).
Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The Diaphragm
 
The diaphragm is the primary muscle of respiration, essentially being
the workhorse of inspiration (see Figure 6-12). It is a single muscle that
separates the thorax from the abdomen and is bi-domed, similarly to the
humps on a camel. The dome on the right-hand side is situated a bit
higher than the dome on the left because the liver occupies the upper
right-hand quadrant of the abdomen. The diaphragm is among the
largest muscles in the body. As it lies in place, it looks rather large and
resembles an open umbrella. However, if you were to remove the
diaphragm and spread it out flat on a table, you would note that it is
relatively thin and broad.
The muscle fibers insert into a core of connective tissue called the

central tendon, which is actually an aponeurosis that resembles a
trifoliate leaf (somewhat like the maple leaf on a Canadian flag).
Because the diaphragm separates the thorax from the abdomen, it is
perforated with several openings to allow structures to pass from the
thorax to the abdomen. Noteworthy are the (1) aortic hiatus, which
allows the aorta to pass through to the abdomen; (2) foramen vena cava,
which allows the vena cava to pass through to the abdomen; and (3) the
esophageal hiatus, which allows the esophagus to pass through on its
way to the stomach.
The diaphragm has three points of origin: a sternal portion that
attaches to the posterior surface of the xiphoid process; a costal portion
that anchors onto the lowermost six ribs; and a lumbar portion that
attaches to L1 through L3 by way of two legs called crura. Of these
three attachments, the lumbar attachment is inflexible. Since the lumbar
attachment is inferior to the body of the diaphragm, contraction will
result in the diaphragm descending toward its lumbar attachments. In
other words, during contraction, the diaphragm lowers toward the
contents of the abdomen, thereby increasing the longitudinal (or
vertical) volume of the thorax. Because of its costal and sternal
attachments, contraction of the diaphragm will also pull down on the
sternum and lower six ribs. In addition to these three points of origin, the
diaphragm also has connections to the lungs (by way of the visceral
pleura; a more thorough discussion of the pleurae can be found in the
section that describes the lungs) and the fibrous layer of the
pericardium.

 
Figure 6-13 The internal and external intercostal muscles.
(Reprinted with permission from Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008).
Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The Intercostal Muscles
 
The external and internal intercostals also play a significant role in
inspiration. As their name implies, the intercostal muscles can be found
between the ribs (see Figure 6-13). The terms external and internal refer
to their relative position to each other—the externals are superficial and
the internals are deep. The 12 pairs of ribs have 11 spaces between them.
Not surprisingly, there are 11 pairs of internal and external intercostal
muscles. The fibers of the intercostal muscles are oriented obliquely
(i.e., 
diagonally) 
although 
in 
opposite 
directions 
(essentially
crisscrossing each other). This crisscrossing of the two muscles occurs
throughout most of the distance between each adjacent pair of ribs.
However, at the sternal and vertebral terminals, only one of the two

muscles can be found. At the vertebral terminal, the external intercostals
continue all the way to the vertebral column but the internal intercostals
stop short of it. At the sternal terminal, the opposite is true. The internal
intercostals proceed all the way to the sternum, but the external
intercostals terminate approximately at the chondro-osseous juncture
(the point where the rib ends and the cartilage that continues to the
sternum begins). Any space that is not occupied by either the internal or
external intercostal muscle is occupied by connective tissue.
The external intercostal muscles are stronger than the internal
intercostals. The net action of the external intercostal muscles is to
expand the rib cage by elevating the ribs. The origin for each external
intercostal muscle is the rib immediately above, and the insertion is the
rib immediately below. As each external intercostal muscle contracts,
the lower rib to which it is attached elevates. The sum of the contraction
of all 11 pairs of external intercostals then is an increase in the
transverse volume of the thorax.
The internal intercostal muscles may actually have a dual purpose.
Not only do they apparently assist in inspiration, but they are also
thought to assist in forced expiration. The ventral fibers of the internal
intercostals (i.e., from the sternum to approximately the chondro-
osseous juncture) act in much the same way as the external intercostals.
However, the greater length of the internal intercostals (i.e., from the
chondro-osseous juncture to a few centimeters away from the vertebral
column) has the opposite effect on the ribs. Along the lateral and
posterior wall of the rib cage, the internal intercostal muscles lower the
ribs.
The intercostal muscles are thought to have an additional function
besides elevating and lowering the rib cage. Evidence seems to suggest
that these muscles also keep the intercostal spaces rigid during
respiration so that they do not bulge out during expiration or get drawn
in during inspiration (Agur & Dalley, 2005). One might expect that by
expanding the rib cage, the outward force that is placed on the ribs will
generate an inward force on the intercostal spaces. Similarly, the inward
force that is generated by contraction of the rib cage will generate an
outward force on the intercostal spaces. The intercostal muscles serve to
make the intercostal spaces rigid to prevent these forces from acting
upon them.

Secondary Muscles of Inspiration
 
In all, 14 additional muscles can be considered muscles of inspiration,
and any number of them may be called upon to assist when there is a
greater demand for air intake. All of them are paired muscles. These
secondary muscles include the lateral iliocostalis cervicis, lateral
iliocostalis thoracis, latissimus dorsi, levator costarum brevis, levator
costarum longus, pectoralis major, pectoralis minor, scalenus anterior,
scalenus medius, scalenus posterior, serratus anterior, serratus
posterior superior, sternocleidomastoid, and subclavius. In the
following sections, these muscles have been subclassified according to
their location: ventral thorax, dorsal thorax, and neck.
The Ventral Thorax
 
There are four pairs of muscles situated within the ventral thorax. These
are the pectoralis major, pectoralis minor, subclavius, and serratus
anterior (Figure 6-14 illustrates all four of these muscles). The primary
purpose of these muscles is to assist in moving the arm and shoulder.
However, they may play a minor role in respiration by assisting in deep
inspiration, such as what would occur during vigorous exercise or
yawning. The pectoralis major is a fan-shaped muscle that has three
attachments: the clavicle, the sternum, and the humerus. The clavicular
and sternal attachments are this muscle’s origin while the humerus is the
insertion. When the pectoralis major contracts and the humerus is in a
fixed position, it will elevate the sternum and with it the anterior aspect
of the ribs attached thereon.

 
Figure 6-14 Muscles of the upper thorax, including the pectoralis
major and minor, subclavius, and serratus anterior. (Reprinted with
permission from Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2005). Grant’s atlas of
anatomy (11th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.)
 
The pectoralis minor is deep to the pectoralis major and runs from
the anterior aspect of R2 through R5 to the scapula. When this muscle
contracts and the scapula is in a fixed position, the net effect will be
elevation of ribs 2 through 5.

The subclavius gets its name from the fact that it courses
immediately below and parallel to the clavicle. Its origin is the chondro-
osseous juncture of the first rib and its insertion is the inferior surface of
the clavicle. When the clavicle is in a fixed position, contraction of this
muscle will result in elevation of the first rib.
Finally, the serratus anterior is a sawtooth-shaped muscle (hence,
the term “serratus”) that has its origin on R1 through R8 (and in some
cases R9) and its insertion on the inner surface of the scapula and outer
surfaces of the ribs. When the scapula is in a fixed position and this
muscle contracts, the first eight (and in some cases, the ninth) ribs will
elevate.
The Dorsal Thorax
 
Six pairs of muscles comprise the dorsal region of the thorax. These are
the lateral iliocostalis cervicis, lateral iliocostalis thoracis, latissimus
dorsi, levator costarum brevis, levator costarum longus, and serratus
posterior superior. The lateral iliocostalis cervicis originates on the
outer surfaces of the third through sixth ribs and inserts into C4, C5, and
C6. When it contracts, it elevates ribs 3 through 6. Its partner, the lateral
iliocostalis thoracis, runs from the upper edges of R7 through R12 and
terminates at the lower edges of the first six ribs. This muscle works in
concert with the lateral iliocostalis cervicis by stabilizing the posterior
rib cage wall. The lateral iliocostalis muscles can be seen in Figure 6-15.

 
Figure 6-15 The lateral iliocostalis muscle. (Modified with
permission from Moore, K.L., Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2009).
Clinically oriented anatomy (6th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.)
 

 
Figure 6-16 The latissimus dorsi muscle. (Modified with
permission from Moore, K.L., Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2005).
Clinically oriented anatomy (5th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The latissimus dorsi muscle is wider medially than it is laterally
(see Figure 6-16). It originates at the lower thoracic, lumbar, and sacral
vertebrae and then inserts onto the upper aspect of the humerus. If the
humerus is fixed in position and this muscle contracts, it will elevate the
last three ribs.
The two sets of levator costarum muscles—the levator costarum
brevis and the levator costarum longus (see Figure 6-17)—can be found
along the posterior rib cage immediately lateral to the vertebral column.
The terms “brevis” and “longus” refer to the relative length of the
muscles. The brevis muscles are 12 in number; each rib receives a pair
of brevis muscles. The origin of the brevis muscles is on the transverse

processes of C7 through T11, with the insertion being the rib
immediately below (i.e., the first pair of brevis muscles originate on the
transverse processes of C7 and insert onto R1 and so on until the final
pair of brevis muscles originates on the transverse processes of T11 and
inserts onto R12). The longus muscles are confined to the last four pairs
of ribs. Their origins are also on the transverse processes of the thoracic
vertebrae, but their insertion is onto the second rib below (in essence
making them approximately twice the length of the brevis muscles).
With this in mind, the first pair of longus muscles originates on the
transverse processes of T7 and inserts onto R9, whereas the last pair of
longus muscles originates on the transverse processes of T10 and inserts
onto R12. As their names imply, the levator costarum muscles elevate
the posterior rib cage when they contract.
 
Figure 6-17 The levator costarum muscles (brevis and longus).
(Modified with permission from Moore, K.L., Agur, A.M., Dalley,
A.F. (2009). Clinically oriented anatomy (6th ed.). Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)

 
Finally, the serratus posterior superior is illustrated in Figure 6-18.
The term “serratus” refers to the fact that this muscle has a jagged
appearance as it inserts into the ribs. The serratus posterior superior
originates on the spinous processes of C7 through T3 and then inserts
lateral to the angle of R2 through R5. When it contracts, it elevates ribs
2 through 5.
The Neck Muscles
 
Four pairs of muscles in the neck region may contribute to inspiration.
These are the scalenus anterior, scalenus medius, scalenus posterior,
and sternocleidomastoid. All of these muscles are illustrated in Figure 6-
19. As a whole, these four neck muscles serve to elevate the first two
ribs, sternum, and clavicle. The net effect of this action is a slight
increase in the anteroposterior dimension of the rib cage, such as would
be needed for deep inhalation during strenuous exercise or yawning.
The three scalenes are among the deepest muscles in the neck.
They originate on the transverse processes and posterior tubercles of
most of the cervical vertebrae and then insert either onto R1 (the
scalenus anterior and medius) or R2 (the scalenus posterior).
Contraction of the scalenus anterior and scalenus medius will result in
elevation of the first rib, whereas contraction of the scalenus posterior
will result in elevation of the second rib.

 
Figure 6-18 The posterior serratus muscles (superior and inferior).
(Modified with permission from Moore, K.L., Agur, A.M., Dalley,
A.F. (2009). Clinically oriented anatomy (6th ed.). Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The sternocleidomastoid is an interesting muscle not only in its
architecture but also in its action. It has three attachments, as its name
implies: the sternum, the clavicle, and the mastoid process (the rounded
part of the base of the skull immediately posterior to the ear). The
primary purpose of this muscle is to allow us to turn our head from side
to side. It accomplishes this action because of how it is situated. The
mastoid process is behind the axis of the body (i.e., the vertebral
column), but the sternum and clavicle are anterior to the axis. With the
sternum and clavicle anchored, the sternocleidomastoid will pull upon
the mastoid process, thereby turning the head to one side. However, the
head turns to the side that is opposite to the muscle that is contracting.
That is, when the sternocleidomastoid on the right side of the neck

contracts, it turns the head to the left, and vice versa. If the mastoid
process is anchored, the sternocleidomastoid will slightly elevate the
sternum and clavicle.
 
Figure 
6-19 
Muscles 
of 
the 
neck, 
including 
the
sternocleidomastoid and scalenus muscles (anterior, medius, and
posterior). (Reprinted with permission from Agur, A.M., Dalley,
A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th ed.). Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
As a unified, coordinated whole, the muscles of inspiration serve to
increase the longitudinal, transverse, and anteroposterior volumes of the
thoracic cavity. Having the lungs contained within, expansion of lung
tissue will also occur in any of these three dimensions that are at work.

A more thorough discussion of these mechanics is reserved for the
section on Physiology of the Respiratory System.
The Muscles of Expiration
 
The muscles of expiration are generally located in the abdomen and are
categorized into two groups: primary muscles and secondary muscles.
The primary muscles are found within the wall of the abdomen and
hence they are referred to as abdominal wall muscles. All of the
secondary muscles of expiration (with the exception of the quadratus
lumborum) can be found within the thorax. The quadratus lumborum is
a deep abdominal muscle. Table 6-3 summarizes the origins, insertions,
and actions of the muscles of expiration.
Primary Muscles of Expiration
 
Four pairs of muscles within the abdominal wall play a part in
expiration. These are the external oblique, internal oblique, rectus
abdominus, and transversus abdominus. Removal of the epidermis of
the abdomen will reveal the external oblique and rectus abdominus
along with a network of connective tissue that binds the muscles
together. The connective tissue includes the lumbodorsal fascia
posteriorly, the inguinal ligament inferiorly, and the abdominal
aponeurosis anteriorly. Of particular note is the latter. The abdominal
aponeurosis forms the linea alba (literally, “white line”) at the midline
of the belly, coursing from the xiphoid process to the pubic symphysis.
With the linea alba positioned vertically in the middle of the abdomen,
the muscles of the abdominal wall are all paired with one on each side of
midline.

 
Upon dissection of the epidermis and connective tissue, the
external oblique and rectus abdominus are the first muscles in view. The
external oblique is the largest and strongest of all the abdominal wall
muscles (see Figure 6-20). It is broad and thin, originating on the
posterior surfaces of the lower eight ribs and terminating at the anterior
aspect of the iliac crest as well as the abdominal aponeurosis. As its
name implies, the fibers of the external oblique run in a diagonal
direction. When this muscle contracts, it pulls the lower ribs downward
and also compresses the anterior and lateral walls of the abdomen.

To be able to view the internal oblique, the external oblique and
rectus abdominus must be removed. The fibers of the internal oblique
also course in a diagonal direction, although the direction is opposite
that of the external oblique (see Figure 6-21 and compare with Figure 6-
20). The origin of the internal oblique is the lateral half of the inguinal
ligament and the anterior two-thirds of the iliac crest, whereas the
insertion is the linea alba and the 10th through 12th ribs (and in some
people, the 9th). Contraction of this muscle will pull downward on the
lower ribs and compress the anterior and lateral walls of the abdomen.
 
Figure 6-20 The external oblique and rectus abdominus muscles.
(Modified with permission from Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008).
Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The rectus abdominus is immediately lateral to the linea alba and
runs parallel to it. Along its length, the rectus abdominus is

compartmentalized by a series of tendinous inscriptions, giving this
muscle the “wash-board effect” when it is well developed. The fibers of
the rectus abdominus course vertically from the pubis to the xiphoid
process and R5 through R7 (see Figure 6-20). When the rectus
abdominus contracts, it pulls down on the sternum and ribs 5 through 7.
This muscle also assists in compressing the anterior abdominal wall.
Once the internal oblique is dissected, the deepest abdominal wall
muscle can be seen—the transversus abdominus (see Figure 6-21).
Fibers of this muscle run horizontally from the inner surfaces of R6
through R12, the diaphragm, and the transversus thoracis to the pubis
and abdominal aponeurosis. Contraction of the transversus abdominus
causes a compression of the anterior and lateral walls of the abdomen.
It should be noted that the primary purpose of the abdominal wall
muscles is to allow an individual to bend his or her body. If both
muscles in each pair contract, the body will bend forward. If contraction
is unilateral (i.e., only one of the two muscles in each pair contracts), the
body will bend in the opposite direction. In terms of expiration, if the
vertebral column is kept rigid, contraction of these muscles will depress
the ribs, thereby decreasing thoracic volume while at the same time
generating increased intra-abdominal pressure by compressing the
anterior and lateral abdominal walls.
 
Figure 6-21 The internal oblique and transversus abdominus
muscles. (Reprinted with permission from Agur, A.M., Dalley,

A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th ed.). Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Secondary Muscles of Expiration
 
There are eight pairs of secondary muscles of expiration. They include
the internal intercostals, lateral iliocostalis lumborum, lateral
iliocostalis thoracis, latissimus dorsi, quadratus lumborum, serratus
posterior inferior, subcostals, and transversus thoracis. All of these
muscles are found in the thorax except the quadratus lumborum, which
is found deep within the abdomen.
You may recall that the internal intercostals, lateral iliocostalis, and
latissimus dorsi were all described earlier in the section that described
the muscles of inspiration (refer back to Figures 6-13, 6-15, and 6-16,
respectively). These muscles play a dual role in respiration. You learned
earlier that the portions of the internal intercostals that abut the sternum
function similarly to the external intercostals, that is, they perform an
inspiratory function. However, when the lateral and posterior portions of
the internal intercostals contract, they depress the rib cage, which is an
expiratory function. Similarly, the latissimus dorsi plays an inspiratory
role when only the costal portion of this muscle contracts, but it plays an
expiratory role when the entire body of the muscle contracts. When the
whole muscle contracts, the latissimus dorsi compresses the lower
portion of the rib cage. Finally, the lateral iliocostalis is a muscle that
has three parts: cervicis, thoracis, and lumborum. The cervicis and
thoracis bundles are involved in inspiration, whereas the lumborum and
thoracis bundles are involved in expiration. The lateral iliocostalis
lumborum originates at the lumbodorsal fascia, lumbar vertebrae, and
posterior surface of the coxal bone and inserts into the lower edges of
ribs 7 through 12. When it contracts, it depresses the lower six ribs. The
lateral iliocostalis thoracis works with the lumborum bundle by simply
stabilizing the back of the rib cage (which it also does with the lateral
iliocostalis cervicis during inspiration).
The remaining three pairs of expiratory muscles within the thorax
—the serratus posterior inferior, subcostals, and transversus thoracis—

all serve to depress a number of the ribs. The serratus posterior inferior
begins on the spinous processes of T11 through L3 and inserts into the
inferior border of R8 through R12 (see Figure 6-18). When this muscle
contracts, it pulls down on ribs 8 through 12. The subcostal muscles (see
Figure 6-22) can be seen running in an oblique direction on the internal
surface of the lower ribs near their angles, in relative proximity to the
vertebral column. The specific ribs into which they insert differ from
person to person. Contraction of these muscles will pull down on the
ribs to which they are attached. Finally, the transversus thoracis muscles
resemble the legs of a spider as they extend from the posterior surface of
the sternum, xiphoid process, and R5-R7 to the posterior surfaces of R2
through R6 (see Figure 6-23). When this muscle contracts, it pulls
downward on ribs 2 through 6.
 
Figure 6-22 The subcostal muscles. (Reprinted with permission
from Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy
(12th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

The final secondary muscle of expiration is the quadratus
lumborum (see Figure 6-24). To see this muscle from the ventral side of
the body, the abdominal contents (e.g., intestines, stomach, liver) must
be removed. The point of origin for this muscle is the iliac crest and
iliolumbar ligament. Its insertion is the transverse processes of L1–L4
and the lower border of the 12th rib. Its action is thought to be to anchor
R12 during forced expiration.
NEURAL INNERVATION OF THE MUSCLES OF
RESPIRATION
In Chapter 4, you were introduced to the human nervous system. A
thorough discussion of the nervous system was provided there, and
therefore will not be provided here. However, it is important that you
understand the neural innervation of the many of the important muscles
of respiration because in many cases, pathology of the respiratory
system may be a result of nerve damage (see Chapter 7 for a more
thorough discussion of the impact of neurological impairment on
breathing).

 
Figure 6-23 The transversus thoracis muscles. (Modified with
permission from Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of
anatomy (12th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.)
 

 
Figure 6-24 The quadratus lumborum muscle. (Modified with
permission from Moore, K.L., Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2009).
Clinically oriented anatomy (6th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Table 6-4 provides a summary of most of the muscles of inspiration
and expiration and their neural connections. In all, 23 spinal nerves (8
cervical, 12 thoracic, and 3 lumbar) are involved in the motor
innervation 
of 
the 
muscles 
of 
respiration. 
In 
addition, 
the
sternocleidomastoid is innervated in part by a cranial nerve.
As was mentioned earlier in this chapter, the diaphragm is the
primary muscle of respiration, accounting for the longitudinal dimension
of thoracic cavity expansion. The diaphragm is innervated by the
phrenic nerve, which arises from the third through fifth cervical spinal
nerves. Two branches of the phrenic nerve pass through the neck in
proximity to the scalenus anterior muscle and carotid artery on their way
to the thoracic cavity. The left phrenic nerve proceeds directly to the
diaphragm to innervate it, but the right phrenic nerve passes through the

foramen vena cava at the level of T10 and then rises to meet the
diaphragm. In addition to innervating the diaphragm, the phrenic nerves
also provide sensory innervation to the mediastinum, pleurae, liver,
and gall bladder.
 
Why You Need to Know
 
Damage to the phrenic nerves will result in paralysis of the diaphragm.
Because the diaphragm is responsible for mediating longitudinal
expansion of the thorax—and hence accounts in part for tidal volume—
an individual with paralysis of the diaphragm will require a ventilator to
assist in respiration. The good news is that since the diaphragm receives

bilateral innervation, it would be difficult (although not impossible) to
completely paralyze it. That would require a pathological condition that
is more central rather than peripheral. Paralysis and its effect on the
breathing mechanism will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 7.
 
Secondary to the diaphragm, the intercostal muscles play a
significant role in the inspiratory process. Both sets of intercostals
muscles (i.e., external and internal) are innervated by the intercostal
nerves, which are formed by the anterior (i.e., ventral) rami of spinal
nerves T1 through T11. Each intercostal muscle receives its own
intercostal nerve. However, the thoracic spinal nerves innervate more
than just the intercostal muscles.
The remaining muscles of inspiration are inner-vated by various
combinations of cervical and/or thoracic spinal nerves. The pectoralis
major and minor are innervated by C5 through C8. The subclavius
receives its innervation from cervical spinal nerves 5 and 6. The three
pairs of scalenus muscles are innervated by C2 through C8. The levator
costarum muscles (brevis and longus) receive innervation from C8 as
well as thoracic spinal nerves 1 through 11. The serratus anterior
receives innervation from cervical (C5–C7) and thoracic (T2 and T3)
spinal nerves. The serratus posterior superior is innervated by T2 and
T3. Finally, the sternocleidomastoid is the only muscle that receives
innervation from a cranial nerve (the spinal accessory nerve—cranial
nerve XI). However, it also receives motor commands from cervical
spinal nerves 1 through 5.
The muscles of expiration within the abdominal wall are all
innervated by spinal nerves T7 through T12; the internal oblique and
transversus abdominus are innervated by the first lumbar spinal nerve
(L1) as well. The quadratus lumborum is innervated by T12 in addition
to L1–L3. The subcostals are inner-vated by the intercostal nerves (T1
through T11). The latissimus dorsi (which is also classified as a muscle
of inspiration) is innervated by cervical spinal nerves 6 through 8. The
serratus posterior inferior is inner-vated by T9 through T12. Finally, the
transversus thoracis receives its innervation from thoracic spinal nerves
2 through 6.
THE LUNGS AND PLEURAE

The two lungs consist of spongy, porous tissue and are housed within
the rib cage, one on the right-hand side and the other on the left (see
Figure 6-25A). Between the two lungs, posterior to the sternum, and
anterior to the vertebral column is the mediastinum, which contains all
of the thoracic viscera except the lungs (see Figure 6-25B). These
viscera include the heart and pericardium, aorta, vena cava, phrenic
nerves, esophagus, trachea, main stem bronchi, lymph nodes of the
central thorax, and lesser blood vessels and nerves. The mediastinum is
encapsulated by loose connective tissue.
A comparison between the two lungs reveals that the right lung is
larger than the left, but it is also shorter in part because of the liver
below it. The left lung is smaller because the heart occupies some of the
space of the left lung, in a concavity called the cardiac impression.
Both lungs are divided into lobes: the right lung has three lobes
separated by the oblique and horizontal fissures, whereas the left lung
has two lobes separated by the oblique fissure. You may recall from the
discussion of the bronchial tree that each lobe receives its own lobar or
secondary bronchus. Although the bronchial tree has considerable
smooth muscle tissue within it (especially as the tree divides further and
further), lung tissue has very few smooth muscle fibers. This means that
the action of the lungs is passive; that is, the lungs must rely on outside
forces to act upon them to make them expand and contract during
respiration. The interior volume of an average adult male’s lungs is
approximately 5 liters (5000 cc); in an average adult female, the volume
is approximately 4 liters (4000 cc). That is, for an adult female, the
capacity of air for each lung would be equivalent to a 2-liter bottle of
your favorite soft drink.

 
Figure 6-25 The human lungs and mediastinum. A. Anterior view
of the lungs. B. Transverse section through the lungs and
mediastinum. (Reprinted with permission from Agur, A.M., Dalley,
A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th ed.). Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
In adults, there are approximately 300 million alveoli pulmoni—
small pits or depressions within the air sacs of the lungs. At birth, there
are approximately 25 million alveoli. That number increases to the adult
number of 300 million by age 8 years, and remains at that number
throughout life. The alveoli pulmoni consist of Type I and II cells as
well as phagocytic cells. Type I cells are epithelial cells arranged in a
single layer. Type II cells are responsible for producing pulmonary
surfactant, a somewhat soapy substance that breaks up surface tension
within the alveoli during respiration. Phagocytic cells in the lungs assist
in eliminating any bacteria or other organisms that have found their way
to the alveoli. The alveoli pulmoni are engorged with an elaborate
system of capillaries where carbon dioxide is released from the
bloodstream so that it can be exhaled, and oxygen is taken up by the
bloodstream so it can be distributed throughout the body.
Why You Need to Know

 
A baby born prematurely tends to have underdeveloped lungs. For
example, Type II cells may not be fully developed, leading to a reduction
in the production of pulmonary surfactant resulting in an increase in
surface tension within the alveoli. The baby may show signs of
respiratory distress and may be placed on a ventilator until the lungs
develop more fully to allow her to breathe independently. Similarly,
underdevelopment of phagocytic cells may leave the baby susceptible to
infectious processes such bacterial or viral pneumonia.
 
Each lung is somewhat triangular in shape, with the apex extending
into the root of the neck and the base making contact with the
diaphragm. Each lung is enclosed within a double-layered membrane
called the pleurae. The pleurae that surround each lung are independent
of each other. This is a protective mechanism; if the pleura of one lung
is compromised, the other lung will not be affected. The pleurae not
only line the lungs but also line the inner surface of the rib cage,
superior surface of the diaphragm, and mediastinum. The outer layer of
each pleura lines the inner surface of the ribs and hence is referred to as
the costal (or parietal) pleura. The inner layer covers the diaphragm
and is known as the visceral pleura. The thoracic visceral pleura
continues beyond the diaphragm and is continuous with the visceral
lining of the abdomen. A potential space exists between the two pleurae;
this space is referred to as the pleural cavity or intrapleural space and
contains a serous fluid that allows the two layers to glide upon each
other without friction during respiration.
The two layers of the pleurae adhere to each other and are airtight.
This vacuum is known as pleural linkage and essentially binds the
lungs to the interior of the rib cage and to the superior surface of the
diaphragm. Approximately 75% of the surface of the lungs is in contact
with the interior wall of the rib cage. The remaining 25% is in direct
contact with the superior surface of the diaphragm as well as indirectly
with the abdominal wall muscles. This means that the diaphragm must
exhibit greater movement than the rib cage to effect comparable changes
in lung volume.
Because of pleural linkage, whenever the rib cage and/or
diaphragm are displaced, the lungs will also displace proportionately.

Analogous to Mary and her little lamb (i.e., the rib cage and the
diaphragm are Mary and the lungs are her little lamb), wherever Mary
goes, the lamb is sure to follow. This is a very important part of the
physiology of breathing.
Physiology of the Respiratory System
 
In the first half of this chapter, the physiology of respiration was alluded
to during the discussion of various anatomical structures. In this section
of the chapter, a more thorough and integrated discussion of respiratory
physiology will be presented. With a firm understanding of the
anatomical structures of respiration, you should have little difficulty
comprehending how the process of respiration takes place. The clinician
in training must be able to describe respiratory physiology as it relates to
normal, quiet breathing (referred to as vegetative breathing), and then be
able to describe the changes that take place when respiration is used for
the purpose of vocal activity. Before discussing the actual mechanics
though, you need to understand some basic concepts that are related to
breathing.
BASIC CONCEPTS
Volume, Pressure, and Airflow
 
To understand the mechanics of inspiration, you must understand some
very basic concepts. Two of these are volume and pressure. These two
concepts are integrally related to each other. According to Boyle’s law,
assuming temperature is kept at a constant, volume and pressure will be
inversely related to each other. In other words, as the value of one
increases, the value of the other decreases proportionately. This very
simple law of physics applies to gases, and of course, the air we breathe
is a gas. Figure 6-26 illustrates the relationship. Assume we have two
containers, one being larger than the other. Assume also that each
container is filled with the very same number of air molecules. Because
one container is larger than the other, its interior volume is also larger.

The air molecules in the larger container “spread out” to fill the interior
volume of that container. For the smaller container, the air molecules are
more compacted because they do not have as much interior space to
occupy as the larger container. Because the air molecules in the smaller
container are compacted, they exert a greater amount of pressure within
the container as compared with the larger container where the molecules
are not quite as compacted. If there was a way to further reduce the
interior volume of the container, the air pressure within would continue
to increase as its volume gets smaller and smaller. The inverse is also
true: if you make the container larger and larger, its interior volume will
also get larger and larger and along with it, the pressure within will
continue to decrease.
 
Figure 6-26 A schematic representation of Boyle’s law. As volume
decreases (as depicted when going from container A to container
B), air molecules are more compacted, resulting in greater pressure
within the container.
 
Now let us move from the containers to the human lungs. The lungs
are also containers of air, and their interior volume can be manipulated.
Recall from the discussion of anatomy that the lungs consist of relatively
few smooth muscle fibers, so they must be manipulated by external
forces. As the lungs expand, their interior volume increases. As the

lungs contract, their interior volume decreases. Taking Boyle’s law into
consideration, as the lungs expand, the air pressure within the alveoli
decreases because the air molecules “spread out” to occupy the
increased volume. Conversely, as the lungs contract, the air pressure
within the alveoli increases because the air molecules become more
compacted.
To understand the process of inspiration, one must also understand
fluid mechanics. The term “fluid” is used to denote any gas or liquid.
One of the principles of fluid mechanics states that a fluid will always
flow from areas of greater pressure to areas of lesser pressure. Of
course, this implies that there are two areas (referred to as gradients) of
pressure. Recall from the discussion immediately above that one
gradient of pressure is within the lungs. This is referred to as
pulmonary pressure. The other gradient of pressure is the air outside
the body—what we commonly refer to as atmospheric pressure. If
pulmonary pressure is equal to atmospheric pressure, there will be no
flow of air from one gradient of pressure to the other. However, if either
of these pressures changes relative to the other, air will flow from the
gradient of greater pressure to the gradient of lesser pressure.
Understanding these basic concepts, you are well equipped to
comprehend how inspiration takes place. Before a breath is taken, when
the lungs are at resting volume, pulmonary pressure and atmospheric
pressure are essentially equivalent. Expansion of the lungs causes their
interior volume to increase, thereby resulting in a decrease in pulmonary
pressure relative to atmospheric pressure. Because fluids always flow
from gradients of greater pressure to gradients of lesser pressure, the air
outside the body will enter the respiratory passageway and fill the lungs
until pulmonary pressure once again is equal to atmospheric pressure, at
which time airflow will cease. The individual has just “taken a breath,”
that is, inspired air.
Notice that humans inspire air by creating negative pressure within
the lungs. Because of this, humans are referred to as negative pressure
breathers. Some animals are positive pressure breathers. For example, a
frog generates positive pressure by puffing its cheeks in and out like a
piston. A frog has no diaphragm, so it cannot generate negative pressure
in its lungs.
Passive Forces

 
When the thorax expands during inspiration, several physical
phenomena are set into motion. These are referred to as passive forces
and include elastic recoil, torque, intra-abdominal pressure, and
gravity. Newton’s Third Law of Motion comes into play here. It states
that for every action, there is an opposite and equal reaction. Elastic
recoil, torque, and intra-abdominal pressure are all forces that conform
to this basic law. First, because the lungs are composed of elastic tissue,
they have the ability to be “stretched” during inspiration. Expansion of
lung tissue creates a certain force, and there is an opposite and equal
force that acts upon the lungs to collapse them. This is elastic recoil.
Second, rib cage expansion is accomplished by rotation of the ribs upon
their longitudinal axes. The force that is generated by this rotation is
known as torque. Once again, when the ribs rotate upon their axes, an
opposite and equal force exists in opposition to the torque that is created.
Third, when the diaphragm contracts, it descends toward the abdomen.
Think of the diaphragm as acting somewhat like a piston. As it
descends, it applies downward pressure on the abdominal contents,
creating what is referred to as intra-abdominal pressure. Intra-abdominal
pressure exerts itself proportionately on the inferior surface of the
diaphragm, attempting to force the diaphragm back to its resting
position.
In part, these three phenomena account for the expiratory phase of
respiration along with gravity. Gravity assists the expiratory phase by
acting upon the ribs. As the ribs are elevated during inspiration, gravity
pulls on them to lower them back to their resting position. The net effect
of these four passive forces is contraction of the rib cage, which
subsequently results in expiration. In some cases, these passive forces
are all that is needed to mediate expiration. In other cases, expiration is
more active (i.e., it requires contraction of certain muscles).
Lung Volumes and Capacities
 
Obviously, the lungs are not always completely filled with air, neither
are they ever completely empty. In fact, at rest when an individual is
between breaths, the lungs are about 40% full of air. An individual
cannot force out all the air in his lungs, neither does he typically breathe

in as deeply as he possibly can during quiet vegetative breathing. As
such, the lungs have certain volumes. A lung volume is a discreet unit
that is independent of all other volumes. In other words, volumes do not
overlap. Tidal volume (TV) is the air that is normally exchanged during
a complete respiratory cycle (i.e., an inspiration followed by an
expiration). In a typical adult male, TV is approximately 600 cubic
centimeters (cc) or milliliters (ml) and in adult females TV is
approximately 450 cc.
The lungs have volumes that extend beyond a normal tidal
inspiration and a normal tidal expiration. These are referred to as
inspiratory reserve volume (IRV) and expiratory reserve volume
(ERV), respectively. A typical adult has an IRV of approximately 2500
cc and an ERV of approximately 1000 cc. You can reach your IRV by
taking a normal tidal inspiration, stopping, and then gulping in as much
additional air as you can. IRV will be the amount of additional air you
gulped in. By the same token, you can access your ERV by taking a
normal tidal expiration, stopping, and then forcing out all the air you
can. The additional air you forced out (before you started wheezing and
coughing!) is ERV.
Even upon forcing out as much air as possible, some air will remain
in the lungs. This is known as residual volume (RV) and remains in the
lungs to keep them from collapsing. RV is approximately 1100 cc in a
typical adult. Finally, air fills structures within the respiratory
passageway outside the lungs—the oral and nasal cavities, larynx,
trachea, and bronchi. These are referred to as dead air spaces, and they
contain approximately 150 cc of air. Incidentally, upon inspiration, the
first 150 cc of air to enter the lungs will come from the dead air spaces.
Conversely, the final 150 cc of air released from the lungs upon
expiration will fill these dead air spaces.
Although lung volumes are discreet, independent units, lung
capacities are not. Lung capacities are formed by the combination of
lung volumes. Humans only use a portion of their total lung volume
during vegetative breathing and vocal activity. When there is a greater
demand for air (e.g., when exercising or when engaging in vocal
activity), we have the ability to call upon our IRV and/or ERV. In other
words, healthy lungs have the capacity to meet our every demand for
air. Lung capacities include inspiratory capacity (IC), functional

residual capacity (FRC), vital capacity (VC), and total lung capacity
(TLC). IC can be expressed as TV + IRV. In other words, an
individual’s IC is the amount of air he or she can maximally inhale from
a resting expiratory level. FRC is equal to ERV + RV; that is, FRC is the
amount of air in the lungs at a resting expiratory level. The formula for
VC is IRV + TV + ERV. It is the amount of air a person can maximally
and forcibly exhale upon taking a deep inspiration. Finally, TLC is the
combination of all lung volumes (IRV + TV + ERV + RV).
Why You Need to Know
 
All lung capacities are important from a clinical standpoint, but VC is
very likely of greatest clinical interest to a speech–language pathologist
because it includes TV, IRV, and ERV—all of the volumes that may
come into play during vocal activity. One can determine by using a
mathematical formula the expected VC for a given individual. For adult
males, expected VC can be determined by multiplying the person’s age
by 0.112, subtracting that number from 27.63, and then multiplying the
result by that individual’s height (in centimeters, or cm). For adult
females, one would multiply the individual’s age by 0.101, subtract that
number from 21.78, and then multiply the result by the individual’s
height (in cm). VC is typically used as a general indicator of an
individual’s ability to provide breath support for vocal activity. In some
cases, persons with voice disorders or neuromotor problems will exhibit
a diminished ability to provide adequate breath support for speech. In
these cases, VC may be considerably less than what the clinician may
expect. An instrument called a spirometer is used to measureVC, and
norms exist to give the clinician an idea as to how much VC a person
should be able to generate. Although beyond the scope of this textbook
to discuss, there are other instruments that we use to study respiration.
These include, but are not limited to, the pneumotachometer and
plethysmograph. A more thorough discussion of instrumentation and its
use in studying respiratory physiology can be found in Hixon, Weismer,
and Hoit (2008).
 
Lung volumes and capacities can vary considerably from person to
person. An individual’s size, gender, and age often influence his or her

lung volumes and capacities. For example, VC tends to change with age.
It first increases gradually up until a person reaches the age of 20 years,
levels off until age 25 years, and then decreases at the rate of
approximately 100 cc each year thereafter. Similarly, a person’s position
(e.g., lying down vs. standing up) and posture will also affect
measurements of lung volume and capacity. In the supine position, for
example, resting lung volume drops from 40% to about 20% because of
the effect of gravity. The strength of the muscles that assist in mediating
respiration will also have an effect on these measures. Finally, disease
processes may also affect lung volumes and capacities (a more thorough
discussion of some of these disease processes can be found in Chapter
7).
Breathing and the Exchange of Air
 
A typical human takes approximately 12 breaths per minute when
engaging in quiet, vegetative breathing. Of course, for more strenuous
activity, the number of breaths taken per minute will increase—in some
cases, quite dramatically. In the section immediately above, it was
mentioned that TV is approximately 600 cc (or ml) for an adult male and
450 cc for an adult female. In other words, with each breath, a typical
male exchanges approximately 600 cc and an adult female exchanges
approximately 450 cc of air. Considering an average of 12 breaths per
minute, a typical male exchanges approximately 7.2 liters of air per
minute (12 breaths per minute times 600 cc equals 7200 cc or 7.2 liters).
This is known as the individual’s minute volume. A person’s
maximum minute volume is the amount of air that person can
maximally exchange each minute (assuming he or she does not
hyperventilate during the process!). Maximum minute volumes range
from approximately 150 to 170 liters, which indicates that humans only
use a fraction of their VC during quiet breathing.
Figure This Out
 
What would a typical adult female’s minute volume be if she took 12
breaths per minute with an average TV of 450 cc?
 

The human body must have oxygen to function properly. The air
we breathe actually contains relatively little oxygen—only about 20% of
atmospheric air is oxygen; the remaining 80% is nitrogen, carbon
dioxide (0.04%), and other elements and compounds. Although only
one-fifth of air is oxygen, it is still more than enough to sustain life. In
fact, only 20% of the oxygen humans inspire is actually consumed by
the body! Expired air is composed of approximately 16% oxygen, 4%
carbon dioxide, and 75% nitrogen. Note that the carbon dioxide we
breathe out is 100 times greater than the carbon dioxide we breathe in.
With more than 6 billion people on earth breathing, we generate a lot of
carbon dioxide. Of course, plants use carbon dioxide like humans use
oxygen.
Let us do some more math. If a person has a respiratory rate of 16
breaths per minute with TV measured at 500 cc per breath, the total
amount of oxygen consumed by that individual in a minute is 320 cc
(minute volume = 8000 cc of air; 8000 cc of air × 20% oxygen = 1600
cc of oxygen; 1600 cc of oxygen × 20% actually consumed = 320 cc). If
you do your math right, you will realize that approximately 4% of
inspired air is actually consumable oxygen (20% of 20% is 4%).
Figure This Out
 
How much oxygen would a person consume per minute if he has a TV of
550 cc and a respiratory rate of 14 breaths per minute?
 
Why You Need to Know
 
Emphysema, a disease that adversely affects the alveoli and elasticity of
the lungs, can dramatically alter blood oxygen levels. Consumable
oxygen may be well below 4% of inspired air in individuals who present
with this disease. Emphysema will be discussed in greater detail in
Chapter 7.
 
THE PROCESS OF VEGETATIVE BREATHING
Inspiration

 
Now that you understand the basic concepts involved in respiration, a
question that may come to mind is “How do the lungs expand so that
pulmonary pressure will decrease resulting in the sequence of events
that creates inspiration?” Your knowledge of respiratory muscles now
comes into play. Recall from the discussion of anatomy that certain
muscles are responsible for inspiration. These muscles are summarized
in Table 6-2. The action of all these muscles will result in expansion of
the thoracic cavity in three dimensions—longitudinal, transverse, and
anteroposterior—although all three dimensions may not be acted upon at
any given time.
Vegetative breathing is primarily an automatic function (i.e., you
do not have to consciously think about taking a breath) that is regulated
by the lower brain center for breathing housed within the medulla
oblongata. This center does two things: (1) regulates the levels of
oxygen and carbon dioxide in the arterial blood and (2) controls the
rhythmic pattern of breathing. Whenever the medulla senses that there is
too much carbon dioxide and not enough oxygen in the blood, it sends
neural signals to the nerves that control respiratory muscle activity. The
appropriate muscles that enable us to yawn contract. A yawn is simply a
reflexive behavior mediated by the lower brain center for breathing.
The diaphragm is responsible primarily for longitudinal expansion
of the thoracic cavity. As this muscle contracts, it descends toward the
abdomen. Because of its attachments, the diaphragm not only expands
the thoracic cavity in the vertical dimension (i.e., longitudinally), but it
also pulls down on the lower rib cage and distends the abdominal wall
outward. This generates negative pressure within the thorax. When a
person is standing or sitting in an upright position, muscles in the chest
wall and abdominal wall contract to prevent the rib cage from being
“sucked” inward by the negative force being generated by the
diaphragm. The counteraction of the abdominal wall muscles also exerts
an upward force on the diaphragm, which assists the diaphragm in
lifting the rib cage. Although the diaphragm remains in a contracted
(i.e., lowered) position, its body is spread out superiorly and laterally by
the intra-abdominal pressure exerted upon it by contraction of the
abdominal wall muscles. Because the diaphragm has attachments to the
lower ribs, the net effect will be an expansion of the lower rib cage. In

this way, not only does the diaphragm mediate longitudinal expansion of
the thorax but also assists in transverse expansion. When an individual is
lying in the supine (i.e., “belly up”) position, gravity will exert an
inward force on the diaphragm so that the abdominal muscles do not
need to contract.
The external intercostal muscles are second only to the diaphragm
in terms of their importance to vegetative breathing. During shallow
breathing, the external intercostals may not even be called upon; their
contribution to inspiration becomes more pronounced when you take a
deeper than normal breath (e.g., yawning or sighing). Recall that the
external intercostals course from each rib to the rib immediately below.
As these muscles contract, they pull up on the rib below. The
articulations the ribs have with the thoracic vertebrae and sternum allow
the ribs to rotate on their longitudinal axes. The ribs evert, resulting in
greater lateral thoracic volume.
During quiet, vegetative breathing, there may be measurable
upward and forward movement of the sternum, as the anterior ribs are
acted upon by the internal intercostal muscles. This movement will
create a slight increase in the anteroposterior dimension of the thoracic
cavity. Contraction of the neck muscles will also generate a slight
increase in the anteroposterior dimension of the thorax, but these
muscles are usually not involved in the process unless vegetative
breathing becomes strenuous. For example, as an individual engages in
heavy aerobic exercise, the demand for more oxygen may cause the
individual to contract the neck muscles as he or she strains to get more
air into the lungs.
The majority of muscles involved in inspiration are relegated to a
secondary role. The remaining inspiratory muscles of the thorax (as well
as the neck muscles just mentioned) typically do not play a role in
inspiration unless there is a greater demand for oxygen by the body or if
an individual wants to generate considerable vocal volume (i.e., yell or
scream). Under these scenarios, the secondary muscles contract to
further expand the transverse and anteroposterior volumes of the
thoracic cavity.
It should be noted that intrapleural pressure (the pressure within the
potential space between the costal and visceral pleurae) is always
negative throughout respiration. At rest (i.e., between breaths),

intrapleural pressure is approximately –6 cm H2O. During inspiration,
the contraction of the diaphragm pulls on the visceral pleura. This
generates even more negative intrapleural pressure (from –6 cm H2O to
approximately –10 cm H2O). Boyle’s law plays a role here. Expansion
of the rib cage and descent of the diaphragm increases the volume
within the intrapleural space, which causes the drop in pressure. Upon
expiration, contraction of the rib cage and elevation of the diaphragm
generates greater (i.e., more positive) intrapleural pressure, although
overall the pressure is still negative.
What does this mean in terms of inspiring air? As was mentioned
briefly in the section on anatomy, not only are the lungs made of elastic
tissue, they also act as a unit with the diaphragm and rib cage because of
pleural linkage (remember Mary and her little lamb). The visceral and
costal pleurae act like two compressed plates of glass with liquid
between them, meaning that they glide upon each other but do not
separate. Longitudinal and transverse expansion of the lungs creates
greater volume within the alveoli pulmoni. The greater volume in the
alveoli results in lower pulmonary pressure by comparison to
atmospheric pressure (pulmonary pressure is approximately –2 cm H2O
relative to atmospheric pressure). Air will flow from outside the body to
within the lungs to equalize the drop in pressure. Once the pressure is
equalized, airflow ceases and you are at the end of the inspiratory phase
of the respiratory cycle (i.e., pulmonary pressure is 0 cm H2O relative to
atmospheric pressure).
Why You Need to Know
 
Under certain pathological conditions such as asthma or chronic
bronchitis, the individual may contract the neck muscles in an attempt to
create greater lung volume to compensate for reduced tidal inspiration
due to the obstruction within the bronchi. These pathological conditions
will be discussed in Chapter 7.
 
Expiration
 

Once air gets into the lungs, how do we get it out? Does it require
additional muscle activity? From the discussion about respiratory
anatomy, you know that there are certain muscles that are classified as
muscles of expiration. However, for quiet, vegetative breathing, the
action of these muscles is typically negligible. In fact, the expiratory
muscles (especially the abdominal wall muscles) actually assist in the
process of inspiration. What then serves as the impetus for expiration?
For the most part, passive forces act upon the thorax to contract it.
As was mentioned earlier, these passive forces include elastic recoil,
torque, intra-abdominal pressure, and gravity. As the muscles of
inspiration relax, these forces act upon the thorax to compress it. As the
thorax compresses back to its resting position, the alveoli within the
lungs are compressed as well. Compression of the alveoli results in an
increase in pulmonary pressure relative to atmospheric pressure (i.e.,
pulmonary pressure is now +2 cm H2O relative to atmospheric
pressure). With pulmonary pressure being greater than atmospheric
pressure, air will flow from the lungs to outside the body. The lungs
deflate until they reach their resting volume, which is also the point at
which pulmonary pressure once again equals atmospheric pressure (i.e.,
the pressure differential is 0 cm H2O).
With these passive forces at work, what prevents the thorax from
compressing before we have a chance to use the oxygen from the air?
The answer is the inspiratory muscles (especially the external
intercostals) and the abdominal wall muscles. Upon inspiration, the
diaphragm almost immediately relaxes. However, the external
intercostals and the abdominal wall muscles remain active throughout
inspiration. This prevents the rib cage from contracting prematurely.
Interestingly enough, when the external intercostal muscles start to
relax, the internal intercostal muscles may contract, exerting a
downward and inward force on the ribs to assist in deflating the thorax.
Once the thorax has returned to its resting state, another cycle of
respiration begins.
The Respiratory Cycle
 
During quiet, vegetative breathing, the inspiratory phase is active. In

other words, muscles are always involved in the process. Muscles of
inspiration are needed to initiate the inspiratory phase. Other than the
possible contraction of the internal intercostals, the expiratory phase is
usually passive. Newton’s Third Law of Motion acts upon the thorax to
initiate expiration by generating the passive forces of elastic recoil,
torque, and intra-abdominal pressure. Gravity also plays a role in the
expiratory process.
If one were to time a typical cycle of respiration during quiet,
vegetative breathing, it would be evident that the timing of the
inspiratory and expiratory phases is almost equivalent. The inspiratory
phase accounts for approximately 40% of the respiratory cycle, whereas
the expiratory phase accounts for 60% of the cycle. As an example, if a
complete cycle of respiration takes 2 seconds to complete, inspiration
will account for 800 msec (0.8 seconds) of the cycle, while expiration
will account for the remaining 1200 msec (1.2 seconds).
When the thorax is at rest (i.e., when a person is between breaths),
the air in the lungs occupies approximately 40% of VC. This is referred
to as resting lung volume. The TV that is created during quiet,
vegetative breathing accounts for an additional 10% of VC. This means
that on average, only 50% of VC is used during quiet, vegetative
breathing. When we yawn, we go into IRV. For example, inspiration
during a vigorous yawn can occupy as much as 90% or more of VC.
You can imagine that an activity like physical exercise will also cause us
to utilize more of our IRV and thus VC.
THE PROCESS OF BREATHING FOR VOCAL
ACTIVITY
When an individual uses the breath stream for vocal activity, the
respiratory system undergoes distinct physiological changes. These
changes affect both the mechanics and timing of the respiratory cycle.
The primary difference between vegetative breathing and using the
breath stream for vocal activity is the introduction of the phonatory
system into the equation. The vocal folds remain abducted (i.e.,
separated) during vegetative breathing, but they adduct (i.e., come
together) during vocal activity. The phonatory system will be described
more fully in Chapter 8. In this section, we will describe respiratory

physiology as it relates to vocal activity. More specifically, we will
discuss what happens when we engage in two vocal activities—
continuous, steady phonation and conversational speech.
Continuous Phonation
 
Continuous, steady phonation is defined as the sustaining of phonation
with little variation in pitch or intensity. An example of this would be
sustaining a vowel sound or a single musical note. The speaker inspires
air and then continuously phonates until he or she runs out of breath.
During vocal activity, expired air is used to generate vocal fold
vibration. Because inspired air is not involved in phonation, the
mechanics of inspiration do not change considerably from what one
would observe during quiet, vegetative breathing. The same phenomena
that explain vegetative inspiration still apply. To inspire air, the
individual simply contracts the diaphragm, external intercostal muscles,
and possibly some secondary muscles of inspiration. The internal
intercostals and abdominal wall muscles contract to stiffen the rib cage
so that the intercostal spaces are not sucked in by the negative pressure.
The net result of this muscle activity is expansion of the thorax. Because
of pleural linkage, the lungs expand as well. Pulmonary pressure
decreases relative to atmospheric pressure because of the increased
volume within the alveoli. Air enters the lungs to equalize the drop in
pressure.
Although the basic inspiratory mechanics are the same for
continuous vocal activity as they are for vegetative breathing, an
observable difference is that IRV will likely be called into play during
continuous vocal activity. In other words, the speaker will take a deeper
breath than he or she normally would during vegetative breathing. If the
speaker is asked to sustain continuous phonation until he or she runs out
of breath, then ERV will also be accessed. This will necessitate a change
in expiratory mechanics as well.
Take note of Figure 6-27. The upper part of the figure shows the
changes in lung volume that occur during continuous vocal activity.
Point “A” represents the peak of the volume trace. Here, the speaker has
taken a deep breath, essentially going into IRV. Then, there is a gradual
decrease in lung volume throughout the vocal activity until it “bottoms

out” (point “B”). The speaker is below resting lung volume; in other
words, the speaker has accessed ERV. Now note the trace below the
volume trace. This second trace represents pulmonary pressure. You can
see that although lung volume diminishes over time throughout
continuous vocal activity, pulmonary pressure remains relatively
constant. Pulmonary pressure is what we use to set the vocal folds into
vibration (except at the vocal folds, it is referred to as subglottic
pressure). At a normal loudness level, it only takes approximately 5 to 8
cm H2O of subglottic pressure to maintain vocal fold vibration.
 
Figure 6-27 Muscle activity during steady, continuous phonation.
 
In terms of inspiration, accessing IRV means that more air is
introduced into the alveoli. The speaker is in a condition of high lung
volume (point “A” in Figure 6-27). High lung volume means greater
pulmonary pressure. Greater pulmonary pressure means greater

relaxation pressure (remember that for every action, there is an opposite
and equal reaction). To counter the increased relaxation pressure, we
must put a brake on the expiratory forces (referred to as the checking
mechanism) that act to make the rib cage collapse (Hixon, Mead, &
Goldman, 1976). This is accomplished by the chest wall inspiratory
muscles (i.e., the external intercostals primarily, but other muscles may
also be active). Refer back to Figure 6-27. Note the muscles that are
involved in inspiration (from the beginning of the graph to point “A”).
The diaphragm and external intercostals contract simultaneously, but the
diaphragm relaxes almost immediately. The external intercostals remain
active beyond relaxation of the diaphragm. This is done to counter the
increased relaxation pressure at high lung volume as the speaker begins
to phonate on expired air. Note also that the abdominal wall muscles
(e.g., the external obliques and rectus abdominus) are also active during
inspiration. These muscles contract to counter the negative force on the
intercostal spaces.
Why You Need to Know
 
Any neuromuscular disease or disorder that affects the braking
mechanism of the external intercostal muscles will have a concomitant
effect on phonation time, that is, an individual’s ability to maintain
vocal fold vibration beyond a few seconds. The individual may not be
able to speak but a few words before running out of breath.
Neuromuscular pathologies will be discussed in greater detail in
Chapter 7.
 
At the point of the vertical dotted line in Figure 6-27, when the
external intercostal muscles relax, the speaker is approaching resting
lung volume (i.e., is in mid lung volume), but phonation continues
uninterrupted. As the speaker continues to phonate, expiratory rib cage
muscles (i.e., internal intercostals) contract to maintain the steady (5 to 8
cm H2O) subglottic pressure to sustain vocal activity. The speaker
continues to phonate and begins to tap into ERV. At this point, the
speaker is below resting lung volume, and pulmonary pressure is
negative in relation to atmospheric pressure (i.e., the speaker is at low
lung volume). However, subglottic pressure for phonation remains a

steady 5 to 8 cm H2O. To be able to do this, the speaker has to apply
even greater muscular pressure on the breathing mechanism. At this
point, the abdominal wall muscles (especially the external obliques and
rectus abdominus) become active. By contracting these muscles, greater
intra-abdominal pressure is exerted upon the diaphragm, which in turn
exerts greater pressure on the lungs. As the speaker continues more and
more into ERV, expiratory thoracic muscles (e.g., latissimus dorsi) and
additional abdominal muscles become active until the speaker runs out
of breath (point “B” in Figure 6-27).
It should be noted that muscle activity during vocal activity is not
an all-or-none event. In other words, it is not a matter of the inspiratory
muscles contracting first, then relaxing, and then finally the expiratory
muscles contracting. Breathing for vocal activity requires a coordinated
and overlapping effort between all of the muscles of inspiration and
expiration. This way, rib cage wall and abdominal wall volume will
decrease at a constant rate throughout phonation. Lung volume will also
decrease at a relatively constant rate throughout phonation, providing
the steady and constant pulmonary pressure that is necessary to initiate
and maintain vocal fold vibration.
Conversational Speech
 
The physiological changes that occur during conversational speech are
even more remarkable than for continuous, steady phonation. In the
latter case, vocal pitch and intensity remain somewhat constant
throughout phonation. In the case of conversational speech, we vary our
vocal pitch, intensity, and quality quite a bit. Changes in vocal pitch and
intensity are what allow us to vary our lexical stress and intonation. For
example, in some contexts, lexical stress allows us to differentiate the
meaning of words (say the word “record” with stress on the first syllable
and then with stress on the second syllable). Similarly, intonation also
plays a part in conveying the meaning of our utterances (e.g., say the
sentence “We are going to the store tonight” first with a rising intonation
at the end of the sentence and then with a falling intonation). Nine of the
24 consonant sounds in English are produced without vocal fold
vibration. Therefore, in conversational speech, there are intermittent
periods where vocal fold vibration is either “on” or “off.”

Another difference between continuous, steady phonation and
conversational speech is that we do not typically utilize a large portion
of IRV or ERV for conversational speech. We tend to take quick, rapid
inspirations (going slightly into IRV) and then speak until we go a little
into ERV. We could use all of IRV and ERV to speak, but it would
cause a disruption in our ability to produce conversational speech in a
smooth, uninterrupted manner.
Because of these changes, respiratory physiology is once again
altered somewhat. Volume and pressure change considerably throughout
our conversational speech. For conversational speech, lung volume is
primarily a mid-range event. Remember that VC at resting lung volume
is approximately 40%. Normal tidal inspiration adds another 10% to
VC, meaning that we only use about 50% of our VC for vegetative
breathing. During conversational speech at a normal intensity level,
inspiration accounts for approximately 60% of VC; in other words, we
utilize only a small portion of our IRV. We then speak on expired air
and continue until we are relatively close to resting lung volume. In
some cases, we might even go into ERV a bit (to about 30% to 35%
VC). In these cases, the checking mechanism during high lung volume
and the active contraction of muscles of expiration during low lung
volume will not likely come into play to the degree they would during
steady, continuous phonation. We do not typically go well into IRV
unless we want to increase our vocal intensity (such as in yelling or
screaming), and we do not go too far into ERV unless we continue to
speak until we run out of breath (such as might occur when we are
excited or when we are trying to hold the floor during conversation).
For such activities like singing, reading loudly, or yelling, we do go
more into our IRV and may use more of our ERV. According to Hixon
(1973), our inspiration accounts for approximately 80% of VC when we
read loudly and as much as 85% to 90% when we yell or sing
classically. At the end of expiration, we are usually around 35% VC. In
other words, for vocal activity produced at greater intensity, we typically
use between 45% and 55% of our VC. Naturally, if we go more and
more into our ERV, we will utilize more and more of our VC.
What are the physiological mechanisms during conversational
speech? In essence, we tend to “charge” the respiratory system during
conversational speech by taking quick inspirations intermittently

throughout our speech. Slight upward and downward variations in
pulmonary (and hence, subglottic) pressure override our expiratory
breath stream and allow us to alter our vocal pitch, intensity, and quality.
We generate slight increases in pulmonary pressure to mediate lexical
stress and slight decreases in pulmonary pressure at the end of breath
groups where pitch and intensity tend to level off.
Once again, the same basic mechanics apply for inspiration during
conversational speech as they do for vegetative breathing and steady,
continuous phonation. The difference, of course, is whether we require
as much braking activity by the external intercostals at high lung volume
or more active participation of the expiratory abdominal and chest wall
muscles at low lung volume. The greatest change in physiology involves
the expiratory phase.
The expiratory phase is mediated by the expiratory abdominal and
chest wall muscles. These muscles are typically not involved in
inspiration during conversational speech. This allows these muscles to
be at the ready to drive expiration as soon as the inspiratory phase has
ended. When the abdominal wall muscles contract, they generate greater
intra-abdominal pressure that exerts itself upon the diaphragm. This
results in three actions. First, it increases the diaphragm’s radius of
curvature and elongates its principal muscle fibers. This allows the
diaphragm to produce quick, powerful inspirations so that there are
minimal disruptions to running speech. Second, upward force on the
diaphragm generates an upward force on the rib cage, which elevates it.
This in turn stretches the fibers of the expiratory rib cage muscles to
allow them to produce quick expiratory pulses for varying lexical stress
and vocal intensity. Finally, inward incursion of the abdominal wall
muscles prevents an outward excursion of the abdomen when the
diaphragm acts upon the rib cage to elevate it. If this did not take place,
there would be a reduction in the expiratory chest wall muscles’ ability
to generate the expira-tory pulses necessary to effect changes in
intensity, stress, and intonation. That is, if the expiratory chest wall
muscles contracted without opposition from the abdominal wall
muscles, the inward pressure generated by the expiratory chest wall
muscles would simply dissipate by outward excursion of the abdomen.
The abdominal muscles then mechanically “tune” the breathing
mechanism for inspiration and expiration during conversational speech.

The Respiratory Cycle
 
It should be clear to you that dramatic changes occur to the respiratory
cycle during vocal activity. First and probably most obvious are the
mechanical changes that take place, especially during the expiratory
phase. Perhaps not quite as obvious are the changes that occur to the
timing of respiration. As you learned earlier in this chapter, during quiet,
vegetative breathing, inspiration accounts for approximately 40% of the
respiratory cycle, while expiration accounts for the remaining 60%.
During vocal activity, the ratio between inspiration and expiration
changes dramatically to approximately 10% and 90%, respectively. This
makes sense when one considers what is going on physiologically
during vocal activity. Because the vocal folds adduct for phonation, they
create an obstacle to the expired air so that it takes longer for the
expiratory phase to be completed. To a lesser degree, the checking
mechanism of the external intercostal muscles during expiration also
causes the expiratory phase to be prolonged. In addition, we tend to
utilize more of our VC during vocal activity than what we do during
quiet, vegetative breathing. We use varying amounts of our inspiratory
and expiratory reserve volumes during vocal activity. These volumes are
not utilized as much during tidal breathing.
Summary
 
This chapter provided a thorough description and discussion of the
anatomy and physiology of the respiratory system. The respiratory
system is the power source for vocal activity. Without adequate breath
support, humans would not be able to generate a vocal tone, that is, they
would not have a voice. Indeed, there are many pathological conditions
that may result in poor breath support for speech, and as expected,
individuals exhibiting any of these pathologies will also have voice
problems. Some of these pathologies will be discussed in Chapter 7.
Then, in Chapter 8, a thorough discussion of the phonatory system will
be presented. Through a discussion of the phonatory system, you should
gain a greater appreciation for the important role respiration plays in the

process of speech production.

 
Knowledge Outcomes for ASHA Certification for Chapter 7
   Demonstrate knowledge of the biological basis of the basic
human communication processes (III-B)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the neurological basis of the basic
human communication processes (III-B)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the etiologies of voice and
resonance disorders (III-C)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the etiologies of swallowing
disorders (III-C)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the characteristics of swallowing
disorders (III-C)
 
Learning Objectives
 
   You will be able to list and briefly describe the medical
etiologies associated with respiratory pathologies.
   You will be able to explain the impact of respiratory pathologies
on speech breathing and voice production.
   You will be able to explain the impact of respiratory pathologies
on swallowing.
 

 
Introduction
 
Breathing is not only our life force, it is our “speech force” because the
breath serves as the very foundation of each and every vocal utterance.
A number of pathologies can disrupt this force and result in disrupted
speech production. A brief review of the respiratory anatomy and
physiology will set the stage to discuss these pathologies.
Breathing is a twofold process of ventilation and respiration.
Ventilation refers to the movement of air in and out of the lungs via the
upper airway beginning at our nostrils and mouth opening and
continuing through the oral and nasal cavities posteriorly to the
pharyngeal regions: nasopharynx, oropharynx, and hypopharynx. As
the air travels through these passages lined with mucous membranes—
especially those of the nasal cavity—it is warmed, moistened, and freed
from unwanted debris. Indeed, consider breathing in the cold winter
weather where it is a necessity to warm the air by breathing through
your nose. Take even a modest breath through your mouth in near zero
temperatures and you will find yourself coughing. The breath stream
continues inferiorly through the larynx and the trachea prior to following
the branching of the bronchi. The bronchi and their multiple generations
(see Chapter 6) distribute the air to the right and left lung segments.
Finally, the air reaches the bronchioles and alveoli where the process of

respiration actually takes place, that is, the vital exchange of oxygen
(O2) for carbon dioxide (CO2). The CO2 is expired and that completes
one breath cycle. Any disruption in this system can result in respiratory
pathology that can have ramifications for speech production.
Respiratory Pathologies
 
There are a number of pathologies that can affect respiratory function
through obstruction, an interrupted neural supply, a disrupted respiratory
process, or a musculoskeletal disorder. A list of such pathologies
(modified from Hixon & Hoit, 2005; Kersten, 1989) can be found in
Table 7-1.
Some of these pathologies are specific to respiration, while others
affect multiple body systems. For example, emphysema, tuberculosis,
and pneumothorax primarily affect lung function. Emphysema is a
chronic condition associated with smoking and other environmental
toxins. Its pathology is characterized by an enlargement of the alveoli
and a resultant decrease of elasticity with consequential decreased
efficiency of blood–oxygen exchange. For the patient, this results in
effortful breathing, shortness of breath, and associated fatigue.
Tuberculosis is a bacterial infectious disease with symptoms including a
bad cough, a fever, and chest pain. Pneumothorax refers to a collection
of air or gas in the pleural cavity resulting in a collapsed lung due to
trauma or disease. Symptoms of pneumothorax also include shortness of
breath, chest pain, and fatigue in addition to a rapid heart rate. In fact, a
caveat is in order in that any disorder that affects lung function can and
often does impact cardiac function. There is a reason the entire system is
referred to as the cardiopulmonary system. Pulmonary blood circulation
refers to the blood vessels that receive deoxygenated blood from the
right side of the heart, circulate it through the lungs to become
oxygenated, and return the blood to the heart’s left side (Kersten, 1989).
An example of the impact of less efficient oxygen exchange is chronic
emphysema. Individuals have enlarged hearts due to the extra effort
required by the heart to pump oxygenated blood to muscles and organs.
Alternatively, many of the disorders listed in Table 7-1 impact systems
beyond the cardiopulmonary. Such is the case with congenital disorders

such as muscular dystrophy (MD), an inherited disease of progressive
muscle deterioration and weakness, and neurological disorders such as
multiple sclerosis (MS), a disease of the central nervous system
affecting the myelin covering of the axons. Also, some disorders may be
only temporary or transient in nature with proper medical treatment,
such as those associated with allergies such as asthma and hay fever or
infections of the lungs such as pneumonia or tuberculosis. Other
disorders progressively worsen with respiratory function decreasing over
time such as with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) (also known as
Lou Gehrig’s disease).

 
Speech–language pathologists (SLPs) become involved when
respiratory function impacts speech breathing beyond the acute phase.
Thus, individuals with chronic breathing problems may benefit from
evaluation and intervention for speech breathing. You will recall from
Chapter 6 that our respiratory system is extremely flexible, generating
positive and negative pressures for inspiration and expiration,
respectively, that go well beyond that needed for conversational speech.
Because of this excess “reserve,” individuals with significantly reduced
respiratory capacity can often speak intelligibly at adequate intensities,
although those same individuals may not have long utterances or be able
to speak loudly or shout with as much success. When lung volume and
capacities become too small for functional speech, then the patient
becomes ventilator dependent and collaborative work with the
respiratory therapist begins and/or efforts switch to the use of
augmentative and alternative communication systems.
This chapter now turns to a brief description of some of the
respiratory pathologies an SLP may encounter in his or her practice. As
mentioned earlier, a number of disorders resulting in respiratory
difficulties can be medically managed without a referral for speech
therapy services. However, it should be understood that whenever the
breath stream is compromised, speech production is also likely
compromised. The extent to which SLPs intervene is presented in great
detail in Hixon and Hoit’s (2005) comprehensive text on evaluation and
management of individuals who have speech breathing disorders.
AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION
A number of respiratory difficulties are secondary to obstructions in the
upper and lower airways that hinder the flow of air and gas exchange at
the alveoli. Selected respiratory disturbances will be discussed as they
relate to the power supply for speech production.
Asthma and Paradoxical Vocal Fold Movement
 
Asthma and paradoxical vocal fold movement (PVFM) can be
mistaken for one another, as they both are a function of airway

obstruction and both result in sudden difficulty breathing. However,
there are a number of differences that distinguish the two. A hallmark
symptom of PVFM is difficulty breathing in air (Hixon & Hoit, 2005),
whereas asthma is better described as difficulty breathing out. Further,
PVFM is an upper airway obstruction that occurs secondary to sudden
adductor spasms of the vocal folds that interfere with normal breathing
(Mathers-Schmidt, 2001). In contrast, asthma is a lower airway
obstruction due to constriction of both large and small pulmonary
passages (e.g., bronchi, bronchioles). In asthma, there is abnormal
sensitivity of smooth muscle surrounding the bronchioles causing them
to close and trapping air inside the lungs (Goodman, 2003). In addition,
an “asthma attack” brings about inflammation of the bronchial lining
and the production of mucus as depicted in Figure 7-1A. Abnormal
“noise” when breathing is heard with both disorders, but again, there are
differences. Asthma is associated with wheezing and a concomitant
patient complaint of tightness in the chest; this wheezing emanates from
the pulmonary passages. The sound associated with PVFM is
inhalatory stridor. Stridor is caused by the creation of air turbulence
during inspiration through the adducted vocal folds; thus, the sound
emanates from the larynx. Further, when the vocal folds fully adduct
during breathing, dyspnea or complete cessation of breathing can occur.
There are varying views espoused in the literature concerning the
etiologies of PVFM. It has been considered an organic disorder similar
to asthma in that it may be brought on by a response to environmental
allergens and/or strenuous exercise. Alternatively, it may be a functional
disorder with a psychological component (see Chapter 9, for a
discussion of organic versus functional voice disorders). Mathers-
Schmidt (2001) blends the two views and considers PVFM a complex,
heterogeneous laryngeal disorder. The American Speech-Language-
Hearing Association (n.d.) concurs by including the following as
possible triggers for PVFM:

 
Figure 7-1  Airway obstruction. A. The triad of symptoms
secondary to an asthma attack. B. The combination of emphysema
and chronic bronchitis results in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). (From Kersten, L. (1989). Comprehensive
respiratory nursing: A decision making approach. Philadelphia,
PA: W.B. Saunders.)
 
  Shouting/coughing.
  Physical exercise.
  Acid reflux.
  Cold air breathing.
  Smoke and air pollution.
  Psychosocial issues.
  Neurological issues.
It should be noted that an individual can present with both PVFM
and asthma. When obstruction occurs to the lower airway, accessory
muscles of respiration come into play to assist the primary muscles in
moving air in and out of the lungs.
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
 
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a general and
nonspecific term that refers to chronic bronchitis and emphysema as
illustrated in Figure 7-1B. Chronic bronchitis is the continuous over
production of mucus due to the structural changes of the bronchi
because of environmental pollutants and allergens such as smoking (see

Why You Need to Know Box). Emphysema results in the breaking
down of the walls of the air sacs resulting in clumps of alveoli and
decreased surface area for gas exchange (see Figure 7-2). Furthermore,
the alveoli become thick walled and lose their elasticity. COPD then
impacts both ventilation and respiration. Through medical treatment,
ventilation is maintained by medication administered through inhalers
and nebulizer treatments. Respiration is managed but cannot be
improved by the use of oxygen support. You may have seen individuals
carrying or pulling oxygen tanks attached to tubing inserted into their
nose by way of nasal cannulae; most likely, these individuals have
COPD (although lung cancer may also be the culprit). In addition,
individuals with advanced emphysema are termed “pink puffers” by
medical personnel, as they have a ruddy complexion and are short of
breath (the “puffing”), often breathing through pursed lips.
Individuals with COPD are able to speak conversationally but may
use shorter breath groups or get fatigued more easily with speech. A
breath group is simply the quantity of speech, as measured by number of
syllables or words, produced in a single breath. As you can imagine, as
lung volume decreases, breath group length also decreases. Along with
the reduced phrase length, expect the reduced lung volumes and
capacities to also result in lower subglottic pressure and reduced vocal
intensity all while requiring increased respiratory effort on the part of
the speaker (Seikel, King, & Drumright, 2005). The fatiguing effect of
speaking is related to decreased oxygen in the blood stream. Hixon and
Hoit (2005) provide a clinical example of managing speech breathing to
decrease fatigue in an individual with moderate emphysema. In clients at
risk for desaturation during speaking activities, monitoring of oxygen
saturation (SpO2) levels and/or end-tidal breathing partial pressure of
carbon dioxide (PCO2) is done under the direction of a pulmonologist
and with the assistance of a respiratory therapist (Hixon & Hoit, 2005).
Hixon and Hoit suggest using a pulse oximeter to monitor oxygen
saturation (SpO2) to assist in determining the type of speaking behavior
that causes desaturation and teach strategies to reduce this (e.g.,
incorporating nonspeech breaths between speech breaths).

 
Figure 7-2  An illustration of airway obstruction in chronic
bronchitis and the breakdown of alveolar walls in emphysema
(chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD]) compared with
normal respiratory function. (Modified with permission from
Nettina, S.M. (2009). Lippincott manual of nursing practice (9th
ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Why You Need to Know
 
Smoking is clearly linked to lung disease attributing to 438,000 deaths
in the United States each year. The majority of these deaths are a result
of COPD (chronic bronchitis and emphysema) and lung cancer (Centers
for Disease Control, 2005). Although prevalence rates have declined in
young adults 18 to 24 years of age in the United States, smoking is still
the most prevalent in this age group (American Lung Association,
2007). Furthermore, adult males and females who smoke lose an

average of 13.2 and 14.5 years of life, respectively, as compared with
nonsmokers.
 
Congestive Heart Failure
 
The weakening of the heart’s ability to efficiently and adequately pump
blood leads to congestive heart failure (CHF). This, in turn, causes
decreased circulation of blood with fluid buildup in the lungs as well as
other tissues. Congestion refers to this buildup of fluid and concomitant
swelling (i.e., edema). Causes are many and include years of
uncontrolled high blood pressure and coronary artery disease.
Individuals with CHF have chronic shortness of breath and persistent
coughing up of phlegm. Most typically, the left ventricle or chamber of
the heart fails and blood backs up into tissues (e.g., the swelling seen in
the lower extremities) and organs. Lung congestion, or pulmonary
edema, occurs with this left-sided heart failure. This fluid then fills the
alveoli and prevents gas exchange or respiration from occurring. Speech
is impacted due to decreased lung volume and decreased ability to
generate and sustain the subglottic pressures necessary for continuous
speech with adequate loudness. In addition, patients with CHF present
with a wet or gurgly sounding voice and persistent coughing; this makes
it hard to determine at bedside if they are at risk for aspiration of food
and drink because these symptoms mimic those that indicate swallowing
problems.
MUSCULOSKELETAL CONDITIONS
Conditions affecting voluntary skeletal muscle include the various forms
of muscular dystrophy (MD). Muscular dystrophies are inherited genetic
diseases resulting in degeneration of skeletal muscle and associated
progressive muscle weakness. The types of MD vary in terms of age of
onset, distribution of affected muscle groups, rate of progression, and
extent of muscle weakness (National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke, n.d.). Although involvement of the muscles of respiration
are not a required characteristic of the disease, it is often the case that
MD results in such severely weakened respiratory muscles that the

patient’s breathing becomes ventilator dependent.
 
Figure 7-3  Deviations of the spinal column. A. Scoliosis. B.
Kyphosis and lordosis. (Modified with permission from Stedman’s
medical terminology (2010). Baltimore: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.)
 
Individuals with MD may present with a variety of respiratory
issues affecting speech breathing. The progressive muscle weakness
leads to reduced lung capacities and decreased ability to generate
adequate subglottic pressures for phonation (Seikel et al., 2005).
Furthermore, Seikel and colleagues indicate that the reduced range of
motion seen in individuals with MD, as well as other dysarthrias of the
flaccid type, can result in reduced breath groups, impaired prosody, and
reduced vocal intensity.
Spinal column deformities, when severe, also hinder breathing
abilities. Scoliosis (also termed kyphoscoliosis) refers to a lateral (i.e.,
sideways) spinal curvature that is a deviation from the normal vertical
line of the spine or vertebral column. Figure 7-3A illustrates a right
thoracic scoliosis, as the spinal deviation is to the right at the thoracic
region of the vertebral column. According to the National Scoliosis
Foundation (n.d.a), scoliosis is found in 2%–3% of the US population,

affecting infants to adults with an average age of onset between 10 and
15 years. If the lateral curvature is severe, the ribcage may press against
the lungs and heart and compromise cardiopulmonary function.
The vertebral column is aligned in the center of our back and has
two areas of normal anterior curvature at the cervical and lumbar
regions. These curves are important to maintain an erect posture and
provide for maximal mechanical efficiency for breathing. Thus,
structural deformities of the vertebral column will limit the natural and
efficient expansion and recoil of the ribcage. Lordosis refers to
abnormally large anterior curvatures of the vertebral column. All of us
have a little bit of what may be referred to as “swayback.” Typically, an
underlying disease is at the root of a serious lordosis such as with MD
(National Scoliosis Foundation, n.d.c). Kyphosis (or “round back”) is
the opposite of lordosis. It is an abnormal increase in the posterior
curvature of the vertebral column (National Scoliosis Foundation, n.d.b).
This is most often seen in the thoracic vertebral region where we have a
certain degree of natural rounding. Figure 7-3B shows these spinal
curvatures via a lateral view. You might be familiar with Dowagers
hump, often associated with aging women. This hump is a type of
kyphosis due to a collapse of the vertebrae in the upper thoracic region
because of low bone density or osteoporosis. The key to minimizing or
avoiding this is prevention through consuming adequate levels of
calcium and vitamin D and performing weight-bearing exercises.
NEUROLOGICAL PATHOLOGIES
Neurological traumas and diseases are numerous as you read about in
Chapter 5. Those disorders of the nervous system that result in
dysarthria likely have a respiratory component. Neurological damage
impacting ventilation and respiration can be widespread from the central
nervous system to the peripheral nervous system. In the central nervous
system, the upper motor neurons (UMNs), the control circuitry of the
cerebellum and basal ganglia, the medullary respiratory center, the
brainstem cranial nerve nuclei, and the anterior horns of the spinal cord
are all involved in breathing. In the peripheral nervous system, the lower
motor neurons (LMNs), the neuromuscular junction, and the muscles of
inspiration and expiration are all involved. You are referred back to

Chapter 5 on neurological pathologies for a discussion of the various
dysarthrias associated with the neuropathologies mentioned in this
chapter. Here, the focus will be on select pathologies that have a
significant respiratory component involved with management and
treatment. These include spinal cord injuries and progressive
neurological diseases.
Prior to a discussion of certain neurological pathologies, a review
of the central nervous system control of respiration is in order. As
presented in Chapter 4, central control of respiration is both conscious
and unconscious in nature. Voluntary control over breathing is
evidenced in simple activities such as taking a big breath, holding the
breath, and breathing faster or slower, and in more complex activities
such as breathing for speech production. Voluntary neural mechanisms
for breathing include frontal lobe motor cortices (e.g., premotor cortex,
motor strip), parietal lobe somatosensory areas, the basal ganglia,
thalamus, and cerebellum. In addition, breathing changes associated
with emotions are mediated by the limbic lobe (see Figure 7-4). Next
time you become emotional, take special note of the effect on your
breathing. In fact, you may not even be able to generate and control the
breath to speak in emotionally charged situations. Although volitional
and emotional breathing occurs, our breath is primarily involuntarily
controlled as dictated by blood chemistry.

 
Figure 7-4  The brainstem respiratory center with input from
higher brain regions, the vascular system, and the lungs and output
to the muscles of respiration. (Modified with permission from
Premkumar, K. (2004). The massage connection anatomy and
physiology. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Importantly, minute changes in blood chemistry sensed by
peripheral chemoreceptors in the blood stream and carbon dioxide
levels in cerebrospinal fluid by central chemoreceptors at the level of
the medulla indirectly control breathing. The medullary rhythmicity
center with separate inspiratory and expiratory centers controls

automatic breathing. In the pons, the apneustic area promotes
inspiration and the pneumotaxic area inhibits inspiration; together
these areas provide input to the medulla to regulate respiratory
coordination. These critical brainstem respiratory centers may be
suppressed through trauma, or “narcotized” by drugs or alcohol (see
Why You Need to Know box).
Why You Need to Know
 
Excessive drinking by college students can result in pulmonary
aspiration and/or respiratory failure and death. This excessive drinking
is often referred to as “binge drinking” roughly defined as five or more
drinks in two hours for men or four or more drinks in two hours for
women. As the body is unable to metabolically keep up with the alcohol,
the effects are ultimately revealed in decreased heart rate, breath rate,
and gag reflex. In turn, the decreased gag reflex may result in
pulmonary aspiration of vomit, potentially fatal due to its asphyxiation
of the lungs. In addition, both cardio and pulmonary effects are seen
when blood alcohol levels (from 0.35 to 0.40) suppress the medullary
respiratory center. Hence, never let a drunk friend “sleep it off;”
instead stay with your friend and call for help if breathing rate is
reduced (i.e., eight breaths or less per minute; recall that a normal quiet
breathing rate is around 12 breaths per minute), if they are unconscious
or semiconscious and do not rouse to a shout or pinch, if their skin is
cold or clammy and has a bluish complexion, or if they are vomiting
without waking! ANY of these signs warrant getting help. Of course, you
want to avoid this situation by urging friends, family, and yourself to
drink in moderation if at all.
 
Select cranial nerves and a number of spinal nerve pairs are also
involved in ventilation. Cranial nerves IX (glossopharyngeal), X
(vagus), XI (spinal accessory), and XII (hypoglossal) innervate muscles
and mucosa involved with the upper airway structures of the
velopharyngeal port, the pharynx, the larynx, and the accessory neck
muscles for breathing. Twenty-three spinal nerve pairs (i.e., 8 cervical,
12 thoracic, and the upper 3 lumbar pairs) are involved with innervating
both the primary and accessory muscles of respiration. You are

encouraged to refer back to Chapter 6 to review the neural innervation
for the muscles presented there. The motor commands that are sent out
from the brainstem and spinal cord are mediated by the afferent input
not only from the chemoreceptors but also from the mechanoreceptors
located in the pulmonary apparatus itself (e.g., alveoli) and those located
in the chest wall responding to muscle stretch (Hixon & Hoit, 2005).
Damage to any of these nerves can have a detrimental effect on
respiration.
Spinal Cord Injury
 
Trauma involving the spinal cord at almost any level can impact
breathing with trauma at the cervical level being the most severe (see
Figure 7-5). For example, Christopher Reeve, the well-known actor and
advocate for spinal cord research, suffered a high cervical spinal cord
injury (SCI) (C1-C2) during an equestrian race resulting in quadriplegia
and the need for ventilator supported breathing for the remainder of his
life. According to the National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Center
(n.d.), spinal cord injuries have a variety of causes with sports-related
injuries accounting for approximately 9% of cases. The leading cause of
spinal cord injuries is motor vehicle accidents (approximately 48%)
followed by falls (approximately 23%). Similar to traumatic brain injury
(TBI), spinal cord injuries are most prevalent in young adult men.
 
Figure 7-5  An illustration of cervical spinal cord injury. (Modified

with permission from Anatomical Chart Company.)
 
Trauma to the spinal cord is often secondary to fractured vertebrae
due to displaced bone and/or discs that compress the cord itself (Young,
2003), although one can suffer vertebral fracture without SCI. When the
spinal cord is involved both tissue gray and white matter of the CNS can
be impacted as well as spinal nerves of the PNS carrying afferent and
efferent neural information to and from the spinal cord, respectively.
Thus, SCI disrupts sensory, motor, and autonomic nervous system
functions. The body location and extent of the disruption is dependent
on the level and severity of the injury.
One way to classify SCI is “complete” or “incomplete” in regard to
the amount of remaining function below the level of injury. The level of
injury refers to the spinal cord segments and vertebrae and their
corresponding numbers: cervical (1–8), thoracic (1–12), lumbar (1–5),
and sacral (1–5). Complete SCI refers to no function below the level of
the injury, that is, no sensation or voluntary movement on either side of
the body below the level of injury. An incomplete SCI is defined as
some function present below the level of injury. In addition, symptoms
can also be secondary to autonomic nervous system disruption. These
symptoms can include disruption of bowel and bladder control, blood
pressure regulation, and body temperature regulation. More specifically
to the interest of the SLP is weakness or paralysis of respiratory muscles
for speech breathing and for swallow safety. For example, if the injury
results in weakened or paralyzed intercostal and abdominal muscles, the
patient will not be able to produce a productive cough and will be at
increased risk for aspiration and pneumonia. An SCI above C4 may
require a ventilator for breathing.
Hixon and Hoit (2005) present two case examples of clients with
SCI. Here, a brief summary of each case is presented to give you a
glimpse at the type of interventions that can be done to assist individuals
with SCI to gain improved speech function. A young woman with a C6
injury as a result of a fall was quadriplegic with limited residual function
in her arms and hands. Although she could speak, her breath support for
speech was severely limited due to weakened muscles of respiration.
Her voice lacked intensity, she spoke in short breath groups, and became

fatigued with speaking. Due to the level of her injury, innervation to the
diaphragm was spared (recall that the diaphragm is innervated by the
phrenic nerve that arises at C3–C5, above her level of injury). Following
the SLP’s evaluation and consultation with the pulmonologist, an
elastic wrap-around binder was used to position the abdominal wall
inward and support the body trunk. This treatment resulted in longer
breath group productions and improved vocal intensity. A second client
was described as a young adult male who suffered a C2 level SCI
following a motor vehicle accident. Due to the level of SCI, he was left
with paralysis of the diaphragm, muscles of the rib cage, and muscles of
the abdomen. As expected, he required a ventilator to breath. After
extensive medical consultation and testing, he was determined to be a
candidate for a phrenic nerve pacer (see Figure 7-6). A phrenic nerve
pacer acts as a respiratory neural prosthesis that electrically stimulates
the phrenic nerves for diaphragm contraction and resultant inspiration
(Hoit & Shea, 1996). The pacer, along with abdominal binding and
behavioral treatment, resulted in such good speech production that he
often sounded like a normal speaker (Hixon & Hoit, 2005).
Why You Need to Know
 
A phrenic nerve pacer, also called a diaphragmatic pacer, is an
electrode that is placed in the cervical region behind the phrenic nerve
with a radiofrequency receiver that communicates with an external
radiofrequency transmitter. The patient is introduced to the pacer
gradually and stimulation is adjusted according to ventilation needs.
Potential candidates for this type of pacer include individuals with SCI,
ALS, and MS, whereas individuals with COPD would not be candidates
(Hoit & Shea, 1996).
 
Progressive Neurological Diseases
 
The diseases that result in degeneration of certain aspects of the nervous
system vary widely in rate of symptom progression. Some diseases
progress slowly such as Parkinson’s disease (PD), some diseases
progress rapidly such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and some

are widely variable in progression rate such as multiple sclerosis (MS).
Entire texts are devoted to the speech and swallowing disorders and
management associated with these diseases (e.g., Yorkston, Miller, &
Strand, 2003). Here, a brief overview of selected diseases is presented
along with a description of each disease’s potential impact on breathing.
Freidreich’s Ataxia
 
Freidreich’s ataxia (FA) is a hereditary spinocerebellar degenerative
disorder named for the German physician who first described its
symptoms in 1863. It is an autosomal recessive genetic disease meaning
that the affected individual must inherit two affected genes, one from
each parent. For this reason, there may be no apparent family history as
each parent would be “silent carriers.” Signs and symptoms associated
with this type of ataxia include a progressive loss of balance and
coordination beginning with a poor gait and progressing to include the
trunk and upper extremities. Initial symptoms typically occur between 5
and 15 years of age; however, rate of progression varies widely across
individuals (Muscular Dystrophy Association, n.d.). In addition, muscles
atrophy over time and individuals may develop scoliosis. FA also affects
the heart and can result in congestion as described previously; these
symptoms are managed medically. As the disease progresses, speech
and swallowing are also affected by decreased muscle coordination and
timing of movements. Respiratory effects with ataxic dysarthria in
general include reduced coordination between speech processes and
within the process of respiration itself. For example, decreased ability to
coordinate inspiration and expiration with resulting inappropriate timing
and explosive expiratory bursts may occur (Seikel et al., 2005). Thus,
respiratory control is an apt target for intervention along with targeting
improved timing of tongue, jaw, and lip movement.

 
Figure 7-6  An implanted phrenic nerve pacer. (From a Google
image search of “phrenic nerve pacer.”)
 
Multiple Sclerosis
 
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a progressive disease that results in multiple
lesions of the oligodendroglia comprising the myelin in the central
nervous system. Thus, disrupted myelin can occur in the brain, spinal
cord, or optic nerves. Sclerosis refers to the scar tissue that is left to
replace patches of destroyed myelin, producing lesions known as MS
plaques. As mentioned earlier, the progression is highly variable across
individuals with the most common pattern involving remission and
relapse. Relapsing-remitting MS is typified by nearly full remissions
following an exacerbation of symptoms with a period of stability or
incomplete remissions with a chronic progression of symptoms. MS is
usually diagnosed in young adults between the ages of 18 and 40 years

and is more common among woman than men. Life expectancy is not
affected for 85% of those diagnosed with MS (Yorkston, Miller, &
Strand, 1995). Table 7-2 lists the various types of MS based on
progression of the disease.
Given the varied lesion sites associated with MS, symptoms may
also be varied. Motor, sensory, and visual systems may be impacted
with symptoms of unilateral vision loss, sensory loss, and/or motor
weakness and spasticity (Johnson & Jacobson, 2007). When dysarthria
is present, it is the mixed type, most often a spastic–ataxic type with
respiratory and phonatory symptoms prominent (Darley, Aronson, &
Brown, 1975; Duffy, 2005). More specific to respiration, Chiara, Martin,
and Sapienza (2007) state that the dysfunctional neural control of
expiratory muscles in particular results in reduced subglottic pressure for
adequate speech production. This, in turn, leads to phonatory problems.
The additional difficulty in coordinating respiratory and phonatory
function may also result in reduced breath groups. Nonspeech
respiratory characteristics can include decreased vital capacity and, more
rarely, the need for ventilatory support (Darley, Brown, & Goldstein,
1972).
 
Parkinson’s Disease
 
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is also a progressive disorder of the central
nervous system. In the case of PD, the basal ganglia are involved; more
specifically, the dopamine producing neurons of the substantia nigra

degenerate. This results in the characteristic symptoms of bradykinesia,
rigidity, and resting tremor. Individuals with PD often present with a
masked-like face, a stooped posture, and a “pill-rolling” movement of
the hands. As can be seen in Figure 7-7, the trunk flexion of an
individual with PD is one problem that compromises the respiratory
system. The onset of PD is typically in the sixth or seventh decade of
life and its rate of progression varies.
Individuals with PD have a decreased ability to automatically
execute learned motor plans. This includes the ease at which they can
utilize the respiratory system for efficient and effective speech
production. Duffy (2005) notes that the primary speech issues for
individuals with PD center on phonation, articulation, and prosody.
Specific respiratory symptoms that are reflected in speech breathing
difficulties include decreased vital capacity, decreased chest wall
excursion, decreased respiratory muscle strength, irregular breathing
patterns, and increased breathing rate. These symptoms may be due to
an “…alteration in the agonistic/antagonistic relationship between
respiratory muscles during breathing” (Duffy, 2005, p. 198).
Furthermore, individuals with PD evidence a bowing of the vocal folds
which further hinders the ability of the respiratory and laryngeal systems
to collaborate for loud, clear speech production. The interaction between
these two systems is exemplified well in the Lee Silverman Voice
Treatment program, or LSVT (see Why You Need to Know box).

 
Figure 7-7  A woman exhibiting symptoms of Parkinson’s disease.
(Modified with permission from LifeART image copyright © 2010
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. All rights reserved.)
 
Why You Need to Know
 
The Academy of Neurologic Communicative Disorders and Sciences
(ANCDS) has taken the lead in providing systematic reviews of
treatment and presenting practice guidelines in the various areas of
neurologic communication disorders. One such review was a paper on
behavioral management of respiratory/phonatory dysfunction in
dysarthria (Yorkston, Spencer, & Duffy, 2003). Among studies reviewed
were those by Ramig and colleagues, who investigated the effects of Lee
Silverman Voice Treatment (LSVT) with individuals with Parkinson’s
disease. LSVT focuses on the voice through effortful and repetitive
exercises at the respiratory and phonatory levels to increase loudness,
and in so doing, improve speech quality. The ANCDS concluded that
evidence supporting LSVT is good for immediate posttreatment
improvement and has some evidence that supports long-term

maintenance of treatment effects (Yorkston et al., 2003).
 
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
 
As mentioned in Chapter 5, ALS is a progressive disease of the motor
neurons (refer back to Figure 5-1) that results in both UMN and LMN
symptoms. Early symptoms may be manifested in limb weakness or in
weakness of the muscles of the head and neck resulting in speech and
swallowing problems (i.e., bulbar symptoms). Onset of the disease is in
adulthood and life expectancy ranges on average from 1 to 5 years
postdiagnosis. However, a quarter of individuals diagnosed with ALS
survive for more than 12 years (Bromberg, 1999). Death is usually due
to respiratory failure (Duffy, 2005).
Consistent with involvement of upper and lower motor neurons, a
mixed dysarthria of the spastic-flaccid type is common in individuals
with ALS. Those speech characteristics most indicative of respiratory
involvement include decreased loudness, reduced breath groups, and
decreased use of prosody manifested in monoloudness and monopitch.
In addition, individuals with ALS may exhibit decreased ability to
generate subglottic pressure sufficient for coughing (Duffy, 2005).
Shortness of breath and decreased vital capacity while in the supine
position, as well as weakness of the diaphragm, inspiratory and
expiratory chest wall muscles, and abdominal muscles can all be
expected (Hixon & Hoit, 2005).
Tracheotomy and Mechanical Ventilation
 
Individuals with a variety of respiratory pathologies resulting in airway
obstruction and/or muscle weakness may depend on artificial airways
and/or ventilators to meet their respiratory needs. Many of the etiologies
associated with these patient groups have already been discussed in this
or previous chapters; these include stroke, TBI, SCI, laryngeal or chest
trauma, and pulmonary, cardiopulmonary, and neurodegenerative
diseases. Most typically, these patients present in intensive care units
(ICUs) either in the acute stage of trauma or, alternatively, at end stages

of progressive disease.
Tracheotomy often follows oral/nasal endotracheal intubation (see
Figure 7-8). A tracheotomy refers to the surgical incision (see Figure 7-
9) made around the second or third tracheal rings, whereas a
tracheostomy refers to the opening made by the incision. This opening is
also referred to as the stoma. Furthermore, a tracheostomy tube is a
short artificial airway that is inserted into the trachea through the stoma
during the surgery (also see Figure 7-9). This tube allows for a direct
airway into the lower respiratory passages, bypassing upper airway
obstruction due to trauma, disease, or surgery. Notice in Figure 7-10 that
the tracheostomy tube is inserted below the subglottic space directly into
the trachea, and thus it is below the true vocal folds. This has important
implications for voicing possibilities.
 
Figure 7-8  Endotracheal tube placement. (Modified with
permission from LifeART image copyright © 2010 Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins. All rights reserved.)
 
A tracheostomy tube has multiple components. As pictured in
Figure 7-11, the outer most tube is referred to as the outer cannula and
the innermost tube is the inner cannula. The obturator is necessary for

tube insertion. A tracheostomy tube can be cuffed or uncuffed. For a
cuffed tube, a small balloon (or cuff) surrounds the outer cannula. This
cuff can be inflated or deflated. When the cuff is inflated, expired air
cannot travel up to the larynx but instead is directed back out of the
stoma. When the cuff is deflated, expired air is free to travel around the
cannula and up through the larynx as long as the stoma is occluded. In
this condition, a deflated cuffed tracheostomy tube acts in the same way
as an uncuffed tube.
 
Figure 7-9  Tracheotomy and tracheostomy. (Modified with
permission from Moore, K.L, Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2010).
Essential clinical anatomy (4th ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.)
 

 
Figure 7-10  Sagittal view of the placement of a tracheostomy
tube. (Modified with permission from Stedman’s medical
dictionary (2005) (28th ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.)
 
There are different options when it comes to speaking with a
tracheostomy tube in place. For example, one can deflate a cuffed
tracheostomy tube or simply wear an uncuffed tube. When either an
uncuffed or deflated cuffed tube is worn and the stoma is occluded,
expired airflow is directed superiorly through the larynx. This allows the
air to pass between the adducted vocal folds and through the oral and
nasal cavities, thereby allowing for speech to occur. The stoma can be
occluded either manually with a finger or by using a speaking valve (see
Figure 7-12). This is a oneway valve that is fitted on the stoma end of
the tracheostomy tube that allows the patient to breathe in through the
valve, but on expiration the pressure of expired air closes the valve so
that air is redirected to the upper airway similar to manual occlusion (see

the Why You Need to Know box for a discussion of various speaking
valves). The speaking valve then allows the patient to speak on expired
air without having to manually occlude the stoma.
When it comes to deflating a cuffed tube or using an uncuffed tube,
a caveat is in order. There may be contraindications regarding cuff
deflation. For instance, the patient may be at risk for aspiration due to
excessive oropharyngeal and tracheal secretions. Therefore, working
closely with nursing staff and obtaining medical clearance prior to
targeting voice and speech production is imperative. Similarly, decisions
must be made regarding the necessity and advantage of placing a
tracheostomy tube over the more short-term endotracheal intubation.
Many texts offer in-depth discussion of these matters for the SLP (e.g.,
Johnson & Jacobson, 2007).
 
Figure 7-11  Components of a tracheostomy tube. (Modified with
permission from Pillitteri, A. (2009). Maternal and child health
nursing: Care of the childbearing and childrearing family (6th ed.).
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

 
Figure 7-12  An example of a speaking valve (Aqua PMV 007;
Passy-Muir Inc., Irvine, CA). (From Passy-Muir Web site product
catalog 
(http://www.passy-muir.com/products/pmvs/pmv007.
aspx).)
 
Why You Need to Know
 
A number of considerations must be given prior to the placement of a
speaking valve for a tracheostomy and/or ventilator-dependent patient.
Often times, an SLP is consulted early in the process for consideration
of a speaking valve. The preplacement evaluation of the patient is
conducted ideally with collaboration among team members—the SLP,
the respiratory therapist, and the nursing staff under the direction of the
pulmonologist. Areas the SLP will be directly responsible for include an
in-depth oral motor examination, evaluation of cognitive and
motivational status for speaking, and adequate alertness throughout
most of the day to support verbal communication (Johnson & Jacobson,
2007). In addition, the SLP should be knowledgeable regarding the
various types of speaking valves that are available as well as
manufacturer support. Fortunately, professional meetings such as the
annual 
convention 
of 
the 
American 
Speech-Language-Hearing
Association provide extensive opportunities to view and learn about
tracheostomy tubes and the various speaking valves available through
demonstration 
and 
interaction 
directly 
with 
manufacturers’
representatives.
 
Patients may require mechanical ventilation—or a breathing
machine—for breath support due to hypoxemia, hypercapnia, or both.
Hypoxemia refers to low pulmonary artery oxygen levels and

hypercapnia refers to elevated blood carbon dioxide levels. Ventilators
are set according to air pressure, air volume, and respiratory rate. A
number of factors play into these settings such as disease state and
medical status of the patient. Regardless, it is the physician, most
typically a pulmonologist, who determines the settings and works with a
team of professionals to carry out the orders and keep the physician
informed. This team includes a respiratory therapist, a nurse, and, often,
an SLP. Although mechanical ventilation is common in intensive care
and acute settings, sometimes it is necessary over the long term and
therefore is also seen in home health settings and long-term care
settings. Indeed, some individuals function remarkably well for a
number of years with portable ventilators. It should also be noted that a
number of less invasive means are available to assist a patient with the
work of breathing if full ventilator support is not needed (e.g., a full
facial mask that delivers positive pressure to the patient’s airway).
Figure 7-13 illustrates a patient on a ventilator; the pictured scene is
typical of the number of tubes and machines utilized in an ICU.

 
Figure 7-13  A patient in an intensive care unit on mechanical
ventilation 
for 
breathing. 
(From
http://www.medem.com/medem/images/jamaarchives/JAMA_Practi
lev20.)
 
SLPs may work with patients as they are weaned from ventilators
and tracheostomy tubes to spontaneously breathe on their own. A
speaking valve may be a good intermediate step for this weaning process
as the patient goes from full breathing through a tracheostomy tube to
the complete occlusion of the tube through capping it (Johnson &
Jacobson, 2007).

Summary
 
This chapter provided an introduction to a number of respiratory
pathologies that can affect speech breathing and the potential role of the
SLP. When disease or trauma disrupts one’s ability to breathe, the power
source for voice and indeed all of speech is curtailed. Difficulties range
from total inability to use the breath for speech as in intubated patients
to primary impact on the ability to coordinate and control the airstream
for the most efficient use for speech as seen in patients with ataxic
dysarthria. Because respiration serves as the very foundation of speech,
understanding the various pathologies and their impact on the air supply
equips the speech–language professional to target respiratory
management in a team setting to achieve the best outcome possible for
speech.
Clinical Teaser—Follow-Up
Your study of Chapter 7 should have informed you of a number of
factors that support the physician’s diagnosis of PVFM disorder. In
thinking about respiratory pathologies, PVFM disorder is a result of
airway obstruction, where the vocal folds themselves get in the way of
inspiration. This was noted in the case description regarding inhalatory
stridor. Recall that stridor is caused by the creation of air turbulence
during inspiration through adducted vocal folds. Indeed, a hallmark
symptom of this disorder is difficulty breathing in. Another clue that this
may be a case of PVFM disorder is the close association of symptoms to
physical exercise. Other triggers for PVFM include smoking and acid
reflux, both exhibited by this patient. Although the diagnosis of PVFM
disorder is accurate, the physician would likely take the opportunity to
educate Richard regarding what he is doing to his lungs through his
smoking behavior and the possible outcome of chronic bronchitis and
emphysema. Quality of life is often diminished when one is forced to
live with COPD. This could turn out to be a real issue for Richard if he
does not defeat his smoking habit.
 

PART 3 SUMMARY
Part 3 (Chapters 6 and 7) presented information regarding respiratory
anatomy, physiology, and pathology. The understanding of the
respiratory system and its pathologies prepares you to build on this
foundational knowledge for speech production as we move to the
upstream speech systems of phonation, articulation, and resonance.
Respiration serves as the power supply for speech production. Air
pressures, volumes, and flows are generated in the pulmonary apparatus
by active (i.e., muscles) and passive (e.g., elastic recoil of the lungs)
forces. The movement of air in and out of the lungs through the process
of ventilation is critical for the life-sustaining process of respiration but
also quite literally gives us air to speak on. Thus, pathologies that affect
ventilation for respiration also affect our power supply for speech. These
pathologies are many and varied, resulting from diverse etiologies such
as airway obstruction, musculoskeletal deformities, and neurologic
disease. Some of these pathologies are transient in nature and are
resolved with acute medical intervention (e.g., asthma); others are
persistent and move into chronic and oftentimes progressive stages such
as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, muscular dystrophy, and
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Chapter 7 concluded with an introduction
to the breath support systems of tracheostomy and mechanical
ventilation. The speech–language pathologist needs to be aware of the
impact these diseases and support systems have on breathing for speech
production to effectively intervene with these patients given a team
approach (e.g., doctors, respiratory therapists).
PART 3 REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Describe the support framework for the respiratory system in as
much detail as possible.
2. How does the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide take place
within the lungs?
3. What is the difference between lung volume and lung capacity?
List and describe as many of the volumes and capacities as you can.
As far as breath support for speech or other vocal activity is

concerned, which lung capacity is probably most relevant, and
why?
4. How do the inspiratory and expiratory phases of respiration change
from vegetative to vocal function?
5. Explain how passive forces act during respiration.
6. Describe how inspiration takes place, using such terms as
pulmonary pressure, atmospheric pressure, and Boyle’s law.
7. What are the neural underpinnings of the respiratory system? How
might neurological pathology affect breathing?
8. Contrast ventilation with respiration and indicate one respiratory
pathology that compromises each.
9. How do the respiratory symptoms associated with paradoxical
vocal fold movement disorder differ from symptoms associated
with asthma?
10. Why do individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
speak on shorter breath groups?
11. Why do individuals with congestive heart failure speak with
decreased loudness?
12. Name two musculoskeletal conditions that may impact breathing
for speech.
13. Why would an individual with a spinal cord injury at C1/C2 be a
better candidate for a phrenic nerve pacer than an individual with a
spinal cord injury at C6/C7?
14. Providing therapy on the timing of the respiratory cycle and
coordination of the structures involved with ventilation is
appropriate for an individual with what type of progressive
neurological disease?
15. Individuals with pathologies affecting the respiratory system often
have increased risk for aspiration. Why?
16. What impact could an uncuffed or deflated cuffed tracheostomy
tube have on swallow safety?

 

 
Knowledge Outcomes for ASHA Certification for Chapter 8
   Demonstrate knowledge of the biological basis of the basic
human communication processes (III-B)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the neurological basis of the basic
human communication processes (III-B)
 
Learning Objectives
 
   You will be able to discuss the framework that supports the
phonatory system.
   You will be able to list and describe the muscles that mediate
phonatory activity.
   You will be able to define the basic concepts involved in
phonation, including but not limited to airflow, Bernoulli effect,
fundamental frequency, harmonics, octaves, and subglottic
pressure.
   You will be able to describe the mechanics of phonation in terms
of the Myoelastic Aerodynamic Theory and the Cover–Body
Model.
 

 
Clinical Teaser
Destiny is a typical 15-year-old sophomore in high school. She has
many friends and is a very sociable person. She is active in
extracurricular school activities, especially cheerleading and singing in
the school choir. She has a younger sister and an elder brother at home.
Because of all the activities she and her siblings are into, home life is a
bit chaotic. The entire family is quite vocal and there is a lot of yelling
among Destiny and her siblings. Destiny loves being the center of
attention; however, she constantly has to vie for her parents’ attention
along with her brother and sister. It seems like the child who is loudest is
usually the one noticed by mom and dad.
Over the past several months, Destiny has noticed that her voice
fatigues very rapidly over the course of a typical day. She also notices
that her vocal pitch is much lower than it normally is. She has been
struggling with the vocal aspect of her cheerleading and also notices that
while she sings she has trouble hitting the high notes. Her voice quality
is very hoarse and there is a certain degree of breathiness in her voice as
well. Although it is sometimes painful for Destiny to cheerlead and sing,
she continues to do so.
Destiny’s parents have also noticed the deterioration of her voice

over the last couple of months. They are concerned that Destiny’s voice
is worsening. They call their primary care physician who examines
Destiny and then recommends her to an otorhinolaryngologist, or ENT
doctor. The ENT conducts a more thorough examination of Destiny’s
voice. She uses a fiberoptic endoscope with stroboscopy to observe the
anatomy and physiology of Destiny’s vocal folds as she phonates. Based
on the examination, the ENT diagnoses Destiny with bilateral vocal
nodules, approximately 1.5 mm in size, on the juncture of the anterior
one-third of the length of the vocal folds. The ENT refers Destiny to
your clinic and recommends that she receive voice therapy.
Note any terms or concepts in the foregoing case study that are
unfamiliar to you. As you read the first chapter of this part, pay
particular attention to the anatomy and physiology pertinent to this case.
We will return to this case at the conclusion of this part.
 
Introduction
 
In Chapter 4, you learned that the nervous system is the control center
for speech production in much the same way the CPU is the control unit
for a computer. The respiratory, phonatory, and articulatory/ resonance
systems then can be thought of as the computer’s peripherals, although
these peripherals have quite different functions than the peripherals
you’d see with a computer. You learned in Chapter 6 that the respiratory
system is the power source for speech production. In this chapter, your
attention will be turned toward the phonatory system—the motor or
generator for speech production. The phonatory system is responsible
for the creation of the vocal tone. In other words, it is the system by
which humans generate voice. An acoustic signal is produced by
vibration of the vocal folds. This signal is then modified and
transformed as it passes through the vocal tract on the way out the lips.
The process of modification and transformation is accomplished by the
articulatory/resonance system, which will be the focus of Chapter 10.
For now, you will learn to appreciate the beauty and sophistication of
the human vocal mechanism.

Anatomy of the Phonatory System
 
In Chapter 6, a house building analogy was used to describe the anatomy
of the respiratory system. To a lesser extent, the same analogy can be
used to describe the anatomy of the phonatory system. Recall that the
house building analogy involved the construction of a foundation and
framework (i.e., bones, cartilages, and connective tissue); installation of
insulation (i.e., muscles); erection of walls (i.e., mucous membranes);
and installation of the electrical system (i.e., the nervous system).
In the sections that follow then, the anatomy of the phonatory
system will be presented according to this analogy. The foundation and
framework (i.e., bones, cartilages, and connective tissue) will be
discussed first. Then, muscles that are important to the function of the
phonatory system will be presented (i.e., the insulation). Following the
muscles, mucous membranes (i.e., the walls) will be described. Finally,
the neural underpinnings (i.e., the electrical system) of the phonatory
system will be presented.
THE FRAMEWORK FOR THE PHONATORY SYSTEM
The foundation or framework of the phonatory system includes the
hyoid bone and the larynx. The hyoid bone can be thought of as the
superior boundary of the phonatory system. The larynx is a
musculocartilaginous structure that resides inferiorly to the hyoid bone
and is attached to it by membranes. The trachea is immediately inferior
to the larynx and is also attached to it by a membrane or ligament (the
trachea was described more fully in Chapter 6 as part of the respiratory
system). Figure 8-1 provides an illustration of the phonatory system.

 
Figure 8-1 The phonatory system, including the larynx, hyoid
bone, and other associated structures. (Modified with permission
from Moore, K.L., Dalley, A.F., Agur, A.M. (2009). Clinically
oriented anatomy (6th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippicott Williams &
Wilkins.)
 
The Hyoid Bone
 
The hyoid bone can be seen in Figure 8-1 and is further illustrated in
greater detail in Figure 8-2. It is located in the upper region of the neck
approximately at the level of the third cervical vertebra (C3) and is
immediately superior to the larynx. Upon inspection, the hyoid is
somewhat horseshoe or U shaped, with the open end facing posteriorly
(i.e., toward the esophagus). An interesting fact about the hyoid bone is
that it does not articulate with any other bone, but rather it is suspended
in place by the stylohyoid ligaments coming from the styloid processes
of the temporal bones of the skull.
Technically, although the hyoid bone and larynx are connected, the
hyoid is not considered an integral component of the larynx. Rather, the

hyoid is considered part of the tongue complex, serving as the point of
attachment for several tongue muscles coming from above. Not only do
muscles make attachments to the hyoid bone from above, but muscles
also make attachments to the hyoid from below. As such, the hyoid bone
is literally suspended in place by a total of 22 or 23 pairs of muscles.
Many of these muscles will be presented later in this chapter.
As illustrated in Figure 8-2, the hyoid bone consists of a corpus
(i.e., body), two greater cornua (i.e., horns), and two lesser cornua. The
corpus has a convex anterior surface and a concave posterior surface.
Projecting posteriorly and somewhat superiorly are the two greater
cornua, each one attached to a lateral border of the corpus. The lesser
cornua rise superiorly from the juncture of the corpus and greater
cornua. They resemble “devil’s horns.” Both the greater and lesser
cornua, as well as the corpus of the hyoid, are the point of origin or
insertion of muscles.
 
Figure 8-2 Anterolateral and anterosuperior views of the hyoid
bone, with selected landmarks. (Modified with permission from
Moore, K.L., Dalley, A.F., Agur, A.M. (2009). Clinically oriented

anatomy (6th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippicott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Why You Need to Know
 
The hyoid bone is variable from specimen to specimen. For example, in
some instances, one or both lesser cornua may be absent. This does not
create a problem for the person who has this condition. The muscles will
simply attach to an alternate structure.
 
The Larynx
 
The human larynx is a complex musculocartilaginous structure found in
the anterior region of the neck (see Figures 8-1, 8-3, and 8-4)
approximately from the level of the third cervical vertebra (C3) to C6.
For most people (especially males), the larynx can be located quite
readily by the prominent bulge extending outward in the neck,
commonly referred to as the Adam’s apple. In reality, the Adam’s apple
is a landmark on the largest of all the cartilages composing the larynx.

 
Figure 8-3 The cartilages of the larynx with selected landmarks.
(Modified with permission from Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008).
Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.)
 
As seen in Figure 8-3, the larynx is composed of a total of nine
cartilages along with their connecting membranes and ligaments.
Although there are nine cartilages in total, only six have distinct names
as three of the cartilages are paired. The three unpaired cartilages are the
thyroid, cricoid, and epiglottis. The three paired cartilages are the
arytenoids, cuneiforms, and corniculates. The thyroid, cricoid, and
arytenoids are all classified as hyaline cartilage, which has a tendency to
ossify with advanced age. The remaining cartilages (i.e., epiglottis,
cuneiforms, and corniculates) are classified as elastic cartilage. In the
following paragraphs, a more thorough description will be provided for
each cartilage, along with the connecting membranes that are
noteworthy.

Thyroid Cartil-age
 
The thyroid cartilage is further illustrated in Figure 8-4. It is the largest
of all the laryngeal cartilages. The thyroid is formed by two
quadrilateral-shaped plates of cartilage called the thyroid laminae. The
two laminae are fused together at midline anteriorly, forming the
thyroid angle. In adult males, this angle is approximately 90 degrees; in
adult females, the angle is approximately 120 degrees. The fusion of the
two laminae is not complete. Instead, the two laminae separate
superiorly forming the thyroid notch. Immediately below the thyroid
notch is the point where the thyroid cartilage projects most anteriorly.
This point of projection is called the thyroid prominence or the Adam’s
apple. The manner in which the two laminae fuse anteriorly means that
the thyroid cartilage is similar in shape to the hyoid bone with an open
posterior. On each thyroid lamina, there may be a prominent ridge
running obliquely along the surface. This ridge is referred to as the
oblique line, and actually may be a tendon for the sternothyroid and
thyrohyoid muscles that attach to the larynx at this point.
An examination of Figure 8-4 (A, B, and D) reveals two pair of
cornua projecting superiorly and inferi-orly (one pair of each is found at
the posterior terminus of each thyroid lamina). By comparison, the two
superior cornua are longer yet more slender than the two inferior
cornua. The superior cornua project superiorly, posteriorly, and
somewhat medially (i.e., they take an upward, backward, and slightly
inward direction). The superior cornua articulate indirectly with the
greater cornua of the hyoid bone by way of the lateral hyothyroid
ligaments (in fact, the entire superior surface of the thyroid cartilage
articulates with the inferior surface of the hyoid bone by way of the
hyothyroid membrane; the lateral hyothyroid ligaments are simply a
thickening of the hyothyroid membrane where the superior cornua of the
thyroid cartilage articulate with the greater cornua of the hyoid). The
inferior cornua of the thyroid cartilage articulate directly with the cricoid
cartilage and are held in place by the capsular ligaments, which are
actually composed of a series of ligaments: the anterior, posterior, and
lateral ceratocricoid ligaments. The union of the thyroid and cricoid
cartilages forms the bilateral cricothyroid joints. These joints will be

described in more detail later in this section on anatomy as well as in the
section on physiology.
 
Figure 8-4 Various views of the larynx: (A) anterior view, (B)
right lateral view, (C) sagittal view, and (D) posterior view.
(Modified with permission from Tank, P.W., Gest, T.R. (2008).
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins atlas of anatomy. Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)

 
Why You Need to Know
 
The thyroid cartilage is variable from specimen to specimen. For
example, in about one-third of the population, there are small foramens
in the region of the superior cornua where blood vessels may pass as
they enter the interior of the larynx (Zemlin, Simmon, & Hammel, 1984).
For about 5% of the population, one of the superior cornua may be
missing. Although the thyroid cartilage has a symmetric shape for most
people, there may be a few cases where the cartilage exhibits
asymmetry.
 
Cricoid Cartilage
 
Greater detail for the cricoid cartilage is provided in Figures 8-3 and 8-4.
This cartilage serves as the lowermost border or base of the larynx and
articulates with the first cartilaginous ring of the trachea by way of the
cricotracheal ligament. The cricoid is smaller than the thyroid
cartilage, but it is also more stout. The cricoid is composed of two parts:
an anterior arch and a posterior quadrate lamina. The two parts are
continuous so that the cricoid cartilage is a circular ring, similar to a
signet ring. The anterior arch lies immediately below the angle of the
thyroid where the two thyroid laminae meet. The posterior quadrate
lamina is somewhat broad so that it occupies a portion of the open space
in the posterior region of the thyroid cartilage.
There are three landmarks of note on the cricoid cartilage. The first
landmark is a pair of oval articular facets along the lateral margin of the
cricoid where the anterior arch ends and the posterior quadrate lamina
begins. These facets are the point of articulation of the cricoid cartilage
with the inferior cornua of the thyroid cartilage, forming the cricothyroid
joints mentioned earlier. The second landmark is a vertically oriented
ridge along the midline of the posterior quadrate lamina with two
shallow depressions on either side of the ridge. The ridge is the point of
insertion of some fibers from the esophagus, whereas the shallow
depressions are the point of insertion for the posterior cricoarytenoid

(PCA) muscles. Finally, the third landmark is a pair of articular facets
along the superior surface of the posterior quadrate lamina that serve as
the point of articulation of the cricoid cartilage with the two arytenoid
cartilages.
Epiglottis
 
The epiglottis is further illustrated in Figures 8-3 and 8-4. It somewhat
resembles a leaf, with a broad body tapering into a short, slender stalk.
The broad portion is referred to as the corpus, and the stalk is called the
petiolus. The anterior, or lingual, surface of the corpus is convex and its
surface is relatively smooth. The posterior surface of the corpus is
concave and appears pitted.
The epiglottis has a vertical orientation. Superiorly, the corpus lies
immediately posterior to the root of the tongue and the corpus of the
hyoid bone. As illustrated in Figure 8-5, the anterior surface of the
corpus is continuous with the root of the tongue by way of a single
medial 
and 
two 
lateral 
glossoepiglottic 
folds. 
The 
medial
glossoepiglottic fold is separated from the two lateral glossoepiglottic
folds by two pits called valleculae. The corpus of the epiglottis is
anchored to the interior surface of the corpus of the hyoid bone by the
hyoepiglottic ligament (see Figure 8-4C). Adipose tissue forming a fat
pad lies between the epiglottis and hyoid bone. Inferiorly, the petiolus
extends just behind the thyroid notch and is anchored there by the
thyroepiglottic ligament (see Figure 8-4C).
Arytenoid Cartilages
 
Greater detail for the arytenoid cartilages is provided in Figure 8-6. The
two arytenoids lie on the posterior sloping border of the posterior
quadrate lamina of the cricoid cartilage, forming the cricoarytenoid
joints. The arytenoids resemble a three-sided pyramid with an apex and
a base. The three sides include the medial surface, posterior surface, and
anterolateral surface. The medial surfaces of the arytenoids face each
other. The posterior surfaces are on the same plane as the posterior
quadrate lamina of the cricoid. The medial and posterior surfaces of each
arytenoid are at a 90-degree angle. The anterolateral surface then

proceeds from the medial surface to the posterior surface.
The medial surface of each arytenoid is nondescript. The posterior
surface houses some important muscles that will be discussed in detail
later. The anterolateral surface of each arytenoid is the most detailed of
the three surfaces. The anterolateral surfaces have several landmarks
including the triangular fovea, arcuate ridge, and fovea oblonga. The
two foveae are depressions on the anterolateral surface; the triangular
fovea is found toward the apex of the arytenoid and the fovea oblonga
lies along the base. The arcuate ridge separates the triangular fovea from
the fovea oblonga. Each of these three landmarks serves as a point of
attachment for muscles.

 
Figure 8-5 Mid-sagittal (A) and superior (B) views of the laryngeal
region with selected landmarks. (A: Modified with permission from
Anatomical Chart Company; B: Modified with permission from

Snell, R. (2004). Clinical anatomy (7th ed.). Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins.)
 
 
Figure 8-6 Relationship of the arytenoid cartilages to the cricoid
cartilage. (Modified with permission from Oatis, C.A. (2008).
Kinesiology (2nd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.)
 
In addition to the three landmarks of the antero-lateral surface,
there are other noteworthy landmarks on the arytenoid cartilages. Along
the base of each arytenoid where the anterolateral surface meets the
posterior surface is a prominent, laterally directed landmark known as
the muscular process. Similarly, along the base where the anterolateral
and medial surfaces meet is an anteriorly directed landmark called the
vocal process. These two processes serve as a point of attachment for
some very important muscles that will be presented later.
Cuneiform and Corniculate Cartilages
 
To understand the paired cuneiform and corniculate cartilages, you must
know that two folds of tissue run along the interior of the larynx from
the lateral borders of the corpus of the epiglottis to the arytenoid
cartilages. These folds are referred to as the aryepiglottic folds (see
Figure 8-7). Both the cuneiform and corniculate cartilages are embedded

within the aryepiglottic folds, thereby providing a measure of stability to
the folds. The corniculate cartilages rest atop the apexes of the
arytenoids, and the cuneiform cartilages are found immediately
anterolateral to the corniculates. Because they are embedded within the
aryepiglottic folds, you would not be able to see these cartilages but
instead would see little bumps in the posterior region of the aryepiglottic
folds. The two medial bumps are the corniculate tubercles and the two
lateral bumps are the cuneiform tubercles (see Figure 8-7).
 
Figure 8-7 The aryepiglottic folds with corniculate and cuneiform
tubercles. (Modified with permission from Agur, A.M., Dalley,
A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th ed.). Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Laryngeal Joints
 
Two pairs of joints are formed by articulation of the arytenoid and
thyroid cartilages with the cricoid cartilage. The joints formed by
articulation of the arytenoid cartilages with the cricoid cartilage are the
cricoarytenoid joints. Bilateral articulation of the thyroid cartilage with
the cricoid cartilage creates the cricothyroid joints.
The cricoarytenoid joints are formed by the articulation of the
arytenoid articular facets located on the base of the muscular process
of each arytenoid cartilage with the cricoid articular facets located on
the lateral sloping border of the posterior quadrate lamina of the cricoid
cartilage. The arytenoid articular facets are concave, whereas the cricoid

articular facets are convex. These articulations result in saddle joints that
allow for rocking and some limited gliding movement. A series of
ligaments hold these joints in place. For each joint, a posterior
cricoarytenoid ligament limits the amount of forward movement of the
arytenoid 
cartilage 
upon 
the 
cricoid, 
whereas 
an 
anterior
cricoarytenoid ligament limits the amount of backward movement. As
you will learn in more detail later, the lateral and posterior cricoary
tenoid muscles (LCAs and PCAs, respectively) and the interarytenoid
(IA) muscles (i.e., oblique and transverse arytenoids) act upon this joint
by moving the arytenoid cartilages backward, forward, laterally, and
medially upon the posterior quadrate lamina of the cricoid.
The cricothyroid joints are created by articulation of the inferior
cornua of the thyroid cartilage with the cricoid cartilage in the region,
where its anterior arch ends and posterior quadrate lamina begins. On
each side, the ceratocricoid ligaments (anterior, lateral, and posterior)
loosely hold the joints in place. The cricothyroid joints are pivot joints,
allowing the cricoid and/or thyroid cartilages to pivot upon the axes
created by these joints. This is accomplished by contraction of the
cricothyroid, thyroarytenoid, and superior thyroarytenoid muscles that
act upon this joint.
The Laryngeal Membranes
 
An intricate series of membranes binds the various cartilages of the
larynx into a singular unit. Some of these membranes have one of their
attachments to a laryngeal cartilage, but the other attachment is to a
structure outside the larynx. These are referred to as extrinsic
membranes. Conversely, there are other membranes whose attachments
are found entirely within the cartilaginous confines of the larynx. These
are called intrinsic membranes. Incidentally, the muscles that will be
discussed later are also classified as either extrinsic or intrinsic for the
same reason as the membranes discussed here.
Extrinsic Laryngeal Membranes
 
Three major membranes anchor the larynx in place superiorly and
inferiorly. As was mentioned earlier, immediately superior to the larynx

is the hyoid bone and immediately inferior is the trachea. The extrinsic
membranes then bind the larynx to the hyoid bone and trachea. All three
of these membranes were mentioned previously, but for the sake of
enhancing your learning, they bear mentioning again. The three extrinsic
membranes are the hyothyroid, hyoepiglottic, and cricotracheal. The
prefix and root of each of these words indicates where the membrane is
located.
As its name indicates, the hyothyroid membrane occupies the space
between the inferior border of the hyoid bone and the superior surface of
the thyroid cartilage (refer back to Figure 8-4). This membrane is
somewhat thicker in its mid-region and also posteriorly where it bridges
the space between the greater cornua of the hyoid and the superior
cornua of the thyroid cartilage. In these regions, the hyothyroid
membrane is referred to as the medial and lateral hyothyroid ligaments.
In many cases, small cartilages called the triticial cartilages are
embedded within the lateral hyothyroid ligaments. The triticial cartilages
were not mentioned as components of the larynx because they reside
outside the cartilaginous confines of that structure.
As you have probably already discerned, the hyoepiglottic
membrane binds the epiglottis to the hyoid bone. More specifically, it is
an unpaired, elastic ligament found midline that connects the lingual
surface of the corpus of the epiglottis to the upper, posterior surface of
the corpus of the hyoid bone. Recall from a previous section that the
epiglottis is bound in place by two ligaments. The hyoepiglottic
membrane is one of them. The other—the thyroepiglottic ligament—is
not classified as an extrinsic membrane because it resides completely
within the larynx (attaching the petiolus of the epiglottis to the thyroid
cartilage).
The cricotracheal membrane binds the cricoid cartilage (i.e., the
base of the larynx) to the first tracheal ring. Because of the size of the
cricoid cartilage, the first tracheal ring tends to be larger than all of the
other tracheal rings. The membrane courses from the inferior border of
the cricoid to the superior border of the first tracheal ring, thereby
providing an inferior anchor for the larynx.
Intrinsic Laryngeal Membranes
 

The intrinsic laryngeal membranes are more complex and are not quite
as distinct as the extrinsic membranes. Figure 8-8 provides a schematic
diagram of the organization of the intrinsic membranes, while Figure 8-9
provides an illustration of these membranes according to posterior and
sagittal views of the larynx. Almost all of the intrinsic laryngeal
membranes are a part of a single, continuous layer of fibroelastic tissue
called the elastic membrane. Nearly the entire interior of the larynx is
lined by this membrane. The elastic membrane is divided into two
components: the upper portion is referred to as the quadrangular
membrane and the lower portion is known as the conus elasticus.
 
Figure 8-8 A schematic representation of the elastic membrane.
 

 
Figure 8-9 Various membranes of the larynx. A. Posterior view.
(Modified with permission from Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008).
Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.) B. Right sagittal view. (Modified with
permission from Anatomical Chart Company.)
 
The quadrangular membrane is actually a paired membrane that
originates superiorly along the lateral borders of the epiglottis, then
continuing around the adjacent interior walls of the thyroid cartilage
until they terminate at the corniculate cartilages and medial surfaces of
the arytenoid cartilages. This superior portion of the quadrangular
membrane is known as the aryepiglottic folds. As was mentioned in a
previous section of this chapter, embedded within the aryepiglottic folds
posteriorly are the corniculate and cuneiform cartilages. There may be
muscle fibers within the aryepiglottic folds, but they tend to be poorly
developed. From the aryepiglottic folds, the quadrangular membrane
continues inferiorly until it terminates as a pair of thickened ligaments
called the ventricular ligaments. The ventricular ligaments course from
the angle of the thyroid immediately below the epiglottic attachment to
the triangular foveae of the arytenoid cartilages. Recall that the
triangular foveae are found on the anterolateral surfaces of the
arytenoids in proximity to their apexes. Because of this arrangement, the

two ventricular ligaments approximate each other anteriorly (i.e., at their
thyroid attachment) but separate as they proceed posteriorly to the
arytenoids. The ventricular ligaments serve as the point of attachment
for the ventricular folds, more commonly referred to as the “false
folds.”
The purpose of the conus elasticus is to bind the thyroid, cricoid,
and arytenoid cartilages. Inferiorly, this membrane starts as the medial
and lateral cricothyroid ligaments. The medial cricothyroid ligament
can be found at midline, running from the superior border of the arch of
the cricoid to the inferior border of the thyroid cartilage at the thyroid
angle. The two lateral cricothyroid ligaments begin at the superior lateral
margins of the cricoid cartilage, then proceed into the interior of the
larynx, terminating immediately below the ventricular ligaments from
the quadrangular membrane. At this superior margin, the lateral
cricothyroid ligaments attach themselves anteriorly to the thyroid
cartilage just behind and below the thyroid notch in a region called the
macula flava anterior. They then proceed posteriorly to the vocal
processes at the base of the arytenoids. This superior margin of the
conus elasticus is known as the vocal ligaments. The vocal ligaments
are the anchor for the true vocal folds.
Note that both the ventricular ligaments and vocal ligaments
originate at the inner aspect of the thyroid cartilage and then proceed
back to the arytenoids. Both sets of ligaments converge at this anterior
attachment but separate as they move posteriorly. Although the course
of the ventricular and vocal ligaments is parallel, the ventricular
ligaments are superior to the vocal ligaments, terminating closer to the
apices of the arytenoids as opposed to their bases. Subsequently, the
ventricular folds are superior to the true vocal folds.
In summary, if you were to label the elastic membrane from its
superior margin to its inferior margin, the landmarks would include the
aryepiglottic folds, ventricular ligaments, vocal ligaments, and finally
the medial and lateral cricothyroid ligaments. The first two landmarks
are part of the quadrangular membrane and the remaining landmarks are
part of the conus elasticus.
THE MUSCLES OF THE PHONATORY SYSTEM

The muscles of the phonatory system are classified similarly to the
laryngeal membranes. That is, muscles are classified as either extrinsic
or intrinsic. Extrinsic muscles have either their origins or insertions on a
laryngeal cartilage, but the other attachment is to a structure outside the
larynx. Intrinsic muscles have their origins and insertions within the
cartilaginous confines of the larynx. An intrinsic muscle may reside
between two different laryngeal cartilages (e.g., between the cricoid and
arytenoid cartilages) or between the two partners of a pair (e.g., from the
left arytenoid to the right arytenoid).
With the extrinsic muscles, in most cases, one of the attachments is
to the hyoid bone. Some of the muscles come from anatomical structures
superior to the hyoid and then insert somewhere along the superior
margin of the hyoid. Others come from structures inferior to the hyoid
and then rise to attach to some point along the inferior margin of the
hyoid. These muscles are referred to as suprahyoid and infrahyoid
muscles, respectively. A small number of extrinsic muscles come from
structures below the hyoid bone but do not insert onto the hyoid.
Although these could be considered infrahyoid muscles, they are not
typically classified in that manner because they do not make an
attachment to the hyoid. These few muscles will simply be classified as
miscellaneous extrinsic muscles.
Although the extrinsic membranes were presented before the
intrinsic membranes, the intrinsic muscles will be described first in this
section. As far as the physiology of the larynx is concerned, the intrinsic
muscles play a greater role than the extrinsic muscles, and for this
reason, the intrinsic muscles will be discussed first.
It should be noted that all laryngeal muscles— intrinsic and
extrinsic muscles alike—are paired. Although Table 8-1 provides the
actions of the laryngeal muscles, only a brief anatomical description of
each muscle will be provided in this section. Muscle action will be
discussed more fully in physiology section of this chapter.

 
 
Figure 8-10 The thyroarytenoid muscles. (Modified with

permission from Anatomical Chart Company.)
 
Intrinsic Laryngeal Muscles
 
A brief summary of the origin, insertion, and action of each intrinsic
laryngeal muscle is provided in Table 8-1. The intrinsic muscles include
the 
thyroarytenoids, 
posterior 
cricoarytenoids 
(PCAs), 
lateral
cricoarytenoids, oblique arytenoids, transverse 
arytenoids, 
and
cricothyroids. The name of each of these muscles is a direct hint as to its
origin and insertion.
Thyroarytenoid Muscles
 
The thyroarytenoid muscles course from the inner aspect of the angle of
the thyroid cartilage back to the vocal processes and foveae oblonga
along the bases of the arytenoids (see Figure 8-10). In essence, the
thyroarytenoids make up the bulk of the vocal folds. These muscles have
two parts—a medial bundle (i.e., thyrovocalis) that flanks the vocal
ligament and a lateral bundle (i.e., the thyromuscularis) that serves as
the body of the muscle. During abduction, both portions of the
thyroarytenoids 
appear 
straight, 
but 
upon 
adduction, 
the
thyromuscularis presents a somewhat twisted appearance. Because the
vocal folds are composed primarily of muscle tissue, they have the
ability to contract. The interesting thing about the thyroarytenoids is the
dual function they play in phonation. The primary purpose of
thyroarytenoid contraction is to increase vocal fold tension, but this
muscle is also involved in decreasing vocal fold tension (this will be
discussed in greater detail in the section Modifications of Vocal Pitch).
To a lesser degree, the thyroarytenoids may also play a part in their own
adduction.
According to Hirano (1974, 1981), the thyroarytenoids consist of
five layers of tissue (these layers are summarized in Figure 8-11). The
epithelial layer (composed of squamous cells) is the most superficial of
all the layers and assists in maintaining the shape of the vocal folds. The
superficial layer of the lamina propria is soft and somewhat gelatinous in

its consistency. This layer is responsible for the mucosal wave that can
be viewed when the vocal folds vibrate. The intermediate layer of the
lamina propria is soft and rubbery due to the elastic fibers that are found
there. The fourth layer, the deep layer of the lamina propria, is
collagenous in consistency, giving it an appearance similar to cotton
fibers. Finally, the vocalis muscle is composed of stiff, rubbery fibers.
As Figure 8-11 indicates, the epithelial layer and superficial layer of the
lamina propria are collectively referred to as the cover of the
thyroarytenoid muscles. The intermediate and deep layers of the lamina
propria are referred to as the transition. Finally, the vocalis muscle is
considered to be the main body of the thyroarytenoids.
 
Figure 8-11 A schematic representation of the layers of the
thyroarytenoid muscles.
 
Vocal fold length varies greatly from individual to individual.
However, on average, vocal fold length in adult males is in the range of
17 to 24 mm. For adult females, the range is between 13 and 17 mm.
Naturally, the vocal folds of children are even shorter but become longer
as they mature until they reach the adult size for their gender.
Why You Need to Know
 
In approximately half of the world’s population, there may be an
additional muscle called the superior thyroarytenoid. This muscle

originates at the superior-most limit of the thyroid notch and proceeds
posteriorly to insert onto the muscular process of the arytenoids. Upon
contraction, the superior thyroarytenoids tilt the thyroid cartilage back,
thereby shortening the distance between the thyroid cartilage and the
arytenoid cartilages. This in turn creates a shortening of the vocal folds,
which relaxes them.
 
Posterior Cricoarytenoid Muscles
 
The posterior cricoarytenoid muscles (referred to as the PCA muscles)
are illustrated in Figure 8-12. These muscles originate at the shallow
depressions immediately lateral to the vertical ridge on the posterior
quadrate lamina of the cricoid cartilage. They then insert onto the
muscular processes of the arytenoids. Because the origins of the PCAs
are posterior and inferior to their insertions, contraction will cause the
muscular processes of the arytenoids to rotate posterolaterally. Because
the vocal folds are attached to the vocal processes and foveae oblonga of
the arytenoids, the net action is abduction of the vocal folds. In fact, the
PCA is the only abductor muscle in the larynx.
Lateral Cricoarytenoid Muscles
 
The origin of each LCA is the arch of the cricoid cartilage in proximity
to where the arch ends and the posterior quadrate lamina begins (see
Figure 8-12). The insertion is the muscular process of each arytenoid
cartilage. In this case, the point of origin is anterior and inferior to the
point of insertion, so contraction of the LCA will have just the opposite
effect of the PCA. In other words, the LCA is an adductor muscle; its
purpose is to assist in bringing the vocal folds to midline. To a lesser
degree, the LCA also assists in relaxing the vocal folds.
Oblique and Transverse Arytenoid Muscles
 
The oblique and transverse arytenoid muscles originate on one of the
two arytenoid cartilages and then inserts onto the other. Because these
two muscles are confined to the arytenoid cartilages, coursing from one

to the other, they are collectively referred to as the interarytenoid (IA)
muscles (see Figure 8-12). The origin of each oblique arytenoid muscle
is the posterior surface of the muscular process. The muscle then
proceeds along the posterior surface to the opposite arytenoid cartilage
near its apex. This arrangement gives the oblique arytenoids an “X”
appearance. You would be able to see the “X” formed by these muscles
because they are superficial to the transverse arytenoid muscles.
The transverse arytenoid muscles originate at the lateral aspect of
the posterior surface of one arytenoid cartilage and then course
horizontally across the posterior surface of the two arytenoids to the
lateral aspect of the opposite arytenoid cartilage. Some of the deeper
fibers continue around to the anterolateral surface to intermingle with
fibers of the thyroarytenoid muscles. When the oblique and transverse
arytenoid muscles contract, they cause the two arytenoid cartilages to
approximate each other. Because the vocal folds are attached to the
vocal processes and foveae oblonga, the net action is adduction of the
vocal folds. Therefore, the IA muscles are classified as adductor
muscles, along with the LCA described earlier.
Cricothyroid Muscles
 
As their name implies, the cricothyroid muscles run between the cricoid
and thyroid cartilages (see Figure 8-13). The muscles are actually
composed of two bundles, the pars recta and pars oblique. Both
bundles have their origin at the anterior arch of the cricoid, somewhat
lateral to midline. The pars oblique bundle has its insertion along the
anterior aspect of the inferior cornua of the thyroid cartilage. The pars
recta bundle inserts into the inner aspect of the inferior margin of the
thyroid lamina.

 
Figure 8-12 The posterior and lateral cricoarytenoid muscles and
the interarytenoid muscles. A. Posterior cricoarytenoid. B. Lateral
cricoarytenoid. C. Oblique arytenoid. D. Transverse arytenoid.
(Top: Modified with permission from Anatomical Chart Company;
A–D: Modified with permission from Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F.
(2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th ed.). Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

There is a space between the anterior arch of the cricoid and the
thyroid cartilage. The relationship between these two cartilages is
similar to the visor on the helmet of a suit of armor. When the
cricothyroid muscles contract, the thyroid tilts downward and forward
and/or the cricoid tilts upward, somewhat similarly to lowering the visor
on the helmet. This changes the angle between the thyroid and cricoid
cartilages and increases the distance between the interior aspect of the
thyroid cartilage and the arytenoid cartilages. Because the vocal folds
course between these two points, contraction of the cricothyroid muscles
results in a lengthening of the vocal folds, thereby increasing their
tension. As such, the cricothyroid muscles are classified as tensor
muscles.
 
Figure 8-13 The cricothyroid muscle. (Modified with permission
from Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy
(12th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Extrinsic Laryngeal Muscles
 
The extrinsic laryngeal muscles are subclassified as either suprahyoid or
infrahyoid muscles. Suprahyoid muscles have one of their attachments
superior to the hyoid bone; infrahyoid muscles have one of their
attachments inferior to the hyoid bone. Upon contraction, the net action
of suprahyoid muscles is an elevation of the hyoid bone, and
subsequently the larynx because the hyoid and larynx are coupled by the
hyothyroid membrane. The net effect of contraction of the infrahyoids

(and the miscellaneous muscles mentioned later) is to depress or lower
the hyoid bone and larynx. The importance of these actions will be
discussed more fully in the section on physiology.
Suprahyoid Muscles
 
The suprahyoid muscles include the digastricus, stylohyoid, mylohyoid,
geniohyoid, hyoglossus, and genioglossus. Table 8-2 provides a
summary of the origins, insertions, and actions of these muscles. Four of
these muscles originate in the region of the mandible (i.e., the jaw).
From superficial to deep, these include the digastricus (anterior body),
mylohyoid, geniohyoid, and genioglossus. Superficial refers to muscles
that are closer to the surface of the skin. Deep then refers to muscles that
are farther away from the surface of the skin, or closer to the base of the
tongue inside the oral cavity in this case.
As its name indicates, the digastricus has two bellies—an anterior
one and a posterior one (see Figure 8-14). The anterior belly has its
origin inside the lower border of the mandible. It then courses
downward and backward until it joins with the posterior belly in an
intermediate tendon that penetrates the stylohyoid muscle before
inserting onto the lesser cornua of the hyoid bone. The posterior belly
originates at the mastoid process, which is the rounded base of the skull
immediately behind the ear, then courses downward and forward to meet
the anterior belly at the intermediate tendon. If the hyoid bone is
anchored, contraction of the digastricus will assist in depressing the
mandible (i.e., opening the mouth). With the mandible fixed, contraction
will assist in elevating the hyoid bone and larynx.

 

 
Figure 8-14 Suprahyoid muscles: A. digastricus, B. mylohyoid,
and C. stylohyoid. (Top: Modified with permission from Agur,
A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th ed.).
Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; A–C: Modified
with permission from Cael, C. (2009). Functional anatomy:
Musculoskeletal anatomy, kinesiology, and palpation for manual
therapists. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The stylohyoid muscle passes from the styloid process at the base
of the skull to the junction of the corpus and greater cornua of the hyoid

bone (see Figure 8-14). Upon contraction, this muscle will draw the
hyoid bone and larynx upward and backward.
The mylohyoid muscle is also illustrated in Figure 8-14. It forms
essentially the muscular floor of the oral cavity. Its origin is the
mylohyoid line that runs along the inner surface of the corpus of the
mandible. Fibers from each side of the mandible course downward and
medially until the two sides meet at the midline raphe. The posterior-
most fibers along the midline raphe insert onto the corpus of the hyoid
bone. When this muscle contracts, it will either elevate the hyoid bone
and larynx or depress the mandible, depending upon which anatomical
structure is anchored and which is not.
The geniohyoid muscle originates at the lower portion of the
mental symphysis of the mandible (i.e., inside the chin) and then
courses inferiorly to insert onto the anterior surface of the corpus of the
hyoid bone (see Figure 8-15). Contraction of this muscle will result in
elevation of the hyoid bone in a forward direction.

 
Figure 8-15 Suprahyoid muscles: A. geniohyoid, B. genioglossus,
geniohyoid, and hyoglossus. (Top: Modified with permission from
Agur, A.M., & Dalley, A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th

ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; A, B:
Modified with permission from Cael, C. (2009). Functional
anatomy: Musculoskeletal anatomy, kinesiology, and palpation for
manual therapists. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.)
 
The hyoglossus muscle is also illustrated in Figure 8-15. It is a
muscle primarily associated with the tongue, but it does have an indirect
action upon the larynx by way of the hyoid bone. Its origin is the corpus
and greater cornua of the hyoid bone, and its insertion is along the sides
and back of the tongue. This muscle is thought to influence positioning
of the larynx in relation to tongue activity.
The course of the genioglossus muscle is from the inner aspect of
the mental symphysis of the mandible to the tongue and hyoid bone (see
Figure 8-15). As the genioglossus runs in a posterior direction, upper
fibers insert into the inferior regions of the tongue, whereas lower fibers
insert onto the corpus of the hyoid bone. Although this muscle is
primarily associated with the tongue, it may play a part in positioning
the larynx in much the same way as the hyoglossus muscle.
Infrahyoid Muscles
 
The extrinsic infrahyoid muscles are summarized in Table 8-3 according
to their origins, insertions, and actions. The infrahyoids include the
thyrohyoid, sternohyoid, and omohyoid muscles. The thyrohyoid
muscles course from the oblique lines of the thyroid cartilages to the
lower margin of the greater cornua of the hyoid bone (see Figure 8-16,
top drawing and drawing C). Upon contraction, the thyrohyoid muscles
will either depress the hyoid bone or elevate the thyroid cartilage,
depending on which of these two structures is anchored.

 
As can be seen in Figure 8-16 (top drawing and drawing A), the
sternohyoid muscles originate along the posterior aspect of the
manubrium of the sternum as well as the medial aspect of the clavicle,
then course vertically to insert into the inferior border of the corpus of
the hyoid bone. Contraction of these muscles results in depression (i.e.,
lowering) of the hyoid bone.
Similar to the digastricus muscles, the omohyoid muscles consist of
two bodies joined by intermediate tendons (see Figure 8-16, top drawing
and drawing B). The inferior bellies of the omohyoid muscles have their
origins along the superior borders of the scapulae. The fibers then course
almost completely horizontally until they join fibers of the superior
bellies at the intermediate tendons. The intermediate tendons are held in
place by tendinous slips that anchor onto the sternum and first rib. From
the intermediate tendons, fibers of the superior bellies course vertically
and somewhat medially to insert into the inferior margin of the greater
cornua of the hyoid bone. Although the omohyoid muscles assist in
preventing the neck region from collapsing during deep inhalation, they
may also assist in depressing the hyoid bone.
Miscellaneous Extrinsic Muscles
 

Two muscles act upon the larynx in much the same way as the
infrahyoid muscles, yet they are not classified as infrahyoid because
they have no attachment to the hyoid bone. These are the sternothyroid
and inferior pharyngeal constrictor muscles (see Figures 8-17 and 8-18,
respectively). Table 8-3 provides summary information relating to the
origin, insertion, and action of these two muscles.

 
Figure 8-16 Infrahyoid muscles: A. sternohyoid, B. omohyoid, and
C. thyrohyoid. (Modified with permission from Cael, C. (2009).
Functional anatomy: Musculoskeletal anatomy, kinesiology, and
palpation for manual therapists. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.)

 
 
Figure 8-17 Infrahyoid muscles: sternothyroid. (Modified with
permission 
from 
Cael, 
C. 
(2009). 
Functional 
anatomy:
Musculoskeletal anatomy, kinesiology, and palpation for manual
therapists. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The sternothyroid muscles originate along the posterior aspect of
the manubrium of the sternum and the cartilage of the first rib. Their
fibers then travel vertically to insert into the lower border of the oblique
line of the thyroid cartilage. With the sternum and first rib anchored,
contraction of these muscles will result in bilateral depression of the
thyroid cartilage.
The inferior pharyngeal constrictor muscles make up the lower part
of the pharynx and are actually formed by a number of individual
muscles that intermingle (these muscles will be discussed in more detail
in Chapter 10). Some of the fibers of these muscles insert into the

vertical ridge located at midline on the posterior quadrate lamina of the
cricoid cartilage as well as the posterior borders of the thyroid cartilage.
The action of these muscles assists in mediating the resonant
characteristics of the vocal tone.
MUCOUS MEMBRANE
The entire laryngeal cavity is lined by a mucous membrane that is
continuous with the mucous membrane found within the pharynx above
and trachea below. This membrane is tight and closely adheres to the
epiglottis, aryepiglottic folds, and vocal folds, but it tends to be loose
elsewhere within the larynx. The mucous membrane on the regions of
the vocal folds that approximate during phonation is composed of
squamous epithelium. The mucous membrane that lines the interior of
the cricoid cartilage (referred to as the subglottic space) is ciliated,
similarly to the mucous membrane of the trachea immediately below.
Why You Need to Know
 
Orlikoff and Kahane (1996) describe a laryngeal feedback system.
Mechanoreceptors can be found throughout the joints, membranes, and
muscles of the larynx. These specialized receptor cells are thought to
allow the brain to determine and maintain the status of the larynx,
making reflexive adjustments as necessary. To date, relatively little is
known about the specifics of this feedback system.
 
NEURAL INNERVATION OF THE MUSCLES OF
PHONATION
Table 8-4 provides a summary of the neural innervation of select
intrinsic and extrinsic muscles of the phonatory system. Four cranial
nerves are involved in the process of phonation. These include the facial
(VII), hypoglossal (XII), trigeminal (V), and vagus (X). Cranial nerves
V, VII, and XII innervate the extrinsic muscles, whereas cranial nerve X
innervates the intrinsics.

 
Figure 8-18 Infrahyoid muscles: inferior pharyngeal constrictor.
(Modified with permission from Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008).
Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.)
 

 
Innervation of the Intrinsic Muscles
 
All of the intrinsic laryngeal muscles receive their motor innervation
from one of two branches of the vagus nerve (cranial nerve X). All
intrinsic laryngeal muscles except the cricothyroids are innervated by
the recurrent laryngeal nerve. The cricothyroid muscles are innervated
by the superior laryngeal nerve.
The recurrent laryngeal nerve gets its name from the fact that it
takes the “scenic route” on its way to the intrinsic muscles of the larynx
(see Figure 8-19). The left recurrent laryngeal nerve passes under and
around the aorta on its way to the larynx, whereas the right recurrent
laryngeal nerve passes under and around the subclavian artery. Because
the aorta is inferior to the subclavian artery, the left recurrent laryngeal
nerve is a bit longer than the right recurrent laryngeal nerve. However,
there is no discernible effect on the timing of neural impulses to the
muscles these two nerves serve. By comparison with the recurrent
laryngeal nerves, the superior laryngeal nerves take a more direct route
on their way to the cricothyroid muscles.

 
Figure 8-19 The superior and recurrent laryngeal nerves.
 
Innervation of the Extrinsic Muscles
 
The suprahyoid muscles receive their innervation from either the facial
(VII), hypoglossal (XII), or trigeminal (V) cranial nerve. The anterior

belly of the digastricus and the mylohyoid muscles receive their motor
supply from branches of the trigeminal nerve. The posterior belly of the
digastricus and the stylohyoid muscles are innervated by branches of the
facial nerve. The geniohyoid, genioglossus, and hyoglossus muscles all
receive innervation from branches of the hypoglossal nerve.
The three infrahyoid muscles are innervated by branches of the
hypoglossal nerve along with branches coming from various spinal
nerves. The sternohyoid and omohyoid muscles are innervated by a
branch of the hypoglossal nerve whose fibers intermingle with fibers
from spinal nerves C1 through C3. The thyrohyoid muscles are
innervated by branches from the hypoglossal nerve that interdigitate
with fibers from spinal nerves C1 and C2.
Finally, the inferior pharyngeal constrictor is inner-vated by the
vagus nerve (cranial nerve X), with possible contribution from the spinal
accessory nerve (XI). The sternothyroid muscle is innervated by the
hypoglossal nerve (XII) with contributions from C1, C2, and C3.
Why You Need to Know
 
In rare instances, the laryngeal branches of the vagus nerve may be
severed or damaged during neck surgery or because of an accident. This
can result in severe voice problems for the patient. Depending on the
extent of damage, the patient may not have a voice at all, or the voice
may sound dull and monotonous due to the patient experiencing
problems in regulating pitch. The patient’s voice may be whispery with
diminished intensity. A more thorough discussion of the effects of vagus
nerve damage on voice will be presented in Chapter 9.
 

 
Figure 8-20 The aditus laryngis with selected landmarks (the
ventricular folds are superior to the true vocal folds). (Modified
with permission from Anatomical Chart Company.)
 
THE LARYNGEAL CAVITY
Now that the larynx is complete with all the cartilages, connective
tissue, and muscles, you will note that the interior of the larynx is a tube
with several spaces residing within. If you were to look into the
laryngeal cavity, you would see the two ventricular folds and the two
true vocal folds extending into the space. The ventricular folds are
superior to the true vocal folds (see Figure 8-20). The “shelves” formed
by the ventricular folds and true vocal folds serve to divide the laryngeal
cavity into several regions.
Figure 8-21 provides a schematic organization of these regions.
Starting at the very top of the larynx and making your way down, these
include the aditus laryngis, vestibule, ventricle, and subglottic space.
The aditus laryngis is the entryway into the laryngeal cavity. It is
bounded by the epiglottis anteriorly, the aryepiglottic folds laterally, and

the arytenoid cartilages posteriorly. Immediately below the aditus
laryngis and immediately above the ventricular folds is an open area
called the vestibule. Between the ventricular folds and true vocal folds is
a space that runs horizontally along the length of the two sets of folds.
This space is called the ventricle. Finally, immediately inferior to the
true vocal folds is a space corresponding to the interior of the cricoid
cartilage. This space is referred to as the subglottic space.
 
Figure 8-21 A schematic representation of the internal cavities of
the larynx.
 
Although not really a space, there is a variable-sized opening
between the two true vocal folds known as the rima glottis, or simply
the glottis. Variable-sized means that the width of the glottis can change
depending on what the vocal folds are doing. When the vocal folds fully
adduct, there is zero glottis—no opening between the vocal folds.
During normal quiet vegetative breathing, the vocal folds are in a
somewhat half-open position known as the paramedian position. In
this case, the glottis is open but not quite as wide as it has the potential

to be (for adult males, with the vocal folds in the paramedian position,
the glottis is approximately 8 mm at its widest point). When a person
yawns or starts to breathe heavily due to strenuous exercise, the vocal
folds abduct even more, beyond their paramedian position. In this
scenario, the glottis is at maximum width (for adult males, as much as
16 to 18 mm at its widest point).
The glottis is divided into two parts. The first part is referred to as
the membranous glottis and the second is the cartilaginous glottis. The
membranous glottis corresponds to the portions of the vocal folds that
are attached to the vocal ligaments (which are membranous). This makes
up approximately 60% of the length of the glottis (approximately 15 mm
in adult males and 12 mm in adult females). The remaining 40% of the
length (i.e., the cartilaginous glottis) corresponds to the vocal processes
and foveae oblonga of the arytenoid cartilages (approximately 10 mm in
adult males and 8 mm in adult females). The entire length of the glottis
then is approximately 25 mm in adult males and 20 mm in adult
females.
Laryngeal Region
 
The laryngeal cavity is typically divided into three regions: the
supraglottic, glottic, and subglottic regions. The supraglottic region
involves all laryngeal structures above the level of the vocal folds (since
the vocal folds form the glottis). This would include the aditus laryngis
(i.e., epiglottis, aryepiglottic folds, and arytenoid cartilages), vestibule,
ventricular folds, and ventricle. As illustrated in Figure 8-22, the
pyriform sinuses are posterolateral to the aditus laryngis. These sinuses
are formed by the space between the superior cornua of the thyroid and
the arytenoid cartilages.

 
Figure 8-22 The vocal folds in the paramedian position along with
selected landmarks.
 
Why You Need to Know
 
For persons with swallowing disorders, food or drink may pocket within
the pyriform sinuses because the patient does not have the ability to
propel the food past the larynx and into the esophagus. The patient may
choke or aspirate on the food or drink.
 
The vocal folds and the glottis that is formed by their abduction
make up the glottic region. Finally, the space below the vocal folds is
known as the subglottic space, and it corresponds to the subglottic
region. The mucous membrane that lines the interior of the subglottic
space is composed of ciliated epithelial cells. The hairlike projections
rising from the mucous membrane continually beat toward the vocal
folds. This helps move mucous and inhaled debris (e.g., dust particles)
toward the vocal folds where it can be forcibly cleared by a reflexive
cough.

Physiology of the Phonatory System
 
The prima ry structure of the phonatory system, the larynx, serves a
couple of biological or primary functions. First, it acts as a protective
mechanism for the lower respiratory passageway. The larynx prevents
foreign objects from getting into the trachea, bronchi, and lungs. If by
chance a foreign object did find its way into the larynx, contact with the
vocal folds would generate a cough reflex to expel the foreign matter.
This is especially true during the process of swallowing. When
swallowed food or drink (referred to as a bolus) approaches the larynx,
the epiglottis and aryepiglottic folds constrict the aditus laryngis so that
the bolus cannot enter the larynx. The bolus then passes over the larynx
posteriorly and into the esophagus. Anyone who has ever accidentally
aspirated swallowed water can certainly recall the violent coughing that
results!
The second biological function of the larynx is to serve as a valve
during thoracic fixation (also known as the Valsalva maneuver).
During this procedure, expired air is trapped beneath the adducted vocal
folds, generating increased abdominal and/or thoracic pressure. The
increased pressure is used by a person attempting to lift a heavy object,
or by a person who may be straining to empty their bladder or rectum, or
by a female giving birth.
Why You Need to Know
 
The Valsalva maneuver is also used by cardiologists to assess the
condition of the heart, and may also be used by persons experiencing
tachycardia to slow down their heart rate and/or lower their blood
pressure. Otolaryngologists (ENTs) also know the utility of a different
form of the Valsalva maneuver as a means of actively adjusting middle
ear pressure (see Chapter 12).
 
The nonbiological or secondary purpose of the larynx is to serve as
the sound source for the human voice. It accomplishes this by offering
variable resistance to airflow coming from the lungs as expired air. As
expired air is forced through the adducted vocal folds, it sets them into

vibration. The vibration of the vocal folds is the sound source for voice.
It is this particular function of the larynx to which the remainder of this
chapter will be dedicated. Before entering into a thorough discussion of
how the vocal mechanism works, you should be familiar with several
basic concepts related to voice production.
BASIC CONCEPTS
Pure Tones and Complex Tones
 
Sound is produced by a variable disturbance of the pressure between
molecules within a medium; in most cases, the medium is air. When an
object is set into motion, it is said to vibrate (one complete back and
forth vibration is called a cycle). The disturbance of air molecules
transfers energy, referred to as acoustic energy. The acoustic energy
travels from the source of the pressure disturbance from air molecule to
air molecule in a longitudinal wave to the hearing mechanism of an
animal or human where it is perceived.
If you have ever undergone an audiological evaluation or
screening, you are no doubt familiar with the beeping tones to which
you were to respond. These tones are referred to as pure tones; that is,
each tone presented is a single, individual, discrete frequency.
Frequency is the number of completed cycles of vibration that occur in
one second (hence, cycles per second or cps). For example, an object
(such as a tuning fork) that produces a 512 cps pure tone is completing
512 back and forth vibrations of its tines in one second. In other words,
the vibrating tines of the tuning fork generate 512 pressure disturbances
per second. Not only does a sound have frequency but it also has
intensity. Intensity is the magnitude of energy carried along the sound
wave and is measured in a unit known as the decibel (dB).
Frequency and intensity are physical measures, that is, they are
constant and do not change because of humans’ perceptions. In speech
science, we use the measure of Hertz (Hz) to represent the number of
cycles per second, so an object vibrating at 1000 cps is measured as
1000 Hz. Humans, however, perceive frequency as pitch. Pitch is the
psychological perception of frequency and can change depending on

people’s perceptions. A sound that is perceived as low in pitch has a
source that is vibrating at a slower rate than the source of a perceived
high-pitched sound. Similarly, intensity is a physical measure of sound
pressure level that has a perceptual correlate—loudness.
There are relatively few things in our world that produce pure
tones. Most sounds are complex tones. Complex tones are sounds
resulting from two or more pure tones blended together. Through a
process known as Fourier analysis, a complex tone can be analyzed
into its pure tone components along with their individual intensities. The
vocal tone (i.e., the sound created by vibration of the vocal folds) is a
complex tone that is composed of many frequencies; in other words, it
includes a wide range of frequencies. The lowest frequency in this
complex tone is referred to as the fundamental frequency (abbreviated
F0). Although the vocal tone is a complex tone with a range of
frequencies, we usually refer to it in terms of its fundamental frequency
instead of its range. The average adult male has a fundamental frequency
of approximately 125 Hz, the average adult female has a fundamental
frequency exceeding 200 Hz, and children (regardless of gender) have a
fundamental frequency exceeding 300 Hz.
The vocal tone is said to be rich in harmonics. Harmonics are
created by many different modes of vibration of the vocal folds.
Fundamental frequency is created by vibration of the entire length of the
vocal folds. However, not only does the entire length of the vocal folds
vibrate, but sections along the vocal fold length also vibrate, literally
creating “vibrations within vibrations.” For example, the two halves of
each vocal fold also vibrate, and the frequency of vibration of each of
these halves is two times the fundamental. The relationship between
frequency and length is an inverse one. As length gets shorter and
shorter, frequency gets higher and higher. Therefore, since there are two
equal halves instead of a whole, each half vibrates at twice the rate as
the entire length. This is the second harmonic (the first harmonic is
associated with the entire length of the vocal folds, i.e., the fundamental
frequency). Not only does each half of the vocal fold vibrate, but each
third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, etc., also vibrates at a different
mode that is a multiple of the fundamental frequency. These would be
the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, etc., harmonics. As an
example, if the fundamental frequency is 100 Hz, the harmonics are 100

Hz (first), 200 Hz (second), 300 Hz (third), 400 Hz (fourth), 500 Hz
(fifth), 600 Hz (sixth), 700 Hz (seventh), 800 Hz (eighth), and so on.
The human vocal tone on average can extend into as many as 20 or more
harmonics although not all of them would likely be perceived. With
each successive harmonic, vocal intensity tends to diminish at a rate of
approximately 12 dB per octave until the higher-frequency harmonics
are literally imperceptible.
In music, you might recognize the term octave as a series of eight
musical notes. In speech science, an octave is defined as a successive
doubling of frequency, usually in reference to the fundamental
frequency. In the example above, the first octave would be 100–200 Hz
(200 Hz represents a doubling of the fundamental frequency of 100 Hz).
The second octave would be 201–400 Hz (400 Hz being a doubling of
200 Hz), the third octave would be 401–800 Hz (800 Hz being a
doubling of 400 Hz), and the fourth octave would be 801–1600 Hz
(1600 Hz being a doubling of 800 Hz). Although the vocal folds can
generate a large number of harmonics (and therefore, octaves), vocal
intensity diminishes at the rate of 12 dB per octave. Because the highest
frequencies are practically imperceptible, the average human being has
an effective vocal range of approximately two to two and a half octaves.
By comparison, some humans have slightly greater vocal ranges.
Although this is not confirmed scientifically, a quick search of the
Internet reveals that singer Rob Halford (from the heavy metal band
Judas Priest) is reported to have a vocal range of approximately four
octaves. Mariah Carey (no introduction needed!) and Annie Haslam
(from the 1970s progressive rock band Renaissance) are each reported to
have a vocal range of five octaves. Trained, professional singers may
have a naturally wider vocal range than most humans, but they also learn
how to extend their vocal range to some degree.
Subglottic Pressure
 
Vocal fold vibration requires a coordinated effort between release of the
expired air stream from the lungs and adduction of the vocal folds. As
the expired air comes up from the lungs and approaches the larynx, the
vocal folds adduct. Adduction of the vocal folds creates an obstruction
to the expired air so that it becomes trapped below the vocal folds within

the subglottic space. As the expired air continues to build below the
vocal folds, it generates a certain amount of pressure against the inferior
surfaces of the vocal folds. This is known as subglottic pressure. As
you shall see in the sections that follow, subglottic pressure is a crucial
component in vocal fold mechanics.
Longitudinal Tension and Medial Compression
 
The larynx is capable of making two primary adjustments that regulate
the vocal tone. These are longitudinal tension and medial
compression. Longitudinal tension refers to the amount of tension that
is generated by changes in the length of the vocal folds. Anyone who
has ever played with a rubber band knows that as the rubber band is
stretched (i.e., as its length is increased), its tension increases. The same
holds true for the vocal folds. Conversely, you could accurately assume
that as the vocal folds are shortened, their tension decreases. As the
vocal folds lengthen and shorten, other changes are also occurring.
Vocal fold lengthening also results in a decrease in their cross-sectional
area or mass. By the same token, shortening of the vocal folds results in
increased cross-sectional area or mass. The relationship between cross-
sectional area and tension is an inverse one. As cross-sectional area
increases, tension decreases, resulting in a lower frequency vocal tone.
As cross-sectional area decreases, tension increases; the net result is a
higher frequency vocal tone. As you can no doubt deduce, changes in
vocal fold tension and mass have direct effects on the frequencies that
are produced when the vocal folds vibrate. Keep in mind that although
changes in cross-sectional area and tension are what are responsible for
changes in vocal tone frequency, the two are mediated by changes in
vocal fold length. Other than serving as the mechanism for regulating
cross-sectional area and tension, vocal fold length has essentially a
negligible role in vocal tone frequency. For the most part, vocal fold
length is a means toward an end.
Medial compression refers to the pressure that is generated by
adduction of the vocal folds. In other words, medial compression could
be thought of as the “force of adduction.” Humans have the ability to
regulate the amount of compression between the vocal folds from a very
light contact to an excessive amount of compression. As medial

compression increases, the vocal folds offer greater and greater
resistance to subglottic pressure. The amount of subglottic pressure that
would be needed to overcome the resistance of the vocal folds when the
vocal folds are making a light contact with each other is much less than
the subglottic pressure that would be needed when the vocal folds are
adducted very tightly. Regardless of the amount of medial compression,
at some point, subglottic pressure will overcome the resistance of the
vocal folds. If there is minimal medial compression, then minimal
subglottic pressure will accumulate before the vocal folds’ resistance is
overcome. Because so little subglottic pressure is generated, a relatively
small puff of air will pass through the open vocal folds. Conversely,
when there is maximum medial compression, maximum subglottic
pressure will be necessary to overcome the resistance of the vocal folds.
At the time the vocal folds are overcome, the massive subglottic
pressure that had built up will be released as a relatively large puff of
air. Essentially, the size of the puffs of air is associated with vocal
intensity. Small puffs of air (generated by minimal medial compression)
will result in a relatively low intensity vocal tone; large puffs of air will
result in a vocal tone having greater intensity.
THE PROCESS OF PHONATION
Myoelastic Aerodynamic Theory of Phonation
 
Despite the advances of modern science, to this date it is still not
completely clear as to how the vocal folds vibrate. Several theories have
been posited over the years in an attempt to describe the process of pho-
nation. Perhaps the most widely accepted theory of phonation is the
Myoelastic Aerodynamic Theory (van den Berg, 1958). As its name
indicates, this theory is concerned with principles of muscle tissue
elasticity and aerodynamics. One would think that with all of the tools of
modern science at our disposal, this theory would be a relatively recent
one, but the theory was actually proposed by two 19th century scientists
—Helmholtz and Müller—and was further refined by van den Berg in
the 1950s.
Central to this theory are the concepts subglottic pressure,

elasticity, and Bernoulli effect. Subglottic pressure was defined earlier
as the force of air upon the inferior surfaces of the vocal folds when the
vocal folds are adducted and expired air is trapped below them. Being
composed of muscle tissue, the vocal folds have a certain elasticity; that
is, they can be manipulated by external forces as well as internal
mechanics. Finally, the Bernoulli effect states that when a gas or liquid
flows through or around a constriction, velocity of the gas or fluid
increases. The abrupt increase in velocity in turn results in a drop in
pressure within the gas or fluid relative to the walls of the constriction
through which it passes. The net result is a vacuum between the walls of
the constriction. If you have ever been on a freeway passing a tractor-
trailer and gotten the sensation that you are being “sucked” toward the
bigger vehicle, it was the Bernoulli effect that caused that sensation. The
differential in air velocity between the two vehicles created a vacuum.
Lower air pressure was generated by the tractor-trailer (which was
creating greater air velocity) and higher air pressure was generated by
your car (which was creating less air velocity). Air flows from regions
of higher to lower pressure, and hence your car was actually drawn
toward the larger vehicle. It is also interesting to note that the Bernoulli
effect is integral to the mechanics of flight. The contour of an airplane
wing is designed in such a way that as air passes over and under the
wing, velocity of air movement over the wing is greater than under the
wing. This creates a drop in pressure above the wing by comparison
with the pressure below it. Air below the wing creates “lift” as it
attempts to equalize the drop in pressure above the wing.
According to the Myoelastic Aerodynamic Theory, when the vocal
folds are adducted, they create resistance to expired air coming from the
lungs. Air pressure (in the form of subglottic pressure) then builds
within the subglottic space. At some point, subglottic pressure will
overcome the resistance of the vocal folds. Because of their elasticity,
subglottic pressure will force the vocal folds to separate creating a small
glottis. As soon as this occurs, subglottic pressure is released
immediately as airflow. The increase in velocity of the air as it passes
through the glottis creates a drop in pressure of the air relative to the
medial borders of the vocal folds. The vocal folds are literally brought
back together by the vacuum that is created by the increased velocity
(i.e., the Bernoulli effect), as well as by the recoil pressure that is created

by their inherent elasticity. This entire sequence of events (buildup of
subglottic pressure; subglottic pressure overcoming the resistance of the
vocal folds; increase in velocity creating a vacuum that brings the vocal
folds back together again) results in one cycle of vibration. For a vocal
tone with a fundamental frequency of 100 Hz, this entire cycle takes
only 1/100 of a second to complete. To look at it another way, there
would be 100 cycles of glottis open/glottis closed per second! At such a
fast rate, subglottic air does not flow through the glottis continuously but
rather, small puffs or bursts of air pass through the glottis very similarly
to Native American smoke signals.
By the description immediately above, it should be clear that also
inherent to vocal fold vibration are the laws of fluid mechanics. You will
recall from Chapter 6 that when there is a difference in pressure between
two gradients, gases and liquids will always flow from regions of greater
pressure to regions of lesser pressure. When the vocal folds adduct for
phonation, expired air is trapped below the vocal folds, creating
subglottic pressure. By the time the vocal folds are forced open,
subglottic pressure is greater than the atmospheric pressure above the
vocal folds (referred to as supraglottic pressure). As the vocal folds
open, subglottic pressure is released and flows upward through the
glottis and vocal tract to equalize the drop in supraglottic pressure.
Cover–Body Model
 
In recent decades, advances in computer-assisted modeling and imaging
techniques such as videostroboscopy have allowed scientists to get a
better look at how the vocal folds vibrate. Among the pioneers in this
area are Titze (1994, 2006) and Hirano et al. (e.g., Hirano, Kakita,
Kawasaki, Gould, & Lambiase, 1981; Hirano, Yoshida, & Tanaka,
1991). As a result of his studies involving computer-assisted modeling,
Titze (2006) proposed a modification to the Myoelastic Aerodynamic
Theory commonly referred to as the Cover–Body Model.
Titze’s studies on vocal fold vibration (referred to as oscillations)
lead him to believe that the Bernoulli effect alone could not account for
how the vocal folds maintain their vibratory mechanics once phonation
is initiated. That is, he discovered that the vocal folds have the ability to
continue oscillating even during brief periods when there is no energy

source. The Bernoulli effect cannot account for this. Instead, Titze found
that the inherent structure of the vocal folds plays a big part in their
ability to maintain vibration.
To understand how this happens, you should realize that the entire
masses of the vocal folds do not vibrate as a whole once subglottic
pressure overcomes their resistance. In other words, the vocal folds do
not separate from each other en masse. Rather, the vocal folds vibrate in
a wavelike fashion from bottom to top. Figure 8-23 illustrates this
concept. As you can see in Figure 8-23A, the vocal folds adduct as
expired air comes up from the lungs, thereby generating subglottic
pressure. At some point (see Figure 8-23B), subglottic pressure
overcomes the resistance of the vocal folds, and the lower parts of the
vocal folds are forced laterally by the pressure. At this point, the lower
parts of the vocal folds are wider apart than the upper parts, and this
creates convergent airflow. The air continues upward and forces the
upper parts of the vocal folds to move laterally (see Figure 8-23C). At
the same time this is happening, the lower parts return to midline. Now
the upper parts of the vocal folds are wider apart than the lower parts.
This creates divergent airflow. As illustrated in Figure 8-23D, the upper
parts of the vocal folds return to midline and subglottic pressure once
again exerts a force upon their inferior surfaces. This process repeats
itself over and over again.

 
Figure 8-23 A schematic representation of vocal fold vibration
(coronal view): (A) the vocal folds are adducted and subglottic
pressure exerts a force upon their lower surfaces; (B) the lower
portions of the vocal folds separate creating convergent air; (C) the
upper portions of the vocal folds separate as the lower portions
return to midline, thereby creating divergent air; and (D) the upper
portions of the vocal folds return to midline. This cycle repeats
itself (A–B–C–D), creating oscillations of the vocal folds.
 
The vocal folds can be thought of as a mass-spring system.
According to Titze (1994, 2006), the body (i.e., thyroarytenoid muscle

proper) is one mass, whereas the cover (i.e., epithelium and superficial
layer of the lamina propria) is composed of many masses from the
bottom of the vocal folds to the top. All of the masses (cover and body
together) are connected by virtual springs, but their movements are
independent of one other. This allows the masses within the cover to be
displaced in a wavelike fashion from bottom to top, thereby creating
regions of convergent and divergent airflow through the glottis. This is
referred to as a vertical phase difference. Air pressure during regions of
convergent airflow is greater than during regions of divergent airflow.
Titze contends that it is the asymmetry in pressures between convergent
and divergent airflow (i.e., the vertical phase difference) that sustains the
vocal folds’ oscillatory ability and not the Bernoulli effect per se.
Why You Need to Know
 
A short section in this textbook cannot do justice to the beauty of vocal
fold vibration as described by Titze. For a more fascinating and in-
depth look at vocal fold mechanics, you are encouraged to read Titze’s
works—Principles of Voice Production (1994) and The Myoelastic
Aerodynamic Theory of Phonation (2006).
 
The Mechanics of Phonation
 
The Process
 
It is clear that phonation occurs when the vocal folds are nearly or
fully adducted. They cannot vibrate if they are overly abducted. This
begs the question: How do humans adduct the vocal folds so that they
can phonate? Conversely, how do humans abduct the vocal folds so that
they will stop phonating?
In a single word, the answer is muscles. In two words: intrinsic
muscles. Recall from the discussion of the anatomy of phonatory
muscles that some of them were classified as adductors, and one of them
was classified as an abductor. The adductors are the LCA and the
transverse and oblique arytenoids (collectively referred to as the

interarytenoids, or IAs). The lone abductors are the PCAs.
As expired air passes from the lungs through the bronchi and up to
the trachea, the LCA and IA muscles contract. Contraction of the IA
muscles literally squeezes the two arytenoid cartilages together (i.e.,
adducts them). Because the vocal folds are attached to the arytenoids at
the vocal processes and foveae oblonga, they too will be adducted.
Simultaneous with IA contraction is LCA contraction. LCA contraction
causes the muscular processes of the arytenoids to rotate medially,
thereby pulling the vocal ligaments downward and toward midline.
Keep in mind that the PCA ligaments restrict the amount of forward and
downward movement of the arytenoid cartilages when the LCA
contracts. In summary, the net action of the adductor muscles is to bring
the arytenoid cartilages forward, medially, and downward. This action
causes the vocal folds to adduct. The adductor muscles can be
contracted in varying degrees, which means that humans have the ability
to adjust the amount of medial compression between the vocal folds.
Now that the vocal folds are adducted, they have the capacity for
phonation. As discussed earlier, the Myoelastic Aerodynamic Theory of
phonation and Cover-Body Model describe how this process takes place.
It should be noted, however, that during phonation, the arytenoids
remain adducted by the IA and LCA muscles throughout the entire
process. Vibration of the vocal folds is not the result of continuous
adduction and abduction of the arytenoid cartilages. For the most part,
the arytenoid cartilages remain adducted during phonation. Vibration is
the result of subglottic pressure overcoming the resistance of the vocal
folds, and then the vocal folds’ natural recoil and a vertical phase
difference bringing them back together again.
Why You Need to Know
 
As the vocal folds vibrate, a wave is created that travels from their
medial borders to their lateral margins near to where the vocal folds are
overlapped by the ventricular folds. This is referred to as the mucosal
wave (Berke & Gerratt, 1993; Hirano et al., 1981). The first two layers
of the vocal folds (i.e., the epithelial layer and the superficial layer of
the lamina propria) slide over the remaining three layers as the vocal
folds vibrate. The mucosal wave is used as a diagnostic tool. An absent

or abnormal mucosal wave may signal a pathological condition.
 
There does not need to be complete, absolute adduction of the
vocal folds to effect phonation. By the same token, not a lot of subglottic
pressure is necessary to set the vocal folds into vibration. As little as 2 to
3 cm H2O is all the subglottic pressure that is needed to set the vocal
folds into vibration. For conversational speech at approximately 60-dB
intensity, subglottic pressure averages between 7 and 10 cm H2O. It
increases to approximately 15 to 20 cm H2O for loud speech, and even
higher for high-intensity vocal activity such as yelling or screaming.
How do we abduct the vocal folds, and under what conditions do
they abduct? Abduction of the vocal folds is the result of a single pair of
muscles—the PCAs. Contraction of the PCA muscles causes the
muscular processes of the arytenoids to rock upward and backward. This
separates the arytenoid cartilages, thereby also abducting the vocal folds.
Keep in mind that the anterior cricoarytenoid ligaments restrict the
amount of backward movement of the arytenoids. Obviously, abduction
of the vocal folds is necessary for the individual to breathe, but the vocal
folds also abduct periodically during vocal activity. The English
language consists of approximately 41 speech sounds—24 consonants,
14 pure vowels, and three diphthongs. The vast majority of these sounds
are classified as voiced sounds, that is, they require vocal fold vibration.
All of the pure vowels and diphthongs are voiced, as well as most of the
consonants. Only nine consonant sounds are unvoiced (/p, t, k, f, s, ∫, θ,
h, t∫/). During speech, whenever a voiced sound is encountered, the
vocal folds adduct so that they can vibrate. They will remain adducted as
long as there is a continuous stream of voiced speech sounds. As soon as
an unvoiced speech sound is encountered, the vocal folds abduct so that
vocal fold vibration ceases. Upon encountering the next voiced sound,
the vocal folds adduct again to pho-nate. You should immediately gain
an appreciation for how rapidly the vocal folds must respond to the
demands of the sound system of a language!
Phases of Phonation
 
The process of phonation is divided into two phases—the prephonation
phase and the attack phase. The first phase is defined as the period of

time during which the vocal folds move from the paramedian position to
a nearly adducted or fully adducted position. The timing between the
prephonation phase and expiration of air is crucial. Mistiming between
respiration and prephonation will likely result in aberrations of the
attack phase.
The attack phase begins at the moment the vocal folds are adducted
and continues through the first cycles of vibration. If timing between
expiration and prephonation is optimal, the expired air will reach the
vocal folds at the same time the attack phase begins. This is referred to
as a simultaneous attack. By comparison, if air is released from the
lungs before the vocal folds have adducted, there will be a certain
quantity of air wastage through the glottis before the vocal folds begin
vibrating. This is called a breathy attack, and the person who exhibits
this attack will have a breathy quality to their voice. On the opposite end
of the spectrum, if the vocal folds are adducted before air is released
from the lungs and medial compression is considerable, the person will
exhibit a glottal attack. The voice will sound very explosive upon
initiation of phonation.
Why You Need to Know
 
As will be discussed in Chapter 9, mistiming between the prephonatory
and attack phases of phonation can result in a voice disorder due to
hypofunction or hyperfunction of the phonatory system. More times than
not, these types of voice disorders tend to be functional in nature, that is,
there appears to be no known physical or neurological etiology for the
problem.
 
MODIFICATION OF VOCAL TONE FREQUENCY
AND INTENSITY
Humans have the ability to modify their voices. They can change their
vocal pitch for the purpose of regulating prosody during speech or for
the purpose of singing. Likewise, humans can vary the loudness of their
voice from a barely audible whisper to a yell or scream. How do humans
make these modifications to their voices? As was explained in an earlier

section of this chapter, changes in vocal pitch are mediated by
adjustments in longitudinal tension. Changes in vocal loudness are
mediated by adjustments in medial compression. In the paragraphs that
follow, the mechanics of vocal pitch and intensity will be discussed
more fully.
Modifi cations of Vocal Pitch
 
Humans have the ability to change their vocal pitch from a very low-
pitched guttural sound (called glottal fry) to a very high-pitched (i.e.,
falsetto) sound. During conversational speech, vocal pitch constantly
varies due to the changes in intonation that occur in running speech.
Very seldom, however, will an individual use their highest and lowest
vocal pitches during speech. Most humans tend to speak toward the
lower end of their pitch range, about one-fourth of the way from the
bottom of their pitch range to the top. This is referred to as the person’s
habitual pitch. During singing and other vocal activity, a wider pitch
range is typically used than during speech.
When the vocal folds are abducted, they are already close to their
maximum length. During adduction then, the vocal folds shorten
somewhat as they come to mid-line. The adjustments that occur to the
vocal folds to create higher and lower pitches are accomplished relative
to this basic mechanic. With that said, your attention is now turned
toward the regulation of higher and lower vocal pitches, which is
generally accomplished through changes in longitudinal tension.
Regulation of Higher Pitch
 
From their habitual pitch level, humans have the ability to create a range
of higher pitches all the way to falsetto. If one were to gradually increase
his or her pitch from habitual to falsetto, the first pitches would be
mediated by intrinsic muscle activity. As the individual proceeds to the
highest pitches (nearing falsetto), the limits of the intrinsic muscles
would be reached so that certain extrinsic muscles would have to be
called upon.
Initially, higher pitch is mediated by the cricothyroid muscles, with
possibly some additional contraction of the thyroarytenoids and PCAs.

The prevailing thought is that the cricothyroid muscles “load” the vocal
folds for higher pitch by stretching them. Fine-tuning is accomplished
by the vocal folds (i.e., the thyroarytenoids) themselves. The exact
action the cricothyroids have on the pitch-changing mechanism
continues to be debated to this day. Some scientists believe that
contraction of the cricothyroid muscles elevates the anterior arch of the
cricoid toward the thyroid cartilage immediately above while the thyroid
cartilage remains essentially immobile. Others believe that contraction
of the cricothyroid muscles causes the thyroid cartilage to tilt forward by
decreasing the distance between its inferior border and the arch of the
cricoid (in this case, the cricoid cartilage remains essentially immobile).
Regardless of which cartilage is actually acted upon, the result is the
same (recall the helmet visor analogy presented earlier). Action of the
cricothyroid muscles creates greater distance between the interior of the
thyroid angle and the vocal processes of the arytenoid cartilages.
Because the vocal folds are attached to these two points, an increase in
distance between these two points will result in a lengthening of the
vocal folds. As the vocal folds lengthen, their cross-sectional area or
mass will decrease (i.e., the vocal folds will get thinner) and their
tension will increase. The net effect is an increase in pitch. Fine
adjustments are made to the higher pitches by contraction of the muscle
tissue within the vocal folds (i.e., the vocalis portion of the
thyroarytenoid muscles). The PCAs play a minor role in this mechanic
by preventing the arytenoid cartilages from tilting forward as the
anterior structures are displaced. Anterior movement of the arytenoids is
also limited by the PCA ligaments.
As pitch continues to increase toward falsetto, the intrinsic muscles
will finally reach their limit. The vocal folds will be stretched maximally
so that additional muscle action will have to play a role in the highest
pitches. This muscle action comes from some of the extrinsic laryngeal
muscles—more specifically, the suprahyoid muscles. The primary
purpose of the extrinsic muscles is to provide support to, and maintain
the position of, the larynx. Secondary to this, the suprahyoid muscles
elevate the hyoid bone and larynx, while the infrahyoid muscles have
the opposite effect. In terms of the production of the highest pitches, it is
thought that when the suprahyoid muscles contract and the hyoid bone
and larynx subsequently elevate, the result is increased tension of the

conus elasticus, of which the vocal ligaments are a part. Indeed, if you
were to look at your neck in a mirror during production of your highest
pitches, you would very likely see the thyroid prominence (i.e., Adam’s
apple) move upward due to action of the suprahyoid muscles. Action of
the suprahyoid muscles takes place in addition to the action of the
intrinsic muscles. The final product is generation of the highest pitches
in the human vocal range.
Regulation of Lower Pitch
 
You would be correct in assuming that if stretching of the vocal folds
results in higher pitch, relaxing them will result in lower pitch. When the
vocal folds are shortened, it results in an increase in their cross-sectional
area with a concomitant decrease in tension. These factors result in
lower pitch. Recall from the discussion above that vocal fold
lengthening is accomplished by increasing the distance between the
interior of the thyroid angle (i.e., the anterior attachments of the vocal
folds) and the vocal processes of the arytenoid cartilages (i.e., the
posterior attachments). Shortening of the vocal folds then requires that
the distance between the anterior and posterior attachments be
decreased. This is accomplished by contraction of the thyroarytenoid
muscles themselves without supplemental contraction of any other
intrinsic muscles. When the thyroarytenoids contract unopposed, they
literally pull the thyroid cartilage back (the arytenoid cartilages remain
stable during this action), thereby shortening the distance between the
thyroid angle and vocal processes. The vocal folds basically “bunch up”
on themselves. For 50% of the population that has them, the superior
thyroarytenoid 
muscles 
perform 
the 
same 
function 
as 
the
thyroarytenoids.
When you want to transition to your lowest pitches (i.e., glottal
fry), additional muscle activity will be necessary. At this point, the vocal
folds have been shortened as much as possible by intrinsic muscle
activity so that the infrahyoid muscles must be called upon to assist in
reaching glottal fry. The infrahyoid muscles depress the hyoid bone and
larynx when they contract (this can be seen by viewing yourself in the
mirror while producing very low pitches). Depression of these structures
results in a lessening of tension on the conus elasticus, and subsequently

the vocal ligaments. As is the case with the highest pitches, the lowest
pitches are produced by the combined action of the appropriate intrinsic
and extrinsic muscles.
Vocal Registers
 
As vocal pitch is varied from the lowest to the highest frequencies,
physiological changes occur to the vocal folds. These are referred to as
voice or vocal registers. Hollien (1972, 1974) identified three vocal
registers during speech production: (1) the pulse register that is
associated with the lowest frequencies in the vocal pitch range; (2) the
modal register that is associated with the mid-frequencies of the vocal
pitch range; and (3) the loft register that is associated with the highest
frequencies in the vocal pitch range.
In the pulse register, there are low frequency irregularly timed
bursts of air through the glottis. The vocal folds are compressed tightly
and appear to be short, thick, and somewhat compliant. In some cases,
the ventricular folds may descend and nearly touch the vocal folds. The
bulk of the vocal folds move very little if at all; only the glottal margins
appear to move in a floppy fashion. The infrahyoid muscles also
contract to reduce tension on the vocal ligament. The result is a
“bubbling” of air through the glottis. This bubbling sound contains very
low frequencies, usually in the range of 50 Hz or less, and has been
described as similar to the sound of popcorn popping or bacon frying.
In the modal register (which is where conversation speech occurs),
the vocal folds have an upper and lower edge along the glottal margin
and are still somewhat compliant. When air passes through the glottis,
almost the entire vocal fold vibrates, starting with the inferior region and
then spreading to the superior region. As pitch rises in the modal
register, the vocal folds become longer and stiffer, and thus become less
compliant. At the highest pitches within the modal register, the glottal
margin appears as a single edge. The modal register accounts for the
production of frequencies in the range of four to six octaves above the
pulse register (roughly between 50 and 3200 Hz, but this range varies
widely from individual to individual). Not only is a wide range of
frequencies possible in the modal register, but also a wide range of
intensities is also possible (approximately 40 to 110 dB). However, keep

in mind that the highest frequencies will likely be imperceptible because
of the 12 dB per octave loss of energy.
In the loft register, the vocal folds become so stiff and tense that
only their medial-most borders vibrate and the vertical phase difference
(mentioned earlier) is lost. There is only a single edge to the glottal
margin. Because of the maximum tension that is produced, the anterior
and posterior regions of the vocal folds barely move, thereby reducing
the effective vibrating area of the vocal folds so that very high
frequencies are produced. The suprahyoid muscles also contract to place
even greater tension on the vocal ligament. The vocal folds vibrate
similarly to strings in this case. Frequencies in the loft register typically
exceed 1000 Hz.
Modifications of Vocal Loudness
 
Vocal intensity or loudness is a direct function of changes in the amount
of subglottic pressure. Minimum levels of subglottic pressure will result
in a voice that has reduced intensity. Conversely, maximum levels of
subglottic pressure will create a voice having greater intensity. As was
mentioned earlier in this section of the chapter, when the vocal folds
vibrate, they release puffs of air through the glottis. The number of puffs
of air that pass through the glottis per second is related to the frequency
of vibration. The size of the puffs, on the other hand, is related to vocal
intensity. The laryngeal adjustment responsible for regulating pitch is
longitudinal tension. The laryngeal adjustment that regulates vocal
intensity is medial compression.
The more tightly the vocal folds are adducted during phonation, the
more resistance they offer to subglottic pressure. Under a condition of
minimum medial compression, minimum subglottic pressure will be
necessary to overcome the resistance of the adducted vocal folds.
Because so little subglottic pressure has built up by the time the vocal
folds are blown apart, relatively tiny puffs of air will pass through the
glottis. The net result is a voice having minimal intensity.
On the other hand, under a condition of maximum medial
compression, the requirement for sufficient subglottic pressure to
overcome the resistance of the vocal folds will be considerable. A very
high level of subglottic pressure must be sustained to overcome the

medial compression created by the adducted vocal folds. When this
resistance is finally overcome, relatively large puffs of air will pass
through the glottis. The net result is a voice having maximum intensity.
Another way to increase vocal intensity is to push more air through
the glottis. The force of this action not only creates more pressure below
the vocal folds when they are closed but also faster airflow through the
glottis when the vocal folds separate. The faster airflow creates a greater
drop in pressure between the vocal folds, which in turn draws the vocal
folds back toward the midline faster and with greater force. When the
vocal folds meet at midline, they become compressed with greater force
due to inertia. This leads to a longer “closed phase” during phonation,
which in turn leads to the opportunity for greater subglottic pressure to
build up prior to the vocal folds being blown apart once again. To
illustrate this, compare the phonatory cycle during conversational speech
to the phonatory cycle during speech marked by increased vocal
intensity. During conversational speech, vocal intensity is such that the
vocal folds are open during 50% of the phonatory cycle, closing during
37% of the cycle, and closed during 13% of the cycle. By comparison,
during loud speech, the open phase accounts for 33% of the phonatory
cycle, the closing phase accounts for 37% of the cycle, and the closed
phase accounts for the remaining 30%. In summary, airflow appears to
be used for intensity changes at low frequencies, while maximum medial
compression (mediated by muscle contraction) appears to be the
mechanism by which greater intensity is generated at higher frequencies.
A general rule of thumb is that vocal intensity will rise on the
magnitude of approximately 8 to 12 dB with each successive doubling
of subglottic pressure. As was stated earlier, subglottic pressure for
conversational speech at 60 dB is approximately 7 to 10 cm H2O. To
increase the intensity of speech to approximately 68 to 72 dB, subglottic
pressure would have to double to approximately 14 to 20 cm H2O. A
yell or scream at 110 dB would require subglottic pressure on the
magnitude of approximately 112 to 640 cm H2O.
In the anatomy section of this chapter, you learned that three
muscles are classified as vocal fold adductors. These are the LCAs and
interarytenoids (i.e., the oblique and transverse arytenoids). Humans
have the ability to adjust the contraction of these muscles, thereby
mediating medial compression.

The Relationship Between Vocal Tone Frequency and Intensity
 
For the most part, vocal intensity is regulated by medial compression
and its effect on subglottic pressure, while changes in vocal pitch are a
result of adjustments to longitudinal tension of the vocal folds.
However, there are instances where adjustments to medial compression
may affect longitudinal tension as well. Anyone who has ever raised the
intensity of their voice in an abrupt and dramatic fashion has probably
noted that their pitch increased as well. This may be due to one or both
of two factors: (1) at greater vocal intensity, reflexive tensing of the
vocal folds may occur, and increased tension results in higher pitch; (2)
with greater vocal intensity, increased subglottic pressure causes the
vocal folds to adduct more quickly, and the quicker timing of adduction
results in an increase in pitch.
Vocal pitch and intensity are used to mark the suprasegmental
aspects of speech production such as intonation and stress. Intonation is
mediated primarily by variations in vocal pitch, whereas stress is
mediated by both pitch and intensity. This is accomplished very rapidly
throughout the stream of speech— on average, about one-tenth of a
second. In that very brief period of time, stress is generated by increases
in subglottic pressure on the magnitude of about 2 cm H2O along with
slight increases in vocal pitch. Increases in subglottic pressure are
accomplished by contraction of the muscles involved in medial
compression (i.e., the lateral cricoarytenoids and IAs) as well as the
internal intercostal muscles acting upon the rib cage. Increases in pitch
are accomplished by generating greater tension on the vocal folds
through action of the cricothyroids and thyroarytenoids (vocalis
portion).
Intonation, of course, would involve only the pitch-change
mechanism. For example, for a rising intonation pattern (typically seen
in questions that require a “yes” or “no” response, such as “Are we
going to the store?”), there is approximately a 50-Hz increase in the
fundamental frequency of the vocal tone (Netsell, 1973). We have a
natural tendency to lower our pitch at the end of a breath group. This
means that when we encounter an utterance that has a rising intonation,
we must work against this natural tendency by contracting the

cricothyroid muscles.
Physiology of Other Forms of Vocal Activity
 
The foregoing discussion examined the physiology of phonation
primarily in reference to typical speech activity. For other forms of vocal
activity such as speaking or singing in falsetto or whispering, the
physiology of phonation is a bit different. This final section of the
chapter will briefly describe the phona-tory physiology of falsetto and
whisper.
Physiology of Falsetto
 
Recall that falsetto involves the production of frequencies at the
uppermost end of the vocal pitch range. Not only is the rate of phonation
affected, but the actual manner of phonation changes as well. Although
there tends to be some degree of overlap between the upper end of an
individual’s modal register and the lower end of the loft register (where
falsetto resides), there are laryngeal adjustments made that are particular
to falsetto. During the production of falsetto, only the free medial
borders of the vocal folds make contact and vibrate. The bulk of the
vocal folds remain relatively firm and stationary. The appearance of the
vocal folds is long, very stiff, and bowed. This results in a shorter
effective vibrating area of the glottis, and hence higher frequency
vibration. The suprahyoid muscles also assist the process by creating
greater tension on the vocal ligament when they contract. Increased
tension also results in higher frequency vibration. The vertical phase
difference is not at play during falsetto.
Physiology of Whisper
 
A whisper is not voiced; that is, the vocal folds do not vibrate during this
form of vocal activity. During normal phonation, the arytenoid cartilages
come together medially and the two vocal folds are parallel to each other
along their entire length. During whisper, however, the arytenoid
cartilages do not come into contact with each other medially. Instead,

they are slightly abducted with their vocal processes converging
medially (i.e., the arytenoids are “toed in”). This is accomplished by
contraction of the lateral cricoarytenoids with little to no contribution
from the IAs (Monoson & Zemlin, 1984; Solomon, McCall, Trosset, &
Gray, 1989). Such a configuration creates an opening in the
cartilaginous region of the vocal folds, referred to as a glottal chink. If
you were to look at the length of the vocal folds from their adduction
anteriorly to their abduction posteriorly, it would resemble an inverted
“Y.” As the person whispers, air passes through the glottal chink at a
relatively rapid rate, creating turbulence (the rate of airflow during the
normal production of vowel sounds is approximately 100 cc per second;
for whisper, it is double this). The turbulence of air as it passes through
the glottal chink is essentially what is perceived as the whisper.
Summary
 
This chapter provided a thorough description and discussion of the
anatomy and physiology of the phonatory system. The phonatory system
can be considered the motor or generator for vocal activity. Phonation is
accomplished by vibration of the vocal folds and is mediated by intrinsic
laryngeal muscle activity. Phonation also involves changes in frequency
and intensity of the vocal tone. Changes in frequency are mediated by
adjustments to longitudinal tension, while changes in intensity are
primarily the result of adjustments to medial compression. Longitudinal
tension involves activity of intrinsic and extrinsic laryngeal muscles.
Medial compression is accomplished by intrinsic muscle activity, and
more specifically by contraction of the vocal fold adductors. Basic
principles of voice production (e.g., complex tones, fundamental
frequency, and harmonics) and other forms of vocal activity (e.g.,
falsetto and whisper) were also discussed. The following chapter
(Chapter 9) will assist you in understanding how aberrations in
phonatory anatomy and/or physiology can result in disorders of voice.
Then, Chapter 10 will show you how the vocal tone is shaped and
molded into the acoustic phenomenon we recognize as human speech.

 
Knowledge Outcomes for ASHA Certification for Chapter 9
   Demonstrate knowledge of the biological basis of the basic
communication processes (III-B)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the etiologies of voice and
resonance disorders (III-C)
 
Learning Objectives
 
   You will be able to defi ne normal and disordered voices.
   You will be able to explain the physiology of phonation (e.g., the
Myoelastic Aerodynamic Theory of phonation).
   You will be able to explain how to clinically evaluate parameters
of voice.
   You will be able to describe some of the common voice
disorders.
   You will be able to explain clinical perspectives relevant to
management of voice disorders.
 

 
Introduction
 
In this chapter, an introduction to voice disorders will be presented by
building on the anatomical and physiological foundation offered in
Chapter 8. The goal is to relate clinically relevant voice parameters to
the structure and function (i.e., anatomy and physiology) of the larynx in
a way that will make sense when the speech–language clinician, as a
voice therapist, is faced with the responsibility of evaluating and
offering remedial options to clients with voice concerns. Clinicians learn
the anatomy of speech production for the purpose of relating structure to
function as required to appropriately understand what they are hearing
and how best to manage voice production for the most positive
communication outcome. However, there are clearly challenges to
effective evaluation and management of voice disorders. Deem and
Miller (2000) noted four such challenges.
   There is no direct relationship between the perception of a voice
disorder and the presence of pathology.
   Social acceptance of voice problems creates a significant challenge
for the voice therapist.
   The patient’s level of motivation to restore vocal health will be related
to the importance of the voice in his or her profession.
   Terms used to describe voice disorders are often misunderstood
among professionals (p. 3).

In this chapter, these challenges will be addressed, although not
completely resolved, as the principles of voice production, voice
perspective, and voice parameters are discussed. The goal is to present
an introduction to voice that relates anatomy and physiology to normal
voice, exceptional voice, and voice disorders in a clinically relevant
way.
Voice Production
 
Respiration, phonation, articulation, and resonance are the underlying
physiological processes of speech production. These processes are
represented schematically in Figure 9-1 where air from the lungs causes
vibration of the vocal folds (represented by the tuning fork) and thus a
basic laryngeal tone (represented by the sine wave). Here, a simple tube
represents the supraglottic resonators, and the repeating waveform at the
right is a resulting vowel. The vowel wave could be that of any vowel,
as the resonators serve to modify the basic laryngeal tone (i.e.,
fundamental) into the desired production.
As related to voice and voice disorders, the emphasis in this chapter
will be on phonation as driven by respiration. Voice is the acoustic or
audible result of the phonatory process or phonation. Sound is audible
vibration, and phonation is the physiological process that results in vocal
fold vibration and thus voice. Phonation and respiration are inexorably
linked in oral human communication. For vocal fold vibration to occur,
a driving force is necessary. In phonation, the force is the air provided
and controlled by the subglottic respiratory mechanism. Movement of
air is required. The phonatory process begins with closure of the glottis,
that is, the vocal folds moving to midline. Subglottic air pressure
increases to the point that it exceeds the resistance of the vocal folds.
The vocal folds are blown apart and air is released. Based on the mass
and elasticity of the vocal folds and the aerodynamic factors associated
with air moving rapidly through a narrow orifice, the vocal folds return
to a closed position and the process begins all over again (recall the
discussion in Chapter 8 about the Myoelastic Aerodynamic Theory
and Cover–Body Model).
This physical process of voice generation is the heart of the

Myoelastic Aerodynamic Theory of phonation. Objects—including
vocal folds—vibrate as a function of their physical properties, mass, and
elasticity. For example, some guitar strings are larger (i.e., bigger in
circumference) than others and thus have more mass. The larger thicker
strings produce a lower pitched vibration than do the smaller thinner
strings, and all strings produce a higher pitched vibration when made
shorter and more taut by placing one’s fingers on the frets. Analogous
adjustments can be made by human producers of voice. Although we do
not adjust the length of the vocal folds by using our fingers, we are able
to vary their length by adjusting the relationship of the cricoid and
thyroid cartilages, and we are able to vary the relative thickness/thinness
of the vocal folds as well. It is the cricothyroid muscles that are
primarily responsible for this adjustment. Interestingly, the cricothyroids
are the only intrinsic muscles of the larynx that are not innervated by the
recurrent laryngeal branch of the vagus nerve. The superior laryngeal
branch of the vagus nerve serves the cricothyroid muscles, and thus
insult to the superior branch might be suspected when a patient is unable
to control vocal pitch.
The ability to make these changes in the mass and elasticity of the
vocal folds affords us the opportunity to make incredible changes in the
fundamental frequency perceived as pitch. The difference between the
vibratory energy source for a guitar and the human voice producing
mechanism is acknowledged. We do not pluck or strum the vocal folds.
Instead, we force subglottic air past them to generate vibration. Thus, we
must recognize the importance of the physical properties of the air
movement (aerodynamics) in phonation. Once the physiological process
of phonation is understood, normal voices, exceptional voices, and
disordered voices can be understood, appreciated, and managed. Voices
that are appropriate for one’s age and gender, do not call undue or
negative attention to the speaker, or do not interfere with communication
are considered normal. Some voices are considered exceptional because
of their unique quality or the masterful control exhibited by the speaker
or singer. Such voices are easily recognized and appreciated. They are
exceptional in that they bring positive attention to the speaker or singer.
By contrast, disordered voices are ones that bring negative attention to
the speaker and/or interfere with communication. However, American
society seems to have a liberal tolerance for voice differences, and thus

noticeable voice differences may not be viewed as disordered. Deem and
Miller (2000) noted that this circumstance may have an effect on patient
motivation. Regardless of whether voices are considered normal,
exceptional or disordered, the basic laryngeal anatomy is the same as are
the physiological processes that result in phonation and the physical
principles that underlie them. Our understanding of voice normalcy,
exceptionality, or disorder is enhanced by our knowledge of the anatomy
and physiology and the physical principles of vocal fold vibration.
 
Figure 9-1 A schematic of the underlying processes of speech
production.
 
Perspectives
 
Several common pathologies of voice are summarized in Table 9-1.
Voice disorders can be viewed from several different perspectives, as
speech–language pathologists seek to better understand them and
effectively evaluate and treat them. In the discussion that follows, voice
disorders will be discussed from the perspectives of the causes,
prevalence, duration, and life span, then followed by an introduction to
voice that focuses on the parameters that define it as normal,
exceptional, or disordered.
ETIOLOGY
Voice disorders are frequently discussed from an etiological perspective,
a perspective intended to help the clinician better understand the cause
or causes of the problem. Voice disorders are categorized as being

psychogenic (i.e., functional) or organic in origin. Psychogenic voice
disorders can be further differentiated as being subsequent to or a
symptom of personality and adjustment disorders; for example, stress,
anxiety, or mental health conditions. Psychogenic voice disorders can
also be associated with personality type and/or faulty voice habits. In
fact, faulty voice habits are most likely to be a factor in psychogenic
voice disorders. Vocal abuse, in one form or another, is the leading
cause of voice disorders. By contrast, organic voice disorders are viewed
as a consequence of mass lesions or neurogenic conditions.
A voice disorder is organic if it is caused by structural (i.e.,
anatomic) or physiologic disease, either a disease of the larynx itself or
by remote systemic illness which alters laryngeal structure or function
(Aronson, 1990). Aronson goes on to identify congenital disorders,
inflammation, tumors, endocrine disorders, trauma, and neurologic
disease as organic etiological categories with voice consequences.
Interestingly, psychogenic etiologies can result in organic pathologies,
thus 
somewhat 
blurring 
the 
psycho-genic–organic 
etiological
dichotomy. For example, vocal abuse is accepted as the etiological basis
for the development of vocal nodules. The nodules—clearly mass
lesions—are generally agreed upon to be a consequence of vocal abuse,
which must be addressed clinically to alleviate the voice disorder.
Although organic in nature, vocal nodules (see Figure 9-2A), polyps
(see Figure 9-2B), and contact ulcers (see Figure 9-2C) are often
discussed as secondary pathologies consequent to abusive behavior, and
thus are typically classified as being psychogenic in origin.
However, alternative causal factors suggest that both psychogenic
and organic causes can result in the same pathology. Contact ulcers can
result from abusive behaviors, but they can also result from
gastroesophageal reflux disease. Pannbacker (1992) noted the difficulty
in making a distinction between psychogenic and organic voice
problems. In essence, there are frequently psychogenic elements
associated with organic etiologies and psychogenic etiologies that result
in organic factors. Pannbacker’s thesis is that voice disorder etiologies
can be viewed on a continuum ranging from psychogenic on one end to
organic on the other.
PREVALENCE

Another perspective from which to view voice disorders is that of
prevalence. Some voice problems occur much more frequently than
others. Six percent of school-aged children have been found to present
with chronically hoarse voices (Baynes, 1966), and 80% of that 6% were
found to present with vocal nodules (Wilson, 1990). No other voice
problem will approach the prevalence of the hoarseness associated with
vocal nodules as a focus of concern for speech–language pathologists
working in a school setting. Understanding the anatomical and
physiological basis for the voice quality associated with nodules is
important if the clinician is to deal effectively with the evaluation and
management of them. Vocal nodules can be considered significant
because of the frequency with which they occur. Comparatively,
papilloma (see Figure 9-2D) is an example of a condition that affects
voice, and occurs much less frequently than do vocal nodules, but it is
no less important for the clinician to understand the anatomical and
physiological consequences of these mass lesions and his or her role in
the management of a child with papilloma.

 

 


 
Figure 9-2 Various mass lesions of the vocal folds: (A) vocal
nodules; (B) polyp; (C) contact ulcers; and (D) papilloma.
(Reproduced 
with 
permission 
from 
CIBA 
Pharmaceutical
Company, Summit, NJ; J. Harold Walton (Ed.), The larynx, W.
Saunders, with illustrations by F.H. Netter, 1964.)
 
DURATION
Some voice disorders present temporarily, usually as the consequence of
abuse or some short-lived and treatable disease process. Edema of the
vocal folds can result in a voice quality characterized by breathiness and
tension, similar to vocal nodules, thus making it difficult to identify the
cause of the dysphonia based on perceptual parameters alone. The
anatomical nature of the edema on one hand or vocal nodules on the
other is different and the physiological consequences of these conditions
may be as well, but the resulting voice may be quite similar, ranging
from mild breathiness and tension to aphonia. This is an example of the
lack of direct relationship between how a voice sounds and the presence
of a particular pathology. With respect to duration, the dysphonia
associated with edema may last only a few hours or a day or so, but
similar voice characteristics resulting from the presence of nodules may
require months of vocal abuse management to eliminate.
Other voice disorders can last a very long time or be permanent.
Spasmodic dysphonia is a progressive and often permanent condition.
Although symptomatic relief is possible, in the vast majority of cases,
patients must deal with the disorder for the rest of their lives. The loss of
voice in the laryngectomee is clearly permanent. Once the larynx is
removed, the patient will never phonate in the natural way as before the
surgery. There are, of course, several alternative sound/phonation
sources that will allow the laryngectomee to speak, but natural vocal
fold phonation is permanently lost.
Why You Need to Know
 
We live in marvelous times! Until relatively recently, undergoing a

laryngectomy or having unsalvageable trauma to the larynx meant the
end of natural speech production. However, advances in the areas of
bioengineering and organ transplantation may soon change the way
speech–language pathologists conduct their business—especially in
regard to persons with profound voice disorders. The first attempts at
laryngeal transplantation have proven to be successful for the most part.
More incredible than this, though, is the recent advent of tissue
engineering (i.e., creating complete organs from stem cells). Tissue
engineering of the larynx has been accomplished successfully in
animals. Just imagine how it will revolutionize the field of speech–
language pathology if tissue engineering can be refined for use with
humans!
 
LIFE SPAN
Finally, viewing and understanding voice disorders across the life span
also requires an understanding of the anatomical and physiological
conditions that result in noticeable voice differences. Vocal nodules
frequently result from the yelling and screaming that children do, and
papilloma is typically found in preadolescent children when it does
occur. The presbylaryngis of the elderly client results in voice
characteristics for which there may be structural and physiological
explanations—explanations inherent to the aging process and not
typically associated with infancy, childhood, or even young adulthood.
It should be noted, however, that following their review, Boone,
McFarlane, von Berg, and Zraick (2010) concluded that the voice
characteristics of the elderly are more a function of disease processes
than of physiological deterioration.
In summary, regardless of perspective, when viewing voice
disorders it is imperative to be able to relate structure and function of the
voice producing mechanism to the affected parameters of voice. The
voice clinician will always be better prepared to understand the disorder,
to evaluate and monitor the voice, and to provide appropriate therapy
and counsel if he/she is able to relate the perceptual consequences of the
condition (i.e., the voice) to the structure and function of the mechanism.

Parameters of Voice
 
The psychological parameters of voice—pitch, loudness, quality, and
flexibility—are the perceptual characteristics of voice that define it as
either normal (i.e., pleasing to the ear, not calling undue or negative
attention to the speaker, and not interfering with communication) or
abnormal or disordered (i.e., dysphonic). Speech–language pathologists
are faced with the responsibility of describing and documenting voices
in terms of these parameters. When a clinician is able to do so
effectively, the voice problem will be well understood, appropriate
directions for therapy will be forthcoming, and treatment will likely be
efficacious.
PITCH
In Chapter 8, pitch was defined as the psychological correlate of
frequency. Pitch is primarily a function of the basic laryngeal tone, or
voice fundamental—the frequency at which the vocal folds open and
close (or release puffs of subglottic air) per second. Studies have
documented the habitual pitch of the voice of various aged subjects.
Thus, there is empirical evidence of habitual fundamental frequency as a
function of age. As noted in Chapter 8, there is individual variation in
vocal fold length from person to person as well as a significant
difference in the length of the vocal folds between adult males and
females. The difference in habitual pitch between males and females is
evident in adults but not in children. In general, there is nearly an octave
difference in habitual pitch between adult females and males, and
females are able to achieve significantly higher frequencies at the upper
end of their pitch range than are their male peers. Conversely, adult
males are able to produce lower frequencies at the lower end of their
pitch range than are adult females. These gender-related differences are
explainable and understandable when you consider the anatomical
variance between adult female and male speakers such as overall
laryngeal size, degree of the thyroid angle, and vocal fold length and
mass. Therefore, from a clinical perspective, normal pitch can be
defined as a pitch that is appropriate for age and gender. Conversely,

disordered pitch occurs when the speaker loses age or gender identity.
For example, an adult female has lost age identity if she answers the
phone and is asked if the caller can speak to her mother because the
caller assumes from her voice that she’s a child.
One of the most interesting, dramatic, and treatable disorders of
pitch is puberphonia, a condition in which an inappropriately high pitch
—often falsetto—is used by males in their late teens or early adulthood.
Puberphonia has the capacity to affect gender identity and surely calls
undue and negative attention to the speaker. Voices of somewhat high
pitch, though not as dramatically so as puberphonia, can cause concern
on the part of the speaker, and occasionally their employer, and may
have implications for employment or promotions. It should be noted,
however, that many therapists remain cautious about trying to
dramatically 
effect 
pitch 
change 
in 
clients 
(puberphonia
notwithstanding) for what might be termed “social” reasons. The
concept that there is a habitual pitch that is best, and some might say
healthiest, for each of us is discussed often in the literature. Our most
natural pitch is referred to as optimal pitch and is thought to be the
pitch at which our phonation producing mechanism is most efficient.
The idea that there is a pitch that is most natural for the anatomical and
physiological features of our larynx runs deep among voice therapists
even when they disagree about how to establish optimal pitch and may
be reluctant to facilitate change to optimal pitch as a therapeutic goal. It
may be best to think of optimal pitch as the equivalent of habitual pitch
for the vast majority of healthy nonabusive speakers.
Our discussion of pitch as a critical parameter of voice production
would not be complete without consideration of vocal registers. The
term vocal register refers to pitch ranges and to types of phonation, or
ways in which the vocal folds function. Vocal registers are laryngeal
events that can be identified on physical, acoustic, and perceptual bases
and remind us of the incredible adaptability and flexibility of the
laryngeal anatomy. These registers are ranges of vocal frequencies that
overlap but are perceptually distinct. The vocal register that we use most
is referred to as the modal register and is important because it is
associated with the most common vibratory pattern of the vocal folds.
Physiologically, when we phonate in our mid-range or normal voice, our
vocal folds present an upper and lower edge that vibrates along their

entire anteroposterior length. As pitch increases, the vocal folds are
increasingly stretched and their thickness is decreased. In the modal
register, the frequency range is one and a half octaves or more and a
wide intensity range (40 to 110 dB) is possible. The quality of the modal
register voice is considered rich, pleasing, and mellow. Normal vocal
fold vibration is complex; as the puffs of air are released through the
glottis, the thyroarytenoid muscle and the cover layers of the vocal folds
vibrate differentially.
By contrast, in the pulse register, phonation is characterized by
low frequency irregularly occurring bursts. The vocal folds are thick,
short, and tightly compressed. The puffs of air may be individually
perceived, and thus the phonation is referred to as glottal(or vocal) fry,
sounding similar to the sound of bacon frying. In the pulse register,
vocal intensity is limited and frequencies are in the range of 3 to 50 Hz.
At the other end of the human phonation range, the highest frequencies
are produced in the loft register or falsetto range. In this mode of
phonation, the vocal folds stiffen to a single thin tense edge and only the
free margins vibrate. The vibration is primarily in the area of the
junction of the anterior and middle thirds of vocal fold length. Vocal
fold movement is described as a simple opening and closing with no
phase effects or mucosal wave. The resulting voice is high pitched with
restricted intensity range and perhaps a breathy quality.
LOUDNESS
Loudness of voice is directly related to subglottic air pressure and is not
a function of the mass and elasticity of the vocal folds as with pitch. To
maintain a constant loudness level, one must be able to maintain
constant air pressure below the glottis. The ability to maintain constant
subglottic air pressure while constantly decreasing subglottic air volume
is both a remarkable and achievable physiological ability for most
people with a healthy respiratory and phonatory system. Controlled
relaxation of the muscles of inspiration, including the diaphragm and
intercostals, and support from the abdominal muscles is critical to the
maintenance of constant subglottic air pressure.
Clinically, loudness is judged on the basis of its appropriateness for
the social or environmental situation. For example, an individual having

a personal one-to-one conversation with another person who brings
attention to himself by speaking in a voice that is too loud for the
situation may be perceived as having a voice loudness problem.
Conversely, a teacher who is so soft spoken that students have difficulty
hearing her lectures has a voice that is not loud enough for the demands
of the classroom.
The ability to maintain loudness control may be compromised in
neurological conditions or in patients with degenerative neurological
diseases. More often however, vocal loudness that is inappropriate for
the social or environmental situation is a function of hearing status. A
person with a sensorineural hearing loss is likely to speak in a voice
that is deemed too loud for the situation. Because of this person’s
inability to monitor the loudness of his own speech through the auditory
system, he may speak in a voice that is louder than the situation requires.
By contrast, a person experiencing a conductive hearing loss may speak
in a soft voice—one considered not loud enough for the situation. The
conductive hearing loss diminishes this person’s perception of ambient
noise, thus making his voice sound louder to himself than it really is. In
this case, the speaker has a tendency to reduce the loudness of his voice
to compensate for the increased loudness he perceives. Regardless of
whether the impairment is sensorineural or conductive, hearing loss
compromises a speaker’s ability to monitor his voice and the parameter
of vocal loudness is affected. It should be noted that in neither foregoing
case is the anatomy or physiology of the voice producing mechanism
affected. Anatomy and physiology are also not affected when
diminished vocal loudness is attributable to psychological depression or
to an excited (perhaps manic) psychological state, both of which are
possible. Finally, it should be noted that vocal loudness may be
attributable to environmental and cultural influences—for example,
quiet soft spoken families or cultures verses louder, more verbally
aggressive families or cultures. Again however, any noticeable
differences in vocal loudness that can be attributable to environmental or
cultural differences are not a function of anatomical or physiological
factors.
QUALITY

Voice quality, similar to the parameter of pitch and unlike loudness, is
very much a function of anatomical and/or physiological laryngeal
factors. The primary problem of dealing clinically with voice quality is
one of descriptive terminology. “Hoarse,” “harsh,” “breathy,” “tense,”
“strident,” and other terms have been used to describe voice quality. The
clinician must ask the following questions: (1) Which terms are the most
relevant when diagnosing dysphonia? (2) Which terms assist the
clinician in relating structure to function? And (3) Which terms help the
clinician best plan for effective management? Wilson (1990) has
suggested that a great deal can be understood and communicated about
dysphonia by using the terms “breathiness” and “tension” as quality
descriptors. Based on didactic and clinical experience, breathiness and
tension are descriptive terms of voice quality that relate well to the
Myoelastic Aerodynamic Theory of phonation, to the anatomical
changes that affect voice production, and to the relevant management of
dysphonia.
Breathiness relates directly to phonatory inefficiency. When the
vocal folds are not vibrating in the normal way or cannot adduct
appropriately, they become inefficient and more air escapes than under
normal phonatory conditions. The excess air turbulence is perceived as a
breathy voice quality. In flaccid dysphonia, for example, the vocal folds
do not approximate normally (see Figure 9-3). The result is a breathy
voice quality often described as weak, as it may be difficult for the
speaker to produce a loud voice because of reduced ability to increase
subglottic air pressure. Most frequently, a left vocal fold is flaccid and
does not move to midline to approximate with the nonaffected fold, and
thus there is no tension perceived in the voice.

 
Figure 9-3 Normal vocal fold symmetry and vocal fold paralysis:
(A) normal vocal fold symmetry; (B–E) various configurations of
vocal fold paralysis. (Reproduced with permission from CIBA
Pharmaceutical Company, Summit, NJ; J. Harold Walton (Ed.),
The larynx, W. Saunders, with illustrations by F.H. Netter, 1964.)
 
At this point, it is important to remember that flaccid paralysis is
associated with lower motor neuron and/or peripheral nerve damage. To

illustrate this, consider the vagus nerve (cranial nerve X). The important
branches of the vagus nerve for speech production are the pharyngeal
branch, the superior branch of the laryngeal nerve (SLN), and the
recurrent branch of the laryngeal nerve (RLN). Each of these branches is
paired, which provides bilateral innervation to the velum and intrinsic
muscles of the larynx. The pharyngeal branches of the vagus nerve
provide motor innervation to the soft palate. The SLNs serve the
cricothyroid muscles and the RLNs innervate all of the other intrinsic
muscles of the larynx. Recall that the cricothyroid muscles are involved
in the regulation of vocal pitch, while the other intrinsic laryngeal
muscles mediate abduction and adduction of the vocal folds as well as
vocal pitch and intensity. These three branches come off the vagus nerve
in the following order (from superior to inferior): pharyngeal branch,
SLN, and finally RLN.
The vagus nerve pathway is complex. Several features of voice can
be affected depending on the extent of vagus nerve involvement. In
general, the higher the damage to the vagus nerve, the more widespread
(i.e., diffuse) the effect will be on the speech production mechanism.
Conversely, the lower the damage to the vagus nerve, the less
widespread (i.e., more focal) the effect will be. For example, if the
damage is above the pharyngeal branch, not only will the velum be
affected but the intrinsic muscles of the larynx on that side will also be
affected because the SLN and RLN are below the level of the
pharyngeal branch. The outcome of pharyngeal branch involvement
likely will be velopharyngeal incompetence and hypernasality.
Involvement of the RLN will be manifested in a diminished ability to
abduct and adduct the vocal fold on the affected side; damage to the
SLN will be manifested in a diminished ability to regulate vocal pitch,
also on the affected side. On the other hand, involvement of the intrinsic
laryngeal muscles without involvement of the velum means that vagus
nerve damage must be below the pharyngeal branch but before either the
SLN or RLN have branched off. Finally, when damage is even more
peripheral—that is, on the pharyngeal branch, SLN, or RLN alone—
only the structures innervated by that specific branch will be affected.
Recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis is more common on the left
side than the right because of the longer pathway of the left recurrent
laryngeal nerve. The more common flaccid paralysis of the left vocal

fold can result from trauma, surgery, or heart disease although about
one-third of the cases are idiopathic. Inability to adduct one or both
vocal folds will result in a breathy voice quality. By contrast, in cases of
excess tension in the voice, the vocal folds are extremely tense and may
spasm tightly. This type of voice is described as spasmodic dysphonia
and is considered the most extreme type of hypertensive dysphonia.
Tension is the overwhelmingly predominant voice quality in cases of
spasmodic dysphonia.
It is possible, and actually quite common, to have both breathiness
and tension as voice quality characteristics. Two common examples are
edematous vocal folds and vocal nodules. Edematous vocal folds occur
commonly as a result of vocal abuse. Yelling at a ball game or talking
over noise at a party or other public event can cause swelling of the
vocal folds, thus changing their mass and elasticity and thereby
changing their vibratory characteristics. The result is inefficiency that
allows excessive air to escape, and thus breathiness. Our natural
tendency is to increase laryngeal tension in an attempt to reduce
breathiness. This same combination of breathiness and tension in voice
quality is also common in cases of vocal nodules, the most common
discrete lesion of the vocal folds. The nodules, also referred to as
singer’s, preacher’s, or teacher’s nodules, occur most often bilaterally on
the free margins of the vocal folds at the junction of the anterior and
middle thirds. The callous-like bumps on the folds cause them not to
approximate in the normal way during phonation. Excessive air escapes,
tension is increased to compensate for the breathiness, and the result is a
breathy and tense voice quality.
SECONDARY CHARACTERISTICS
There are several secondary voice characteristics or features that are
frequently present in association with a breathy and tense dysphonic
voice. Glottal or vocal fry is a low-pitched sound that can be attributed
to a paralyzed vocal fold or vocal polyp. From an anatomical and
physiological perspective, it is important to understand that vocal fry can
be the result of something that is vibrating in addition to the vocal folds.
When this occurs, two pitches may be heard and this is referred to as
diplophonia. The anatomical source of diplophonia is varied. It has

been attributed to a difference in the vibratory pattern of the two vocal
folds caused by paralysis of one fold or by a unilateral polyp, as noted
earlier. Other sources for diplophonia include aryepiglottic and
ventricular fold vibration occurring simultaneously with normal vocal
fold vibration.
When coupled with breathiness and tension, vocal fry contributes
to what is often referred to as hoarseness or a hoarse voice quality.
However, it should also be recognized that vocal fry is used to describe
a mode of vocal fold vibration—the pulse register— that is not
associated with dysphonia but is simply a different vibratory pattern
from that of typical phonation (i.e., the modal register) or falsetto (i.e.,
the loft register). Other secondary phonatory characteristics may include
pitch breaks and phonation breaks. Pitch breaks are frequently
associated with an abrupt shift from the typical (i.e., modal) register to
the loft register (i.e., falsetto). Interestingly, when such pitch breaks are
controlled musically, they are referred to as yodeling. Pitch breaks as
secondary voice characteristic are likely associated with cricothyroid
function and may be attributable to superior laryngeal nerve damage.
Phonation breaks or aphonic periods are associated with tense
breathy voices, and are sometimes referred to as intermittent whisper. It
appears that the vibratory pattern of the vocal folds is interrupted such
that voice (i.e., audible phonation) is stopped briefly. This phenomenon
is sometimes seen in cases of advanced or well-developed vocal
nodules. In similar voices, a variation on the phonation break is delayed
onset of phonation. In this case, the start of phonation is delayed at the
beginning of an utterance and a brief period of aphonia or whispered
speech is perceived prior to phonation beginning.
Other secondary features seen frequently in dysphonic patients
include noisy inhalation and inhala-tory laryngeal stridor. Both result
from some degree of airway obstruction. Noisy inhalation and laryngeal
stridor are audible features associated with several voice disorders. A
paralyzed vocal fold could cause audible air turbulence during inhalation
as could papilloma or other laryngeal obstruction. Secondary voice
characteristics are important for the voice clinician to note because they
are features that add to the overall impression of voice and are features
that can be explained by the anatomy and physiology of the voice
production mechanism. Secondary voice characteristics are closely

associated with voice quality, as contrasted with pitch, loudness, and
flexibility, and are important to document as part of the diagnostic and
therapeutic process.
FLEXIBILITY
The final voice parameter that defines normal and abnormal voice is
flexibility. As normal speakers, we expect, by both linguistic necessity
and linguistic convention, to have a degree of variation in our vocal
output. Speech that is void of pitch and loudness variation is
monotonous, probably void of affect, and inconsistent with cultural
expectations. Stress, pause, and intonation in language are linguistic
necessities if one is to communicate effectively. These features in
language can make a difference in meaning and when they do, they are
referred to as suprasegmental phonemic elements. The rising intonation
at the end of questions or the contrastive stress between the words pro
duce and pro duce affect the speaker’s meaning and perhaps the
expectations for the listener. Even when pitch, loudness, and
intonational features of voice do not affect meaning in specific ways,
they are important to the communication of affect on the part of the
speaker. Speech delivered in a monotonous, computer-like manner is
void of emotional tone or affect. In general, as listeners we find such
speech boring. The literal meaning of the message may be preserved but
the importance, urgency, or mood is lost.
Flexibility in speech is not a function of specific anatomical
structures or physiological processes but is secondary to those
anatomical features and physiological processes that are important to the
control of pitch and loudness. Clinically, a voice without appropriate
flexibility can be described as lacking pitch and loudness variation and
thus flat and dull. At the extreme, a computer- or robot-like voice is
conspicuously monotonous and lacking in emotional color. Although
clinically monotonous voices are not necessarily robot-like, they can
bring negative attention to the speaker by the lack of conventional
flexibility and affective communication. Cases where excessive
flexibility is a voice liability are rare and are usually associated with
personality issues ranging from over dramatic and excited to psychotic.

Clinical Perspectives
 
Students in speech–language pathology—beginning clinicians if you
will—are encouraged to develop a clinical perspective or fundamental
framework to guide their approach to evaluation and therapy. The proper
perspective will help clinicians recognize their limitations, define their
role, and guide their effectiveness. The following are some perspective
suggestions for consideration when dealing with voice disorders.
PERSPECTIVE 1: MEDICAL CLEARANCE
With respect to voice disorders, it is important to keep in mind that
medical clearance is critical. Because there is no direct relationship
between voice characteristics and specific laryngeal pathology, the
clinician cannot be certain of the cause of the voice disorder.
Furthermore, it is outside the clinician’s scope of practice to diagnose
laryngeal pathologies. Speech–language pathologists must avoid treating
clients until the etiology of the voice problem has been confirmed and it
is agreed that voice therapy is indicated. Treating a dysphonic child,
assuming the presence of vocal nodules when it is in fact papilloma that
is present, is a critical error that must be avoided.
PERSPECTIVE 2: LISTENING
It might appear overly obvious or a trite admonition to emphasize
listening as a clinical perspective when evaluating and treating voice
disorders. After all, don’t clinicians instinctively listen to their clients?
Yes, but voice features can be subtle and confusing. Experience suggests
that to be a good listener of voice parameters requires training and
practice. Student clinicians are urged to take advantage of available
recorded materials designed to help develop critical listening skills for
primary and secondary vocal characteristics (e.g., Boone et al., 2010;
Dworkin & Meleca, 1997; Wilson, 1990). Clinicians, as students or as
practicing professionals, should never hesitate to consult colleagues
about what they are hearing in the voices of clients. Listen, listen again,
and discuss what you are hearing. Discussion of what is heard,

confirmation of what is heard, and arrival at possible consensus can only
be in the best interest of the client.
PERSPECTIVE 3: DOCUMENTATION
Documentation of voice characteristics and dysphonic qualities is
critical to quality referral, appropriate diagnosis, and effective
management and treatment. Careful description of pitch, loudness,
quality, and flexibility is valuable to the physician to whom the client is
referred and helps to build a respectful professional rapport. That same
high quality professional description will always remain as the
permanent record of your analysis of the voice at the time. When your
perception has been confirmed by the perception of others, it is validated
and thus respected. In addition, whenever possible, it is excellent
practice to support your subjective perception of voice features with
objective data.
It is acknowledged that in many settings, instrumentation for voice
analysis is not available, but when available should be used to the extent
possible to support perceptual judgments. Audio recordings serve as a
relatively permanent documentation of the voice at a particular point in
time. They serve as a source of comparison for future voice samples and
can be used to garner the judgments of other professionals at any time.
Computer programs for voice analysis are excellent sources of objective
data, particularly on features related to pitch and flexibility. Voice
fundamental, habitual pitch, and pitch range are examples of features of
phonation that can be easily obtained with computer analysis. When
computer analysis is not available, a pitch pipe or musical instrument
like a piano can help the clinician establish a reasonable estimation of
several pitch features. Loudness is highly subjective because it is a
matter of appropriateness for the social situation. Computer programs
provide some loudness documentation, but the information obtained is
disassociated from the demands of the speaking situation. A simple
sound level meter can be used in the communication environment, but
that too is not likely to be accessible to clinicians in the public schools.
The documentation of the quality of dysphonic voices is also highly
subjective. Although there are features of computer analysis that relate
to dysphonia, there is no substitute for the well-trained ear of the

clinician. Again, audio recordings serve to preserve the voice sample for
later analysis and comparison and provide a source of confirmation by
others, thus validating the perceptions of the clinician.
Why You Need to Know
 
Several instruments are used today to obtain objective data regarding
the parameters of voice (i.e., pitch, intensity, and quality). One such
computer-based instrument is the Computerized Speech Lab (CSL) by
Kay Elemetrics. The CSL is a hardware/software package that includes
such analyses as nasometry, real-time pitch analysis, and spectography.
One particular software program—the Multidimensional Voice Profile,
or MDVP—can be used to objectively assess various parameters of
vocal quality. Although it is beyond the scope of this textbook to provide
a detailed discussion of instrumentation, you are encouraged to read
about the advances that have been made in this particular area of
speech– language pathology. Boone et al. (2010) provide a good primer
in this area.
 
PERSPECTIVE 4: EMPHASIS
When writing diagnostic reports, SOAP notes, and other therapy
documentation, the clinician is urged to place appropriate emphasis on
the most obvious and clinically relevant factors that characterize the
voice. What stands out as most conspicuous in this voice? What is it
about this voice that is within generally acceptable normal limits, and
what is not? Of those features that appear not to be within normal limits,
which, if any, are dominant? Reporting with appropriate emphasis and
clearly relating the salient features of voice to the basic parameters of
pitch, 
loudness, 
quality, 
and 
flexibility 
will 
clarify 
clinical
communication while providing a clear record of the client’s diagnosis
and progress in therapy. Appropriate emphasis is particularly important
in the summary and recommendation sections of reports, where other
professionals are likely to first get the “big picture” of the case.
PERSPECTIVE 5: COMMUNICATION

In all of what we do clinically, there is no substitute for clear
communication. 
Because 
voice 
cases 
almost 
always 
involve
interdisciplinary interaction, the speech–language pathologist must be
mindful of the limits of their role and the nature of their contribution.
Although medical professionals are the most likely referral sources and
referral recipients, school teachers, psychologists, and teachers of
singing are also likely professionals to whom referrals are made and
from whom referrals are received.
When communicating about voice disorders, the speech–language
pathologist must be careful not to make a medical diagnosis or overstate
the case in a way that might be construed as a medical diagnosis. The
clinician should carefully describe the voice problem, support that
description with as much objective and quantitative data as possible,
identify the salient issues from the case history, and clearly pose any
questions for which he or she hopes to receive answers. The clinician
can go so far as to say that the nature of the dysphonia and the notable
features of the history are consistent with the possible presence of vocal
nodules, for example, but should present the case in a way so as not to
positively confirm the presence of nodules. The following is an example
of how the communication might be phrased:
Dr. ENT:
CL is a 6-year-old male who was evaluated on February 28, 2007 and
who presented with a dysphonia characterized by tension and
breathiness that is moderate in severity and is accompanied by
phonation breaks and intermittent aphonia. The dysphonia appears to
have increased in severity over the past six months as reported by CL’s
parents. They describe him as always having been an active child, prone
to using a loud voice inside, and being among the most vocal in his play
group outside. Yelling and screaming have increased since he has been
involved in organized sports this year.
CL’s voice and history are consistent with the possible presence of
vocal nodules, but he has not had vocal fold visualization or a medical
examination related to his voice problem. Please advise as to the
appropriateness of therapy to help CL understand and reduce vocal
abuse.

Respectfully,
Ima Therapist
Summary
 
The intent of this chapter was to provide you with an understanding of
how the anatomy and/or physiology of the phonatory system relates to
various common disorders of voice. Perhaps more so than any of the
other systems involved in speech production (i.e., the respiratory and
articulatory systems), there is a clear relationship between laryngeal
anomalies and expected aberrations of voice. For example, increased
mass on the vocal folds created by mass lesions such as vocal nodules,
polyps, or papilloma will very likely result in a lower pitch than normal.
Should the mass lesion invade the medial borders of the vocal folds, the
vocal folds will not be able to approximate completely during phonation
and the result will likely be manifested as a breathy voice quality. A
differential in size or shape of bilateral lesions will likely cause the vocal
folds to vibrate asynchronously, and the result will be a harsh voice
quality. In cases of spasmodic dysphonia, the laryngeal mechanism may
spasm so severely that the patient will exhibit a very labored vocal
quality known as a “strain-strangled” voice. Having a good knowledge
of the anatomy and physiology of the phonatory system will benefit the
clinician greatly in assessing and treating voice disorders.
Clinical Teaser—Follow-Up
At the beginning of Chapter 8, we described Destiny, a 15-year-old
high school student with diagnosed vocal nodules. Her history is
clearly consistent with the medical diagnosis. Singing can be and
cheering often is a factor in the history of young women with vocal
nodules. The quality of her voice was described as hoarse with a
degree of breathiness. What is described as hoarseness (i.e.,
dysphonia) is very often a result of breathiness and tension, so the
description of Destiny’s voice is again quite consistent with the
presence of nodules. In Destiny’s case, her actual habitual pitch (as
instrumentally confi rmed) was not reported but is likely to be

perceived as low because of her dysphonia. In fact, the entire history
and description of her voice are consistent with vocal nodules with the
exception of pain on phonation, which is less likely to be an associated
symptom in vocal nodules and more likely to be reported in association
with contact ulcers. It is important to keep in mind, however, that
given the history and voice description, Destiny could have edematous
vocal folds or, with the presence of pain on phonation, contact ulcers.
Thus, the point is once again made that we cannot confi rm pathology
with vocal characteristics. Medical diagnosis and clearance to proceed
with therapy are necessary.
The key to remediation of Destiny’s voice problem is to reduce
vocal abuse. It is most likely that singing and cheering are implicated as
abusive activities, and it is also likely that cheering is the more
deleterious of the two. Does this mean that Destiny can no longer
participate in these activities? Should complete vocal rest (i.e., no voice
use) for a period of time be recommended? The answer to both of these
questions is no. In fact, complete and prolonged vocal rest can actually
cause problems and will not solve the problem if—when voice use is
resumed—vocal abuse continues.
From a management perspective, it is recommended that the
clinician help Destiny to understand what vocal nodules are and what
causes them. It is important for Destiny to take responsibility for her
situation and the management of it. She is not at fault or to blame for
having nodules, but she will need to be an active participant in her vocal
remediation. She is likely to wonder, “Why me?” There is no
explanation for why she has developed vocal nodules while her friends
who participate in the same activities have not. Although she should not
feel guilty, she will have to accept responsibility for change, something
that may not be easy at her age. Understanding that she need not give up
activities important to her may be a great boost to her motivation for
change. Surgical removal of nodules is possible, but without change in
vocal behavior (i.e., abuse reduction), nodules are likely to recur.
Identifi cation of abusive behaviors is recommended as a first step.
Cheering and singing are likely to emerge at the top of a list of abusive
behaviors for Destiny, but social vocal habits with friends,
communication style at home, and other vocal habits (e.g., laughing,
throat clearing, hard glottal attack) could also be factors contributing to

her problem. Once a hierarchy is established, strategies can be explored
to manage the abusive behaviors. For example, while cheering, Destiny
might either lip-sync the cheers or speak them without yelling. During
practice, she might refrain from vocalizing the cheers and instead
concentrate on the physical aspects of cheerleading. Also, if Destiny
were to “teach” others what she has learned about vocal abuse and its
management, she might be able to help others avoid similar problems in
the future. In that way, she could acknowledge her problem while
helping others.
While singing, she might reduce vocal intensity, limit singing to
only her modal register (i.e., mid-frequencies), limit the amount of
participation, and avoid singing loudly with the car radio or in the
shower. If singing is a very important activity for Destiny, she might
consider getting a teacher of singing to aid in the development of
healthy singing techniques. Elimination of vocal nodules will take time,
but they will reduce in size and will eventually disappear through
elimination of vocal abuse.
PART 4 SUMMARY
Part 4 (Chapters 8 and 9) provided you with a basic understanding of the
anatomy and physiology of the phonatory system, along with some
common pathologies associated with voice production. The primary
structure of phonation—the larynx—is a musculocartilaginous structure
that is supported by, and serves as a framework for, several muscle
groups. The intrinsic laryngeal muscles are responsible for producing
the vocal tone and for mediating the pitch and loudness of that tone. The
extrinsic muscles are involved primarily in assisting pitch regulation.
The process of vocal fold vibration was described according to the
Myoelastic Aerodynamic and Cover-Body Theories of phonation. The
result of phonation is a complex tone that is rich in harmonic structure.
In Chapter 9, you were introduced to a number of pathologies associated
with the phonatory system. A direct relationship was established
between some common pathologies (e.g., mass lesions, vocal fold
paralysis, spasmodic dysphonia) and the underlying anatomical and/or
physiological anomalies associated with those pathologies. In addition,

Chapter 9 offered several perspectives for diagnosing and remediating
vocal pathologies.
PART 4 REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Name all of the cartilages that comprise the larynx. Which of these
cartilages are most important in the process of phonation?
2. Name the intrinsic and extrinsic membranes of the larynx and
briefly describe each one’s purpose.
3. Name the intrinsic laryngeal muscles and briefly describe how each
of them contributes to phonation.
4. Describe how the extrinsic laryngeal muscles contribute to
laryngeal physiology. What is the net effect of their contribution?
5. What are the contributions of the superior laryngeal nerve and
recurrent laryngeal nerve to phonation?
6. From what cranial nerve do the superior and recurrent laryngeal
nerves emerge? What other cranial nerves are involved in the
process of phonation? Describe each one’s contribution.
7. What are the underlying physiological processes of voice
production? Explain their interdependence.
8. Briefly describe the Myoelastic Aerodynamic and Cover-Body
Theories of phonation.
9. List and define the components of a complex tone.
10. Define medial compression and longitudinal tension. What is each
one’s contribution to voice production?
11. Describe the phases of phonation.
12. How are pitch and loudness of voice controlled?
13. What is dysphonia, and how does it relate to the parameter of voice
quality?
14. Name three voice disorders presented in Chapter 9 and describe the
effects they are likely to have on voice.
15. What is flexibility of voice, and in what ways is it important in
conversation?
16. Why is medical clearance important in voice disorder management
for the SLP?

 

 
Knowledge Outcomes for ASHA Certifi cation for Chapter
10
   Demonstrate knowledge of the biological basis of the basic
human communication processes (III-B)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the neurological basis of the basic
human communication processes (III-B)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the acoustic basis of the basic
human communication processes (III-B)
 
Learning Objectives
 
   You will be able to describe the framework that supports the
articulatory/resonance system.
   You will be able to recall the major anatomical structures of
articulation and resonance and their role in the process of speech
production.
   You will be able to describe the muscles that mediate articulation
and resonance.
   You will be able to discuss the basic concepts involved in speech
production as described by Source-Filter Theory.
 

 
 
Clinical Teaser
You are a speech–language pathologist working in a hospital setting.
You are also a member of the local cleft palate team. On one particular
day, you are asked to participate in an evaluation of Aidan, a 4-year-old
boy who exhibits the features of Pierre Robin syndrome: micrognathia,
cleft palate, and glossoptosis. Fortunately, these features are not
pronounced to the degree that Aidan has been unable to thrive.
However, unfortunately, Aidan’s parents did not seek medical attention
for their child’s condition, so his orofacial anomaly has been left
untreated. He has been brought to your hospital by authorities of Child

Protective Services. Upon meeting Aidan for the first time, you observe
that although he has little difficulty breathing, it is somewhat labored.
You also note that he is generally malnourished. Because he has not
received the proper medical intervention he needs, his development has
been adversely affected.
The micrognathia, cleft palate, and glossoptosis are of primary
concern to you. What would you expect to find when you perform a
speech and language evaluation on this child? Would you expect
articulation errors of any kind? If so, which speech sounds would he
most likely produce in error? Would you expect any problems in terms
of resonance? Would you suspect any other problems in terms of
communication and/ or swallowing? Assuming Aidan exhibits problems
in these areas, what would your intervention strategy be?
 
Introduction
 
As presented in Chapters 6 and 8, the respiratory and phonatory systems
work together to produce the human vocal tone. The respiratory system
provides the air pressure that sets the adducted vocal folds into
vibration. The vocal folds are housed within the larynx, which is part of
the phonatory system. The phonatory system is not only responsible for
producing the vocal tone but also has the ability to vary the intensity and
frequency of the vocal tone. Once the vocal tone is generated, it passes
through the vocal tract where it is shaped and molded into an acoustic
signal we recognize as human speech. The anatomical structures within
the vocal tract constitute the articulatory/resonance system.
In Chapter 8, the vocal tone* was described as a complex tone
resembling a buzzing sound. The vocal tone itself would not be
recognized as speech. It would therefore have to be transformed into an
acoustic signal recognized as human speech. This process of
transformation takes place by way of the articulatory/resonance system.
You will note that the articulatory/resonance system has two
components: articulation and resonance. These components will be
described in more detail in the physiology section of this chapter, but for
now it will be mentioned that these two components are not separate but

rather act together simultaneously to shape the vocal tone into speech.
To understand the processes of articulation and resonance, one must
know the structures that comprise the vocal tract.
_______________
 
*You should not be mislead into thinking that the vocal tone is the only
source of sound during speech production. In fact, in English, 9 of the
24 consonant sounds are produced without vocal fold vibration (and
hence are referred to as “unvoiced” sounds). Sounds from the wide array
of languages around the world come from a variety of sources and not
just the vocal folds. We use the term “vocal tone” in this textbook to
represent the acoustic signal that is generated by vocal fold vibration.
 
The remainder of this chapter will be devoted to a thorough
discussion of the anatomy and physiology of the articulatory/resonance
system. It is expected that upon reading this chapter, you will be well
versed in the structure and mechanics of articulation and resonance, and
how these processes work together to produce human speech. It should
also be noted that many of the structures that make up the
articulatory/resonance system are also involved in deglutition. Because
speech–language pathologists work with persons having swallowing
disorders, a discussion of the anatomy and physiology of the swallowing
mechanism will also be presented in this chapter.
Anatomy of the Articulatory/Resonance System
 
Three primary cavities form the vocal tract: pharyngeal, oral, and nasal
(see Figure 10-1). The pharyngeal cavity extends from the base of the
skull to the cricoid cartilage of the larynx. It has a vertical orientation.
The oral cavity extends from the lips and teeth anteriorly to the
palatoglossal arches posteriorly, and from the hard and soft palate
superiorly to the tongue inferi-orly. Its orientation is horizontal. Finally,
the nasal cavity actually consists of two separate chambers. These
chambers run horizontally from the nostrils anteriorly to the uppermost
portion of the pharynx posteri-orly. Each of these three primary cavities
consists of a number of anatomical structures and/or landmarks.

The oral cavity is composed of several anatomical structures and
landmarks. These include the lips, teeth, alveolar ridge, hard palate,
velum, tongue, and mandible. Each of these structures will be described
in greater detail below. The nasal cavity includes the nose and two
chambers separated at midline by the nasal septum. Within each
chamber is a series of landmarks that will be discussed later. Finally, the
pharyngeal cavity is rather unremarkable in terms of structures and
landmarks but is composed of an intricate and complex network of
muscles that will be discussed in a later section of this chapter.
The vocal tract then consists primarily of the following structures:
lips, teeth, alveolar ridge, hard palate, velum, tongue, mandible, oral
cavity, nasal cavity, and pharyngeal cavity. With the nasal and oral
cavities being oriented horizontally and the pharyngeal cavity being
oriented vertically, the vocal tract resembles a capital letter “F.” In an
adult male, the distance between the vocal folds and lips is
approximately 17 cm. Five centimeters of this distance is the oral cavity,
with the remaining 12 cm being the length of the pharynx.
Similar to many of the anatomical structures of the respiratory and
phonatory systems, movement of the primary anatomical structures of
the articulatory/resonance system are mediated by muscle activity.
Therefore, this chapter will include a thorough discussion of the muscles
that assist in articulation and resonance. Many of these muscles have
their insertion or origin on bones of the skull. During the process of
communication, facial expression may convey part of the message.
Muscles are involved in facial expression, and many of these muscles
also have attachments to the bones of the skull. Because of this, a
discussion of the articulation/resonance system would not be complete
without a description of the human skull. Once the human skull has been
presented, the discussion will turn to the anatomical structures that make
up the oral, nasal, and pharyngeal cavities.

 
Figure 10-1 Sagittal view of the oral, nasal, and pharyngeal
cavities. (Adapted with permission from Moore, K.L., Agur A.M.,
Dalley, A.F. (2009). Clinically oriented anatomy (6th ed.).
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
THE SKULL
Figure 10-2 shows several views of the human skull. Upon first glance,
the human skull appears to be a structure consisting of two parts: the
skull proper and the jaw bone. However, in actuality, the skull is a
complex structure that consists of 28 bones that articulate with each
other similarly to a three-dimensional jigsaw puzzle. Some of these
bones are paired and others are singular. All of them can be categorized
into one of three groups: bones of the cranium, bones of the face, and
miscellaneous bones. There are eight bones that comprise the cranium,
the part of the skull that houses the brain. These include the unpaired
ethmoid, sphenoid, frontal, and occipital and the paired parietals and

temporals. The facial portion of the skull is that part that corresponds to
the recognized human face. There are 14 bones that comprise the facial
portion of the skull. These include the unpaired mandible and vomer and
the paired maxillae, nasals, palatines, lacrimals, zygomatics, and
inferior nasal conchae.
Finally, the miscellaneous bones are six in number and include a
series of three tiny bones housed within each temporal bone of the
cranium—the malleus, incus, and stapes—which are part of the hearing
mechanism. These bones will be discussed at greater length in Chapter
12 and therefore will not be discussed in this chapter. Some anatomists
include one additional bone under the miscellaneous category, resulting
in a total of 29 bones for the skull. This is the hyoid bone which was
discussed in detail in Chapter 8. Anatomists who include the hyoid bone
as one of 29 do so because the hyoid is more intimately related to the
tongue than to the larynx. However, because the hyoid does not
articulate directly with any other bones of the skull, it is not included
here as a part of the skull. Having been discussed in more detail in
Chapter 8, the hyoid bone will not be described in detail here.
Gross anatomy of the skull will reveal several anatomical structures
and landmarks. The orbits of the eye are prominent cavities where the
eyeballs reside. Keeping to the analogy of a three-dimensional jigsaw
puzzle, one will realize that the orbits are not composed of one bone but
actually are composed of parts of several bones, among them the
ethmoid, frontal, lacrimal, maxillary, palatine, sphenoid, and zygomatic
bones. Similarly, within the nasal cavity is a vertical partition of bone.
This partition is called the bony nasal septum, and it also is not a
singular bone but actually composed of two bones: ethmoid (more
specifically, the perpendicular plate) and vomer. Along the lateral walls
of each chamber of the nasal cavity are three scrolls of bone known as
the nasal conchae or turbinates. The two upper conchae (superior and
medial) come from the ethmoid, whereas the lowermost scroll is an
independent bone—the inferior nasal concha. The three nasal conchae
form small chambers called meatuses. Returning to the exterior of the
skull, one will note several landmarks: the frons (forehead), occiput
(posteriormost point of the skull), and vertex (superior tip of the skull).
Along the sides of the skull, where the facial part ends and the cranium
begins, are depressions called temporae. These correspond to the

temples when the soft tissue structures overlay the skull. Just lateral to
and below each orbit is a prominent loop of bone called the zygomatic
arch, more commonly referred to as the cheekbone. The zygomatic arch
is not a singular bone but rather is created by parts of three bones:
maxilla, temporal, and zygomatic.
If one were to remove the top of the skull by cutting around the
circumference of the cranium, one would be holding the calvaria or
skullcap. By then removing the brain from the cranium, one would note
three major cavities within the floor of the cranium. These are the
anterior, medial, and posterior cranial fossae.
On each side of the skull, immediately posterior to where the
mandible articulates with the skull, is a small opening. This opening is
the bony external auditory meatus. Immediately behind and projecting
below each external auditory meatus is a rounded protuberance called
the mastoid process. Medial to each external auditory meatus on the
inferior surface of the skull is a sharp projection of bone known as the
styloid process. At the base of the skull between and behind the styloid
processes is a large hole. This hole is called the foramen magnum.
Finally, one will note that several jagged lines traverse the cranial
part of the skull. These jagged lines are known as sutures. There are four
prominent sutures: coronal, sagittal, lambdoidal, and occipitomastoid.
The coronal and sagittal sutures are named in reference to the planes in
which they course. The lambdoidal suture is named for the fact that it
resembles the Greek letter lambda (λ). The occipitomastoid suture refers
to the anatomical structures it joins together (i.e., the occipital bone and
mastoid processes of the temporal bones).

 

 
Figure 10-2 Various views of the human skull. A. Anterior view.
B. Lateral view. C. Inferior view. (Adapted with permission from
Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th
ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Facial Bones
 
Maxillae
 
The paired maxillae are illustrated in Figure 10-3. These bones make up
the greater portion of the central face just lateral to the nose and below
the eyes and are second only to the mandible in size. The two maxillae
fuse with each other at midline just below the nasal opening by way of
the intermaxillary suture. This suture continues between the two upper

central incisors and between the palatine processes of the maxillae.
Immediately posterior to the upper central incisors is a small opening
called the incisive foramen. In very early development, fine sutures that
extend bilaterally from the incisive foramen to between the lateral
incisors and canines form a triangular region referred to as the
premaxilla. In some animals, this is a separate bone, but in humans the
sutures are usually completely fused and therefore the two halves of the
premaxilla are counted as part of the palatine processes of the maxillae.
Why You Need to Know
 
Sometimes in fetal development, the sutures of the maxillae fail to fuse
properly, resulting in a condition known as cleft palate. The cleft may
involve only the intermaxillary suture or may involve the sutures that
define the premaxilla. Cleft palate will be discussed in greater detail in
Chapter 11.
 
Each maxilla has a corpus (i.e., body) and a number of processes.
In all, each maxilla articulates with nine other bones. These include the
ethmoid, frontal, inferior nasal concha, lacrimal, the opposite maxilla,
nasal, palatine, vomer, and zygomatic. Of note is the frontal process that
articulates with the frontal bone of the cranium and the zygomatic
process that articulates with the zygomatic bone of the facial portion of
the skull. Each maxilla also has an orbital process that creates much of
the inferior orbit of the eye. Immediately below the orbit of the eye is a
small opening called the infraorbital foramen. Each maxilla has a
number of alveolar processes where the upper teeth are housed.

 
Figure 10-3 The maxillae. A. Anterior view. B. Lateral view.
(Adapted with permission from Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008).
Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Of particular note is a somewhat vertically oriented ridge in the maxilla
where the canine tooth resides (the third tooth from midline).

Appropriately enough, this ridge is referred to as the canine eminence.
The palatine processes are noteworthy as they form the anterior
three-fourths of the hard palate. The palatine process of each maxilla
fuses with its partner to form most of the ceiling of the oral cavity and
floor of the nasal cavity. On the nasal side of each palatine process is a
small ridge called the nasal crest. The nasal crests from both maxillae
form a horizontally directed groove where the perpendicularly directed
vomer resides. The nasal crests continue in an anterior direction and
terminate as the anterior nasal spine.
Upon close inspection of the maxillae, one will note that these bone
are not solid but rather have a hollow interior. These are called the
maxillary paranasal sinuses, and they are the largest of all the
paranasal sinuses. The maxillary paranasal sinuses are present at birth.
Mandible
 
The mandible is more commonly referred to as the jaw bone and is
illustrated in Figure 10-4. It is the largest of the facial bones of the skull.
During embryonic development, the mandible starts as two halves
joined together at the mental symphysis which courses vertically,
starting between the two lower central incisors. The mandible consists of
an anterior corpus and two posterior rami (the mandibular rami). In the
region of the mental symphysis, the corpus extends outward forming the
mental protuberance. The mental protuberance is bordered on each side
by the mental tubercles. Along the superior margin of the corpus are
dental alveoli for the lower teeth. Just lateral and somewhat superior to
each mental tubercle is a small opening called the mental foramen. Also
running from each mental tubercle somewhat posteriorly and superiorly
is an indistinct ridge called the oblique line. On the inner (posterior)
surface of the corpus is a more prominent ridge running horizontally
from side to side. This ridge is known as the mylohyoid line.
The mandibular rami arise at an angle that is approximately 90
degrees to the corpus, although this angle may vary somewhat from
person to person. On the superior border of the mandibular rami are two
processes. The anterior process is called the coronoid process and the
posterior process is referred to as the condylar process. The mandibular
notch separates the coronoid process from the condylar process. The

condylar process from each side articulates with the temporal bone of
the skull to form the temporomandibular joint (TMJ). This joint will
be described in greater detail later.
Nasals
 
The paired nasal bones are illustrated in Figure 10-5. These bones form
the bridge of the nose and lie medi-ally to the frontal processes of the
maxillae. Although they are rather small in size, they articulate with the
frontal bone, perpendicular plate of the ethmoid, and maxillae as well
as the septal cartilage. The two nasal bones are fused together at
midline at the inter-nasal suture. A nasal foramen may also exist in one
or both bones.
Palatines
 
The paired palatine bones are somewhat “L” shaped and comprise the
posterior one-fourth of the hard palate as well as a portion of the floor
and lateral walls of the nasal cavity (see Figure 10-6). These bones also
help form the inferior orbits of the eyes. Of particular note are the
horizontal processes which form the posterior portion of the hard
palate. The anterior border of each horizontal process is serrated to allow
for a strong articulation with the palatine processes of the maxillae. The
two horizontal processes when fused form a posterior nasal spine. The
posterior border of the horizontal processes is free and forms the point
of attachment for the velum. The palatine bones articulate with each
other as well as the ethmoid, frontal, inferior nasal conchae, maxillae,
and vomer.
Lacrimals
 
The lacrimal bones are the smallest bones of the facial portion of the
skull (see Figure 10-7). They are so named because of their proximity to
lacrimal (i.e., tear) glands. In addition to forming a small portion of the
medial orbits of the eyes, these bones articulate with the ethmoid,
frontal, inferior nasal conchae, and maxillae.

Zygomatics
 
The paired zygomatic bones are illustrated in Figure 10-8. They help
form a portion of the lateral and inferior walls of the orbits of the eye.
Each bone consists of a corpus and four processes: the frontosphenoidal;
orbital; maxillary; and temporal, which describe their attachments to
other bones (the frontal, maxillae, sphenoid, and temporal bones). Of
particular note are the maxillary and temporal processes. Medially, the
maxillary process of the zygomatic bone articulates with the zygomatic
process of the maxilla. Laterally, the temporal process of the zygomatic
bone articulates with the zygomatic process of the temporal bone. These
articulations form the zygomatic arch, which is more commonly known
as the cheekbone.

 
Figure 10-4 The mandible. A. Anterior view. B. Anterolateral
view. C. Midsagittal view. (A: Adapted with permission from
Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th
ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; B and C: Adapted
with permission from Anatomical Chart Company.)
 

 
Figure 10-5 The nasal bones. (Adapted with permission from
Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th
ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Inferior Nasal Conchae
 
The inferior nasal conchae are illustrated in Figure 10-9. One of these
bones is found in each of the two chambers making up the nasal cavity,
more specifically making up the lowermost part of its lateral wall. These
bones articulate with the maxilla anteriorly and the palatine bones
posteriorly. Along with the superior and medial nasal conchae (which
are part of the ethmoid bone), the inferior nasal conchae are scrolls of
thin bone that are also referred to sometimes as the turbinate bones.

Vomer
 
The vomer is a somewhat quadrilaterally shaped bone that comprises the
lower half of the bony nasal septum (the upper half of the bony nasal
septum comes from the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone).
Illustrated in Figure 10-10, the vomer resides in the horizontally oriented
groove created by the nasal crests of the maxillae. In addition to
articulating with the maxillae, the vomer articulates with the palatine
bones below and the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid and the rostrum
of the sphenoid bone above. Its posterior border is free, but its anterior
border articulates with the cartilaginous nasal septum.
Cranial Bones
 
Frontal
 
The frontal bone corresponds to the forehead region and the anterior
portion of the top of the cranium. It is illustrated in Figure 10-11. The
frontal bone consists of a squamous portion and an orbital portion. The
squamous portion is the larger of the two and corresponds to the
forehead and anteriormost part of the cranium. The orbital portion
corresponds to the superior orbits of the eye and the eyebrow region. In
infancy, there may be a metopic suture that divides the frontal bone
into two halves.
Medially between the orbits of the eyes is a frontal spine. Superior
to this spine, immediately between the two eyebrows is a region called
the glabella. Lateral to the glabella are the supraorbital margins. These
margins may be superimposed by either a supraorbital foramen or notch.
Within the orbital surfaces are small depressions in the bone called
lacrimal gland fossae. Tear glands are housed within these fossae.
Finally, an opening exists between the orbital portions of the frontal
bone and below the frontal spine. This opening is referred to as the
ethmoidal notch. In an intact skull, this notch is occupied by the ethmoid
bone.
In all, the frontal bone articulates with 12 bones: the singular

ethmoid and sphenoid and the paired lacrimals, maxillae, nasals,
parietals, and zygomatics. The posterior border of the squamous portion
of the frontal bone articulates virtually along its entire length with the
two parietal bones.
Similarly to the maxillae, the frontal bone is also hollow in its
interior. Two cavities are separated by a thin bony septum, forming the
paired frontal para-nasal sinuses. These sinuses are virtually absent at
birth. They start to develop during the first or second year of life but do
not fully form until puberty.
Parietals
 
The parietal bones are illustrated in Figure 10-12. The two parietal
bones articulate with each other at midline so that they form essentially
the rounded roof of the cranium. The parietal bones are shaped
somewhat like rectangles, meaning each one has four margins and
angles. The frontal margin is that part of the parietal bone that articulates
with the frontal bone. The sagittal margin is that part of the parietal bone
that articulates with the other parietal bone. The occipital margin is the
part of the parietal bone that articulates with the occipital bone, and,
finally, the temporal margin is that part of the parietal bone that
articulates with the temporal bone.
The articulation between the two parietals takes place along the
sagittal suture. The articulation of the parietal bones with the frontal
bone takes place along the coronal suture. The parietal bones also
articulate with the occipital bone along the lambdoidal suture. The
sagittal suture intersects the coronal suture ante-riorly and the
lambdoidal suture posteriorly.

 
Figure 10-6 The palatine bones. A. Anterior view. B. Sagittal view.
C. Inferior view. (C: Adapted with permission from Agur, A.M.,
Dalley, A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th ed.).
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Although the outer surface of each parietal bone is somewhat
smooth in appearance, the inner surface is marked by grooves

resembling blood vessels. In fact, these grooves are called the middle
meningeal vessel grooves where blood vessels that pass through the
meningeal layers of the brain rest.
Occipital
 
The occipital bone makes up the posterior portion of the cranium (see
Figure 10-13) and consists of two parts: the larger squamous portion and
the smaller basilar portion. The squamous portion is relatively
unremarkable except for the lambdoidal (or parietal) margin where the
occipital bone articulates with the parietal bones and the mastoid margin
where the occipital bone articulates with the temporal bones. The point
where the squamous part of the occipital bone extends most posteriorly
is called the inion or external occipital protuberance. Running
transversely along the occipital bone where the squamous portion ends
and the basilar portion begins are two ridges called the superior and
inferior nuchal lines.

 
Figure 10-7 The lacrimal bone. (Adapted with permission from
Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th
ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The basilar portion of the occipital bone is more remarkable in
terms of landmarks. Most obvious is the large hole in the basilar part
called the foramen magnum. The spinal cord passes through the foramen
magnum on its way down the spinal column. In the anterior region of
the foramen magnum and lateral to it are two prominent occipital
condyles. The occipital condyles are the points of articulation of the

base of the skull to the first cervical vertebra (C1, or the atlas). Anterior
to each condyle is a hypoglossal canal. Anterior and medial to the
condyles is the pharyngeal tubercle, where the superiormost border of
the pharynx attaches to the base of the skull. Finally, posterior to the
condyles is a depression called the condylar fossa. Within this fossa is a
small opening known as the condylar canal.
Temporals
 
The temporal bones comprise the sides of the cranium (see Figure 10-
14). These bones consist of two major parts and three subparts. The two
major portions of the temporal bones are the squamous and petrous
portions. The squamous portion is smooth in appearance and makes up
the lateral, anterior, and superior portion of the temporal bone. Of
particular note is the zygomatic process, a landmark of the squamous
portion that articulates with the temporal process of the zygomatic bone
to form the zygomatic arch, or cheekbone.
 
Figure 10-8 The zygomatic bones. A. Anterior view. B. Interior

view. (A: Adapted with permission from Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F.
(2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.)
 
 
Figure 10-9 The inferior nasal conchae. A. Sagittal view. B.
Midsagittal view. (Adapted with permission from Anatomical
Chart Company.)
 
The petrous portion lies at the base of the skull between the
sphenoid and occipital bones and can be further divided into tympanic
and mastoid sections. The petrous portion gets its name from the fact
that the bone is very hard. Within the tympanic section of the petrous
portion reside the essential organs of hearing and balance—the cochlea
and semicircular canals. Posterior to the tympanic section is the mastoid
section, which includes the mastoid process. The mastoid section is not
solid bone but rather composed of numerous irregularly shaped cavities
referred to as the mastoid air cells. In the inferior part of the mastoid
section, these air cells are relatively small and diminish in size until all
that remains is bone marrow. In the anterior and superior regions of the
mastoid section, the air cells are progressively larger until they give way
to the tympanic antrum. The upper limit of the tympanic antrum is the

tegmen tympanum, which is the roof of the tympanic cavity. These
structures will receive a more detailed discussion in Chapter 12.
 
Figure 10-10 The vomer. A. Midsagittal view. B. Inferior view.
(Adapted with permission from Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008).
Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.)
 

 
Figure 10-11 The frontal bone. (Adapted with permission from
Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th
ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Two final landmarks of note are the styloid process and the
mandibular fossa. The styloid process roughly resembles a sharpened
pencil tip. It is located in the petrous portion of the temporal bone,
posterior and inferior to the zygomatic process. The styloid process is
the point of attachment of three muscles (styloglossus, stylohyoid, and
stylopharyngeus) and two ligaments (stylomandibular and stylohyoid).
The mandibular fossa is a depression located on the inferior surface of
the temporal bone between the styloid and zygomatic processes. The
condylar process of the mandible rests within this fossa forming the

temporomandibular joint (TMJ).
Ethmoid
 
The ethmoid bone is interesting in that although it is classified as a bone
of the cranium, it also contributes to the facial part of the skull. The
ethmoid contributes to the orbits of the eyes and nasal cavity as well as
makes up the medial portion of the anterior cranial base. Figure 10-15
provides an illustration of this bone, which consists of five parts:
cribriform plate, crista galli, perpendicular plate, and two ethmoidal
labyrinths. The cribriform plate is horizontally oriented, whereas the
crista galli and perpendicular plates comprise one piece that is oriented
vertically (the crista galli rises above, while the perpendicular plate
extends below the cribriform plate). The ethmoidal labyrinths are also
inferior to the cribriform plate but have a lateral orientation.
The cribriform plate serves as a partition between the nasal and
cranial cavities (the nasal cavity is below and the cranial cavity is
above). It is perforated by small openings. The olfactory nerve (cranial
nerve I) rests upon the cribriform plate, and nerve fibers from it pass
through the perforations into the nasal cavity to course along the
surfaces of the nasal conchae.

 
Figure 10-12 The parietal bone. (Adapted with permission from
Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th
ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Rising above the cribriform plate in a vertical plane is the crista
galli (translated literally as “cock’s comb”). Therefore, the crista galli is
housed within the cranial cavity. This somewhat triangular process
serves as the anterior point of attachment for the falx cerebri, a fold of
dura mater that separates the two cerebral hemispheres of the brain.
The perpendicular plate of the ethmoid extends inferiorly from the
cribriform plate in a vertical plane. It articulates with the frontal and
nasal bones anteriorly and the vomer and rostrum of the sphenoid
posteriorly. The cartilaginous nasal septum is also attached to the
anterior perpendicular plate.
The ethmoidal labyrinths contain highly irregular air cells that form
the paired ethmoid paranasal sinuses. These sinuses are present at

birth. The labyrinths are separated from the medial walls of the orbits of
the eyes by a very thin layer of bone (the lamina papyracea). Thin
scroll-like layers of bone also extend from the labyrinths. These are
known as the superior and middle nasal conchae (recall that the inferior
nasal conchae are independent bones of the facial part of the skull). In
total then, there are three scrolls of bone along the lateral walls of each
of the two chambers of the nasal cavity.
Sphenoid
 
The sphenoid bone is perhaps the most complex of all the bones of the
skull. When removed from the skull, it somewhat resembles a butterfly
(see Figure 10-16). Within the skull, it can be found immediately
posterior to the ethmoid and immediately anterior to the foramen
magnum and basilar portion of the occipital bone. The sphenoid has
seven major parts: a singular corpus and paired greater wings, lesser
wings, and pterygoid processes. The greater and lesser wings extend
laterally from the corpus while the pterygoid processes extend inferiorly.
The anterior surface of the corpus forms the posterior wall of the nasal
cavity. The inferior surface of the corpus has a small ridge called the
rostrum, which articulates with the vomer.
The two lesser wings extend laterally from the superior–anterior
aspect of the corpus. The inferior surfaces of the lesser wings form the
upper boundaries of the superior orbital fissures. The anterior margins
of the lesser wings articulate with orbital plates of the frontal bone. The
lesser wings come together at the jugum. Posterior to the jugum is the
chiasmatic sulcus which houses the optic chiasma where the two optic
nerves (cranial nerve II) cross over after they have exited the retinal area
of the eyeballs and passed through the optic canals. Immediately
posterior to the chiasmatic sulcus is the sella turcica which houses the
pituitary gland.

 
Figure 10-13 The occipital bone. A. Posterior view. B. Interior
superior view. C. Inferior view. (Adapted with permission from
Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th
ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

 
Figure 10-14 The temporal bone. A. Lateral view. B. Internal
superior view. (Adapted with permission from Agur, A.M., Dalley,
A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th ed.). Baltimore:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

 
Figure 10-15 The ethmoid bone. A. Coronal view. B. Superior
view. (A and B1: Adapted with permission from Anatomical Chart
Company; B2: Adapted with permission from Agur, A.M., Dalley,
A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th ed.). Baltimore:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

 
Figure 10-16 The sphenoid bone. A. Anterior view. B. Posterior
view. C. Internal superior view. (A: Adapted with permission from
Anatomical Chart Company; B: Adapted with permission from
Oatis, C.A. (2008). Kinesiology (2nd ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; C: Adapted with permission from Agur,
A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th ed.).
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The greater wings also extend laterally from the corpus of the
sphenoid. These wings contribute primarily to the orbits of the eyes as

part of their superior, lateral, and inferior walls. The lateral margins of
the greater wings articulate with the zygomatic bones. At the point
where the greater wings meet the corpus of the sphenoid, the pterygoid
processes extend vertically in a downward direction.
Each of the two pterygoid processes is composed of two laminae.
These are the medial and lateral pterygoid lamina, which are separated
from each other by the pterygoid notch. Along their anterior aspects, the
pterygoid notches articulate with the palatine bones. The lateral
pterygoid lamina is wider than the medial pterygoid lamina and serves
as the point of articulation for the medial and lateral pterygoid muscles.
The medial pterygoid lamina is more narrow and terminates in a small
hook-like structure called the hamulus.
The corpus of the sphenoid is hollow. Two chambers can be found
within; these chambers are separated by a thin midline septum creating a
pair of sphenoid para-nasal sinuses. These sinuses are not present at
birth, but rather start to form around the third year of life. The sphenoid
paranasal sinuses, along with the frontal, ethmoid, and maxillary
paranasal sinuses (mentioned in earlier sections), are lined with a
membrane created by a fusion of periosteum and mucous membrane
(this membrane is referred to as the mucoperiosteum). The lining of
these paranasal sinuses is continuous with the mucous membrane lining
of the nasal cavity.
All of the paranasal sinuses drain into the nasal cavity proper. The
sphenoid paranasal sinuses open into spaces above the superior nasal
conchae. The frontal and maxillary sinuses open into the medial nasal
meatus, and the ethmoid paranasal sinuses open into the superior and
medial nasal meatuses.
Why You Need to Know
 
Sinusitis is a condition where the mucous membranes of the paranasal
sinuses and nasal cavity become inflamed. As the inflammation
continues, the paranasal sinuses may not be able to drain into the nasal
cavity. Mucous is then trapped within the paranasal sinuses, creating
tenderness and pain. If the condition is chronic, a surgeon may have to
drill larger holes (called windows) in the nasal cavity to allow the
mucous to drain more freely.

 
In all, the sphenoid bone articulates with all of the other cranial
bones of the skull as well as several of the facial bones (maxillae,
palatines, vomer, and zygomatics). This bone contributes to the orbits of
the eyes as well as the nasal and pharyngeal cavities.
THE ORAL CAVITY
The oral cavity is the most active of the cavities involved in speech
production. It consists of several anatomical structures including the
lips, cheeks, teeth, alveolar ridge, hard palate, velum, tongue, and
mandible. The faucial pillars, tonsils, velopharyngeal (V-P)
mechanism, and muscles of facial expression will also be included here
as part of the oral cavity. One will quickly realize that excluding the
muscles of facial expression, these structures collectively make up the
mouth. The mouth has both primary (i.e., biological) and secondary (i.e.,
nonbiological) functions. In terms of biological function, the mouth
serves as the conduit by which the respiratory and digestive systems
communicate with the external environment. As part of the digestive
system, the mouth is used during the processes of mastication
(chewing) and deglutition (swallowing). The digestion of food begins in
the oral cavity.
Why You Need to Know
 
Although mothers often tell their children to breathe through their nose,
many tend to be “mouth breathers,” that is, they take in oxygen
primarily through the mouth. The problem with such breathing is that
inhaled air is not moistened and heated quite as efficiently as it is when
breathed in through the nose. To some degree, the nose also filters the
air as it passes through on its way to the pharynx and beyond. The oral
cavity performs this task less effectively.
 
The nonbiological or secondary function of the oral cavity is to
generate speech sounds and to modify the pitch characteristics of the
vocal tone through the process of resonance. These secondary functions
will be discussed in greater detail in the physiology section of this

chapter. In the paragraphs that follow, a closer inspection will be made
of the individual structures that comprise the oral cavity.
The Lips
 
The lips, or rima oris, are illustrated in Figure 10-17. The lips are
composed of four layers of tissue; from superficial to deep, these include
the cutaneous, muscular, glandular, and mucous layers. Fat, in differing
amounts depending upon the individual, may also be deposited within
these layers. The cutaneous layer is simply skin. Deep to the cutaneous
layer is a layer of muscle tissue. This muscle is the orbicularis oris, a
sphincter muscle that completely encircles the lips. The orbicularis oris
has a deep and a superficial layer. The deep layer consists of muscle
fibers arranged in concentric rings, while the superficial layer receives
muscle fibers from other facial muscles (these muscles will be discussed
later). The glandular layer contains labial glands that are similar to saliva
glands in structure. Finally, the mucous layer of the lips is continuous
with the mucous membrane of the oral cavity and pharynx. On their
inner (or lingual) surface, the lips are anchored at midline to the alveolar
region (upper lip) and mandible (lower lip) by the superior and inferior
labial frenula (singular: frenulum).

 
Figure 10-17 Landmarks of the lips. (Adapted with permission
from 
Lippincott 
Williams 
& 
Wilkins’ 
Surface 
Anatomy
Collection.)
 
A view of the external surface of the lips reveals several landmarks.
The lips are darker in hue than the rest of the face due to the
transparency of the vermilion zone (this transparency is created by an
abundance of eleidin in the epithelium). The transparency of the
vermilion zone allows the vascular tissue below to be more prominently
displayed. Running from the septum of the nose to the middle of the
upper lip are two vertically oriented ridges with a deep furrow between
them. This furrow is called the philtrum. The philtrum terminates on
the upper lip, creating a midline depression that makes the upper lip
appear like an archer’s bow. Hence, the upper margin of the upper lip is
referred to as Cupid’s bow.
The Cheeks
 

The cheeks, or buccae, are similar in structure to, and are continuous
with, the lips. The external layer is skin (i.e., cutaneous), the innermost
layer is a mucous membrane, and muscular and glandular layers reside
within. Several facial muscles (whose functions are to assist in
mastication and to mediate facial expression) can be found in the
muscular layer of the cheeks. Within the glandular layer reside five or
six glands corresponding to the molar region of the teeth. Appropriately
enough, they are referred to as the molar glands. Stenson’s duct (a part
of the parotid salivary gland) also opens into the buccal region. Finally,
a buccal fat pad may exist to some degree. In infants, this pad is quite
prominent, but it tends to dissipate somewhat as the individual develops.
The cheeks and lips, along with the gums and posterior teeth, form a
secondary cavity within the oral cavity called the buccal cavity.
The Teeth
 
The complete set of teeth for an adult numbers 32, but for a child, it is
only 20. Obviously then, humans have two sets of teeth. The first set
that develops during early childhood is called the deciduous set (but is
also referred to by some people as the baby, milk, primary, or temporary
teeth). These teeth eventually shed and are replaced by the permanent
teeth. There are more teeth in the permanent set because the maxillae
and mandible have grown large enough to accommodate the additional
teeth.
Morphologically, there are four basic types of teeth: incisors,
cuspids (also known as canines), premolars, and molars. Incisors are
chisel shaped, allowing them to efficiently cut and shear food. Cuspids
are more tusk-like in appearance. This arrangement allows these teeth to
rip and tear. Finally, the premolars and molars are flat with broad
surfaces; this makes them ideal for crushing and grinding.
A Typical Tooth
 
A typical tooth consists of several structures (see Figure 10-18). Gross
anatomy of the external surface reveals a crown, neck, and root. The
crown is the part of the tooth that can be seen (approximately one-third
of the tooth). The root lies below the gum line and therefore cannot be

seen (approximately two-thirds of the tooth). The neck is an ill-defined
region between the crown and root, generally at the gum line. The crown
is covered by a very hard substance called enamel (approximately 96%
mineral by weight), while the root is covered by cementum
(approximately 50% mineral by weight). The neck region corresponds to
the cementoenamel junction, where the enamel ends and the cementum
begins. The bulk of the solid portion of a tooth is referred to as dentin.
 

Figure 10-18 Anatomical structure of a typical tooth. (Adapted
with permission from Anatomical Chart Company.)
 
The tooth is anchored within its dental alveolus (tooth socket) by a
periodontal ligament or membrane. The articulation of tooth and
alveolus is a joint called a gomphosis. This type of joint holds the tooth
in its socket while allowing the periodontal ligament to absorb the
mechanical forces placed on the tooth through chewing or other activity
where the teeth come into contact with each other.
An internal view of a typical tooth will also reveal several
landmarks and structures. The interior of a tooth is hollow, forming a
pulp canal. The larger portion of the pulp canal is referred to as the pulp
cavity. The pulp cavity is filled with dental pulp, specialized tissue that
is rich in nerve endings and blood vessels. The nerve fibers and blood
vessels make their way into the pulp cavity through the apical foramen,
which is actually at the bottom of the tooth root(s).
Depending on its type, a tooth can have any number of surfaces.
The contact surface of an incisor is called the incisal edge, but for the
other teeth, it is called the occlusal surface. The posterior surface (facing
the oral cavity) is called the lingual surface, in reference to the tongue.
The anterior surface of the incisors and cuspids is referred to as the
labial surface in reference to the lips. For the premolars and molars, this
surface is called the buccal surface in reference to the cheeks. Finally,
adjacent teeth have approximal surfaces. If one divides the upper and
lower sets of teeth into left and right halves (i.e., starting at midline
between the two central incisors), the approximal surfaces will be
classified as either mesial (facing toward the midline) or distal (facing
away from the midline). This means that the surfaces of the two central
incisors that face each other are both mesial surfaces.
The Development of Teeth
 
The life cycle of teeth involves four stages: growth, calcification,
eruption, and attrition. During the growth stage, the tooth buds form
along with the enamel and dentin. The enamel and dentin harden during
the calcification stage. These two stages take place while the teeth are

still embedded within the maxillae and mandible. The eruption stage
takes place when the teeth begin to migrate into the oral cavity. This
stage has two substages: intraosseous and clinical. During intraosseous
eruption, the teeth make their way through the bony alveolar ridge. At
this point, the teeth are still not completely calcified and the roots have
not fully formed. Through a process known as resorption, specialized
cells called osteoclasts break down the bone tissue within the alveolar
ridge and the teeth migrate. Once the teeth have clinically erupted,
osteoblasts reform the bone to create the alveoli. Clinical eruption is
evidenced by the teeth cutting through the gingivae. The final stage,
attrition, takes place throughout life. As mechanical forces of chewing
act upon the teeth, they wear down. However, the teeth still maintain
their spatial relationships because eruption also continues throughout
life.
The deciduous or primary teeth are 20 in number but do not all
erupt at once. Eruption of the complete deciduous set takes
approximately 14 to 18 months to accomplish, although this can vary
considerably from child to child. Typically, the first teeth that erupt are
the lower central incisors. This takes place between approximately 6 to 9
months of age. The upper central and upper lateral incisors tend to be
the next teeth to erupt, at approximately 8 to 10 months of age. Eruption
then continues anteriorly to posteriorly until the second molars erupt at
approximately 20 to 24 months of age. When all deciduous teeth have
erupted, the child will have 20 teeth: two upper central incisors; two
upper lateral incisors; two upper cuspids; two upper first molars; two
upper second molars; two lower central incisors; two lower lateral
incisors; two lower cuspids; two lower first molars; and two lower
second molars (see Figure 10-19A).
Before the complete permanent set of teeth comes in, there is a
period of time when the child may have some deciduous teeth and some
permanent teeth. This is referred to as the mixed dentition stage. The
same process that causes the deciduous teeth to erupt is responsible for
eruption of the permanent teeth. A bony partition separates the
deciduous teeth from the permanent teeth below them. At the appointed
time, osteoclasts resorb bone allowing the permanent teeth to migrate.
The deciduous teeth above are shed. Once the permanent teeth are in
place, osteoblasts reform bone. The mixed dentition stage spans

approximately 6 years. It begins typically when the deciduous lower
central incisors are shed at 6 to 8 years of age, and ends when the
deciduous second molars are shed at approximately 10 to 12 years of
age.
The permanent set of teeth begins to erupt with the lower central
incisors and upper and lower first molars at approximately 6 to 7 years
of age. Eruption then continues for the anterior teeth (incisors and
cuspids) and eventually for the posterior teeth (bicuspids and molars).
Eruption of the permanent teeth spans approximately 11 to 19 years. The
upper and lower third molars (also known as “wisdom teeth”) may not
erupt until the individual is in his or her mid-20s.
 
Figure 10-19 The complete set of teeth. A. Deciduous teeth. B.
Permanent teeth. (Adapted with permission from Anatomical Chart
Company.)
 
When the complete permanent set has erupted, there will be 32
teeth, 12 more than were in the deciduous set (see Figure 10-19B). Some
permanent teeth have a deciduous partner, while some permanent teeth

do not. The permanent teeth that have a deciduous partner are referred to
as successional teeth, whereas permanent teeth that do not have a
deciduous partner are called superadded teeth. The super-added teeth
include two upper first and two upper second bicuspids (also known as
premolars), two lower first and two lower second bicuspids, and two
upper and two lower third molars. Figure 10-19B illustrates a complete
permanent dental set. Each dental arch (upper and lower) has 16 teeth
with the left and right halves of each arch being mirror images of each
other. Each half arch has a central incisor, lateral incisor, cuspid, first
bicuspid, second bicuspid, first molar, second molar, and third molar.
The incisors, cuspids, and bicuspids tend to have a single root although
the upper first bicuspids may have two roots. The lower molars typically
have two roots, but the upper molars typically have three roots. The
occlusal surfaces of bicuspids and molars tend to be flat by comparison
with the incisors and cuspids. The flat surface of these teeth is divided
into sections created by grooves along the surface. These sections are
called cusps. As the term implies, bicuspids have two cusps. The first
molars typically have four cusps; the second molars may have three or
four cusps; and finally the third molars typically have three cusps.
Why You Need to Know
 
There is a relationship between the development of the teeth and
development of speech. In general, the first consonant sounds to emerge
(at about 6 to 9 months) are produced by either the lips (/p, m/) or the
tongue and alveolar ridge (/t, d, n/). The first primary teeth (lower and
upper central incisors and upper lateral incisors) emerge between 6 and
10 months. The 20 primary teeth are in place by approximately 30
months of age. The first consonant sound to emerge that involves the
teeth (and lower lip) is usually the /f/ at around 30 to 36 months. This is
followed by the /v/ at around 48 months, and finally the two “th” sounds
(where the tongue tip is placed between the upper and lower teeth) at
around 54 to 60 months. Incidentally, when the primary upper and
lower central and lateral incisors are shed at approximately 6 to 8½
years, some children may exhibit a bit of a regression in the ability to
produce the two “th” sounds correctly. These errors usually dissipate
once the permanent central and lateral incisors are in place.

 
Of some importance to speech–language pathologists are the spatial
relationships of the teeth. A certain amount of maxillary overbite and
overjet is normal. Because the maxillary arch is larger than the
mandibular arch, the anterior mandibular teeth (incisors and cuspids)
will rest inside of their maxillary counterparts when the jaw is closed
(this is maxillary over-bite). The upper incisors are also angled a little
more toward the lips than the lower incisors, resulting in a normal
degree of overjet.
Over 100 years ago, Angle (1899) proposed a system for
classifying the relationship of the upper jaw to the lower jaw that is still
used today. The reference point for this relationship is centric occlusion
where the mandible is central to the maxilla and there is complete
occlusal contact of the upper and lower teeth (i.e., the jaw is
“clenched”). Angle suggested three basic types of occlusion (Class I
occlusion and Class I malocclusion are considered one type of
occlusion, with Class II and Class III malocclusion viewed as the other
two types). Class I occlusion, which is considered normal, is evidenced
by the cusps of the mandibular (lower) first molars resting ahead and
inside the cusps of the maxillary (upper) first molars. With this normal
profile, one can then describe three types of malocclusion. With Class I
malocclusion, the first molar relationship is intact, but some type of
anomaly exists in the anterior region of the dental arch. With Class II
malocclusion, the cusps of the mandibular first molars are behind and
inside their counterparts in the maxillary dental arch. The chin will
appear to be receding and the individual with this type of mal-occlusion
will be said to have an “overbite.” Interestingly, almost half the world’s
population has a Class II malocclusion! With Class III malocclusion, the
cusps of the mandibular first molars rest ahead of the maxillary first
molars, giving the chin the appearance that it is jutting out. A person
with this type of malocclusion is said to have an “underbite.” Finally, in
addition to the overall occlusal relationship of the teeth, there may be
any number of teeth that are not positioned properly. Any number of
teeth 
may 
exhibit 
disto-version, 
infraversion, 
labioversion,
mesioversion, supraversion, and/or torsiversion.
The Alveolar Ridge

 
The alveolar ridge is the bony part of the mandible and maxilla where
the alveoli (tooth sockets) reside. This ridge continues behind the upper
and lower teeth and is more prominent in the maxillary arch. A layer of
mucous membrane covers the bony ridge. This mucous membrane is
continuous with the membrane that lines the rest of the oral cavity. The
maxillary alveolar ridge is more clinically important for speech–
language pathologists because it is the site of production of several of
the consonant sounds in the English language.
The Hard Palate
 
The hard palate makes up the bony part of the ceiling of the oral cavity
as well as the floor of the nasal cavity. As mentioned previously, it is not
a singular bone but instead is actually formed by the processes of four
bones. More specifically, the anterior three-fourths of the hard palate is
formed by the palatine processes of the maxillae, whereas the posterior
one-fourth is formed by the horizontal processes of the palatine bones.
The palatine and horizontal processes from the left fuse with their
partners on the right along the intermaxillary suture. At midline where
the two horizontal processes meet, the posterior nasal spine is formed. A
palatal arch is created by the fact that the palatine processes are thicker
anteriorly and laterally but thinner medially. This arch is highly variable
from person to person and is somewhat dependent upon the status of the
maxillary dental arch.
The maxillary alveolar ridge and hard palate are covered with a
mucous membrane. Immediately behind the alveolar ridge is a series of
transversely oriented wrinkles called rugae. Extending beyond the rugae
along the length of the hard palate is a midline raphe. The prominence of
the rugae and midline raphe is also highly variable from person to
person. Finally, in approximately one-fifth of the population, there may
be a visible bulge on the hard palate. This bulge is known as a torus
palatinus, which is typically an outgrowth of bone along the
intermaxillary suture. The tissue surrounding the torus palatinus is likely
to have a bluish tint.
The Velum

 
The velum, or soft palate, is a three-layered structure. The deepest layer
is a palatal aponeurosis that attaches onto the posterior free border of
the horizontal processes of the palatine bones. This aponeurosis can be
considered the “skeleton,” and along with other connective tissues, it
makes up approximately one-third of the bulk of the velum. The
intermediate layer has muscle fibers from several muscles. Laterally,
muscle fibers from the velum are continuous with the muscles that
comprise the superior pharyngeal constrictor. Otherwise, the bulk of
velar muscle tissue is confined to its mid-region. The superficial layer of
the velum is a mucous membrane that is continuous with the rest of the
oral cavity.
The muscles of the velum are summarized in Table 10-1. When
these muscles contract, they will elevate, lower, or tense the velum. The
palatoglossus and palatopharyngeus muscles serve to lower and relax
the velum. The tensor veli palatini (TVP) muscle also lowers the velum
but tenses it as well. Finally, the levator veli palatini (LVP) (which
makes up the bulk of the muscular tissue of the velum) and the musculus
uvulae raise the velum (see Figure 10-20 for views of these muscles).
The actions of these muscles will be described more fully when the V-P
mechanism is discussed in the section on physiology. At rest, the velum
hangs down into the upper posterior region of the oral cavity. At
midline, one will see a singular structure known as the uvula. If you
start at the uvula and move laterally, you will see two folds of mucous
membrane along the sides of the posterior oral cavity. These are the
faucial pillars, which will be described in more detail below.

 
Figure 10-20 Muscles of the velum. A. Posterior view. B. Sagittal
view. (Adapted with permission from Tank, P.W., Gest, T.R.
(2008). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins atlas of anatomy. Baltimore:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

 
The Tongue
 
The tongue is an intricate structure whose importance cannot be
understated. Its biological functions are to serve as the primary organ of
taste as well as to participate in the processes of mastication and
deglutition. Secondary to these functions is the formulation of speech
sounds. The tongue is the major structure responsible for modifying the
resonant characteristics of the vocal tract and is also the primary
articulator in the production of many of the consonant sounds of
English.
Gross Anatomy

 
Figure 10-21 provides an illustration of the gross anatomy of the tongue.
The two primary parts of the tongue are the blade and root. The blade is
that part of the tongue that is readily visible, while the root is below the
blade and cannot be seen easily. The blade is further divided into a tip,
blade, front, and back. If the tongue is pressed flat against the ceiling of
the oral cavity, the tip will rest against the anterior teeth, the blade will
rest against the alveolar ridge, the front will rest against the hard palate,
and the back will rest against the velum. Running lengthwise down the
center of the tongue is a furrow called the longitudinal median sulcus.
Approximately two-thirds of the way down the length of the dorsum of
the tongue from its tip, the longitudinal median sulcus intersects with a
chevron-shaped landmark called the sulcus terminalis, which courses
transversely and is perpendicular to the longitudinal median fissure. At
the point where the longitudinal median sulcus intersects the sulcus
terminalis, a small pit known as the foramen cecum resides. At the
posterior limit of the root of the tongue, three slips of tissue arise and
anchor the base of the tongue to the anterior (lingual) surface of the
epiglottis. These are the median and lateral glossoepiglottic folds.
Between the median glossoepiglottic fold and each of the lateral
glossoepiglottic folds are small depressions called valleculae. The
surface of the tongue has somewhat of a rough appearance. This is due
to the presence of papillae all over the surface of the tongue anterior to
the sulcus terminalis. There are four types of papillae: filiform,
fungiform, simple, and vallate. The papillae house the taste buds which
are the essential organs for the sense of taste.

 
Figure 10-21 Gross anatomy of the tongue and surrounding
structures. (Adapted with permission from Tank, P.W., Gest, T.R.
(2008). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins atlas of anatomy. Baltimore:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The posterior one-third of the tongue is smoother in appearance
than the anterior portion. Several mucous glands are found here along
with lymphoid tissue known as the lingual tonsil. Anteriorly on the
under-surface of the tongue, you will note a vertically oriented slip of
mucous membrane that courses from the inferior surface of the tongue to
the floor of the oral cavity. This is the lingual frenulum.
Why You Need to Know
 
At one time or another, you may have heard another person say
something to the effect that “that person is tongue tied.” Obviously we
do not possess the ability to tie our tongues into knots! The term “tongue
tied” generally means that the person is having difficulty speaking. In
fact, the individual may have a lingual frenulum that is too short so that
it may not provide the tongue the mobility to approximate the alveolar

ridge, hard palate, and/or velum. This indeed could very likely cause
imprecise or incorrect articulation of speech sounds that require the
tongue to move toward the ceiling of the oral cavity.
 
The outer surface of the tongue is a mucous membrane that is
continuous with the covering of all other structures in the oral cavity. On
the inferior surface of the tongue, the mucous membrane is relatively
thin. It is thick, loose, and freely movable in the region posterior to the
sulcus terminalis. Anterior to the sulcus terminalis, the mucous
membrane is thin and closely adheres to the underlying muscle tissue.
The mucous membrane consists of a basement layer of connective tissue
called the corium. The corium is dense and somewhat felt-like in
consistency. It can be thought of as the “skeleton” of the tongue.
The Tongue as a Muscular Hydrostat
 
The bulk of the tongue is composed of muscle tissue. Some of the
muscles are housed completely within the tongue itself and are referred
to as intrinsic muscles. Other muscles originate on anatomical structures
outside the tongue but attach to some part of the tongue (and hence are
known as extrinsic muscles). Other than the hyoid bone and the corium,
there is relatively little skeletal support for the tongue. Instead, the
tongue has the ability to change its shape and position without
diminishing its volume in the process. As such, the tongue acts like a
fluid-filled structure that is incompressible. Of course, the tongue is not
filled with fluid but instead is composed of muscle tissue. This
architecture is referred to as a muscular hydrostat (Kier & Smith, 1985;
Smith & Kier, 1989).

 
The corium of the tongue provides the leverage for eight muscles
(four intrinsic and four extrinsic) to play off each other to effect the
movements the tongue is capable of making (Miller, Watkin, & Chen,
2002). As it changes its shape and position, inward displacement in one
area of the tongue results in outward displacement of another area,
thereby preserving the tongue’s volume. The hydrostatic property of the
tongue allows it to perform a myriad array of movements including
bulging, centralizing, curling, flattening, grooving, lateralizing, pointing,
protruding, retracting, and moving from side to side, among others.
The intrinsic tongue muscles include the following: inferior
longitudinal, superior longitudinal, transverse, and vertical. Table 10-2
summarizes the origins, insertions, and actions of these muscles, while
Figure 10-22 provides illustrations of them. It should be noted that the
intrinsic muscles are all considered paired because of the presence of a
vertically oriented cavity within the tongue called the fibrous midline
septum. Fibers of the superior longitudinal muscles are confined
primarily to the mid-region of the tongue, while the inferior
longitudinals can be found more laterally. The fibers of both of these
muscles course along the length of the tongue. As the terms transverse
and vertical imply, these two muscles have fibers that are arranged in the
transverse and vertical planes. Upon inspection of Table 10-2, you will
observe that the intrinsic muscles are responsible primarily for refined
tongue movements and postures (e.g., elongating, flattening, narrowing,

shortening).
Why You Need to Know
 
The two halves of the interior of the tongue also receive independent
neural innervation and blood supply. In neurological disorders where
half of the tongue is affected (i.e., unilateral paralysis), the unaffected
half will still function properly. A clinical sign of unilateral paralysis of
the tongue is deviation of the tongue to the paralyzed side when the
patient is asked to stick out the tongue. This is because the unaffected
muscles will overbalance and mechanically turn the tongue to the side of
least resistance—the paralyzed side.
 
The extrinsic muscles are responsible for gross posturing of the
tongue. These muscles include the genioglossus, styloglossus,
palatoglossus, and hyoglossus. The origins, insertions, and actions of
these muscles are summarized in Table 10-3. The palatoglossus was
mentioned as a muscle of the velum (refer back to Figure 10-20). The
remaining extrinsic muscles are illustrated in Figure 10-23. Being an
astute student, you will note that all of these muscles have the term “-
glossus” (referring to the tongue) as the second half of their name. The
first half of the name refers to the other structure to which the muscle is
attached (e.g., “genio-” = chin or inside of the mandible; “stylo-” =
styloid process; “palato-” = velum; “hyo-” = hyoid bone).

 
Figure 10-22 The intrinsic tongue muscles. A. Coronal view. B.
Sagittal view. (Adapted with permission from Tank, P.W., Gest,
T.R. (2008). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins atlas of anatomy.
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The genioglossus has anterior and posterior muscle fibers. This
muscle makes up the bulk of the tongue tissue. It is the largest and

strongest of all tongue muscles. The styloglossus is an antagonist of the
genioglossus (i.e., its action is the opposite of the genioglossus). The
palatoglossus (also referred to sometimes as the glossopalatine) has
three functions: (a) it pulls the velum down; (b) it elevates the posterior
portion of the tongue; or (c) it does both. Which action is performed is
dependent upon which structure (tongue or velum) is anchored, or upon
both structures being free to move.
 
Figure 10-23 The genioglossus, styloglossus, and hyoglossus
muscles. (Adapted with permission from Tank, P.W., Gest, T.R.
(2008). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins atlas of anatomy. Baltimore:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

The hydrostatic interplay between and among the intrinsic and
extrinsic muscles allows for intricate posturing and maneuvering of the
tongue. The superior longitudinal is responsible for elevating the tongue
tip while the inferior longitudinal performs the opposite function. The
transverse muscle narrows the tongue. Tongue protrusion is
accomplished primarily by contraction of the posterior fibers of the
genioglossus; however, this muscle contracting alone will simply cause
the tongue to hang downward as it protrudes. The superior longitudinal,
inferior longitudinal, and vertical muscles assist in protrusion by
pointing the tongue tip and narrowing the tongue body. Retraction of the
tongue is effectuated primarily by the anterior fibers of the genioglossus.
The superior and inferior longitudinals shorten the tongue as it retracts
and the hyoglossus depresses the sides of the tongue during retraction. If
you wanted to retract the tongue all the way back into the pharynx (as in
swallowing), you would contract the styloglossus muscle.
Movement of the tongue from side to side is accomplished by
contraction of the superior and inferior longitudinals. The two muscles
on the right acting together will turn the tongue tip to the right.
Similarly, simultaneous contraction of the superior and inferior
longitudinals on the left will turn the tongue tip to the left. Depression of
the body of the tongue is accomplished by contraction of the
genioglossus (medial portion of the tongue) and hyoglossus (lateral
edges of the tongue). To elevate the posterior tongue, contraction of the
palatoglossus muscle is necessary. The transverse muscle assists the
palatoglossus by bunching up the back of the tongue.

 
If you wanted to create a longitudinal groove along the middle of
the tongue, you’d have to contract the geniohyoid and vertical muscles.
To create a shallow groove, you’d contract only a part of the
geniohyoid. Contraction of the entire geniohyoid would create a deep
groove. Finally, relaxation of the lateral edges of the tongue is
accomplished by contracting the posterior fibers of the genioglossus as
well as the superior longitudinal and transverse muscles. You no doubt
are getting the impression that the tongue is capable of refined
movement and posturing, and this requires a sophisticated dance
between and among the intrinsic and extrinsic tongue muscles!
The Mandible
 
The mandible (illustrated in Figure 10-4) was described in detail along
with the other bones of the skull. In this section, instead of describing
the mandible, we will examine more closely the joint that is created by
the articulation between the mandible and temporal bone of the skull. As
was mentioned earlier in this chapter, this is referred to as the
temporomandibular joint (TMJ).
The Temporomandibular Joint
 
The TMJ is formed specifically by the articulation of the condylar

process of the mandible with the mandibular fossa of the temporal bone.
The mandibular condyle only indirectly articulates with the mandibular
fossa because it is separated from it by the articular meniscus. The parts
of the condyle and mandibular fossa that actually articulate with each
other are covered by a fibrocartilage. This deviates from typical joint
architecture because most bones that articulate with each other are
padded with hyaline cartilage. The primary difference between hyaline
cartilage and fibrocartilage is that the latter is devoid of vascular tissue.
This is important for the TMJ because blood vessels would be crushed
by the action of the TMJ during chewing and vocal activity if the
articular surfaces were lined with hyaline cartilage. Finally, the entire
TMJ is encapsulated by a membrane called the articular capsule. The
condyle is held in place by a series of ligaments. These include the
temporomandibular (or lateral), sphenomandibular, and stylomandibular
ligaments.
The TMJ is classified as a ginglymoarthrodial joint. This type of
joint allows for a hinge-like movement with some limited gliding. In
actuality, there are two TMJs but if functioning properly the two act as a
single bilateral unit. The joint is set in such a way that the mandible is
able to move vertically (i.e., opening and closing), anteroposteriorly
(i.e., protruding and retracting), and transversely (i.e., from side to side).
All these three dimensions of movement take place to some degree
during chewing and speaking.
Why You Need to Know
 
TMJ dysfunction syndrome can severely restrict one’s ability to utilize
the mandible for chewing or speech purposes. Symptoms may include
facial pain and spasm, reduced mandibular movement, and noises in the
joint. Treatment may include surgery or the use of an orthodontic
prosthesis to reduce grinding of the teeth.
 

 
Mandibular Movements
 
The primary movement of the mandible is elevation and depression.
When the mandible is elevated, the mouth is closed. By the same token,
when the mandible is depressed, the mouth is open. Two sets of muscles
are responsible for these movements, and they are referred to as the
mandibular elevator and mandibular depressor muscles. Tables 10-4 and
10-5 provide summary information about the elevator and depressor
muscles, respectively.
The mandibular elevator muscles include the masseter, medial (or
internal) pterygoid, and temporalis. The masseter and temporalis
muscles are illustrated in Figure 10-24, and the medial pterygoid is
illustrated in Figure 10-25. The masseter has both internal and external
fibers. Although it is a relatively slow muscle, it is the most powerful of
all muscles of mastication. The temporalis is a quicker muscle whose
action is snapping. The medial pterygoid along with the masseter are
referred to as the mandibular sling muscles because they suspend the
mandible in place along with the mandibular ligaments mentioned in the
previous section.
The mandibular depressor muscles include the digastricus,
mylohyoid, geniohyoid, and lateral (or external) pterygoid. The first
three of these muscles were described in Chapter 8 as suprahyoid
laryngeal muscles, but they also have the ability to pull the mandible
down. The lateral pterygoid muscle is illustrated in Figure 10-25 along

with the medial pterygoid so that you can see the relationship between
them. The digastricus, geniohyoid, and mylohyoid muscles are
illustrated in Figure 10-26.
 

 
Figure 10-24 The masseter and temporalis muscles. (Adapted with
permission from Scheumann, D.W. (2002). The balanced body: A
guide to deep tissue and neuromuscular therapy (2nd ed).
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
As was mentioned in the section above, the mandible not only has
the ability to raise and lower but can also protrude, retract, and move
from side to side. The same muscles that elevate and depress the
mandible are responsible for these movements. Anteroposterior and
transverse movement of the mandible is dependent upon which of these
muscles is contracting at a given time. Mandibular protrusion is

dependent upon simultaneous contraction of the medial and lateral
pterygoid muscles. Retraction is mediated by simultaneous contraction
of the posterior fibers of the temporalis and the anterior belly of the
digastricus as well as the mylohyoid and geniohyoid muscles. Finally,
transverse (i.e., lateral) movement is dependent upon simultaneous
contraction of the lateral pterygoid and the posterior portion of the
temporalis. Imagine how intricate the interplay of muscular contraction
must be to effect the rotary movements of the mandible that are seen
during chewing and to a lesser extent, speaking!
Other Structures of the Oral Cavity
 
Faucial Pillars
 
The faucial pillars can be seen quite clearly when you open your mouth
and examine the back of your oral cavity in a mirror. As a reference
point, at midline of the ceiling along the posterior limit of the oral cavity
is the uvula, the singular bulb-like structure at the terminus of the velum.
If you start at the uvula and follow either side along the back of the oral
cavity, two folds of skin will become apparent on each side. These folds
are the anterior and posterior faucial pillars. Although you will see only
the mucous membrane of these folds, within them are muscle fibers. The
anterior faucial pillars house fibers of the palatoglossus muscles. The
posterior pillars contain fibers from the palatopharyngeus muscles. As
such, the anterior pillars are sometimes referred to as the palatoglossal
folds, while the posterior pillars are known as the palatopharyngeal
folds. A space—the tonsillar fossa—exists between these two folds.

 
Figure 10-25 The medial and lateral pterygoid muscles. A. Lateral
view. B. Posterior view. (A: Adapted with permission from
Scheumann, D.W. (2002). The balanced body: A guide to deep
tissue and neuromuscular therapy (2nd ed). Baltimore: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; B: Adapted with permission from Anatomical
Chart Company.)
 

 
Figure 10-26 The digastricus, geniohyoid, and mylohyoid muscles.
A. Anterior-inferior view. B. Posterior-superior view.
 
Tonsils
 
At the posterior limits of the oral cavity are a series of lymphoid masses

called tonsils. These masses are arranged somewhat in a circle and are
therefore referred to as Waldeyer’s ring. One of these masses was
mentioned in the section on the tongue: the lingual tonsil. This tonsil,
found at the base of the posterior tongue, is the floor of Waldeyer’s ring.
The lateral walls of the ring are created by the palatine tonsils. These are
housed within the tonsillar fossae between the anterior and posterior
faucial pillars. Some of the tonsillar fossae still remains immediately
superior to the palatine tonsils. This space is called the supratonsillar
fossa. Finally, the ceiling of Waldeyer’s ring is formed by the
pharyngeal tonsil, or adenoids. The adenoids are found along the
posterior pharyngeal wall in the region of the velum.
Beinglymphoid tissue, the tonsils are responsible for fighting
infection. As bacteria are introduced into the oral and pharyngeal
cavities, the tonsils trap as much of the invaders as possible so that the
upper respiratory tract will remain healthy. However, sometimes, the
tonsils become inflamed and infected. This is usually evident by pus
accumulating in the supratonsillar fossae. Because the pharyngeal
ostium (opening) of the Eustachian tube is proximal to the adenoids, any
infection of the adenoids may reflux into the Eustachian tube and
through it enter the middle ear cavity.
Why You Need to Know
 
Chronic hypertrophy (swelling) of the adenoids may result in
obstruction of the nasopharynx, which in turn may result in mouth
breathing and denasality of the voice. The individual’s speech will
sound dull, especially for the nasal consonants /m/, /n/, and / /. Words
like “mom,” “nice,” and “song” will sound like “bob,” “dice,” and
“sog.” At some point, the doctor may decide to perform a “T & A”
procedure— removal of the tonsils and adenoids.
 
Velopharyngeal Mechanism
 
Most of the structures of the velopharyngeal (V-P) mechanism, or port,
were described in the section on the velum. The V-P mechanism is
responsible for regulating the communication between the oral and nasal

cavities. This is important for both digestive and speech functions, as
will become evident when the V-P mechanism is revisited later in this
chapter in the section on physiology. The V-P mechanism consists of the
velum and posterior pharyngeal wall. When the velum is raised to
approximate the posterior pharyngeal wall, the V-P port is closed.
Separation between the velum and posterior pharyngeal wall means that
the V-P port is open. The muscles that mediate movement of the velum
(refer back to Table 10-1) are involved in V-P mechanics.
In some individuals, a bulging of the posterior pharyngeal wall,
called Passavant’s pad, may exist to assist the velum in approximating
the posterior wall of the pharynx. Whether Passavant’s pad actually
exists is a topic of debate among anatomists. Some believe it does not,
while others believe it does. Still others hold the position that
Passavant’s pad may exist for some individuals, especially for persons
whose velum is shorter than normal so that it cannot adequately
approximate the posterior pharyngeal wall without some assistance from
the pharynx.
V-P Closure
 
The primary muscle of velar elevation is the levator veli palatini (LVP).
Fibers of this muscle comprise approximately 40% or more of the velum
(Boorman & Sommerlad, 1985; Kuehn & Kahane, 1990). The fibers
extend from just behind the hard palate to the front of the uvula and then
proceed laterally at an angle of about 45 degrees to their cranial
attachments, in essence forming a superiorly oriented sling with the
velum serving as the cradle. Bilateral contraction of the LVP will lift the
velum toward the posterior pharyngeal wall in an angular fashion.
Contraction affects a large area of the velum, thereby allowing for a
broad seal between the velum and posterior pharyngeal wall.
The musculus uvulae assists in elevating the velum when a tighter
seal is required. This muscle accounts for the lengthwise convexity of
the upper surface of the velum. When it contracts, it serves three
purposes: (1) it shortens the velum; (2) it elevates the velum; and (3) it
increases the thickness of the velum throughout a portion of its length.
The musculus uvulae assists in shortening the distance between the
velum and posterior pharyngeal wall while creating greater contact force

between the two.
Finally, the superior constrictor muscle (a pharyngeal wall muscle
in the region of the nasopharynx) may also assist in closure of the V-P
port. When this muscle contracts, it pulls the posterior pharyngeal wall
forward as it pulls the lateral walls inward. This action, in concert with
action of the LVP and in some cases the musculus uvulae, creates a seal
between the velum and posterior pharyngeal wall.
It should be noted that as the velum slides up and down the
posterior pharyngeal wall, friction is generated. The frictional forces
generated by this activity causes velar glands to secrete a lubricating
substance to reduce the friction (Kuehn & Moon, 2005).
V-P Opening
 
To open the V-P port, the velum must be lowered. This is accomplished
through the contraction of the palatopharyngeus, palatoglossus, and, to
some extent, the tensor veli palatini (recall that the first two muscles
comprise 
the 
faucial 
pillars). 
Of 
these 
three 
muscles, 
the
palatopharyngeus muscles provide the greatest force of depression. The
prevailing thought is that the palatopharyngeus acts like a sling that is
oriented in the opposite direction of the LVP (Hixon, Weismer, & Hoit,
2008). With the pharyngeal attachment of the muscle stabilized, the
vertical fibers of the palatopharyngeus pull downward and backward on
the velum when they contract. With the tongue stabilized, contraction of
the palatoglossus muscles will also depress the velum but with less force
than what the palatopharyngeus muscles provide (Moon & Kuehn,
2004).
Finally, the TVP muscle plays a minor role in velar depression.
Fibers of the TVP originate at the sphenoid bone and the cartilaginous
part of the Eustachian tube and then course downward in a vertical
direction to terminate in a tendon. The tendon then wraps around the
hamulus of the medial pterygoid lamina where the muscle changes to a
more horizontal direction, terminating at the hard palate and velum
(Barsoumian, Kuehn, Moon, & Canady, 1998). This arrangement allows
the TVP to act similarly to a rope being pulled around a pulley (the
hamulus being the pulley). TVP contraction causes three things to
happen: (1) it lowers the velum slightly; (2) it flattens the velum; and (3)

it applies tension to the palatal aponeurosis in much the same way as a
drumhead tightens on a drum.
Other Functions of the V-P Mechanism
 
Not only do the muscles of the V-P mechanism work to mediate the
degree of coupling between the oral and nasal cavities, but they perform
other important tasks. First, the V-P mechanism is thought to assist in
swallowing. Not only is the V-P port activated during a swallow, but
Kuehn, Templeton, and Maynard (1990) and Liss (1990) found that the
TVP, LVP, and palatoglossus muscles contain muscle spindles. They
believed that these spindles house special receptors that aid in initiating
the pharyngeal swallow reflex.
The other task that the V-P mechanism performs is related to
phonation. Recall from Chapter 8 that the vocal folds are set into
vibration when subglottic pressure overcomes their resistance. Prior to
phonation, subglottic pressure is greater than supraglottic pressure so
that when phonation commences, the air passes upward and outward
through the vocal folds. However, as soon as the vocal folds begin to
vibrate, subglottic pressure diminishes. To maintain vocal fold vibration
once it has been initiated, subglottic pressure must remain greater than
supraglottic pressure. As the vocal folds vibrate, the velum increases its
height. The increase in velar height results in greater supraglottic
volume. The increased supraglottic volume causes a drop in supraglottic
pressure so that it remains less than subglottic pressure.

 
Figure 10-27 Selected muscles of facial expression. (Adapted with
permission 
from 
Cael, 
C. 
(2009). 
Functional 
anatomy:
Musculoskeletal anatomy, kinesiology, and palpation for manual
therapists. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Muscles of Facial Expression
 
A thorough discussion of the oral cavity would not be complete without
at least mentioning the muscles of the face. Not only do humans
communicate primarily through an acoustic signal (i.e., speech), they
also communicate through facial expression. Furthermore, the
production of some speech sounds requires contraction of at least some
of the facial muscles. Therefore, this final section of our journey through
the oral cavity will provide you with an overview of the muscles that
mediate facial expression.
The orbicularis oris, which was described in the section concerning
the lips, is the reference point for most of the muscles of facial
expression. Many of the muscles listed in Table 10-6 make their
insertion into its superficial layer from various angles. Five muscles
(depressor labii inferior, levator labii superior, levator labii superior
alaeque nasi, zygomatic major, and zygomatic minor) approach the
orbicularis oris from an oblique direction above or below. Two muscles,

the buccinator and risorius, insert into the orbicularis oris from a
horizontal direction. Three muscles (depressor anguli oris, levator angli
oris, and mentalis) course in a perpendicular fashion toward the
orbicularis oris before inserting into it. The incisivus labii inferior and
incisivus labii superior are not true lip muscles, but they course in a
direction parallel to the length of the orbicularis oris. The remaining
muscles (corrugator, epicranius frontalis, orbicularis oculi, and
platysma) are supplementary muscles of facial expression. Many of
these muscles are illustrated in Figure 10-27.
All of these muscles act as a unit to mediate facial expression. The
full gamut of facial expressions can be represented by contraction of any
number of these muscles. This includes blinking and winking the eyes;
raising and lowering the eyelids; pursing the lips; frowning; and smiling.
Indeed, these expressions can be accomplished with varying intensity
(e.g., a “gentle” frown versus a “heavy” frown). A closer inspection of
Table 10-6 will reveal the complexity of muscle activity that is involved
in facial expression.
THE NASAL CAVITY
When one thinks of the nose, the first thing that comes to mind is
breathing or smelling. If you believe that these are the only functions of
the nose, you’d be in error. The nose—or more specifically the nasal
cavity—plays an important role in speech production. This function will
be described in more detail in the section on physiology; for now, we
will turn our attention to the anatomical structures of the nose and nasal
cavity. The nasal cavity begins at the nose and terminates in the region
of the nasopharynx, immediately above the velum and anterior to the
posterior pharyngeal wall. The structures that will be discussed in this
section include the nose, nasal septum, nasal conchae and meatuses, and
mucous membrane.

 

 
Figure 10-28 Landmarks of the nose. (Adapted with permission
from 
Lippincott 
Williams 
& 
Wilkins’ 
Surface 
Anatomy
Collection.)
 
As illustrated in Figure 10-28, the nose can be divided into several
parts. These include the root, bridge, dorsum, apex, base, nares, and
columella nasi. The root of the nose corresponds to the point where the
nasal bones articulate with the frontal bone. The bridge is that part of the
nose that corresponds to the nasal bones. Extending from the nasal
bones is cartilage; the dorsum is this part of the nose. The apex (or tip) is
the part of the nose that protrudes furthest from the face. The base is the

bottom of the nose where it joins the face above the upper lip. Along the
base are two openings called the anterior nares, which are more
commonly referred to as nostrils. The anterior nares are separated by a
partition called the columella nasi. The columella nasi is simply a
continuation of the dorsum to the base of the nose.
The outer lining of the nose is epithelial tissue (i.e., skin).
Underlying the mucous membrane are several cartilages that give the
nose its shape (see Figure 10-29). The septal cartilage is a vertically
oriented partition that extends outward from the nasal orifice at midline.
It not only serves as the dorsum of the nose but also completes the nasal
septum that separates the nasal cavity into two chambers. Its posterior
attachment is the bony nasal septum. Recall that the bony nasal septum
is formed by the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid (the superior part)
and the vomer (the inferior part). The lateral nasal cartilages make up
the sides of the nose, while the alar cartilages (major and minor)
complete the framework by assisting in the formation of the nares. The
lateral nasal cartilages articulate with the septal cartilage and the nasal
bones. The alar cartilages articulate with the lateral nasal cartilages.

 
Figure 10-29 Nasal cartilages. (Adapted with permission from
Agur, A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2008). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (12th
ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Superimposed upon the nasal cartilages are several muscles that
assist in the process of breathing and to a lesser extent play a role in
facial expression. Table 10-7 summarizes the muscles of the nose in
terms of their origins, insertions, and actions. Figure 10-30 illustrates
these muscles, which include the anterior nasal dilator, depressor alae
nasi, levator labii superior alaeque nasi, nasalis, posterior nasal dilator,
and procerus. With the exception of the procerus, these muscles serve to
either dilate or constrict the nostrils.

 
Figure 10-30 Selected muscles of the nose.
 

 
The interior of the nasal cavity consists of two chambers separated
by the nasal septum. The open space immediately inside the anterior
nares is the vestibule (children stick their finger here when “picking
their nose”). Along the lateral walls of each chamber are three scrolls of
bone that extend into the cavity space and form longitudinal channels
along the length of the nasal cavity. The scrolls of bone are the superior,
medial, and inferior nasal conchae or turbinates. You may recall from a
previous discussion in this chapter that the superior and medial nasal
conchae come from the ethmoid, while the inferior nasal conchae is an
independent bone.
Why You Need to Know
 
Many people have a “deviated” septum from trauma to the nose (e.g.,
being hit in the nose while boxing) or disease. This means that the
cartilaginous portion of the nasal septum is bent so that it deviates to
one side instead of remaining midline. The deviation is usually to the
left. A deviated septum can pose problems for a person in terms of
breathing through one nostril or drainage of mucous on one side of the
nose.
 
The longitudinal channels formed by the conchae are the nasal

meatuses. As there are three conchae, there are three meatuses in each
chamber. Referred to as the superior, medial, and inferior meatuses, they
correspond to their like-named conchae. Each meatus lies below its
corresponding concha. The lateral walls of the nasal cavity also contain
the openings through which the paranasal sinuses drain into the nasal
cavity.
The ceiling of the nasal cavity is composed primarily of the
cribriform plate of the ethmoid. The cribriform plate is perforated so that
fibers from the olfactory nerve (cranial nerve I) can pass into the nasal
cavity. The posterior limit of the nasal cavity opens into the uppermost
region of the pharynx—the appropriately named nasopharynx. The nasal
cavity communicates with the nasopharynx via the posterior nares, or
choanae.
The interior of the nasal cavity is covered by a mucous membrane.
As with the rest of the respiratory passageway, the mucous membrane is
ciliated. That is, tiny hairs project from the surface of the mucous
membrane. A thin layer of mucous blankets the interior of the nasal
cavity. This protective blanket traps organisms and contaminants. The
cilia continually sweep the mucous and trapped invaders toward the
nasopharynx. Eventually, the polluted mucous makes its way down the
throat and into the stomach.
THE PHARYNGEAL CAVITY
The pharyngeal cavity is more commonly referred to as the throat,
although it actually extends all the way to the base of the skull
superiorly and to the esophagus inferiorly (refer back to Figure 10-1). Its
composition is similar to that of the velum; it has a basement “skeleton”
known as the pharyngeal aponeurosis, an intermediate layer of muscle
tissue, and finally a superficial layer of mucous membrane.
Pharyngeal Aponeurosis
 
The pharyngeal aponeurosis is a funnel-shaped sheet of connective
tissue that originates at the base of the skull, and more specifically, the
pharyngeal tubercle of the occipital bone (immediately anterior to the
foramen magnum), petrous portion of the temporal bone, cartilage of the

Eustachian tube, and medial pterygoid lamina of the sphenoid. In an
adult male, this tube is approximately 12 cm in length. The greatest
width of the pharynx is approximately 4 cm and the greatest depth is
approximately 2 cm. This is at the superior end of the tube, at the base of
the skull. The pharynx then narrows considerably until by the time it
terminates at esophagus, it has a width of only approximately 2½ cm
and virtually zero depth (i.e., the anterior and posterior pharyngeal walls
touch each other and do not separate until food or drink passes through
on the way to the esophagus).
Pharyngeal Muscles
 
The pharyngeal aponeurosis is superimposed by muscle tissue. The
muscular pharynx is highly complex. Muscles interdigitate to such an
extent that it is difficult to parse out the individual muscles. Therefore,
the muscular layer of the pharynx is typically divided into three
overlapping regions referred to as the superior, medial, and inferior
constrictor muscles. Each of the constrictor muscles consists of between
two and four individual muscles. In addition to the constrictor muscles,
secondary muscles also play a role in pharyngeal mechanics. Table 10-8
provides summary information for the pharyngeal muscles. The
constrictor muscles are illustrated in Figure 10-31. The superior
pharyngeal constrictor consists of four muscles: buccopharyngeus,
glossopharyngeus, mylopharyngeus, and pterygopharyngeus. The
medial 
pharyngeal 
constrictor 
consists 
of 
two 
muscles:
ceratopharyngeus and chondropharyngeus. The inferior pharyngeal
constrictor 
consists 
of 
two 
muscles: 
cricopharyngeus 
and
thyropharyngeus. Although the superior pharyngeal constrictor is the
most complex of the constrictor muscles, it also is the weakest. All three
of the constrictor muscles influence the volume of the pharyngeal tube.
When bilateral contraction of these muscles occurs, they act as a
sphincter that serves to narrow the pharyngeal lumen. This action has
implications for swallowing and vocal resonance.

 
Figure 10-31 The pharyngeal muscles. A. Lateral view. B.
Posterior view. (Adapted with permission from Moore, K.L., Agur,
A.M., Dalley, A.F. (2009). Clinically oriented anatomy (6th ed.).
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

 
Why You Need to Know
 
Of particular importance is the cricopharyngeus muscle which is part of
the inferior constrictor. In many cases of laryngectomy (removal of the
larynx, usually due to cancer), a portion of the cricopharyngeus is
preserved, if possible. The cricopharyngeus will serve as the
laryngectomee’s sound source for “voicing” by vibrating as air is
forced across it.
 
Although not part of the pharyngeal constrictor complex, the
palatopharyngeus 
(also 
known 
as 
the 
pharyngopalatine),
salpingopharyngeus, and stylopharyngeus muscles also play a part in

pharyngeal mechanics. The palatopharyngeus muscle was described
earlier as a velar depressor, but some of its fibers blend with fibers of the
pharynx. This muscle shortens the distance between the velum and
pharynx, thereby narrowing the posterior faucial pillars. With the velum
stabilized, the palatopharyngeus assists the superior constrictor in
drawing the lateral pharyngeal walls medially, thereby narrowing the
pharyngeal lumen. The salpingopharyngeus muscle also assists in
narrowing the pharyngeal lumen. When it contracts, it pulls the lateral
walls of the pharynx upward and inward, thereby decreasing the width
of the pharynx.
The stylopharyngeus has the opposite effect on the pharynx as the
constrictors, palatopharyngeus and salpingopharyngeus. This muscle
elevates the pharynx and pulls the lateral walls even more laterally,
thereby widening the pharyngeal lumen. This muscle, along with the
palatopharyngeus, also elevates the pharynx and larynx, which is an
action necessary in swallowing.
Mucous Membrane
 
The superficial layer of the pharynx is a mucous membrane that is
continuous with the mucous membrane of the oral cavity, larynx, and
esophagus. In the uppermost region of the pharynx, the membrane
consists of columnar ciliated epithelium. In the lower (i.e., oral and
laryngeal) regions, the membrane consists of stratified squamous cells.
Clusters of mucous glands lie immediately beneath the mucous
membrane. These clusters are more numerous around the orifice of the
Eustachian tube than elsewhere in the pharynx.
Pharyngeal Regions
 
As illustrated in Figure 10-1, the pharynx is divided into three regions:
the nasopharynx, oropharynx, and laryngopharynx. The nasopharynx
is superior to the velum and extends from the choanae to the posterior
pharyngeal wall. This part of the pharynx contains several landmarks.
These include the torus tubarius, pharyngeal ostium of the Eustachian
(auditory) tube, adenoids, and pharyngeal bursa. The torus tubarius is a

comma-shaped ridge in the lateral walls of the nasopharynx. It is
composed of two muscles lying beneath the mucous membrane: the
salpingopalatine (anterior portion) and salpingopharyngeus (posterior
portion). The ostium of the Eustachian tube resides under the curved
part of the torus tubarius. The adenoids are found along the posterior
pharyngeal wall, superior to the velum. Finally, the pharyngeal bursa is
a groove in the mucous membrane that runs vertically at midline from
the adenoids to the base of the skull.
By 
comparison 
with 
the 
nasopharynx, 
the 
oro- 
and
laryngopharynges are relatively void of landmarks. The oropharynx
extends from the velum superiorly to the hyoid bone inferiorly. The
laryngopharynx then extends from the hyoid bone superiorly to the
aditus laryngis inferiorly.
NEURAL INNERVATION
Because all structures of the vocal tract are in the head and neck, you
might surmise correctly that cranial nerves will be responsible for
innervating the muscles of the velum, tongue, mandible, face, nose, and
pharynx. Table 10-9 summarizes the neural innervation of most of the
muscles that were discussed in this chapter. In total, half of the 12
cranial nerves serve the structures of the face and the oral, nasal, and
pharyngeal cavities. These include the trigeminal (cranial nerve V),
facial (VII), glossopharyngeal (IX), vagus (X), spinal accessory (XI),
and hypoglossal (XII) nerves.
All of the muscles of the velum are innervated by the vagus nerve
except the tensor veli palatini (TVP), which is innervated by the
trigeminal. The musculus uvulae, palatoglossus, and palatopharyngeus
may also be innervated by the spinal accessory nerve.
All of the intrinsic muscles of the tongue are inner-vated by the
hypoglossal nerve. The same is true for all of the extrinsic tongue
muscles except the palatoglossus, which is innervated by the vagus and
possibly the spinal accessory nerve.
The mandibular elevator muscles are all inner-vated by the anterior
trunk of the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve. Three cranial
nerves inner-vate the mandibular depressor muscles. The anterior belly
of the digastricus, the lateral pterygoid, and the mylohyoid muscles are

innervated by the trigeminal nerve. The posterior body of the digastricus
is innervated by the facial nerve. Finally, the geniohyoid muscle is
innervated by the hypoglossal nerve.
All three pharyngeal constrictor muscles receive their innervation
from the vagus nerve. The spinal accessory nerve may also be involved,
but its role in the innervation of these muscles is not as clear as the
vagus. This is also true of the palatopharyngeus and salpingopharyngeus
muscles. The only exception to pharyngeal innervation is the
stylopharyngeus muscle, which is innervated by the glossopharyngeal
nerve.
The muscles of the nose and face are not included in Table 10-9.
However, as a general rule, the muscles of the nose and face receive
motor innervation from the facial nerve. The skin, glands, and other soft
tissues receive primarily sensory innervation from the trigeminal nerve.
Although virtually all muscles of the nose and face are innervated by the
facial nerve, they receive their innervation from various branches of the
nerve. For example, the stylohyoid muscle receives innervation from the
stylohyoid branch of the facial nerve. The corrugator, frontalis, and
orbicularis oculi muscles are innervated by the temporal branch, and the
last of these three muscles also is innervated by the zygomatic branch.
The buccinator, procerus, and orbicularis oris muscles are innervated by
the buccal branch of the facial nerve. Finally, the platysma muscle
receives innervation from the mandibular and cervical branches of the
facial nerve.

 
Physiology of the Articulatory/Resonance System
 
In this section, we turn our attention to the physiology of the
articulatory/resonance system. First, you will learn the mechanics that
are involved in speech production. Related to this is a discussion of how
the vocal tone produced by the vocal folds is shaped and formed into the
acoustic signal we recognize as human speech. Finally, because
dysphagia is an important area of clinical practice in speech–language
pathology, you will be provided the basic mechanics of mastication and

deglutition.
THE MECHANICS OF SPEECH PRODUCTION
When one comes to an understanding of the mechanics of speech
production, one begins to appreciate the complexity of the event. A
typical human produces conversational speech at a rate of approximately
175 words per minute. This equates to approximately 20 speech sounds
per second. To be able to produce speech at such a rapid rate, the
structures that make up the vocal tract must work cooperatively and in
synchrony. This involves the coordinated effort of literally hundreds of
neural impulses and muscle contractions. Although it is not the purpose
of this text to provide you a thorough description of speech production, a
basic discussion of the physiology of the articulatory/resonance system
should drive home the complexity of human vocal communication.
 
In the foregoing section on the anatomy of the vocal tract, you may
have realized that some structures are relatively benign in terms of their
contribution to articulation and resonance, while other structures play a
more active role. Some structures are immovable, whereas others are
moveable due to muscle contraction. In the sections that follow, a brief
description will be provided for each of the structures that comprise the

vocal tract: lips, teeth, alveolar ridge, hard palate, velum, tongue,
mandible, and pharynx.
In the sections that follow, you will be presented the vowels and
consonants that make up the sound system of the English language.
There are 26 letters of the alphabet, but approximately 43 speech sounds
in English. Because there are more speech sounds than alphabet letters
in English, speech–language pathologists use a special character set to
represent each of the speech sounds. This character set comes from the
International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA). The IPA uses alphabet letters to
represent some of the speech sounds but relies on special characters to
represent others. Table 10-10 provides a list of the English vowels and
consonants and the IPA characters that are used to represent them. As
you read the sections below, if you encounter an IPA character you are
not familiar with, simply consult Table 10-10 to see how that particular
sound is pronounced.
The Lips
 
The lips are composed of the orbicularis oris muscles. The orbicularis
oris muscles, in turn, serve as the insertion for several facial muscles.
The buccinator, depressor anguli oris, depressor labii inferior, incisivus
labii inferior, incisivus labii superior, levator anguli oris, levator labii
superior, levator labii superior alaeque nasi, mentalis, risorius,
zygomatic major, and zygomatic minor muscles all act upon the lips in
one fashion or another. These muscles work together in various
combinations to mediate a wide range of lip movements during vocal
activity. One particular movement seen in speech production is lip
rounding. This is accomplished primarily through action of the
orbicularis oris muscles, which act in a sphincter-like manner when they
contract. Lip rounding is necessary for the production of certain vowel
sounds (e.g., /u/ and /o /) as well as the consonant sound /w/. Lip
rounding and protrusion results in elongation of the oral cavity, which in
turn changes the resonant properties of the vocal tract. Lip protrusion is
accomplished by simultaneous contraction of the depressor labii inferior,
levator labii superior, mentalis, and zygomatic minor muscles.
The lips are also involved in the production of other consonant
sounds referred to as bilabials. As the term implies, the two lips come

into contact with each other during the production of these sounds,
which include the /p/, /b/, and /m/. You can see right away that the lips
are actively involved in speech production.
The Teeth
 
The teeth are involved in speech production to a certain extent, although
their contribution to the process is more benign than the lips or other
structures of the oral cavity. With the exception of the lower set of teeth
during mandibular movement, the teeth are immovable. However, the
teeth are involved in the production of some speech sounds such as the
linguadental consonants /θ/ and /ð/ (referred to as the soft and hard “th”
sounds, respectively) and the labiodental consonants /f/ and /v/. As the
name implies, lingua-dental consonants are produced by placing the
tongue tip between the upper and lower teeth. By the same token,
labiodental sounds are produced by compressing the upper teeth onto the
lower lip. In either case, the teeth do not initiate the production of the
consonant but rather serve as the secondary articulators (the tongue and
lips are the primary articulators).
The Alveolar Ridge
 
One may recall from the discussion in the anatomy section of this
chapter that the alveolar ridge is the bony part of the upper and lower
gums where the tooth sockets reside. They are covered by a layer of
mucous membrane. In terms of speech production, the maxillary
alveolar ridge deserves mention. Being benign in terms of its
contribution to speech production, it serves as the secondary articulator
of consonant sounds referred to as alveolar sounds. The tongue is the
primary articulator in the production of these sounds, which includes the
/t/, /d/, /s/, /z/, /l/, and /n/. For some people, the /r/ sound may also be
produced in the region of the alveolar ridge.
The Hard Palate
 
The hard palate is also a benign structure and therefore serves as a

secondary articulator in the production of some speech sounds. In some
cases, the tip of the tongue approximates the anteriormost part of the
hard palate (at its juncture with the alveolar ridge). This includes the
consonants /∫/, /3/, /t∫/, and /d3/. The /r/ may also be produced in this
region by some people. One consonant sound in English is a true palatal
sound—the /j/. In this case, the blade of the tongue articulates with the
bulk of the hard palate.
The Velum
 
Being composed partly of muscular tissue, you can surmise that the
velum is an active structure in speech production. It is the secondary
articulator for the production of the velar consonant sounds /k/, /g/, and /
/. In these cases, the back of the tongue elevates to approximate the
velum. However, in speech production, the primary purpose of the
velum is to assist in regulating oral/nasal resonance. Along with the
posterior pharyngeal wall, the velum does this as part of the V-P
mechanism or port.
When the V-P port is open, some of the vocal tone is diverted into
the nasal cavity to resonate there while the remainder of the vocal tone
resonates in the oral cavity. When the V-P port is closed, the nasal
cavity is sealed off from the oral cavity so that all of the vocal tone
passes into the oral cavity to resonate. This mechanism is very important
because in English, all speech sounds are produced through oral
resonance except for three consonants. These three are referred to as the
nasal consonants and include the /m/, /n/, and / /. You will note that
these three sounds were presented above. That is, the /m/ is a bilabial
consonant, the / / is an alveolar consonant, and the /n/ is a velar
consonant. What distinguishes these three sounds from all the others is
that not only is there resonance taking place in the oral cavity but in the
nasal cavity as well. The resonance of part of the vocal tone within the
nasal cavity gives these three sounds a distinctive nasal quality or
“twang.” This is referred to as nasal murmur.
For the V-P port to be open so that nasal resonance can occur for
the /m/, /n/, and / /, the soft palate must be depressed. You will recall
that the V-P mechanism acts in a sphincter-like fashion so that the
velum does not lower like a door on a hinge but rather separates from

the posterior pharyngeal wall. The muscles that are responsible for
depressing the velum are the palatoglossus and palatopharyngeus
muscles, and to a lesser extent possibly the tensor veli palatini (TVP)
muscles. Any time one of the nasal consonants is encountered in
conversational speech, these muscles must contract to depress the velum
and open the V-P port. All the other speech sounds in English require
some degree of V-P closure.
The degree of V-P closure during speech varies according to the
phonetic context. Obviously, the V-P port is open considerably for the
nasal consonants. However, V-P closure is not necessarily complete for
the production of nonnasal speech sounds. There is a degree of V-P
opening for the low vowels (/ε/, /æ/, / /, /a/) although not as much as for
the nasal consonants. Similarly, there is a smaller degree of V-P opening
for the high vowels (/i/, /I/, /u/, / /) than the low vowels, and even
greater closure of the V-P port for the oral consonants than either the
low or high vowels. The degree of V-P closure is greatest for the
plosives (/p/, /b/, /t/, /d/, /k/, /g/) than other speech sounds because these
require the greatest intra-oral air pressure for production. The V-P
port must be closed to allow you to generate the intra-oral pressure that
is necessary for production of the plosives. V-P port closure is
accomplished by contraction of the levator veli palatini (LVP) and
musculus uvulae muscles.
From the foregoing discussion, you can see that V-P closure does
not have to be absolute to effectuate the proper balance between oral and
nasal resonance. Moll (1962) estimated that normal speakers exhibit
14% opening of the V-P port during production of the isolated /i/ vowel,
37% opening for the /a/ vowel, and as much as 38% V-P opening for the
/æ/ vowel. According to Raphael, Borden, and Harris (2007), no
apparent nasality is perceived during speech if the velum comes within 2
mm (approximately 20 mm2 of open area) of the posterior pharyngeal
wall. On the other hand, there is a definite perception of nasality once
the velum exceeds 5 mm (approximately 50 mm2 of open area) of
distance from the posterior pharyngeal wall.
When you consider the rapidity of human speech and the relatively
random nature in which the nasal consonants are dispersed throughout a
person’s speech, you will quickly realize that more critically important
is the timing of V-P opening and closure. Poor timing of the V-P

mechanism may result in an imbalance between oral and nasal
resonance. To drive home the point, recall that the average rate of
speech is approximately 175 words per minute (roughly 20 speech
sounds per second). The duration of an English nasal sound is
approximately 70 msec and the duration of other speech sounds may be
somewhat longer (e.g., vowels) or shorter (e.g., plosives) than that. You
should have no problem appreciating how quickly the velum must move
to provide the proper balance between oral and nasal resonance at such
high rate of speech.
Why You Need to Know
 
When the degree and/or timing of V-P closure are adversely affected,
the result may be a condition of hypernasality or denasality. With
hypernasality, there is too much nasal resonance during the production
of nonnasal speech sounds. With denasality, there is not enough nasal
resonance during the production of /m/, /n/, and / /. Some structural
anomalies that may result in poor oral/nasal resonance will be
discussed in Chapter 11.
 
The Tongue
 
The tongue is the primary articulator during the production of most
consonant sounds and is also the primary structure responsible for the
production of vowel sounds. The tongue is involved in the production of
18 of the 24 consonant sounds in the English language (the consonants
that are produced without tongue involvement are the /p/, /b/, /m/, /f/,
/v/, and /h/). In the case of the linguadental consonants (/θ/ and /ð/), the
tip of the tongue is placed between the upper and lower teeth. For the
alveolar consonants (/t/, /d/, /s/, /z/, /n/, /l/, and for some people /r/), the
tip of the tongue comes into proximity with the maxillary alveolar ridge.
In the case of the palatal consonants (/j/, /∫/, /3/, /t∫/, /d3/, and for some
people /r/), the blade and/or front of the tongue articulates with the hard
palate. Finally, for the velar consonants (/k/, /g/, and / /), the back of the
tongue raises to approximate the velum. Although the /w/ sound is
considered by many to be a bilabial sound, the back of the tongue may

also come into proximity with the velum during its production.
The tongue is also involved in the production of all of the vowel
sounds. In English, there are 14 monophthongs (also known as pure
vowels) and five diphthongs. A more thorough discussion of the
acoustic qualities of the vowels will be presented in the section below.
For now, you are referred to Figure 10-32. This figure illustrates what is
commonly known as the vowel quadrilateral. The left side of the
quadrilateral represents the anterior region of the oral cavity (i.e., the
lips and alveolar ridge). The right side represents the posterior region
(i.e., the velum and pharynx). You will note two dimensions: horizontal
and vertical.
 
Figure 10-32 The vowel quadrilateral showing the result of vertical
and horizontal tongue placement within the oral cavity. (Adapted
with permission from Raphael, L.J., Borden, G.J., Harris, K.S.
(2006). Speech science primer (5th ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.)

 
The horizontal dimension represents protraction and retraction of
the tongue within the oral cavity. That is, the tongue is able to move
toward the lips, toward the pharynx, or any point between the two. The
terms front, central, and back are used to indicate the relative position of
the tongue horizontally. The vertical dimension represents movement of
the tongue toward the floor of the oral cavity, toward the ceiling (i.e.,
hard palate), or any point between the two. The terms high, mid, and low
are used to indicate the relative position of the tongue vertically. The
vowel sounds are classified then, according to these two dimensions. For
example, the /i/ vowel is classified as a high front vowel. This means
that the tongue tip and blade move forward and up toward the alveolar
ridge. In the case of the /a/ vowel, the tongue moves backward and down
toward the lower oropharynx. All monophthongs are classified in this
manner.
The diphthongs are single vowel sounds consisting of a blending of
two monophthongs produced in a rapid fashion. In other words, the
tongue rapidly transitions from its placement for one vowel (the on-
glide) to the placement for a second vowel (the off-glide). For example,
the diphthong / I/ is produced when the tongue initiates its placement for
the vowel / / (low and toward the back of the oral cavity) and then
moves rapidly to the articulatory position for the /I/ vowel (high and
toward the front of the oral cavity). This process occurs so rapidly that
acoustically we perceive a singular vowel sound.
Naturally, muscle activity is necessary for allowing the tongue to
move to the various regions of the oral cavity to produce most of the
consonants and all of the vowel sounds. Recall in the previous section
that tongue muscles are classified as either extrinsic or intrinsic. The
extrinsic muscles are responsible for gross positioning of the tongue
within the oral cavity. For example, the hyoglossus muscles and anterior
fibers of the genioglossus muscles retract the tongue while posterior
fibers of the genioglossus muscles protrude the tongue. The
palatoglossus and styloglossus muscles elevate and retract the back of
the tongue. Finally, the hyoglossus muscles along with the entire
genioglossus muscles depress the tongue within the oral cavity.
The intrinsic tongue muscles are responsible for making fine

adjustments to the tongue but also assist in positioning the tongue within
the oral cavity. The inferior longitudinal and superior longitudinal
muscles shorten the tongue. However, the inferior longitudinal muscles
can also pull the tongue tip downward and the superior longitudinal
muscles can also raise the tongue tip upward. The transverse muscles
narrow and elongate the tongue, while the vertical muscles flatten it.
These muscles allow the tongue to move rapidly within the oral cavity,
which is essential for speech production. The tongue tip is able to
produce more than eight repetitive movements per second (e.g., “tah-
tah-tah-tah … ”)! This makes the tongue a very efficient articulator.
The Mandible
 
The mandible or lower jaw is also actively involved in speech
production. Its movements are accomplished by way of the
temporomandibular joints (TMJs). As was mentioned in an earlier
section of this chapter, although there are two TMJs, they act as a unit
when elevating and depressing the mandible. Mandibular elevator (i.e.,
masseter, medial pterygoid, and temporalis) muscles close the mouth by
raising the mandible, and mandibular depressor (i.e., digastricus,
geniohyoid, lateral pterygoid, and mylohyoid) muscles open the mouth
by depressing the mandible. Not only does the mandible move in a
vertical dimension (i.e., opening and closing), but it can also move in an
anteroposterior, lateral, and rotary fashion. These actions are
accomplished through differential contractions of the elevator and
depressor muscles. Seldom does the mandible completely close during
speech production. Movement of the mandible during vocal activity is
approximately 7 to 18 mm vertically and 2 to 3 mm anteroposteriorly.
You will note that as one produces the front (/i/, /I/, /e/, /ε/, /æ/) and
back (/u/, / /, /o/, / /, /a/) vowels from high to low position, mandibular
depression becomes greater and greater. Like the tongue, the mandible is
also capable of rapid repetitive movements. On average, the mandible
can produce approximately 7.5 repetitive movements (e.g., “pah-pah-
pah-pah …”) per second. This makes the mandible capable of handling
the demands placed upon it by speech production.
The Pharynx

 
The pharynx is a funnel-shaped tube that courses from the base of the
skull to the esophagus. It is typically divided into three regions: the
nasopharynx, oropharynx, and laryngopharynx. The pharynx houses a
complex array of muscles collectively referred to as the superior,
middle, and inferior constrictor muscles. In terms of speech production,
the pharynx is somewhat static, that is, it does not appear to contribute
significantly to the production of speech sounds. However, being a
cavity, it does have resonant properties (and the same can be said of the
oral and nasal cavities as well, although the contribution of the nasal
cavity is also static while the oral cavity is highly dynamic). The action
of the constrictor muscles appears to be more important in swallowing
than in the production of speech.
The Integration of Oral Structures
 
It should be emphasized that the lips, mandible, tongue, velum, and
pharynx do not perform isolated movements. That is, movements of
these structures are interrelated and integrated to an extent. For example,
the mandible is coupled to the tongue and lower lips and teeth. It assists
these structures in meeting their articulatory contacts with other
anatomical structures. The velum, tongue, and faucial pillars also seem
to act as an integrated unit. Stimulation of the larynx, palate, or pharynx
will cause the tongue to protrude, and stimulation of the anterior oral
region will result in tongue retraction.
Finally, the width of the pharyngeal lumen can also be influenced
by the epiglottis, tongue, and velum. The oral and pharyngeal cavities
are coupled by these structures. For example, upward movement of the
tongue, downward movement of the velum, and medial movement of the
palatoglossal arches will cause a reduction in the coupling between the
oral and pharyngeal cavities. Therefore, you should be cognizant of the
fact that the articulators do not perform their tasks in a serial order;
rather, their movements are often dependent upon the movements of
other structures.
ACOUSTICS, ARTICULATION, AND RESONANCE

With the anatomy and physiology of the vocal tract described, it is now
time to turn your attention to how the anatomy and physiology act to
shape the vocal tone into an acoustic signal we perceive as human
speech. Recall from Chapter 8 that the human larynx is capable of
producing a complex tone that is rich in harmonic structure. Humans
possess the ability to vary the vocal tone in its frequency and intensity.
Variations in vocal frequency are evident in the intonational patterns that
are used during conversational speech.
The vocal tone is simply a buzzing sound. The structures that are
superior to the larynx (i.e., the structures that make up the vocal tract)
are responsible for transforming the vocal tone into speech. It is the
purpose of this section of the chapter to describe the transformation
process. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to offer a detailed and
thorough account of articulation and resonance (that can be
accomplished through a basic course in speech science). The purpose of
the foregoing discussion then is to provide you with a very basic
understanding of these processes.
Basic Principles of Acoustics
 
Before the transformation process can be described, you must have an
understanding of some basic concepts related to acoustics. First, you
must understand the concept of resonance. In general, resonance is
simply a response to an outside force. The response is typically
vibration. When something resonates, it vibrates. The object that
vibrates is called a resonator. When a resonator is acted upon by an
outside force, it responds to that outside force by vibrating. Practically
everything on this planet vibrates and has its own natural resonant
frequency. When an outside force matches a resonator’s natural
resonant frequency, it vibrates at its greatest amplitude and is said to be
“in resonance.” Anyone who has ever placed their lips over the mouth of
an empty bottle and blown into it has witnessed resonance. When the
force of exhaled air reaches the natural resonant frequency of the bottle,
the bottle responds by vibrating at its greatest amplitude. The result is a
loud sound.
The vocal tract is similar in structure to a bottle or tube that is
closed at one end (i.e., the vocal folds) and open at the other (i.e., the

lips). If an outside force acts upon the vocal tract, it will resonate.
However, because of the placement of the tongue and other anatomical
structures, the vocal tract can be partitioned into a series of chambers,
each one having its own natural resonant frequency that responds to the
outside force acting upon it. In the case of the vocal tract, what is the
outside force? Quite simply, the outside force is the vocal tone being
generated by the larynx. As the vocal tone passes through the vocal
tract, it sets the air within the vocal tract into vibration, resulting in
resonance within the partitioned chambers. Which frequencies resonate
depends upon the volumes of these chambers.
There is a predictable relationship between chamber volume and
resonance. This relationship can be easily demonstrated by using the
same bottle mentioned above. If you blow with enough force into the
empty bottle, the result will be a loud sound of relatively low frequency.
However, if you fill the bottle halfway with water and then blow into it,
the loud sound is now relatively higher in frequency. By filling it
halfway with water, you have lessened the effective vibrating volume of
the bottle. In other words, the volume of the bottle is smaller. Therefore,
the relationship between volume and frequency is an inverse one. As
volume decreases, frequency increases and vice versa.
 
Figure 10-33 A spectrogram showing the formants for the vowels
/i/, /a/, and /u/. (Adapted with permission from Raphael, L.J.,
Borden, G.J., Harris, K.S. (2006). Speech science primer (5th ed.).
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; Courtesy of Kay
Elemetrics.)

 
Returning to the vocal tract you may quickly surmise that its
partitioned chambers can be adjusted in terms of their volumes; the
result then would be changes in the natural resonant frequencies of those
chambers. In other words, humans have the ability to manipulate and
change which frequencies of the vocal tone will resonate. As such, the
vocal tract can be thought of as an acoustic filter. Depending on vocal
tract configuration, certain frequencies of the vocal tone will resonate
while other frequencies will lose energy or dampen.
In fact, large bands of frequencies will resonate at any given time.
These bands are called formants. When the partitioned cavities of the
vocal tract resonate, several formants are produced. The first formant
(F1) is the band of lowest frequency; the second formant (F2) is the next
higher frequency band; the third formant (F3) is composed of even
higher frequencies, and so on. Formants can be seen clearly on a
spectrogram—the output of a spectrograph, an electronic instrument that
analyzes sound according to frequency and intensity. Figure 10-33
provides a spectrogram showing the vowels /i/, /a/, and /u/. The
formants are the dark horizontal bars. The darkness of the bars indicates
that they are of relatively great amplitude (in other words, they are in
resonance). The “thickness” of the bars shows that the formants are not
just individual frequencies but bands of frequencies.
A distinction should be made between periodic sounds and
aperiodic sounds. When a sound is generated, it creates waves of
acoustic energy. If the waves repeat themselves consistently and
predictably over time, the result is a periodic sound. If, however, the
waves emanate in a random fashion so that there is no discernible
pattern to their behavior, the result is an aperiodic sound. The vocal tone
is a periodic, complex tone. An example of an aperiodic sound is noise
(e.g., a hissing sound). When the vocal tract is relatively open (i.e., very
little constriction exists along its length), the acoustic signal that is
produced is periodic. However, when an obstruction or constriction
exists anywhere along the vocal tract, the result will be a sound that is
aperiodic. Periodicity of sound will be described in more detail below.
Finally, one should understand the difference between voiced and
unvoiced speech sounds. When a sound is voiced, it means that the

vocal folds are vibrating and generating a vocal tone during its
production. In contrast, the vocal folds do not vibrate during the
production of unvoiced sounds; this means that there is no vocal tone
being generated during the production of unvoiced sounds. In English,
all vowel sounds are voiced. Fifteen of the 24 English consonant sounds
are voiced. This means that the voiced consonants will have some
degree of periodicity because of the vocal tone being generated as they
are being articulated.
Articulation and Resonance
 
The purpose of this section is to provide you with a basic understanding
of how articulation and resonance results in the transformation of the
vocal tone into an acoustic signal recognized as speech. In 1960, Gunnar
Fant developed the Acoustic Theory of Speech Production to describe
how vowels are produced. Over the years, his theory has become more
widely known as the Source-Filter Theory (see Figure 10-34).

 
Figure 10-34 The source and transfer functions of Source-Filter
Theory, with resulting output (a vowel sound). (Adapted with
permission from Raphael, L.J., Borden, G.J., Harris, K.S. (2006).
Speech science primer (5th ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.)
 
As its more common name implies, speech production is a result of two

components—a source and a filter. Anatomically, the source is the
vibrating vocal folds while the filter is the vocal tract. As illustrated in
Figure 10-34, when the vocal folds vibrate, they create a complex tone
that is rich in harmonics (as illustrated by the vertical lines in the top-
most graph). These harmonics diminish in intensity for the higher
frequencies. The vocal tone produced by the vibrating vocal folds is
referred to as the source function. The vocal tract, as a filter, causes
certain bands of frequencies to resonate. As shown in the middle graph
of Figure 10-34, this is referred to as the transfer function. The peaks
you see are formants. In the graph, there is a peak at 500 Hz, another at
1500 Hz, and another at 2500 Hz. The peak at 500 Hz represents the
natural resonant frequency for the first formant, the peak at 1500 Hz
represents the natural resonant frequency for F2, and the peak at 2500
Hz represents the natural resonant frequency for F3. It should be noted
that although Figure 10-34 shows only one example of a transfer
function, there are actually many transfer functions—each one
associated with a different configuration of the vocal tract. If the
configuration of the vocal tract is changed even minimally (e.g., by
tongue movement), a different transfer function will result, that is, the
resonant characteristics of the vocal tract will change and a different
sound will emerge.
As the vocal tone makes its way through the vocal tract, it is passed
through the filter and the transfer function modifies the vocal tone so
that the resulting spectrum resembles both the source and the filter. The
harmonic structure of the vocal tone remains intact, but instead of a
steady and gradual decrease in amplitude from the lower to higher
frequencies, there are amplitude peaks superimposed upon the vocal
tone by the transfer function. These peaks correspond to the format
frequencies of the transfer function. The various speech sounds in a
language are created by changing the filter (i.e., vocal tract
configuration), thereby changing the transfer function. The source
function remains relatively the same; it is the transfer function that
causes a change in speech sound. In other words, each speech sound has
its own transfer function created by a different configuration of the vocal
tract.
Vowels

 
According to the Source-Filter Theory, vowels are produced simply by
changing the configuration of the vocal tract, which is accomplished
primarily by placement of the tongue. As you may recall from an earlier
section of this chapter, vowels are classified as front to back and high to
low. These terms describe what the tongue is doing during vowel
production. Shifting the position of the tongue changes the configuration
of the vocal tract, which in turn sets up changes in resonance. In other
words, formant frequencies can be adjusted by the position of the
tongue. Although each vowel in English has several formants, only the
first two (F1 and F2) are of critical importance for discriminating most of
the vowel sounds.
The first format (F1) is affected primarily by tongue height.
Movement of the tongue toward the ceiling of the oral cavity (as for the
high vowels) will result in a lowering of frequencies associated with F1,
and movement of the tongue toward the floor of the oral cavity will
result in a rise in frequencies associated with F1. The second formant
(F2) is affected primarily by the anterior-to-posterior placement of the
tongue. As the tongue moves in an anterior direction (as for the front
vowels), the frequencies associated with F2 rise, and as the tongue
moves in a posterior direction, the frequencies associated with F2 lower.
To understand this, you should consider that the tongue essentially
divides the oral cavity into two chambers, one anterior to the position of
the tongue and the other posterior to it. The first formant is associated
with resonance within the chamber that is posterior to the tongue and the
second format is associated with resonance within the chamber that is
anterior to the tongue. If the tongue is moved toward the ceiling of the
oral cavity, the chamber posterior to the tongue will enlarge, thereby
causing the frequencies associated with F1 to lower. If one moves the
tongue forward (i.e., towards the lips), it causes the anterior chamber to
become smaller, thereby resulting in a rise in frequencies associated
with F2 (remember the relationship between chamber volume and
frequency).
To illustrate, consider the vowels /i/ and /a/, which are high-front
and low-back vowels, respectively. For the vowel /i/, the tongue moves
forward and toward the ceiling of the oral cavity. For the vowel /a/, the

tongue moves backward and toward the floor of the oral cavity. One
would expect then that F1 for the vowel /i/ would be lower than F1 for
the vowel /a/ because the tongue is in a higher position for /i/. Similarly,
one would expect that F2 would be higher for /i/ than for /a/ because the
tongue has a more anterior placement for /i/ than for /a/. Indeed, the
average F1 frequency for an adult male is 270 Hz for /i/ and 730 Hz for
/a/; the average F2 frequency is 2290 Hz for /i/ and 1090 Hz for /a/ (see
the formant comparisons for these vowels in Figure 10-35). All the other
vowel sounds are a result of changes in formant frequencies brought on
by changes in tongue height and advancement. With each change in
tongue height and/or advancement, a different filter is created and hence,
a different transfer function is created as well. Each vowel has its own
acoustic spectrum.
 
Figure 10-35 Comparison of formants for the vowels /i/ and /a/ for
an adult male. (Adapted with permission from Raphael, L.J.,
Borden, G.J., Harris, K.S. (2006). Speech science primer (5th ed.).
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Consonants

 
The production of consonant sounds differs from that of vowels.
Although some consonants resemble vowels in terms of their spectral
properties, most of them do not look much like vowels. In general,
vowel sounds are produced by relatively little constriction anywhere
along the vocal tract. In other words, the vocal tract tends to be open.
Most of the consonants, on the other hand, are produced by creating
either a complete obstruction or a narrow constriction somewhere in the
vocal tract.
In the physiology section of this chapter, you learned that
consonants are classified according to the place where they are created.
Bilabial consonants are produced by the lips; labiodental consonants by
the lips and teeth; linguadental consonants by the tongue and teeth;
alveolar consonants by the tongue and alveolar ridge; palatal consonants
by the tongue and hard palate; velar consonants by the tongue and soft
palate; and finally the one glottal consonant by the open vocal folds.
Consonant sounds are also classified according to the manner in which
they are created.
Plosives (also known as stops) are produced by creating a complete
obstruction of the expired breath stream so that intra-oral air pressure
builds up behind the obstruction. The air pressure is then released
abruptly, creating an explosive sound. The plosives include the /p/, /b/,
/t/, /d/, /k/, and /g/ sounds. For the /p/ and /b/, the obstruction is at the
lips (recall that they are classified as bilabial sounds). For /t/ and /d/, the
obstruction is at the alveolar ridge. Finally, for /k/ and /g/, the
obstruction is at the velum. The abrupt release of air pressure results in a
spike of acoustic energy that is aperiodic. The /b/, /d/, and /g/ sounds are
voiced, so there is at least a small degree of periodicity associated with
the vocal tone during the production of these consonants.
Fricative consonants are produced by creating a narrow constriction
somewhere in the vocal tract. Instead of completely obstructing the
breath stream, the breath stream is forced through the narrow
constriction, thereby creating turbulence or friction. The fricatives are
the largest class of consonants according to manner of production in
English. They include the /s/, /z/, /f/, /v/, /θ/, /ð/, /∫/, /3/, and /h/ sounds.
The turbulence created by these sounds results in a very noticeable
aperiodic component. The voiced fricatives (/z/, /v/, /ð/, and /3/) also

have a periodic component due to generation of the vocal tone during
their articulation. You are referred back to the section on physiology to
determine where in the vocal tract the constriction occurs for the various
fricative sounds.
Two consonant sounds are classified as affricates (/t∫/ and /d3/). An
affricate is a combination of a plosive and fricative sound. During their
production, a total obstruction is first created, but then instead of an
abrupt release of intra-oral air pressure, there is a transition to a narrow
constriction through which the air pressure is forced. These sounds also
have a fricative component that is aperiodic. The /d3/ is voiced, and
therefore has at least some degree of periodicity.
In terms of place, the nasal consonants (/m/, /n/, and / /) are similar
to the plosives /b/, /d/, and /g/. In terms of manner, however, there is an
added characteristic of the nasals that does not exist for the plosives (or
any other speech sounds for that matter). During the production of the
nasals, the V-P port is opened (for all other speech sounds, including the
vowels, the V-P port is closed). This allows some of the breath stream to
be diverted into the nasal cavity to resonate there, while some of the
breath stream resonates within the oral cavity. Nasal cavity resonance
gives these three sounds a distinctive nasal “twang.” All three nasal
sounds have a vowel-like resonant quality. All three are also voiced so
that the vocal tone provides an even greater degree of periodicity.
The remaining consonant sounds are the semi-vowels because their
spectral characteristics are very similar to the vowel sounds. The
semivowels are further classified as either liquids or glides. The liquids
include the /r/ and /l/, and the glides include the /w/ and /j/. The /r/ and
/l/ are referred to as liquids because their acoustic properties change
depending on what other speech sounds are adjacent to them. For
example, an /r/ sound before a vowel is a slightly different sound than an
/r/ after a vowel (e.g., compare the /r/ in “ring” to the /r/ in “car”). The
/w/ and /j/ are called glides because there are actually two articulatory
positions when they are produced. The articulators move into a
particular position but then glide to a second position during production.
The semivowels are periodic not only because of their vowel-like
resonant qualities but also because they are all voiced.
THE PROCESS OF SWALLOWING

Swallowing, or deglutition, is a highly complex process that requires the
integrated activity of many anatomical structures, muscles, and nerves.
Practically, the entire vocal tract is involved in the process—the lips,
tongue, mandible, hard palate, velum, pharynx, and larynx are all part of
the event. Muscles of the lips, tongue, mandible, velum, pharynx, and
larynx are also involved. Finally, cortical and brainstem centers, as well
as 6 of the 12 cranial nerves, play a part in swallowing.
The process of swallowing has three distinct phases: oral,
pharyngeal, and esophageal. Some would add a fourth phase—the oral
preparatory phase—to the list, but technically, this phase is an
antecedent to the actual process of swallowing. It will be included here
to give you a better understanding of the complete process, from activity
leading up to the swallow to the swallow proper.
The oral preparatory and oral phases are under voluntary control,
that is, an individual has the ability to start or stop the process at any
time. The muscles that are involved in these phases are striated, or
voluntary, muscles. The motor and premotor areas of the frontal lobe
cortex are responsible for controlling these muscles. Once a swallow
enters the pharyngeal phase, the process is switched over to autonomic
control primarily. Striated and smooth muscles receive innervation
during these phases of swallowing. Food is transported through the
pharynx by contraction of striated muscles and then through the
esophagus through peristalsis (which takes place via contractions of
smooth muscles). The involuntary phases of swallowing are regulated
by subcortical areas, more specifically the medulla oblongata and pons.
During the brief time a swallow takes place, the swallowing center of
the medulla oblongata and pons inhibits the respiratory center of the
medulla. In other words, the person does not breathe during a swallow.
The Phases of Swallowing
 
Oral Preparatory Phase
 
The oral preparatory phase involves the preparation of food so that it can
be swallowed. The tongue, teeth, mandible, and salivary glands are
primarily involved in the process, and the lips and cheeks play a

secondary role. The lips seal the oral cavity so that food is not ejected
back out of the mouth and the cheeks compress themselves upon the
teeth to prevent food from being pushed into the buccal cavity.
As the food is chewed (i.e., masticated), the salivary glands release
saliva to begin the process of breaking down the food. The anterior
tongue manipulates the food by pushing it into the teeth, pulling it back
to be mixed with saliva, and then pushing it back into the teeth again
(this occurs between 20 and 30 times before the swallow is initiated).
The posterior tongue is raised by the palatoglossus muscles to prevent
food from being forced into the pharynx. With assistance from the hard
palate, the tongue forms a bolus of appropriate size so that it can be
passed into the pharynx and eventually the esophagus. Mastication
involves the elevator and depressor muscles of the mandible, the
intrinsic and extrinsic muscles of the tongue, and the muscles of the lips
and cheeks.
While the food is being chewed, the individual must breathe
through the nose. To be able to do so, the palatoglossus muscles must
contract to lower the velum and establish communication between the
nasal and pharyngeal cavities. You will note that during the oral
preparatory phase, the palatoglossus performs a dual function—lowering
the velum while raising the back of the tongue.
Oral Phase
 
The oral, or buccal, phase is the first true stage of swallowing. In this
phase, chewing stops. With the bolus prepared, activity shifts to the
transport of the bolus to the pharynx. The posterior tongue lowers while
the anterior tongue elevates toward the hard palate. The tongue then
retracts in a posterior direction to squeeze the bolus back toward the
pharynx. The muscles of the lips and cheeks remain contracted to
narrow the oral cavity to facilitate bolus transit. As the bolus approaches
the oropharynx, the back of the tongue and uvula elevate primarily
through contraction of the palatoglossus and styloglossus muscles. This
action seals the nasopharynx to prevent the bolus from being injected
into it. Muscles of the lips, face, tongue, and uvula are involved in the
oral phase of swallowing, requiring neural innervation from the
trigeminal (V), facial (VII), and hypoglossal (XII) cranial nerves. The

glossopharyngeal (IX) cranial nerve provides sensory fibers to the
tongue. Once the bolus makes contact with the faucial pillars, the oral
phase terminates and the pharyngeal phase begins. At this point,
swallowing becomes involuntary, as the autonomic nervous system
takes primary control of the process.
Pharyngeal Phase
 
As the bolus enters the oropharynx, the velum elevates toward the
posterior pharyngeal wall, primarily by contraction of the levator veli
palatini (LVP) muscles. The muscles making up the superior constrictor
contract, thereby narrowing the faucial pillars to prevent the bolus from
being ejected into the oral cavity. As this is taking place, the hyoid bone
and larynx elevate and move anteriorly through action of the suprahyoid
muscles. The anterior and superior positioning of the larynx relaxes the
cricopharyngeus muscles, which relaxes the upper esophageal sphincter
(UES) at the upper end of the esophagus. The epiglottis passively seals
the aditus laryngis while the vocal folds adduct to seal the lower
respiratory passageway. The bolus is forced down the pharynx by
contraction of the constrictor muscles. As it approaches the epiglottis,
the bolus divides into two masses that are then forced around the larynx
and through the pyriform sinuses in preparation of entry into the
esophagus. The masses meet again at the UES and are forced by the
inferior constrictor into the esophagus. Breathing ceases during the
second it takes for the bolus to be transported through the pharynx to the
esophagus. The pharyngeal phase involves neural innervation from four
cranial nerves: trigeminal (V); vagus (X); spinal accessory (XI); and
hypoglossal (XII).
Esophageal Phase
 
Esophageal transit time is approximately 10 to 20 seconds. Once the
bolus enters the esophagus, the cricopharyngeus muscles contract to seal
the UES. In the upper third of the esophagus, the constrictor muscles
force the bolus down until the striated muscles give way to involuntary
muscles. Peristalsis and gravity continue to push the bolus of food
toward the stomach. As the lower esophageal sphincter is approached, it

relaxes and the bolus is emptied into the stomach. At the same time the
bolus enters the esophagus, the larynx and velum lower to allow
respiration to resume.
The vagus (X) cranial nerve appears to be most actively involved in
the esophageal phase of swallowing. For the upper one-third of the
esophagus, the vagus nerve has more of a direct role by innervating the
voluntary muscles fibers found there. For the remainder of the
esophagus, the vagus plays more of a modulatory role as the
autonomous nervous system innervates the smooth muscle fibers in this
region.
Why You Need to Know
 
Treatment for swallowing disorders includes compensatory swallowing
strategies, dietary modifications, exercises to improve muscle function,
medications and/or surgery, and neuromuscular electrical stimulation.
The last treatment option involves stimulation of paralyzed muscles with
electric current to trigger a swallowing response. The speech–language
pathologist is an integral member of the dysphagia team. If you are
interested in the topic of neuromuscular electrical stimulation, an
example of research in this area can be found in Baijens, Speyer,
Roodenburg, and Manni (2008).
 
Summary
 
This chapter described the anatomy and physiology of the
articulatory/resonance system. Chapters 6 and 8 described the anatomy
and physiology of the respiratory and phonatory systems, respectively.
In those chapters, you learned how respiration is used to set the vocal
folds into vibration. Vibration of the vocal folds, in turn, generates a
complex tone that is rich in harmonic structure. However, the vocal tone
is nothing more than a buzzing sound. This chapter provided you with
the final piece of the puzzle—how articulation and resonance act to
transform the vocal tone into the acoustic signal humans recognize as
speech. This chapter also provided you with a basic understanding of the

swallowing process. A typical speech–language pathologist may have a
number of individuals on her caseload who have a diagnosis of
dysphagia. A good understanding of the normal process of deglutition is
necessary to understand how dysphagia may adversely affect a person’s
ability to swallow.

 
Knowledge Outcomes for ASHA Certification for Chapter
11
   Demonstrate knowledge of the etiologies of articulation
disorders (III-C)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the characteristics of articulation
disorders (III-C)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the etiologies of swallowing
disorders (III-C)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the characteristics of swallowing
disorders (III-C)
 
Learning Objectives
 
   You will be able to describe how a knowledge of articulatory
phonetics can assist you in understanding the various pathologies
that may affect the articulatory/resonance system.
   You will be able to discuss the etiology and characteristics of
cleft lip and palate and other craniofacial anomalies, and how
these anomalies may adversely affect articulation and resonance.
   You will be able to define velopharyngeal incompetence and
provide examples of pathological conditions that may result in
this disorder.
   You will be able to evaluate how articulation and resonance may
be adversely affected by cranial nerve damage.

   You will be able to recite some of the differences between
apraxia of speech and dysarthria.
   You will be able to discuss how apraxia of speech and dysarthria
affect the articulatory/ resonance system.
   You will be able to describe several progressive and
nonprogressive neurological pathologies and how their
characteristics may adversely affect articulation and resonance.
   You will be able to differentiate the different types of hearing
impairment and describe how hearing impairment may adversely
affect speech production.
 
 
A Brief Review of Articulation and Resonance
 

ARTICULATORY PHONETICS
As you learned in Chapter 10, the vocal tract comprises the
articulatory/resonance system. The vocal tract consists of three cavities
(i.e., nasal, oral, and pharyngeal) and several anatomical structures.
These include the lips, teeth, alveolar ridge, hard palate, velum, tongue,
and pharynx. As the vocal tone passes through the vocal tract, it is
molded and shaped into the various speech sounds of a language by
action of these structures.
To understand how the articulatory/resonance system can be
affected by pathologies, you must first have a basic understanding of
articulatory or physiological phonetics—the study of the sounds of a
language in regard to the physiological movements that are necessary to
produce them. You were introduced to articulatory phonetics in Chapter
10. Although we provided a brief description of articulatory phonetics in
that chapter (especially as it related to the movements that are required
of the various articulators), it is probably not a bad idea to reintroduce
the topic (in condensed form) at the beginning of this chapter so that you
will have a point of reference in terms of “normal” articulation and
resonance when the disorders are presented later in this chapter.
It should be mentioned that it is not within the scope of this
textbook to provide you a comprehensive discussion of articulatory
phonetics. Our purpose in including this discussion is simply to provide
you the basic framework behind articulation and resonance. As such, the
discussion will focus on the production of individual speech sounds and
not on connected (or conversational) speech. For example, the effects of
coarticulation on connected speech will be reserved for a course in
speech science and therefore will not be presented in this chapter. Only a
brief overview of basic articulatory phonetics will be provided here.
You should make the distinction between articulation and
resonance. Articulation involves the accuracy, direction, and timing of
the movements of the vocal tract structures to produce speech sounds.
Resonance involves modification of the vocal tone as a result of forced
vibration as the tone passes through the cavities of the vocal tract. Both
processes (i.e., articulation and resonance) occur simultaneously,
resulting in the production of speech sounds.
Refer to Table 11-1. This table provides a classification of the

consonant sounds in the English language. Consonant sound production
can be classified according to the place and manner of articulation, as
well as whether or not the vocal folds vibrate during their production.
Place refers to where the articulators go during consonant production,
while manner refers to how the consonant sound is actually produced.
As the term implies, bilabial means two lips. Consonants classified as
bilabial are produced at the lips. Labio-dental refers to the lips and teeth.
Interdental means “between the teeth.” Alveolar refers to the alveolar
ridge; palatal refers to the hard palate; velar refers to the soft palate; and
glottal refers to the glottis.
In terms of manner, plosive sounds are created by completely
occluding the expired breath stream and then releasing it abruptly,
resulting in an explosive type of sound. Fricative sounds are produced
by creating a narrow constriction that the expired breath stream is forced
through or around, creating turbulence or a friction type of sound.
Affricates are a combination of plosives and fricatives. First, a complete
obstruction is created in the vocal tract, but the obstruction gives way
rapidly to a constriction that the breath stream is forced through. The
nasal consonants are produced in much the same way as voiced plosives,
but there is the added feature of resonance within the nasal cavity due to
the opening of the velopharyngeal (V-P) port during their production.
Opening of the V-P port allows some of the breath stream to be diverted
to the nasal cavity while the balance of the breath stream continues
through the oral cavity. Glides are consonant sounds that are somewhat
similar to diphthongs. There is a rapid transition from one articulatory
position to another that creates these sounds (i.e., the /w/ and /j/).
Finally, the /r/ and /l/ sounds are given the name “liquid” because like
liquid (e.g., water), they change depending on the context in which they
are produced (i.e., as water changes its shape and form depending on the
container in which it is poured, the liquid consonants also change their
shape and form depending on what other speech sounds are produced
adjacent to them).

 
Finally, 9 of the 24 consonant sounds are produced without vocal
fold vibration. In Table 11-1, you will note that in several of the cells
there are two consonants separated by a comma. In each of these cases,
the consonant on the left is an unvoiced consonant; in other words, the
vocal folds do not vibrate during their production. The consonant on the
right of the comma is voiced. All of the single consonants in Table 11-1
are voiced with the exception of the /h/ sound, which is the only
unvoiced consonant that does not have a voiced partner. As a final word,
it should be noted that resonance is involved in consonant production
(especially for the nasals, glides, and liquids), but consonant production
is more a result of breath stream obstruction or constriction than
resonance.
The tongue is involved in the production of three-fourths of the
consonant sounds. The consonant sounds that do not require
involvement of the tongue are the bilabials (/p/, /b/, and /m/),
labiodentals (/f/ and /v/), and the fricative /h/. The bilabials are produced
by compressing the upper and lower lips. The labiodentals are produced
by compressing the upper teeth onto the lower lip. The /h/ sound is
produced by forcing air through the open glottis, creating turbulence at
the level of the vocal folds. As far as all of the other consonants (i.e.,
alveolars, interdentals, palatals, and velars) go, the tongue works with
the alveolar ridge, teeth, hard palate, or velum to produce the consonant.
In the case of the interdentals (the “th” sounds /θ/ and /ð/) for example,
the tongue tip is placed behind or between the upper and lower teeth.
From this example, you should be able to determine how the other
consonants are produced. The /w/ sound is interesting because it has two
simultaneous places of articulation. Note as you produce the /w/ sound

(as in “wood”) that your lips round as the body of the tongue moves up
toward the soft palate.
There are eight cognate pairs of consonants in English. For these
cognate pairs, both the place and manner of articulation are identical.
The only difference between the two sounds in each pair is that one is
produced without vocal fold vibration, whereas the other is produced
simultaneously with vocal fold vibration.
 
Vowel sounds are typically classified according to where the
tongue is placed within the oral cavity. Tongue placement can be
accomplished within the vertical and horizontal dimensions. Vertical
placement is referred to as tongue height. Horizontal placement is
referred to as tongue advancement. Both height and advancement of the
tongue determine vowel sound production. Vowel sounds are not
differentiated according to the unvoiced/voiced scheme because all
vowels are produced with vocal fold vibration (hence, they are all
voiced).
Referring to Table 11-2, you can see that tongue height is described
using such terms as high, mid, and low. A high vowel is produced by
elevation of the tongue toward the ceiling of the oral cavity. By the same
token, a low vowel is produced by lowering the tongue toward the floor
of the oral cavity. In terms of tongue advancement, the terms front,
central, and back are used. Front vowels are produced by placing the
tongue in the vicinity of the teeth. Back vowels then are produced by
placing the tongue in the vicinity of the soft palate and pharynx. When
you combine both tongue height and advancement, you get a wide range

of possible tongue positions. For example, the /i/ vowel (as in the word
“heat”) is classified as a high front vowel because the tongue is placed in
a position that approximates the alveolar ridge. The /æ/ vowel (as in the
word “cat”) is also produced by placing the tongue in an anterior
position, but the tongue is also placed at the floor of the oral cavity. As
one produces the front and back vowels from high to low, the mandible
also lowers a bit more and more. You can test this out yourself. Say the
words “beat,” “bit,” “bait,” “bet,” and “bat” in succession. Make a
mental note of what the tongue and mandible are doing when you say
these words (you are producing the front vowels in succession from high
to low). It should be noted that tongue height and advancement function
to create the various vowel sounds by modifying the resonant
characteristics of the oral cavity. With each change in placement of the
tongue, the oral cavity becomes a different resonator and thus, a
different vowel sound is produced (recall the Source-Filter Theory
described in Chapter 10).
The tongue is also the primary structure involved in the production
of diphthongs (/aI/ as in “nice”; /a / as in “how”; / I/ as in “boy”).
However, in the case of the diphthongs, the tongue rapidly shifts from
the articulatory position for one vowel to the articulatory position for a
second vowel. Note the characters that are used to represent the
diphthongs. Go back to Table 11-2 and you can see which two vowels
are involved in the production of each diphthong. Take the /a /
diphthong. This sound is produced by having the tongue first assume the
position for the /a/ vowel and then rapidly transitioning the tongue to the
position for the / / vowel. Note that in this case, the shift is from a low
back vowel to a high back vowel, and indeed, /a / is produced by
shifting from a low tongue position to a high tongue position. The
advancement of the tongue remains back throughout the production of /a
/. In the case of /aI/ and / I/, both tongue height and advancement
change. Both of these sounds start with a low back tongue position but
then move quickly to a high front tongue position. Shifts from one
articulatory position to another create a gliding acoustic quality that is
distinctive of the diphthongs.
RELATING ARTICULATORY PHONETICS TO
DISORDERS OF ARTICULATION AND RESONANCE

Why should you be concerned with this crash course in articulatory
phonetics? The answer is simple. If you understand how speech sounds
are produced, that is, which anatomical structures are involved and the
physiological processes that play a part in articulation and resonance,
you can easily determine how aberrations in structure and/or function
will affect the production of speech sounds. Many articulation and
resonance disorders have an anatomical, neurological, or physiological
etiology. It is the relationship between these etiologies and the resulting
articulation and/or resonance disorder to which we now turn our
attention.
Pathologies Affecting Articulation and Resonance
 
DEFINITIONS AND ORGANIZATION OF DISORDERS
Before we begin an extended discussion of the relationship between
anatomical and physiological impairments and articulation/resonance
disorders, we must begin with some basic definitions. First and
foremost, you should understand the distinction between an articulation
disorder and a phonological disorder. An articulation disorder results
from “[i]ncorrect production of speech sounds due to faulty placement,
timing, direction, pressure, speed, or integration of the movement of the
lips, tongue, velum, or pharynx.” (Nicolosi, Harryman, & Kresheck,
2004, p. 21) In other words, an articulation disorder is a physical
impairment of the ability to correctly move and position the articulators
for the correct production of speech sounds. A phonological disorder, on
the other hand, not only involves incorrect production of speech sounds
but also involves violations of the rules that govern the speech sound
system. In fact, it is typically the violations of underlying rules that
results in speech sound errors. To put it another way, phonology is one
component of language; articulation is one component of phonology.
Therefore, a phonological disorder is a broader disorder than an
articulation disorder. It is not within the scope of this textbook to discuss
phonological disorders but rather to help you see the relationship
between 
abnormal 
anatomy 
and/or 
physiology 
and

articulation/resonance disorders.
A distinction also needs to be made between an organic disorder
and a functional disorder. An organic disorder (whether articulation,
language, voice, or any other communication disorder) can be traced
back to an observable etiology such as a biochemical aberration, genetic
variation, illness, injury, or neurological impairment. By contrast, a
functional disorder exists in the absence of any known or observable
organic pathology. In the case of articulation, a disorder may exist
simply due to the habituation of faulty motoric patterns (i.e., the child
habitually makes incorrect placements of the articulators). A functional
articulation disorder may also be referred to as a developmental
articulation disorder because the errors tend to occur during childhood
during the developmental period. It is not within the scope of this
chapter to discuss functional disorders because of the fact that no known
anatomical or physiological etiology is apparent. We will instead turn
our attention to articulation disorders of an organic nature.
For the remainder of this chapter, you will be acquainted with a
variety of organic disorders that may result in impaired articulation
and/or resonance. These organic disorders will be discussed in relation
to their underlying etiology—structural, neurological, and sensory.
Structural disorders involve aberrations of anatomy such as cleft lip
and/or palate. The etiology of neurological disorders is within the
nervous system. Neurological disorders include nerve damage
(especially to the cranial nerves), motor speech disorders, and other
neurological disorders affecting the central and/or peripheral nervous
systems. Motor speech disorders affect the proper execution of
movements that are necessary for correct speech production and include
apraxia of speech (AOS) and dysarthria. Other neurological disorders
may include progressive neurological disorders (e.g., amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis [ALS], multiple sclerosis [MS]) or nonprogressive
neurological disorders (e.g., cerebral palsy [CP]). Finally, sensory
disorders involve impairments of sensory systems that are essential for
proper articulation and resonance. These include the auditory, tactile,
and kinesthetic systems. The discussion of sensory disorders that takes
place later in this chapter will only focus on the auditory system.
It must be emphasized that you should not be too overly concerned
with the classification scheme mentioned above. There are other ways of

classifying impairments that affect the articulatory and resonance
systems. It should also be noted that within the classification system
mentioned earlier, there is considerable overlap. For example, AOS will
be discussed as a motor speech disorder although it could just as easily
be discussed as a neurological disorder. Similarly, nerve damage (e.g.,
trauma) could be viewed as a structural disorder although it will be
discussed here as a neurological disorder. Your focus then should not be
on how impairments are classified but rather on the relationship between
these impairments and the potential articulation and/or resonance
disorders that may result. That said, let us turn our attention to these
impairments.
STRUCTURAL DISORDERS THAT MAY AFFECT
ARTICULATION AND RESONANCE
Perhaps, the most obvious structural disorder that will likely have a
detrimental effect on articulation and resonance is cleft lip and palate.
Similarly, there are several other craniofacial anomalies that may also
manifest themselves as deviations of articulation and/or resonance. In
the case of structural disorders, the probability that articulation and
resonance will both be adversely affected is high.
Cleft Lip and/or Palate
 
Cleft lip and palate are among the most common congenital anomalies
(American Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Association and Cleft Palate
Foundation, 1997). The incidence of clefting differs according to race.
Cleft lip with or without cleft palate occurs in approximately one in
1000 live births among Caucasians; approximately 1.7 in 1000 live
births among Asians; approximately 3.6 in 1000 live births among
Native Americans; and 1 in 2500 live births among African Americans
(Harold, 2009). In Chapter 10, you learned that the two maxillary bones
fuse together medially at the intermaxillary suture. A cleft occurs when
the maxillary bones do not fuse between the eighth and twelfth weeks of
embryonic development. There are several classification schemes for
cleft lip and palate, but these are not important for the purpose of this

discussion. As you can see in Figure 11-1, clefts may involve the upper
lip only (referred to as cleft lip); the hard palate only (referred to as cleft
palate); the upper lip and hard palate (referred to as cleft lip and palate);
or the upper lip, hard palate, and velum (referred to as complete cleft lip
and palate). Clefts of the prepalatal region (i.e., the lip and alveolar
ridge) can be unilateral or bilateral.
 
Figure 11-1  Various types of cleft. A. Cleft lip only. B. Cleft
palate only. C. Unilateral cleft lip and palate. D. Bilateral cleft lip
and palate. (Modified with permission from Anatomical Chart
Company.)
 
Possessing an understanding of the anatomy of the lips, teeth, hard
palate, and velum, you should be able to surmise that a cleft will likely
have an adverse effect on articulation and/or resonance. Clefts of the lip

and/or alveolar ridge without involvement of the hard or soft palate may
result in some articulation errors due to the likelihood that the
individual’s dentition is adversely affected. Similarly, a cleft of the lip
may affect the individual’s ability to round the lips for the /w/ consonant
or the vowels that require lip rounding (mainly several of the back
vowels). However, there will probably not be a problem with resonance
as the hard and soft palates are essentially intact.
When the hard palate and/or velum are involved, both articulation
and resonance may be detrimentally affected. From the standpoint of
articulation, a cleft of the hard or soft palate may prevent the individual
from being able to generate sufficient intraoral air pressure to produce
the pressure consonants—primarily the plosives and affricates, but also
the fricatives to a lesser extent. The individual’s productions of the
plosives, fricatives, and affricates may be distorted, weak, or absent.
From the standpoint of resonance, a cleft of the hard and/or soft palate
will compromise the integrity of the oral and nasal cavities. There will
not be a separation between the oral and nasal cavity, so a portion of the
breath stream may pass unimpeded into the nasal cavity and resonate
there. The result is a condition known as hypernasality, a resonance
disorder in which nonnasal speech sounds (all of the vowels and
diphthongs and all but three of the consonants in English) may become
heavily nasalized. The air that passes into the nasal cavity, if under
sufficient pressure, may also create turbulence as it exits the nostrils,
creating nasal air emission. In the more extreme cases of cleft lip and
palate, the individual typically develops compensatory strategies in an
attempt to produce the pressure consonants and to reduce hypernasality.
Of these, the glottal stop and pharyngeal fricative are commonly used
to substitute for the plosives and fricatives, respectively. The pharyngeal
fricative (which is produced by creating turbulence of the breath stream
in the pharynx) does not occur in English, not even for persons who
have an intact speech sound system. The glottal stop also is not
recognized as an English speech sound, but it is used in certain linguistic
contexts by persons who have an intact speech sound system (e.g., in
saying the word “curtain,” we seldom enunciate the /t/ sound; instead,
we substitute a glottal stop and pronounce the word as “ker-n” with a
very slight pause between the two syllables). The difference between a
person with an intact speech sound system and an individual who has a

cleft palate is that the glottal stop tends to be pervasive in the speech of
the individual with cleft palate.
It should be noted that many children with cleft palate also have
chronic bouts of conductive hearing loss. As you may recall from
Chapter 10, the Eustachian (or auditory) tube runs from the middle ear
cavity to the nasopharynx. In the case of cleft palate, food or drink that
is swallowed may be injected into the nasopharynx because of the
opening created by the cleft. If the food or drink gets injected into the
Eustachian tube, it can lead to middle ear infections, known as otitis
media. The result could be a conductive hearing loss. The hearing loss
could also adversely affect speech production (this will be discussed
more fully below).
Other Craniofacial Anomalies
 
Cleft lip and palate is classified as a craniofacial anomaly because the
structures of the skull and face deviate from what would be considered
normal anatomy. Although trauma to the face and/or skull could
certainly result in an anomaly, we typically think of craniofacial
anomalies as having a genetic etiology. There are literally hundreds of
genetically based craniofacial anomalies or syndromes. Many of these
syndromes have little effect on speech production, but there are many
that may have an adverse effect on speech. Cohen and Bankier (1991)
estimated that there are nearly 350 syndromes in which orofacial clefting
is a characteristic. It is outside the scope of this textbook to provide an
exhaustive discussion of these syndromes; instead, you will be exposed
to a small sample of craniofacial syndromes that may affect speech
sound production.
Why You Need to Know
 
Many craniofacial syndromes have a genetic etiology. The etiology is
typically autosomal, meaning that chromosomes other than those that
determine gender and sexual characteristics are affected. In some cases,
the syndrome can be traced back through the family history. These are
known as familial cases. When new mutations of the syndrome occur,
they are referred to as sporadic. The proportion of cases that are

familial versus sporadic differs from syndrome to syndrome.
 
 
Figure 11-2  Apert syndrome. A. Typical facial features seen in the
syndrome. B. Syndactyly of the fingers. C. Syndactyly of the toes.
(A: Modified with permission from Gold, D.H., Weingeist, T.A.
(2001). Color atlas of the eye in systemic disease. Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; B: Modified with permission from
Strickland, J.W., Graham, T.J. (2005). Master techniques in
orthopedic surgery: The hand (2nd ed.). Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; C: Image provided by Stedman’s
[Dr. Barankin’s Collection].)
 
Apert Syndrome
 
Apert syndrome, or acrocephalosyndactyly, is a craniofacial anomaly
that occurs in approximately one of every 100,000 live births (Gorlin,
Cohen, & Levin, 1990). As the more technical name implies, persons
with this disorder exhibit two prominent features— an unusually peaked

head and webbed fingers and/or toes (see Figure 11-2). This disorder
primarily affects the mandible and maxilla, and the face may be flat or
concave. There may be unusual deformities of the palate, including
clefts. The pharynx tends to be shallow, which may result in a
compromised airway. Hearing loss is common. In terms of speech
production, there could be numerous speech sound errors due to several
factors: compromised integrity of the velopharyngeal mechanism;
malformed oral structures; and hearing impairment.
Crouzon Syndrome
 
Crouzon syndrome (technically referred to as craniofacial dysostosis) is
similar to Apert syndrome but is less severe. It occurs more often than
Apert syndrome, in approximately 1 of every 25,000 live births (Gorlin
et al., 1990). The webbing of the fingers and toes that is seen in Apert
syndrome is not seen in craniofacial dysostosis. However, the premature
fusion of cranial bones seen in Apert syndrome is also seen here.
Additional facial features typically seen in Crouzon syndrome are
widely spaced eyes, shallow orbits, a beak-like nose, and a flattened
nasal bridge. The shallow orbits make the eyes appear as if they are
protruding (see Figure 11-3). In terms of oral structures, the person with
Crouzon syndrome will have a small maxilla and a shorter
nasopharyngeal space. Kreiborg (1981) found that cleft lip and/or palate
are rare but not impossible in this syndrome. If clefting does occur, you
can expect deviations in oral–nasal resonance. Similarly, malformation
of oral structures may be manifested by a variety of articulation errors.
Ectrodactyly-Ectodermal
 
Dysplasia-Clefting Syndrome
 
Ectrodactyly-ectodermal dysplasia-clefting syndrome—or simply
EEC syndrome—is primarily manifested by “lobster-claw” deformities
of the hands and feet, a paucity of body hair, dry skin, and missing or
malformed nails and teeth. In the case of the hands and feet, one or more
central digits may be missing (i.e., ectrodactyly), giving the appearance

of claws. The malformation of teeth and nails, sparse hair, and dry skin
(due to the absence of sweat glands) is known as ectodermal dysplasia.
As you can see from the name of the syndrome, clefting is also a
prominent characteristic. Cleft lip and palate occur in approximately
three-fourths of cases of EEC syndrome. A conductive hearing loss (due
to anomalies of the middle ear bones—malleus, incus, and stapes)
occurs in just under one-third of cases of this disorder. If a cleft does
exist, the individual will likely have difficulty in generating sufficient
intraoral air pressure to produce the pressure consonants. There may also
be hypernasality with concomitant nasalization of nonnasal speech
sounds. Dental anomalies and other oral variations may result in
numerous speech sound errors. The individual with EEC syndrome may
engage in compensatory articulatory strategies.
 
Figure 11-3  Typical facial features seen in Crouzon syndrome.
Note the protruding eyes, beak-like nose, and a fl attened nasal

bridge. (Modified with permission from Gold, D.H., Weingeist,
T.A. (2001). Color atlas of the eye in systemic disease. Baltimore,
MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Pierre Robin Sequence
 
Pierre Robin sequence is technically not a syndrome because a genetic
defect does not appear to be the etiology of the disorder. During fetal
development, the mandible fails to grow properly so that the tongue is
prevented from descending into the oral cavity. The tongue remains high
in the oral cavity, preventing the palatal shelves from elevating and
fusing. The result is a cleft palate, usually U or V shaped. In addition to
a cleft palate, the individual with Pierre Robin sequence will exhibit
habitual posterior displacement of the tongue into the pharynx, which in
turn may cause upper airway obstruction and swallowing problems.
Further deficits may be exhibited in the digits, ears, eyes, and heart.
Pierre Robin sequence may occur in isolation but is just as likely to be
one component of a broader craniofacial anomaly (see Figure 11-4).
Stickler Syndrome
 
An example of a syndrome that includes characteristics of Pierre Robin
sequence is Stickler syndrome, or congenital progressive arthro-
ophthalmopathy. Many of the signs of Pierre Robin sequence are
manifested in this syndrome, with added pathology of the joints (e.g.,
arthritis, skeletal abnormalities) and visual system (e.g., astigmatism,
cataracts, detached retinas, and severe myopia). Once again—as with
other craniofacial anomalies involving clefting—the cleft will likely
create problems in oral–nasal resonance. In severe cases, unusual
articulatory strategies may be used to compensate for the inability to
generate sufficient intraoral air pressure and/or to reduce hyper-nasality
and nasal air emission.

 
Figure 11-4  Pierre Robin sequence. A. Lateral view of the facial
features typically seen in the sequence. Note the micrognathia. B.
Cleft palate in an individual with the sequence. (A: Reprinted with
permission from Sadler, T.W. (2006). Langman’s medical
embryology (10th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins. Courtesy of Dr. R.J. Gorlin, Department of Oral
Pathology and Genetics, University of Minnesota. B: Reprinted
with permission from Chung, E.K. et al. (2006). Visual diagnosis in
pediatrics (1st ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins. Courtesy of Ellen Deutsch, MD.)
 
Velocardiofacial Syndrome
 
Perhaps, the most frequently occurring craniofacial syndrome of which
clefting is a characteristic is velocardiofacial syndrome (Peterson-
Falzone, Hardin-Jones, & Karnell, 2001). As the name of this syndrome
implies, the soft palate, heart, and structures of the face are typically
involved. Individuals with this disorder tend to have cardiac problems
and atypical facial features such as a prominent nose, long face, retruded
chin, and unusually small head (known as micro-cephaly). Of primary
concern to the speech–language pathologist is the involvement of the
velum. It may have a cleft or there may be congenital velopharyngeal
incompetence due to a soft palate that is so short that it cannot
approximate the posterior pharyngeal wall to provide proper balance
between oral and nasal resonance. In either case, the likely outcome will
be hypernasality. The nonnasal speech sounds (i.e., all English speech
sounds except the /m/, /n/, and / /) may be highly nasalized. The

individual may also exhibit compensatory articulatory substitutions such
as the glottal stop and pharyngeal fricative.
Why You Need to Know
 
Not included in this formal discussion of craniofacial anomalies, but
worth mentioning, is Down syndrome. This syndrome is neither a
craniofacial disorder nor a structural disorder as defined here.
However, it is an autosomal genetic disorder resulting from a condition
known as trisomy-21, the presence of an extra 21st chromosome. The
primary characteristic of Down syndrome is intellectual impairment, but
other characteristics tend to be present such as almond-shaped eyes,
short limbs, poor muscle tone, and protruding tongue. This syndrome is
mentioned here because speech production errors tend to occur in
persons having this syndrome. Speech may be characterized as
imprecise, sluggish, or slurred (Gordon-Brannan & Weiss, 2006).
Omissions of final consonants in words are also common (Kumin, 1998;
Stoel-Gammon, 1998). By comparison with the craniofacial anomalies
described here, in the case of Down syndrome, speech sound errors do
not appear to be a result of structural deformity. Finally, chronic ear
infections and a conductive hearing loss may create further disturbances
in speech production.
 
Other Structural Anomalies
 
Velopharyngeal Incompetence Not Related to Craniofacial Anomalies
 
Velopharyngeal incompetence may occur congenitally in the absence of
craniofacial anomalies. This condition results from a soft palate that is
too short so that it cannot approximate the posterior pharyngeal wall in
the region of the nasopharynx or from a nasopharyngeal space that is too
deep or wide to allow the soft palate to gain an adequate seal. In terms
of speech production, the result of velopharyngeal incompetence is
similar to what you would expect for cleft palate—hypernasality.
However, not all cases of velopharyngeal incompetence are a result of

an underlying craniofacial anomaly. Some structural variations not
associated with a particular syndrome may result in velopharyngeal
incompetence. For example, the individual may simply have a hard
palate that is too short. This may cause an otherwise normal velum to
have an anterior displacement that does not allow it to approximate the
posterior pharyngeal wall. On the other hand, the hard palate may be
normal, but the velum may be too short. In many of these cases, the
muscles that mediate movement of the soft palate may insert into the
hard palate instead of the anterior portion of the soft palate. Finally, in
some cases, there may be neurological damage to either the nerves or
muscles that control movement of the velum so that it cannot elevate to
meet the posterior pharyngeal wall (this condition will be discussed in
more detail below). No matter the underlying cause, the result will be
velopharyngeal incompetence and with that a likelihood of improper
balance between oral and nasal resonance.
Glossectomy
 
According to the American Cancer Society (2004), there are
approximately 30,000 new cases of oral cancer in the United States each
year. Of these cases, nearly 7500 involve cancer of the tongue. The
incidence then is approximately 2.5 per 100,000 population annually.
The primary causes of oral cancer (and cancer of the tongue) are long-
term alcohol and tobacco use. Although cancer of the tongue is fairly
uncommon by comparison to other cancers, its effects can be
devastating. In the most severe cases, the individual with tongue cancer
will require a total glossectomy. Removal of all of the tongue will have
a negative effect on speech production and swallowing.
As you have learned, the tongue is involved in the production of all
of the vowels and diphthongs and 75% of the consonant sounds in
English. It is also an integral structure in the process of swallowing as
the tongue helps to shape and form the bolus during chewing and then
forces the bolus to the pharynx for swallowing. Although a prosthetic
tongue may be provided after total glossectomy, to this time medical
technology has not been able to make a prosthesis flexible and mobile
enough to do the work of the natural tongue.
In terms of articulation and resonance, with partial removal of the

tongue you may be able to assist the patient in developing compensatory
strategies to improve articulation of error speech sounds and improving
oral resonance for the diphthongs and vowels. In some cases where only
minor surgery is involved, you may even be able to restore the patient’s
speech production to its premorbid level. With total glossectomy,
however, you can expect pervasive articulation errors involving
practically the entire speech sound system as well as poor resonance of
the diphthongs and vowels. The speech sound system may be so
adversely affected that the patient’s speech is highly unintelligible. In
these cases, the only option may be to provide an augmentative and
alternative communication (AAC) system for the individual. AAC
systems may include gestural communication such as Amer-Ind or
manual signs; basic communication displays with alphabetic letters,
words, or symbols on them; or electronic devices that produce synthetic
speech output.
NEUROLOGICAL DISORDERS THAT MAY AFFECT
ARTICULATION AND RESONANCE
As mentioned previously in this chapter, the term “neurological
disorder” encompasses a wide range of pathological conditions affecting
the nervous system. Some of these conditions may affect only the
central nervous system (i.e., the brain and spinal cord), whereas others
may affect only the peripheral nervous system (i.e., the cranial nerves,
spinal nerves, and other peripheral nerves). Still other conditions may
affect both the central and peripheral nervous systems. For the purpose
of further discussion, neurological disorders have been divided into
three broad categories: cranial nerve damage; motor speech disorders;
and 
other 
neurological 
disorders, 
including 
progressive 
and
nonprogressive neurological disorders. Our discussion of neurological
disorders will proceed in that order.
Cranial Nerve Damage
In Chapter 10, you learned that half of the 12 pairs of cranial nerves play
some role in articulation and/ or resonance. These include the trigeminal

(cranial nerve V), facial (VII), glossopharyngeal (IX), vagus (X), spinal
accessory (XI), and hypoglossal (XII) nerves. As you can see by
perusing Table 11-3, some of these cranial nerves have a major impact
on articulation and resonance (as well as swallowing) while others play
a relatively minor role.
The cranial nerves that are involved in speech production and
swallowing can be affected by neuropathy or trauma. For example, if
pressure is exerted upon the cranial nerves (e.g., due to inflammation),
the result may be neuralgia and in some cases even palsy. Disease
processes such as Lyme disease, neoplasm, or sarcoidosis may also
result in nerve pathology. Two of the cranial nerves in particular—the
trigeminal and facial nerves—may be affected by disorders that are
specific to them (i.e., trigeminal neuralgia and Bell’s palsy,
respectively). Cerebrovascular accidents, or strokes, may also affect any
of the cranial nerves.
Trauma can come in the form of gunshot or stab wounds to the
head and/or neck or from surgical procedures that go awry. For example,
the spinal accessory nerve is susceptible to damage from facelift surgery
that is not performed properly. Similarly, the hypoglossal nerve may be
damaged during surgery to remove a blockage in an artery in the neck.
Naturally, which body parts are affected depends on which cranial
nerves are experiencing the neuropathy or trauma. As you can see from
Table 11-3, the muscles that mediate lip movement are all innervated by
the facial nerve (cranial nerve VII). The muscles that mediate elevation
of the mandible (i.e., closing the jaw) are all innervated by the
trigeminal (V) nerve, whereas the muscles that mediate depression of the
mandible (i.e., opening the jaw) are innervated by the trigeminal, facial
(VII), or hypoglossal (XII) nerve. The intrinsic tongue muscles (which
primarily mediate its shape and form) are all innervated by the
hypoglossal (XII) nerve, as are all of the extrinsic muscles (which
depress, elevate, protrude, and retract the tongue) except the
palatoglossus, which is innervated by the vagus (X) and possibly the
spinal accessory (XI) nerve. The muscles that elevate and depress the
soft palate are innervated primarily by the vagus nerve (and the spinal
accessory nerve as well), with the exception of the tensor veli palatini
which is innervated by the trigeminal nerve. As you can deduce, there is
some degree of redundancy in terms of neural innervation. This

redundancy is a protective mechanism of sorts. For many of the
structures of the oral cavity, more than one cranial nerve would have to
be affected to cause complete loss of function.
The signs and symptoms you would observe in a patient who has
experienced head or neck trauma or neuropathy are dependent upon
which nerves are affected and the location where the damage is focused.
In general, the higher up one goes toward the brain and brainstem, the
more diffuse (i.e., widespread) the damage will be. By the same token,
the lower one goes toward the periphery, the more focal (i.e., limited)
the damage will be. In the paragraphs that follow, you should keep in
mind that the discussion pertains to damage to the lower motor neuron
(LMN) as opposed to the upper motor neuron (UMN). Signs and
symptoms of cranial nerve damage differ considerably depending on
whether the damage is in the central nervous system or peripheral
nervous system. The effects of UMN damage on articulation and
resonance will be discussed in more depth in the later section on
progressive neurological disorders. Regardless of which cranial nerve is
affected, the primary signs of LMN damage may include fasciculations,
flaccid paralysis, loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, and weakness.

 
Damage to the Trigeminal Nerve
 
Although there are many possible etiologies of trigeminal nerve damage,
one neuropathy specific to this nerve that is worth mentioning is
trigeminal neuralgia, which is also known as tic douloureux. It is the
most frequently occurring of all neuralgias. The cause of this disorder is
not fully understood, but it is thought that it may be due to degeneration

of the trigeminal nerve or by pressure placed upon it by inflammation or
some other source. The primary symptom of trigeminal neuralgia is a
sharp, cutting sensation on one side of the face, usually in the area of the
jaw. In some cases, the disorder may mimic the symptoms of dental
disease. In younger people, there may be concern that the symptoms
could be an early sign of multiple sclerosis (MS). The pain can last from
several minutes to several hours at a time, and it can be triggered by
such activities as smiling, chewing, blowing the nose, or brushing the
teeth. The disorder may come and go in some individuals but may be
more chronic in others. During periods of severe pain, the individual
may experience difficulty in chewing or speaking.
According to Table 11-3, the trigeminal nerve is primarily
responsible for innervating the muscles that raise and lower the jaw.
This action is necessary for mastication as well as speaking. Only one
other cranial nerve is involved in jaw movement—the facial nerve,
which innervates the posterior body of the digastricus to assist in
lowering (i.e., opening) the jaw. The trigeminal nerve also innervates the
tensor veli palatini muscle, which assists in lowering the soft palate, but
the majority of muscles that mediate movements of the soft palate are
not innervated by the trigeminal nerve. Therefore, damage to the
trigeminal nerve will have a detrimental effect on an individual’s ability
to open and close the jaw, and a lesser effect on the ability of an
individual to lower the soft palate. How much ability is diminished
depends on whether the damage is unilateral or bilateral. If the damage
is uni-lateral, the jaw will deviate to the side of the damage when the
individual is instructed to open or close the jaw. If the damage is
bilateral, there may be complete inability to open and close the jaw,
thereby impeding the individual from chewing and also affecting speech
production. The effect on speech production will involve primarily oral
resonance (see what happens to the resonance of your voice when you
speak with your jaw being closed or opened very wide). From an
articulatory standpoint, the inability of the individual to close the jaw
may affect production of the bilabials (i.e., /p/, /b/, /m/), interdentals
(i.e., /θ/ and /ð/), and labiodentals (i.e., /f/ and /v/). Because of the
functional relationship between the tongue and mandible, high anterior
speech sounds (e.g., the alveolars and high front vowels) may be
affected to a lesser extent.

Damage to the Facial Nerve
 
Bell’s palsy is a neuropathology that is associated with the facial nerve
(see Figure 11-5). It is the most common cause of facial paralysis and is
always unilateral. The etiology is unknown although it is thought that a
virus (e.g., herpes simplex) may be behind the disorder. For most
sufferers, the condition is only temporary, typically lasting 3 to 8 weeks
on average. However, for approximately 16% of persons who develop
Bell’s palsy, the condition may become chronic. The primary symptoms
of this disorder include altered sense of taste; difficulty speaking;
drooling from the mouth on the affected side; drooping of the ipsilateral
eyelid and corner of the mouth; dryness or excessive tearing of the
affected eye; and a heightened sense of hearing on the affected side.
 
Figure 11-5  A child with Bell’s palsy (facial nerve pathology) on
the right side of her face. Note the drooping of the eye and corner
of her mouth on the right. (Modified with permission from Bickley,
L.S., Szilagyi, P. (2003). Bates’ guide to physical examination and
history taking (8th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.)
 

As shown in Table 11-3, the facial nerve primarily innervates the
muscles that mediate facial expression, although it also innervates the
posterior belly of the digastricus, which assists in lowering the jaw.
However, as you know from the forgoing discussion of the trigeminal
nerve, jaw movement will more likely be affected adversely by cranial
nerve V damage. The bad news is that the facial nerve is the only cranial
nerve that innervates the facial muscles, so there is no neural
redundancy to serve as a protective mechanism. As is true for the
trigeminal nerve, unilateral damage will not affect speech production or
swallowing as adversely as bilateral damage will. In the case of Bell’s
palsy, damage is always unilateral, so speech production and swallowing
may be only mildly affected. Other forms of facial nerve damage can be
bilateral.
Not all facial muscles are involved in speech production. For this
discussion, we are only interested in the muscles that mediate movement
of the lips. These include the buccinator, depressor anguli oris, depressor
labii inferior, incisivus labii inferior and superior, levator anguli oris,
levator labii superior, levator labii superior alaeque nasi, mentalis,
orbicularis oris, risorius, and zygomatic major and minor. The net action
of these muscles is to compress, evert, round, and pucker the lips as well
as pull the corners of the mouth laterally, upward, and downward. Some
of these actions are necessary for speech production and swallowing. In
the case of speech production, inability to compress or round the lips
may adversely affect production of the bilabials (i.e., /p/, /b/, /m/) and
labiodentals (i.e., /f/ and /v/) as well as the rounded speech sounds (i.e.,
/w/, /u/, / /, /o/, / /, / / and /  /).
In terms of swallowing, you know from Chapter 10 that the lips
compress to prevent the bolus from exiting the mouth as the tongue
forces the bolus toward the pharynx. Therefore, damage to the facial
nerve may disrupt the swallowing process. Depending on the severity of
the problem, food and drink may eject from the mouth as the individual
attempts to swallow. The individual may also exhibit drooling from one
or both sides of the mouth.
Damage to the Glossopharyngeal Nerve
 
From Table 11-3, you can see that the glossopharyngeal nerve is

involved minimally in the processes of resonance and swallowing. This
nerve innervates only one muscle involved in these processes—the
stylopharyngeus. This muscle plays a part along with several other
muscles to dilate, elevate, relax, and tense the pharynx. Since several
other muscles are also involved in these actions, damage to the
glossopharyngeal nerve alone will likely have a minimal effect on
resonance or swallowing. The vagus nerve, and possibly the spinal
accessory nerve as well, would have to be damaged along with the
glossopharyngeal nerve for there to be any measurable effect on
resonance or swallowing.
Damage to the Vagus and Spinal Accessory Nerves
 
When it comes to the head and neck region, there is an almost
inexorable link between the vagus and spinal accessory nerve. A
controversy exists as to whether the spinal accessory nerve really
innervates any of the head and neck muscles independently of the vagus
nerve. Therefore, you will note in Table 11-3 that all of the muscles
listed under the spinal accessory nerve are also listed under the vagus
nerve. The vagus nerve does innervate some muscles that the spinal
accessory nerve clearly does not—the levator veli palatini and all of the
pharyngeal constrictor muscles. The discussion that immediately follows
will focus on the vagus nerve, but keep in mind that for some of the
structures mentioned later, the spinal accessory nerve may also be
involved.
From Chapter 8, you learned that the vagus nerve plays a major
role in phonation via the recurrent and superior laryngeal nerves.
However, the vagus nerve also innervates several muscles that are
integral in mediating movements of the pharynx, soft palate, and tongue.
This nerve innervates the muscles that raise the soft palate as well as two
of the three muscles that lower it (the third muscle—the tensor veli
palatini—is innervated by the trigeminal nerve). The vagus nerve also
innervates one muscle that assists in raising the back of the tongue.
Finally, the vagus nerve innervates several muscles that mediate
pharyngeal movements (the only exception is the stylopharyngeus
muscle, which is innervated by the glossopharyngeal nerve). Clearly, the
vagus nerve is the primary source of innervation for the muscles of the

soft palate and pharynx. It plays a lesser role in the innervation of the
muscles that mediate tongue movement. Therefore, damage to the vagus
nerve is more likely to affect the soft palate and pharynx.
The site of nerve damage is very important in understanding which
structures will be affected. Almost immediately upon exiting the base of
the cranium, the inferior ganglion of the vagus nerve gives off three
important branches along its journey through the neck. Most superior of
these is the pharyngeal branch. Below the pharyngeal branch, the vagus
gives off the superior laryngeal nerve, and finally below that the
recurrent laryngeal nerve. If damage occurs at the level of the inferior
ganglion, then all structures below that point will be affected, including
the soft palate, pharynx, and larynx. If the damage is below the level
where the pharyngeal branch comes off the vagus nerve, then the
damage will be confined to the larynx since the nerve is still intact at the
level of the pharyngeal branch (remember this mantra: “the higher up
the lesion, the more widespread the damage”). If damage is confined to
the pharyngeal branch alone, then the larynx will not be affected but the
soft palate and pharynx will.
That said, if the pharyngeal branch of the vagus nerve is damaged,
the result will likely be diminished movement of the soft palate and
pharynx (see Figure 11-6). As you recall, the soft palate is part of the
velopharyngeal mechanism. If the soft palate cannot raise and lower
properly, the result will be improper oral–nasal resonance. An individual
with paralysis of the soft palate will likely have some degree of
hypernasality. The hypernasality will be more pronounced if there is
bilateral damage because both sides will be paralyzed and the soft palate
will not be able to elevate at all. In the case of unilateral damage, the
uvula will still be able to elevate on one side, so at least some degree of
velopharyngeal closure can be accomplished.

 
Figure 11-6  Hemiparesis of the soft palate due to right vagus
nerve damage. The soft palate will deviate to the opposite side
during the production of staccato “ah.” (Modified with permission
from Bickley, L.S., Szilagyi, P. (2003). Bates’ guide to physical
examination and history taking (8th ed.). Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Why You Need to Know
 
Having the patient produce a staccato “ah” is a diagnostic test to
determine where damage to the vagus nerve is occurring. If upon
producing a staccato “ah” there is no movement of the soft palate at all,
you can expect that there is bilateral damage to the vagus nerve. If upon
producing a staccato “ah” the soft palate deviates to one side, then the
damage is likely unilateral. In the case of unilateral damage, you can
determine which side is affected by observing the uvula. The uvula will
move to the unaffected side. This is because the muscles on the
unaffected side are still able to contract, and thereby will “pull” the soft
palate to that side. Figure 11-6 depicts vagus nerve damage on the
patient’s right side.
 
In terms of swallowing, an inability to raise the soft palate may
cause the bolus to be injected into the nasopharynx when it is forced into
the pharynx by the tongue. Collection of food or drink within the
nasopharynx may set the stage for bacteria to travel up the Eustachian

tube and into the middle ear, potentially resulting in otitis media.
Similarly to the soft palate, the pharynx plays a role in resonance
and swallowing. Therefore, paralysis of the pharyngeal muscles may
adversely affect these processes. In the case of resonance, the voice may
sound “muffled” or not as crisp as you would expect. In the case of
swallowing, the lack of motility within the pharynx may prevent the
bolus from being passed into the esophagus. Instead, the bolus may
pocket in the inferior pharynx, most notably within the pyri-form
sinuses. In severe cases, aspiration of the bolus into the larynx can
occur.
Damage to the vagus nerve (and to a lesser degree the spinal
accessory nerve) will probably not have as negative an effect on
articulation as it may on resonance and swallowing. The soft palate and
pharynx are not actively involved in the articulation of speech sounds.
The vagus nerve does innervate one extrinsic tongue muscle (the
palatoglossus), but the action that this muscle performs on the tongue
can also be accomplished by the styloglossus muscle, which is
innervated by the hypoglossal nerve. Production of back consonants and
vowels (i.e., /k/, /g/, / /, /u/, / /, /o/, / /, and /a/) may be affected
somewhat, but in most cases the individual will still be able to produce
these sounds.

 
Figure 11-7  Hemiparesis of the tongue due to right hypoglossal
nerve damage. The tongue will deviate to the affected side during
protrusion. (Modified with permission from Campbell, W.W.
(2005). DeJong’s 
the 
neurologic 
examination 
(6th 
ed.).
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Damage to the Hypoglossal Nerve
 
With the exception of the innervation of the geniohyoid muscle, the
hypoglossal nerve’s role is almost exclusively associated with
movements of the tongue (see Figure 11-7). This nerve innervates all of
the intrinsic muscles of the tongue as well as all of the extrinsic tongue
muscles except the palatoglossus (which, as you have just learned, is
innervated by the vagus and possibly even the spinal accessory nerve).
Clearly, damage to this cranial nerve is going to have serious
consequences for the primary structure of articulation and oral
resonance.

Why You Need to Know
 
Similarly to the vagus nerve and the soft palate, you can determine
whether hypoglossal nerve damage is unilateral or bilateral, and if
unilateral, which hypoglossal nerve is affected. In this case, ask the
patient to stick her tongue out. If she cannot do this task at all, the
damage is likely bilateral. If, however, she can stick out her tongue but
it deviates to one side of the mouth, the damage is unilateral. Which side
the tongue deviates tells you which hypoglossal nerve is damaged. The
tongue will deviate to the side of the damage. This is because unilateral
damage to the genioglossus muscle means that only half of it is
contracting—the half that causes the tongue to move toward the
opposite side. The tongue will move away from the intact genioglossus,
that is, toward the “bad” side. Figure 11-7 depicts damage to the right
hypoglossal nerve.
 
Articulation, chewing, resonance, and swallowing will all be
affected adversely by damage to the hypoglossal nerve, especially if the
damage is bilateral. As has been mentioned several times, the tongue is
the primary articulator, playing a role in the production of three-fourths
of the consonant sounds in English (the non-tongue–influenced
consonants are /p/, /b/, /m/, /f/, /v/, and /h/). In addition, the tongue is the
primary structure involved in oral resonance for all of the vowels and
diphthongs. For the processes of chewing and swallowing, the tongue
also plays an important role. During deglutition, the tongue helps shape
and form the bolus as it is being chewed. During swallowing, the tongue
is responsible for “squeezing” the bolus back along the ceiling of the
oral cavity, eventually forcing it through the oropharyngeal isthmus and
into the pharynx. Just think of how adversely affected an individual’s
ability to chew, speak, and swallow would be if he had bilateral damage
to the hypoglossal nerve!
Motor Speech Disorders
 
As you learned in Chapter 5, a motor speech disorder is the result of a
neurological impairment in which motor planning, programming,
neuromuscular control, or the execution of speech is adversely affected

(Duffy, 2005). The more common etiologies of this condition are
cerebrovascular accident (i.e., stroke), degenerative disease, traumatic
brain injury, and neoplasm. Two neuropathologies are classified as
motor speech disorders: apraxia of speech (AOS) and dysarthria. As
you will learn in reading the paragraphs that follow, one of these
disorders—dysarthria—in many cases is the result of cranial nerve
damage and therefore the discussion of dysarthria is highly related to the
foregoing discussion on cranial nerve damage. However, keep in mind
that the discussion above centered on the likely outcome of isolated
cranial nerve damage, and specifically damage that is more peripherally
based. In the majority of cases of dysarthria, several cranial nerves may
be involved or the damage may be more diffuse as the site of lesion
tends to be more central.
 
To the untrained observer, AOS and dysarthria may appear to be
very similar disorders. However, to a speech–language pathologist, the
difference between the two is more obvious. Table 11-4 provides a
summary of some of the differences between AOS and dysarthria. First
and foremost, the site of lesion is different between the two. AOS is a
central nervous system disorder with damage originating in the
language-dominant cerebral hemisphere (for most people, the left
hemisphere). In some cases of dysarthria, damage also occurs at the

level of the cerebral cortex, but in most cases, the damage is subcortical,
bulbar (i.e., brainstem), cerebellar, and/or peripheral. Another
noteworthy difference between the two is the fact that AOS tends to be
confined to the articulatory system, whereas dysarthria tends to affect
every aspect of speech production including respiration, phonation,
articulation, and resonance. In the case of dysarthria, the patient looks
like he has a motor disorder. Finally, differences exist between the two
types of motor speech disorder in terms of (1) the speech sounds that
tend to be in error; (2) the types of articulation errors that are exhibited;
(3) the consistency of articulation errors; and (4) the effect of increasing
linguistic context on the patient’s speech. These differences in speech
production will become more apparent in the following sections. You
should realize, however, that within each of the two motor speech
disorders, there tends to be quite a bit of variability from person to
person. Two persons having a diagnosis of AOS or dysarthria may
exhibit a different set of articulation errors. Because of this, the
discussion below will not focus on specific articulation errors but on
generalities.
As a final note, it should be mentioned that the speech–language
pathologist tends to see a large number of persons who have had a stroke
who exhibit a motor speech disorder along with swallowing difficulties.
Estimates of the prevalence of dysphagia among persons who have had a
stroke range from 25% to 70% (Howden, 2004; Mann, Hankey, &
Cameron, 2000; Marik & Kaplan, 2003; Martino, Foley, Bhogal, et al.,
2005; Paciaroni, Mazzotta, Corea, et al., 2004; Schelp, Cola, Gatto,
Goncalves da Silva, et al., 2004). Disturbances in any or all of the
phases of the swallow can occur (e.g., aspiration, ejection of food
outside the mouth or into the nasopharynx, inability to form the bolus or
transport it to the oropharynx, pocketing of the bolus in the pyriform
sinuses). Because of the high prevalence of dysphagia in persons who
have had a stroke, swallowing therapy is likely to be a component of a
comprehensive intervention plan.
Apraxia of Speech
 
AOS is a central nervous system disorder. As was previously mentioned,
the focus of neuropathology is in the language-dominant cerebral

hemisphere. Rarely would you see a case of isolated AOS. Instead, you
are more likely to observe a patient with AOS also having aphasia. In
terms of speech production, one could think of AOS as a “short circuit”
in the brain’s ability to program the articulators for correct speech sound
production. Think of a lamp that has an electrical short. Sometimes the
electrical circuit gets completed so that the light comes on, while at
other times the circuit is disrupted and the light goes off. You are not
able to predict when the light will come on and when it will go off. Such
is AOS; a person with this disorder tends to have periods of fluent,
easily understandable speech but other periods of effortful groping to
find the correct articulatory postures for speech sounds with numerous
speech sound errors.
For a person with AOS, speech sound errors primarily involve the
consonants, but in some cases may involve the vowels as well. Errors
typically involve distorted sound substitutions, omissions of sounds, and
to a lesser degree sound transpositions. Errors occur most often during
volitional speech while “automatic” speech (e.g., reciting the days of the
week or giving social greetings) tends to remain intact. A patient with
AOS will have relatively few articulatory errors when producing
utterances of low linguistic complexity, but errors tend to increase
considerably as the linguistic context gets more complex (e.g.,
producing longer sentences or saying words of increasing syllable
length). Prosody tends to be adversely affected in AOS. Finally, an
individual with AOS will likely not exhibit disturbances in respiration,
phonation, or resonance as the disorder is primarily an impairment of the
articulatory system alone.
Dysarthria
 
The site of lesion for dysarthria can be the cerebral cortex, the
subcortical region of either hemisphere, the cerebellum, the brainstem,
and/or the periphery (i.e., the cranial and/or spinal nerves)—quite a wide
range of possibilities! There could be damage to the UMNs, LMNs, or
both. In Chapter 5, you learned that there are seven types of dysarthria:
ataxic, flaccid, hyperkinetic, hypokinetic, spastic, unilateral UMN
(UUMN), and mixed. Ataxic dysarthria is associated with cerebellar
damage. Flaccid dysarthria involves LMN damage, while spastic

dysarthria involves bilateral UMN damage. The site of lesion for
UUMN dysarthria is fairly self-explanatory. The site of lesion for the
hyperkinetic and hypokinetic types is the basal ganglia. Finally, mixed
dysarthria incorporates two or more of the single types; the site of lesion
depends on which single types are involved. With such a wide range of
possibilities, you can well imagine that the symptoms you’d observe
depend on the specific type of dysarthria. Because of this, it is beyond
the scope of this textbook to discuss characteristics of speech production
in specific terms.
Perhaps, the most striking difference you’d note between AOS and
dysarthria is how widespread dysarthria is by comparison. Dysarthria
typically involves every component of speech production— respiration,
phonation, articulation, resonance, and prosody. Another difference
between the two involves nonverbal oral movements (e.g., sticking out
the tongue, moving the tongue from side to side, pursing the lips). In
AOS, range of movement and strength of the articulators tends to be
intact, while these tend to be impaired in dysarthria. Speech production
errors also tend to be different for dysarthria. For example, both
consonants and vowels are typically affected in dysarthria. Articulation
errors include distortions and omissions of speech sounds. In many
cases, the patient exhibits imprecise productions of consonants. Speech
may be slow and slurred. By contrast to AOS, there tend to be no
periods of error-free speech in dysarthria. Although many speech–
language pathologists are realizing that speech sound errors are more
consistent in AOS than was originally thought, speech sound errors in
dysarthria are highly consistent and predictable. In dysarthria, automatic
and volitional speech tend to be equally affected, and speech sound
errors tend to be consistent regardless of linguistic complexity.
Other Neurological Disorders
 
There are a whole host of central and/or peripheral nervous system
disorders that may affect the speech production mechanism in some
way. These remaining disorders have been classified as either
progressive or nonprogressive neurological disorders. The term
“progressive” refers to the fact that the pathology will worsen over time,
and in many cases prove to be fatal. Naturally, nonprogressive disorders

do not get worse over time. The patient develops the disorder at some
point but symptoms remain pretty much constant across the life span.
The progressive neurological disorders that will be presented here
include amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), multiple sclerosis (MS),
and Parkinson’s disease. These will be discussed to show you the wide
range of symptoms and pathological signs that accompany these
disorders, including the wide range of speech impairment that exists
from disorder to disorder. One nonprogressive disorder will be presented
here—cerebral palsy (CP). As you read the sections that follow, you will
note almost immediately that when it comes to speech production, these
neuropathies include some type of dysarthria. Indeed, the disorders
described and discussed in this section are the neurological disorders;
the speech disorder (i.e., dysarthria) is just one characteristic of the
broader neurological disorder.
Progressive Neurological Disorders
 
To see the wide range of symptoms and signs that exist from disorder to
disorder, we will compare three well-known progressive neurological
disorders: ALS, MS, and Parkinson’s disease. The three differ in terms
of neurological involvement, symptoms, and the speech characteristics
that are typically exhibited.
ALS, or Lou Gehrig’s disease, is a fatal neuropathy in which the
motor neurons—both upper and lower— degenerate, resulting in
diminished or lost voluntary muscle activity. As the disease progresses,
muscles no longer receive neural impulses, so they become paralyzed
and wither away (see Figure 11-8). The etiology is unknown. ALS is
slightly more common in men than in women, usually occurring
between the ages of 40 and 60 years. In the United States, approximately
one person per 250,000 will develop ALS. Early symptoms of ALS
include general weakness followed by twitching, cramping, or stiffening
of affected muscles usually in an arm or leg. In the later stages of the
disease, the muscles of the respiratory system are affected to the point
that the individual will likely die of respiratory failure or pneumonia.
Because both the upper and lower motor neurons are affected, ALS is a
central and peripheral nervous system disease. In Chapter 5, you learned
that an outcome of UMN damage is spasticity, whereas an outcome of

LMN damage is flaccidity. If you think about this in relation to the
speech mechanism, you may correctly surmise that ALS results in mixed
dysarthria of the flaccid and spastic types. Aberrations in activity for the
muscles of the speech production mechanism will result in speech that
exhibits the following signs: hypernasality with nasal air emission,
imprecise articulation of consonants, slow speaking rate, and vowel
distortions. Problems in swallowing are also common, especially in the
later stages of the disease. There is, however, a wide range of specific
symptoms from person to person (Duffy, 2005).
 
Figure 11-8  A patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Note the
atrophy of muscles in his arms. (Modified with permission from
Campbell, W.W. (2005). DeJong’s the neurologic examination (6th
ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
MS is an autoimmune disorder in which the person’s immune
system attacks the central nervous system. The myelinated axons of
neurons lose their myelination; this process prevents neurons in the
brain and spinal cord from communicating with each other by
interrupting a neuron’s ability to conduct neural impulses to other

neurons (see Figure 11-9). The breakdown of myelin creates scar tissue
(i.e., sclerosis) along the axon. “Multiple” refers to the fact that
demyelination can occur in several places within the central nervous
system—brainstem, cerebellum, cerebrum, and spinal cord. MS occurs
more often in women than in men. Its onset is usually between the ages
of 20 and 40 years, although cases have been known to occur in persons
older than 40 years. Approximately 140 to 150 persons per 100,000
develop the disease. The specific etiology is unknown, but some believe
that its origin may be viral. Symptoms of this disease include chronic
fatigue, sensory disturbances (e.g., burning, itching, numbness, and
tingling), and visual problems (e.g., double vision, decreased color
perception, and reduced visual acuity). Because demyeli-nation can
occur in several places within the central nervous system, the resulting
dysarthria can be diffi-cult to predict. In many cases, there is no
dysarthria at all. For those cases where dysarthria is present, the most
common type is mixed with characteristics of the ataxic and spastic
types (which would seem to indicate that the cerebellum and UMNs are
affected). If the cerebellar system is involved, the distinguishing speech
characteristic is imprecise articulation resulting in slurred speech due to
poor motor coordination. The person will sound as if she is intoxicated.
“Overshooting” of the tongue (possibly due to the spasticity) as it
attempts to make articulatory contacts is also fairly common in persons
who have MS.

 
Figure 11-9  Illustration of the demyelination and scarring that
occur in multiple sclerosis. (Anatomical Chart Company.)
 
Similar to MS, Parkinson’s disease is also a central nervous system
neuropathy. The site of lesion is within the basal ganglia in the
subcortical regions of the cerebral hemispheres. Diminished production
of the neurotransmitter dopamine results in decreased stimulation of the
motor cortex by the basal ganglia, which results in the following
symptoms: bradykinesia, masked facies, muscle rigidity with
diminished range of motion, shuffling gait, stooped posture, and tremors
(see Figure 11-10). By comparison with other progressive neurological
diseases, Parkinson’s disease is fairly common, occurring in
approximately 350 to 400 persons per 100,000. In the United States,
there are nearly twice as many men than women with Parkinson’s
disease. Toxins and head trauma (such as what a boxer like Muhammad

Ali might experience in his career) are thought to be two etiologies. For
many persons with Parkinson’s disease, the etiology is idiopathic.
Primarily because of the bradykinesia, the most common articulation
and resonance problems are imprecise consonants (due to articulatory
undershooting) and hypernasality. Verbal output is also characterized by
difficulty in initiating speech, quick rushes of unintelligible speech
(usually mumbled), and palilalia. Swallowing problems are also
common in persons with Parkinson’s disease.
 
Figure 11-10  Clinical signs seen in a patient with Parkinson’s
disease. (Modified with permission from Timby, B.K., Smith, N.E.
(2003). Introductory medical–surgical nursing (8th ed., p. 626).
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

Why You Need to Know
 
One pathological condition worth noting here is muscular dystrophy
(MD). It was not included in the main discussion because technically it
is not a neurological disorder. Instead, it is a muscular disorder that
affects approximately 15 to 20 persons per 100,000. There are several
forms of muscular dystrophy; some affect both males and females while
others (e.g., Duchenne MD) affect males almost exclusively. Muscular
dystrophy can occur at almost any age, and the severity of symptoms
varies across type of MD. Symptoms, however, are chronic, diffuse, and
progressive. Although the nervous system typically is not affected by
MD, the signs and symptoms of the disorder are similar to what you’d
see in many of the degenerative disorders that affect the nervous system.
If the structures of the vocal tract are affected, you can expect to see
speech (i.e., dysarthria) and swallowing difficulties.
 
 
Figure 11-11  A child with cerebral palsy. (Modified with

permission from Weber, J., Kelley, J. (2003). Health assessment in
nursing (2nd ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.)
 
Nonprogressive Neurological Disorders
 
Cerebral palsy (CP) (see Figure 11-11) is one of the most common
nonprogressive neurological disorders and is the most common
developmental motor impairment (Best, Bigge, & Sirvis, 1994; Love,
2000). Cerebral palsy is a result of injury to the central nervous system
(i.e., the brain) before, during, or soon after birth (Dillow, Dzienkowski,
Smith, & Yucha, 1996; Hardy, 1994; Love, 2000). The annual incidence
of the disorder is approximately 2 to 2.5 per 1000 live births. There are
several types of cerebral palsy. The most common is spastic CP, with
approximately 50% of all cases being of this type. The athetoid type
makes up approximately 20% of cases, and the ataxic type occurs in
approximately 10% of cases. The remaining 20% of cases involve mixed
types of cerebral palsy.
Disturbances in speech production may involve the respiratory,
phonatory, articulatory, and resonance systems (Bishop, Brown, &
Robson, 1990; Dillow et al., 1996; Hardy, 1994; Love, 2000). Persons
who have spastic CP may exhibit reduced vital capacity that results in
inadequate breath support for speech (in terms of both phonation and
articulation). They may also have a degree of hypernasality due to
velopharyngeal incompetence. Speech production tends to be slow and
laborious, with imprecise articulation especially for the affricates and
fricatives (Love, 2000). Persons with CP of the athetoid variety may
exhibit rapid and irregular breathing, and some may even engage in
reverse breathing. The effect of athetosis on phonation can be quite
severe, rendering the person aphonic in the worst cases, and in less
severe cases, phonation may be strained and strangled. Poor mobility of
the soft palate will result in hypernasality. During articulation, you may
observe a person with athetoid CP engaging in exaggerated jaw
movements but severely limited tongue movements. These processes
will likely result in distortions of the consonants and vowels (in the case

of the latter, tongue height is usually not affected but tongue
advancement is). Finally, speech characteristics of persons with ataxic
CP are similar to what you would expect for ataxic dysarthria due to the
incoordination of muscle activity. These include shallow inspiration and
lack of expiratory control; imprecise consonants and vowels;
inconsistent sound substitutions and omissions; and poor rhythm and
reduced prosody of speech. Oral–nasal resonance, on the other hand,
tends to be unaffected.
SENSORY DISORDERS THAT MAY AFFECT
ARTICULATION AND RESONANCE
There are several sensory impairments that may have an adverse affect
on articulation and/or resonance. These include auditory, kinesthetic,
and tactile disorders. Of these, only auditory disorders (i.e., hearing
impairment) will be presented as an example of how sensory disorders
may affect the processes of articulation and resonance.
Hearing Impairment
 
A final anatomical/physiological correlate to speech sound disorders is
hearing impairment. In Chapters 12 and 13, you will learn more about
the auditory system and disorders that have an impact upon a person’s
ability to perceive sound. For this section, you will see the connection
between the auditory and speech production systems.
The relationship between hearing impairment and articulatory and
resonance disorders cannot be overstated. For persons without hearing
impairment, speech production is monitored through several modalities,
including the auditory, tactile, and kinesthetic modalities. The auditory
channel is the primary means by which we monitor our speech. For
those of us who have normal hearing, we are keenly aware of what our
voices sound like. To illustrate this, record your voice as you speak. As
you are speaking, make note of what your voice sounds like. Then, play
back the recording. No doubt you will notice that it does not sound quite
the same as when you hear your voice “live.” This is because when we
speak, our voices are fed back to us through two auditory channels— air

conduction and bone conduction. As your voice leaves your lips, it is
transmitted through the air back to your ears (just like it does for anyone
else who is near you). However, in addition to receiving feedback in this
channel, you are also hearing your own voice through the forced
vibrations of your skull as you speak (of course, other people around
you do not hear your voice in this manner). When you listen to your
voice on a recording, you are only hearing it through air conduction; you
lose the bone conduction channel. In other words, when you listen to
your voice on a recording, you are essentially hearing it the same way
everyone else does. The point in mentioning this is that proper operation
of our auditory system is critical to our ability to monitor our speech.
You can well imagine that a hearing loss, if severe enough, prevents an
individual from monitoring his voice. If he cannot monitor his voice,
how is he going to know whether the speech sounds he is producing are
accurate? There is still tactile and kinesthetic feedback, but these
modalities are secondary to the auditory modality. Loss of the auditory
modality will likely have a significant negative impact on the speech
production system.
Hearing impairment is described in terms of its type, configuration,
and severity. Of particular interest are four types of hearing impairment:
central, conductive, mixed, and sensorineural. A conductive loss
involves the outer and/or middle ears. For some reason, acoustic energy
is not being transmitted effectively to the inner ear. This type of hearing
loss is reversible. For example, if the etiology is otitis media, it is a
relatively simple matter to clear up the infection by a course of
antibiotics. Once the infection is cleared, hearing returns to normal.
Similarly, if there is damage to the tiny bones of the middle ear (i.e., the
ossicles), this can also be addressed through reconstructive surgery.
Hearing will then return to normal, essentially. A sensorineural hearing
loss, on the other hand, is permanent. In this case, the hair cells within
the cochlea (which are necessary to convert mechanical energy from the
middle ear into a neural impulse to be sent to the brain via the acoustic
nerve) are irreversibly damaged, or the acoustic nerve has some form of
pathology. A mixed hearing loss has both a conductive and a
sensorineural component. The conductive loss can be corrected, but the
sensorineural loss will remain. Finally, a central hearing loss refers to
poor auditory reception as a result of central nervous system damage.

The hearing mechanism (i.e., outer ear, middle ear, inner ear, and
acoustic nerve) is essentially intact, but the neural signal does not make
its way to the auditory cortex because of brain damage.
Hearing loss is also described according to its level of severity.
Terms such as “mild,” “moderate,” “severe,” and “profound” are often
used to describe how severe the hearing loss is. Configuration refers to
the extent of the hearing loss in terms of the sound frequencies that are
most affected by the loss. For example, a person could have a high
frequency hearing loss, a low frequency hearing loss, or a sloping
hearing loss (which means that the severity is worse as the frequencies
get higher). When it comes to hearing impairment and its effect on
speech production, the more severe the loss, the more likely the speech
sound system will be adversely affected. Also, you can expect that a
hearing loss in the mid-frequencies (i.e., 500, 1000, 2000, and 4000 Hz)
will have a greater affect on speech production than other frequencies
because the vocal tone consists of these mid-frequencies.
The speech production system may be affected by a hearing loss
alone or by a hearing loss that is a component of another anomaly that
affects speech. In a previous section of this chapter, you learned that
conductive hearing loss is often associated with cleft palate. Because the
hard and/or soft palate is compromised, food or drink is susceptible to
being injected into the nasopharynx, and from there, bacteria may
develop and pass from the Eustachian tube into the middle ear cavity.
Otitis media may be the final outcome. In fact, children with cleft palate
(or other disorders where the velopharyngeal mechanism is
compromised) tend to have recurring bouts of otitis media. You should
be able to imagine how these recurring infections and the conductive
loss they bring can affect a child’s speech sound system, especially if the
infections occur often during the speech development period
(approximately the first 6 to 8 years of life).
Approximately 1450 persons per 100,000 are deaf. Each year,
approximately 1 infant in 1000 will be born with a profound hearing
loss. The term “deaf” is used to denote a person whose sense of hearing
is essentially nonfunctional. In other words, the hearing loss is likely to
be sensorineural (or central), profound, and pervasive across the entire
frequency range. Deafness can be congenital or acquired. Some of the
most 
common 
etiologies 
are 
infections, 
metabolic 
disorders,

neurological disorders, prematurity, toxins, trauma, tumors, and vascular
disorders. If the impairment is acquired after the period of speech
development, there may be some deterioration of speech sound
production and oral–nasal resonance, but for the most part the speech
production system will be minimally affected. On the other hand, if the
impairment is congenital or acquired before or during the period of
speech development, you can expect a greater negative impact on the
speech production system. In this case, there may be numerous speech
sound errors involving the consonants, diphthongs, and vowels (in fact,
the child may have a phonological disorder). Speech sound errors are
typically substitutions and omissions (the latter typically occurring for
final consonants in words; Abraham, 1989). Other errors may include
(1) an inability to distinguish between oral and nasal consonants; (2)
frequent substitutions of plosives for fricatives and liquids; (3) an
inability to distinguish between voiced and unvoiced consonants; and (4)
neutralization of vowels (i.e., the front and back vowels tend to be
produced more centrally like the schwa / /).
Oral–nasal resonance will also be affected. Persons with profound
hearing impairment tend to exhibit a vocal quality known as cul-de-sac
resonance. The voice of a person who exhibits culde-sac resonance will
sound “flat” or “muffled.” Denasality is also common in persons with
profound hearing impairment. There may also be poor coordination
between respiration and phonation, resulting in diminished vocal
intensity, aberrant stress and intonational patterns, and unusual syntactic
phrasing.
Summary
 
In this chapter, you learned the effect that pathologies of the vocal tract
have on the speech production system (i.e., the processes of articulation
and resonance). A wide range of pathologies may affect speech sound
production and oral–nasal resonance. These include structural disorders,
neurological disorders, and sensory disorders. Structural disorders
include cleft lip and palate, other craniofacial anomalies such as Apert
syndrome, and other structural anomalies such as velopharyngeal
incompetence and glossectomy. Neurological disorders were further

classified into three groups: cranial nerve damage, motor speech
disorders, and other neurological disorders. Motor speech disorders
include AOS and dysarthria. You learned that other neurological
disorders can be classified as either progressive or nonprogressive.
Progressive disorders include ALS, MS, and Parkinson’s disease.
Cerebral palsy was discussed as an example of a nonprogressive
neurological disorder. Finally, hearing impairment was presented as an
exemplar of sensory disorders. These disorders have varying effects on
an individual’s ability to produce speech sounds (consonants,
diphthongs, and vowels) and/ or to regulate proper oral–nasal resonance.
The purpose of this chapter was to instill within you an appreciation of
the importance of knowing the anatomy and physiology of the
articulatory/resonance system and how pathological conditions may
affect speech production and swallowing.
Clinical Teaser—Follow-Up
In Chapter 11, you learned some of the characteristics of Pierre Robin
syndrome. You know that it is classified as a craniofacial anomaly. Of
primary interest to you are the signs you observed during your
evaluation: micrognathia, cleft palate, and glossoptosis. You know that
micrognathia means an abnormally small jaw and you also know that
glossoptosis is an abnormal downward or backward placement of the
tongue. With your knowledge of the articulatory/resonance system and
articulatory phonetics, you know there is a strong likelihood that
Aidan’s untreated cleft palate will adversely affect oral–nasal resonance.
Your observations indicate that he does indeed have hypernasality with
nasal air emission. The micrognathia and glossoptosis together may
have a negative impact on Aidan’s ability to produce certain speech
sounds. As you know that his habitual tongue placement is too far back,
you suspect that he will have difficulty in using the tongue to produce
the anterior speech sounds. Aidan’s cleft palate is also going to have a
negative impact on his speech production, as the excessively diverted air
into the nasal cavity will prevent Aidan from generating sufficient
intraoral air pressure to produce the pressure consonants—plosives,
fricatives, and affricates. Upon administering the Goldman-Fristoe Test
of Articulation, your suspicions are supported. Aidan exhibited
numerous articulation errors, especially in regard to the pressure

consonants. Although the Goldman-Fristoe does not specifically test
vowel sounds, you informally observed that Aidan’s productions of the
vowels were characterized by pervasive, heavy nasalization; you also
noted that he experienced great difficulty in producing the front vowels.
Aidan’s medical history noted that he had frequent bouts of otitis media.
You suspect that the middle ear infections were coming from bacteria
that were created by food and drink being injected into the nasopharynx
during swallowing.
The primary focus of intervention should be to repair the cleft
palate. You predict that by having his cleft palate repaired, several
positive outcomes will result: (1) the hypernasality of his voice will
decrease or possibly even be eliminated; (2) intraoral air pressure will be
restored so that Aidan can produce the pressure consonants; and (3) the
ear infections and the conductive hearing loss they create will be
dramatically reduced in frequency and number. Once the cleft has been
repaired, your focus will be to assist Aidan in acquiring the correct
productions of the speech sounds he had in error.
 
PART 5 SUMMARY
This part provided a thorough description and discussion of the
articulatory and resonance system and the pathologies that may affect
the integrity of this system. In Chapter 10, you learned that the
articulatory/resonance system is composed of the vocal tract, which
includes the oral, nasal, and pharyngeal cavities and the structures found
within them. These include the lips, teeth, tongue, mandible, alveolar
ridge, hard palate, velum, nasal cavity, and pharynx. You learned about
the velopharyngeal mechanism and how its function is very important in
swallowing and regulating oral-nasal resonance. Finally, you were
introduced to the Source-Filter Theory that describes how the vocal tone
that is produced by the vocal folds is shaped and formed into speech
sounds.
Chapter 11 provided you a thorough discussion of structural,
neurological, and sensory pathologies and how they may affect
swallowing and speech sound production and/or resonance. Structural

problems such as cleft lip and palate or glossectomy can adversely affect
the production of many speech sounds and can also affect oral-nasal
resonance in a negative manner. Neuropathies also affect an individual’s
ability to accurately produce speech sounds or to regulate oral-nasal
resonance by paralyzing muscles that are necessary for articulation and
resonance. Finally, you learned that hearing impairment can also affect
articulation and resonance. In general, the more severe the hearing
impairment, the more adversely the speech production system will be
affected. This is because as hearing impairment becomes more severe,
the individual receives even less feedback from the auditory system to
allow her to monitor the accuracy and quality of her speech output.
PART 5 REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Describe the bones of the skull (facial and cranial) and recall as many
of the primary landmarks as you can for each bone.
2. What is meant by the term “muscular hydrostat” as a descriptor of the
architecture and function of the tongue?
3. Describe the architecture of the velum. How is the architecture of the
velum similar to the architecture of the pharynx? List the muscles of
the velum and pharynx and explain what they do when they contract.
4. Discuss how the mandibular depressor and elevator muscles can
mediate anteroposterior and lateral movements of the jaw.
5. What are the four phases of mastication and deglutition? Describe
each phase in as much detail as you can.
6. Explain how Source-Filter Theory accounts for the production of
English vowel sounds.
7. How are English vowel sounds classified? What terms are used to
describe tongue advancement and tongue height?
8. How are consonants classified? Explain what the terms “place” and
“manner” mean.
9. What is velopharyngeal incompetence? Name three pathological
conditions in which velopharyngeal incompetence may be an issue.
10. Compare and contrast apraxia of speech and dysarthria.
11. Explain how damage to each of the following muscles can have an
adverse effect on speech production: trigeminal; facial;

glossopharyngeal; vagus, spinal accessory; hypoglossal.
12. Define “progressive” and “nonprogressive” neurological disorders.
Give an example of each one and describe how the disorder may
affect speech production.
13. How might a sensory disorder like hearing impairment affect speech
production? What would likely result in a more severe articulation
disorder—congenital impairment or acquired impairment after the
developmental years? Why?

 

 
Knowledge Outcomes for ASHA Certification for Chapter
12
   Demonstrate knowledge of the biological basis of the basic
human communication processes (III-B)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the neurological basis of the basic
human communication processes (III-B)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the acoustic basis of the basic
human communication processes (III-B)
 
Learning Objectives
 
   You will be able to generalize the anatomical terms used in the
study of aural anatomy and physiology.
   You will list and describe the anatomical structures of the
conductive auditory mechanism.
   You will list and describe the anatomical structures of the inner
auditory mechanism.
   You will list and describe the anatomical structures of the
vestibular mechanism.
   You will be able to explain the physiological function of the
conductive auditory mechanism.
   You will be able to explain the physiological function of the
inner ear in terms of audition and balance.
 

 
 
Clinical Teaser—Introduction
A 50-year-old father of three, ages 15, 12, and 9, was recently seen by
an audiologist for a diagnostic evaluation having been referred by his
physician for some very disturbing episodes of dizziness. The first
incident took him somewhat by surprise in that he was driving and
looking over his shoulder to change lanes. When he turned his head back
to center he became so vertiginous that he had to pull over and just sit
quietly until the sensation passed, approximately 30 minutes later. He
proceeded to drive home but continued to suffer from nausea and
lightheadedness upon head turning for the rest of the evening. He
reported unsteadiness for the following several days. The next incident
was even more eventful and his symptoms seemed to localize to his
right ear. Approximately 30 minutes prior to the initiation of the
dizziness, his right ear “just closed off ” and started roaring. Then the
vertigo and nausea began, this time to the point that he actually vomited.
By the next morning, he was feeling better. His ear had stopped roaring

and it seemed to “open up” but again he had some residual unsteadiness
for several days. He did note though that when he goes to sleep at night
he can hear a slight noise in his right ear he had not noticed before.
The patient’s overall medical condition is good except for some
spring hay fever symptoms and the need to lose approximately 40
pounds. The patient states that cola, pizza, and popcorn with lots of
butter and salt are his downfall.
His initial audiometric evaluation was unremarkable except for a
slight low-frequency hearing loss in his right ear. He was counseled to
return for a repeat test when he is having ear symptoms to document any
measurable changes.
The patient did return one week later with the presence of a roaring
in his right ear and residual unsteadiness from a vertiginous episode the
day prior. His right ear hearing thresholds had dropped further in the low
frequencies to a mild-moderate level. In light of the progression of his
loss and continued symptoms, it was recommended that he be referred to
an otologist for a medical evaluation and treatment and return to the
audiologist for balance testing.
Are there any terms or concepts in the above case study that are
unfamiliar to you? As you read the first chapter in this unit, pay
attention to the anatomy and physiology that may be pertinent to this
case. You will revisit this case at the end of the second chapter in this
part.
 
Introduction
 
This unit on the anatomy and pathology of the ear was written by a
clinical audiologist who has worked for years with physicians
identifying hearing disorders. However, it took the labor of teaching
students the subject of anatomy, physiology, and pathology to really
appreciate the effect one has on the other. This effect is so significant
that instruction on the physiology of the auditory system has been
blended into the instruction on anatomy in this chapter, as opposed to
separating the two topics as has been done in the other chapters in this
book. Also within this chapter are Why You Need to Know boxes that

contain brief discussions on relevant pathologies, although a more
thorough discussion of pathologies will follow in Chapter 13.
You may be interested in the anatomy of the ear from the
perspective of a future speech-language pathologist (SLP) or
audiologist. Not only will the hearing mechanism be discussed in this
chapter, but information will also be provided on the primary, basic
function of the human inner ear—the balance system. The hearing
function of our ear gets the most attention and has a critical purpose for
us humans; however, the balance system provides the necessary
information to keep us upright and oriented in relation to gravitational
forces. Hearing is critical to humans in that it is necessary for the
acquisition of our oral communication. We still lack complete
understanding of both functions of the ear. This chapter will provide you
with the basics of both hearing and balance.
An impairment of the hearing mechanism whether from injury,
disease or genetics, often causes a communication problem. Failure to
identify hearing loss early in life, no matter the etiology, can have
detrimental effects. These effects are seen as delays in speech and
language acquisition, difficulties in academic performance, and
maladjustment in social emotional development.
INCIDENCE AND PREVALENCE
Knowles Electronics has conducted six MarkeTrak surveys of the
United States hearing loss population. The MarkeTrak surveys are then
published by the Better Hearing Institute (BHI). The BHI is an
independent, not-for-profit corporation that educates the public about the
neglected problem of hearing loss and what can be done about it. As
summarized by Kochkin (2005), executive director of BHI, the hearing
loss population has grown to 31.5 million with continued major
increases in the “baby boomers” (persons born between the years 1944
and 1964) and elderly (75+ years of age) brackets. This places the total
incidence of hearing loss at approximately 10.4% of the U.S. population.
Of the total 31.5 million, there are approximately one million school-
aged children in the United States with hearing loss. A little over six
million people between 18 and 44 suffer hearing loss from a myriad of
either acquired pathologies (e.g., Ménière’s disease, otosclerosis) or

hereditary factors (e.g., genetic predisposition). Approximately 12
million baby boomers have some degree of hearing impairment. The
incidence of hearing loss for this population is approximately 15%. The
incidence of hearing loss increases to 30% to 40% for all people over 65
years of age. Using the figures from the MarkeTrak report, the incidence
for persons 65 to 74 years of age is approximately 28% and the
incidence rises to 29% for persons in the 75 to 84 year age group. Not
surprising is the 70% incidence for the 85+ age group. According to the
National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders
(1999), approximately 15% of Americans between 20 and 69 years of
age suffer from hearing loss as a result of occupational and recreational
noise exposure. The high incidence of noise-induced hearing loss is
unfortunate as this cause of hearing loss is entirely preventable.
The onset of many hearing disorders is at birth but onset can also
be extended into infancy. The cause is split fairly equally between
genetic factors and acquired environmental issues (e.g., complications
during pregnancy and/or delivery, or teratogenic causes). The
prevalence of hearing loss is estimated to be 1 to 6 per 1000 newborns
and infants (Kemper & Downs, 2000; Northern & Hayes, 1994).
Northern and Hayes developed a theoretical model to estimate the
overall prevalence of sensorineural hearing loss. Their model includes
hearing loss ranging in severity from mild to profoundly deaf and also
includes infants with developmental disabilities. The researchers
combined the estimate of 3 per 1000 (0.3%) deaf and hard of hearing
“well-babies” with the estimate of 30 per 1000 (3.0%) infants “at risk”
for developmental disabilities and concomitant hearing loss. (Note that
the prevalence of hearing loss in the “at risk” population is ten times
greater than the well-baby population). These indices yield an overall
prevalence of hearing loss in newborns and infants of approximately 5.7
per 1000 (0.57%). However, if screening is limited to only the “at risk”
population, then almost half of the well-baby nursery population will go
unidentified. It was research such as the study discussed above that
provided strong evidence for universal newborn hearing screening
(i.e., screening all newborn babies and infants whether well or at risk).
Universal newborn hearing screening programs allow for early
identification of hearing loss. The objective of such a program is not
only screening by one month of age but also diagnosis of the loss by

three months of age and enrollment in an appropriate intervention
program by six months of age. There is supportive evidence that infants
meeting this goal avoid the many delays and difficulties that can be a
consequence of hearing loss (Yoshinaga-Itano, Sedey, Coulter, & Mehl,
1998). The clinician should be well versed in the anatomy and
physiology of the hearing and balance system to be effective in the
assessment and intervention of individuals of all ages with hearing loss.
THE RANGE OF HUMAN HEARING
Study of the etiology of hearing loss consumes a large part of education
for audiologists and SLPs. There is a very strong relationship between
hearing loss and speech and language problems. Audiologists work to
identify hearing loss and SLPs assist in the habilitation of persons with
hearing impairment. Both audiologists and speech pathologists must be
able to speak a common language and much of the language of
communication disorders is derived from the anatomical bases.
The human ear has an incredible ability to detect a wide range of
sounds both in terms of frequency (i.e., pitch) and intensity (i.e.,
loudness). The average frequency range of hearing is from 20 to 20,000
Hertz (Hz); in other words, our ears can detect objects vibrating as few
as 20 times per second or as many as 20,000 times per second. In
regards to intensity, our ears can respond to a sound pressure wave
measuring as little as 20 micropascals (μPa) but can withstand (just
barely) a pressure wave as intense as 200 million µPa. As such, the
pressure of a sound that is as loud as a human can withstand is on the
magnitude of approximately 10 million times greater than the pressure
for a sound that is barely audible to the human ear. This range is
expressed on a logarithmic scale of 0 to 140 decibels (dB) sound
pressure level (SPL). Adding more detail to the above information,
human hearing sensitivity is not equal for every frequency. A graph of
the required SPL across the hearing sensitivity range is called a minimal
audibility curve. A curve is an accurate description of the plot points on
the XY graph as the lower frequencies (below ~500 Hz) and the higher
frequencies (above ~5000 Hz) require more sound pressure to become
audible to our ears. Amazingly, the frequency range to which the human
ear is most sensitive is approximately the same range as many of our

speech sounds (i.e., 125 to 8000 Hz). Can one assume that the speech
sounds used in spoken language were selected to take advantage of the
frequency range over which our ears are most sensitive? Later in this
chapter, there will be a detailed discussion of the physiology of the ear
that accounts for the increased sensitivity at a select frequency range.
Why You Need to Know
 
You are at an electronics store, primed to spend your hard earned
dollars on a state-of-the-art sound system. The salesperson is touting the
various features of each, selling you on the fact that a particular stereo
has a frequency response range up to 30,000 Hz. You are not impressed.
You know that the salesperson’s pitch is nothing but hype. You read this
chapter before going to the electronics store, so you know that the upper
end of the stereo’s frequency range is beyond the capacity of the typical
human ear to perceive. You know that any frequency above 20,000 Hz
will be completely lost on humans. You realize that your pet is going to
be the only member of your household who will be able to fully
appreciate the entire frequency range of your new stereo system (a
dog’s hearing range extends to 60,000 Hz and a cat’s range extends to
85,000 Hz). You are not willing to spend several hundred dollars on a
stereo system only an animal can fully appreciate—even if the animal is
your beloved pet!
 
Anatomy and Physiology of the Auditory and Vestibular
Systems
 
Anatomically, the hearing mechanism can be divided into four parts:
outer ear, middle ear, inner ear, and neural pathway (see Figure 12-
1). The primary structures of the outer ear include the pinna (or auricle)
and the external auditory meatus (EAM, or ear canal). The middle ear
consists of the tympanic membrane (TM; commonly known as the
eardrum, which forms the boundary between the outer and middle
ears), ossicles (malleus, incus, and stapes; collectively known as the
ossicular chain), Eustachian (or auditory) tube, and the middle ear

cavity (a space). The inner ear includes the cochlea, vestibule, and
semicircular canals. Finally, the neural pathway includes the
vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIII), which consists of the
combined cochlear and vestibular branches as it courses through
different levels of the brainstem.
 
Figure 12-1  Overview of the entire ear with the four anatomical
divisions. (1) The outer ear gathers the acoustic pressure wave and
directs it to the ear canal. (2) The middle ear acts on the acoustic
pressure wave mechanically, contributing by vibrating against the
fluid-filled inner ear. (3) The fluid of the inner ear
hydromechanically stimulates the specialized structures of hearing
transforming the energy to the electrical stimulation received by the
neural fibers. (4) The neural pathway carries the electrical energy to
the brain, so that the processes of hearing and balance are
accomplished. (Reprinted with permission from Anatomical Chart
Company.)

 
The four parts of the auditory system provide their own particular
contribution to the pressure wave created by a sound source that is
ultimately “heard” by the individual. A pressure wave consists of a
repeating pattern of high- and low-pressure regions (relative to
atmospheric pressure) moving through a medium. The structures of the
ear basically function as an energy transducer converting pressure waves
into the electrical energy transmitted to the brain for processing. The
outer ear acts on the pressure wave by gathering it into the system. The
middle ear then acts on the wave mechanically completing its
contribution by vibrating against the fluid-filled inner ear. The fluid
within the inner ear hydromechanically stimulates the specialized
structures of hearing transforming their energy to the electrical
stimulation needed by the neural fibers. The neural fibers carry the
electrical energy to the central centers for audition so that hearing can
take place.
STRUCTURES OF THE AUDITORY CONDUCTIVE
SYSTEM
The anatomical structures of the outer and middle ear are known as the
conductive auditory system as they serve to conduct the acoustic signal
to the sensory and neural receptors (i.e., the cochlea and cochlear branch
of cranial nerve VIII).
Outer Ear
 
Pinna and EAM
 
The pinna or auricle is the most obvious anatomical structure, and is
usually what most people think of when a person says the word “ear”
(see Figure 12-2). The framework of the pinna is made of cartilage,
known as the auricular cartilage. There are several muscles that attach
the pinna to the head, reverting back to other mammals that turn their

ears to localize sound. Most humans have no motor control of these
muscles, but there are exceptions. (Every family seems to have one elder
relative who likes to entertain small children by voluntarily wiggling
their ears.) The helix is the outermost portion of the auricular cartilage
that curves to form the ear’s cupped shape. Darwin’s tubercle is a
cartilaginous protuberance which presents as a thickening on the helix.
The tubercle is dominantly inherited but still may or may not be visible.
This tubercle is seen as a “throwback” to the higher primates (hence the
term Darwin in the name). The helix itself ends inferiorly to form the
lobule (or earlobe). The lobule is the most common site for ear piercing
as it is composed of tough connective tissue lacking the firmness and
elasticity of cartilage. The lobule has a large blood supply, serving to
help warm the ears in cold climates. The earlobe contains many nerve
endings and for some people is an erogenous zone. Earlobes elongate
slightly with age (and gravity). Human earlobes may be detached (free)
or attached. We have our relatives to thank for this characteristic. Free
or detached lobes are dominantly inherited and attached earlobes are
inherited through recessive gene transmission. The antihelix is another
prominent ridge and ends inferiorly to form the antitragus which serves
to form the lower border of the concha bowl. The tragus is a flap of
cartilage on the anterior wall of the ear canal. Pressing on the tragus
serves nicely to close off the canal to dampen unwanted sound. There
are no two pinnas alike; even differences exit between the two pinnas of
the same individual. It is one part of the aural anatomy that can be easily
examined and studied.

 
Figure 12-2  Structure of the human pinna (auricle) with pertinent
landmarks. (Reprinted with permission from Anatomical Chart
Company.)
 
The EAM (or ear canal) is continuous with the cartilage of the
pinna to about one-third of its depth, but then turns to bone for the
remaining two-thirds of its depth (the bone is the temporal bone of the
skull). The pinna and EAM reach adult size by about 9 to 12 years of
age. The location of the pinna in relation to the other features of the head
is very predictable (see Figure 12-3). Moderate deviations of the
relationship between the pinna and other facial structures may signal a
congenital disorder or syndrome.

 
Figure 12-3  The location of the pinna in relation to the other
features of the head. Note the alignment of the pinna with the
canthus (corner) of the eye. (Reprinted with permission from
Nettina, S.M. (2001). The Lippincott manual of nursing practice
(7th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The human ear is a paired organ; one benefit of this is in the
localization of a sound source. For example, acoustic pressure waves
directed toward the right ear will have greater amplitude, contain a
broader frequency spectrum, and reach the right ear sooner than the
same wave traveling around the head to the left ear opposite from the
source. These interaural differences alert the brain and allow humans to
locate the source of a sound. The shape of the pinna also acts as a
directional microphone. Sounds arriving from behind are dampened
slightly compared to sounds that hit the pinna directly from the front.
This effect helps us separate the signal from a background sound.
The pinna with the help of the concha bowl (refer back to Figure
12-2) collects and directs the acoustic waves down the EAM. The
meatus is basically a tube with the tympanic membrane (TM) being the
internal, closed end. Therefore, the ear canal acts as a closed tube
resonator having its own resonant characteristics. Remembering your
high school physics class, certain frequencies will get either enhanced or
dampened. The length of the ear canal is approximately 2.5 cm or 25
mm in adults and its diameter of approximately 7 mm will amplify the
incoming acoustic wave as much as 20 dB at 2500 Hz. In all, with the

addition of the resonance of the concha bowl, there is a 5 to 20 dB
boost of the incoming acoustic wave in the frequency range between
1500 and 7000 Hz.
The pinna and the EAM also have a nonacoustic function. The
depth and curvature of the ear canal (a somewhat irregular “S” shape)
serves to protect the TM from direct injury. However, small children
have been known to place beans, beads, and other various “treasures”
down the ear canal.
The ear canal has a self-cleaning function. It is lined with epithelial
skin cells. In the ear canal, the skin does not slough off like our other
skin cells; instead, the skin migrates along the canal to the entrance from
the depth of the eardrum to be sloughed off to the outside. This is called
epithelial migration. The outer one-third of the canal is also where
cerumen or ear wax is produced. Cerumen, a yellowish-brown, waxy
substance is the normal product of sebaceous glands (i.e., sweat glands)
secreting their oily substance onto the cilia, the fine hairs located at the
entrance to the canal. Together they protect the canal by repelling water
and expelling the dead skin cells. Cerumen is also slightly acidic, which
discourages the growth of bacteria and fungi that would otherwise grow
in the warm moist environment of the ear canal. For the most part,
cerumen build-up is not a problem. The dead skin migrates to the
entrance of the ear canal. The action of the cilia, plus the mechanical
action of the jaw during talking and chewing, serves to massage the
cerumen out of the canal. Impaction of cerumen is typically caused by
one’s attempt to mechanically clean the canal with a cotton-tip
applicator or other ominous tool (your grandmother was correct when
she told you not to place anything smaller than your elbow down your
ear canal). To inspect for cerumen one performs otoscopy using an
otoscope. The “S” curve of the canal will need to be straightened out.
This is accomplished by pulling the helix up and back. This will direct
the light of the otoscope down the canal for visualization of its contents
and the eardrum.
Middle Ear
 
Tympanic Membrane

 
The TM (or eardrum) defines the border between the outer and middle
ear (see Figure 12-4). It is a true membrane in that it is very thin, having
a very small mass. A healthy TM is a relatively transparent, pearl-gray
allowing the observer to identify several structures behind it in the
middle ear. Its thinness and small mass make it very mobile, yet it is
also very sturdy. The TM resides at an approximate 55° angle at the end
of the ear canal. It is slightly taller than it is wide and is concave in
shape so that its center is displaced medially, toward the structures of the
middle ear cavity. For most of its circumference, the TM fits in a small
sulcus in the bony wall of the EAM called the annular or tympanic
sulcus. Since the outer ring of the TM is fixed into the sulcus, not all of
the surface of the TM can vibrate. The effective vibrating area of the TM
is approximately 55 mm2.
 
Figure 12-4  The tympanic membrane (TM) or eardrum. A.
Artist’s rendition of a “normal” TM. (Reprinted with permission
from Tank, P.W., Gest. T.R. (2008). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
atlas of anatomy. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.) B. A
“normal” TM (in vivo) with visible landmarks. Using otoscopy, the
observer should be able to identify several structures that lie behind
a healthy TM. (Reprinted with permission from Moore, K.L., Agur,
A. (2002). Essential clinical anatomy (2nd ed.). Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The TM consists of three layers. The central fibrous layer of the
TM accounts for its sturdiness. This central or intermediate layer is

comprised of radial and circular fibers held together by connective
tissue, and sandwiched between the two remaining layers. The
outermost (i.e., lateral) layer consists of a thin epithelium that is
continuous with the lining of the ear canal. The innermost or medial
layer is a mucous membrane that is continuous with the lining of the
middle ear cavity. The fibers of the intermediate (i.e., middle) layer are
found mostly throughout the TM except in a small superior portion.
Because of the sparseness of the fibers in this superior region, it is
referred to as the pars flaccida. The remaining fibrous portion of the
TM is known as the pars tensa. The pars flaccida is not acoustically
active, but serves to equalize pressure by moving outward when the air
in the middle ear cavity is compressed by inward movement of the pars
tensa, serving in essence as a relief valve.
Otoscopy is the primary means of inspecting the TM. Visualized on
a healthy TM are the tiny blood vessels that course its surface. Another
landmark seen when performing otoscopy is the cone of light, which is
the reflection of the otoscope light due to the concavity of the TM. The
cone of light will be present at approximately 5 o’clock for the right ear
and 7 o’clock for the left. Many physicians use the presence or absence
of the cone of light to aid in their diagnosis of middle ear disease. In
cases of disease due to poor ventilation of the middle ear cavity, the TM
tends to displace medially or inward due to the negative pressure within
the middle ear cavity. This typically causes the cone of light to be absent
during otoscopy. When there is an absence of the cone of light, many
physicians will report that the eardrum looks “dull.”
Why You Need to Know
 
Poor ventilation from Eustachian tube dysfunction results in negative
pressure within the middle ear cavity. The pars flaccida region of the
TM may become displaced inward. When this condition becomes
problematic, the physician must attempt to equalize the negative
pressure within the middle ear cavity to the more positive atmospheric
pressure. This is done by placing a pressure equalization (PE) tube in
the TM. The pars tensa is the region where these tubes are placed
because of its ability to retain the PE tube for a relatively long period of
time. The epithelial tissue of the eardrum will eventually grow under the

tube and expel it from the surface. The TM can spontaneously perforate
from infection or be perforated from trauma. It can usually heal itself
from small perforations but when a large perforation typically does not
heal on its own, a surgical procedure called a tympanoplasty can be
performed. The middle ear is naturally sealed off from water exposure,
so when a TM perforation allows water (and the bacteria that
accompany it) to enter the middle ear space, it can lead to an increased
risk of middle ear infection.
 
 
Figure 12-5  The ossicles with pertinent landmarks. Located in the
middle ear space, the malleus, incus, and stapes are collectively
referred to as the ossicular chain. (Reprinted with permission from
Tank, P.W., & Gest, T.R. (2008). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
atlas of anatomy. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Ossicular Chain
 
Portions of the ossicles can be identified through the transparent TM
during otoscopy. The cavity medial to the TM is called the middle ear
cavity or space. Located within the space is a chain of three linked
bones. Collectively they are referred to as the ossicular chain, or ossicles

(see Figure 12-5). These three bones are among the smallest in the entire
human body; one can place all three bones on the surface of a dime and
still have room to spare! As one proceeds medially from the TM, the
first and largest bone in the chain is called the malleus which is
approximately 9 mm in length. During otoscopy, one can see the long
process of the malleus, called the manubrium. The manubrium appears
as an opaque whitish streak behind the TM coursing downward at about
one o’clock in the right ear and 11 o’clock in the left. The manubrium is
firmly attached to the medial surface of the TM. It is the manubrium that
draws the TM inward toward the middle ear space giving the TM its
concave shape. The most depressed part of this concavity is named the
umbo. In addition to the manubrium, there are two projections off the
malleus called processes. They are the anterior and lateral processes,
named for the location of their anatomical directions. The lateral process
is in the anterosuperior quadrant of the TM, and appears as if it is
“pointing” at the observer when seen through a healthy, transparent TM.
The anterior process cannot usually be visualized with otoscopy. The
pars tensa and pars flaccida appear to be divided by a fold, known as the
malleolar fold, running along the upper portion of the TM. This fold is
created by an anterior attachment of a ligament band to the anterior
process of the manubrium and a posterior attachment of a ligament band
to the lateral process of the manubrium.
The second bone in the ossicular chain is the incus. It weighs
slightly more than the malleus but is shorter, being approximately 7 mm
in length. Using otoscopy, only a portion of the incus, its long process,
can be visualized through a healthy transparent TM. The long process
hangs down parallel to the manubrium and the short process of the
incus projects posteriorly. The body of the incus and the bulky head of
the malleus cannot be seen while performing otoscopy. They are
suspended above the level of the TM in the uppermost region of the
middle ear cavity called the epitympanic recess, or attic. The head of
the malleus and body of the incus articulate with each other, forming the
malleoincudal joint. There appears to be only limited range of motion
of this joint.
The third and most medial bone in the ossicular chain is the stapes.
The stapes is not only the smallest of the three bones that comprise the
ossicular chain, but is also the smallest bone in the human body, at a

mere 3.5 mm in length. The angle of the stapes, along with its distance
medially from the TM, makes it invisible to the otoscope. The head of
the stapes articulates with the lenticular process of the incus, forming
the incudostapedial joint.
The neck of the stapes bifurcates to become the anterior crus and
posterior crus. The two crura form an arch in their attachment to the
base, which is called the footplate. The footplate of the stapes inserts
into the oval window and is sealed by the elastic annular ligament in
much the same way as the TM is held in place within the tympanic
sulcus. The annular ligament firmly holds the footplate in place while
still allowing for efficient vibration within the oval window.
Why You Need to Know
 
Chronic middle ear disease or traumatic injury can fairly easily disrupt
the incudostapedial joint, causing a disarticulation. This condition
results in a moderate loss in the conduction of sound to the inner ear.
Surgeons may attempt to repair the integrity of the chain by
reconstructing the damaged ossicles.
 
The bones of the ossicular chain are suspended by ligaments
attached to strategic places within the walls of the middle ear cavity.
These attachments take place in most anatomical directions: lateral,
anterior, superior, and posterior. The ligaments are designed to suspend
the ossicular chain without interfering with its vibratory efficiency.
Stapedius and Tensor Tympani Muscles
 
Two important striated muscles attach themselves to two of the three
ossicles. The stapedius tendon inserts onto the neck of the stapes, hence
its name. The body of the stapedius muscle is deeply embedded in bone
arising from the posterior wall of the middle ear cavity; only its tendon
emerges from a bony projection, the pyramidal eminence, to attach to
the stapes. The stapedius muscle is innervated by its own branch of the
facial nerve (cranial nerve VII). The muscle serves to contract in
response to sudden loud sounds. Muscle action rotates the stapes in a
posterior direction. The tensor tympani tendon enters the middle ear

cavity from the anterior wall. Similarly to the stapedius muscle, the body
of the tensor tympani muscle is housed within a bony canal so that only
its tendon enters the middle ear space. The tendon of the tensor tympani
muscle attaches to the neck of the malleus. The tensor tympani is
innervated by the trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V). When this muscle
contracts, it pulls the malleus in an anteromedial plane reducing the
range of motion of the TM. The dual action of stapedius and tensor
tympani contraction (termed the acoustic reflex) serves to stiffen the
ossicular chain, thereby reducing the admittance of the acoustic signal
particularly for lower frequency sounds. Therefore, contraction of these
muscles is theorized to be a protective mechanism for the cochlea by
preventing the stapes from excessively vibrating in the oval window (to
be discussed later). However, for most humans the response time for this
action is too slow to prevent hearing damage from exposure to sudden,
excessive sound (e.g., a shotgun blast or a firecracker exploding).
Why You Need to Know
 
Audiologists measure the intensity level that triggers the acoustic reflex
contraction by monitoring the change in the admittance of the stimulus.
On average, it takes 85 dB SPL to elicit a contraction of the stapedius
muscle (Gelfand, 1984). The presence or absence of the stapedius reflex
contraction is an indirect measure of the integrity of both the cochlear
nerve (cranial nerve VIII) and facial nerve (cranial nerve VII) at the
level of the lower brainstem (Borg, 1973). The intense acoustic stimulus
must travel the reflex arc intact through the cochlear nerve, along the
auditory pathway to the level of the superior olivary complex to
communicate with the nuclei of the facial nerve, so that the stimulus will
trigger a response from the stapedius muscle. There are several
pathological lesions that can interrupt the normal acoustic reflex
circuit. For example, a lesion on cranial nerve VII or VIII can elevate
the intensity level necessary for contraction or eliminate the muscle
contraction altogether. Audiologists utilize a special instrument for
testing the acoustic reflex, called an immittance meter.
 
Middle Ear Cavity

 
The middle ear cavity is an air-filled space lined with a mucous
membrane. It is located in the petrous portion of the temporal bone of
the skull and is approximately two cubic centimeters (2 cm3) in volume.
The middle ear cavity is surrounded on all sides by bone except its
lateral wall, which houses the TM. It is best known for housing the
ossicles but has numerous other significant landmarks. The space as a
whole is more hourglass-shaped than cube-shaped as shown in Figure
12-6. It is taller than it is wide, with a narrowing in the middle and a
wider space inferiorly and superiorly. The wide upper space of the
cavity is known as the epitympanic recess or attic. As mentioned earlier,
the epitympanic recess is where the head of the malleus and the body of
the incus reside.
For the purpose of examination, the middle ear cavity will be
referenced by its walls in the various anatomical directions. The entire
lateral wall of the cavity is occupied by the TM. By removing the lateral
wall, the remaining contents of the middle ear cavity can be examined.
Along the posterior wall in the area of the epitympanic recess is the
aditus. The aditus is the passageway that leads to the air cells within the
mastoid process of the temporal bone of the skull. The air in the middle
ear cavity communicates through this passageway with the mastoid air
cells. The purpose of the air cells is simply to lessen the weight of the
head, since the temporal bone is not solid. If the petrous portion of the
temporal bone was solid, the human head would weigh several ounces
more than it does. Another significant landmark on the posterior wall
just below the level of the aditus is the pyramidal eminence of the
stapedius muscle.


 
 
Figure 12-6  The middle ear cavity. Its contents are referenced by
its walls in the various anatomical directions. Illustrated are four

views of the middle ear cavity. A. The tympanic membrane (TM)
comprises the lateral wall. Looking into the ear canal, some
structures of the middle ear cavity can be viewed through the
transparent TM. (Reprinted with permission from Tank, P.W.,
Gest, T.R. (2008). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins atlas of anatomy.
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.) B. A view of the
medial wall of the cavity with the TM, malleus, and incus removed.
(Reprinted with permission from Tank, P.W., Gest, T.R. (2008).
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins atlas of anatomy. Baltimore:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.) C. Coronal section of the cavity
facing the posterior mastoid wall. (Modified with permission from
Moore, K.L., Dalley, 0A.F., Agur, A.M. (2009). Clinically oriented
anatomy (6th ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.) D.
Inside the middle ear cavity looking laterally at the tympanic
membrane. (Reprinted with permission from Tank, P.W., Gest,
T.R. (2008). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins atlas of anatomy.
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The inferior or jugular wall (i.e., the floor) of the middle ear cavity
is relatively unremarkable. It consists of a thin plate of bone which
separates the tympanic cavity from the jugular bulb that lies just
beneath its surface. The superior wall, also called the tegmental wall or
roof, is not known for any specific landmark but is significant in that
only a thin plate of bone separates the middle ear cavity from the cranial
cavity where the brain resides. Severe or chronic infection in the middle
ear space could lead to an abscess in this wall resulting in an infection
invading the brain. From studying the areas surrounding the middle ear
cavity, it is obvious that complications of recurrent untreated infection
can result in mastoiditis or brain abscess.
The remaining walls of the middle ear space have numerous
relevant landmarks. The anterior wall is noted for the orifice (i.e.,
entrance) of the Eustachian tube (ET). The ET orifice is bone that is
continuous with the middle ear wall but the ET terminates in the
nasopharynx as cartilage. This structure will be examined more
thoroughly later. Parallel to the ET runs the tensor tympani muscle. The
tensor tympani muscle and the orifice of the ET are separated by a thin

curved projection or process of bone called the cochleariform process.
The tendon of the tensor tympani passes over this process as it exits the
anterior wall on its way to attach to the malleus, and in doing so it gains
a little leverage when contracting the ossicles. Running along the outside
of the anterior wall is a portion of the carotid canal.
Within this area of the middle ear space, the facial nerve is housed
in a bony canal. The canal runs from the anterior wall superior to the
cochleariform process, then curves across within the medial wall and
turns downward to exit deep into bone on the posterior wall. In this
immediate area are three branches of the facial nerve. Two of the three
deserve mention: the stapedial branch and the chorda tympani branch.
The chorda tympani conveys taste sensation from the anterior two-third
of the tongue. It traverses the middle ear cavity between the long process
of the incus and the manubrium of the malleus. The stapedial branch
innervates the stapedius muscle. When otologists perform ear surgery,
they are careful to identify the facial nerve canal as well as the branches
of the facial nerve. Surgeons try not to disturb the chorda tympani
although it can tolerate being displaced somewhat during a procedure.
The patient may experience some odd metallic taste sensations during
postoperative recovery. The facial nerve canal is strictly avoided during
any surgical procedure. If the facial nerve is disturbed, the patient can
suffer permanent facial weakness or paralysis.
The medial wall, also known as the labyrinthine wall, contains
landmarks related to the inner ear. Most notable is the oval window. The
oval window separates the air-filled middle ear cavity from the fluid-
filled contents of the inner ear. The footplate of the stapes rests in the
oval window in an anteroposterior orientation and is held in place by the
annular ligament. There appears to be a greater degree of attachment of
the footplate anteriorly than posteriorly. As mentioned previously,
although the footplate is held in place by the annular ligament, it does
not adversely affect the vibratory action of the ossicular chain onto the
oval window. The vibratory action appears to be more like a swinging
gate rather than a plunger motion.
Why You Need to Know
 
The stapes may become attached or “fixed” to the surrounding bone by

abnormal bone growth. The bone growth is not life threatening and
often the only symptom is a roaring tinnitus and a resultant hearing
loss. The condition, known as otosclerosis, is typically identified using
audiometry and immittance measures. The bone growth can be
removed and a prosthetic device can be used to “replace” the stapes,
thereby restoring the integrity of the ossicular chain.
 
A second structure leading to the inner ear (specifically the
cochlea) is also located along the medial wall of the middle ear cavity. It
is the round window. The round window separates the middle ear
cavity from the scala tympani, a duct within the cochlea. The round
window is covered by a flexible membrane. Vibration of the stapes in
the oval window compresses the fluid within the cochlea, thereby
creating a wave. The inward movement of the stapes footplate is
allowed because the round window membrane yields to the fluid wave
by bulging toward the middle ear cavity. Between the oval and round
windows is the promontory, a distinctive bulge in the wall created by
the first (i.e., basal) turn of the cochlea on the other side.
Superior to the oval window is the bony prominence of the lateral
or horizontal semicircular canal of the vestibular system. The
prominence is seen as a bulge on the medial wall. The prominence is
thin and can be eroded with severe chronic middle ear disease causing
infection to invade the vestibular system. The facial nerve canal
(discussed earlier) runs across the medial wall to exit on the posterior
wall. It runs between the lateral semicircular canal prominence and the
oval window.
Contained within the middle ear space are all the attachments that
serve to suspend and balance the ossicles. There are eight in all. Three
ligaments suspend the malleus: superior, anterior, and lateral malleolar
ligaments. The tendon of the tensor tympani muscle also serves to
suspend the malleus. The malleus is attached laterally to the TM. The
incus is suspended in place by the posterior and superior incudal
ligaments. The stapes is suspended in the oval window by the annular
ligament and is also suspended by the tendon of the stapedius muscle.
These attachments balance the ossicles so that the rotational axis is very
near to the center of gravity (CoG). This arrangement allows the TM and
ossicular chain to operate as a unit. The TM and ossicles initiate and

cease vibration synchronously.
Eustachian Tube
 
The orifice of the ET was mentioned as a landmark within the anterior
wall of the middle ear cavity. It was named for the Italian anatomist and
physician Eustachius who lived in the mid-1500s. The ET is the
passageway leading from the nasopharynx (just above the soft palate in
proximity to the uppermost region of the pharynx) to the anterior wall of
the middle ear cavity. The ET opens to replenish the air in the middle
ear cavity. For the middle ear to function optimally, the ET must
equalize the air pressure within the middle ear and the “atmospheric” air
pressure that inhabits the ear canal and impinges upon the eardrum.
Atmospheric pressure can vary greatly. For example, air pressure is
much lower on Pike’s Peak in Colorado than in New Orleans, a city that
is predominantly below sea level. The ET allows humans to withstand
these great variances in air pressure so that the hearing mechanism will
function properly.
The middle ear portion of the ET (i.e., the orifice) is open and fixed
within the temporal bone. As one proceeds toward the nasopharynx, the
bone gives way to cartilage (approximately one-third of its length is
bone, with the final two-thirds being cartilage). Where the bone
transitions into cartilage, the ET becomes quite narrow in a region called
the isthmus. The cartilaginous portion of the ET normally remains
closed at rest and opens by the action of two muscles—the levator veli
palatini and the tensor veli palatini.
The ET is approximately 35 mm (3.5 cm) in length in adults. The
adult ET is angled downward and forward to set at about a 45° angle. In
children the tube is in a more horizontal position. As the child’s head
grows, it elongates and migrates into a more vertical position. The ET
terminates in the nasopharynx where it is surrounded by lymphoid tissue
known as the adenoids.
Why You Need to Know
 
Based on work by researchers such as Brodsky and Koch (1993), it has
been demonstrated that the adenoids can contribute to recurrent or

chronic ear disease as they can harbor a chronic infection. The tissue
swells as it reacts to bacteria or other pathogens. In children who have
suffered multiple upper respiratory infections (URIs), the adenoids are
often very large. The enlarged lymphoid tissue may block the
nasopharyngeal opening of the Eustachian tube (ET). Since the ET
passageway is lined with mucous membrane, a URI can also cause
inflammation of the mucosa leading to further obstruction. An inflamed
ET cannot open, and therefore cannot equalize the air pressure within
the middle ear to outside atmospheric air pressure. The air pressure in
the middle ear space then becomes negative by comparison to outside
air pressure. The negative air pressure will cause the mucous membrane
that lines the middle ear cavity to secrete fluid. The fluid fills the middle
ear space, negatively impacting the ossicular chain by adversely
affecting its ability to vibrate. A temporary conductive hearing loss is a
very likely outcome of this condition.
 
The levator veli palatini and tensor veli palatini wrap around the
cartilaginous portion of the ET. The two muscles serve a dual purpose in
that they assist in opening the cartilaginous ET as well as act upon the
soft palate (i.e., velum). It is not known exactly how the muscles open
the ET but many anatomists believe that the tensor veli palatini is
responsible for dilation whereas the levator veli palatini pulls the
cartilage in a medial direction along with the uvula.
When the ET opens, atmospheric air rushes through to replenish the
middle ear space. The ET can be forced to open by the valsalva
maneuver, but natural opening of the ET takes place during yawning,
swallowing, chewing or talking. At the same time the ET dilates, the soft
palate is raised (primarily by the action of the levator veli palatini) to
block or separate the nasal cavity from the oral cavity. The raising of the
soft palate shields the ET from food or drink in the oral cavity so that
they are not injected into the nasal passageway and out of the nose
and/or into the middle ear cavity via the ET. The raising of the soft
palate closes off ventilation from the oropharynx and ensures that only
nasally inhaled air passes through to the middle ear.
Why You Need to Know
 

Years ago, surgeons looked for a way to surgically repair a poor
functioning Eustachian tube. All attempts failed. It did not appear that
correction of negative middle ear pressure could be accomplished by
surgical intervention. Surgeons then began to examine other ways in
which negative middle ear pressure could be alleviated. Pressure
equalization (PE) tubes were first developed to assist combat pilots in
equalizing middle ear pressure. They are now commonplace for children
who suffer from chronic Eustachian tube dysfunction. Complications
from middle ear disease occur less frequently now because the surgeon
can bypass the dysfunctional ET by placing PE tubes through the
tympanic membrane to equalize pressure via the ear canal.
 
Why You Need to Know
 
Chronic patulous (i.e., open) Eustachian tubes can cause a patient
severe difficulty. The patulous tube acts as a sound conduit, directing
our own vocalizations and breathing up into the middle ear cavity.
Patients have an awareness of these sounds (known as autophonia) as
well as an awareness that their tympanic membranes are vibrating with
inhalation and exhalation (Mencher, Gerber, & McCombe, 1997). This
can be very disconcerting to the patient. This condition may result from
dramatic weight loss or chronic use of decongestants. Historically,
physicians have not been very successful at relieving patients’
symptoms.
 
Transformer Action of the TM and Ossicular Chain
 
It was previously discussed how the ear canal is capable of amplifying
an incoming pressure wave. Once again, thanks to physics, we will see
how the TM and the ossicular chain work together to further contribute
to the amplification of the acoustic signal. The purpose of the TM and
ossicular chain is to transform the acoustic pressure waves that hit the
TM into mechanical energy that in turn can be used to set up hydraulic
pressure waves within the inner ear. When this transformer action
takes place, the net result is amplification of intensity of the incoming

signal of approximately 27 dB. While the middle ear is transforming the
acoustic waves to fluid waves, it is overcoming the resistance of the
outside air to the fluid-filled inner ear. Because air and fluid have
different densities, there is an impedance mismatch between the two
mediums. Physics teaches us that for energy to flow with the least
resistance (i.e., impedance) or the least amount of energy loss, it must
flow continuously through a similar medium. Air functions at a
resistance of 41.5 ohms and cochlear fluid at a resistance of 161,000
ohms, representing a differential ratio of 3880:1 (Wever & Lawrence,
1954). Obviously, the impedance properties of these two media are very
different. If the ear had no way of matching these resistances (i.e.,
making the differences smaller), only one-tenth of 1% of the sound
carried on the air pressure wave would pass to fluid, whereas the
remaining 99.9% would be reflected back through the outer ear.
Therefore, one of the primary functions of the ossicular chain is to act as
a mechanical transformer. It accomplishes this in three very distinct
ways: area advantage, curved membrane buckling, and lever action.
The area advantage is the largest contributor to the transformer
action of the middle ear.
As illustrated in Figure 12-7, one way to increase pressure is to
decrease the area that the force is being distributed across (pressure =
force/area). The effective vibrating area of the TM is 55 mm2, whereas
the area of the oval window by comparison is about 3.2 mm2. This
means that the area of the TM is 17 times larger than the area of the oval
window. By focusing all the acoustic energy from the TM to a smaller
area (the oval window), pressure is increased considerably. The 17:1
size differential of the TM to the oval window translates into an increase
of acoustic pressure of about 25 dB (Bekesy, 1960).

 
Figure 12-7  The large vibrating area of the tympanic membrane in
relation to the smaller vibrating area of the oval window (pressure
= force/area). (Modified with permission from Emanuel, D.C.,
Letowski, T. (2007). Hearing science. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.)
 
 
Figure 12-8  Curved membrane coupling. The tympanic membrane
vibrates in multiple segments.
 
The second variable in transformer action is curved membrane
buckling, as illustrated in Figure 12-8. The TM does not vibrate as a
whole unit. Instead, it vibrates in segments, with those portions that are
least anchored being more readily set into vibration. The segments of the
TM closer to the annular sulcus and the manubrium are more resistant to
displacement. The force displacing the TM is distributed in multiple
segments rather than being displaced in one large segment. This action
serves to increase pressure.
The last impedance matching function is accomplished by the
ossicular chain acting as a class 1 lever. As Figure 12-9 shows, the
efficiency of a lever is increased when the pivot point is placed closer to
the load being displaced. In this case the long leg of the lever is the

manubrium, the pivot point is the malleoincudal joint, the long process
of the incus is the shorter section of our lever, and the load being
displaced is the stapes in the oval window. In the end, only a slight
amount of pressure placed on the manubrium is necessary to yield an
increase in pressure at the oval window. This lever action effect adds an
additional gain of 2 dB to the acoustic signal (Wever & Lawrence,
1954). With all three transformer variables acting together, the result is a
gain of approximately 27 to 30 dB for the incoming signal. Any disease
process or injury that might disrupt even one of these events will result
in a significant loss of hearing by adversely affecting the transformer
action of the middle ear.
 
Figure 12-9  The simple lever action advantage of the ossicular
chain. A. Longer leg (manubrium). B. Fulcrum or pivot point
(malleoincudal joint). C. Shorter leg (long process of incus). D.
Mass (stapes footplate in the oval window).
 
STRUCTURES OF THE INNER EAR LABYRINTH
The inner ear is also referred to as the labyrinth because of its maze-
like complex structure. It contains the end organs of two sensory
systems: the vestibular system and the auditory system.

The inner ear is housed deep in the petrous portion of the temporal
bone of the skull. As Figure 12-10 illustrates, the inner ear itself is
divided into three sections: (1) the cochlea of the auditory system, (2)
the vestibule of the vestibular system, and (3) the semicircular canals of
the vestibular system. The entire inner ear, whether the vestibular
system or the auditory system, is housed within a bony (osseous)
labyrinth or capsule. Contained within the bony labyrinth is a chambered
membranous, epithelium-lined channel. The membranous labyrinth fits
within the bony labyrinth and follows its contours. This is mostly true
for the vestibular system. However, as seen in Figure 12-11, the
channels within the cochlea have a slightly different orientation. All of
the channels found within both the bony and membranous labyrinths are
filled with fluid.
 
Figure 12-10  The two systems and the three sections of the inner
ear. (Reprinted with permission from Tank, P.W., Gest, T.R.
(2008). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins atlas of anatomy. Baltimore:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

 
Figure 12-11  The relationship of the bony labyrinth and the
membranous labyrinth channels throughout the inner ear. The small
views depict how the membranous labyrinth fits within the bony
labyrinth of the vestibular system and how within the cochlea the
membranous channel is pulled to one side with attachments to the
bony labyrinth. These attachments divide the bony labyrinth into
two sections, one above and one below the membranous labyrinth.
(Reprinted with permission from Tank, P.W., Gest, T.R. (2008).
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins atlas of anatomy. Baltimore:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The two fluids of the inner ear are perilymph and endolymph.
Each fluid has its own distinct chemistry. Perilymph fills the channel
formed between the outer wall of the membranous labyrinth and the
inner wall of the bony labyrinth. Perilymph resembles the chemistry of
extracellular fluid, being high in sodium (Na+) and calcium (Ca++) and
low in potassium (K+). Endolymph, the fluid within the membranous
labyrinth, has a high potassium (K+) content and low sodium (Na+) and
calcium (Ca++) concentration. The endolymphatic fluids of the
membranous labyrinth of the vestibular and auditory systems are
interconnected by a series of ducts forming one continuous endolymph
filled system—the ductus reuniens and another small diversion, the
endolymphatic sac. The endolymphatic sac lies in a bony niche within

the cranium. Nowhere do the endolymph and the perilymph fluids of the
two labyrinths communicate with one another.
Structures of the Vestibular System
 
Vestibule
 
The vestibule is the central egg-shaped cavity of the inner ear. The
vestibule lies medial to the middle ear, having the oval window as its
lateral border. Suspended within the perilymph is the vestibule’s
membranous labyrinth. Within the membranous labyrinth are two end
organs known as the utricle and saccule.
The saccule lies on the medial wall and is continuous with the
cochlea. The utricle is the larger of the two and is continuous with the
semicircular canals. The semicircular canals open into the utricle by way
of five openings. The posterior and anterior semicircular canals share
one opening at the common crus. Figure 12-12 shows a cutaway of the
utricle and saccule exposing the receptor end organ called the macula.
The two maculae are oriented so that they are at right angles to each
other. The macula of the utricle responds to horizontal stimulation and
the macula of the saccule responds to vertical stimulation. The major
role then of the utricle and saccule is to keep the body vertically oriented
with respect to gravity and linear acceleration.
The maculae contain biological sensors called hair cells. Each hair
cell is innervated by afferent nerve fibers. The hair cells convert the
stimulation from gravitational or linear forces into a synapse with the
nerve fibers that ultimately make up the vestibular portion of the
vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIII). Hair cells are so named
because cilia project from their cell bodies. These stereocilia can
number between 50 and 100 per hair cell. They project from the cell
body and are ordered to angle by height. There is one particularly tall
cilium (called the kinocilium) located on the perimeter of each hair cell.
Whether or not a hair cell is excited depends on which direction its
stereocilia are stimulated. When they are bent toward the kinocilium the
firing rate increases and bending away from the kinocilium decreases
the firing rate to the vestibular nerve. The lineup of hair cells within

each macula is arranged so that they lie in different directions. A single
sheet of hair cells can detect motion forward and back and side to side.
The maculae can therefore cover any motion in a horizontal or vertical
plane. The maculae structure consists of a cluster of hair cell bodies with
their stereocilia embedded in an epithelial gelatinous membrane called
the otolithic membrane. Situated on top of the otolithic membrane are
tiny calcium carbonate crystals called otoconia. The hair cells are
stimulated when linear acceleration in any direction causes a weighted
shift of the otoconia on the otolithic membrane mass. The otoconia
provide the inertia, and the otolithic membrane mass drags on the hair
cells. Sudden changes in gravity such as taking a fast elevator ride with
a sudden stop at the top or even rapid acceleration in a sports car
followed by a sudden stop will cause an individual to experience this
reaction. However, once you are moving at a constant speed, again as in
a car, the otoliths come to equilibrium and you no longer perceive the
motion until you come to a stop.


 
Figure 12-12  Structure of the vestibule of the inner ear. A. The
bony vestibule cut away to reveal the utricle and saccule. B.
Structure of the macula. C. Orientation of the macula within the
utricle and saccule. (Reprinted with permission from Bear, M.F.,
Connors, B.W., Paradiso, M.A. (2006). Neuroscience exploring the
brain (3rd ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Semicircular Canals
 
Arising from the utricle are three loops referred to as the semicircular
canals. The three semicircular canals are oriented to different anatomical
positions: posterior, anterior (i.e., superior), and lateral (i.e., horizontal).
They are oriented spatially at right angles to each other which allow
them to respond to angular head motion (e.g., head rotation). Each canal
plane is perpendicular to the other canal directions, comparable to the
relationship of two right angle sides and the floor of a cube. The canals
on each side operate simultaneously as if joined with the canals on the
opposite side of the head. The right posterior canal and the left anterior
canal, the right and left lateral canals, and the left posterior and right
anterior canals respond as a unit. Therefore, head rotation in any
direction will stimulate a response from the appropriate paired structure.
Each semicircular canal opens into the vestibule by a bulb-like
expansion called an ampulla. Figure 12-13 shows a cross section of the
ampulla and its contents. Housed within the ampulla and lying
perpendicular to the long axis of the canal is the receptor end organ
called the crista ampullaris. The crista contains the vestibular hair cells
and supporting cells. The stereocilia of the hair cells extend into a
gelatinous mass resembling a semipointed cap, called the cupula. When
the head rotates in an angular motion, flow of endolymph within the
membranous labyrinth lags behind, pushing on the cupula and causing
the stereocilia to bend. When the stereocilia bend in the appropriate
direction toward the kinocilium, the cell bodies respond and send
information via the vestibular branch of the vestibulocochlear nerve to
the brain. When the stereocilia are pulled by endolymph flow in a

direction away from the kinocilium, there is an abrupt reduction in the
information sent to the nerve fibers. Therefore, with head motion, the
cupulae of the paired canals (e.g., the right anterior and left posterior)
are displaced in a push–pull direction so that one side is always being
excited whereas the other is always being inhibited. The push–pull
information equals out and the signal is accepted. Dizziness, the
inappropriate sensation of motion, is the brain’s response from an
imbalance of the push–pull system.
 
Figure 12-13  Cross section of the ampulla (with the semicircular
canals oriented to different anatomical directions). A. Each canal
opens into the vestibule by a bulb-like expansion called an ampulla.
(Reprinted with permission from Anatomical Chart Company.) B.
Cross section view of the ampulla with the receptor end organ

crista ampullaris exposed. (Reprinted with permission from Bear,
M.F., Connors. B.W., Paradiso, M.A. (2006). Neuroscience
exploring the brain (3rd ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.) C. Endolymph flow pushing on the crista. (Reprinted
with permission from Anatomical Chart Company.)
 
Why You Need to Know
 
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) is the most common type
of vertigo. Patients report a spinning sensation when lying down, rolling
over in bed, bending down or looking up. Estimates indicate that at least
20% of all patients who present to the physician complaining of vertigo
have BPPV (Foroehling et al.,1991). The disorder may result from an
age-related degeneration of the mechanism. In individuals under the age
of 50, it is more often associated with head trauma and is rarely seen in
children. For whatever reason, a few of the otoconia from a macula
detach from the otolithic membrane and are free to float in the
endolymph usually resting in the ampulla of the posterior semicircular
canal. A change in head position creates movement of the endolymph
and the floating otoconia. Their presence adds to the density of the
endolymph flow resulting in stimulation of the cupula which will, in
turn, increase the neuronal firing rate of that canal and result in an
exaggerated perception of movement. It is believed that the symptoms
will subside if the otoconia can be coaxed back to the macula from
where they came. This is attempted through a series of positioning
maneuvers called canalith repositioning treatment (CRT). For evidence-
based practice on BPPV and canalith repositioning treatment, refer to
Froehling et al. (2000).
 
Vestibular Nerve Pathway
 
The afferent nerve fibers projecting from the vestibular end organs
collect to form Scarpa’s ganglion. From this ganglion, the vestibular
nerve courses through the internal auditory canal (IAC) (or meatus)
of the temporal bone to enter the brainstem at the ponsmedullary

junction, a deep groove that separates the pons from the medulla. This
is the point of transition from the peripheral vestibular system to the
central structures of vestibular input. The central structures consist of
four major nuclei: the superior, medial, lateral, and descending. The
adaptive process of the central vestibular system takes place in the
cerebellum. Its job is to monitor and integrate vestibular, somatosensory
and visual sensory input and make conscious and unconscious corrective
motor adjustments.
Maintenance of the center of gravity (CoG) is sensed by the
integration of three systems—visual, vestibular, and somatosensory—
and not one sense is solely responsible for the information. Visual input
is responsible for recognizing the horizon, and therefore needs an
external reference for its sensations. Vestibular input is the result of an
internal reference to the sense of weight (gravity) on the macula during a
resting position of the head. The somatosensory input gains information
from an internal reference by the orientation of one body part to another
through the position and tone of skeletal muscles and the pressure on the
soles of the feet from a firm surface. There is no exact combination from
the contribution of the three input systems. When there is an absence in
either visual or somatosensory information, the vestibular system is
utilized. The vestibular system can function independently of the two as
its primary interest is controlling head and eye position. The vestibulo-
ocular reflex (VOR) is a reflexive eye movement that stabilizes vision
during head movement by producing an eye movement in the direction
opposite to the head movement. (This reflex is what allows us to read
while jogging on the treadmill.) The semicircular canals detect the head
rotation, which triggers a compensatory movement of the eyes. The
VOR does not depend on visual acuity and works in total darkness or
when the eyes are closed.
Why You Need to Know
 
Vestibular rehabilitation therapy (VRT) is balance retraining through
physical therapy. As discussed in the text, the maintenance of one’s
balance involves integration from multiple systems; therefore, successful
VRT requires a careful and thorough evaluation to identify the specific
area(s) of weakness. The exercises will target the particular deficit(s)

and retraining will take advantage of neural mechanisms in the brain
for adaptation, plasticity, and compensation. An audiologist will be
involved in the evaluation of balance and hearing and maybe even
retraining therapy as VRT is within the audiologist’s scope of practice
(as well as the scope of practice of occupational therapists and physical
therapists).
 
Why You Need to Know
 
Motion sickness is a result of the visual and somatosensory systems
sensing different information. The visual system perceives motion but
the somatosensory cannot confirm the motion; therefore, confusion of
the integrated signal takes place. When there is confusion in the
interpretation, it is the vestibular system that contributes to the
maintenance of the center of gravity for balance.
 
Structures of the Auditory Sensory-Neural System
 
The anatomical structures of the cochlea and the cochlear nerve are
known as the sensory-neural system as it houses the fine receptors that
must sense and change the acoustic signal into the neural information
transmitted to the brain for the process we think of as hearing.
Cochlea
 
The cochlea is the inner ear organ of audition. While the outer and
middle ears comprise the mechanism for conducting sound to the
cochlea, the cochlea is the mechanism that changes the acoustic signal
into the neural impulses that are transmitted to the brain for the process
we think of as “hearing.”
The cochlea is no larger in size than a pea but is amazing in its
function. It is so complex that we do not completely comprehend its
physiology and is so embedded in the dense temporal bone that access
for the purpose of research is very difficult. The cochlea’s position in the
head is oriented so that the apex is anterior and slightly lateral within the

head pointing toward the cheekbone. The bony labyrinth resembles a
snail’s shell coiled around itself between 2½ and 2⅝ times before
reaching its apex. The cochlea is 5 mm in height; at its base, it is 9 mm
in width and tapers toward the apex. Figure 12-14 shows a cross section
of the cochlea and its contents. The porous, perfo-rated bony core of the
cochlea is called the modiolus. The cochlea wraps around the modiolus
from base to apex. The perforated modiolus accommodates the blood
vessels and nerve fibers leading off from the hair cells. In its design, the
modiolus adds protection to the essential blood vessels supplying the
cochlea and nerve fibers also coursing through its center.
Housed within the bony labyrinth is its membranous channel
known as the scala media (also known as the cochlear duct). The scala
media conforms to the shape of the bony cochlea so that it is also coiled.
Uncoiled, the scala media measures approximately 25 to 35 mm in
length. In looking at a cross section, the scala media does not float
within the perilymph of the bony labyrinth but rather a large section of
the scala media is attached to the lateral wall of the bony capsule. There
are connections to the medial wall as well, dividing the interior of the
cochlea into thirds. The boundaries of the scala media completely
separate the bony labyrinth into two channels. Perilymph fills the space
above and below the scala media. The two bony channels surrounding
the scala media meet at the apical end of the bony labyrinth with a small
opening at the apex called the helicotrema. This opening allows
perilymph to be continuous throughout the bony channel even though
there is a division. The upper channel is called the scala vestibuli and
the oval window forms its point of origination. The lower channel is
called the scala tympani and the round window is its point of
termination.
There are two, less emphasized, fluid pathways that lead off from
the inner ear structures. One leading away from the vestibule is the
vestibular aqueduct (VA). Contained within the VA is a membranous
sac containing endolymph. The other aqueduct, termed the cochlear
aqueduct (CA), leads away from the basal turn of the scala tympani
only a few millimeters from the round window to the subarachnoid
space of the brain. The CA contains perilymph since it originates at the
scala tympani. A commonly accepted view about the CA is that it allows
transfer of perilymph to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Perilymph has

essentially the same chemical composition as CSF.
Why You Need to Know
 
Enlarged vestibular aqueduct syndrome (EVAS) is identified as an
inner ear bony malformation causing a bilateral (and usually)
progressive sensorineural hearing loss. The specific etiology is
unknown, however, it appears to be the result of a gene mutation but
environmental factors have also been suspected. The effect is that the
membranous sac containing endolymph is much larger than normal.
EVAS is diagnosed by high-resolution radiological scans that show the
enlarged aqueduct.
 
The scala media contains the receptor end organ of hearing, the
organ of Corti (see Figure 12-14). The lateral wall of the scala media is
attached to the bony labyrinth by the spiral ligament. The medial or
modiolar attachment of the scala media is the osseous spiral lamina.
The spiral lamina consists of two thin plates of bone. There is a space
between the two layers of the lamina where the nerve fibers course and
is called the habenula perforata.
Joining the spiral lamina is the basilar membrane (BM) (also
known as the cochlear partition). The spiral ligament reaches out to
meet the BM, completing the floor. The organ of Corti rests on the
membrane. The spiral ligament, a band of flexible connective tissue,
affixes the BM to the lateral wall of the bony labyrinth. When displaced,
the membrane pivots at the point where it attaches to the spiral lamina.
Together the BM and the spiral lamina run the entire length of the
cochlea, separating the scala media from the scala tympani. The cochlea
and spiral lamina are wider at the base than the apex, whereas the BM
(cochlear partition) runs just the opposite, being narrower at the base
and wider at the apex. Because of this arrangement, the BM is under
considerable tension at the base but is relatively flaccid at the apex. The
physical characteristics of the BM play a critical role in the process of
audition allowing for passive tuning of the high frequencies at the base
and low frequencies at the apex.

 
Figure 12-14  Cross section of the cochlea. A. Coiled around the
bony core the cochlea protects its nerve fibers. B. The membranous

labyrinth divides the bony labyrinth into two sections: the scala
vestibuli above and the scala tympani below. The scala media
houses the receptor end organ of hearing. C. The structures of the
organ of Corti rest on the basilar membrane. (Reprinted with
permission from Gartner, L.P., Hiatt, J.L. (2009). Color atlas of
histology (5th ed.). Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Reissner’s membrane forms the superior wall of the membranous
labyrinth. It projects obliquely across the scala media to attach to the
lateral wall of the duct. This attachment serves to separate the scala
media from the scala vestibuli above. The stria vascularis extends
along the lateral wall of the scala media from Reissner’s membrane to
the basilar membrane. The stria vascularis is a highly vascularized layer
of epithelium thought to produce and maintain the chemical balance of
the ions (in particular potassium) within the endolymph of the scala
media.
Organ of Corti
 
The organ of Corti, named for the Italian anatomist Corti during the
mid-1800s, is the end organ for hearing and rests on the BM. Acoustic
energy that was transformed into mechanical energy by the middle ear
will be further transformed into electrochemical neural information by
the organ of Corti. The basic structure includes two types of sensory
cells and many supporting cells. Supporting cells include the inner and
outer pillar cells. The arrangement of the pillar cells is in rows which
are wide apart at their base and merge together at their apices defining
the triangular area called the tunnel of Corti, which is filled with its
own fluid called cortilymph. The base for the pillar cells is on the BM
and is broad and supportive.
On the modiolar (i.e., medial) side of the pillar cells is a single row
of sensory inner hair cells (IHCs). On the lateral side of the pillar cells
are three rows of sensory outer hair cells (OHCs). The IHCs and OHCs
are held in place by a complex network of supporting cells. The
structure and arrangement of Deiters’ cells cradle the base of the OHCs
and send phalangeal processes to the surface to intermesh forming the

roof of the organ of Corti. The tight meshwork is known as the reticular
lamina. It forms a tight seal to the endolymphatic space. Hensen’s cells
are tall columnar cells adjacent to the last row of Deiters’ cells. The
Hensen’s cells also lend their support to the OHCs and support the
tectorial membrane. Claudius’ cells are cube-shaped cells that rest on
the BM and fill the space between Deiters’ cells and the base of the stria
vascularis (Claudius, Deiters, and Hensen were 19th century German
anatomists). The Claudius cells also add strength to the BM. The spiral
limbus is a mound of connective tissue that rests on the spiral lamina. It
provides the medial attachment for Reissner’s membrane and the
tectorial membrane.
The tectorial membrane is not really a membrane, but rather a
gelatinous flap composed of collagen and proteins (Steel, 1983). The
membrane projects radially across the organ of Corti. It has the
capability of pivoting from its medial attachment to the spiral limbus. Its
function is to provide the mechanical shearing (push or pull) of the
stereocilia of the OHCs. The stereocilia of the OHCs, particularly in row
1, are embedded in its inferior surface. It is significant to note that the
IHCs are not embedded in the tectorial membrane. Endolymph fills the
space between the tectorial membrane and the reticular lamina. As seen
in Figure 12-15, the different hinge points for the tectorial membrane
and the BM lend to the mechanical stimulation of the OHCs. The IHCs
are disturbed by the drag imposed on them from the surrounding fluid.

 
Figure 12-15  The action of the tectorial and basilar membranes on
the outer hair cells. The inner hair cells are stimulated by the
turbulent flow (i.e., drag) of the endolymph. (Reprinted with
permission from Bear, M.F., Connors, B.W., Paradiso, M.A.
(2006). Neuroscience exploring the brain (3rd ed.). Baltimore:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The two types of receptor hair cells, inner and outer, are different
from each other in several physical ways. The IHCs are “flask” or “tear
drop” shaped whereas the OHCs bodies are more cylinder or test tube
like in shape. The single row of IHCs numbers approximately 3500 cell
bodies and the three to four rows of OHCs number approximately
12,000 to 13,000 cell bodies (Retzius, 1884, as cited in Hudspeth, 1989).
Geisler (1998) discovered that the length of the OHCs varies depending
on its location along the tuned BM. As one could anticipate, the hair
cells are shorter at the base of the BM than the hair cells arranged along

the low-frequency tuned apex of the BM. Tilney, Tilney, and DeRosier
(1992) reported that the stereocilia projecting from the apical surface of
the auditory hair cells are organized into bundles and rows of graded
lengths. Both the IHC and OHC bundles lack the tall kinocilium seen
with the vestibular hair cells. The pattern of the stereocilia bundle on the
IHCs forms a shallow “U” shaped row, whereas the pattern of the
stereocilia bundle on the OHCs resembles a “W” or “V.” Stereocilia of
both cell types are shorter and more numerous at the base of the cochlea
than they are at the apex. Maximum numbers seen at the basal end reach
approximately 150 per cell body. The number of stereocilia tapers off
toward the apical end of the cochlea, where there are approximately 65
to 70 per OHC. The shorter stereocilia are linked laterally ensuring that
when they are disturbed, they move more or less as a unit.
The IHCs and OHCs function very differently. The IHCs
selectively respond to the various frequencies of an incoming signal.
Their shallow U-shaped stereocilia bundle lends itself to stimulation by
the flow of endolymph. The OHCs, on the other hand, contain an
unusual structural characteristic usually associated with muscle cells and
the chemical makeup to change shape. Both factors enable the OHCs to
be motile, meaning they can shorten or lengthen in response to being
stimulated or inhibited (Pickles, 1988). Damage to the hair cells results
in a permanent sensory hearing loss. The most likely cause of hair cell
death is from excessive noise exposure. Because the cochlea is unable to
generate new hair cells, damage is irreversible. It is interesting however
that hair cell regeneration is possible in all vertebrates except mammals.
Why You Need to Know
 
Cotanche (1987) and others discovered in the mid-1980s that mature
birds exposed to loud noise or ototoxic drugs like antibiotics, in as little
as 28 days were able to regenerate and replace dead hair cells and
return their hearing to near normal levels. Within the avian cochlea at
least, the secret seems to be in the supporting cells reentering the cell
cycle after injury to regenerate into hair cells complete with stereocilia.
Researchers Stone and Cotanche (2007) have induced cell division in
the inner ear of mice, guinea pigs, and rats using a variety of growth-
promoting molecules. They have also discovered one gene (but there are

probably more) that is responsible for “turning off” the production.
Researchers such as Staecher, Praetorius, Kim, and Douglas (2007)
have been most successful in restoring hair cells for the vestibular
portions of the inner ear. They know that it is more than knowing how to
manipulate the inhibitory genes to control for the appropriate number of
cells in the inner ear but also how to keep the cells alive and functional.
It is exciting to think that someday (perhaps in the next 10 to 15 years)
there may be a treatment for sensory hearing loss in humans.
 
Experimental evidence demonstrated that Bekesy (1960) was
correct in describing the mechanical characteristics of the BM and its
passive contribution to the tuning of the incoming acoustic signal. The
BM acts like a mechanical resonator, varying in thickness, width, and
stiffness. It is thinner, narrower, and stiffer at the base making it more
resonant to high-frequency vibration. At the apex, the BM is thicker,
wider, and more flaccid, making it more resonant to lower frequencies.
The process of audition begins when the fluid within the cochlea is
disturbed by the vibrating stapes in the oval window. As illustrated in
Figure 12-16, the vibration of the stapes creates a fluid wave that travels
from the base to the apex. There is minimal displacement of the
membrane until it reaches the point where its physical characteristics are
most receptive to the stimulus frequency. In other words, the area of
maximum membrane displacement corresponds to the frequency of the
stimulus and to the tuning of the hair cells of the organ of Corti.
In addition to the passive mechanical contribution of the BM,
researchers beginning with Dallos (1992) described an active
contribution the hair cells make in the analysis of the incoming signal.
He revealed that they too resonate best at select frequencies. The IHCs
and OHCs play different roles in their contribution. The IHCs are
necessary for frequency coding. The IHCs are not embedded in the
tectorial membrane and therefore must rely on the strong turbulence of
endolymph around their stereocilia for their displacement and
subsequent excitement. The flow of endolymph alone is not strong
enough to disturb the IHCs until the intensity of the stimulus is above
approximately 40 dB SPL. The OHCs contribute to hearing sensitivity
for less intense sounds. Remember, the difference in the pivot points for
the BM and the tectorial membrane contributes to the shearing action of

the OHCs. A 40 dB sound is fairly quiet; however, it will still displace
the BM so that the OHCs become sheared. The shearing causes the
OHCs to react, pulling on the tectorial membrane. The “tightening” of
the tectorial membrane modifies the tectorial–reticular lamina spatial
relationship. The result is the constriction of the flow of endolymph
causing the turbulent flow necessary to stimulate the IHCs. Therefore,
the motile activity of the OHCs adjusts the mechanics of the organ of
Corti so that the IHCs can react to less intense stimuli, providing the
minute frequency coding. The OHCs act as the “cochlear amplifier”
providing the necessary sensitivity for humans to hear soft level sounds
(Zwislocki, 1990). At the resonate frequency of the hair cell, threshold is
easily crossed generating a response. A hair cell can be stimulated at
frequencies other than its resonant frequency, but the threshold must be
greater than the one required to stimulate the hair cell at its own select
frequency.
 
Figure 12-16  The cochlea uncoiled to demonstrate the place of
maximum displacement along the basilar membrane for a pure
tone.
 
Why You Need to Know

 
Otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) are acoustic signals generated by normal
functioning OHCs. The OHCs spontaneously generate the emission as
they expand and contract to incoming acoustic stimulation. These
emissions can be detected by inserting a tiny microphone into the ear
canal. A mild hearing impairment typically begins as a loss of the motile
ability of the OHCs. Consequently, evoked OAEs provide audiologists
with a useful clinical tool in the evaluation of cochlear function.
 
Neural Pathways
 
All cochlear hair cells receive both afferent (i.e., sensory) and efferent
(i.e., motor) innervation; however, the majority of fibers are afferent.
This section will provide a discussion of the afferent and efferent
auditory pathways as they relate to the process of hearing. The central
processing of auditory information within and between the two cerebral
hemispheres was covered in Chapter 4.
Neurotransmission
 
The hair cells are innervated by no less than 30,000 nerve fibers. Before
joining with the fibers of the IHCs, the nerve fibers that connect to the
OHCs course through the tunnel of Corti. Together they move through
the habenula perforata. The nerve fibers carry information along their
peripheral processes to the spiral ganglia. The nerve fibers are
unmyelinated in the region between their endings on the hair cells and
the habenula perforata but become myelinated as they pass through the
internal auditory canal (IAC). For the OHCs, the neural information is a
product of the shearing action of the tectorial membrane. For the IHCs,
the neural information is a product of the turbulence created in the flow
of the endolymph. Although there are approximately three times as
many OHCs as IHCs, the OHCs send only 5% of the afferent
information along the cochlear nerve. The IHCs send 95% of the
afferent information. Each IHC communicates with as many as 10 to 18
ganglion cells (see Figure 12-17). The remaining 5% of peripheral nerve
fibers branch with as many as 10 to 50 OHCs (this is a relatively small

number of afferent nerve fibers spread out over a relatively large number
of OHCs) (Spoendlin, 1974).
 
Figure 12-17  There are several differences in the inner and outer
hair cells, from shape to innervation pattern. The inner hair cells
send 95% afferent information to the cochlear nerve. The outer hair
cells receive 95% crossed efferent information from the
olivocochlear bundle.
 
The process known as transduction, the changing (i.e.,
transforming) of mechanical vibrations from the BM into neural
information, occurs at the level of the hair cells. Endolymph is rich with
the positively charged ions potassium and calcium. Endolymph has a
resting potential (the voltage potential present with no stimulation) of
+100 millivolts (mV) to +80 mV (Tasaki & Spiropoulis, 1959).
Therefore, the scala media has a strong positive potential called the
endocochlear potential (EP). Transduction is dependent on the
intracellular resting potential of the hair cells, which are about −40 mV
for the IHCs and −70 mV for the OHCs (Dallos, Santos-Sacchi, &

Flock, 1982). The positive resting potential of endolymph and the
negative resting potential of the hair cells yield a very large voltage
potential difference of 120 to 150 mV depending on the cell type. As
described by Hudspeth (1989), when a stimulus is delivered a
mechanical gate on the stereocilia is opened. As seen in Figure 12-18,
the tip links reach up from the top of the shorter cilia to the side of the
adjacent taller cilia. This arrangement allows them to be stretched much
like a spring to open a gate (Pickles, Comis, & Osborne, 1984). With the
gate now open, a route is provided for the higher concentration of
potassium (K+) in the endolymph to flow toward the lower concentration
within the hair cells. As a result of the flow of potassium, the EP shifts
negatively from its highly positive charge (the opposite positive and
negative charge differences want to balance). The EP shifting of a
positive charge is termed depolarization. Depolarization activates
channel opening along the lateral cell membrane. These channels allow
for the influx of calcium and the efflux of potassium from the hair cell.
The influx of calcium triggers the release of the neurotransmitter
glutamate into the nerve terminals in contact with the hair cell base. The
diffusion of the neurotransmitter across the terminal triggers an action
potential to be propagated down the nerve fibers. For a split moment, the
shifting of the ion concentrations within the hair cells causes the cell to
be hyperpolarized. When a cell is in a state of hyperpolarization, it is
unable to be stimulated. It is not until it regains its resting potential that
it is again ready to respond. During the action of transduction, the ion
balance within the endolymph is shifted dramatically. It is the function
of the stria vascularis to return the endolymph to its resting (potassium,
sodium, and calcium) balance (Pickles, 1988).

 
Figure 12-18  Depolarization of a hair cell. A. Tip links are
stretched to open the potassium (K+) channels. B. Depolarization
serves to open the calcium (Ca++) channels, releasing the
neurotransmitter. C. Endocochlear potential: strong positive
potential, negative intracellular resting potential. (Reprinted with
permission from Bear, M.F., Connors, B.W., Paradiso, M.A.
(2006). Neuroscience exploring the brain (3rd ed.). Baltimore:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The act of transduction is triggered by the frequency of the sound
that causes the point of maximum displacement along the passive BM.
Researchers have also examined the intensity level necessary to bring

about depolarization (Dallos, 1992). The displacement of the membrane
increases in magnitude as the stimulus intensity increases. A tuning
curve (see Figure 12-19) is a graph of the intensity level necessary to
trigger (i.e., reach threshold) the hair cell response to an input stimulus.
The greater the intensity level, the broader the range of frequencies
whose thresholds are crossed (i.e., the broader the shape of the graph).
The broadness of the BM response to high intensities decreases the
frequency selectivity. The increase number of hair cells that are
stimulated creates a greater neural response from the cochlear nerve. In
contrast, for less intense stimuli, a response is seen at a limited range of
frequencies where threshold is crossed. The magnitude of BM deflection
is limited. There is progressively less and less membrane deflection as
the intensity of a sound increases.
 
Figure 12-19  Tuning curve for a 3000 Hz tone. The 3000 Hz tone
seen along the basilar membrane at the point of maximum
displacement.
 
Once threshold has been crossed and depolarization takes place,
impulses (i.e., action potentials) travel down the peripheral processes of

the nerve fibers to the spiral ganglion and continue along until they enter
the brainstem. As soon as the fibers collect at the exit point from the
cochlea’s 
modiolus 
they 
form 
the 
cochlear 
branch 
of 
the
vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIII). Yost (2000) reviewed the
tonotopic organization of the cochlear branch of cranial nerve VIII. He
noted the fibers originating from the apex of the cochlea form the core
or center of the branch. The outer layer originates from the basal end of
the cochlea and twists around the core, which means that the high-
frequency fibers twist around the low-frequency fibers.
Why You Need to Know
 
Auditory neuropathy (AN), or to be more exact auditory dys-synchrony
(AD), is an unusual hearing disorder that is primarily a timing deficit
affecting the normal synchronous activity of the IHCs or the auditory
nerve (Zeng et al., 1999). The OHC function is unaffected. The degree of
hearing loss is not predictable and may even fluctuate from day to day.
The neural dys-synchrony causes speech understanding difficulties that
are worse than can be predicted from the pattern of hearing loss.
Amplification unfortunately has minimal benefit in improving speech
discrimination. Sign language may be necessary for language learning.
Identification of auditory dys-sychrony is a diagnosis of exclusion.
Otoacoustic emissions are present; however, evoked potential [auditory
brainstem response (ABR)] testing of the auditory pathway is abnormal
as well as the middle ear muscle reflex. Radiologic evaluations are
normal as there is no obvious lesion.
 
Afferent Auditory Pathway
 
The cochlear branch of the vestibulocochlear nerve merges with the
vestibular branch that has bundled from the nerve fibers of the ampullae,
saccule, and utricle. The two branches maintain their separate identities
but combine to become cranial nerve VIII. Cranial nerve VIII meets
cranial nerve VII (the facial nerve) to travel through the internal auditory
canal (IAC). The cochlear branch occupies a position beneath the facial
nerve and to the side of the vestibular nerve.

Why You Need to Know
 
The IAC is a site for the growth of a benign Schwannoma neuroma that
tends to arise from the vestibular nerve but with time will encroach on
the cochlear nerve. The neuroma is contained within the narrow meatus
and therefore quickly compresses on the nerve causing unilateral
symptoms such as balance disturbances, tinnitus, and hearing loss.
Remembering the tonotopic organization of the cochlear nerve, a lesion
will initially result in a high-frequency hearing loss. An undiagnosed
neuroma may grow large enough to affect the mid to low frequencies
and compress on the facial nerve (cranial nerve VII) causing facial
paresis.
 
Figure 12-20 illustrates the auditory pathway. A lesion along the
auditory pathway (e.g., a Schwannoma or acoustic neuroma) creates a
retrocochlear hearing loss. Audiometrically, a retrocochlear hearing
loss will look the same as a sensorineural hearing loss (i.e., air and bone
conduction loss). A lesion on the cochlear nerve will cause a loss in the
detection of sound and a loss in the recognition of words.

 
Figure 12-20  Afferent auditory pathway as it leaves the cochlea
and travels through the different levels of the brainstem to
terminate at the anterior and posterior transverse temporal gyri (i.e.,
Heschl’s gyrus) along the superior temporal gyrus of the cerebrum.
(Reprinted with permission from Bear, M.F., Connors, B.W.,
Paradiso, M.A. (2006). Neuroscience exploring the brain (3rd ed.).
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Cranial nerve VIII enters the brainstem at the junction of the pons
and medulla. The cochlear nerve travels through the different levels of
the brainstem to terminate at the auditory cortex, Heschl’s gyrus of the
temporal lobe of the cerebrum. The nerve fibers synapse with at least

four different nuclei along the way to the cortex. The first-order neurons
originate from the cochlear hair cells (mostly the IHCs) and terminate at
the cochlear nuclei. All fibers terminate at either the ventral cochlear
nucleus or the dorsal cochlear nucleus, where they synapse with the
second-order neurons. It is at this level that the neurons pass through the
trapezoid body to be distributed to the ipsilateral and contralateral
superior olivary complex. Each superior olivary complex and the nuclei
above will have information from both ears. This is referred to as
binaural representation and is important for localization of a sound
source.
Third-order neurons continue upward from the superior olivary
complex along a tract called the lateral lemniscus. These third-order
neurons are joined by some second-order neurons that arose from the
cochlear nucleus but bypassed the superior olivary complex. The
second- and third-order neurons may terminate at the lateral lemniscus
or continue to the inferior colliculus at the dorsal midbrain. The
majority of neurons will synapse at the inferior colliculus. The inferior
colliculus has a large bundle of nerve fibers that cross to communicate
with the nucleus on the opposite side. A commissural tract allows the
two inferior colliculi to communicate with each other. Interaural time
and intensity differences occur at this level, playing a role in auditory
localization. Fourth-order neurons leave the inferior colliculus to
terminate at the medial geniculate body of the thalamus. The third-
order neurons that bypassed the inferior colliculus will terminate here. In
other words, all ascending (i.e., afferent or sensory) neurons will have a
final synapse at this subcortical level before proceeding to the auditory
cortex. The final destination of afferent fibers is Heschl’s gyrus (also
referred to as the anterior and posterior transverse gyri), which is found
within the superior temporal gyrus along the temporal lobe of the
cerebrum (Brodmann areas 41 and 42) in both hemispheres. The
frequency organization of the cochlea is preserved along the pathway
and in bands across the cortical surface of the superior temporal gyrus.
The orderly representation is known as tonotopic organization.
Researchers (e.g., Troost & Waller, 1998) have demonstrated the
tonotopic organization of the medial geniculate body in which low
frequencies are represented laterally and high frequencies are located
medially in the principal division. The peripheral auditory mechanism is

the site for the detection of sound but it is the central cortical level that is
the location for conscious processing of sound that we refer to as
“hearing.”
Why You Need to Know
 
Auditory brainstem response (ABR) audiometry refers to the
measurement of the electrical potential of the auditory pathway as it
passes through the different levels of the brainstem. The responses are
elicited by an auditory stimulus. Test administration and interpretation
are performed by an audiologist. The signal travels along the auditory
pathway from the cochlear nucleus to the inferior colliculus. The elicited
response can be measured by surface electrodes. The response normally
occurs within a 15-millisecond time period after a stimulus is presented.
ABR audiometry is considered an effective tool in the evaluation of
hearing loss and suspected retrocochlear pathology.
 
Binaural representation is critical in the processing of acoustic
information. It is used for localization as in detecting the origin of a
sound. The interaural acoustic information is processed for time,
intensity, and frequency characteristics. The differences are conveyed
throughout the pathway to the auditory cortex. Damage to the pathway,
after the point of binaural representation, usually has no effect on the
detection of sound, thanks to the redundancy of information being sent
to the brain. Hearing loss (a detection of impaired frequency and
intensity of sound) is theoretically only caused by damage to the outer
and middle ear, cochlea, or cochlear nerve. Auditory processing is the
brain using the frequency, intensity, and pattern of sounds (speech in
particular) that our ears detect (the brain using what the ear hears). A
lesion along the auditory cortex interferes with the processing of speech
creating a central hearing loss. This is most obvious when the speech
signal is in competition with or imbedded in background noise. The
individual has an inability to filter out competing auditory signals. A
central auditory processing disorder (CAPD) is the result of a central
hearing loss. For the most part, auditory processing works fine in simple
face-to-face conversation in a quiet environment. However, when the
system is stressed, as when trying to converse in the presence of

background noise or listening to instruction while the teacher walks
around a large reverberant classroom, a lesion in the system will become
apparent and the auditory information will be misunderstood or missed
altogether. Many sites can be at fault for a central hearing loss: a deficit
in the interpretation of the signal; disruption in the redundant auditory
pathway; or lack of communication between the two auditory cortices.
The prevalence of CAPD in children is estimated to be between 2% and
3% (Chermak & Musiek, 1997) with it being twice as prevalent in males
than females. It often coexists with other disabilities. These include
speech and language disorders or delays, learning disabilities or
dyslexia, attention deficit disorders with or without hyperactivity, and
social and/or emotional problems. Testing for CAPD is complicated and
time-consuming. Due to neuromaturation of the central auditory nervous
system, assessment of children under age 7 is not recommended due to
the high degree of variability in their performance. After an extensive
case history and assessment is completed, specific suggestions for
management will be shared. Keep in mind this is not a peripheral loss so
traditional amplification is not the treatment. CAPD management is
usually in the form of an auditory training program and phonological
awareness training, therapy for any existing language and/or behavior
deficits, and methods for improving the quality of the incoming signal.
This can be accomplished with the use of a personal auditory trainer to
enhance the signal (e.g., the teacher’s voice) over the random
background (e.g., other sounds in the classroom), thereby improving the
signal-to-noise ratio.
Efferent Auditory Pathway
 
All the information from the peripheral hearing mechanism is carried
along the afferent pathway to the cortex for processing. The efferent
pathway is the way the brain communicates information down to the
peripheral structures. The olivocochlear pathway (refer back to Figure
12-17) carries efferent information from the olivocochlear bundle (OCB)
in the superior olivary complex in the brainstem to the hearing
mechanism.
Guinan, Warr, and Norris (1983) described two main olivocochlear
pathways, one crossed and the other uncrossed. The uncrossed pathway

originates from the lateral superior olivary complex (LSOC) and
consists of unmyelinated fibers that terminate on the afferent fibers of
the IHCs. The OHCs receive few of these same uncrossed fibers. The
crossed pathway originates from the medial superior olivary complex
(MSOC). These fibers are myelinated and terminate directly on the
OHCs. The role of the efferent pathways (both crossed and uncrossed) is
believed to be the production of inhibitory effects. Information along the
efferent pathway seems to inhibit the OHCs’ ability to amplify the BM
motion. It is believed that this function further facilitates the active
tuning effect of the hair cells.
Middle Ear Muscle Reflex Arc
 
The auditory pathway described above has been relatively simplified
into the major afferent and efferent tracts. There are many lesser tracts
that receive stimulation from the cochlear neurons that enter the
brainstem. The middle ear muscle reflex arc deserves discussion as its
presence or absence is used clinically as an indicator for site of lesion.
Borg (1973) described the middle ear muscle reflex as being dependent
upon contraction of the stapedius muscle in response to loud sounds. An
intense sound (e.g., 70 to 110 dB HL) presented to either ear will illicit a
contraction of the stapedius muscle in both ears and therefore can be
measured in either an uncrossed (i.e., ipsilateral) or a crossed (i.e.,
contralateral) condition. The sensory component of the reflex arc is
provided by afferents of the cochlear portion of the vestibulocochlear
nerve (cranial nerve VIII). The motor component of the reflex is
provided by efferent nerve fiber tracts of the facial nerve (cranial nerve
VII). The reflex is initiated by a stimulus that is carried to the brainstem
by cranial nerve VIII. Once in the brainstem, the afferent fibers travel to
the ventral cochlear nucleus, synapse, and then go to the superior olivary
nucleus on the ipsilateral side. A portion of the fibers at the superior
olivary complex will continue through and cross to the opposite superior
olivary nucleus and synapse. Now both the ipsilateral and contralateral
superior olivary nuclei have received communication from the stimulus
ear. The arc continues from both the ipsilateral and contralateral sides to
send efferent information back down to the motor nucleus of the facial
nerve (cranial nerve VII). The synapses at the motor facial nucleus will

then send an impulse out to elicit a contraction of the stapedius muscles.
When measured in healthy, normal-hearing ears, the reflex is roughly
symmetrical so that when either ear is stimulated, the reflex will appear
on both sides.
Summary
 
The anatomical ear is easily divided into the two functional systems
related to hearing and balance. The anatomical structures of the two
systems were identified and the function or physiology of the structures
was discussed. The next step in your education is to learn how disease,
injury, and genetics can disrupt this normal function to result in a
hearing or balance disorder. Proper identification of a disorder is critical
in determining what treatment options are available (e.g., surgical vs.
medical). Clinicians who specialize in the identification of hearing or
balance disorders have a fond appreciation of the anatomy and
physiology of the hearing and balance system. In the next chapter, you
will learn how diseases and other disorders of the auditory system can
negatively impact hearing and balance.

 
Knowledge Outcomes for ASHA Certification for Chapter
13
   Demonstrate knowledge of the developmental and life span
bases of the basic human communication processes (III-B)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the etiologies of receptive and
expressive language disorders (III-C)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the etiologies of hearing disorders
(III-C)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the characteristics of hearing
disorders (III-C)
   Demonstrate knowledge of the prevention of hearing
disorders (III-D)
 
Learning Objectives
 
   You will be able to list the five cardinal signs of ear pathology
and refer them back to the client’s chief complaint.
   You will be able to differentiate the clinical characteristics of
common ear pathology.
   You will be able to discuss the communicative impact of ear
pathology.
   You will be able to identify genetic and environmental hearing
disorders.
   You will be able to recognize the clinical characteristics of

congenital syndromic and nonsyndromic hearing disorders.
 
 
Introduction
 
Anatomy can best be learned when the physiology (i.e., function) of the
mechanism is taught in parallel. Included in the anatomy section was a
smattering of pathology to demonstrate how pathogens, disease, trauma,
and genetic aberrations affect the delicate, intricate function of the ear.
This chapter will proceed to elaborate on common congenital anomalies
and move through acquired pathologies of the outer, middle, and inner
ear. There are complete texts on hearing disorders but at the conclusion
of this chapter you will be able to demonstrate knowledge of the
characteristics and etiologies of some of the more common hearing
disorders. Hearing losses are caused by lesions, which by definition are
changes in either the structures and/ or function of the auditory
mechanism due to injury or disease. The patient with a hearing loss
seeks treatment or assessment from an otologist (i.e., ear physician) or
otolaryngologist, (i.e., ear, nose, and throat physician or ENT). The
hearing loss may be the chief complaint or may, as in the case of a
draining ear, be a secondary complaint. The clinician (physician or
audiologist) will begin the examination by taking a case history.
According to Jafek and Barcz (1996), the case history should include

questions that are identified as the five “cardinal signs” of ear pathology.
The patient’s responses will help identify the presence of ear pathology:
1. Is there a presence of hearing loss?
2. Is there a presence of ear pain (i.e., otalgia)?
3. Is there a presence of ear discharge (i.e., otorrhea)?
4. Is there a presence of ringing, buzzing or humming in the ears (i.e.,
tinnitus)?
5. Is there a presence of dizziness, subjective vertigo (i.e., the patient
feels as if he or she is spinning), or objective vertigo (i.e., the
patient feels as if the room is spinning)?
When a physician determines the pathology to be idiopathic in
nature, the specific underlying etiology cannot be identified. Without a
known cause, the physician is left to treat the symptoms of the disorder.
If the cause is hereditary or familial, it means the pathology is
transmitted by the genetic code that one inherits from one or both of
their parents. Genetic disorders are often congenital meaning they are
present at birth or very shortly after. If the disorder should have an
impact on speech and language development as in the case of hearing
loss, then timing is very important. If the loss is prelingual, the timing
is prior to the development of speech and language and it will have a
greater impact than a postlingual loss (i.e., after speech and language
patterns have been fairly well established). Disorders that occur after
birth and are the result of disease or injury are acquired. The pathology
can have an effect on one ear (i.e., unilateral) or both ears (i.e.,
bilateral). The onset of the pathology can be sudden or gradual. Much
pathology is acute (i.e., having a short duration) but some can be very
debilitating because of their chronic or longstanding nature. Finally, the
pathology can be either temporary or permanent, and can fluctuate or
be progressive. Many disorders, especially syndromes, have a set of
characteristics that set them apart. The pathology will not only disrupt
the anatomy, but the function (i.e., physiology) as well. If you spend
time learning the structures involved in a particular disorder, then you
should be able to predict the effect of not having the structures work the
way they should.
In order to assess the nature of ear pathology, the clinician (i.e.,

audiologist) starts by physically examining the outer ear. This process
begins with a gross inspection of the outer ear. First, the clinician will
note the position of the pinna. In referring back to Figure 12-3, it can be
seen that the normal position of the pinna is determined by noting the
relationship of the superior border of the helix of the pinna to the outer
canthus (i.e., corner) of the eye. The two should be in alignment on a
horizontal plane. The clinician will look for the presence of
malformations such as pits, tags, sinuses, or suture lines in front of or
behind the pinna. The clinician will also inspect for any obvious
drainage from the ear canal. If there is no drainage, the clinician will
perform an otoscopic exam. The presence of cerumen is expected but
should not be excessive. A buildup of excessive cerumen may make it
difficult to visualize the tympanic membrane. The clinician will note any
deviations of the anatomical structures that can be visualized through
otoscopy. With a case history completed and otoscopy performed the
audiologist then compares the normal function of the mechanism to any
abnormal findings observed in the patient. This is accomplished by the
audiologist performing a battery of tests that determine hearing acuity,
middle ear function, speech recognition, and in some cases,
electrophysical measures of the vestibular and auditory mechanism.
These tests are collectively referred to as audiometry.
The degree of hearing loss affected by injury or pathology can
range from slight to profound. The effect may be limited to the high
frequencies, low frequencies, or create a flat configuration where a
broad range of frequencies are affected. Thresholds are obtained for
each ear and each pathway. Air conduction scores are plotted (right = O
and left = X) and bone conduction scores are plotted (right = < and left
= >) on a graph called an audiogram (see Figure 13-1). Audiograms are
designed so that the frequencies range from low to high: the frequencies
from 250 to 8000 Hz are in octave bands across the top and hearing
levels (HLs) in decibels from −10 to 120 dB are down the side. Zero (0)
dB HL represents perfect hearing across all the frequencies on an
audiogram. The frequencies that are tested represent the frequencies of
the phonemes in most languages rather than all the frequencies in one’s
audible range (remember that the audible range for a typical human is
between 20 and 20,000 Hz). The remainder of this section is organized
to discuss the common congenital and acquired pathologies associated

with each of the outer, middle, and inner ear divisions.
 
Figure 13-1 An audiogram depicting normal hearing sensitivity for
both the left and right ear. Note that information regarding
frequency (i.e., 250 to 8000 Hz) is plotted horizontally while
information regarding intensity (i.e., −10 to 120 dB HL) is plotted
vertically.
 
An exhaustive description of audiometry is beyond the scope of
this text. One audiometric procedure is noteworthy however, because it
will be mentioned in subsequent sections of this unit. The procedure
involves air and bone conduction audiometry. The audiologist measures
the patient’s hearing thresholds for both the air conduction pathway and
bone conduction pathway. The air conduction pathway is the route taken
by sound waves entering the ear canal and making their way through the
entire auditory system. Therefore, air conduction testing measures the
total hearing loss the patient is experiencing. Earphones or foam tip
inserts are used in air conduction testing. The bone conduction pathway
is the route taken by sound waves with enough acoustic energy to
vibrate the skull bones. Remember the cochlea resides deep in the
petrous portion of the temporal bone so that when the skull bones
receive auditory vibrations, it sets the cochlear fluids in motion even
though the outer and middle ear structures are bypassed. Therefore, bone

conduction testing measures the degree of sensory and/or neural hearing
loss the patient is experiencing. Bone conduction testing is performed
using a bone vibrator held in place on the mastoid process or the
forehead. In audiometry, air and bone conduction measures are used in
determining the nature of hearing loss. The air-bone gap is an index
that allows the clinician to determine the extent of the difference
between what the total auditory structures are hearing and what the
sensory-neural structures (i.e., cochlea and nerve) are capable of
hearing. Therefore, the presence or absence of an air-bone gap is used to
determine whether a hearing loss is conductive (i.e., an air-bone gap is
present), sensorineural (i.e., no air-bone gap is present), or mixed (see
Figure 13-2 for an illustration of the air-bone gap).
Why You Need to Know
 
The bone conduction pathway has implications for noise damage to the
cochlea. In terms of protecting one’s hearing, conservation measures
are limited to intense air conduction sources (i.e., earplugs, ear-muffs,
etc.). There is little if any protection afforded the cochlea from bone
conducted noise.
 
The normal development of the auditory mechanism begins in utero
and continues along a predictable timetable with little variation. When
there is a disturbance in this developmental sequence, an anomaly is the
result. The anomaly may be visible (as with an ear tag) or invisible (as
with an ossicular fixation). The anomaly may be benign (i.e., not
affecting the hearing mechanism in any appreciable way), or may
adversely affect the function of the hearing mechanism. Along the
predictable timetable, the embryo develops many separate systems
concurrently, and within a single system many structures are also
developing concurrently. Therefore, if there is an anomaly within one
system, another system may also be affected. A disruption rarely
disturbs a single system. For example, maternal rubella may disturb
several developing systems, including the circulatory system (heart and
blood vessels), the visual system (eyes), and the auditory system (ears).
The severity of the deformity is dependent on the timing of the
disruption. Timing is integral to the study of cause and effect. Maternal

rubella contracted during the first trimester of pregnancy is devastating,
causing cardiac defects, cataracts, mental retardation, microcephaly,
short stature, and hearing loss. If maternal rubella is contracted during
the second or third trimester, hearing loss may be the only result.
Therefore, if one understands timetables relative to prenatal
development of the various structures within a system and among the
various systems, the suspicion of hearing loss and its subsequent
identification and assessment can be accomplished early so that effective
intervention can be provided as soon as possible.

 
Figure 13-2 Audiograms illustrating how to interpret the air-bone
gap. A. This audiogram shows a significant gap between bone (>)
and air (X) conduction thresholds for the left ear. This is indicative
of a conductive hearing loss because the patient has normal
cochlear sensitivity (through the bone conduction pathway, which
stimulates the cochlea directly) while having elevated thresholds
for the air conduction pathway (where sound must pass through the
outer and middle ears before stimulating the cochlea). B. This
audiogram reveals no air-bone gap. Air and bone conduction
thresholds are the same and both are outside the range that is
considered “normal” (i.e., 0 to 20 dB). This is indicative of a
sensorineural hearing loss because hearing thresholds are beyond
normal whether the test signals are stimulating the cochlea directly
through the bone conduction pathway or are passing through the
outer and middle ears to stimulate the cochlea (i.e., the air
conduction pathway).
 
At 20 weeks gestation (full term is between 38 and 40 weeks), the
pinna reaches its adult-like shape. The pinna is one of the few auditory
structures that continues to grow in size after birth. It will continue to
grow for approximately 9 to 12 years until its adult size is reached. A
“normal” pinna can take a wide variety of shapes and forms as seen in
Figure 13-3.
Complete maturation of the entire cochlea is complete at
approximately the 20th week (fifth month) of gestation. The inner ear is
the only sense organ to reach full adult size by fetal midterm. Thus, the
cochlea is susceptible to developmental deviations, malformation, and
acquired agents.
Anomalies of the Outer Ear
 
CONGENITAL ANOMALIES OF THE OUTER EAR
Anotia and Microtia

 
At birth, the pinna will be either completely formed, partially absent or
completely absent. Anotia refers to complete absence of the pinna while
microtia refers to partial development of the pinna. Figure 13-4
illustrates several congenital anomalies of the pinna. A genetic
disturbance is the etiology for microtia of the pinna in 5% of the
population, whereas microtia is present 50% of the time as part of a
syndrome. The remaining 45% of cases of microtia are categorized as
idiopathic or of unknown etiology (Mastroiacovo et al., 1995).
Authors/physicians Stephen Park and David Chi (2005) in a recent
discussion on microtia reported an overall incidence of 1 in 5000 to 1 in
20,000 births. They further reported that the incidence of microtia
ranges from 1 in 900 to 1200 births in the Navajo population to 1 in
4000 births in the Japanese population. The male-to-female ratio for
microtia is 2.5:1 and is four times more likely to be unilateral than
bilateral. The right ear is affected more frequently than the left ear
(right-to-left ear ratio of 3:2). Microtia does not cause substantial
hearing loss but can cause major cosmetic problems. The wearing of
eyeglasses can be especially problematic.

 
Figure 13-3 Normal variations in size and shape of the pinna
(auricle). A. Normal pinna. B. Prominent ears (normal when
occurring bilaterally and having familial characteristics). C.
Incomplete structures such as an incomplete helix are often seen in
premature infants, but they typically become normal as the baby
matures. D. Darwin’s tubercle is a normal variant frequently
appearing as a nodule along the posterior segment of the helix. (B,
C, and D. Reprinted with permission from Michael Hawke, MD.

Hawke Library, hawkelibrary.com.)
 
Tags, Pits, and Sinuses
 
Preauricular tags, pits, and sinuses are probably the most common minor
ear malformations with a frequency of 5 to 6 per 1000 live births
(Kugelman et al., 1997). Most often they are benign and occur
unilaterally but occasionally they will occur bilaterally. In referring to
Figure 13-4, it can be seen that a preauricular tag is a mound of
epithelial skin that arises near the front of the ear in the area of the
tragus. Tags alone do not pose any threat to the structure of the ear and
are merely a cosmetic deformity (Kankkunen & Thiringer, 1987). A pit
or sinus results from an abnormal connection between the skin and the
underlying tissue. They are the result of incomplete closure from an
invagination of the embryologic tissue. Ear tags are often seen in
isolation; however, pits can be associated with renal anomalies,
occurring with a frequency of 5% to 40% (Wang, Earl, Ruder, &
Graham, 2001). The incidence of spontaneous formation of ear pits in
persons who do not exhibit some type of syndrome is less than 1%.
Atresia and Stenosis
 
Atresia occurs when the external auditory canal has failed to develop.
Atresia of the ear canal often accompanies microtia of the pinna (see
Figure 13-4). If the ear canal is present but is abnormally narrow, the
condition is referred to as stenosis. Atresia of the external auditory canal
may occur unilaterally or bilaterally, and is almost always accompanied
by ossicular abnormality. The nature and degree of hearing loss should
be evaluated for both ears. Because of the differential timing of the
development of the inner and outer ears, the inner ear structures may not
be affected, thereby limiting the hearing loss to being conductive in
nature. The audiometric results will determine the need for amplification
in one or both ears and the need for a traditional or a bone conduction
aid. If there is unilateral involvement with normal hearing in the
uninvolved ear, then surgery is delayed until the child is at least 5 years

old. The surgical risk in a young child is in injuring an abnormally
situated facial nerve (cranial nerve VII).
Why You Need to Know
 
The Baha® system utilizes the body’s natural bone conduction pathway
to conduct sound. For people with hearing loss, this provides another
pathway to perceive sound. Typical hearing aids rely on air conduction
and a functioning middle ear. In cases where the outer or middle ear
function is damaged or occluded, the Baha implant is an alternative
device as it bypasses these structures altogether. Instead, sound is sent
around the damaged or problematic area, naturally stimulating the
cochlea through bone conduction. Once the cochlea receives these
sound vibrations, the organ “hears” in the same manner as through air
conduction; the sound is converted into neural signals and is transferred
to the brain, allowing a Baha recipient to perceive sound.
 

 
Figure 13-4 Anomalies of the pinna. A. Microtia with atresia and
preauricular tag. B. Preauricular pits (arrows). C. Microtia with
atresia. D. Atresia.
 
ACQUIRED PATHOLOGIES OF THE OUTER EAR
Trauma

 
Cauliflower ear is an acquired pathology of the pinna resulting from
trauma. Wrestlers and prizefighters are at high risk of acquiring this
lesion. It is a direct result of the cartilage of the pinna and its connective
tissue covering (i.e., perichondrium) being separated during the
trauma. Blood collects in the space, called a hematoma, causing the
pinna to lose its normal shape, as seen in Figure 13-5. In the acute stage,
the pinna will be tender and marked redness will be present. The pinna
will not return to its normal shape unless treated. The hematoma will
need to be aspirated and direct pressure applied until the tissue can
reattach itself to the cartilage. A successful outcome is dependent on
early treatment. Hearing loss is not usually a factor unless the opening of
the external auditory meatus is occluded.
Neoplasms
 
Squamous cell carcinoma is a malignant tumor that is commonly seen
on the pinna because of its obvious exposure to the sun. Squamous cell
carcinoma is characterized by persistent thickening of the skin with red
scaling, development of a painless pale outgrowth, and formation of
open sores with a raised edge (see Figure 13-6). The tumor can increase
in size to a large mass and metastasize if not treated early. Basal cell
carcinoma is a slow growing malignant skin cancer that also is
prevalent on the pinna and also is a result of repeated sun exposure. It
presents as a flat, painless lesion with the edges becoming slightly
raised. The lesion develops a rolled edge with a penetrating central ulcer
that bleeds easily. It typically remains localized but there is a small
possibility for metastasis. Although hearing may not be adversely
affected, these cancers can be life threatening and should be reported to
a physician immediately.

 
Figure 13-5 Caulifl ower ear is the result of trauma to the pinna.
Blood collects between the layers of tissue causing the deformity.
The ear will not return to its normal shape unless treated.
 

 
Figure 13-6 Basal cell and squamous cell carcinoma are types of
skin cancers commonly seen on the pinna as a result of
overexposure to the sun. (Reprinted with permission from
Anatomical Chart Company.)
 
Obstructions
Obstructions of the ear canal are common. The vast majority of objects
found in the ears are placed there, usually by children, and are a
common reason for emergency room visits. Objects are limited only by
the diameter of the ear canal, and might include earring backs, artificial
fingernails, beans, beads, or insects. The vast majority of the objects are
harmless. Some, however, can be extremely uncomfortable and require
an anesthetic to be removed. If medical treatment is delayed, the object
can quickly produce an infection.
Excessive cerumen is the most likely natural cause of ear canal
obstruction (see Figure 13-7). Cerumen is created when the migrating
skin of the canal mixes with the cilia and secretions from the
ceruminous glands located in the outer onethird of the canal. Cerumen
buildup occurs when the cilia that protect the entrance to the ear canal
become matted with the migrating dead skin cells, impeding the natural

sloughing process. Impaction is more common in males due to the
presence of thicker, courser cilia. Cerumen also tends to become drier
with age. Cotton swabs, earplugs, and hearing aids all can impact
cerumen. Impaction can cause a temporary mild conductive hearing loss
and in some cases discomfort. Removal of excessive cerumen is
accomplished by curette, suction, or irrigation. However, before
cleaning the ear canal by irrigation, the tympanic membrane should be
examined for the presence of a perforation or pressure equalization (PE)
tube, so that cleaning agents are not forced into the middle ear cavity
during the removal process.
 
Figure 13-7 Otoscopic view of complete cerumen obstruction.
(Reprinted with permission from Weber, J., Kelley, J. (2003).
Health assessment in nursing (2nd ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Another common obstruction occurring in the ear canal is an
osteoma. These are smooth, benign bony tumors that reside in the ear
canal, most commonly at the isthmus where bone and cartilage meet.
They are typically a result from swimming, surfing, or diving in cold
water. Upon otoscopic examination, they appear as singular or multiple
masses. They are usually not painful unless touched. Osteomas can
continue to grow and interfere with the normal process of migration of
skin to the outer ear. If large enough, they may block the canal and
cause a conductive hearing loss. Osteomas can be surgically removed if

necessary.
Inflammation
 
Figure 13-8 illustrates external otitis (i.e., otitis externa), which is an
inflammatory condition of the ear canal. The organism that causes the
inflammation is either fungi or bacteria that invade breaks in the
epithelial lining of the ear canal. The organism resides in water and
becomes trapped in the tortuous ear canal when it is repeatedly exposed
to the water. Swimmers are prone to external otitis, hence its common
name “swimmer’s ear.” The normally oily lining of the canal becomes
inflamed, swollen, and itchy, creating a white discharge. The pinna can
be painful to the touch, particularly in the area of the tragus. External
otitis can either be acute or chronic. The individual prone to chronic
inflammation prevents reoccurrence by protecting the ears from water.
This can be accomplished with the use of custom earplugs worn during
hair washing or swimming. Hearing aid users must be particularly
careful to dry their ears before inserting their aids. The ear mold or shell
can trap moisture in the ear canal exposing the skin to bacteria or fungi.
 
Figure 13-8 Acute external otitis (otitis externa) is an inflammation
of the skin lining the ear canal. It is typically very painful and is
caused from repeated exposure to water. (Reprinted with
permission from Bickley, L.S., Szilagyi, P. (2003). Bates’ guide to
physical examination and history taking (8th ed.). Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 

Anomalies of the Middle Ear
 
Although anomalies of the middle ear can be congenital in nature,
especially if they are part of a genetic syndrome, they tend to be
relatively rare. The most common problems associated with the middle
ear are acquired. Two acquired anomalies of the middle ear deserve a
thorough discussion because of their prevalence in children and adults:
otitis media (OM) and otosclerosis.
ACQUIRED PATHOLOGIES OF THE MIDDLE EAR
Otitis Media
 
OM is an inflammation of the lining of the middle ear. It is the most
common of childhood infections and one of the most frequent reasons
parents take their children to the physician. According to Schappert
(1992) from the National Center for Health Statistics, visits to the
physician for OM in 1975 totaled 10 million. By 1990, the number had
increased to 25 million. As a population, children younger than 2 years
of age have the highest rate of office visits for OM. It has been
hypothesized that the high rate of OM in children is because they are
together in large groups such as daycares and preschools, where
exposure to the viruses and bacteria that cause the inflammation is more
likely. Grundfast and Carney (1987) offered some additional statistics
related to OM. In the United States, 85% to 90% of all children before
the age of 6 years will have had at least one ear infection. Half of the
children who have one ear infection before the age of one will have six
or more episodes in the following 2 years. Therefore, the younger they
start having infections, the more likely they are to continue. Nearly 20%
of children who suffer ear infections will at some point require surgery
to correct the problem. In addition, 25% to 40% of all upper respiratory
infections (URIs) are associated with OM.
Howie, Ploussard, and Sloyer (1975) reported that gender and
family history play a role in the incidence of OM. In terms of gender,
males have a higher incidence of OM than females. In terms of family

history, if a parent or parents had many ear infections when they were
children, their own children will most likely have several infections.
There is no OM gene per se, but facial features are inherited. For
example, poor function of the structures of the nasopharynx such as the
Eustachian tube (ET) can be inherited and can lead to bouts of OM.
There are several contributing factors that place a child at risk for
OM. One is the exposure to secondhand cigarette smoke (Ey et al.,
1995). The products in cigarette smoke can irritate the nasopharynx and
lead to the onset of OM. A child of low socioeconomic status who lives
where there are poor sanitary conditions or overcrowding and repeated
exposed to chemicals, viruses, and bacteria that cause URI will place the
child at greater risk for OM. Climate in and of itself is not a direct
contributor to OM, but children who spend most of their time indoors
because of poor outdoor weather conditions may be in close contact with
many people and therefore may pass around viruses and bacteria that
lead to URIs.
OM is nearly always the result of the Eustachian tube (ET) not
opening to ventilate the middle ear. It may become blocked by
inflammation of surrounding tissue. In particular, adenoid tissue may
swell in response to irritants, viruses or bacteria. The inflamed adenoids
block the nasopharyngeal opening of the ET. As was discussed in
Chapter 12, the ET must be able to open to ventilate the middle ear
cavity and thereby equalize air pressure between the middle ear and the
atmosphere. In its acute form, OM commonly develops in association
with an URI. Children and adults who have a syndrome or disorder
whose sequelae include structural or functional abnormalities of the
pharyngeal muscles are significantly at risk for middle ear disease.
There are basically three stages of OM: acute OM, OM with
effusion and OM with tympanic membrane perforation. Acute OM
commonly presents with a sudden onset of otalgia in association with
symptoms of URI such as rhinorrhea, nasal congestion, cough and
fever; however, these symptoms are not always present. Similarly, not
all cases of otalgia are caused by OM.
Otoscopy performed on an individual who presents with acute OM
reveals a red or yellow tympanic membrane depending on the degree of
inflammation and the amount of purulent material in the middle ear
cavity. There may be bulging of the pars flaccida or the entire eardrum.

The movement of the tympanic membrane may be diminished. If the
tympanic membrane is ruptured, ear pain will diminish but cloudy or
purulent drainage in the ear canal will be visible. Antibiotic therapy is
used to treat the infection and anti-inflammatory medication is used to
treat the pain.
OM with effusion is the stage where fluid occupies the normally
air-filled middle ear cavity. The fluid may be a remnant from the acute
stage or may develop silently without the presence of a bacterial
infection. OM with effusion creates a mild conductive hearing loss. On
average there is a 27 dB hearing loss based on pure tone air conduction
thresholds (see Figure 13-9). The majority of the loss is in the lower
frequencies. Long standing, untreated OM can lead to much more
complicated and severe ear disease processes, not to mention the
concomitant hearing loss causing a delay in speech development of
children who are in the critical years for speech and language
acquisition.
 
Figure 13-9 Typical audiometric pattern and hearing levels for a
right ear with otitis media.
 
When the ET does not function properly, it does not allow for
ventilation of the middle ear cavity. The air that is normally in the cavity
becomes stagnant and is absorbed by the membranous lining of the walls

of the cavity. As a result, air pressure within the cavity will decrease
(i.e., become negative) relative to atmospheric air pressure outside the
cavity. The negative pressure causes the eardrum to be drawn inward or
retracted from its normal position. The area of the pars flaccida is more
susceptible to this negative pressure. Retraction of the eardrum is what
causes the ear pain. Also as a result of the negative air pressure, serous
fluid is secreted by the mucous membrane that lines the middle ear
cavity. This fluid is thin and watery in consistency. If the ET continues
to remain closed or inflamed, the consistency of the middle ear fluid will
become thick and mucous-like. Bacteria can cause inflammation at any
stage and create a pusfilled space. The term mucoid OM would
eventually be applied with continued thickening of the effusion leading
to adhesive OM or “glue ear.” As the middle ear fluid gets thicker in
consistency, hearing loss gets progressively worse. At the point where
adhesive OM is present, there may be as much as a 40- to 50-dB
conductive hearing loss. The hearing loss from serous OM may be the
only sign of ear pathology. Middle ear fluid may not be obvious on
otoscopic examination, so detection is aided by the audiologist
performing tympanometry to measure the immittance (i.e., mobility) of
the eardrum. Middle ear fluid is indicated by a lack of movement, which
reveals itself as an abnormal (i.e., flat-type B) tympanogram (see
Figure 13-10).
 

Figure 13-10 Tympanograms: Type A tympanogram result for a
normal ventilated middle ear; Type B pattern indicates effusion
(lack of ventilation) in the middle ear space.
 
There are several surgical options for treatment of OM. When OM
has been attributed to blockage of the ET by hypertrophic (i.e., enlarged)
adenoids, an adenoidectomy will be recommended. If fluid has filled
the middle ear cavity, a myringotomy may be performed. A
myringotomy is an incision that is made in the tympanic membrane,
with suctioning of the fluid from the middle ear cavity being done
through the incision. The incision in the eardrum will heal in a matter of
days. There is a chance that fluid will form again if whatever is causing
the inflammation of the ET is not treated.
A pressure equalization (PE) tube, made of silastic material, is
placed through a myringotomy incision into the eardrum (see Figure 13-
11). The tube acts to ventilate the middle ear cavity by allowing outside
atmospheric air to enter through the eardrum, thereby circumventing the
function of the ET. The result is that the middle ear space is ventilated,
with hearing returning to normal. Insertion of PE tubes buys time for the
ET to begin working on its own or the child to outgrow whatever caused
the ET to dysfunction in the first place. A PE tube will stay in place for
months, until the eardrum heals and the tube is expelled into the ear
canal. The normal migration of the ear canal epithelium will carry the
tube along until it reaches the entrance of the canal where it will simply
be sloughed off or can be reached by the physician’s curette. When
tubes are in place, there is concern about keeping water out of the ears.
Conceivably, bacteria carried in water could enter the middle ear
through the patent PE tube and cause an infection. Custom earplugs can
be fit for hair washing, bathing, and swimming.

 
Figure 13-11 Myringotomy and placement of a pressure
equalization (PE) tube into the tympanic membrane. (Reprinted
with permission from Anatomical Chart Company.)
 
Complications of OM
 
Some complications of OM can be very significant and some can be
minor. The most common complication is tympanosclerosis or scar
tissue on the eardrum. It is the result of tissue changes that form on the
TM as a result of recurrent ear infections. Tympanosclerosis is often
seen as a white calcium plaque or scar tissue on the pars tensa.
Fortunately, it has little effect on hearing.
Perforations of the eardrum can be caused by chronic ear infections
where the TM ruptures and fails to heal, but can also be caused by
trauma such as a puncture or forceful slap to the ear by a cupped hand or
loud explosion. A perforation is described by its location on the
eardrum: central, attic or marginal. A central perforation is shown in
Figure 13-12. Small perforations will usually heal spontaneously.
However, larger perforations generally require a surgical repair called a
myringoplasty or Type I tympanoplasty. The surgeon uses the patient’s
own tissue (usually taken from the back of the ear) to create a graft that

will be inserted underneath the eardrum remnant to close the perforation.
Remember that the middle ear cavity has the ability to
communicate with the mastoid air cells; thus, bacterial secretory mucous
(i.e., acute OM) can spread into the mastoid cavity, resulting in
mastoiditis, a potentially life-threatening infection. Infected debris in
the mastoid is trapped and can only be removed by surgical cleaning of
this space. The surgeon removes the infected debris by drilling out the
individual air cells leaving one large cavity (referred to as a
mastoidectomy). The healthy cavity must then be mechanically cleaned
periodically to prevent further disease. Another complication of OM is
the formation of a cholesteatoma, a cyst made of layers of epithelial
debris from the tympanic membrane. The cyst contains considerable
amounts of keratin, a protein found in cells. Formation of a
cholesteatoma is usually associated with poor ET function and chronic
OM where the TM has been in a long-standing retracted state. A pocket
is formed in the area of the pars flaccida by the continual retraction from
negative middle ear pressure. As illustrated in Figure 13-13, the pocket
retains sloughed debris. Inflammation causes the pocket to swell and
expand. It can eventually invade the epitympanic recess or attic of the
middle ear cavity. The expanding cholesteatoma destructively
encroaches upon the middle ear cavity and structures. As it continues to
grow, it has the potential to erode away portions of the ossicles and
invade other structures such as the mastoid air cells, the horizontal
semicircular canal, and even the bones of the cranium. Its aggressive
capability makes it potentially life threatening. It is also a major cause of
a conductive hearing loss. A cholesteatoma should be surgically
removed and monitored because of its ability to reform.

 
Figure 13-12 Central left tympanic membrane perforation typically
caused by chronic ear infections.
 
 
Figure 13-13 A cholesteatoma is a complication from poor
Eustachian tube function and otitis media. Debris forms in a
retraction pocket in the pars flaccida region of the tympanic
membrane. (Reprinted with permission from Anatomical Chart
Company.
 

Otosclerosis
 
Otosclerosis is a middle ear disease in which normal bone is
progressively reabsorbed and replaced by spongy bone growth. This
condition most often takes place around the footplate of the stapes and
the oval window. The new growth of bone interferes with the normal
vibration of the stapes footplate. It is not painful and the patient does not
even know what is happening except for the progression of a hearing
loss. There are often head noises, typically a roaring or seashell-like
sound. The progression of the disease is slow and takes place over
several years. Otosclerosis is usually bilateral, first seen in one ear and
then progressing to the other ear. However, the disease tends to progress
at different rates for each ear. The ears are otoscopically normal with the
possible exception of Schwartze’s sign, a reddish or pinkish glow
visualized through the tympanic membrane produced by increased
vascularity on the promontory.
 
Figure 13-14 Typical audiometric pattern and bone conduction
Carhart’s notch for a left ear with otosclerosis.
 
Otosclerosis impedes the vibration of the footplate of the stapes

resulting in a conductive hearing loss. The hearing loss worsens in
degree as the disease progresses. Audiometry and immittance measures
are performed to aid in the identification of this disease. As charted in
Figure 13-14, the conductive portion of the loss is usually moderate (no
greater than a 60-dB loss) depending on the disease progression. Bone
conduction thresholds are often elevated at 2000 Hz. This classic pattern
is called Carhart’s notch and is typically only seen with otosclerosis.
The notch in the bone conduction threshold for 2000 Hz is thought to be
a result of the diminished resonance of the ossicular chain.
There are varying estimates of the prevalence of hearing loss as a
result of otosclerosis. Pearson (1974) reported the prevalence as high as
10% of the general population. Declau et al. (2001) also studied
prevalence and compared it to what was seen clinically. Their estimate
of 0.3% (3 per 1000) was much more conservative than Pearson’s
estimate. Many clinicians would agree that the prevalence reported by
Declau et al. (2001) is a more realistic estimate. The cause of
otosclerosis is not fully understood. It may begin at any age but there
seems to be a relationship between otosclerosis and the timing of
hormonal changes typically seen in puberty, pregnancy, or menopause.
Otosclerosis tends to be more prevalent in families and more so in
Caucasian women.
Otosclerosis cannot be treated medically but surgery is an option.
The goal of surgery is to restore the air conduction hearing levels for the
patient. Amplification is also an option when surgery is not elected. A
good candidate for surgery should exhibit a substantial air-bone gap
(greater than 20 dB) with normal or near-normal bone conduction
thresholds and good word recognition scores. The surgery, called a
stapedectomy, involves removal of the stapes superstructure and
footplate (see Figure 13-15). Upon removal of the stapes, the oval
window is sealed with connective fascia tissue. The stapes is then
replaced with a prosthetic device made of Teflon and titanium. The head
of the prosthesis is crimped to the lenticular process of the incus, thereby
reestablishing the ossicular chain. The other end of the prosthesis is
articulated with the oval window. The intact chain can once again
transmit vibrations to the cochlea. When otosclerosis is bilateral, surgery
is performed on one ear at a time; the ear with the larger air-bone gap is
usually operated on first. The second ear surgery is delayed a minimum

of 6 months to ensure that the initial result is successful. Surgery is
considered successful when the preoperative air-bone gap is closed.
 
Figure 13-15 Stapedectomy for otosclerosis. A. Arrow points to
spongy bone growth on the stapes footplate. B. Stapes removed. C.
Footplate is removed. D. Prosthesis placed into position. (Reprinted
with permission from Smeltzer, S.C., Bare, B.G. (2000). Textbook
of medical-surgical nursing (9th ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.)
 
Anomalies of the Inner Ear
 
GENETICS OF HEARING LOSS
Smith, Green, and Van Camp (1999) authored an excellent review of
genetics and hearing loss. They reported that genetics account for
approximately 50% of the cases of hearing loss. The remaining 50% are
acquired (i.e., nongenetic) from environmental causes. There is
however, within the acquired environmental group 25% that are
idiopathic in nature, meaning that there is no known cause.
Hereditary hearing loss through genetic transmission may be
syndromic or nonsyndromic. A syndrome is a consistent pattern of
abnormalities and/ or symptoms that results from the same underlying

cause. The term nonsyndromic refers to a disorder that occurs in
isolation of any other genetic features. Seventy percent of genetic
hearing losses are nonsyndromic and 30% are syndromic.
The mode of inheritance typically takes one of three forms:
autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked recessive. For
autosomal dominant, one parent carries the dominant gene on at least
one chromosome and he or she is affected by the trait (in this case,
hearing loss). The genetic transmission from one parent is sufficient to
produce the disorder. Therefore, each time there is a pregnancy, there is
a 50% chance the baby will receive the dominant gene trait (see Table
13-1).
Autosomal recessive trait is illustrated in Table 13-2. The parent
carries the gene but does not exhibit the trait (i.e., hearing loss). The
parent most likely would not even be aware that they carry the gene. The
genetic trait from only one parent is not enough to produce the disorder
in the offspring. With autosomal recessive transmission, both carrier
parents are needed for the trait to be expressed (i.e., a deaf or hard of
hearing offspring). Each time there is a pregnancy, the baby will have a
25% chance of the recessive trait being expressed, 50% chance of
receiving the recessive gene and being a carrier like the parents, and
25% chance of losing the recessive gene altogether.
 
A genetic (but nonsyndromic) hearing loss is suspected when a

child is either born with a hearing loss or acquired it very early in their
life. During the period 1996–1997, researchers such as Kumar and
Gilula (1996) identified the gene responsible for the majority of
recessive inherited sensorineural deafness. The offspring of two
(hearing) carrier parents inherits the mutated gene (GJB2) located on the
13th chromosome. The gene GJB2 encodes for the gap junction
channel protein connexin 26. Gap junctions are clusters of intercellular
channels that allow communication between cells. Without proper
cellular communication, the chemical balance of the endolymph and the
perilymph within the organ of Corti cannot be maintained.
 
 
X-linked recessive trait accounts for only about 2% of the cases of

congenital hearing loss. Transmission is always from mother to son as
males get either their dominant X or recessive x chromosome from their
mother. The mother does not have the hearing loss and she most likely is
unaware that she is a carrier. When the gene trait is expressed, the son
inherits his mother’s recessive x for hearing loss. When that son has
children, his daughters will inherit the recessive gene trait making them
carriers; his sons will be fine because they will inherit either their X or x
from their mother. X-linked recessive trait is illustrated in Table 13-3.
CONGENITAL DISORDERS OF THE INNER EAR
Anomalies of the inner ear may be associated with genetic syndromes or
may occur alone. The most extreme and rare form of an inner ear
anomaly is called Michel dysplasia. The term dysplasia means a
malformation of the bone that may occur in any part of the body. Michel
dysplasia results when cochlear development is arrested early during the
embryonic period. With extreme dysplasia, there are no definitive
cochlear or vestibular structures (Kavanagh & Magill, 1989). A common
cavity may occur and in some cases the entire auditory nerve may also
be absent. Michel dysplasia may affect only the cochlea and the
vestibule, with the semicircular canals being essentially normal. Michel
dysplasia is seen in 1% of individuals with profound hearing loss.
Mondini dysplasia involves the normal development of the first
1½ turns of the cochlea. The remaining turn will be either absent or
markedly malformed in that there is no separation between the osseous
and membranous labyrinth. The vestibule and semicircular canals may
or may not be normally developed. Mondini dysplasia may be present at
birth or develop later in adult life. Since the basal end of the cochlea is
essentially missing, the loss in the high frequencies will be profound.
Scheibe dysplasia is the most common form of congenital
malformation of the inner ear. The bony labyrinth is typically complete
and intact. However, the membranous labyrinth is intact for the
semicircular canals and utricle but the saccule and cochlear duct (scala
media) are poorly defined with atrophy of the organ of Corti. The degree
of hearing loss is of course profound.
Alexander aplasia is typically limited to the absence of the basal
turn of the cochlear duct, organ of Corti, and ganglion cells. Absence of

the basal portion of the cochlea will result in highfrequency hearing loss
while low-frequency hearing remains relatively intact.
Associated Anomalies
 
Syndromes present themselves from a genetic origin 30% of the time.
Hearing loss is but one of the associated anomalies. The other anomalies
that are frequently seen in syndromes with hearing loss are classified as:
   integumentary (pertaining to the skin)
   skeletal
   ocular (visual impairment)
   other (commonly, renal or cardiac).
When an error in the genetic message interrupts the embryologic
developmental process in one area (such as skin), another area (such as
skeletal formation) may also be disrupted. Integumentary anomalies
pertain to pigmentation changes of the skin. Integumentary anomalies
and congenital sensorineural hearing loss are the chief sequelae of many
syndromes. Both skin and portions of the cochlea have the same
embryological origin. The genetic message that results in the abnormal
patterns of pigmentation such as albinism (i.e., a lack of pigmentation)
or piebaldism (i.e., strips of too much or too little pigmentation) may
also result in a severe congenital sensorineural hearing loss.
Waardenburg syndrome is an example of a syndrome with multiple
associated anomalies.
 
A syndrome characterized by a skeletal defect is Klippel-Feil
syndrome. Persons with this syndrome exhibit a shortened neck,
curvature of the spine, and within the middle ear a poorly shaped stapes.

The origin of skeletal and ossicular malformations can often be traced
back to the same embryologic beginnings. Poor fusion of the cranial
structures is sometimes associated with atresia of the ear canal.
Ocular anomalies are commonly associated with hearing loss. A
variety of ocular anomalies are seen with Crouzon syndrome. These
anomalies can range from complete absence of the eyes, to widely
separated eyes, to bulging of the eyes. Usher’s syndrome is associated
with a slow progressive loss of vision resulting from retinitis
pigmentosa (i.e., atrophy of the retina) and a gradual loss of hearing.
Visual impairment is one of the three most common disorders associated
with hearing loss. Table 13-4 presents a brief chart of genetic syndromes
associated with hearing loss. Note the associated anomalies that often
accompany the hearing loss.
ACQUIRED ETIOLOGY OF CONGENITAL HEARING
LOSS
The TORCH Complex
 
Twenty-five percent of the cases of congenital hearing loss are acquired
from various etiologies. From the third to ninth week of gestation, the
developing embryo is extremely susceptible to teratogenic agents. It is
during this period that the fetal organs are formed from the primitive
germ cell layers; therefore, it is the timing of fetal exposure that
determines the severity of the problem. When present in the fetal
environment, a teratogenic agent may cause disorders that affect the
baby’s development and/or learning. Maternal infections are of primary
concern; in particular, the major teratogenic agents that cross the
pregnant mother’s placenta to infect the fetus are referred to by the
acronym TORCH: Toxoplasmosis, Other (including syphilis), Rubella,
Cytomegalovirus, and Herpes. Some of the TORCH infections, such as
toxoplasmosis and syphilis, can be effectively treated with antibiotics if
the mother is diagnosed early in her pregnancy. Many of the viral
TORCH infections have no effective treatment, but some, notably
Rubella, can be prevented by vaccinating the mother prior to pregnancy.
If the mother has active herpes simplex, delivery by Caesarean section

can prevent the newborn from contact and consequent infection with this
virus.
Toxoplasmosis is a parasitic infection contracted by consumption
of contaminated raw meats and eggs as well as from improper handling
of cat feces. The parasite called Toxoplasma gondii multiplies in the
intestine of cats and is shed in cat feces, mainly into litter boxes and
garden soil. Healthy mothers usually do not suffer ill effects from
toxoplasmosis; at most they may feel like they have the flu. The disease
is transmitted to the developing fetus through the placenta. Infected
babies may not develop the disease or they may become very ill. The
exposed newborn often has low birth weight, jaundice, an enlarged liver,
inflammation of the retina, and hearing loss which may be moderate to
severe and progressive. Toxoplasmosis is preventable by avoiding
exposure to the agents that carry the parasite. If you have been infected
previously (at least 6 to 9 months before your pregnancy) with
toxoplasma, you will develop immunity to it. The infection will not be
active when you become pregnant, and so there is rarely a risk to the
baby.
Congenital syphilis is a sexually transmitted bacterial infection
(Treponema pallidum) that is passed from the mother to her fetus. The
infection affects many of the baby’s systems and early signs include skin
lesions, meningitis, mental retardation, seizures, and hearing loss to list
just a few. The disease was dubbed the “great imitator” because so many
of its signs and symptoms are indistinguishable from those of other
diseases. The sensorineural hearing loss is typically delayed in onset,
developing at any time during childhood or adulthood. The loss may
have a sudden onset or may progress slowly, and may be unilateral or
bilateral. Early identification and prompt treatment with high doses of
antibiotics improves the potential for reversibility.
Congenital rubella is a viral infection passed from the mother to
her baby through the placenta. Infection spreads through direct contact
with discharge from the nose or throat of an affected individual. If the
infection is contracted within the first trimester of pregnancy, it poses
the greatest risk to the developing fetus. Rubella syndrome in the
newborn results in a consistent pattern of physical abnormalities
characterized by rash, low birth weight, small head size (i.e.,
microcephaly), cardiac abnormalities, hearing loss, visual problems, and

bulging fontanelle. Since it is a viral infection, there is no cure; only
treatment of the symptoms is possible. An epidemic of rubella occurred
in the 1960s; however, the development of a vaccine in 1968 has greatly
reduced the incidence of this disease.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV), a virus of the herpes group, can be
transmitted sexually or by close contact with infected secretions. It is a
virus most humans are exposed to at some time in their life, but typically
only individuals with a weakened immune system become ill from CMV
infection. By 40 years of age, between 50% and 80% of adults in the
United States have been infected with CMV. Adults acquire CMV
through sexual contact with an infected partner who is shedding the
virus in blood, semen or vaginal fluids. Adults and children can acquire
it from contact with infected children shedding the virus in blood, saliva,
and urine as might be the case in a daycare environment. An infected
mother may even transmit the virus to her infant through contact with
breast milk. Pass, Hutto, Reynolds, and Polhill (1984) tested a cohort of
children less than 12 months of age at a typical daycare center. Less than
10% of the children were shedding the virus at the time they enrolled in
the daycare but 6 to 12 months later 78% were shedding the virus. Once
an individual is infected with the virus, it remains for life. Eventually,
the virus goes dormant and the individual’s immune system develops
antibodies to fight it. Therefore, for the majority of people, it is “silent”
and not a serious problem. However, a primary (or first) CMV infection
in a pregnant woman can cause serious harm to the developing fetus.
About 1% to 4% of pregnant women experience a primary CMV
infection. Thirty-three percent of these women pass the virus to their
unborn babies. High levels of stress can also reactivate the dormant
virus in a pregnant woman but this happens less than 1% of the time.
A baby infected in utero (i.e., congenital CMV) may be
symptomatic or asymptomatic at birth. Five percent of infected
newborns are symptomatic and present with symptoms ranging from
mild to severe. The mild symptoms may include being small for
gestation age (SGA), having an enlarged spleen or liver, exhibiting
jaundice, and having a distinctive purplish rash. Up to 10% of
symptomatic infants die shortly after birth; of the survivors, many suffer
from serious impairments such as mental retardation, hearing loss, and
visual 
impairment. 
Sensorineural 
hearing 
loss 
is 
present 
in

approximately 40% of these symptomatic infants. Infants with the more
severe effects from primary CMV are born to women who contracted
the infection in the first trimester of pregnancy.
Approximately 95% of babies who are infected with the virus in
utero are asymptomatic at birth (Oshiro, 1999). There is approximately a
5% chance of these babies developing a complication. Hearing loss is
the most common complication (in 7% to 15% of cases) and very often
is delayed in its onset, with 4 years of age being the average age of
onset. Researchers such as Foulon et al. (2008) have seen the onset of
hearing loss attributed to congenital CMV up to the age of 15. Once the
hearing loss presents itself, it is always progressive and usually severe to
profound in degree. To summarize the incidence of congenital CMV,
one child out of 150 births is infected. Approximately one child out of
750 born with the infection develops permanent disabilities; this equates
to 6000 children each year. Congenital CMV is as common a cause of
serious disability as Down syndrome and fetal alcohol syndrome. Being
a common cause of hearing loss in childhood, regular audiometric
evaluations should be conducted in children with known congenital
CMV.
Neonatal herpes is a sexually transmitted viral disease that can be
passed from the infected mother to her fetus either during pregnancy or
during delivery if the disease is active. One of every 3000 newborns
delivered is infected with neonatal herpes. Over 70% of infants infected
with the herpes simplex virus are from mothers with a primary infection
who have asymptomatic viral shedding during labor. Infected infants
even with immediate treatment may have central nervous system
involvement and sensorineural hearing loss.
Bacterial Meningitis
 
Bacterial meningitis is an acquired pathology that is spread by direct
contact with nasal secretions, saliva or sputum from an infected
individual. It can also be a major complication from an untreated ear or
sinus infection. It is seen almost exclusively in children less than 5 years
of age. Contracting the infection places the individual at significant risk
for hearing loss. The bacteria enter the blood stream and spread to the
meninges covering the brain and the spinal cord (in particular the

subarachnoid space). The extent the infection spreads explains the
symptoms including high fever, vomiting, a stiff neck, and malaise.
Several bacterial strains can be responsible for meningitis but 70% of
the infections are from the haemophilus influenzae Type b (Hib).
Although Hib is the most common bacteria to cause meningitis,
fortunately it is the least likely to result in hearing loss (in only 3% to
16% of cases). Other causes of bacterial meningitis include the
pneumococcal and meningococcal strains. These have a much lower
incidence of causing meningitis but a higher incidence of causing
hearing loss (24% to 36% of cases). Treatment for meningitis is with
antibiotics delivered intravenously. Successful treatment depends on
prompt diagnosis. A lumbar puncture is often necessary to check for the
presence of the bacteria in the cerebrospinal fluid. The haemophilus
influenzae Type b bacteria can be safely and effectively prevented from
causing meningitis with the use of the Hib vaccine that was introduced
in 1990.
Severe to profound sensorineural hearing loss occurs when the
cochlea is invaded by the bacterial infection. Any episode of meningitis
warrants a hearing evaluation even before the patient is discharged from
the hospital. It is recommended that any finding of hearing loss be
followed with monthly reevaluation until the hearing loss stabilizes. The
major complication of an infection invading the cochlea is the
ossification of the bony labyrinth. The ossification process begins to
appear within 3 months of the onset of meningitis and may be complete
by 1 year. The ossification is often bilateral. If the hearing loss is
profound and a cochlear implant (CI) is considered (see Figure 13-16),
the presence of ossification within the cochlea can create problems with
placement of the electrode array (refer to the Why You Need to Know
box on the CI); therefore, the typical waiting period is waived to
expedite the surgery before ossification can become too advanced and
reduce the likelihood of successful implantation.
Other Risk Factors
 
There are several other birth complications that place an infant at risk for
an acquired hearing loss. Prior to the advent of universal newborn
hearing screening, the presence of “risk factors” were used to aid in

early identification efforts. It is now accepted that screening children
based on risk factors alone is not enough. Recall that 25% of cases of
hearing loss are idiopathic in origin. Additionally, there might not be an
obvious family history of hearing loss. As previously discussed, 70% of
the cases of nonsyndromic hearing loss are due to autosomal recessive
gene transmission where the individual is unaware of the genetic link.
With that said, the 2007 Joint Committee on Infant Hearing (JCIH)
established a position statement outlining principles and guidelines for
Early Hearing Detection and Intervention (EHDI) programs.
 
Figure 13-16 A typical cochlear implant (CI) system. Sounds are
picked up by the small directional microphone located in the
headset at the ear. A thin cord carries the sound from the
microphone to the speech processor which, in turn, filters, analyzes,

and digitizes the sound into coded signals that are sent from the
processor to the transmitting coil. The transmitting coil sends the
coded signals (RF signals) to the CI located under the person’s
skin. The implant delivers the appropriate electrical signals to an
array of electrodes that have been inserted into the cochlea. The
electrodes within the cochlea stimulate the remaining fibers of the
cochlear portion of the vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIII).
These fibers then send the sound information to the auditory cortex
for interpretation. (Reprinted with permission from Nettina, S. M.
(2001). The Lippincott manual of nursing practice (7th ed.).
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.)
 
The JCIH endorses early detection of and intervention for infants
with hearing loss. The goal of EHDI is to maximize linguistic
competence and literacy development for children who are deaf or hard
of hearing. Without appropriate opportunities to learn language, these
children will fall behind their hearing peers in communication,
cognition, reading, and social–emotional development. Such delays may
result in lower educational and employment levels in adulthood. To
maximize the outcome for infants who are deaf or hard of hearing, the
hearing of all infants should be screened at no later than 1 month of age.
Those who do not pass screening should have a comprehensive
audiological evaluation at no later than 3 months of age. Infants with
confirmed hearing loss should receive appropriate intervention at no
later than 6 months of age from health care and education professionals
with expertise in hearing loss and deafness in infants and young
children. Regardless of previous hearing–screening outcomes, all infants
with or without risk factors should receive ongoing surveillance of
communicative development beginning at 2 months of age during well-
child visits in the medical home [boldface added]. EHDI systems
should guarantee seamless transitions for infants and their families
through this process (Joint Committee on Infant Hearing, 2007, p. 898).
The position statement does establish several criteria for identifying
children at risk for congenital, delayedonset, permanent, or progressive
hearing loss during childhood (several of these criteria have been
discussed in this chapter). These criteria include:

   caregiver concern regarding hearing, speech, language, or
developmental delay
   a family history of permanent childhood hearing loss
   a stay in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) of more than 5 days
   in utero infections, such as CMV, herpes, rubella, syphilis and
toxoplasmosis
   syndromes known to be associated with hearing loss or progressive or
lateonset hearing loss
   physical findings that are associated with a syndrome known to
include a sensorineural or permanent conductive hearing loss
   the presence of craniofacial anomalies, including those that involve
the pinna, ear canal, ear tags, ear pits, and temporal bone anomalies
   culture positive postnatal infections associated with sensorineural
hearing loss including confirmed bacterial meningitis
   neurodegenerative disorders or sensory motor neuropathies
   head trauma, especially basal skull/temporal bone fractures that
require hospitalization
   chemotherapy.
The position statement recommends that the hospital-based EHDI
screening program provides the parents with information about hearing,
speech, and language milestones. The screening results will be sent to
the medical home for management and any need for referral and
followup. The primary care provider will refer to an audiologist any
patient for whom there are concerns or findings consistent with hearing
loss. Therefore, for infants with a risk factor which may be considered
low risk, at least one audiology assessment by 24 to 30 months is the
recommendation. In contrast, for an infant with risk factors known to be
associated with late onset or progressive hearing loss (such as CMV or
family history), early and more frequent assessment is appropriate. Early
and more frequent can be interpreted as every 6 months or more,
depending on the clinical findings and concerns.
Why You Need to Know
 
The cochlear implant (CI) is a management tool for deafness, not a
treatment for deafness. In fact, the CI relies on the functioning
structures of the auditory mechanism. The implant provides electrical

stimulation to the cochlear nerve fibers by bypassing the missing or
damaged hair cells. In most cases of deafness, the cochlear nerve
remains functional. Sounds are picked up by the implant’s external
microphone and sent to a processor. The processor converts the
acoustic signal into a digital signal. The transmitter, held in place by a
magnet, sends the signal via radio waves to the implanted receiver to be
delivered by the electrode array hugging the modiolus. The receiver is
surgically placed in a well drilled into the mastoid process. The
electrode array is inserted through a hole drilled into the promontory
(basal turn of the cochlea). The processor takes advantage of the
tonotopic organization of the cochlea, delivering high-frequency
information to electrodes hugging the basal end of the cochlea and low-
frequency information to electrodes hugging the apex. The main
indication for CI candidacy (adults and children) is limited speech
recognition with amplification. Also paramount is for adults who are
prelingually deafened and parents of children with severe-to-profound
hearing loss to have a strong desire for oral communication. The
Federal Drug Administration has approved CIs for children at age 12
months with enrollment in an educational environment that stresses oral
communication.
 
ACQUIRED DISORDERS OF LATER ONSET
Ménière’s Disease
 
Ménière’s disease was first described in 1861 by the French physician,
Prosper Ménière. Classic Ménière’s syndrome is characterized by
vertigo, fluctuating hearing loss, ear noise, and a pressure sensation in
the ear. Episodic vertigo is often accompanied by nausea and vomiting.
The hearing loss is sensorineural in nature. In the initial stages, the
typical configuration involves low-frequency hearing loss, but as the
disease progresses the higher frequencies will decline as well, flattening
out the audiometric pattern. The hearing loss often fluctuates, worsening
just prior to an attack and usually improving as the other symptoms
subside. The individual may experience an unusual intolerance to loud

sounds known as recruitment. The involved ear will likely be afflicted
by low-pitch seashell or roaring tinnitus. The tinnitus usually gets more
intense just prior to an attack. A full, plugged or pressure sensation may
be experienced in the involved ear. This may be a constant symptom or
one that is only present just prior to an attack. Many sufferers experience
an aura or premonition of an impending attack. The disease usually
affects one ear but there may be bilateral involvement. Males under the
age of 50 are more prone to the disease.
The symptoms of Ménière’s are associated with disturbances that
affect the entire inner ear. The disease, therefore, involves the structures
related to both the vestibular and auditory systems. Recall the one
structure that is common to both is the membranous labyrinth. The
disease causes a change in the endolymphatic fluid volume within the
labyrinth. It is not clear if the cause is related to excessive production of
endolymph or the inefficient reabsorption of excessive endolymph.
Many experts believe that endolymphatic fluid volume builds
within the labyrinth to the point that Reissner’s membrane will bulge
and eventually rupture. Recall, Reissner’s membrane separates endo-
lymph in the scala media from perilymph in the scala vestibuli. When
Reissner’s membrane ruptures there is a mixing of the two fluids. The
abrupt chemical disruption accounts for the sudden severe attack of
vertigo with nausea and vomiting. After the acute attack of vertigo
subsides, hearing will improve and the ear noise will alleviate. Attacks
vary in their frequency but the patient experiences vertigo for several
hours and may experience unsteadiness for days. This process may
repeat itself in as little as several days or may not occur again for several
months. Hence, the episodic nature of the disease is very unpredictable.
Ménière’s disease has been attributed to many different causes:
allergic reaction, trauma, viral infection, syphilis, and genetic origin.
However, the primary etiology of Ménière’s disease is idiopathic,
meaning the underlying cause is unknown. There is no cure for
Ménière’s disease, but medical intervention is often helpful in managing
the symptoms. Treatment involves controlling the dizziness with
medication that suppresses the central nervous system’s reaction to the
unequal information from the vestibular structures. Treatment also
focuses on prevention of future attacks by diet and lifestyle changes. It is
recommended that the sufferer avoid factors known to exacerbate the

symptoms such as alcohol, caffeine, tobacco, foods high in sodium, and
to the extent possible, stress. Diuretics may be prescribed to control
symptoms by reducing fluid retention and antihistamines may be used to
control allergies.
Ménière’s syndrome is diagnosed by an extensive case history and
audiometric evaluation to document the hearing loss by configuration
and degree. Serial audiometric evaluations are performed to document
the fluctuation of hearing levels. The integrity of the vestibular system
may be measured and monitored with electronystagmography (ENG).
The physician will use nuclear imaging techniques to rule out the
presence of a tumor on the vestibulocochlear nerve.
Surgical procedures are usually attempted only when medical
treatment has been exhausted and the patient is incapacitated by the
disease. The least invasive procedure involves the placement of a shunt
to reestablish the function of the endolymphatic sac. In theory, the shunt
should decompress the excessive fluid in the sac and allow the inner ear
to reequilibrate, taking pressure off the nerve endings of hearing and
balance. The fluctuating hearing levels should stabilize. When there is
residual hearing worth preserving a vestibular neurectomy is the
procedure of choice (Mattox, 2000). The vestibular branch of the
vestibulocochlear nerve is sectioned. Control of vertigo is successful in
90% of patients as it insures that the diseased vestibular system can no
longer send signals to the brain. In individuals who have very little
functional hearing and very poor discrimination, where preservation is
not the goal, a labyrinthectomy can be performed. This is a procedure
where the entire diseased inner ear is surgically removed or chemically
poisoned with ototoxic drugs (i.e., drugs that are toxic only to the
hearing mechanism).
Following surgery, there is usually a period of severe vertigo. This
can be controlled with medication and should be temporary as the
opposite (i.e., healthy) ear takes over the command of the entire balance
function and assumes full control. If one vestibular system is sending
damaged signs to the brain, the brain has trouble adapting since it is
intermittently getting wrong signals mixed with correct ones. However,
if the inner ear balance nerve is completely shut off on one side and the
damaged system removed, the brain will adapt to this new situation
since it now receives only correct signals from the one remaining

healthy system which will control the entire balance function. Sadly,
about 20% of people with Meniere’s disease will also develop the illness
in their opposite ear later in their lifetime.
Autoimmune Inner Ear Disease
 
The immune system is very complex and is the first line of defense
against infectious organisms and foreign substances that invade our
body and cause disease. The immune system is made up of a network of
cells and proteins that work together to fight the invaders. For the most
part the immune system functions without a problem. However, when
dysfunction occurs, the result can be relatively minor or can result in
major disease. Certain lifestyle issues (i.e., poor diet, cigarette smoking)
and even some prescription medications can trigger an improper
response from the immune system. Some diseases, such as rheumatoid
arthritis, are believed to be caused by an overactive immune system.
How the immune system works is not completely understood. A healthy
immune system recognizes “invaders” such as viruses, bacteria or
anything foreign that is not a normal part of the body and destroys it.
Inflammation is a major function of the immune system, yet sometimes
this works against us. Autoimmune inner ear disease (AIED) is the
result of an improper response from the immune system that affects the
auditory and balance system. This is a syndrome characterized by
progressive hearing loss and/ or dizziness which is caused by antibodies
that attack and cause damage to the inner ear. The classic set of
symptoms (and hence the term syndrome) are: bilateral progressive
hearing loss accompanied with tinnitus (i.e., ringing, buzzing or
humming in the ears), spells of dizziness, and abnormal blood tests for
general autoimmune diseases. The diagnosis is based on history,
physical examination, blood tests, and hearing and balance tests. AIED
may resemble other inner ear disorders such as those seen in Meniere’s
disease, auditory neuropathy, and even syphilis. In general, autoimmune
disorders occur more frequently in women than men and less frequently
in children and the elderly. There are several theories as to what causes
AIED. One theory is bystander damage. In this theory, damage to the
inner ear causes cytokines (involved in the regulation of various
inflammatory responses) to be released which provoke, after a delay,

additional immune reactions. This theory might explain the occasional
cyclical nature of the disease.
Why You Need to Know
 
Cytokines are a class of proteins that are secreted by cells into the
circulation or directly into the tissue. The cytokine proteins locate the
target immune cells and act by binding with them. The result is
inflammation. A certain amount of inflammation is necessary for
healing; however, overproduction or inappropriate production of
certain cytokines by the body can result in disease. For example, in
many types of arthritis, the body’s inflammatory response is misdirected.
 
Another theory is crossreaction. Antibodies created to fight a virus
or bacteria that are attacking the body can mistakenly attack the inner
ear too as they can share common antigens (Boulassel, Tornasi,
Deggoui, & Gersdorff, 2001). It is also common for antigens to be
released following surgery, so the body may wrongly mount an attack
on the “foreign” antigen residing in the inner ear.
An early diagnosis is important in the treatment of AIED. With
proper treatment, the hearing loss may be reversed or at least the
progression arrested. The standard treatment for an autoimmune reaction
is often the same antirejection medications used for transplant patients.
Chemotherapy is an option sometimes delivered as longterm therapy.
Unfortunately, the side effects of these medications can be numerous or
dramatic and can affect the entire body.
Presbycusis
 
An acquired hearing disorder that is the result of aging is referred to as
presbycusis. This term has been used to describe the “deafness of
aging.” Not surprisingly, the prevalence of presbycusis increases as age
increases. The incidence of hearing loss is approximately 30% to 40%
for all individuals over 65 years of age, increasing to 40% to 66% for
individuals older than 75 years, and more than 80% for individuals older
than 85 years (American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, 2008).
As an overall health concern for the elderly, hearing loss is the third

most prevalent chronic health concern ranking just behind arthritis and
hypertension.
Presbycusis is difficult to study as an isolated hearing disorder. By
the time an individual’s life extends into the 70s through 90s, their
auditory mechanism has been exposed to many agents (e.g.,
medications, noise, and trauma) that could contribute to a loss of hearing
sensitivity. The loss of sensitivity is gradual and the affected person
notices that they have increasing difficulty understanding conversation.
There are many peripheral changes that occur to the outer and
middle ear structures with advancing age. The tissue of the pinna loses
elasticity and the skin becomes scaly and dry, appearing translucent with
pigmentation spots. Males experience an increase in hair growth within
the folds of the pinna. The changes in the appearance of the pinna do not
directly affect hearing sensitivity. The epithelial lining of the ear canal
becomes thin and dry. The skin has difficulty migrating to the external
meatus, which can result in obstruction or impaction that can then result
in a temporary conductive hearing loss.
Changes that occur in the middle ear affect the conduction of sound
into the inner ear. The middle ear muscles and tendons atrophy with
advanced age. There may be a loss of elasticity in the ossicular joints,
rigidity of the ossicular chain, and a loss of elasticity of the tympanic
membrane. These structural changes may add a slight conductive
component to the hearing loss.
The majority of the changes related to advanced age occur within
the structures of the cochlea or cochlear nerve. Degeneration of the hair
cells and basilar membrane will take place initially at the basal end of
the cochlea. The cochlear branch of the vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial
nerve VIII) may partially atrophy as well as the spiral ganglion.
Degeneration of the stria vascularis causes a disruption in the ion
balance necessary for cellular function for the entire cochlea.
Schuknecht (1974) described specific audiometric configurations
that are predictable from the structural changes. The type of hearing loss
is sensorineural in nature but as seen in Figure 13-17, the patterns vary.
The changes within the cochlea and cochlear nerve exhibit a sloping
high-frequency loss due to the changes along the basal end of the basilar
membrane. Audiometrically, the stria vascularis changes will also
produce a sensorineural hearing loss but exhibit a more flat

configuration since the stria vascularis degeneration affects the
physiology of the entire cochlea.
Peripheral structures may deteriorate, but there is also apparent
involvement in the central auditory system. Recall this system allows for
interpretation or processing of what the peripheral system detects. As a
person ages, the ascending auditory pathway from the cochlea through
the various levels of the brainstem will typically experience a reduction
in the number of functioning neurons, especially at the level of the
superior olivary complex. The outcome of this central structural change
is a disproportionate difficulty in understanding speech, greater than one
would expect from audiometric results. This condition is termed
phonemic regression.
 
Figure 13-17 Typical audiometric configurations for specific
causes of presbycusis.
 
Many structural changes do not occur in isolation. Depending on
the degree of outer or middle ear involvement, a conductive component
yielding a slight air-bone gap may also be seen. Speech discrimination
may be fair to poor depending on the degree of central involvement.
The longevity of the auditory mechanism varies greatly from
person to person. The high-frequency information affected by the aging
process makes it difficult for the individual to hear conversations

clearly. The aging listener will complain that most speakers sound as if
they are mumbling. Appropriately fit amplification will help the
individual be more aware of conversational speech but may not aid in
clarifying speech if the person is experiencing central processing
changes.
Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
 
Noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) is the most common form of
acquired hearing disorder. It is completely preventable and yet 10
million Americans suffer its effects. The National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health (1998) has designated NIHL as one of
the ten leading occupational diseases and injuries. Elevated recreational
noise will also permanently damage the cochlea. It is not the source of
the noise that is damaging but rather the level of the noise and time of
exposure that causes the damage.
There are two types of noise-induced damage: (1) acoustic trauma
resulting in permanent damage from a single exposure to very high noise
levels and (2) continuous exposure to repeated moderately intense levels
resulting in a gradual hearing loss. Continuous exposure initially affects
thresholds for high frequencies (3000 to 6000 Hz) with a typical “notch”
at 4000 Hz (Clark & Bohne, 1999). As exposure continues, the mid to
lower frequencies become affected. Both forms of NIHL can be
prevented by the regular use of hearing protection such as earplugs or
earmuffs.
Tinnitus (e.g., ringing, buzzing or humming in the ears) or
difficulty understanding conversation is often the first symptom of an
NIHL. Hearing loss and tinnitus may be experienced in one or both ears,
and tinnitus may be constant or just occasional after noise exposure.
Sound intensity is measured on a logarithmic scale known as the
decibel (dB) scale. Noise exposure measurements are often expressed as
dB (A). The A scale is weighted toward the higher frequency sounds to
which the human ear is most sensitive. Unprotected exposure to impulse
or continuous noise levels in excess of 90 dB (A) for an 8-hour period
will cause a shift in an individual’s hearing thresholds. This shift in
threshold is referred to as a temporary threshold shift (TTS). In most
instances, the TTS largely subsides 16 to 48 hours after exposure (Clark,

Bohne, & Boettcher, 1987). However, with repeated exposure and
repeated TTS, damage occurs, and hence the insidious nature of noise.
As the decibel level of a sound increases, the exposure time before there
is permanent damage decreases. Decibel values are based on a
logarithmic scale, so what seems like a slight increase in decibels—say
from 80 dB IL to 90 dB IL—is actually a ten-fold increase in intensity.
OSHA’s table of permissible noise exposure outlines a worker’s
duration per day in hours against the decibel level. Basically, for every 5
dB increase in noise level, the exposure time is cut in half. Therefore, a
4-hour exposure to noise at 95 dB (A) is considered to provide the same
noise “dose” as 8 hours of exposure to noise at 90 dB (A). Think about
this: a single gunshot of approximately 140 dB (A) has the same sound
energy as 40 hours of 90 dB (A) noise! Gradual NIHL typically affects
both ears equally creating a symmetric audiometric pattern. By
comparison, noise from such sources as tractors or firearms expose one
ear more than the other producing an asymmetric hearing loss.
In today’s noisy world, young adults are exposed to many sources
of loud noise that place them at risk for hearing loss. Most high school
industrial arts programs must include education on hearing conservation.
The simplest solution is to simply turn down the volume or, if possible,
wear appropriate hearing protection. The following signs are an
indication that the noise level around you is too loud and could cause
damage if exposure is continued:
   You have to shout to be heard above the noise.
   You cannot understand someone who is speaking to you from less
than 2 feet away.
   A person standing near you can hear the sound from your stereo
headset while it is on your head.
Noise causes permanent changes to the cochlea resulting in a
sensorineural hearing loss. The physical structures of the cochlea
literally get beat to death by the insidious pounding of acoustic pressure
waves. The stereocilia of the cochlea’s hair cells are damaged, bent or
broken. When stereocilia are damaged, the corresponding hair cell body
dies and the neurons that synapse with the hair cell degenerate.
Why You Need to Know
 

Loud rock concerts have contributed to hearing loss in the baby boomer
generation but iPod and similar players are much worse for the present
generation. The problem begins with the headphones resting directly in
the ear canal (concha bowl). This allows the user to easily overcome
any background noise such as the noise of the school lunch room or
lawn mower. As a result, they easily desensitize the user to dangerously
high sound levels. Portable CD players do too, but iPods pose an
additional danger because they hold thousands of songs and can play
for hours without recharging so users tend to listen continuously for
hours at a time. The user does not have to stop to change a CD or a
tape. Damage to hearing caused by high volume is determined by its
duration; continuous listening even at a seemingly reasonable level can
damage the hair cells in the inner ear resulting in permanent hearing
loss. Denying the danger of noise-induced hearing loss would not be so
easy if loud music made the ears bleed, but the early symptoms tend to
come on gradually. It typically starts with ringing in the ears. The
problem often times becomes advanced before people realize they are
having serious difficulty hearing. Adapted from a CBS News interview
August 25, 2005, by Lloyd de Vries, MP3s May Threaten Hearing Loss:
Experts Discuss Risk to Hearing from Listening to Music Devices.
 
Avoiding noise exposure or using appropriate hearing protection
stops further progression of the damage. In the future, the use of
chemoprotective agents such as antioxidants as well as identification of
possible risk factors for susceptibility to NIHL may enhance prevention
and treatment efforts. Risk factors include but are not limited to cigarette
smoking, excessive caffeine consumption, and concurrent exposure to
ototoxic substances such as solvents and heavy metals (Morata et al.,
1993).
The characteristic audiometric pattern indicating NIHL is a notch in
the high frequencies. Figure 13-18 illustrates the classic research by
Taylor, Pearson, Mair, and Burns (1965) which demonstrates the effect
of long-term exposure to noise on hearing levels. The figure
demonstrates the hearing threshold levels of workers comprised over
many years of exposure. The hearing loss continues to get more severe
as the years of exposure continue. The purpose of the study was to
demonstrate the detrimental effect of chronic noise exposure on hearing.

Noise Exposure Regulations
 
An employer must provide for his workers a place of employment that is
free from recognized hazards. The Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (2002) 
requires 
employers 
to 
provide 
hearing
conservation programs for employees where an 8-hour exposure exceeds
an 85-dB weighted average. An occupational hearing conservation
program includes:
   engineering and administrative controls to reduce noise exposures
 
Figure 13-18 Audiometric configuration illustrates the long-term
effect of noise on hearing levels compromised over many years of
exposure.
 
   monitoring of noise levels
   annual audiometric testing for the purpose of monitoring for
significant threshold shifts (defined as a shift of 10 dB or more in the
worse threshold of 2000, 3000 or 4000 Hz)
   use of hearing protectors (i.e., the employer must provide a reasonable
choice of adequate hearing protectors free to all employees)
   employee training on the use of hearing protection
   adequate record keeping.

Claims for occupational hearing loss are typically handled through
state Labor and Industry Workman’s Compensation. A mathematical
formula is used to convert the worker’s degree of hearing loss into a
percentage of impairment. Only certain frequencies are considered
compensable and a minimum amount of hearing loss must be present.
The American Medical Association (1979) uses the average thresholds
of 500, 1000, 2000, and 3000 Hz to determine the amount of hearing
loss. A 25 dB threshold fence is then subtracted and that figure is
multiplied by a constant (1.5) to obtain the percentage of monaural
hearing loss.
Noise exposure, whether occupational or recreational, is the leading
cause of a preventable acquired hearing disorder. Occupational hearing
loss is minimized by well fitting hearing protection and worker
compliance. Recreational NIHL can be reduced by public education of
the harmful effect of noise on the delicate auditory mechanism.
Summary
 
A good clinician will begin patient evaluation by taking a thorough case
history. The case history will include questions that are identified as the
five “cardinal signs” of ear pathology. The patient’s responses will help
identify the presence of ear pathology. A clinician often times feels like
a detective, asking several specific questions to get more and more
detail. Is the loss in one ear or both? Is there any pain or pressure
present, and if so, when did it start? As a student you will learn to
recognize the classic signs and symptoms for a particular pathology. For
example, a patient suffering from Ménière’s disease will experience
low-pitch tinnitus and a low-frequency hearing loss. On the other hand,
a person suffering from an NIHL will suffer from high-pitch tinnitus and
a high-frequency hearing loss. Genetics and environmental agents are
equally responsible for the cause of most hearing disorders and the
patient is simply at their mercy. What is unfortunate is when a hearing
loss is preventable as is often the case with hearing loss from exposure
to excessive levels of noise. Part of our job as a speech or hearing
specialist is to inform the public about the dangers of exposure to high
levels of noise in one’s daily life.

Clinical Teaser—Follow-Up
At the beginning of this part, you were asked to note any terms and
concepts in the case study that were unfamiliar to you. As you read
Chapter 12, you were to pay particular attention to the anatomy and
physiology pertinent to this case. Now we return to the case for further
discussion.
We can interpret this case regarding etiology and pathology. The
gentleman did not report a head injury or trauma or a family history of
ear disease or hearing loss. The etiology of the disease is unknown (i.e.,
idiopathic). The gentleman suffered from both auditory and vestibular
symptoms, thereby leading us to conclude that the entire inner ear must
be involved. The perilymph and endolymph fluids are common to both
the auditory and vestibular systems. There are several diseases that can
have this effect on the entire inner ear. The results of a battery of
audiometric and vestibular tests lead us to the conclusion that this
patient evidences Ménière’s disease in his right ear. What pertinent
information from the case history assisted you in drawing this
conclusion? What pertinent (though limited) information from the
audiometric evaluation assisted you in drawing this conclusion? Lastly,
using the information about Ménière’s in this chapter, explain a
treatment option for this patient paying particular attention to the
anatomy that would be affected by the disease.
 
PART 6 SUMMARY
The ear, organ of hearing and balance, is mostly invisible with the
pinnae being the only visible structures. We recognize that they are
similar in shape among individuals, but when we closely examine each
one, there are many differences. Even the right and left pinna within the
same person can be very different. The remaining structures of the outer,
middle, and inner ear have some uniqueness as well but must not deviate
far from the intended design. Injury, disease, and genetics can produce
an acquired or congenital hearing or balance disorder. Timing is the key
to the overall effect on the structures involved.
The mechanical role of the outer ear may not be as dramatic as that

of the electro-chemical role of the inner ear but is still very necessary.
The ear canal resonance boosts an incoming signal by a significant
amount at a very specific and useful frequency range (20 dB in the range
from 1500 to 7000 Hz). The curvature of the ear canal serves to protect
the fine structures of the tympanic membrane and middle ear. The tym-
panic membrane and ossicular chain obey the laws of physics. The
transformer action of the structures boosts the signal by approximately
27 dB to overcome the impedance mismatch of the air-filled middle ear
to the fluid-filled inner ear.
The inner ear vestibular system is the primary organ for allowing
independent and precise head and eye control in the execution of many
complex motor activities such as running. Vestibular input is critical for
balance when there is misleading information from the other senses
(e.g., visual and somatosensory).
The inner ear auditory system is remarkable. The structure and
function of the cochlea is so intricate that we have yet to completely
understand how it all works. The outer hair cells embedded in the
tectorial membrane mechanically amplify the soft sounds so that the
inner hair cells may respond. The endolymph flow displaces the
stereocilia of the hair cells. The tip links attached to the stereocilia act as
mechanical gates opening channels for ion (i.e., potassium and calcium)
exchange. The ion exchange depolarizes the hair cell stimulating the
release of a neurotransmitter. The stria vascularis then recycles the
cochlear fluids so that the process can then be repeated over and over
again at a mindboggling rate.
Once the cochlear nerve enters the brainstem, we begin the
discussion of the auditory pathway. The reflex arc of the middle ear
muscles relies on the auditory pathway. The processing of the acoustic
information along the pathway facilitates the localization of a sound
source. The redundancy of the auditory pathway as it travels to Heschl’s
gyrus preserves and protects the acoustic information that was sensed by
the peripheral structure.
The moment an acoustic pressure wave is directed by the pinna
down the ear canal, the reaction of the ear structures is set in motion.
Many influences, natural or otherwise, disrupt the function of the aural
anatomy and cause a hearing disorder. The hearing impairment that
accompanies the hearing disorder may cause a communication problem.

Timing is everything. The earlier in life and the more severe the
impairment, the more detrimental the effect will likely be on both aural
(i.e., listening) and oral (i.e., speaking) communication.
PART 6 REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Describe how the anatomical structures of the outer, middle, and
inner ear each contributes to the physiology of the auditory and/or
vestibular systems.
2. Discuss the similarities and differences between the sensory
receptors of the semicircular canals (crista ampullaris) and the
vestibule (macula). Draw a simple illustration of each identifying
the landmarks.
3. Discuss the differences and similarities between the inner and outer
hair cells and draw a simple illustration of each identifying the
landmarks.
4. Choose and describe one of the three ways the conductive
mechanism overcomes the impedance mismatch between the air-
filled middle ear and the fluidfilled inner ear.
5. Choose an ear pathology; identify a chief complaint for that
pathology. Answer the “five cardinal signs of pathology” as if you
were the patient suffering from the pathology you chose.
6. Choose a syndromic hearing disorder of genetic origin. Identify the
systems that are affected in addition to the auditory system and
identify the syndrome’s mode of inheritance. List the possible
transmission probabilities (i.e., percentages) if you marry someone
without any trace of the disorder. List the possible transmission
percentages if you marry someone with the exact same syndrome.
7. Choose an ear pathology that is typically seen within each of the
following age groups: 0 to 18, 18 to 50, 50 to 64, and 65+. Discuss
the etiology of each pathology.

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
abducens: cranial nerve VI, involved with lateral eye movement.
abduction: movement of the vocal folds away from the median
position, thereby opening the glottis.
absolute refractory period: the time immediately following an action
potential when a neuron cannot fire.
acetabulum: the crater-shaped depression on the lateral aspect of the
ischium where the head of the femur articulates.
acoustic: pertaining to sound and its perception.
acoustic neuroma: see Schwannoma neuroma.
acoustic reflex: middle ear muscle (i.e., stapedius and tensor tympani)
contraction in response to the direction of loud sound; muscle
contraction serves to stiffen the ossicular chain for the presumed
purpose of protecting the inner ear from loud noises.
acquired: obtained after birth.
acrocephalosyndactyly: also known as Apert syndrome; a craniofacial
anomaly affecting primarily the head, face, hands, and feet.
acromion: the process of the scapula where the clavicle articulates.
acute: of immediate concern; medically the stage where a patient
presents with severe symptoms and short duration of immediate
illness.
acute otitis media: quick onset of middle ear inflammation, lasting
fewer than 21 days.
adduct: to close (adduction); movement of the vocal folds toward
midline.
adduction: movement of the vocal folds toward mid-line, thereby
bringing them together and closing the glottis.
adenoidectomy: surgical removal of the adenoid tissue in the
nasopharynx.
adenoids: the mass of lymphoid tissue at the back of the pharynx, above

the soft palate.
adhesive otitis media: prolonged inflammation of the middle ear with a
retracted opaque, immobile tympanic membrane.
adipose: loose connective tissue with a high number of fat storing cells.
aditus: opening that connects the epitympanic recess of the middle ear
cavity to the mastoid antrum.
aditus laryngis: the entrance to the larynx, formed by the superior
border of the epiglottis anteriorly, the aryepiglottic folds laterally, and
the arytenoid cartilages posteriorly.
afferent: the conduction of nerve impulses toward the central nervous
system (i.e., sensory).
agnosia: a perceptual impairment related to the inability to recognize
stimuli despite an intact sensory system; it can occur in any sensory
modality—vision, audition, touch, etc.
agrammatism: a term meaning without grammar; a characteristic of
nonfluent aphasia manifested by the omission of function words (e.g.,
articles, conjunctions, prepositions) in verbal expression.
air-bone gap: the difference between bone conduction thresholds and
air conduction thresholds, reported in decibels for each ear at each
frequency; used to determine type of hearing loss.
air conduction: in reference to audiometric testing, a method that is
typically used to evaluate hearing threshold levels for a wide range of
frequencies; the stimuli (pure tones) are delivered through a set of
earphones in an attempt to evaluate the entire auditory system so that
what is measured is what is “heard” through the air as opposed to
what is heard through vibrations of the bones of the skull; the
transmission of sound to the inner ear through the structures of the ear
canal and middle ear cavity.
alar plate: dorsal region of the spinal cord during neurodevelopment
that develops into nervous tissue serving sensory purposes.
albinism: condition of a person who is congenitally deficient in
pigment. The individual typically has milky or translucent skin, white
or colorless hair, and eyes with a pink or blue iris and a deep-red
pupil.
Alexander aplasia: incomplete or faulty development of the
membranous labyrinth of the cochlea; the organ of Corti and the
spiral ganglion at the basal turn are most affected, resulting in a high-

frequency hearing loss, while low-frequency hearing is relatively
preserved.
alveoli pulmoni: tiny pouches along the alveolar sacs, alveolar ducts,
and terminal bronchioles where the exchange of oxygen and carbon
dioxide takes place.
Alzheimer’s disease: the most common type of dementing disease
resulting in progressive cognitive decline.
amphiarthrodial: pertaining to joints that yield.
ampulla: bulbous portion of the semicircular canal that communicates
with the utricle and contains the receptor end organ, the crista
ampullaris; plural: ampullae.
amygdala: almond-shaped subcortical nuclei deep to the uncus in the
anterior temporal lobe, part of the limbic system and involved in
emotion.
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS): a degenerative disorder of the
upper and lower motor neurons; commonly referred to as “Lou
Gehrig’s disease.”
anastomoses: the communication between two arteries.
anatomical position: the general position of a cadaver used as a
reference point in describing position and spatial orientation of
various parts of the body; the cadaver is upright facing the observer
with arms extended to the sides, and head, eyes, and palms of the
hands facing forward.
anatomy: the scientific study of the structure and organization of living
organisms.
aneurysm: the bulging out of weak blood vessel walls, a precursor to
hemorrhage.
annular ligament: the ligament that holds a membrane in place within a
cartilaginous ring or sulcus, for example, the tympanic membrane in
the tympanic sulcus and the footplate of the stapes in the oval
window.
annular sulcus: the ringlike structure in which the tympanic membrane
resides, held in place by the annular ligament; also referred to as the
tympanic sulcus.
anosognosia: denial of illness; associated with right hemisphere
syndrome.
anotia: a congenital absence of the pinna.

anterior arch: the narrower, anterior portion of the cricoid cartilage.
anterior cranial fossa: two forward-most depressions in the base of the
interior cranium where the frontal lobes of the brain reside.
anterior cricoarytenoid ligament: connective tissue anchoring the
anterior base of the arytenoid cartilage to the posterior quadrate
lamina of the cricoid cartilage, thereby restricting the posterior
rocking movement of the arytenoid.
anterior crus: anatomical structure resembling a leg; this crus and the
posterior crus of the stapes connect to the footplate.
antigens: substances that trigger the immune system to produce
antibodies.
antitragus: a cartilaginous prominence on the inferior concha ridge of
the pinna opposite the tragus.
aperiodic sounds: complex sounds whose waveforms have no
discernible repetitive pattern.
aphasia: a central nervous system disorder in which there is partial or
complete impairment of language comprehension and/or production
typically affecting several modalities (e.g., gesturing, listening,
reading, speaking, writing).
aphonia: absence of phonation; a lack of sound produced by vocal fold
vibration; no voice.
apical foramen: a small opening at the tip of the root of a tooth where
nerve fibers and blood vessels enter the interior of the tooth.
apneustic area: the respiratory area in the pons that promotes
inspiration.
aponeuroses: broad, tendinous sheets of connective tissue.
apraxia of speech (AOS): a sensorimotor disorder of articulation
originating in the central nervous system characterized by impaired
ability to volitionally program the position and sequencing of muscles
involved in speech.
aprosodia: decreased use of the prosodic features of language including
pitch, intensity, and timing to signal intonation; associated with right
hemisphere syndrome.
arachnoid granulations: projections of arachnoid mater into dural
sinuses for cerebrospinal fluid diffusion into the venous blood supply.
arachnoid mater: the middle meningeal layer that envelopes the central
nervous system.

arcuate fasciculus: an association tract connecting the frontal lobe
speech and language centers with the temporal lobe language centers;
also known as the superior longitudinal fasciculus.
arcuate ridge: the horizontally directed ridge along the anterolateral
surface of the arytenoid cartilage that separates the triangular fovea
from the fovea oblonga.
area advantage: the large area of the tympanic membrane (TM) being
focused down to the smaller area of the oval window serving to
increase the pressure placed upon the fluids of the inner ear.
areolar: loose connective tissue that forms the bed for skin.
arteriosclerosis: the accumulation of plaque (e.g., fats and cholesterol)
in blood vessels resulting in a narrowing of the arterial lumen.
arteriovenous malformation (AVM): congenital abnormality of
capillary beds in brain tissue.
arthro-ophthalmopathy: also known as Stickler syndrome; a
craniofacial anomaly affecting primarily the joints and eyes.
articulation: the process of forming and producing the speech sounds of
a language; the process of speech production produced by movements
of the structures of the vocal tract.
articulation disorder: an impairment in the ability to produce the
speech sounds that make up a language.
aryepiglottic folds: folds of tissue that begin at the lateral-superior
borders of the epiglottis and proceed posteriorly to the arytenoid
cartilages along the inner surface of the thyroid cartilage; these folds
form the superior border of the quadrangular membrane.
arytenoid articular facets: small projections on the sloping borders of
the posterior quadrate lamina of the cricoid cartilage where the
arytenoid cartilages articulate with the cricoid.
arytenoids: two somewhat pyramid-shaped cartilages that rest upon the
sloping borders of the posterior quadrate lamina of the cricoid
cartilage; the posterior attachment of the vocal folds is on the vocal
processes at the base of these cartilages.
aspiration: the penetration of liquid or food below the true vocal folds
into the lower airway.
association areas: cortical regions of the cerebral hemispheres involved
in elaboration of respective primary areas (unimodal) or involved in
higher cortical functions (multimodal).

association fiber tracts: bundles of axons that run in the cerebral
hemispheres; these can be short or long.
asthma: a disease characterized by muscular spasms of the bronchial
tubes and subsequent mucous membrane edema resulting in
wheezing, difficulty breathing, and cough; often triggered by
allergens.
astigmatism: irregular curvature of the cornea of the eye resulting in
blurred vision.
astrocytes: a type of glial cell that supports neurons and contributes to
the blood–brain barrier.
astrocytomas: benign tumors of the central nervous system; a type of
glioma.
ataxic: a type of cerebral palsy or dysarthria characterized by poor
coordination of motor movement.
atherosclerosis: the buildup of fatty deposits (i.e., plaque) within
arterial walls.
athetoid: a type of cerebral palsy characterized by slow, writhing,
involuntary movements of the hands, feet, and other body parts.
atmospheric pressure: the force that air exerts upon objects within the
external environment.
atresia: absent formation of the external auditory meatus (ear canal).
atrophy: the withering away of a body part due to lack of use.
attack phase: that part of vocal fold vibration from the point where the
vocal folds have adducted to the first cycles of vibration.
attic: upper portion of the middle ear cavity where the heads of the
ossicles reside; also referred to as the epitympanic recess.
audibility: state of being audible.
audible: capable of being heard.
audiogram: the output of audiometry; a graph that shows hearing
thresholds through air and bone conduction for each ear at various
frequencies.
audiologist: as stated in the American Academy of Audiology (AAA)
Scope of Practice, an audiologist is a professional who diagnoses,
treats, and manages individuals with hearing loss or balance
problems. Audiologists have received a master’s or doctoral degree
from an accredited university graduate program. Their academic and
clinical training provides the foundation for patient management from

birth through adulthood. Audiologists determine appropriate patient
treatment of hearing and balance problems by combining a complete
history with a variety of specialized auditory and vestibular
assessments. Based upon the diagnosis, the audiologist presents a
variety of treatment options to patients with hearing impairment or
balance problems. Audiologists dispense and fit hearing aids as part
of a comprehensive habilitative program. Audiologists may be found
working in medical centers and hospitals, private practice settings,
schools, government health facilities and agencies, and colleges and
universities. As a primary hearing health provider, audiologists refer
patients to physicians when the hearing or balance problem requires
medical or surgical evaluation or treatment.
audiometry: hearing measures such as pure tone thresholds and speech
discrimination performed with an audiometer.
auditory radiations: the final component of the auditory pathway
carrying auditory information from the medial geniculate nucleus to
the primary auditory cortex.
auditory tube: structure connecting the middle ear cavity to the
nasopharynx; responsible for the equalization of air in the middle ear
space with that of atmospheric pressure; also referred to as the
Eustachian tube (ET).
augmentative and alternative communication (AAC): a specialty of
speech–language pathology and other disciplines (such as medicine,
occupational therapy, physical therapy) that has an emphasis in
providing systems of communication for persons who have no speech
ability or whose speech is not sufficient to meet their daily
communication needs.
auricle: the visible portion of the outer ear used for the collection of
sound; also referred to as the pinna.
auricular cartilage: cartilaginous framework of the pinna.
autoimmune inner ear disease (AIED): a syndrome characterized by
progressive hearing loss, tinnitus, and/or dizziness which is caused by
immune cells that attack and cause damage to the inner ear.
autonomic nervous system (ANS): also referred to as the visceral
nervous system; the division of the nervous system that innervates
smooth muscles, glands, cardiovascular function, and internal organs;
the parasympathetic and sympathetic branches are further divisions of

the ANS.
autophonia: abnormal resonance of one’s own voice heard inside their
head.
autosomal dominant: a pattern of genetic transmission from one parent
to offspring where only one gene of a pair is necessary to express the
trait; not related to the sex chromosomes.
autosomal recessive: a pattern of genetic transmission from both
parents to offspring where two copies of a gene are necessary to
express the trait; not related to the sex chromosomes.
axon: the part of the neuron specialized to transmit impulses away from
the cell body and toward the terminal.
axon hillock: the enlarged junction of the axon with the cell body; it has
a lower threshold for the initiation of an action potential than the rest
of the cell.
bacterial meningitis: a bacterial inflammation of the meninges of the
brain, labyrinth, or lining of cranial nerve VIII (the vestibulocochlear
nerve).
Baha®: a commercially available system that utilizes a surgically
implanted bone-conduction device. The receiver is implanted and is
designed to communicate with an external amplifier bypassing air-
conducted delivery. This allows the bone to transfer sound to a
functioning cochlea, thereby bypassing the outer and middle ear.
Once the cochlea receives these sound vibrations, the sound is
converted into neural signals and is transferred to the brain, allowing
a Baha recipient to perceive sound.
basal cell carcinoma: slow-growing malignant skin cancer with a raised
or rolled border and a central ulcer; usually a result of chronic sun
exposure.
basal ganglia: a collection of subcortical nuclei including the
telencephalic caudate nucleus, globus pallidus, putamen, and
subthalamic nucleus; functionally, the mesencephalic substantia nigra
is also included.
basal plate: ventral region of the spinal cord during neurodevelopment
that develops into nervous tissue serving motor purposes.
basilar artery: a major supply of blood to the brain; begins at the
foramen magnum where the vertebral arteries converge on it and feed
into the circle of Willis.

basilar membrane (BM): along with the spiral lamina, it forms the
floor of the scala media running the length of the cochlea and
supporting the organ of Corti.
benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV): brief episodes of
vertigo that occur with changes in head position with respect to
gravity; results from loose otoconia from the utricle floating into the
posterior semicircular canal and adhering to its cupula.
Bernoulli effect: an increase in the velocity of a fluid (e.g., air) results
in a decrease in its pressure.
bilateral: both sides; both ears.
binaural representation: reception of information from both ears to
one location.
biology: the scientific study of life and living organisms.
blood–brain barrier: specialized barrier to the transport of noxious
substances to the extracellular fluid of the brain due to the unique
anatomical configu-ration of brain capillaries.
bolus: a small, soft, cohesive mass of food formed through mastication
prior to a swallow.
bone conduction: in reference to audiometric testing, the transmission
of test signals to the cochlea by vibrations of the skull; the
transmission of sound to the inner ear through forced vibrations of the
bones of the skull.
Boyle’s law: the principle that states: with temperature being constant,
volume and pressure are inversely related to each other.
bradykinesia: slow movement; difficulty initiating and regulating
movement once begun; associated with Parkinson’s disease.
brainstem: area of the brain located between the spinal cord and
diencephalon; composed of the midbrain (i.e., mesencephalon), pons
(i.e., part of the metencephalon), and medulla (i.e., myelencephalon).
breath groups: verbal utterances spoken on a single breath.
breathy attack: vocal fold vibration characterized by expired air
escaping through the glottis before the vocal folds have fully
adducted, thereby creating a breathy vocal quality.
Broca’s area: frontal lobe premotor region involved in expressive
speech and language function.
Brodmann areas: numbered regions of the cerebral cortex reflecting its
cytoarchitecture.

buccae: the cheeks.
cadaver: from the Latin phrase “caro data vermibus,” meaning “flesh
given to worms”; a deceased human body donated for the
advancement of science.
calcarine sulcus: the furrow that divides the medial aspect of the
occipital lobe.
callosal sulcus: the furrow that surrounds the superior border of the
corpus callosum.
calvaria: the skullcap which is formed by the vaulted frontal, parietal,
and occipital bones.
canthus: either of the angles formed by the meeting of the eye’s upper
and lower eyelids.
capsular ligaments: a general term used to denote the ceratocricoid
ligaments collectively.
cardiac impression: the indentation along the medial wall of the left
lung where the heart resides.
Carhart’s notch: audiometric pattern of bone conduction thresholds
typically at 2,000 Hz; associated with otosclerosis.
carina: the keel-shaped landmark formed by the bifurcation of the last
tracheal ring into the two main stem bronchi.
cartilaginous joint: the anatomical classification of joints that yield but
do not freely move.
cataracts: clouding of the lens of the eye, resulting in opacity and visual
impairment.
cauda equina: the collection of spinal nerves caudal to lumbar vertebra
number one (L1); literally, horse’s tail.
caudate nucleus: one of the telencephalic basal ganglia; involved with
higher order motor functions.
cauliflower ear: caused by trauma to the pinna; separation of skin from
underlying connective tissue with swelling, thickening, and
malformation; related to trauma from the sport of wrestling or boxing.
cementoenamel junction: the part of the outer surface of a tooth where
the cementum ends and the enamel begins, located approximately at
the gum line.
cementum: the calcified covering of the root of a tooth.
central auditory processing disorder (CAPD): a disorder resulting
from lesions along the higher levels of the auditory pathway or

auditory cortex; the lesion interferes with the processing of auditory
information fed to the brain by the peripheral ear.
central canal: narrow lumen within and running the length of the spinal
cord; part of the ventricular system.
central chemoreceptors: sensory receptors responding to alterations in
carbon dioxide in cerebral spinal fluid; located at the medulla.
central sulcus: furrow separating the frontal lobe from the parietal lobe.
central tendon: the three-lobed connective tissue core on which the
fibers of the diaphragm insert.
centriole: an organelle that assists with nuclear and cell division.
ceratocricoid ligaments: a series of three ligaments (anterior, posterior,
and lateral) that hold in place the articulation between the inferior
cornua (horns) of the thyroid and the cricoid.
cerebellar peduncles: three major pairs of tracts—the superior, middle,
and inferior—running from the brainstem to the cerebellum.
cerebellopontine (CP) angle: the anatomical angle created by the
junction of the pons with the cerebellum where the facial (VII) and
vestibulocochlear (VIII) nerves enter the brainstem.
cerebral aqueduct: the canal that joins the third and fourth ventricles.
cerebral peduncles: major motor tracts running in the ventral midbrain.
cerebrospinal fluid: a thin, watery substance produced by the choroid
plexus that circulates throughout the ventricles and the subarachnoid
space to cushion and provide nourishment to the central nervous
system.
cerebrovascular accident (CVA): see stroke.
cerumen: substance created by a mixture of sloughed skin cells and
secretions from the sebaceous glands located in the ear canal; also
referred to as ear wax.
cervical segment: the most superior of the five parts of the spinal cord
corresponding to the neck region.
checking mechanism: the action of the external inter-costal muscles
upon the rib cage during expiration; these muscles relax gradually
during expiration to prevent the rib cage from recoiling too quickly.
choanae: the posterior openings of the nasal cavity into the region of the
nasopharynx.
cholesteatoma: a pearl-like epithelial mass invading the middle ear
space, usually secondary to prolonged retraction of the pars flaccida

of the tympanic membrane from chronic Eustachian tube dysfunction.
chondro-osseous juncture: any juncture between cartilage and bone,
for example, the juncture where the bony ribs terminate at cartilages
that articulate with the sternum.
chorda tympani: a branch of the facial (VII) nerve that passes through
the middle ear space; conveys taste sensation from the anterior two-
thirds of the tongue.
choroid plexus: the delicate tissue composed of pia mater, capillaries,
and ependymal cells that produces cerebrospinal fluid (CSF); found
in the walls of the ventricles.
chronic: a longstanding condition.
chronic bronchitis: a longstanding and persistent inflammation of the
mucous membranes of the bronchi.
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): various diseases of
the lower airways; often referring to emphysema and chronic
bronchitis.
cilia: short, hairlike structures protruding from some epithelial tissue
types.
cingulate sulcus: the furrow surrounding the superior border of the
cingulate gyrus.
cisterna magna: a large subarachnoid space also referred to as the
cerebellomedullary cistern for its location; contains cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF).
Claudius’ cells: lateral support cells for the organ of Corti, in particular
the outer hair cells.
clavicle: commonly referred to as the collarbone, it runs in a horizontal
plane from the sternum (breast-bone) to the scapula (shoulder blade).
coarticulation: the simultaneous or overlapping articulation of two
phonemes; for example, in the word “sweet,” the lips round for the
/w/ sound even as the /s/ sound is being produced (which by itself
does not require lip rounding).
coccygeal segment: the most inferior of the five parts of the spinal cord;
corresponding to the tailbone.
cochlea: contains the sensory organ of hearing (the organ of Corti);
found within the inner ear labyrinth, within the petrous portion of the
temporal bone.
cochlear aqueduct (CA): the canal or passage leading away from the

cochlea to terminate within the subarachnoid space of the brain; it
contains perilymph because it originates at the scala tympani.
cochlear duct: the membranous labyrinth of the cochlea where the
organ of Corti resides; filled with endolymph, it is bordered by the
basilar membrane, spiral lamina, spiral ligament, and Reissner’s
membrane; also referred to as the scala media.
cochlear implant (CI): surgically implanted receiver that when coupled
with its external processor offers direct electrical stimulation of the
cochlear nerve fibers for the purpose of hearing.
cochlear nuclei: the first large collection of nerve cells within the
brainstem along the auditory pathway, at the level of the caudal pons.
cochlear partition: the anatomical structure made up of the osseous
spiral lamina, basilar membrane, and the spiral ligament that
separates the scala media from the scala tympani.
cochleariform process: bony process projecting into the middle ear
space from the anterior wall; the tendon of the tensor tympani angles
over the process to attach to the manubrium of the malleus.
cognate pair: two speech sounds that have the same place and manner
of articulation, but differ only in the fact that vocal fold vibration
occurs for one sound but not the other.
cognitive–communicative disorder: a communication impairment that
results from underlying cognitive deficits.
commissural fiber tracts: bundles of axons that run from one cerebral
hemisphere to the other; the corpus callosum is the largest of these.
common carotid arteries: large arteries ascending the neck to supply
blood to the head; they have external and internal branches.
common crus: the point where the legs of the posterior and superior
semicircular canals meet and merge.
complex tone: any sound composed of two or more individual (pure)
tones blended together; most sounds in the environment are complex
tones, including the human voice.
concha bowl: deep bowl-like portion of the pinna just above the lobule
that leads to the external auditory meatus.
conductive: in reference to diminished hearing acuity, a reversible
hearing loss due to pathology of the outer and/or middle ear; treating
the pathology usually results in a reversal of the loss.
conductive hearing loss: a correctible hearing loss originating in the

outer or middle ear, caused by a breakdown in the eardrum’s and/or
ossicular chain’s ability to transform acoustic energy into mechanical
energy, or to transmit mechanical energy to the inner ear.
condylar process: the posterior rounded process on the ramus of the
mandible that articulates with the temporal bone of the skull, forming
the temporomandibular joint (TMJ).
cone of light: the reflection of otoscopic light that appears on the
surface of the tympanic membrane (TM) as a bright streak of light
when the TM is resting at its normal 55-degree angle.
cones: one type of photoreceptor found in the retina; they code color
and shape for visual acuity.
congenital: present at the time of birth.
congenital rubella: rubella (German measles) present in the pregnant
mother that may cause developmental anomalies in the fetus.
congestive heart failure (CHF): inadequate pumping of blood by the
heart, resulting in poor circulation.
connective tissue: tissue that combines body structures, supports the
body, and aids in body maintenance.
connective tissue cell: any cell involved with connecting, anchoring,
and supporting body structures; specialized for the formation of
various types of extracellular connecting and supporting elements.
connexin 26: transmembrane proteins that facilitate rapid transport of
ions or small molecules between cells.
constructional impairments: marked by decreased ability to draw or
put together objects using visuospatial skills; associated with right
hemisphere syndrome.
contralateral: pertaining to the opposite side of the body.
contrecoup: focal area of lesion opposite the initial site of impact in a
closed head injury.
conus elasticus: the lower portion of the elastic membrane that extends
from the anterior arch of the cricoid cartilage inferiorly to the vocal
ligaments superiorly.
conus medullaris: the inferior, terminal point of the spinal cord.
corium: a dense, feltlike network of connective tissue lying beneath the
mucous membrane of the tongue, in essence forming the skeleton for
the tongue.
corniculate tubercles: the medial bumps or swellings in the posterior

aryepiglottic folds created by the corniculate cartilages lying within.
corniculates: two tiny cone-shaped cartilages that rest upon the apices
of the arytenoid cartilages and are embedded within the aryepiglottic
folds.
coronal suture: the seam running transversely across the anterior part
of the skull that serves as the joint between the frontal bone and two
parietal bones.
coronoid process: the flat, anterior process on the ramus of the
mandible that serves as the insertion for the temporalis and masseter
muscles.
corpora quadrigemina: the collection of four nuclei— two superior
and two inferior colliculi—found in the dorsal midbrain.
corpus callosum: the large commissural tract connecting the right and
left cerebral hemispheres.
corticobulbar tract: bundles of axons carrying motor information from
the cortex to the brainstem; part of the pyramidal tracts.
corticospinal tract: bundles of axons carrying motor information from
the cortex to the spinal cord; part of the pyramidal tracts.
cortilymph: fluid within the tunnel of Corti that is similar in
composition to perilymph.
costal pleura: the connective tissue membrane that lines the interior of
the rib cage; also known as the parietal pleura.
coup: focal area of lesion at the site of impact in a closed head injury.
cranial nerves: bundles of axons carrying a combination of motor,
sensory, and autonomic nervous system (ANS) information in the
peripheral nervous system; there are 12 pairs of cranial nerves.
craniofacial anomaly: a disorder or syndrome affecting the structures
of the skull and/or face.
craniofacial dysostosis: also known as Crouzon syndrome; a
craniofacial anomaly that is similar to Apert syndrome but less
severe, affecting the bones of the face and skull.
cranium: the rounded part of the skull posterior to the face that houses
the brain.
cribriform plate: the perforated central part of the ethmoid bone
through which fibers of the olfactory nerve (I) pass from the nasal
cavity to the olfactory bulbs.
cricoarytenoid joint: the articulation between each arytenoid cartilage

and the posterior quadrate lamina of the cricoid cartilage.
cricoid: the ring-shaped cartilage forming the base of the larynx; it
articulates with the thyroid cartilage and the arytenoid cartilages.
cricoid articular facets: two small projections on the superior sloping
border of the posterior quadrate lamina of the cricoid cartilage that
serve as the point of articulation for the arytenoid cartilages.
cricothyroid joint: the articulation between the cricoid and thyroid
cartilages; there are two of these joints, each formed by an inferior
cornu of the thyroid and the lateral surface of the cricoid in the region
where the anterior arch ends and the posterior quadrate lamina begins.
cricothyroid ligaments: the inferior portions of the conus elasticus that
bind the cricoid and thyroid cartilages.
cricotracheal ligament: connective tissue that binds the cricoid
cartilage to the trachea at the first tracheal ring.
crista ampullaris: receptor end organ for balance (specifically angular
acceleration) found in the ampulla of the semicircular canals; plural:
cristae ampullares.
crista galli: literally “cock’s comb”; the vertically oriented process of
the ethmoid bone on which a portion of the dura mater of the brain
anchors.
Crouzon syndrome: congenital autosomal dominant disorder with
manifestations related to premature fusion of the cranial sutures
including atresia; conductive or mixed hearing loss may be a
component.
crura: plural of crus.
crus: anatomical structure resembling a leg; the anterior and posterior
crura of the stapes connect to the footplate.
cul-de-sac resonance: an aberration of oral–nasal resonance in which
the vocal tone resonates excessively within the pharynx and/or nasal
cavity instead of within the oral cavity.
cuneiform: two tiny wedge-shaped cartilages that are embedded within
the aryepiglottic folds somewhat lateral and anterior to the corniculate
cartilages.
cuneiform tubercles: the lateral bumps or swellings in the posterior
aryepiglottic folds created by the cuneiform cartilages lying within.
cupid’s bow: the superior border of the upper lip that resembles an
archer’s bow due to the impression of the philtrum upon the medial

part of the upper lip.
cupula: gelatinous membrane covering the stereocilia of the crista
within the ampullae of the semicircular canals.
curette: a surgical instrument that has a scoop, wire loop, or ring at its
tip and is used to clean the ear canal of debris.
curved membrane buckling: the eardrum vibrates in segments rather
than as a whole unit serving to increase the pressure propagated to the
ossicles.
cytoarchitecture: the structure and arrangement of cell bodies in
different regions of the cerebral cortex.
cytokines: proteins secreted by cells especially of the immune system
that are involved in the regulation of inflammatory responses.
cytomegalovirus (CMV): a herpes virus; a prenatal intrauterine
infection which can cause central nervous system disorders, brain
damage, hearing loss, vision loss, and seizures in the infant.
cytoplasm: the fluid interior of the cell outside of the nucleus.
Darwin’s tubercle: anatomical feature of the pinna that is present in
approximately 10.4% of the population; it presents as a thickening on
the helix at the junction of the upper and middle thirds; the gene for
Darwin’s tubercle is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, but
has incomplete penetrance, meaning not all who possess the gene will
necessarily possess the ear tubercle; it is thought to be a sign of
wisdom.
decibels (dB): one-tenth of a bel; the unit of sound intensity based on
the logarithmic relationship of an observed intensity or pressure to a
reference intensity or pressure.
declarative memory: explicit and conscious recall of facts.
deglutition: referring to the process of swallowing.
Deiter’s cells: supporting cell group for the outer hair cells, resting on
the basilar membrane residing in the organ of Corti; cradles the bases
of the outer hair cells.
dementia: a progressive brain disease resulting in cognitive decline over
time.
dendrites: multiple branches off the cell body of a neuron that transmit
neural information toward the cell body.
dens: a toothlike, vertically oriented projection on the axis (C2) upon
which the atlas (C1) rotates; also referred to as the odontoid process.

dentate nucleus: the most laterally located of the deep cerebellar nuclei.
dentin: the body of a tooth overlying the pulp cavity and covered by the
enamel and cementum of the tooth.
depolarization: positive change in neuronal membrane potential
moving it from resting membrane potential (i.e., −70 mV) to a less
negative value (e.g., −15 mV); this allows for membrane channels to
open so that calcium may infuse the cell causing the release of a
neurotransmitter.
desaturation: decreased levels of oxygen in the arterial blood.
developmental articulation disorder: a term used to denote an
articulation disorder that occurs during childhood, usually functional
in nature.
diarthrodial: freely moving joints.
diencephalon: centrally located region of the brain that develops from
the prosencephalon; includes the thalamus, hypothalamus, and
epithalamus.
differentiation: one of the stages of neurodevelopment during which
neurons become further specialized making their functional
connections.
diphthongs: vowel sounds that have two articulatory positions during
production, resulting in a shifting acoustic spectrum.
diplophonia: the simultaneous perception of two pitches during
phonation; a phenomenon frequently associated with dysphonia.
diplopia: double vision (one object seen as two) due to disrupted
innervation to the muscles of the eyes.
distoversion: malposition of a tooth away from the midline of the dental
arch.
dorsal cochlear nucleus: the dorsal portion of the cochlear nucleus; the
first central synapse for the cochlear nerve as it travels the pathway to
the auditory cortex.
dorsal fasciculus: the dorsal or posterior region of spinal cord white
matter where ascending bundles of nerve fibers are found.
dorsal root ganglion: a cluster of neuronal cell bodies for sensory
functions found in the dorsal root of the spinal cord.
dowagers hump: colloquial term for hyperkyphosis describing
excessive posterior curvature of the thoracic vertebrae; usually seen
in elderly women.

ductus reunions: a small tube of the membranous labyrinth where the
cochlea and the saccule meet; it carries endolymph between the
auditory and vestibular systems.
dura mater: the most superficial and toughest layer of the meninges;
cranial dura is double layered (periosteal outer layer and meningeal
inner layer), spinal dura is single layered.
dysarthria: a motor speech disorder due to muscle paresis, paralysis,
incoordination, or altered tone affecting speech processes of
respiration, phonation, articulation, resonance, and prosody.
dysphagia: any difficulty, discomfort, or pain associated with
swallowing; a swallowing disorder.
dysphonia: disordered phonation; phonation that brings negative
attention to the speaker; often described by such terms as hoarse,
breathy, tense, harsh, weak, strident or thin, among others.
dyspnea: general term for difficult or labored breathing.
ear canal: the tubular portion of the outer ear leading from the pinna to
the tympanic membrane; also referred to as the external auditory
meatus (EAM); part of the canal is bone and part of it is cartilage.
eardrum: also referred to as the tympanic membrane (TM), the thin
membrane that forms the border between the outer and middle ear;
the TM vibrates in response to acoustic pressure waves and transmits
the resulting mechanical vibrations to the structures of the middle ear
(i.e., ossicles).
earlobe: see lobule.
ectrodactyly–ectodermal dysplasia-clefting syndrome: also known as
EEC syndrome; a craniofacial anomaly affecting the hands, feet, skin,
nails, hair, and oral structures.
edema: swelling of tissues.
edematous: swollen with an accumulation of fluid.
efferent: the conduction of nerve impulses away from the central
nervous system (i.e., motor).
elastic cartilage: specialized connective tissue that provides some
structural support and is extremely flexible.
elastic membrane: a thin, broad sheet of connective tissue that binds
the laryngeal cartilages together from within; it is composed of the
quadrangular membrane superiorly and the conus elasticus inferiorly.
electronystagmography (ENG): electrical measurement of involuntary

eye movements (i.e., nystagmus) to assess the integrity of the
vestibular mechanism.
eleidin: a gel-like, translucent substance in the second layer of the skin
of the lips that exposes the underlying vascular tissue, giving the lips
a darker hue than the rest of the skin of the face.
embolic: a type of stroke due to an embolus—a traveling clot or plug
that occludes an artery.
emboliform nucleus: medially located deep cerebellar nuclei.
emphysema: chronic and irreversible lung disease characterized by
enlargement of the alveoli due to breakdown of their walls and loss of
elasticity; often associated with smoking.
enamel: the calcified covering of the crown of a tooth.
encephalitis: inflammation of the brain.
endocochlear potential (EP): the differentiated potential between
voltages of the endolymph within the scala media and the perilymph
of the scala tympani.
endolymph: fluid of the membranous labyrinth; its composition has a
high concentration of potassium and calcium and a low concentration
of sodium.
endolymphatic sac: saclike portion of the membranous labyrinth
connected to the endolymphatic duct, believed to play a role in
absorption of endo-lymph.
endomysium: the connective tissue covering a muscle fiber.
endoneurium: the connective tissue covering a nerve cell fiber.
endoplasmic reticulum: an organelle that synthesizes, stores, and
releases various substances within the cell.
endothelial tissue: a type of epithelial tissue that makes up the vessel
linings for the circulatory and lymph systems.
endotracheal: within or passing through the trachea.
enlarged vestibular aqueduct syndrome (EVAS): a collection of
symptoms that results from an already enlarged vestibular aqueduct
becoming traumatized such as in the case of a head injury or sudden
change in barometric pressure; the collection of symptoms typically
comes on suddenly—a flat or sloping hearing loss and vertigo or
symptoms of disequilibrium. The hearing loss is not present at birth
and can fluctuate with each traumatic incident to the ear.
ependymal cells: a type of glial cell that lines the ventricular cavities

and is part of the choroid plexus.
epiglottis: the leaf- or shoehorn-shaped cartilage lying immediately
behind the hyoid bone and thyroid cartilage. It moves backward and
downward to cover the opening of the larynx during swallow.
epimysium: the connective tissue covering a group of muscle fasciculi.
epineurium: the connective tissue covering a group of nerve fascicles.
episodic memory: a subtype of declarative memory regarding events
that are time and place specific.
episodic vertigo: recurring spells of vertigo (dizziness) lasting for
several minutes at a time.
epithalamus: part of the thalamus, involved in autonomic and limbic
system functions.
epithelial cell: cells that cover surfaces and form selective barriers;
specialized for selective secretion and absorption of molecules and
ions.
epithelial migration: the natural migration of the dead skin of the ear
canal from the level of the tym-panic membrane to the outside.
epithelial tissue: tissue that lines the outer surface of the body as well as
the internal passageways and body cavities.
epithelial tissue proper: a type of epithelial tissue that forms the skin
and the internal membranes that are continuous with the skin.
epitympanic recess: see attic.
esophageal stage: the stage of the swallow from the bolus entering the
esophagus to the bolus entering the stomach.
ethmoid bone: a central bone of the skull that forms part of the anterior
cranial floor as well as the ceiling of the nasal cavities.
ethmoid paranasal sinuses: hollow chambers found within the ethmoid
bone formed by the ethmoid labyrinths, opening into the nasal cavity.
ethmoidal labyrinths: a paired series of three (anterior, middle, and
posterior) thin-walled cavities within the ethmoid bone.
etiology: the cause of a disorder.
Eustachian tube (ET): see auditory tube.
evoked: an event that occurs in response to stimulation.
excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSP): depolarizing graded
potentials at the postsynaptic cell making the cell more likely to fire.
executive function: an integrative cognitive process directing initiation,
planning, organizing, self monitoring, and control to achieve a goal.

exocytosis: the process of neurotransmitters being released from the
synaptic vesicle into the synaptic cleft.
expiratory reserve volume (ERV): the volume of air that can be
forcibly expired from the lungs at the end of a normal tidal
exhalation.
external auditory meatus (EAM): see ear canal.
external carotid artery: a division off the common carotid artery
supplying blood to the extracranial head and face.
extracellular: the area external to the cell.
extrinsic: a membrane or muscle whose origin, insertion, or both resides
outside an anatomical structure such as the larynx or tongue.
facial: cranial nerve VII; innervates facial muscles, eyelid depressor
muscles, the stapedius muscle, and some taste receptors.
falsetto: the loft register; phonation in a higher than normal pitch range
characterized by unique free margin vibration of the anterior two-
thirds of the vocal folds.
falx cerebelli: the sickle-shaped extension of the dura mater found
between the cerebellar hemispheres.
falx cerebri: the sickle-shaped, arched fold of the dura mater of the
brain that occupies the longitudinal fissure and anchors anteriorly
onto the crista galli; it separates the two cerebral hemispheres.
familial: occurring in members of the same family but not necessarily
being genetic.
fascia: a sheet of fibrous tissue found below the surface of the skin that
encloses muscles and groups of muscles.
fascicle: a bundle of nerve fibers.
fasciculations: involuntary contractions or twitching of muscle fibers.
fasciculus: a bundle of muscle fibers.
fastigial nucleus: the most medially located of the deep cerebellar
nuclei.
faucial pillars: two pairs of lateral folds at the posterior limit of the oral
cavity formed by the palatoglossus and palatopharyngeus muscles
which serve as the passage between the oral and pharyngeal cavities.
fibrous cartilage: specialized connective tissue that provides strong
structural support and is slightly compressible.
fibrous joint: the anatomical classification of joints that are only
slightly movable or immovable.

fibrous midline septum: the vertically oriented cavity within the
interior of the tongue; its presence means that the intrinsic muscles of
the tongue are paired.
filiform: cone-shaped papillae on the outer surface of the tongue; these
are more numerous than any of the other types of papillae of the
tongue.
filter: in acoustics, any structure (e.g., a cavity or chamber) that
resonates certain frequencies while damping others.
flaccid dysphonia: the dysphonia of muscular hypotonia; the disordered
voice associated with vocal fold paralysis or reduced muscle tension.
flaccid paralysis: a loss of voluntary movement associated with a
reduction in muscle tone.
flexibility: in speech, the perception of frequency and intensity
variation; the complexity of pitch and loudness for linguistic
effectiveness and appropriate cultural affect.
flocculonodular lobe: the oldest part of the cerebellum on its inferior
surface.
fluctuate: to alternately increase and decrease in severity.
fluent aphasias: a classification of language disorders due to brain
lesion characterized by relatively effortless speech production and
average utterance length of more than three words.
footplate: the base of the stapes bone to which the crura are attached;
the portion of the stapes that fits into the oval window.
foramen cecum: a small depression in the middle of the sulcus
terminalis at the root of the tongue.
foramen magnum: the large opening at the base of the occipital bone
through which the spinal cord passes on its way down the spinal
column.
formants: peaks of resonance in the vocal tract, that is, bands of
frequencies with relatively high energy or amplitude.
Fourier analysis: a process by which a complex tone can be analyzed
into its individual pure tone components.
fourth ventricle: part of the ventricular system; the space located at the
dorsal surface of the brainstem between the pons and medulla
(anterior) and the cerebellum (posterior).
fovea: the retinal depression in the eye where light rays are focused for
the best acuity.

fovea oblonga: a depression along the base of the anterolateral surface
of the arytenoid cartilage where the bulk of the posterior vocal fold
attaches.
frequency: a physical measure of the number of times an object vibrates
per second; frequency is perceived by humans as the pitch of a sound;
the unit of measure for frequency is Hertz (Hz).
frons: the forehead.
frontal paranasal sinuses: a pair of cavities within the frontal bone that
open into the nasal cavity.
frontotemporal dementias: subtypes of dementia that have primary
degeneration of nervous tissue in the frontal and temporal lobes;
includes Pick’s disease and primary progressive aphasia.
functional disorder: an impairment that exists in the absence of a
known or observable etiology.
functional residual capacity (FRC): the amount of air that remains in
the lungs after a normal tidal expiration; it includes expiratory reserve
volume and residual volume.
fundamental frequency: the lowest individual frequency (i.e., pure
tone) in a complex tone.
fungiform: approximately 100 mushroom-shaped papillae on each side
of the anterior tongue, each one housing approximately two to four
taste buds.
gap junction channel: intercellular passages that open to allow certain
chemicals to pass.
genetic: related to the inheritance from one’s immediate family.
genetic mutation: a permanent change in one specific gene; associated
with single-gene hereditary disorders such as Huntington’s disease.
genetic variants: changes in a gene that act as genetic risk factors.
germ cell layers: primal embryologic source of organs.
gingivae: the gums; the mucous membrane that surrounds the teeth.
GJB2: the gene on chromosome 13 that codes for the development of
connexin 26, a gap junction protein.
glabella: the portion of the frontal bone between the eyebrows and
immediately superior to the nasal bones.
glenoid fossa: the crater-shaped depression on the scapula where the
head of the humerus articulates.
glial cell: support cells of the nervous system.

gliomas: tumors of the central nervous system of glial cell origin.
globose nucleus: medially located deep cerebellar nuclei.
globus pallidus: a telencephalic nucleus of the basal ganglia involved in
higher order motor control.
glossectomy: surgical removal of the tongue, either in part or totally.
glossoepiglottic folds: slips of mucous membrane that extend from the
posterior base of the tongue to the lingual (anterior) surface of the
epiglottis.
glossopharyngeal: cranial nerve IX; innervates some pharyngeal and
lingual muscles, transmits taste and sensation from the throat.
glottal attack: vocal fold vibration characterized by complete adduction
of the vocal folds before expired air reaches the larynx; the result is
often an initiation of phonation that is explosive in nature.
glottal chink: any opening of the vocal folds while they are adducted in
the median position; a posterior glottal chink is typically seen during
whisper.
glottal fry: phonation of excessively low frequency due to maximum
mass and minimum tension of the vocal folds; vocal fold vibration
composed of the lowest frequencies in the vocal range—the voice
typically sounds creaky when the vocal folds vibrate in glottal fry;
also known as vocal fry.
glottal stop: an unvoiced glottal plosive seen in some languages and
used in certain contexts in English; sometimes used as a
compensatory strategy when the individual exhibits insufficient
intraoral air pressure for the production of pressure consonants (e.g.,
affricates, fricatives, and plosives).
glottis: the variable-sized opening between the vocal folds at their
superior edge.
goblet cells: specialized epithelial cells in the mucous membrane of the
respiratory passageway that secrete mucous.
golgi apparatus: an organelle that packages and stores intracellular
materials.
gomphosis: the virtually immovable joint formed by a tooth and its
articulation with an alveolus (tooth socket).
graded potentials: small, localized, electrical changes from resting
membrane potential on postsynaptic neurons; may be hyperpolarizing
or depolarizing in effect.

gradual: proceeding by steps or degrees.
gustatory cortex: cortical region of the insula and overlying frontal
operculum involved with the processing of neural information
regarding taste.
habenula perforata: the space between the bony layers of the spiral
lamina where the nerve fibers pass as they lead into the modiolus.
habitual pitch: the pitch range typically used by an individual for most
vocal activity; the modal pitch range.
haemophilus influenzae Type B (Hib): responsible for a wide range of
clinical diseases; one of the known bacteria to cause meningitis;
vaccination with Hib conjugate vaccine is effective in preventing
infection, and several vaccines are now available for routine use.
hair cells: inner ear sensory receptor cells with stereocilia projecting
from the cell bodies, typically embedded in a gelatinous membrane
that provides mechanical stimulation.
hamulus: the hook-like terminus of the medial pterygoid lamina of the
sphenoid bone which serves as the pulley for the tendon of the tensor
veli palatini muscle.
harmonic: any individual frequency that is a multiple integer of the
lowest tone in a complex tone (i.e., fundamental frequency); for
example, for a fundamental frequency of 200 Hz, the third harmonic
would be three times the fundamental frequency, or 600 Hz.
hay fever: allergic response to environmental allergens.
helicotrema: apical portion of the cochlear duct where the perilymph of
the scala vestibuli and the scala tympani is continuous.
helix: an anatomical structure of pinna; the outermost prominent curved
rim or ridge.
hematoma: a clot of blood that forms in a tissue, organ, or body space
as a result of a broken blood vessel.
hemispatial neglect: a lack of awareness of the environment opposite
the site of lesion.
Hensen’s cells: supporting cells of the organ of Corti that serve as an
attachment for the tectorial membrane.
hereditary: result of genetic transmission; familial inheritance.
Hertz (Hz): the unit of measurement for frequency, representing
vibration in cycles per second.
Heschl’s gyrus: the transverse temporal gyrus that houses the auditory

cortex for the central processing of speech.
hilum: the point where the main stem bronchi enter the lungs.
hippocampus: a subcortical nucleus found deep to the temporal lobe in
each cerebral hemisphere; part of the limbic system and involved in
memory, especially for new learning.
homeostasis: the physiological balance of the body’s internal
environment.
horizontal processes: the horizontally oriented plates of the palatine
bones that make up the posterior part of the hard palate.
Huntington’s disease: a hereditary degenerative disease of the
telencephalic basal ganglion resulting in chorea.
hyaline cartilage: specialized connective tissue that provides strong
structural support with some flexibility.
hydrocephalus: a pathological accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) casually referred to as “water on the brain”; caused by
blockage in CSF drainage or malfunction of absorption of CSF into
the blood stream.
hydrostat: an anatomical structure (e.g., the tongue) that has the ability
to move with little or no skeletal support for the muscles that
comprise it; the structure makes hydraulic movements in the absence
of fluid, and these movements do not diminish the structure’s volume.
hyoepiglottic ligament: connective tissue that binds the superior,
lingual (anterior) surface of the epiglottis to the posterior surface of
the corpus of the hyoid bone.
hyoid: a U- or horseshoe-shaped bone in the superior region of the neck
that is suspended in place by a series of muscles attaching to it from
structures above and below; the hyoid primarily serves as the base of
the tongue, but it is also bound to the larynx by the hyothyroid
membrane.
hyothyroid membrane: a thin sheath of connective tissue that binds the
inferior surface of the hyoid bone to the superior surface of the
thyroid cartilage, thereby binding the hyoid bone and larynx together.
hypercapnia: elevated carbon dioxide levels in the blood.
hypernasality: abnormal, excessive nasal resonance that affects the
proper production of nonnasal speech sounds.
hyperpolarization: a negative change in the neuronal membrane
potential moving it from resting membrane potential (i.e., −70 mV) to

a more negative number (i.e., −90 mV).
hyperpolarized: denoting an increase in the electrical potential
difference across a cell membrane; neural impulses cannot be created
during this state.
hypoglossal: cranial nerve XII, responsible for inner-vating muscles of
the tongue.
hypoglossal canal: a small opening anterolateral to the foramen
magnum where the hypoglossal nerve (XII) passes from the region of
the medulla oblongata to the oral cavity.
hypopharynx: most inferior portion of the pharynx posterior to the
laryngeal opening (aditus), also called the laryngopharynx.
hypothalamus: diencephalic region inferior to the thalamus, composed
of a set of nuclei involved in autonomic and endocrine nervous
system functions.
hypoxemia: low blood oxygen levels.
idiopathic: having an unknown cause.
ilium: the superiormost and largest of the three bones that make up the
pelvis (the other two being the ischium and pubis).
immittance measures: measurement of the flow of energy through a
medium; energy flow through the middle ear for the purpose of
assessing its static condition, Eustachian tube function and the
acoustic reflex.
immittance meter: a device used to measure immittance, usually of the
middle ear.
impedance mismatch: a condition in which media have dissimilar
impedances; therefore, when a stimulus travels from one medium to
another, there is a loss of energy.
incisive foramen: a small opening in the maxillae immediately behind
and between the two upper central incisors.
incudostapedial joint: the articulated joint between the incus and
stapes.
incus: the second bone in the ossicular chain attached to the malleus and
the stapes; consists of a body and a short and long process.
induction: refers to the interaction of ectoderm with the underlying
mesoderm around the 18th day of gestation causing a commitment of
tissue to become neural tissue.
infarct: a localized area of dead tissue.

inferior colliculi: see inferior colliculus.
inferior colliculus: auditory nucleus located in the midbrain; relays
information from the superior olivary nucleus to the medial
geniculate body; also plays a part in the startle reflex in reaction to a
sudden, loud noise. Plural: inferior colliculi.
inferior cornua: two short, narrow legs of cartilage extending inferiorly
from the posteriormost regions of the thyroid laminae; they articulate
with the cricoid cartilage on each side.
inferior frontal gyrus: the cortical region of the frontal lobe housing
Broca’s area.
infrahyoid: a term used to denote any muscle that has an origin on a
structure that is below the hyoid bone and then rises to insert onto the
inferior surface of the hyoid.
infraorbital foramen: a small opening in the maxilla immediately
below the orbit of the eye.
infraversion: malposition of a tooth so that it does not rest at the line of
occlusion, that is, the tooth is “lower” than adjacent teeth.
infundibulum: connects the pituitary gland to the hypothalamus; also
referred to as the pituitary stalk.
inguinal ligaments: bands of fibrous connective tissue formed by the
aponeurosis of the external oblique muscle running from the iliac
spine to the pubis; they separate the contents of the lower abdomen
from the lower extremities.
inhalatory laryngeal stridor: an audible, noisy sound produced by an
obstruction within the larynx (usually the adducted vocal folds)
during inhalation.
inhalatory stridor: see inhalatory laryngeal stridor.
inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSP): hyper-polarizing graded
potentials at postsynaptic cells making the cells less likely to fire.
inner ear: houses the sensory organs of hearing and balance including
the cochlea, vestibule, and semi-circular canals.
inner hair cells (IHC): receptor sensory hair cells located in the organ
of Corti within the cochlea of the auditory system of the inner ear.
inner pillar cells: supporting cells for the organ of Corti that stabilize
the inner hair cells; they form the tunnel of Corti.
inspiratory capacity (IC): an individual’s maximum capacity to inspire
air; it includes tidal volume and inspiratory reserve volume.

inspiratory reserve volume (IRV): the volume of air that can be
further inhaled after a normal tidal inhalation.
insula: region of the cerebral cortex deep to the lateral fissure involved
with speech functions, the limbic system, and visceral function.
intensity: a physical measure of the amount of pressure that is generated
within a medium by a vibrating object; intensity is perceived by
humans as the loudness of a sound; the unit of measure for intensity is
the decibel (dB).
interarytenoid muscles: a term used to denote the transverse and
oblique arytenoid muscles collectively.
interaural: between the two ears.
intermaxillary suture: the seam or joint between the two maxillae.
intermediate tendon: a short inscription of tendon that connects two
bellies of the same muscle; the omohyoid and digastricus muscles
each have two bodies that are bound together by an intermediate
tendon.
internal auditory canal (IAC): the bony pathway in the petrous portion
of the temporal bone in which the vestibulocochlear (VIII) and facial
(VII) nerves pass; blood vessels that supply the inner ear also pass
through this canal.
internal auditory meatus: see internal auditory canal (IAC).
internal capsule: large projection pathway connecting higher (e.g.,
telencephalon) with lower (e.g., diencephalon) central nervous system
regions.
internal carotid artery: a pair of arteries ascending on the superior
anterior lateral neck that runs through the carotid foramen of the
petrous portion of the temporal bone to join the circle of Willis at the
base of the brain.
interthalamic adhesion: loose fibrous tissue connecting the two halves
of the thalamus; also called the massa intermedia.
interventricular foramen: the paired set of canals joining the lateral
ventricle to the third ventricle; a passageway for cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF); sometimes referred to as the foramen of Monro.
intervertebral discs: cartilaginous discs between adjacent vertebrae in
the spinal column.
intonation: a feature of spoken language in which pitch and stress are
varied for phonemic and affective purposes; the rising and falling

modulation of vocal pitch during speech production.
intracellular: originating or occurring within a cell.
intraoral air pressure: air pressure that is generated in the oral cavity
for the production of speech sounds; the pressure is generated by the
obstruction (e.g., plosives) or constriction (e.g., fricatives) of expired
air by the articulation of various oral structures such as the lips, teeth,
tongue, palate, etc.
intratracheal membrane: a connective tissue membrane that lines the
interior of the trachea; muscle fibers and mucous membrane are
superimposed upon it.
intrinsic: a membrane or muscle whose origin and insertion reside
within an anatomical structure such as the larynx or tongue.
ipsilateral: on the same side.
ischemia: decreased oxygen to the brain.
ischium: the middle of the three bones that comprise the pelvis (the
other two being the ilium and pubis).
isthmus: anatomical part or passage where bone and cartilage meet.
jargon: a series of fluently spoken neologisms and inappropriately used
real words that make little or no sense to the listener.
jugular bulb: bulbous protrusion of the floor of the middle ear to
accommodate the jugular vein.
kinesthetic: pertaining to the unconscious sense that detects position,
weight, or movement of the muscles, tendons, and joints; also
referred to as proprioception.
kinocilium: the tallest cilium of a bundle projecting from a cell body in
the receptor end organs for balance.
Klippel–Feil syndrome: a craniofacial disorder with cleft palate and
skeletal anomalies characterized by a short neck, scoliosis (abnormal
curvature of the spine), kidney problems, and malformed stapes.
kyphoscoliosis: referring to scoliosis.
kyphosis: an abnormal anterior curvature of the spine; also known as
“swayback.”
labioversion: malposition of an anterior tooth (incisor or cuspid) so that
it is tilted toward the lips.
labyrinth: the name for the mazelike structures of the inner ear;
includes the cochlea, vestibule, and the semicircular canals.
labyrinthectomy: surgical destruction of the inner ear.

labyrinthine arteries: paired arteries arising from the basilar artery to
supply blood to the inner ear.
labyrinthine wall: the most medial wall of the middle ear space.
lambdoidal suture: the seam or joint between the occipital bone and the
two parietal and temporal bones.
lamina papyracea: the thin plate forming the lateral surface of the
labyrinths of the ethmoid and forming a large part of the medial wall
of the orbit of the eye.
laryngectomee: a person who has had his or her larynx surgically
removed because of cancer or trauma.
laryngopharynx: a division of the pharynx that extends from the level
of the hyoid bone to the esophagus, found immediately posterior to
the larynx; also referred to as the hypopharynx.
larynx: a singular, musculocartilaginous structure within the neck that
serves two purposes: (a) a protective device for the lower respiratory
passageway; (b) the source of phonation for vocal activity.
lateral fasciculus: lateral region of spinal cord white matter where
ascending and descending bundles of nerve fibers are found.
lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN): a point of synapse in the thalamus
for primary visual system fibers; also referred to as the lateral
geniculate body.
lateral glossoepiglottic folds: two folds of connective tissue that extend
from the lingual (anterior) surface of the epiglottis to the base of the
tongue; they are separated from each other by the median
glossoepiglottic fold and valleculae.
lateral hyothyroid ligaments: somewhat thicker portions of the
hyothyroid membrane that bind the superior cornua of the thyroid
cartilage to the greater cornua of the hyoid bone; in many individuals,
tiny cartilages (triticial cartilages) are embedded within these
ligaments.
lateral lemniscus: the auditory tract or nerve bundle located on the
lateral edge of the pons between the superior olivary nucleus and the
inferior colliculus.
lateral semicircular canal: one of the three canals of the vestibular
system; contains the sensory receptors for angular acceleration; also
referred to as the horizontal semicircular canal.
lateral sulcus: the dividing fissure between the frontal and temporal

lobes of the cerebrum, also referred to as the Sylvian fissure.
lateral ventricles: telencephalic brain cavities that produce
cerebrospinal fluid.
left hemispatial neglect: the failure to report, respond, or orient to
novel or meaningful stimuli to the left hemispace following damage
to the right cerebral hemisphere.
lenticular process: small bony knob at the end of the long process of
the incus that articulates with the head of the stapes.
lenticulostriate arteries: small arterial branches from the middle
cerebral arteries that supply blood to portions of the basal ganglia and
internal capsule.
leptomeninges: the collective name for the pia mater and arachnoid
meningeal layers.
lesion(s): pathological changes to tissue structure or function due to
injury or disease.
levator veli palatini: along with the tensor tympani, one of the two
muscles responsible for opening the Eustachian tube; this muscle also
elevates the soft palate during swallowing.
lever action: the ossicles work together as a lever to increase the
pressure placed on the fluids of the inner ear.
lexical memory: a type of declarative memory specific to word
meaning, spelling, and pronunciation.
ligament: dense connective tissue found at joints that attaches bone to
bone, bone to cartilage, or cartilage to cartilage.
limbic areas: cortical regions (e.g., cingulate gyrus) and subcortical
nuclei (e.g., hippocampi) involved in the limbic system functions of
emotion and memory.
linea alba: a tight band of connective tissue extending from the xiphoid
process to the pubis, formed by the aponeuroses of the external
oblique, internal oblique, and transversus abdominus muscles; this
vertical line separates the abdominal muscles into left and right
mirror-image pairs.
lingual frenulum: a fold of mucous membrane that extends from the
gingivae of the mandible and floor of the mouth to the anterior
undersurface of the tongue.
Lissauer’s tract: dorsolateral white matter region of the spinal cord
involved with transmitting pain and temperature sensations.

literal (phonemic) paraphasias: unintentional errors of word retrieval
in aphasia where wrong sounds are substituted for the correct sounds.
lobule: literally means small lobe, the anatomical structure hanging at
the base of the pinna; the lobule is devoid of cartilage but is
composed of adipose (i.e., fatty) connective tissue; also known as the
earlobe.
loft register: the range of vocal pitches that is associated with falsetto,
that is, the highest pitches of the vocal range.
logorrhea: excessive language output with little or no self-monitoring;
can be seen with fluent aphasia; also known as press of speech.
long process: the prominent bony structure of the incus that terminates
at the lenticular process which articulates with the head of the stapes.
longitudinal fissure: large furrow that divides the right cerebral
hemisphere from the left.
longitudinal median sulcus: a depression on the midline superior
surface of the tongue that runs along its length.
longitudinal tension: the force that is created by lengthening and
shortening of the vocal folds; when the vocal folds are lengthened,
longitudinal tension increases and when the vocal folds are shortened,
longitudinal tension decreases; the laryngeal adjustment that regulates
frequency of the vocal tone.
longitudinal wave: a wave that propagates (i.e., spreads out) in the
same direction as the movement of the air molecules being displaced;
that is, when an object vibrates, the air molecules are displaced by to-
and-fro movements and the wave that is generated by the
displacement also spreads out in the same direction (i.e., along the
same plane as the molecules). Contrast this to a transverse wave
which is seen when a rock is thrown into a pond. The water molecules
move up and down but the wave spreads out horizontally from the
point where the rock entered the water, creating a ripple effect. With a
transverse wave, propagation is perpendicular to the movement of the
molecules.
long-term memories: see retrospective memories.
lordosis: an abnormal posterior curvature of the spine; also known as
“roundback.”
loudness: the perceptual correlate of sound intensity.
lower motor neuron (LMN): a nerve cell whose body is located in the

spinal cord or in the brainstem and whose axon passes by way of a
peripheral nerve to innervate skeletal muscle.
lumbar cistern: enlarged subarachnoid space surrounding the inferior
end of the spinal cord; contains cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
lumbar segment: one of the five segments of the spinal cord
corresponding to the lower back region.
lysosome: an organelle that is responsible for the digestion of bacterial
and cellular debris.
macula: receptor end organ of the utricle and saccule housed in the
vestibule; sensitive to linear and gravitational stimulation; plural:
maculae.
macula flava anterior: the region immediately below the thyroid notch,
somewhat yellowish in color, where the two vocal folds converge
anteriorly.
main sensory nucleus: brainstem nucleus found in the pons that
receives sensory information from the trigeminal (V) nerve regarding
touch.
malleoincudal joint: articulated joint between the malleus and incus.
malleolar fold: a ridge along the tympanic membrane formed by
ligament attachments to the anterior process of the malleus.
malleus: the largest and most lateral bone in the ossicular chain;
articulates with the tympanic membrane and the incus.
mandible: the jaw bone.
mandibular fossa: also known as the glenoid fossa; a depression in the
temporal bone immediately anterior to the external auditory meatus
where the condylar process of the mandible articulates with the skull,
thereby forming the temporomandibular joint (TMJ).
manubrium: the long process of the malleus that articulates with the
tympanic membrane (TM) or eardrum.
masked facies: an expressionless face typically seen in Parkinson’s
disease.
mass effect: the resulting compression of surrounding nervous tissue by
a lesion such as a hemorrhage or tumor.
mass lesions: foreign masses on the vocal folds that affect their ability
to phonate properly, such as nodules, papillomae, or polyps.
mastication: the process of chewing food through mandibular and
tongue movements to form a bolus.

mastoid air cells: the labyrinth of variable-sized cavities within the
mastoid bone.
mastoid process: the rounded, posterior part of the temporal bone
immediately behind the external auditory meatus and lateral to the
styloid process; it serves as an attachment for several muscles.
mastoidectomy: the surgical removal of the bony partition of the
mastoid air cells for mechanical cleaning of infection within the
mastoid process of the temporal bone.
mastoiditis: inflammation of the mastoid air cells within the mastoid
bone.
matrix: extracellular material that is part of connective tissue.
maxillary paranasal sinuses: spaces within the maxillae that open into
the nasal cavity.
maximum minute volume: the amount of air that can be forcibly and
maximally inspired and expired over the course of one minute.
mechanoreceptors: sensory receptors that respond to mechanical
deformation of tissue such as compressing, stretching, etc.; for the
respiratory system, these are found in the pulmonary apparatus and
chest wall.
medial compression: the force of vocal fold adduction; as medial
compression increases, the vocal folds become more resistant to
subglottic air pressure; the laryngeal adjustment that regulates vocal
intensity.
medial cranial fossa: two middle depressions at the base of the interior
cranium where the temporal lobes of the brain reside.
medial geniculate body: the auditory nucleus within the thalamus that
receives primary ascending fibers from the inferior colliculus and
then relays them to the auditory cortex.
medial geniculate nucleus (MGN): see medial geniculate body.
medial lemniscus: a sensory tract traveling from the nuclei gracilis and
nuclei cuneatus (dorsal column nuclei) in the medulla to the thalamus.
medial longitudinal fasciculus: ascending brainstem tract carrying
information from the vestibular nuclei to the motor nuclei that control
eye movement.
median glossoepiglottic fold: a single midline fold of connective tissue
that courses from the lingual (anterior) surface of the epiglottis to the
base of the tongue.

mediastinum: the cavity between the pleurae of the lungs containing
the heart and thoracic viscera.
medical home: an approach to providing comprehensive primary
medical care that facilitates a partnership between an individual
patient and their personal physician; a medical home allows better
access to health care and increased satisfaction with care by insuring
the patient’s continuity of care; also known as Patient-Centered
Medical Home (PCMH).
medulla: see medulla oblongata.
medulla oblongata: referred to as the medulla, it is the most caudal
component of the brainstem and is continuous with the spinal cord.
medullaris: the lower, tapering part of the spinal cord at the level of the
first lumbar segment (L1); also known as the conus medullaris.
medullary centers: large volume of white matter fibers found in the
cerebral hemispheres; the three types of fibers comprising the
medullary centers are association, projection, and commissural fibers.
medullary rhythmicity center: the part of the medulla oblongata that
controls the rate, depth, and rhythm of breathing.
Ménière’s disease: a disease of idiopathic etiology that results from the
excessive accumulation of endo-lymph within the membranous
labyrinth; syndromes include episodic vertigo, fluctuating sensory
hearing loss, and a sensation of fullness in the affected ear.
meninges: connective tissue coverings of the central nervous system
(CNS); there are three meningeal coverings: the dura mater, the
arachnoid, and the pia mater.
meningiomas: central nervous system tumors arising from meningeal
connective tissue.
meningitis: an inflammation of the meninges from bacterial or viral
causes.
meningococcal: referring to an organism that is one cause of bacterial
cerebrospinal meningitis.
mental symphysis: the fibrocartilaginous juncture at midline of the two
halves of the mandible that ossifies during the first year of life; the
chin.
mesencephalic nucleus: a brainstem sensory nucleus receiving
information regarding proprioception from the trigeminal (V) nerve.
mesencephalon: the midbrain, found caudal to the diencephalon.

mesioversion: malposition of a tooth toward the mid-line of the dental
arch.
mesothelial tissue: a type of epithelial tissue that lines the internal body
cavities.
metamemory: a higher level cognitive function denoting the ability to
know and predict recall; memory about memory.
metencephalon: developed from the rhombencephalon; consists of the
pons and cerebellum.
metopic suture: the seam that divides the two halves of the frontal bone
in infants and children that usually disappears by the age of 6 so that
the frontal bone is a singular unit.
Michel dysplasia: a malformation of the inner ear characterized by its
failure to develop, resulting in complete unilateral or bilateral
deafness.
microcephaly: abnormal smallness of the head.
microfilament: an organelle that assists with cell movement and
transport of substances within the cell.
microglia: a type of glial cell with many small, fine processes; involved
in phagocytosis following neuronal death.
micropascals (µPa): unit of measurement of pressure representing one-
millionth of a pascal.
microtia: malformation of the pinna.
microtubule: an organelle that assists with cell movement and transport
of substances within the cell.
middle ear: portion of the hearing mechanism medial to the tympanic
membrane and lateral to the vestibule of the inner ear.
middle ear cavity: air-filled space in the temporal bone where the
contents of the middle ear reside; also referred to as the middle ear
space.
midline raphe: the midline seam where the two mylohyoid muscles
(left and right) meet as their fibers course to insert onto the hyoid
bone.
migration: one of the stages of neurodevelopment during which
neurons move to their destined locations.
millivolts (mV): one-thousandth of a volt; a unit of measure for
electrical current.
minute volume: the amount of air that is exchanged during quiet, tidal

breathing over the course of one minute.
mitochondria: an organelle that provides the energy source for the cell.
mixed: in reference to diminished hearing acuity, a hearing loss that has
both conductive and sensorineural components; the conductive
component can be treated but the sensorineural component is
permanent.
modal register: the range of frequencies associated with the vocal
midrange; it is associated with habitual pitch.
modiolus: the bony central core of the cochlea that houses the nerve
fiber ganglia of cranial nerve VIII as well as blood vessels.
Mondini dysplasia: a specific malformation of the cochlea where only
the basal turn is developed, thereby restricting the bony cochlea to 1.5
turns.
monophthongs: vowel sounds that have only one articulatory position
throughout their production; also known as pure vowels.
motile: capable of movement.
motor homunculus: the topographical map of the precentral gyrus
indicating body representation regarding motor function.
motor speech disorder: a disorder in which the planning, initiation,
timing, coordination, or strength of voluntary muscle movements for
speech is adversely affected; includes apraxia of speech (AOS) and
dysarthria.
mucoperiosteum: the lining of the interior paranasal sinuses (as well as
other parts of the body such as the auditory structure) formed by the
intimate union of the periosteum and a mucous membrane.
mucosal wave: the repetitive, undulating vibration of the mucous
membrane covering of the vocal folds during phonation; aberrations
of the mucosal wave may indicate vocal fold pathology.
multiple sclerosis: an acquired, degenerative, demyelinating disease of
the central nervous system.
muscle cell: synonymous with muscle fiber; specialized for the
production of mechanical force.
muscular dystrophy: a genetic disease characterized by progressive
muscle deterioration and weakness.
muscular process: the rounded projection at the base of each arytenoid
cartilage where the posterior and anterolateral surfaces meet; the
muscular processes are the insertion point for the lateral and posterior

cricoarytenoid muscles.
musculocartilaginous: referring to an anatomical structure that is
composed primarily of cartilages and muscles; the larynx is a
musculocartilaginous structure.
myelencephalon: develops from the rhombencephalon; consists of the
medulla.
myelin: axonal covering necessary for rapid impulse conduction;
oligodendroglia make up myelin in the central nervous system (CNS)
and Schwann cells make up myelin in the peripheral nervous system
(PNS).
mylohyoid line: a ridge running transversely along the interior surface
of the corpus of the mandible; it is the point of origin for the
mylohyoid and other muscles.
Myoelastic Aerodynamic Theory: a theory that describes how the
vocal folds vibrate according to principles of aerodynamics (e.g.,
airflow, Bernoulli effect, pressure); the explanation of the phonatory
process that accounts for the vibratory capacity of the vocal folds
based on their mass and elasticity (myoelastic) and the movement of
air (aerodynamic) through the glottis.
myopia: nearsightedness.
myringoplasty: a surgical procedure to close a tym-panic membrane
perforation.
myringotomy: surgical incision of the tympanic membrane to remove
effusion of the middle ear.
nasal cannulae: tubes inserted into the nasal openings to deliver
oxygen.
nasal murmur: an additional resonance below 500 Hz for the nasal
consonants.
nasal septum: the midline division between the two halves of the nasal
cavity which is formed by bone (the perpendicular plate of the
ethmoid and the vomer) posteriorly and cartilage (septal cartilage)
anteriorly.
nasopharynx: a division of the pharynx which extends from the base of
skull to the level of the velum; the pharyngeal region posterior to the
nasal cavity.
natural resonant frequency: the frequency at which a system vibrates
with greatest amplitude when driven by an external force.

nebulizer: a mechanical device used to administer medication to
individuals with respiratory disease via a liquid mist to the airways.
neocortex: the newest cortex from an evolutionary perspective; it is six-
layered and makes up the cerebral cortex.
neologisms: made-up words that are not found in the patient’s language.
neonatal herpes: herpes infection in the newborn baby.
neoplasm(s): tumors, whether benign or malignant.
nerve cell: synonymous with neuron; specialized for the initiation and
conduction of impulses.
neural arch: the bony arch on the dorsal side of a vertebra formed by
the pedicles and laminae extending from the corpus.
neural crest: neuroectodermal tissue that separates from the neural tube
and develops into structures of the peripheral nervous system.
neural pathway: the nerve cells and pathways of the auditory and
vestibular systems.
neural plate: early stage of neurodevelopment following induction;
neuroectoderm thickening that develops into the neural tube.
neural tube: neuroectodermal tissue that folds in upon itself to form a
tube and later develops into the central nervous system.
neuralgia: pain associated with a nerve.
neurectomy: the surgical excision of part of a nerve.
neurogenic dysphagia: a swallowing disorder with a neurological
etiology.
neurological disorder: any disorder whose etiology can be traced to the
central or peripheral nervous system.
neuromas: tumors of the nervous system, whether benign or malignant.
neuromuscular junction: the point of synapse between a neuron and
the muscle fibers it inner-vates; also referred to as the myoneural
junction.
neuropathy: a disease or abnormality of the nervous system.
neurotransmitter(s): chemical agents at synaptic junctions that allow
neural impulses to propagate.
nodes of Ranvier: intervening spaces between myelin segments on an
axon where the axon communicates directly with the extracellular
space.
noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL): hearing loss due to exposure to
excessive noise levels; the loss is sensorineural and permanent in

nature.
nonfluent aphasias: a classification of language disorders due to a brain
lesion characterized by effortful speech production and average
utterance length of less than three words.
nucleus: the control center of a cell which houses genetic material.
oblique line: a somewhat ill-defined ridge running diagonally along
each thyroid lamina.
occipital condyles: two processes on either side of the foramen
magnum that serve as the point of articulation between the base of the
skull and the first cervical vertebra (C1 or the atlas).
occipitomastoid suture: the seam or joint between the occipital bone
and the mastoid process of the temporal bone which is continuous
with the lamb-doidal suture.
occiput: the back of the cranium.
octave: in speech science, a doubling of frequency usually in reference
to the fundamental frequency; for example, if the fundamental
frequency is 150 Hz, the first octave is 300 Hz.
oculomotor: cranial nerve III, innervates multiple muscles for eye
movement.
odontoid process: a toothlike, vertically oriented projection on the axis
(C2) upon which the atlas (C1) rotates; also referred to as the dens.
ohms: unit of measure of resistance for electrical or other forms of
energy.
olfactory: cranial nerve I, projects from the nasal cavity to the olfactory
bulb transmitting sensory information regarding smell.
oligodendroglia: a type of glial cell responsible for producing myelin in
the central nervous system.
olivocochlear pathway: efferent pathway projecting from the medial
and lateral superior olivary complex and coursing down to the inner
and outer hair cells for the purpose of inhibition.
operculum: area of the cerebral cortex that overlies the insula; includes
the frontal opercula, temporal opercula, and parietal opercula.
optic: cranial nerve II, transmits visual information from the retina
exiting the optic disc and traveling caudally on the ventral surface of
the frontal lobes.
optic canals: two short openings in the lesser wings of the sphenoid
bone where the optic nerves (cranial nerve II) and ophthalmic arteries

pass from the orbits of the eye into the cranial cavity.
optic chiasm: partial crossing point of the optic nerve and part of the
primary visual pathway.
optic radiations: part of the primary visual pathway carrying fibers
from the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus to the primary
visual cortex in the occipital lobe.
optic tract: part of the primary visual pathway carrying fibers from the
optic chiasm to synapse at the lateral geniculate nucleus of the
thalamus.
optimal pitch: natural pitch; the voice fundamental achieved at
maximum phonatory efficiency in the modal register.
oral preparatory stage: the first stage of swallow, including removing
food from a cup or utensil and chewing (i.e., mastication) to form the
bolus.
oral stage: the second stage of the swallow where the bolus is propelled
toward the pharynx to initiate a swallow reflex.
oral transit time (OTT): the amount of time it takes to move the bolus
toward the pharynx and initiate a swallow.
orbit: the large opening in the facial part of the skull where an eyeball
resides.
organ of Corti: organ within the scala media of the cochlea where the
receptor hair cells and supporting cells reside resting on the basilar
membrane.
organelles: structures inside a cell that perform vital functions for the
life of the cell.
organic: relating to the structure, function, or health of living things; see
also organic disorder.
organic disorder: an impairment that can be traced back to an
observable structural or physiological etiology.
oropharynx: a division of the pharynx that extends from the level of the
velum to the level of the hyoid bone; the pharyngeal region posterior
to the oral cavity.
ossicles: the bones of the middle ear: malleus, incus, and stapes.
ossicular chain: the collection of the articulated bones of the middle
ear: malleus, incus, and stapes.
osteoblasts: specialized cells that are responsible for forming or
reforming bone.

osteoclasts: specialized cells that are responsible for the resorption of
bone.
osteoma: benign slow growing bony mass in the ear canal usually
located at the junction of the cartilaginous portion and the bony
portion; exposure to cold water is thought to stimulate their growth.
osteoporosis: significant loss of bone density.
otalgia: ear pain.
otitis externa: an inflammation of the skin lining of the external
auditory meatus or ear canal.
otitis media (OM): inflammation of the middle ear resulting primarily
from poor Eustachian tube function.
otitis media with effusion: inflammation of the middle ear with the
development of fluid in the middle ear space.
otitis media with tympanic membrane perforation: inflammation of
the middle ear with a secondary perforation of the tympanic
membrane (TM) or eardrum.
otoconia: calcium crystals that add mass to the structure of the maculae
of the utricle and saccule; they are located on the gelatinous (i.e.,
otolithic) membrane in which the stereocilia of the hair cells are
embedded.
otolaryngologist: a physician who specializes in the diagnosis,
management, and treatment of ear, nose, and throat conditions; also
known as an ENT.
otolithic membrane: the gelatinous membrane that the otoconia rest
upon that provides for the stimulation of the embedded stereocilia
hair cells of the maculae.
otologist: a physician who specializes in the diagnosis, management,
and treatment of ear disease.
otorrhea: drainage from the ear.
otosclerosis: formation of new spongy bone growth around the stapes
footplate and oval window resulting in stapes fixation and a
concomitant conductive hearing loss.
otoscopy: inspection of the external auditory meatus and tympanic
membrane through use of an otoscope.
outer ear: the outermost portion of the hearing mechanism, beginning
with the pinna, that functions to gather and conduct sound waves
down to the level of the tympanic membrane.

outer hair cells (OHC): motile cells within the organ of Corti that seem
to be responsible for enhancing tectorial membrane movement at low
intensity levels to facilitate stimulation of the inner hair cells.
outer pillar cells: supporting cells for the organ of Corti that stabilize
the outer hair cells; they form the tunnel of Corti.
oval window: the opening on the medial wall of the middle ear leading
into the scala vestibuli of the inner ear; the footplate of the stapes fits
in this window.
palatal aponeurosis: a broad, flat sheet of connective tissue that serves
as the skeleton for the velum (soft palate).
palatine processes: the horizontally directed processes of the maxillae
that form the anterior portion of the hard palate.
palatoglossal arches: also known as the anterior faucial pillars; two
folds on either side of the posterior oral cavity that are formed by the
palatoglossus muscles.
palilalia: a pathological condition in which words are rapidly and
involuntarily repeated.
palliative care: care that is focused on the comfort of the individual
through the prevention and relief of suffering to improve quality of
life.
palsy: partial or complete paralysis of muscles, often accompanied by
loss of sensation and uncontrollable body movements such as
tremors.
papilloma: also known as juvenile papillomatosis; benign tumors of the
larynx in children.
paradoxical vocal fold movement (PVFM): adductory rather than
normal abductory vocal fold movement during inspiration resulting in
constriction or complete occlusion of the airway.
paragrammatism: language errors in the use of grammatical markings
seen in persons exhibiting fluent aphasia.
parahippocampal gyrus: cortical region inferior to the cingulate gyrus
at the medial surface of the temporal lobe.
paramedian position: the somewhat halfway abducted position that the
vocal folds take at rest; the vocal folds can either adduct from this
position or more fully abduct.
parasympathetic division: a division of the autonomic nervous system;
serves to conserve body energy and maintain the internal balance of

body systems.
parenchyma: organ tissue.
parenchymal: deep to the cerebral cortex; also referred to as
intracerebral.
parietal pleura: see costal pleura.
parietal–temporal–occipital (P-T-O) region: the multimodal
association cortex at the convergence of the parietal, temporal, and
occipital lobes.
Parkinson’s disease: a degenerative disease of the mesencephalic basal
ganglia, specifically the substantia nigra.
pars flaccida: the superior region of the tympanic membrane (TM)
having less support from the central fibrous layers.
pars oblique: a bundle of fibers from the cricothyroid muscle that
course in a somewhat diagonal direction; the lateral bundles of the
cricothyroid muscles.
pars recta: a bundle of fibers from the cricothyroid muscle that course
in a somewhat vertical direction; the medial bundles of the
cricothyroid muscles.
pars tensa: make up the body of the tympanic membrane (TM);
consisting of three sturdy fibrous layers.
Passavant’s pad: a bulging of the posterior wall of the nasopharynx
created by contraction of the muscles that comprise the superior
pharyngeal constrictors.
pathology: the scientific study of the nature of diseases and of the
structural and functional changes that occur to the living organism
due to disease processes.
patulous: abnormally open.
pericardial cavity: internal body cavity that houses the heart.
pericardium: the membranous sac that contains the heart.
perichondrium: fibrous membrane surrounding the outer surface of
cartilage.
perilymph: cochlear fluid found in the scala vestibuli and scala
tympani; it is high in concentrations of sodium and calcium and low
in concentration of potassium.
perimysium: connective tissue covering each muscle fasciculus.
perineurium: connective tissue covering each nerve fascicle.
periodic sounds: sounds whose waveforms repeat themselves at equal

intervals over time.
periodontal ligament: the connective tissue that holds a tooth within its
alveolus, thereby forming a joint called a gomphosis.
periosteum: fibrous membrane surrounding the outer surface of bone.
peripheral chemoreceptors: sensory receptors responding to changes
in oxygen levels in the blood; located at the bifurcation of the
common carotid arteries.
peristalsis: the unidirectional wavelike muscular contractions in the
pharynx and esophagus that force food and drink down toward the
stomach.
peristaltic: referring to a wavelike action.
peritoneal cavity: internal body cavity that houses the abdominal
viscera.
permanent: continuing indefinitely without fundamental change.
perpendicular plate of the ethmoid: a vertically oriented lamina of the
ethmoid bone that extends below and perpendicular to the cribriform
plate, forming the superior part of the bony nasal septum.
petiolus: the narrow stalk at the inferior end of the epiglottis that is
bound to the thyroid cartilage just behind the thyroid notch by way of
the thyroepiglottic ligament.
phagocytic cells: cells that capture and absorb waste material, harmful
microorganisms, and other foreign bodies.
phagocytosis: the process of ingesting cellular debris.
pharyngeal aponeurosis: a broad, flat sheet of connective tissue that
serves as the skeleton for the pharynx.
pharyngeal fricative: an unvoiced sound occurring naturally in some
languages (but not English) that is produced by creating turbulence
within the pharynx; in speakers for whom the sound doesn’t occur
naturally, this sound is sometimes used as a compensatory strategy
when intraoral air pressure is insufficient to produce the oral
fricatives.
pharyngeal stage: third stage of the swallow that is initiated with the
swallow reflex and ends with the bolus entering the esophagus.
pharyngeal transit time (PTT): the time it takes for the bolus to pass
through the pharynx and into the esophagus.
pharyngeal tubercle: the region immediately anterior to the foramen
magnum on the basilar part of the occipital bone where the

pharyngeal raphe attaches (the pharyngeal raphe, in turn, serves as the
point of origin and insertion for the pharyngeal constrictor muscles).
pharynx: the upper end of the alimentary canal that extends from the
oral and nasal cavities to the esophagus; also known as the throat.
philtrum: the vertically oriented groove or depression located midline
between the nose and the upper lip bordered on either side by the
columellae nasi.
phonation: the physiological process by which vocal fold vibration
results in a vocal tone; the process of producing a voice by way of
vocal fold vibration.
phonation breaks: phonatory discontinuity; phonation is interrupted
with brief periods of aphonia.
phonemic paraphasias: see literal (phonemic) paraphasias.
phonemic regression: age-related reduction in the ability to recognize
words greater than expected from the amount of documented hearing
loss.
phonological disorder: a speech disorder characterized by speech
sound errors that are cognitively or linguistically based, as opposed to
simple errors in motor production.
photoreceptors: sensory receptors for vision; these include the rods and
cones of the retina.
phrenic nerve: the nerve created by combined branches of spinal nerves
C3, C4, and C5 that inner-vates the diaphragm.
phrenology: the correlation of the structure of the head with personality
and intellect proposed by Franz Joseph Gall in 1809.
physiology: the scientific study of the function of the living organism
and its parts.
pia mater: the innermost of the three meningeal layers; very delicate
and transparent.
piebaldism: an autosomal dominant genetic disorder of pigmentation
characterized by congenital patches of white skin and hair.
pinna: visible portion of the outer ear for the collection of sound; also
referred to as the auricle.
pitch: the perceptual correlate of sound frequency.
pitch breaks: a sudden, noticeable, often unexpected shift from one
pitch to another during phonation; commonly an upward shift of an
octave or more from the modal register to the loft register (falsetto).

plane of reference: the vertical, horizontal, or other direction in which
an anatomical structure is being viewed by the observer; these include
the coronal, sagittal, and transverse planes.
plasma membrane: double-layered outer membrane of a cell.
plethysmograph: a device that allows one to study movements of the
chest and abdomen by observing changes in thoracic and abdominal
volumes.
pleurae: the serous membrane that surrounds the lungs and interior of
the thorax consisting of two layers: the costal pleura and the visceral
pleura.
pleural cavities: internal body cavities that house the lungs.
pleural linkage: the binding of the lungs to the interior of the rib cage
by way of the airtight adhesion of the visceral pleura of the lungs to
the costal pleura of the rib cage, and of the lungs to the superior
surface of the diaphragm by way of the visceral pleura they both
share.
pneumococcal: referring to an organism that is one cause of bacterial
cerebrospinal meningitis.
pneumonia: lung inflammation that is secondary to infection or other
causes such as aspiration.
pneumotachometer: a device that allows one to study changes in air
pressure and air flow.
pneumotaxic area: the respiratory area in the pons that inhibits
inspiration to prevent overinflation of the lungs.
pneumothorax: the presence of gas in the pleural cavity which results
in a collapsed lung.
polyps: nonmalignant growths or tumors protruding from the mucous
membrane of a structure such as the nasal cavity or vocal folds.
pons: a broad mass of chiefly transverse nerve fibers in the brainstem
lying ventral to the cerebellum at the anterior end of the medulla
oblongata; the bridge between the brainstem and the structures of the
midbrain.
pons-medullary junction: the junction on the ventral aspect of the
brainstem that demarcates the pons from the medulla oblongata;
cranial nerve VIII emerges here.
pontine cisterns: enlarged subarachnoid spaces that are ventral to the
pons; contains cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).

posterior cranial fossa: the two rear-most depressions in the base of the
interior cranium where the two lobes of the cerebellum of the brain
reside.
posterior cricoarytenoid ligament: connective tissue anchoring the
posterior base of the arytenoid cartilage to the posterior quadrate
lamina of the cricoid cartilage, thereby restricting the anterior rocking
movement of the arytenoid.
posterior crus: anatomical structure resembling a leg; this crus along
with the anterior crus of the stapes connect to its footplate.
posterior faucial pillars: bands of tissue running from the soft palate to
the pharynx, overlying the palatopharyngeus muscles.
posterior quadrate lamina: the broader posterior portion of the cricoid
cartilage that projects superi-orly to occupy some of the open space in
the posterior inner region of the thyroid cartilage.
postlingual: after speech and language skills have been developed.
precentral gyrus: convoluted gray matter anterior to the central sulcus;
involved in volitional movement.
prefrontal cortex: the multimodal association area of the most rostral
region of the frontal lobes.
prelingual: prior to the development of speech and language skills.
premaxilla: the triangular part of the anterior hard palate that is formed
by two tiny sutures originating bilaterally between the lateral incisors
and cuspids and coursing back to terminate at the incisive foramen;
this region is typically fused in humans.
prephonation phase: that part of the vibratory cycle where the vocal
folds move from the paramedian position to the median position by
means of adduction.
presbycusis: age-related progressive hearing loss most often
sensorineural and bilateral in nature.
presbylaryngis: progressive voice degeneration attributed to the aging
process.
press of speech: see logorrhea.
pressure = force/area: a law of physics that states that pressure change
occurs as a force is displaced over a change in area; with force being
constant, pressure increases as area decreases and vice versa.
pressure consonants: consonant sounds that require a degree of
intraoral air pressure to be produced; includes the plosives and

affricates primarily but can include the fricatives.
pressure equalization (PE) tube: a silastic tube or grommet surgically
placed in the tympanic membrane to provide passive ventilation of
the middle ear space.
primary areas: regions of the cerebral cortex that have single functions.
primary auditory cortex: receives projections from the auditory
pathway, also called Heschl’s gyrus; Brodmann areas 41 and 42.
primary motor cortex: the precentral gyrus in the frontal lobe; gives
off projections for volitional motor movement; Brodmann area 4.
primary progressive aphasia (PPA): a subtype of dementia with the
primary symptom of progressive deterioration of language abilities.
primary somatosensory cortex: the postcentral gyrus in the parietal
lobe that receives sensory projections; Brodmann areas 3, 1, 2.
primary visual cortex: the cuneus and lingual occipital gyri regions
surrounding the calcarine fissure where the sense of sight is
interpreted; Broadmann area 17.
primary visual pathway: the axonal fibers and nuclei involved in
transmitting visual neural information from the retina to the primary
visual cortex in the occipital lobe.
progressive: advancing in degree or severity.
progressive neurological disorder: a pathological condition arising
from the central and/or peripheral nervous system that gets
progressively worse over time and is often fatal.
projection fiber tracts: bundles of axons that transmit neural
information from higher to lower (and vice versa) centers of the
central nervous system (CNS).
proliferation: one of the stages of neurodevelopment during which
neurons multiply.
promontory: the bony prominence in the medial wall of the middle ear
cavity created by the basal turn of the cochlea.
propagation: the transmitting of an action potential down an axon
toward the terminal.
proprioceptive: pertaining to the sense of body position, posture, and
movement.
prosencephalon: a term signifying the rostral vesicle of the neural tube
early in neurodevelopment; further differentiates to form the
telencephalon and diencephalon.

prosody: the intonation and stress that overlies the production of speech
sounds during conversational speech, signaled by modifications in
vocal pitch, intensity, and duration.
prosopagnosia: an inability to recognize familiar faces; a type of
perceptual impairment.
prospective memory: memory for future events and information;
remembering to remember.
protoplasm: the basic living substance of cells.
pseudobulbar palsy: a condition resulting in dysarthria as a result of
lesions occurring above the level of the brainstem.
psychogenic: of psychological origin; from the mind; often used to
mean functional or in the absence of an organic etiology.
ptosis: droopy eyelid(s) secondary to oculomotor (III) nerve
involvement.
puberphonia: also known as mutational falsetto; use of a high pitch,
often falsetto, usually in postpubescent and young adult males such
that age and gender identity may be lost and/or negative attention
results.
pubic symphysis: the joint formed by the union of the medial aspects of
the two pubic bones.
pubis: the inferiormost of the three bones that comprise the pelvis (the
other two being the ilium and ischium).
pulmonary edema: abnormal buildup of fluid in the lungs.
pulmonary pressure: the force that air exerts upon the alveoli pulmoni
within the lungs; also referred to as alveolar pressure.
pulmonologist: a medical doctor who specializes in diseases of the
lungs and respiratory tract.
pulp cavity: the central cavity of a tooth that contains soft tissue pulp.
pulse oximeter: a medical device used to measured heart rate or pulse
as well as to estimate blood oxygen levels.
pulse register: the range of vocal pitches that is associated with glottal
fry, that is, the lowest pitches of the vocal range.
pure tone: an individual, discrete sound frequency; tones produced by
audiometers and tuning forks are pure tones.
putamen: one of the nuclei of the basal ganglia found in the
telencephalon lateral to the globus pallidus; involved in higher-order
motor control.

pyramidal eminence: pyramid-shaped bony projection lying on the
posterior wall of the middle ear cavity that houses the stapedius
muscle.
pyramids: bulges on the ventral aspect of the rostral medulla;
corticospinal and remaining corticobulbar tracts underlie the
pyramids.
quadrangular membrane: the superior portion of the elastic membrane
that extends from the aditus laryngis superiorly to the ventricular
ligaments inferiorly.
recruitment: an abnormal sensitivity to loud stimuli associated with
sensorineural hearing loss.
recurrent laryngeal nerve: a peripheral branch of the vagus nerve
(cranial nerve X) that innervates all intrinsic muscles of the larynx
except for the cricothyroid muscles; it is given the name “recurrent”
because it takes an indirect route to the larynx by first descending into
the upper thorax.
Reissner’s membrane: membrane within the cochlear duct separating
the scala vestibuli and the scala media; projects obliquely from the
osseous spiral lamina and the outer wall of the cochlea; also referred
to as the vestibular membrane.
relative refractory period: brief period of time following the firing of
an action potential when the neuron will only fire if more
depolarization than normally required is generated.
residual volume (RV): the volume of air that remains in the lungs and
cannot be forcibly expelled; its purpose is to prevent the lungs from
collapsing completely.
resonance: selective amplification of certain sound frequencies due to
the natural resonant characteristics of a cavity; the enhancement of
certain tones within the vocal tone as it passes through the vocal tract;
those tones that are tuned to the shape and configuration of the vocal
tract will resonate.
resonant: pertaining to the rate at which a mass will vibrate most
effectively when set into free motion.
resonator: any object or entity that is set into vibration by the action of
an outside force.
respiration: the exchange of oxygen for carbon dioxide at the level of
the alveoli in the lungs.

resting membrane potential (RMP): the voltage charge maintained
across a neuronal membrane when no action potential is being
generated; RMPs are approximately −70 mV.
resting volume: the volume of air that is in the lungs when they are at
their resting state between breaths.
reticular lamina: the netlike structure forming the upper surface of the
organ of Corti; formed from the phalangeal processes of the
supporting cells.
retinitis pigmentosa: a disease caused by overactivity of the pigmented
retinal epithelial cells; leads to damage and occlusion of the
photoreceptors resulting in blindness.
retrocochlear: the structures of the auditory system beyond the level of
the cochlea, especially cranial nerve VIII and the brainstem.
retrospective memories: memories for past events and information;
also known as long-term memories.
reverse breathing: a respiratory anomaly seen in some cases of athetoid
cerebral palsy that is characterized by depression of the sternum
during inspiration instead of elevation.
rhinorrhea: excessive secretion of mucous from the nose; also referred
to as a runny nose.
rhombencephalon: term signifying the caudal vesicle of the neural tube
early in neurodevelopment; further differentiates to form the
metencephalon and myelencephalon.
rima glottis: the technical name for the glottis, the variable-sized
opening between the vocal folds when they are in varying degrees of
abduction.
rima oris: the mouth; the entrance into the oral cavity.
rods: one type of photoreceptor found in the retina specialized for
sensing light.
round window: the membrane-covered window leading to the scala
tympani, located within the medial wall of the middle ear space.
saccule: the structure housed in the vestibule of the inner ear closest to
the cochlea that contains the end organ (macula) sensitive to linear
acceleration and gravity.
sacral foramina: a series of four paired holes or openings within the
sacrum where nerves and blood vessels pass from the lower abdomen
to the lower extremities.

sacral segment: one of the five segments of the spinal cord
corresponding to the hip region.
sagittal suture: the seam running longitudinally down the center of the
skull that serves as the joint between the two parietal bones.
saltatory conduction: the high-speed impulse conduction of myelinated
axons; propagation occurs between nodes of Ranvier.
sarcoidosis: an autoimmune disease in which granulomatous substances
are deposited into the tissues of organs, including the nervous system.
scala media: see cochlear duct.
scala tympani: the lower chamber of the cochlea, filled with perilymph
fluid; it terminates at the round window and the helicotrema.
scala vestibuli: the upper chamber of the cochlea, filled with perilymph
fluid; it terminates at the oval window and the helicotrema.
scapula: known more commonly as the shoulder blade, the somewhat
triangularly shaped bone that is attached to the axial skeleton by way
of the clavicle; it serves as the point of articulation for the humerus.
Scarpa’s ganglion: a ganglion of the vestibular nerve leading into the
internal auditory canal within the vestibular branch of cranial nerve
VIII; two ganglia consisting of the bodies of the primary vestibular
neurons which separate into a superior and an inferior group.
Scheibe dysplasia: the most common form of congenital dysplasia of
the inner ear; the bony labyrinth and membranous utricle and
semicircular canals are fully formed, but the saccule and scala media
are poorly differentiated; resulting from an autosomal recessive
inheritance.
Schwann cell: a type of glial cell that produces myelin to insulate the
axons in the peripheral nervous system (PNS).
Schwannoma neuroma: a benign neoplasm composed of Schwann
cells arising from the vestibular portion of cranial nerve VIII; also
referred to as an acoustic neuroma.
Schwartze’s sign: a reddish glow seen on the promontory produced by
increased vascularity; it can be visualized through the tympanic
membrane during otoscopy; considered an early sign of otosclerosis.
scoliosis: a lateral spinal curvature or “sideways” bending of the spine.
selective permeability: the ability of a neuron to let certain ions in to
the cell and keep other ions out of the cell given certain conditions.
sella turcica: a saddle-shaped depression in the sphenoid bone at the

base of the skull that contains the hypophyseal fossa which in turn
holds the pituitary gland.
semantic memory: a type of declarative memory specific to conceptual
or world knowledge.
semantic paraphasias: see verbal (semantic) paraphasias.
semicircular canals: a part of the vestibular system of the inner ear,
consists of three looped canals of bony labyrinth oriented to
anatomical directions: anterior, lateral, and posterior; contain sensory
receptor end organs that are sensitive to angular acceleration.
sensorineural: in reference to diminished hearing acuity, an irreversible
hearing loss due to pathology of the inner ear; damage to the inner ear
(e.g., the hair cells within the cochlea) cannot be alleviated.
sensory disorder: an impairment of any of the senses such as feeling,
hearing, seeing, smelling, or tasting.
sensory homunculus: the topographical map of the postcentral gyrus
indicating body representation regarding sensation.
septal cartilage: the anterior, cartilaginous part of the nasal septum.
septum pellucidum: the thin, membranous covering of the medial
aspect of the lateral ventricles.
short process: the process of the incus that arises from the bulky body
portion of the ossicles.
silent aspiration: penetration of the airway by saliva, food, or drink that
does not produce a cough reflex.
simple: minute papillae found along the sides of the tongue
approximately two-thirds of the way between the tip and root forming
parallel grooves, each groove housing several hundred taste buds.
simultaneous attack: vocal fold vibration in which expired air reaches
the vocal folds at the same time they reach adduction; the result is
relatively effortless and smooth phonation.
site of lesion: the source or location of pathological change in the
structure of an organ due to injury or disease.
SOAP notes: a method of documentation employed by health care
providers to write out notes in a patient’s medical chart; SOAP is an
acronym for subjective, objective, assessment, and plan.
sodium–potassium pump (SPP): an ion pump in the plasma membrane
of the neuron that exchanges intracellular sodium (Na+) for
extracellular potassium (K+) to assist in restoring and maintaining the

resting membrane potential.
somatic nervous system: a division of the peripheral nervous system;
provides motor and sensory inner-vation to the joints, skin, and
skeletal muscles.
spasmodic dysphonia: a voice disorder characterized by spasmodic
functioning of the larynx that results in extreme phonatory tension;
the vocal folds can spasm shut resulting in the more common
adductor type or can spasm open resulting in abductor spasmodic
dysphonia.
spastic: a type of cerebral palsy or dysarthria characterized by
involuntary jerky muscular contractions resembling spasms.
spatial summation: the addition of multiple postsynaptic potentials
occurring at more than one synapse site on the same cell.
spectrum: a graphic depiction of the frequencies of a complex tone
(represented along the horizontal axis of the graph) along with their
amplitudes (represented along the vertical axis).
speech–language pathologist (SLP): health care professional who is
credentialed in the practice of speech–language pathology to provide
a comprehensive array of services related to prevention, evaluation,
and rehabilitation of speech, language, and swallowing disorders.
sphenoid paranasal sinuses: a pair of cavities within the sphenoid bone
that open into the nasal cavity.
spinal accessory: cranial nerve XI, having a cranial and spinal branch;
the cranial branch assists the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves in
innervating muscles of the velum and pharynx while the spinal branch
innervates some muscles of the neck and shoulder.
spinal nerves: mixed (i.e., sensory and motor) nerves from the spinal
cord that innervate the body (e.g., muscles, glands, mucous
membranes, joints).
spinal trigeminal nucleus: a brainstem sensory nucleus receiving
information regarding pain and temperature from the trigeminal (V)
nerve.
spinous process: the posteriorly directed spine on a vertebra; in some
vertebrae, this process is horizontally oriented, and in others, it is
more obliquely oriented.
spiral ganglia: see spiral ganglion.
spiral ganglion: the location of the cell bodies for the auditory nerve

fibers of the cochlea located in the modiolus; plural: spiral ganglia.
spiral lamina: two thin shelves of bone arising from the modiolar side
of the cochlea between which courses the afferent and efferent nerve
fibers from the inner and outer hair cells.
spiral ligament: a band of connective tissue that anchors the basilar
membrane to the outer bony wall of the cochlear labyrinth.
spiral limbus: a mound of connective tissue in the scala media that
provides the medial attachment for the tectorial membrane.
spirometer: a device that measures the amount of air that enters and
leaves the lungs; it is typically used clinically to measure vital
capacity.
squamous cell carcinoma: a form of skin cancer, the most common
malignant tumor of the pinna, seen as a slow growing scaly patch of
skin with a thickening outgrowth; a result of chronic sun exposure.
stapedectomy: a surgical procedure to remove the stapes footplate after
it has been fixed in the oval window due to otosclerosis; a prosthesis
is used in place of the stapes to restore the integrity of the ossicular
chain.
stapedial branch: a branch of cranial nerve VII (facial nerve) that
innervates the stapedius muscle.
stapedius muscle: striated muscle of the middle ear that attaches to the
neck of the stapes and contracts in response to loud incoming sounds;
innervated by the cranial nerve VII (facial nerve).
stapedius tendon: a tendon of the stapedius muscle that projects from
the pyramidal eminence of the middle ear to insert onto the head of
the stapes bone.
stapes: the most medial bone in the ossicular chain; the head of the
stapes articulates with the lenticular process of the incus and the
footplate resides in the oval window.
stenosis: a narrowing of a tube or passageway.
stereocilia: hairlike projections from the cell body of a hair cell; actin
filaments provide support for the cilia; disturbance of the stereocilia
opens the channels that allow for depolarization which results in a
neural impulse.
sternum: also referred to as the breastbone, the elon-gated bone situated
at midline of the ventral thorax that serves as a point of articulation
for most of the ribs as well as the clavicle.

stoma: a surgical opening into the body from the outside.
strabismus: the misalignment of one eyeball with the other; sometimes
referred to as “lazy eye.”
stria vascularis: a highly vascularized collection of cells located on the
lateral surface of the scala media; responsible for the recycling of
endolymphatic fluids.
striatum: term indicating both the caudate nucleus and the putamen
nucleus of the basal ganglia.
stroke: a sudden interruption of the blood supply to the brain; also
referred to as a cerebrovascular accident.
structural disorder: an impairment whose etiology involves anatomical
deviation.
stylohyoid ligament: fibrous connective tissue that originates at the
styloid process of the temporal bone of the skull and terminates at the
hyoid bone; the hyoid bone is suspended in place by two of these
ligaments, one coming from each side.
styloid process: a pencil tip–shaped projection at the base of the
temporal bone that serves as a point of attachment for the stylohyoid
and stylopharyngeus muscles.
subarachnoid space: the area immediately below the arachnoid layer of
the meninges; blood vessels and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) are found
in this space.
subclavian arteries: major arterial blood supply arising superiorly off
the aortic arch.
subglottic pressure: the force that expired air exerts upon the inferior
surfaces of the vocal folds when they adduct and occlude the breath
stream; this pressure is necessary to initiate and maintain pho-nation.
subglottic space: the region immediately below the level of the vocal
folds, that is, the inner cricoid cartilage and uppermost part of the
trachea.
subthalamus: the nuclei that are inferior to the thalamus; part of the
basal ganglia system.
sudden: acute with rapid onset.
sulci: grooves or furrows in the cerebral cortex running between
adjacent gyri; singular: sulcus.
sulcus limitans: the separation point in spinal cord neurodevelopment
of the alar plate from the basal plate; cells that develop into

autonomic nervous system functions are located near the sulcus
limitans.
sulcus terminalis: the transversely oriented groove along the posterior
dorsum of the tongue, shaped like a chevron or inverted letter “V.”
superior colliculi: paired nuclei in the dorsal mid-brain where
secondary fibers from the visual pathway synapse; involved in visual
reflexes.
superior cornua: two long, narrow legs of cartilage extending
superiorly from the posteriormost regions of the thyroid laminae; they
articulate with the greater cornua of the hyoid bone on each side.
superior laryngeal nerve: a branch of the vagus nerve (cranial nerve X)
that innervates the cricothyroid muscles; these nerves take a more
direct path to the larynx than the recurrent laryngeal nerves.
superior olivary complex: the auditory nucleus located in the hindbrain
that relays information from the cochlear nucleus to the lateral
lemniscus.
superior olivary nucleus: a nucleus in the caudal pons and a point of
synapse for the auditory pathway transmitting neural signals from the
cochlear nuclei on to the inferior colliculi.
superior orbital fissures: clefts between the greater and lesser wings of
the sphenoid bone through which all or part of four cranial nerves
(III, IV, V, and VI) as well as blood vessels pass from the cranial
cavity into the orbits of the eyes.
superior sagittal sinus: a space found between the dural layers of the
falx cerebri; venous blood drains here and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
diffuses into this sinus.
suprahyoid: a term used to denote any muscle that has an origin on a
structure that is above the hyoid bone, and then descends to insert
onto the superior surface of the hyoid.
suprasegmental: a feature that overlays the actual production of speech
sounds during conversational speech such as intonation, stress, or
juncture.
supratonsillar fossa: the part of the tonsillar fossa immediately above
the palatine tonsil.
supraversion: malposition of a tooth so that it extends beyond the line
of occlusion, that is, the tooth is “higher” than adjacent teeth.
sympathetic division: a division of the autonomic nervous system;

serves to prepare the body for “fight or flight” situations.
symptoms: deviations from normal function.
synarthrodial: referring to immovable joints.
synchondrosis: a cartilaginous or amphiarthrodial joint involving
hyaline cartilage.
syndrome: a collection of symptoms.
synovial: pertaining to the secretion of fluid associated with diarthrodial
joints.
synovial joint: anatomical classification of joints that are freely
movable.
syphilis: an acquired or congenital venereal disease which may result in
secondary auditory or vestibular disturbances of the membranous
labyrinth.
tactile: pertaining to the conscious sense of touch or contact.
tectorial membrane: the gelatinous membrane of the organ of Corti
projecting radially and overlying the reticular lamina in which the
cilia of the outer hair cells are embedded.
tegmen tympani: the roof of the middle ear cavity that is created by the
very thin anterior surface of the petrous portion of the temporal bone.
tegmental wall: the superior wall or roof of the middle ear cavity.
telencephalon: anteriormost area of the brain that includes the cerebral
hemispheres; developed from the prosencephalon.
telodendria: the projections extending from an axon’s terminal.
temporae: the temples.
temporal summation: the addition of multiple post-synaptic potentials
occurring in rapid succession at one synapse site on a postsynaptic
cell.
temporary: of short duration and eventually returning to a baseline.
temporary threshold shift (TTS): a temporary reversible hearing loss
as a result of exposure to elevated noise levels; can result in
permanent loss with repeated incidences of exposure.
temporomandibular joint (TMJ): the joint formed by the articulation
of the condylar process of the mandible and the mandibular fossa of
the temporal bone; although there are actually two joints, they act as a
single unit.
tendon: dense connective tissue that connects muscle to bone, cartilage,
or another muscle.

tensor tympani: the striated middle ear muscle attached to the
manubrium of the malleus that contracts in response to a loud
stimulus; innervated by the trigeminal nerve (V).
tensor veli palatini: a muscle found in the nasopharynx that serves to
tense the soft palate upon elevation and facilitates opening of the
Eustachian tube.
tentorium cerebelli: the tentlike fold of dura mater that separates the
occipital lobes from the cerebellum.
teratogenic: an agent that negatively influences embryologic
development resulting in an anomaly or malformation.
terminal boutons: end points of axon terminals that make synaptic
contact with other cells.
thalamus: diencephalic structure composed of separate nuclei
associated with sensory, motor, and cognitive functions having
multiple reciprocal connections with the neocortex.
third ventricle: a diencephalic cavity located in the center of the
thalamus that provides a conduit for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
thoracic segment: one of the five segments of the spinal cord
corresponding to the thoracic (i.e., rib cage) region.
threshold(s): (1) the lowest levels of sound intensity that will yield a
response 50% of the time; (2) the lowest millivolt depolarization that
causes an action potential to occur.
thrombotic: a type of stroke due to a thrombus; a gradual accumulation
of material (i.e., plaque) within arterial walls to the point of
occlusion.
thyroepiglottic ligament: a band of connective tissue that binds the
petiolus of the epiglottis to the inner aspect of the thyroid cartilage
immediately below the thyroid notch.
thyroid: the largest of the laryngeal cartilages, it articulates with and is
immediately superior to the cricoid cartilage.
thyroid angle: the angle formed by the nearly complete union of the
two lamina of the thyroid cartilage; in adult males, this angle is
approximately 90 degrees and in adult females, it is approximately
120 degrees.
thyroid laminae: the two prominent walls of the thyroid cartilage that
meet anteriorly at midline and fuse almost completely except
superiorly where the thyroid notch is formed.

thyroid notch: a prominent indentation in the anterior midline of the
thyroid cartilage, formed by the incomplete fusion of the two thyroid
laminae.
thyroid prominence: a prominent protrusion of the thyroid cartilage
anteriorly, immediately below the thyroid notch; also known as the
Adam’s apple.
tidal volume (TV): the volume of air that is typically exchanged during
a cycle of quiet, vegetative breathing.
tinnitus: a sensation of noise within the ears (perceived typically as a
ringing, buzzing, or humming sound) without an external cause.
tip links: extracellular linking proteins that run between the tips of the
stereocilia; their function is to open the cell membrane channels for
the process of transduction.
tonotopic organization: peripheral and central auditory nervous system
maintenance of the frequency organization that originated along the
basilar membrane within the cochlea.
tonsillar fossa: the cavity or space between the palatoglossal and
palatopharyngeal arches (i.e., anterior and posterior faucial pillars).
TORCH: an acronym for a small group of viral agents (toxoplasmosis,
rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, and “other” agents) that
can cross the placental barrier and cause similar symptoms in
newborns—one of which is hearing loss.
torsiversion: malposition of a tooth so that it is twisted upon its own
vertical axis; for example, in 180-degree torsiversion, the back of the
tooth is facing the front and vice versa.
torus tubarius: a comma-shaped ridge in the region of the nasopharynx
that is formed by the salpingopalatine and salpingopharyngeus
muscles; the opening of the Eustachian tube is located beneath the
curved part of this structure.
total lung capacity (TLC): the sum of all lung volumes, including
inspiratory reserve volume, tidal volume, expiratory reserve volume,
and residual volume.
toxoplasmosis: an infection caused by a single cell parasite (toxoplasma
gondii) that invades the tissues and may seriously damage the central
nervous system, especially in infants.
tragus: the cartilaginous part of the pinna that projects outward from the
face toward the external auditory meatus; pressing down on it will

effectively close off the meatus to block incoming sound.
transduction: the conversion of mechanical energy to chemical to
electrical energy; carried out in the inner ear by the sensory receptor
cells.
transformer action: function of the structures of the middle ear to
overcome the impedance mismatch of the air-filled middle ear cavity
to the fluid-filled cavity of the inner ear.
transient ischemic attack (TIA): a brief interruption of blood supply to
the brain without lasting effects; a warning sign for stroke.
transverse foramina: the small holes or openings typically found in the
region of the transverse processes of the cervical vertebrae where
nerves and blood vessels pass along the length of the neck.
transverse processes: the two projections of bone extending laterally
from a vertebra at the juncture of its corpus and neural arch.
trapezoid body: fiber tract of the auditory pathway leading from the
cochlear nucleus to the superior olivary complex.
traumatic brain injury (TBI): brain damage due to external forces; can
be due to penetrating (i.e., open) head injury or nonpenetrating (i.e.,
closed) head injury.
triangular fovea: a small depression toward the apex of the arytenoid
cartilage on its anterolateral surface, immediately superior to the
arcuate ridge.
trigeminal: cranial nerve V, innervates muscles of mastication and
carries sensory information from the head (including the dura mater)
and mouth.
trisomy-21: a chromosomal disorder in which there are three instead of
two 21st chromosomes; the result is Down syndrome.
trochlear: cranial nerve IV, innervates eye muscles for movement.
tuberculosis: a bacterial infectious disease characterized by ulcerations
and the formation of cavities in the lungs; accompanied by cough and
fever.
tuning curve: a plot showing the lowest intensity at which a nerve fiber
will respond as a function of frequency.
tunnel of Corti: within the organ of Corti, the triangular space created
by the inner and outer pillar cells.
turbinates: also known as conchae; three long, thin scrolls of bone that
extend into the nasal cavity from its lateral walls.

tympanic antrum: a cavity within the petrous portion of the temporal
bone that communicates posteri-orly with the mastoid air cells and
anteriorly with the epitympanic recess of the middle ear cavity.
tympanic membrane (TM): see eardrum.
tympanic sulcus: see annular sulcus.
tympanogram: a graph of tympanic membrane admittance across a
positive to negative pressure gradient, for the purpose of assessing the
function of the Eustachian tube and the contents of the middle ear
cavity.
tympanometry: the procedure used to determine function of the middle
ear; the output of this procedure is called a tympanogram.
tympanoplasty: the surgical repair of the tympanic membrane and
contents of the middle ear; classified by types (Type I, II) according
to the magnitude of repair.
tympanosclerosis: the formation of a whitish plaque on the tympanic
membrane usually as a result of chronic otitis media.
umbo: the center of the tympanic membrane where the tip of the
manubrium of the malleus is attached.
uncinate fasciculus: an association tract connecting the rostral temporal
lobe with the orbital gyri of the frontal lobe.
uncus: gyrus found at the anterior end of the parahippocampal gyrus of
the medial temporal lobe; the amygdala nucleus underlies the uncus.
unilateral: pertaining to one side only.
universal newborn hearing screening: screening for hearing loss in the
newborn population, prior to the age of one month, typically hospital
based, using otoacoustic emissions or automated auditory brainstem
response measures.
unvoiced: a term used to describe some consonant sounds that are
produced without vocal fold vibration.
upper esophageal sphincter (UES): the most superior aspect of the
esophagus which includes the cricopharyngeus muscle; the valve that
prevents acid from refluxing into the esophagus from the stomach.
upper motor neuron (UMN): a nerve cell whose body is located in the
motor area of the cerebral cortex and whose processes connect with
motor nuclei in the brainstem or in the anterior horn of the spinal cord
prior to exiting the central nervous system toward the periphery.
Usher’s syndrome: an inherited condition characterized by congenital

sensorineural hearing loss and progressive loss of vision due to
retinitis pigmentosa.
utricle: the structure housed in the vestibule of the inner ear closest to
the semicircular canals that contains the end organ (macula) sensitive
to linear acceleration and gravity.
uvula: the small, midline terminal of the velum created by the mucous
membrane–covered musculus uvulae muscle.
vagus: cranial nerve X, which has multiple branches involved in
autonomic functions as well as skeletal movement and sensation; it is
involved with inner-vating the intrinsic muscles of the larynx and
some muscles of the velum and pharynx in addition to transmitting
sensation.
vallate: also referred to as circumvallate papillae; large button-shaped
papillae arranged in a row resembling an inverted letter “V”
immediately anterior to the sulcus terminalis, housing several
hundred taste buds.
valleculae: small furrows or pits at the base of the tongue immediately
anterior to the lingual surface of the epiglottis and found between the
median and lateral glossoepiglottic folds.
Valsalva maneuver: a procedure that manually forces the opening of
the Eustachian tube to ventilate the middle ear space, performed by
blowing while holding the nostrils and mouth closed; it also generates
greater subglottic pressure.
velocardiofacial syndrome: a craniofacial anomaly affecting the velum,
heart, and face.
velopharyngeal incompetence (VPI): a condition, either functional or
organic in etiology, in which the soft palate does not make a
sufficient seal with the posterior pharyngeal wall, resulting in
improper balance between oral and nasal resonance.
velopharyngeal mechanism: the mechanism created by the soft palate
and posterior pharyngeal wall that mediates oral–nasal resonance;
when the soft palate meets the posterior pharyngeal wall, nasal
resonance is diminished; when the soft palate is lowered, some of the
vocal tone passes into the nasal cavity to resonate there.
velum: the soft palate.
ventilation: the movement of air in and out of the lungs.
ventilator: a device that mechanically assists the patient in exchanging

oxygen and carbon dioxide; also referred to as an artificial respirator.
ventral cochlear nucleus: portion of the cochlear nucleus for the first
central synapse for the cochlear nerve as it travels through the levels
of the brainstem to the auditory cortex.
ventral fasciculus: the ventral or anterior region of spinal cord white
matter where descending bundles of nerve fibers are found.
ventral posterior medial (VPM) nucleus: the medial part of the ventral
posterior nucleus receiving sensory input from the face and tongue.
ventricle: the space between the ventricular (or false) folds and the
vocal folds, running horizontally along the length of the two sets of
folds.
ventricular folds: the technical name for the false vocal folds, found
immediately superior to the true vocal folds and separated from them
by the ventricle.
ventricular ligaments: bands of connective tissue forming the inferior
border of the quadrangular membrane and serving as the skeleton for
the ventricular folds.
verbal (semantic) paraphasias: unintentional errors of word retrieval
in aphasia where wrong words are substituted for the correct words.
vermilion zone: the part of the upper and lower lips that is darker in hue
due to the visualization of vascular tissue below the translucent
eleidin.
vermis: the central gray matter of the cerebellum.
vertebral: a term used to describe R11 and R12, which only have an
articulation with the vertebral column; these ribs are more commonly
referred to as “floating” ribs.
vertebral arteries: supply blood to the brain; arise from the subclavian
artery and ascend via the transverse foramen of the cervical vertebrae
entering through the foramen magnum to converge on the basilar
artery.
vertebral canal: the central space formed by the vertical orientation of
the vertebrae; houses the spinal cord.
vertebrochondral: a term used to describe R8, R9, and R10 because the
cartilages for these three ribs merge to form a single piece that
articulates with the sternum; these ribs are more commonly referred
to as “false” ribs.
vertebrosternal: a term used to describe R1 through R7 because each of

these ribs has its own cartilage that directly articulates with the
sternum; these ribs are more commonly referred to as “true” ribs.
vertex: the uppermost part of the skull.
vestibular aqueduct (VA): a narrow bony canal that courses from the
vestibule of the inner ear to the cranial cavity; thought to regulate
endolymphatic pressure within the inner ear.
vestibule: (1) the egg-shaped central portion of the inner ear that houses
the balance receptors sensitive to linear acceleration and gravity—the
utricle and saccule are housed within; (2) the wide space within the
cavity of the larynx immediately superior to the ventricular folds and
inferior to the aditus laryngis.
vestibulocochlear (nerve): cranial nerve XIII, involved in hearing and
balance; the vestibular nerve and cochlear nerve branches combined.
vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR): a reflexive eye movement that
stabilizes vision during head movement (eye movement is in the
opposite direction of the head movement); the semicircular canals
detect rotation of the head and send a signal to the oculo-motor nuclei
of the brainstem, which in turn inner-vate the eye muscles.
vestibulospinal tracts: tracts originating from the vestibular nuclei in
the medulla to the spinal cord; involved in motor reflexes and
balance.
videostroboscopy: an imaging technique that combines flexible
endoscopy with a strobe light; the endoscope is used to view the vocal
folds and the strobe light is used to make the vocal folds appear as if
they’re vibrating slowly so that one can view their vibratory pattern.
visceral nervous system: a division of the peripheral nervous system;
innervates glands, internal organs (i.e., viscera), and blood vessels;
also called the autonomic nervous system.
visceral pleura: the connective tissue membrane that covers the surface
of each lung as well as the superior surface of the diaphragm.
vital capacity (VC): the amount of air that can be forcibly expelled
from the lungs after a maximal inspiration; it includes inspiratory
reserve volume, tidal volume, and expiratory reserve volume.
vocal fry: see glottal fry.
vocal ligaments: the thickened, free superior border of the conus
elasticus extending from the macula flava anterior to the vocal
processes of the arytenoids, forming the point of attachment of the

thyroarytenoid muscles (i.e., the true vocal folds).
vocal nodules: benign callous-like bumps on the edges of the vocal
folds, usually bilateral at the juncture of the middle and anterior third
of the vocal folds.
vocal process: a projection at the base of the arytenoid cartilage where
the anterolateral and medial surfaces meet that serves as the posterior
attachment of the vocal ligament.
vocal registers: modes of vocal fold vibration that have distinct
physical, acoustic, and perceptual characteristics; see also loft
register, modal register, pulse register.
voice disorders: pathological conditions where the voice is different
enough in pitch, loudness, quality, and/or flexibility that it calls
negative attention to the speaker and/or interferes with
communication; also referred to as dysphonia.
voice fundamental: the basic laryngeal tone; the lowest vibratory
frequency produced by the vocal folds during phonation; also referred
to as the fundamental frequency.
voiced: a term that is used to describe vocal fold vibration during the
production of speech sounds; all vowels and most consonants are
voiced.
Waardenburg syndrome: a dominantly inherited syndrome
characterized by widely spaced eyes, broad nose, multicolored irises,
white forelock, and a sensorineural hearing loss.
Waldeyer’s ring: a circle of lymphoid tissue formed by the adenoids
superiorly, lingual tonsil inferiorly, and palatine tonsils laterally.
watershed area: the region of overlapping blood supply from the
anterior, middle, and posterior cerebral artery distributions.
Wernicke’s area: the superior temporal lobe region involved in
language comprehension.
working memory: a short-term memory process where sensory input is
compared to long-term memory stores for decision making; a
component of executive functioning.
X-linked recessive: a pattern of inheritance on the X chromosome; the
trait is linked from mother to son; 50% chance of son inheriting trait;
50% chance of a daughter being a carrier; an affected father will pass
the carrier status to 100% of his daughters.
zygomatic arch: the cheekbone, which is formed by contributions of the

frontal, maxillary, temporal, and zygomatic bones.

 
Abraham, S. (1989). Using a phonological framework to describe
speech errors of orally trained, hearing-impaired school-agers.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 54, 600–609.
Adams, J.H., Graham, D.I., Murray, L.S., & Scott, G. (1982). Diffuse
axonal injury due to nonmissile head injury in humans: An analysis of
45 cases. Annals of Neurology, 12, 557–563.
Agur, A.M.R., & Dalley, A.F. (2005). Grant’s atlas of anatomy (11th
ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
American Cancer Society. (2004). Cancer facts and figures. Atlanta,
GA: Author.
American Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Association and Cleft Palate
Foundation. (1997). About cleft lip and cleft palate. Chapel Hill, NC:
Author.
American Heart Association. (2007). Atherosclerosis. Accessed March
16, 2007, from http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.jhtml?
identifier+4440.
American Lung Association (2007). Trends in tobacco use.
Epidemiology and Statistics Unit Research and Program Services.
Accessed December 28, 2007, from http://www.lungusa.org.
American Medical Association. (1979). Guide for the evaluation of
hearing handicap. Journal of the American Medical Association, 241,
2055–2059.
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (DSM-IV) (4th ed.). Washington, DC:
Author.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA). (2005a).
Paradoxical vocal fold movement (PVFM): Causes and numbers.
Accessed September 22, 2009, from
http://www.asha.org/public/speech/disorders/PVFMcauses.htm.

American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA). (2005b).
Roles of the speech-language pathologist in the identification,
diagnosis, and treatment of individuals with cognitive-communicative
disorders: Position statement. Available at www.asha.org/policy.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA). (2008). The
incidence and prevalence of hearing loss and hearing aid use in the
United States. Accessed June 1, 2009, from http://www.asha.org.
Angle, E.H. (1899). Classification of malocclusion. Dental Cosmos, 41,
248–264, 350–357.
Aronson, A.E. (1990). Clinical voice disorders (3rd ed.). New York:
Thieme Publishers, Inc.
Baijens, L.W.J., Speyer, R., Roodenburg, N., & Manni, J.J. (2008). The
effects of neuromuscular electrical stimulation for dysphagia in
opercular syndrome: A case study. European Archives of
Otorhinolaryngology, 265, 825–830.
Barsoumian, R., Kuehn, D., Moon, J., & Canady, J. (1998). An anatomic
study of the tensor veli palatini muscle and dilator tubae muscles in
relation to Eustachian tube and velar function. Cleft Palate-
Craniofacial Journal, 35, 101–110.
Bayles, K. (2006, June). Science based clinical strategies for facilitating
cognitive-linguistic functioning in adults with brain injury and
disease. Presentation given at Evergreen Hospital Medical Center,
Kirkland, WA.
Baynes, R.A. (1966). An incident study of chronic hoarseness among
children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 31, 172–176.
Bear, M.F., Connors, B.W., & Paradiso, M.A. (2007). Neuroscience:
Exploring the brain (3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.
Bekesy, G. (1960). Experiments in hearing. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Benson, D.F. (1989). Disorders of visual gnosis. In J.W. Brown (Ed.),
Neuropsychology of visual perception. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Berke, G., & Gerratt, B. (1993). Laryngeal biomechanics: An overview
of mucosal wave mechanics. Journal of Voice, 7, 123–128.
Best, S., Bigge, J., & Sirvis, B. (1994). Physical and health impairments.
In N. Haring, L. McCormick, & T. Haring (Eds.), Exceptional
children and youth: An introduction to special education (pp. 300–

341). New York: Merrill.
Bhatnager, S.C. (2008). Neuroscience for the study of communicative
disorders (3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Bishop, D., Brown, B., & Robson, J. (1990). The relationship between
phoneme discrimination, speech production, and language
comprehension in cerebral-palsied individuals. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 33, 210–219.
Boone, D.R., McFarlane, S.L., Von Berg, S.L., & Zraick, R. (2010). The
voice and voice therapy (8th ed.). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn &
Bacon.
Boorman, J., & Sommerlad, B. (1985). Levator palati and palatal
dimples: Their anatomy, relationship and clinical significance. British
Journal of Plastic Surgery, 38, 326–332.
Borg, E. (1973). On the neuronal organization of the acoustic middle ear
reflex: A physiological and anatomical study. Brain Research, 49,
101–123.
Boulassel, M.R., Tornasi, J.P., Deggoui, N., & Gersdorff, M. (2001).
COCHB5 B2 is a target antigen of anti-inner ear antibodies in
autoimmune inner ear diseases. Otology and Neurotology, 22, 614–
618.
Bourgeios, M., & Hopper, T. (2005, February). Evaluation and
treatment planning for individuals with dementia. Presentation at the
ASHA Health Care Conference 2005: Dementia, vocal pathologies,
and pediatric dysphagia: Clinical approaches for SLPs in health care
settings, Palm Springs, CA.
Bradley, W.G. (2002). Cerebrospinal fluid dynamics and shunt
responsiveness in patients with normal pressure hydrocephalus. Mayo
Clinic Proceedings, 7(6), 507–508.
Brodsky, L., & Koch, R.J. (1993). Bacteriology and immunology of
normal and diseased adenoids in children. Archives of
Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery, 119, 821–829.
Bromberg, M. (1999). Accelerating the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis. Neurologist, 5(2), 63–74.
Brookshire, R. (2003). Introduction to neurogenic communication
disorders (6th ed.). St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby.
Burns, M. (1985). Language without communication: The pragmatics of
right hemisphere damage. In M.S. Burns, A.S. Halper, & S.I. Mogil

(Eds.), Clinical management of right hemisphere dysfunction (pp. 17–
28). Rockville, MD: Aspen Publications.
Centers for Disease Control (CDC). (2005). Annual smoking-
attributable mortality, years of potential life lost, and productivity
losses—United States. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report,
54(25), 625–628.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2007). More information
on vaccines. Accessed September 16, 2010, from
http://www.cdc.gov/meningitis/vaccine-info.html.
Chermak, G.D., & Musiek, F.E. (1997). Central auditory processing
disorders: New perspectives. San Diego: Singular Publishing Group.
Chiara, T., Martin, D., & Sapienza, C. (2007). Expiratory muscle
strength training: Speech production outcomes in patients with
multiple sclerosis. Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair, 21(3),
239–249.
Clark, W.W., & Bohne, B.A. (1999). Effects of noise on hearing.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 281, 1658–1659.
Clark, W.W., Bohne, B.A., & Boettcher, F.B. (1987). Effect of periodic
rest on hearing loss and cochlear damage following exposure to noise.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 82, 1253–1264.
Cohen, M.M. Jr., & Bankier, A. (1991). Syndrome delineation involving
orofacial clefting. Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Journal, 28, 119–120.
Corbin-Lewis, K., Liss, J.M., & Sciortino, K.L. (2005). Clinical
anatomy and physiology of the swallow mechanism. New York:
Thomson Delmar Learning.
Cotanche, D.A. (1987). Regeneration of hair cell stereociliary bundles in
the chick cochlea following severe acoustic trauma. Hearing
Research, 30, 181–196.
Crary, M.A., & Groher, M.E. (2003). Introduction to adult swallowing
disorders. St. Louis, MO: Butterworth Heinemann.
Cummings, J.L., Vinters, H.V., Cole, G.M., & Khachaturian, Z.S.
(1998). Alzheimer’s disease: Etiologies, pathophysiology, cognitive
reserve, and treatment opportunities. Neurology, 51, S2–S17.
Dallos, P. (1992). The active cochlea. The Journal of Neuro-science, 12,
4578–4585.
Dallos, P., Santos-Sacchi, J., & Flock, A. (1982). Intracellular
recordings from cochlear outer hair cells. Science, 218, 582–584.

Darley, F.L., Aronson, A.E., & Brown, J.R. (1975). Motor speech
disorders. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders.
Darley, F.L., Brown, A.E., & Goldstein, N.P. (1972). Dysarthria in
multiple sclerosis. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 15, 229–
245.
Declau, F., Van Spaendonck, M., Timmermans, J.P., Michaels, L.,
Liang, J., Qiu, J.P., & Van de Heyning, P. (2001). Prevalence of
otosclerosis in an unselected series of temporal bones. Otology and
Neurotology, 22, 596–602.
Deem, J.F., & Miller, L. (2000). Manual of voice therapy (2nd ed.).
Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Dillow, K.A., Dzienkowski, R.C., Smith, K.K., & Yucha, C.B. (1996).
Cerebral palsy: A comprehensive review. The Nurse Practitioner, 21,
45–61.
Draper, M., Ladefoged, P., & Whitteridge, D. (1959). Respiratory
muscles in speech. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 2, 16–
27.
Duffy, J.R. (2005). Motor speech disorders: Substrates, differential
diagnosis, and management (2nd ed.). St. Louis, MO: Elsevier
Mosby.
Dworkin, J.P., & Meleca, R.J. (1997). Vocal pathologies: Diagnosis,
treatment, and case studies. San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing
Group, Inc.
Ey, J.L., Holberg, C.J., Aldous, M.B., Wright, A.L., Martinez, F.D., &
Taussig, L.M. (1995). Group health medical associates: Passive
smoke exposure and otitis media in the first year of life. Pediatrics,
95, 670–677.
Fant, G. (1960). Acoustic theory of speech production. The Hague, The
Netherlands: Mouton.
Finucane, T., Christmas, C., & Travis, K. (1999). Tube feeding in
patients with advanced dementia: A review of the evidence. Journal
of the American Medical Association, 282, 1365–1370.
Firlik, K. (2006). Another day in the frontal lobe: A brain surgeon
exposes life on the inside. New York: Random House.
Foulon, I., Naessens, A., Foulon, W., Casteels, A., & Gordts, F. (2008).
A 10-year prospective study of sensorineural hearing loss in children
with congenital cytomegalovirus infection. Journal of Pediatrics,

153, 84–88.
Fox, M.J. (2002). Lucky man: A memoir. New York: Hyperion.
Froehling, D.A., Bowen, J.M., Mohr, D.N., Brey, R.H., Beatty, C.W.,
Wollan, P.C., & Silverstein, M.D. (2000). The canalith repositioning
procedure for the treatment of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo:
A randomized controlled trial. Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 75, 695–
700.
Froehling, D.A., Silverstein, M.D., Mohr, D.N., Beatty, C.W., Offord,
K.P., & Ballard, D.J. (1991). Benign positional vertigo: Incidence and
prognosis in a population-based study in Olmsted County, Minnesota.
Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 66, 596–601.
Gazzaniga, M.S., Ivry, R.B., & Mangun, G.R. (1998). Cognitive
neuroscience: The biology of the mind. New York: W. W. Norton &
Company, Inc.
Geisler, C.D. (1998). From sound to synapse: Physiology of the
mammalian ear. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gelfand, S.A. (1984). The contralateral acoustic reflex threshold. In S.
Silman (Ed.), The acoustic reflex: Basic principles and clinical
applications (pp. 137–186). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Goodglass, H. (1993). Understanding aphasia. San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Goodglass, H., Kaplan, E., & Barresi, B. (2001). The assessment of
aphasia and related disorders (3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.
Goodman, A. (2003). Understanding the human body: An introduction
to anatomy and physiology, Part 1 (video lectures). Chantilly, VA:
The Teaching Company. www.TEACH12.com.
Gordon-Brannan, M.E., & Weiss, C.E. (2006). Clinical management of
articulatory and phonologic disorders (3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Gorlin, R.J., Cohen, M.M. Jr., & Levin, L.S. (1990). Syndromes of the
head and neck. Oxford Monographs on Medical Genetics, No. 19.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Grundfast, K., & Carney, C.J. (1987). Ear infection in your child.
Hollywood, FL: Compact Books.
Guinan, J., Warr, W., & Norris, B. (1983). Differential olivocochlear
projections from lateral versus medial zones of the superior olivary

complex. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 221, 358–370.
Hagen, C. (1998). The Rancho levels of cognitive functioning: The
revised levels (3rd ed.). Retrieved August 27, 2010 from
www.rancho.org/patient_education/cognitive_levels. pdf.
Halpern, H. (2000). Language and motor speech disorders in adults
(2nd ed.). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Hardy, J.C. (1994). Cerebral palsy. In W.A. Secord, G.H. Shames, & E.
Wiig (Eds.), Human communication disorders: An introduction (4th
ed., pp. 562–604). New York: Merrill.
Harold, C. (Ed.) (2009). Professional guide to diseases (9th ed.).
Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Hirano, M. (1974). Morphological structure of the vocal cord as a
vibrator and its variations. Folia Phoniatrica, 26, 89–94.
Hirano, M. (1981). Clinical examination of voice. New York: Springer-
Verlag.
Hirano, M., Kakita, Y., Kawasaki, H., Gould, W., & Lambiase, A.
(1981). Data from high-speed motion picture studies. In K. Stevens &
M. Hirano (Eds.), Vocal fold physiology (pp. 85–93). Tokyo, Japan:
University of Tokyo Press.
Hirano, M., Yoshida, T., & Tanaka, S. (1991). Vibratory behavior of
human vocal folds viewed from below. In J. Gauffin & B.
Hammarberg (Eds.), Vocal fold physiology: Acoustic, perceptual, and
physiological aspects of voice mechanisms (pp. 1–6). San Diego, CA:
Singular Publishing, Inc.
Hixon, T.J. (1973). Respiratory function in speech. In F.D. Minifie, T.J.
Hixon, & F. Williams (Eds.), Normal aspects of speech, hearing, and
language. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Hixon, T.J., & Hoit, J.D. (2005). Evaluation and management of speech
breathing disorders: Principles and methods. Tucson, AZ: Redington
Brown LLC.
Hixon, T.J., Mead, J., & Goldman, M. (1976). Dynamics of the chest
wall during speech production: Function of the thorax, rib cage,
diaphragm, and abdomen. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research,
19, 297–356.
Hixon, T.J., Weismer, G., & Hoit, J.D. (2008). Preclinical speech
science: Anatomy, physiology, acoustics, perception. San Diego, CA:
Plural Publishing.

Hoit, J.D., & Shea, S.A. (1996). Speech production and speech with a
phrenic nerve pacer. American Journal of Speech-Language
Pathology, 5, 53–60.
Hollien, H. (1972). Three major vocal registers: A proposal. In A.
Rigault & R. Charbonneau (Eds.), Proceedings of the Seventh
International Congress of Phonetic Sciences (pp. 320–331). The
Hague, The Netherlands: Mouton.
Hollien, H. (1974). On vocal registers. Journal of Phonetics, 2, 25–43.
Howden, C.W. (2004). Management of acid-related disorders in patients
with dysphagia. American Journal of Medicine, 117, 44S–48S.
Howie, V.M., Ploussard, J.H., & Sloyer, J. (1975). The “otitis-prone”
condition. American Journal of Diseases of Children, 129, 676–678.
Hudspeth, A.J. (1989). How the ear’s works work. Nature, 341, 397–
404.
Jafek, B.W., & Barcz, D.V. (1996). The otologic evaluation. In J.
Northern (Ed.), Hearing disorders (pp. 33–34). Needham Heights,
MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Johnson, A.F., & Jacobson, B.H. (2007). Medical speech-language
pathology: A practitioner’s guide (2nd ed.). New York: Thieme
Publishers.
Joint Committee on Infant Hearing. (2007). Position statement:
Principles and guidelines for early hearing detection and intervention
programs. Pediatrics, 120, 898–921.
Kankkunen, A., & Thiringer, K. (1987). Hearing impairment in
connection with preauricular tags. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavia, 76,
143–146.
Katzman, R., & Bick, K. (Eds.) (2000). Alzheimer disease— The
changing view. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Kavanagh, K.T., & Magill, H.L. (1989). Michel dysplasia: Common
cavity inner ear deformity. Pediatric Radiology, 19, 343–345.
Kemper, A.R., & Downs, S.M. (2000). A cost-effective analysis of
newborn hearing screening strategies. Archives of Pediatric and
Adolescent Medicine, 154, 484–488.
Kennedy, M., Strand, E., Burton, W., & Peterson, C. (1994). Analysis of
first-encounter conversations of right-hemisphere-damaged adults.
Clinical Aphasiology, 22, 67–80.
Kersten, L. (1989). Comprehensive respiratory nursing: A decision

making approach. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders.
Kier, W., & Smith, K. (1985). Tongues, tentacles, and trunks: The
biomechanics of movement in muscular-hydrostats. Zoological
Journal of the Linnean Society, 83, 307–324.
Kirkpatrick, J.B., & DiMaio, V. (1978). Civilian gunshot wounds of the
brain. Journal of Neurosurgery, 49, 185–198.
Kochkin, S. (2005). MarkeTrak VII. Hearing Review, 12, 16–29.
Kreiborg, S. (1981). Crouzon syndrome. Scandinavian Journal of
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery (Suppl. 18), 1–198.
Kuehn, D., & Kahane, J. (1990). Histologic study of the normal human
adult soft palate. Cleft Palate Journal, 27, 26–34.
Kuehn, D., & Moon, J. (2005). Histologic study of intravelar structures
in normal human adult specimens. Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Journal,
42, 481–489.
Kuehn, D., Templeton, P.J., & Maynard, J.A. (1990). Muscle spindles in
the velopharyngeal musculature of humans. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 33, 488–493.
Kugelman, A., Hadad, B., Ben-David, J., Podoshin, L., Borochowitz, Z.,
& Bader, D. (1997). Preauricular tags and pits in the newborn: The
role of hearing tests. Acta Paediatrica Scandinavia, 86, 170–172.
Kumar, N.M., & Gilula, N.B. (1996). The gap junction communication
channel. Cell, 84, 381–388.
Kumin, L. (1998). Speech and language skills in children with Down
syndrome. Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities
Research Reviews, 2, 109–115.
LaPointe, L.L. (1994). Neurogenic disorders of communication. In F.D.
Minifie (Ed.), Introduction to communication sciences and disorders.
San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing.
Lehman-Blake, M., Duffy, J.R., Myers, P.S., & Tompkins, C.A. (2002).
Prevalence and patterns of right hemisphere cognitive/communicative
deficits: Retrospective data from an inpatient rehabilitation unit.
Aphasiology, 16, 537–547.
Liss, J. (1990). Muscle spindles in the human levator veli palatini and
palatoglossus muscles. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 33,
736–746.
Logemann, J.A. (1998). Evaluation and treatment of swallowing
disorders (2nd ed.). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.

Love, R.J. (2000). Childhood motor speech disability (2nd ed.). Boston,
MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Lubinski, R. (2005, February). Basics of aging and dementia.
Presentation at the ASHA Health Care Conference: Dementia:
Clinical Approaches for SLPs in Health Care Settings, Palm Springs,
CA.
Mann, G., Hankey, G.J., & Cameron, D. (2000). Swallowing disorders
following acute stroke: Prevalence and diagnostic accuracy.
Cerebrovascular Disease, 10, 380–386.
Marik, P.E., & Kaplan, D. (2003). Aspiration pneumonia and dysphagia
in the elderly. Chest, 124, 328–336.
Martino, R., Foley, N., Bhogal, S., Diamant, N., Speechley, M., &
Teasell, R. (2005). Dysphagia after stroke: Incidence, diagnosis, and
pulmonary complications. Stroke: A Journal of Cerebral Circulation,
36, 2756–2763.
Massey, A.J. (2005, February). Medication-related issues associated
with managing dementia. Presentation at the ASHA Health Care
Conference: Dementia: Clinical Approaches for SLPs in Health Care
Settings, Palm Springs, CA.
Mastroiacovo, P., Corchia, C., Botto, L.D., Lanni, R., Zampino, G., &
Fusco, D. (1995). Epidemiology and genetics of microtia-anotia: A
registry based study on over one million births. Journal of Medical
Genetics, 32, 453–457.
Mateer, C.A., & Ojemann, G.A. (1983). Thalamic mechanisms in
language and memory. In J. Segalowitz (Ed.), Language functions
and brain organization (pp. 171–191). New York: Academic Press.
Mathers-Schmidt, B. (2001). Paradoxical vocal fold motion: A tutorial.
American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 10, 111–125.
Mattox, D.E. (2000). Surgical management of vestibular disorders. In S.
Herdman (Ed.), Vestibular rehabilitation (pp. 251–262). Philadelphia,
PA: F. A. Davis Company.
Mencher, G.T., Gerber, S.E., & McCombe, A. (1997). Audiology and
auditory dysfunction. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Mesulam, M.-M. (1981). A cortical network for directed attention and
unilateral neglect. Annals of Neurology, 10, 309–325.
Miller, J.L., Watkin, K.L., & Chen, M.F. (2002). Muscle, adipose, and
connective tissue variations in intrinsic musculature of the adult

human tongue. Journal of Speech, Language and Hearing Science,
45, 51–65.
Miller, N. (2002). The neurological basis of apraxia of speech. Seminars
in Speech and Language, 23, 223–230.
Moll, K.L. (1962). Velopharyngeal closure on vowels. Journal of
Speech and Hearing Research, 5, 30–37.
Monoson, P., & Zemlin, W. (1984). Quantitative study of whisper. Folia
Phoniatrica, 36, 53–65.
Moon, J., & Kuehn, D. (2004). Anatomy and physiology of normal and
disordered velopharyngeal function for speech. In K. Bzoch (Ed.),
Communicative disorders related to cleft lip and palate (5th ed., pp.
67–98). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Morata, T.C., Dunn, D.E., Kretschmer, L.W., Lemasters, G.K., & Keith,
R.W. (1993). Effects of occupational exposures to organic solvents
and noise on hearing. Scandinavian Journal of Work and
Environmental Health, 19, 245–254.
Muscular Dystrophy Association. (n.d.) MDA is knowledge: Diseases.
Retrieved December 30, 2007, from http://www. mdausa.org/disease/.
Myers, P. (1999). Right hemisphere damage: Disorders of
communication and cognition. San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing.
Myers, P. (2005). CAC classics: Profile of communicative deficits in
patients with right cerebral hemisphere damage: Implications for
diagnosis and treatment. Aphasiology, 19, 1147–1160.
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. (1998). Revised
criteria for a recommended standard—Occupational noise exposure.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health
Service, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, DHHS (NIOSH)
Publication 98–126.
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS). (n.d.).
Muscular dystrophy information page. Retrieved December 30, 2007,
from http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/md/md.htm.
National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders.
(1999). Noise-induced hearing loss (Publication No. 97-4233),
National Institutes of Health.
National Scoliosis Foundation. (n.d.a). Information and support.
Retrieved February 26, 2008, from http://www.scoliosis.org/info.php.

National Scoliosis Foundation. (n.d.b). Medical updates: Understanding
kyphosis. Retrieved February 26, 2008, from
http://www.scoliosis.org/resources/medicalupdates/kyphosis.php.
National Scoliosis Foundation. (n.d.c). Medical updates: Understanding
lordosis. Retrieved February 26, 2008, from
http://www.scoliosis.org/resources/medicalupdates/lordosis.php.
National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Center. (n.d.). Facts and figures
at a glance—updated June 2006. Retrieved December 20, 2007, from
http://www.spinalcord.uab.edu/show.asp?durki=19775.
Netsell, R. (1973). Speech physiology. In F.D. Minifie, T.J. Hixon, & F.
Williams (Eds.), Normal aspects of speech, hearing and language
(pp. 211–234). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Nicolosi, L., Harryman, E., & Kresheck, J. (2004). Terminology of
communication disorders: Speech-language-hearing (5th ed.).
Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Nolte, J. (1999). The human brain: An introduction to its functional
anatomy (4th ed.). Baltimore, MD: Mosby.
Northern, J., & Hayes, D. (1994). Universal screening for infant hearing
impairment. Audiology Today, 6, 10–13.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration. (2002). Occupational
noise exposure standard. 29 CFR, Part 1910.95. Hearing
Conservation (revised), 1–32.
Orlikoff, R., & Kahane, J. (1996). Structure and function of the larynx.
In N. Lass (Ed.), Principles of experimental phonetics (pp. 112–181).
St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Oshiro, B.T. (1999). Cytomegalovirus infections in pregnancy.
Contemporary Obstetrics/Gynecology, November, 16–24.
Paciaroni, M., Mazzotta, G., Corea, F., Caso, V., Venti, M., Milia, P.,
Silvestrelli, G., Palmerini, F., Parnetti, L., & Gallai, V. (2004).
Dysphagia following stroke. European Neurology, 51, 162–167.
Pandya, A., Arnos, K.S., Xia, X.J., Welch, K.O., Blanton, S.H.,
Friedman, T.B., Garcia Sanchez, G., Liu, X.Z., Morell, R., & Nance,
W.E. (2003). Frequency and distribution of GJB2 (connexin 26) and
GJB6 (connexin 30) mutations in a large North American repository
of deaf probands. Genetics in Medicine, 5, 295–303.
Pannbacker, M. (1992). Some common myths about voice therapy.
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 23, 12–19.

Park, S.S., & Chi, D.H. (2005). External ear, aural atresia. Accessed
March 13, 2008, from http://www.emedicine.com/ent/topic329.htm.
Pass, R.F., Hutto, S.C., Reynolds, D.W., & Polhill, R.B. (1984).
Increased frequency of cytomegalovirus infection in children in group
day care. Pediatrics, 74, 121–126.
Pearson, R. (1974). Incidence of diagnosed otosclerosis. Archives of
Otolaryngology, 99, 288.
Peterson-Falzone, S.J., Hardin-Jones, M.A., & Karnell, M. (2001). Cleft
palate speech (3rd ed.). St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Pickles, J. (1988). An introduction to the physiology of hearing (2nd ed).
London: Academic Press.
Pickles, J., Comis, S., & Osborne, M. (1984). Cross-links between
stereocilia in the guinea pig organ of Corti, and their possible relation
to sensory transduction. Hearing Research, 15, 103–112.
Prutting, C.A., & Kirchner, D.M. (1987). A clinical appraisal of the
pragmatic aspects of language. Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders, 52, 105–119.
Raphael, L.J., Borden, G.J., & Harris, K.S. (2007). Speech science
primer: Physiology, acoustics, and perception of speech (5th ed.).
Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Reinmuth, O. (1994, February). Stroke: New frontiers in diagnosis and
management. Telerounds video presentation, National Center for
Neurogenic Communication Disorders, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ.
Reisberg, B., Ferris, S., de Leon, M.J., & Crook, T. (1982). The global
deterioration scale for assessment of primary degenerative dementia.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 139, 1136–1139.
Retzius, G. (1884). Das gehororgan der wirbeltheire (Vol. 2).
Stockholm, Sweden: Samson & Wallin.
Sagan, C. (1977). The dragons of Eden: Speculations on the evolution of
human intelligence. New York: Random House, Inc.
Santo Pietro, M.J., & Ostuni, E. (2003). Successful communication with
persons with Alzheimer’s disease: An in-service manual. St. Louis,
MO: Mosby.
Schappert, S. (1992). Office visits for otitis media: United States, 1975–
90. Compilation of Advance Data from Vital and Health Statistics:
National Center for Health Statistics Series 16, No. 214, 1–18.

Schelp, A.O., Cola, P.C., Gatto, A.R., Goncalves da Silva, R., & de
Carvalho, L.R. (2004). Incidence of oropharyngeal dysphagia
associated with stroke in a regional hospital in Sao Paulo State-Brazil
[article in Portuguese]. Arquivos de Neuro-Psiquiatria, 62, 503–506.
Schuknecht, H. (1974). Pathology of the ear. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Seikel, A., King, D., & Drumright, D. (2005). Anatomy and physiology
for speech, language, and hearing (3rd ed.). Clifton Park, NY:
Thomson Delmar Learning.
Smith, K., & Kier, W. (1989). Trunks, tongues and tentacles: Moving
with skeletons of muscle. American Scientist, 77, 28–35.
Smith, R., Green, G., & Van Camp, G. (1999). Deafness and hereditary
hearing loss. Accessed July 1, 2009, from
http://www.geneclinics.org/profiles/deafness-overview/details.html.
Developed by the University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
Sohlberg, M.M., & Mateer, C.A. (1989). Introduction to cognitive
rehabilitation: Theory and practice. New York: Guilford Press.
Sohlberg, M.M., & Mateer, C.A. (2001). Cognitive rehabilitation: An
integrative neuropsychological approach. New York: Guilford Press.
Solomon, N., McCall, G., Trosset, M., & Gray, W. (1989). Laryngeal
configuration and constriction during two types of whispering.
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 32, 161–174.
Spoendlin, H. (1974). Neuroanatomy of the cochlea. In E. Zwicker & E.
Terhardt (Eds.), Facts and models in hearing. New York: Springer.
Square-Storer, P.A., & Apeldoorn, S. (1991). An acoustic study of
apraxia of speech in patients with different lesion loci. In C.A.
Moore, K.M. Yorkston, & D.R. Beukelman (Eds.), Dysarthria and
apraxia of speech: Perspectives on management. Baltimore, MD:
Brookes Publishing.
Staecher, H., Praetorius, M., Kim, B., & Douglas, D.E. (2007).
Vestibular hair cell regeneration and restoration of balance function
induced by math 1 gene transfer. Otology and Neurotology, 28, 223–
231.
Steel, K.P. (1983). The tectorial membrane of mammals. Hearing
Research, 9, 327–359.
Stoel-Gammon, C. (1998). Phonological development in Down
syndrome. Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities

Research Reviews, 3, 300–306.
Stone, J., & Cotanche, D. (2007). Hair cell regeneration in the avian
auditory epithelium. International Journal of Developmental Biology,
51, 633–647.
Strich, S.J. (1961). Shearing of nerve fibres as a cause of brain damage
due to head injury. Lancet, 2, 443–448.
Tasaki, I., & Spiropoulos, C. (1959). Stria vascularis as source of
endocochlear potential. Journal of Neurophysiology, 22, 149–155.
Taylor, W., Pearson, J., Mair, A., & Burns, W. (1965). Study of noise
and hearing in jute weaving. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 38, 113–120.
Tilney, L., Tilney, M., & DeRosier, D. (1992). Actin filaments,
stereocilia, and hair cells: How cells count and measure. Annual
Review of Cell Biology, 8, 257–274.
Titze, I. (1994). Principles of voice production. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Titze, I. (2006). The myoelastic aerodynamic theory of phonation. Iowa
City, IA: National Center for Voice and Speech.
Troost, B.T., & Waller, M.A. (1998). Diagnostic principals in neuro-
otology: The auditory system. In R.N. Rosenberg & D.E. Pleasure
(Eds.), Comprehensive neurology (2nd ed., pp. 611–623). New York:
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Tucker, D.M., & Frederick, S.L. (1989). Emotion and brain
lateralization. In H. Wagner & A. Manstead (Eds.), Handbook of
social psychophysiology (pp. 27–70). New York: Wiley.
van den Berg, I. (1958). Myoelastic-aerodynamic theory of voice
production. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 1, 227–244.
Wang, R., Earl, D., Ruder, R., & Graham, J. (2001). Syndromic ear
anomalies and renal ultrasounds. Pediatrics, 108, 32.
Wertz, R.T., LaPointe, L.L., & Rosenbek, J.C. (1984). Apraxia of
speech in adults: The disorder and its management. San Diego, CA:
Singular Publishing.
Wever, E.G., & Lawrence, M. (1954). Physiological acoustics.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Wilson, F.B. (1990). Voice kit manual: A program of diagnosis and
management for voice disorders. Bellingham, WA: Voice Tapes, Inc.
Yorkston, K.M., Miller, R.M., & Strand, E.A. (1995). Management of

speech and swallowing in degenerative diseases. Tucson, AZ:
Communication Skill Builders.
Yorkston, K.M., Miller, R.M., & Strand, E.A. (2003). Management of
speech and swallowing in degenerative diseases (2nd ed.). Austin,
TX: Pro-Ed.
Yorkston, K.M., Spencer, K.A., & Duffy, J.R. (2003). Behavioral
management of respiratory/phonatory dysfunction from dysarthria: A
systematic review of the evidence. Journal of Medical Speech-
Language Pathology, 11(2), xiii–xxxviii.
Yoshinaga-Itano, C., Sedey, A.L., Coulter, D.K., & Mehl, A.L. (1998).
Language of early and later-identified children with hearing loss.
Pediatrics, 102, 1161–1171.
Yost, W.A. (2000). Fundamentals of hearing: An introduction (4th ed.)
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Young, W. (2003). Acute spinal cord injury. Retrieved February 28,
2008, from
afile=27_February_2003@AcuteSCI.htm">http://sci.rutgers.edu/index
page=viewarticle&afile=27_February_2003@AcuteSCI.htm.
Zemlin, W., Simmon, A., & Hammel, D. (1984). The frequency of
occurrence of foramen thyroideum in the human larynx. Folia
Phoniatrica, 36, 296–300.
Zeng, F.G., Oba, S., Garde, S., Sininger, Y., & Starr, A. (1999).
Temporal and speech processing deficits in auditory neuropathy.
Neuroreport, 10, 3429–3435.
Zwislocki, J.J. (1990). Active cochlear feedback: Required structure and
response phase. In P. Dallos, C.D. Geisler, J.W. Matthews, M.A.
Ruggero, & C.R. Steele (Eds.), Mechanics and biophysics of hearing
(pp. 114–120). New York: Springer.

 
Note: Page locators followed by f and t indicates fi gure and table
respectively.
A
Dbsolute refractory period, 63, 63f
Academy of Neurologic Communicative Disorders and Sciences (ANCDS), 153
Acoustic filter, 263
Acoustic neuromas, 86
Acoustics, basic principles of, 262–263
Acoustic signal, 164, 218, 257, 263, 310, 316
Acrocephalosyndactyly. See Apert syndrome
Adam’s apple, 165, 166
Adenoidectomy, 336
Adenoids, 248, 309
Adipose, 23
Afferent auditory pathway, 323–326, 324f
Affricate, 266, 271
Air-bone gap, 329
Alar plate, 41
Albinism, 340
Alexander aplasia, 340
Alveolar consonants, 265
Alveolar ridge, 239
role in speech production, 259
Alveolar sounds, 259
Alveoli pulmoni, 120, 133
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), 92, 92f
risk factors for, 92–93
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 84, 85f, 153–154, 287, 287f
Anatomical position, 10, 10f
Anatomy, 9
Aneurysm, 88
of middle cerebral artery, 90f

Anomic aphasia, 95–96
Anosognosia, 97
Anotia, 330
Apert syndrome, 276, 276f
Aphasia, 93, 286
agrammatism, 94
classification scheme, 94
fluent aphasias, 94, 96t
anomic aphasia, 95–96
conduction aphasia, 95
transcortical sensory aphasia, 95
Wernicke’s aphasia, 95
nonfluent aphasias, 94, 96t
Broca’s aphasia, 95
global aphasia, 95
transcortical motor aphasia, 95
paragrammatism, 94
types of, 94, 94t
Apneustic area, 150
Aponeuroses, 23
Apraxia of speech (AOS), 101–102, 285–286
definition of, 101
Aprosodia, 97
Areolar, 23
Arteriovenous malformations, 88
Articulation disorder and phonological disorder, distinction between, 273
Articulatory groping, 102
Articulatory/resonance system, 30f, 218–219
affix and part-word related to, 217–218
anatomy of, 219–257
pathologies associated with, 269–291
affix and part-word related to, 269–270
articulation disorder, 273
articulatory phonetics and, 270–273
classification of disorders, 273–274
neurological disorder, 279–289
phonological disorders, 273
sensory disorder, 289–291
structural disorders, 274–279
physiology of, 257–267 (See also Source-Filter Theory)
speech production, mechanics of, 257–262
swallowing, process of, 266–267
transformation of vocal tone into speech, 262–266
skull, human, 220–222, 221f
cranial bones, 226–235
facial bones, 222–226
vocal tract, 219, 270 (See also Nasal cavity; Oral cavity; Pharyngeal cavity)
neural innervation, 256, 257t
oral, nasal, and pharyngeal cavities, 219, 219f
Aryepiglottic folds, 170, 170f

Arytenoid cartilages, 168, 170, 170f
Asthma, 120, 145–146
Astrocytomas, 86
Atherosclerosis, 87
Atmospheric pressure, 135
Atresia, 331, 332f
Attack phase, phonation, 193
breathy attack, 193
glottal attack, 193
simultaneous attack, 193
Attention, 98
Audiograms, 329
Audiometry, 328
Auditory brainstem response (ABR) audiometry, 325
Auditory neuropathy (AN), 323
Auditory radiations, 73
Auditory/vestibular system, 71–74
affix and part-word related to, 297–298
anatomical divisions of ear, 300–301, 300f
anatomy and physiology of, 300–326, 300f
auditory component, 72–73, 73f
auditory pathway, 73f
conductive auditory system, 301–311
Eustachian tube, 309
middle ear, 302–305
middle ear cavity, 305–309
outer ear, 300–301
TM and ossicular chain, transformer action of, 310–311
cranial nerve VIII, 71–72
incidence and prevalence of hearing loss, 299
inner ear, structure of, 311–326
auditory sensory-neural system, 316–326
bony labyrinth and membranous labyrinth, 312, 312f
ductus reuniens, 312
endolymph, 312
endolymphatic sac, 312
perilymph, 312
systems and sections of, 311, 311f
vestibular system, 312–315
pathologies associated with, 327–349 (See also Ear pathology)
range of human hearing, 299–300
vestibular component, 73–74, 74f
Augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) system, 278
Auricular cartilage, 301
Autoimmune inner ear disease (AIED), 346
Autonomic nervous system (ANS), 43
neurons of, 43
parasympathetic division, 43
sympathetic division, 43

B
Bacterial meningitis, 343
Baha® system, 331–332
Basal cell carcinoma, 333, 333f
Basal plate, 41
Bell’s palsy, 281–282, 281f
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV), 315
Benign Schwannoma neuroma, 323
Bernoulli effect, 189–190
Better Hearing Institute (BHI), 299
Bilabials, 258–259, 265
Binge drinking, 150
Biology, 9
Bipolar neurons, 27, 60, 61f
Blood–brain barrier, 60
Body cavities, 22, 23f
Body systems for speech production, 29t
Bolus, 80, 267
Bone, 24
Bone conduction pathway, 329
Boyle’s law, 134, 134f
Bradykinesia, 86
Brain
anatomy of, 43
brainstem, 50, 51f
diencephalon, 47–48
metencephalon, 48–50
telencephalon, 43–47
blood supply to, 56
arteries from vertebral basilar system, 57, 57f
cerebral arteries, 57
origin of, 56–57
venous system, 58, 58f
imaging techniques, 59
Brainstem, 50, 51f
cerebral aqueduct, 50
cerebral peduncles, 50
corpora quadrigemina, 50
fourth ventricle, 50
medulla oblongata, 50
pons, 50
pyramids, 50
Brain tumors, 60
Breath group, 146
Breathing, 144. See also Respiratory pathologies
Broca’s aphasia, 95, 96t
Broca’s area, 67
Brodmann’s cytoarchitectural map, 65, 66f

C
Canalith repositioning treatment (CRT), 315
Capsular ligaments, 167
Cardiac muscle, 26
Carhart’s notch, 338
Cartilage, 23–24
Cartilaginous joints, 24
Cauliflower ear, 332, 333f
Cells, 20–22
characteristics of, 20
parts of, 21t
structure of, 20, 21f
Central auditory processing disorder (CAPD), 325
Central canal, 52
Central chemoreceptors, 150
Centrioles, 20, 21f, 21t
Cerebellar peduncles, 48
Cerebral arteries, 57
Cerebral function
association areas, 67
Brodmann areas, 65, 66f
limbic areas, 67
primary areas, 65–67
Cerebral palsy (CP), 289
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 52, 55, 56f
Cerebrovascular accident. See Stroke
Cerumen, 302
obstruction, 333–334, 333f
Checking mechanism, 140
Cheeks, 236
Cholesteatoma, 337, 337f
Chondro-osseous juncture, 123
Choroid plexus, 55
Chronic bronchitis, 146
smoking and, 147
Chronic middle ear disease, 304
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 146–147
Chronic patulous Eustachian tubes, 309
Cilia, 22
Circle of Willis, 57, 57f
Clavicle, 117–118, 118f
Cleft lip and palate, 274–275, 274f
Cleft palate, 222
Closed head injuries (CHIs), 91
Cochlea, 316–318, 317f
Cochlear implant (CI), 343–345, 343f
Cognitive-communicative disorders, 96–101
Collagen, 23

Colliculi, 50
Complex tones, 188
Computerized Speech Lab (CSL), 210
Computerized tomography (CT), 91
Concussion, 91
Conduction aphasia, 95, 96t
Conductive auditory system
Eustachian tube, 309
middle ear, 302
ossicular chain, 304–305, 304f
stapedius and tensor tympani muscles, 305
tympanic membrane (TM), 302–303, 303f
middle ear cavity, 305–309, 306–307f
aditus, 305
cochleariform process, 308
epitympanic recess, 305
ET orifice, 308
facial nerve branches, 308
inferior wall, 308
medial wall, 308
oval window, 308
promontory, 308
round window, 308
superior wall, 308
outerear, 301
external auditory meatus (EAM), 302
pinna (auricle), 301–302, 301f, 302f
Conductive hearing loss, 275
Cone of light, 303
Cones, 70
Congenital rubella, 342
Congestive heart failure (CHF), 147
Connective tissue, 23–26
classification of, 22t, 23
Connective tissue cells, 21
Consonants, classification of, 265, 270
Constructional impairments, 97
Continuous phonation, 139–141
muscle activity during, 140f
Contrecoup, 91, 91f
Contusion, 91
areas for, 91, 91f
Conversational speech, 141–142
Corium, 242
Corniculate cartilage, 170
Coronal plane of reference, 10
Corticobulbar tract, 75–76
Corticospinal tract, 75
Coup, 91, 91f
Cover–Body Model, 190–191

Cranial bones
ethmoid, 230–231, 233f
frontal, 226, 230f
occipital, 227–228, 232f
parietals, 226–227, 231f
sphenoid, 231, 234–235, 234f
temporals, 228–230, 233f
Cranial nerves, 42, 68, 68t
for eye movements, 70
in speech processes and swallow stages, 80t
Cricoarytenoid joints, 168
Cricoid cartilage, 168
Cricopharyngeus muscle, 255
Cricothyroid joints, 168
Cricothyroid muscles, 175–177, 177f
Cricotracheal ligament, 168
Crouzon syndrome, 276, 277f, 341
Cul-de-sac resonance, 291
Cuneiform cartilage, 170
Cytokines, 346
Cytomegalovirus (CMV), 342
Cytoplasm, 20
D
Darwin’s tubercle, 301, 331f
Declarative memory, 99
Deglutition. See Swallowing
Dementia, 91–93, 100–101
Alzheimer’s, 92
cortical, 92–93
frontotemporal, 93
subcortical, 93
vascular, 93
Denasality, 260
Dentin, 237
Depolarization, 62, 63, 321–322, 322f
of hair cell, 322f
Developmental articulation disorder, 273
Diaphragm, 122, 122f, 137–138
Diarthrodial joint, 25
Diencephalon, 47–48, 48f
hypothalamus, 48
infundibulum, 48
interthalamic adhesions, 48
mamillary bodies, 48
thalamus, 47–48, 48f
Diffuse axonal injury (DAI), 91

Diffuse lesions, 91
Diphthongs, 261
Diplophonia, 208
Diplopia, 71
Dopamine, 85
Dorsal fasciculus, 52
Dorsal root ganglion, 51
Double coverage, 76
Dowagers hump, 148
Down syndrome, 278
Dysarthria, 102–103, 286
ataxic, 103
definition of, 101
flaccid, 103
hypokinetic, 103
mixed, 103
spastic, 103
types, 102, 102t
UUMN, 102–103
Dysphagia, 103–105
Dysphonia, 204
Dyspnea, 145
E
Early Hearing Detection and Intervention (EHDI) programs, 343
Ear pathology
acquired disorders of later onset, 345–349
autoimmune inner ear disease, 346
Ménière’s disease, 345–346
noise-induced hearing loss, 347–349
presbycusis, 346–347
affix and part-word related to, 327
assessment and nature of, 328
audiometry, use of, 328–329
inner ear
acquired hearing loss, 343
congenital disorders, 340–341
genetics of hearing loss, 339–340
middle ear
acquired anomalies, 334–339
otitis media, 334–337
otosclerosis, 337–339
outer ear
acquired pathologies, 332–334
anotia and microtia, 330
atresia and stenosis, 331, 332f
cauliflower ear, 332, 333f

congenital anomalies, 330–332
inflammation, 334
neoplasms, 332–333, 333f
obstructions, 333–334, 333f
tags, pits, and sinuses, 331
Ectrodactyly-ectodermal dysplasia-clefting (EEC) syndrome, 276–277
Edema, 204
Edematous vocal folds, 208
Efferent auditory pathway, 326
EHDI screening program, 344
Elastic cartilage, 23, 24f
Electrochemical communication, 61–62
action potential, 62–63, 62f, 63f
“at-rest” neuron, 61, 62f
depolarization, 62
hyperpolarization, 62
synapse, 63–65
Electronystagmography (ENG), 345
Embolus, 87, 89f
Emphysema, 137, 144, 146
Enamel, 237
Encephalitis, 90
Endocochlear potential (EP), 321
Endolymph, 321
Endomysium, 27
Endoneurium, 27
Endoplasmic reticulum, 20, 21f, 21t
Endothelial tissue, 22
Endotracheal intubation, 154, 154f
Enlarged vestibular aqueduct syndrome (EVAS), 316
Ependymal cells, 55
Epiglottis, 79, 167f, 168, 169f
glossoepiglottic folds, 168, 169f
hyoepiglottic ligament, 167f, 168
petiolus, 168
thyroepiglottic ligament, 167f, 168
valleculae, 168
Epimysium, 27
Epineurium, 27
Episodic memory, 99
Episodic vertigo, 345
Epithelial cells, 21
Epithelial migration, 302
Epithelial tissue, 22, 23f
Epithelial tissue proper, 22
Ethmoid bone, 230–231, 233f
Ethmoid paranasal sinuses, 231
Excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs), 65
Exocytosis, 64
Expiration, 139. See also Muscles of expiration

Expiratory reserve volume (ERV), 136
External oblique muscle, 128, 129f
Extrinsic laryngeal muscles, 11, 177–180
infrahyoid muscles, 11, 180, 180t
omohyoid muscles, 180, 181f
sternohyoid muscles, 180, 181f
thyrohyoid muscles, 180, 181f
innervation of, 184
miscellaneous extrinsic muscles, 180, 182
suprahyoid muscles, 11, 177–180
digastricus, 177, 178f
genioglossus muscle, 180
geniohyoid muscle, 178, 179f, 180
mylohyoid muscle, 178, 178f
origins, insertions, and actions of, 177t
stylohyoid muscle, 178, 178f
Eyeball, structure of, 69, 69f
cones, 70
cornea, 69
fovea, 69
optic nerve, 70
photoreceptors, 69
retina, 69
rods, 69–70
sclera, 69
F
Facial bones
inferior nasal conchae, 226, 229f
lacrimal, 224, 228f
mandible, 224, 225f
maxillae, 222–224, 223f
nasal, 224, 226f
palatine, 224, 227f
vomer, 226, 229f
zygomatic, 224, 228f
Facial expression, muscles of, 250, 250f, 251t
Facial nerve, 77–78, 256
Falsetto, 193, 196, 205
Familial syndrome, 275
Fascia, 23
Fascicles, 27, 61
Fasciculus, 26–27
Faucial pillars, 247–248
Fibrous cartilage, 23–24, 24f
Fibrous joints, 24
Fluid mechanics, 135

Formants, 263
Fourier analysis, 188
Freidreich’s ataxia (FA), 151–152
Frequency, 187
Fricative consonants, 265–266
Frontal bones, 226, 230f
Frontal paranasal sinuses, 226
Functional residual capacity (FRC), 136
Fundamental frequency, 188
G
Genetic syndromes, associated with hearing loss, 341
Genioglossus, 244
Glabella, 226
Glaucoma, 69
Glenoid fossa, 118
Glial cells, 27, 59–60
astrocytes, 60, 60f
microglia, 60, 60f
oligodendroglia, 60, 60f
Gliomas, 86
Global aphasia, 95, 96t
Global Deterioration Scale, 100, 100t
Glossary, 369–399
Glossectomy, 278–279
Glossopharyngeal nerve, 78
Glottal chink, 197
Glottal consonant, 265
Glottal stop, 275
Golgi apparatus, 20, 21f, 21t
Gomphosis, 237
Graded potentials, 64
H
Habitual pitch, 193, 205
Haemophilus influenzae Type b (Hib), 343
Hamulus, 235
Hard palate, 239
role in speech production, 259
Harmonics, 188
Hearing impairment, 289–291
Hearing loss, incidence and prevalence of, 299
Hematoma, 332

Hematomas, 91
Hemorrhages, 87–88
sites of, 89f
Hereditary hearing loss, 339–340
autosomal dominant inheritance, 339t
autosomal recessive inheritance, 339t
X-linked recessive, 340t
Hertz (Hz), 188, 299
Hippocampus, 46, 47, 67, 92
Human organism, organization of. See Organization of human organism
Human skull
anterior view, 221f
bones in, 220
bony nasal septum, 220
calvaria, 220
cheekbone, 220
external auditory meatus, 220
facial bones, 222–226
foramen magnum, 220
inferior view, 222f
lateral view, 221f
mastoid process, 220
nasal conchae, 220
orbits of eye, 220
styloid process, 220
sutures, 222f
temporae, 220
Huntington’s disease, 93
Hyaline cartilage, 23, 24f
Hydrocephalus, 87
communicating, 87
infantile, 87
noncommunicating, 87
Hyoid bone, 165, 165f
Hyothyroid membrane, 167
Hypernasality, 260, 275
Hypoglossal nerve, 27, 61, 80
Hypoxemia, 156–157
Hypoxia, 91
I
IA muscles, 175
Imaging techniques, to measure blood flow, 59
Immittance meter, 305
Infantile hydrocephalus, 87
shunt placement for, 88f
Infarct, 87

Inferior nasal conchae bones, 226, 229f
Inferior pharyngeal constrictor muscles, 180, 182
Inhalatory stridor, 145
Inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs), 65
Inner hair cells (IHCs), 318, 319
Inspiration, 137–138. See also Muscles of inspiration
Inspiratory capacity (IC), 136
Inspiratory reserve volume (IRV), 136
Intensity, 187
Intercostal muscles, 123, 132
Internal auditory canal, 57
Internal intercostals, 130
Internal oblique muscle, 129, 129f
International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA), 258, 258t
Intracellular movement, 20
Intracerebral tumor, 86, 86f
Intra-oral air pressure, 260
Intrapleural pressure, 138
Intrinsic laryngeal muscles, 174
cricothyroid muscles, 175–177, 177f
innervation of, 184
lateral cricoarytenoid muscles, 175
oblique arytenoid muscle, 175
origins, insertions, and actions of, 173t
posterior cricoarytenoid muscles, 175, 176f
thyroarytenoid muscles, 174–175, 174f
transverse arytenoid muscles, 175
Ischemia, 87
Ischemic brain damage, 91
J
Jargon, 95
Joint Committee on Infant Hearing (JCIH), 344
Joints, 24–26
K
Klippel-Feil syndrome, 341
Kyphosis, 148
L

Labiodental consonants, 265
Labiodental sounds, 259
Labyrinthectomy, 345
Labyrinthine arteries, 57
Lacrimal bones, 224, 228f
Laryngeal cavity, 185–186, 185f
aditus laryngis, 185f, 186
glottic region, 187
glottis, 186
paramedian position, 186
subglottic region, 187
subglottic space, 185f, 186
supraglottic region, 186
ventricle, 185f, 186
vestibule, 185f, 186
Laryngeal feedback system, 182
Laryngeal joints, 170
cricoarytenoid joints, 170
cricothyroid joints, 170
Laryngeal membranes, 170–171
extrinsic membranes, 171
cricotracheal membrane, 171
hyoepiglottic membrane, 171
hyothyroid membrane, 171
intrinsic membranes, 171–173, 171f, 172f
conus elasticus, 172
elastic membrane, 171–173, 171f
quadrangular membrane, 172
Larynx, 165–166, 165f, 166f
arytenoid cartilages, 168, 170f
cartilages of, 166f
cricoid cartilage, 166f, 167f, 168
cuneiform and corniculate cartilages, 169f, 170
epiglottis, 166f, 167f, 168
laryngeal joints, 170
membranes of (See laryngeal membranes)
mid-sagittal and superior views of, 169f
thyroid cartilage, 166–168, 167f
views of, 167f
Lateral cricoarytenoid (LCA) muscles, 175
Lateral fasciculus, 52
Lateral hyothyroid ligaments, 167
Lateral iliocostalis, 125, 125f, 130
Lateral lemniscus, 73
Latissimus dorsi, 125, 125f, 130
Lazy eye, 71
Lee Silverman Voice Treatment (LSVT), 153
Lenticulostriate arteries, 57
Leptomeninges, 86
Lesions, 328

Levator costarum muscles, 125–126, 126f
Levator veli palatini (LVP), 240, 240f, 249, 267
Lexical memory, 99
Ligaments, 23
Linea alba, 127
Lips, 235–236, 235f
Cupid’s bow, 236
layers of tissue in, 235–236
orbicularis oris muscle, 236
philtrum, 236
role in speech production, 258–259
vermilion zone, 236
Literal paraphasia, 95
Living organism, 9
Longitudinal tension, 189
Lordosis, 148
Loudness of voice, 206–207
Lou Gehrig’s disease. See Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
Lower motor neuron (LMN), 75, 84, 281
Lung capacities, 136
Lung congestion, 147
Lungs, 132–134, 133f
alveoli pulmoni, 133
cardiac impression, 133
costal pleura, 134
mediastinum, 132, 133f
pleurae, 134
pleural linkage, 134
Lysosomes, 20, 21f, 21t
M
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 91
Malleoincudal joint, 26, 26f
Mandible, 245–247
mandibular depressor muscles, 246–247, 246t
mandibular elevator muscles, 246, 246t
movement of, 246–247
role in speech production, 261
temporomandibular joint, 245
Mandible bones, 224, 225f
Mandibular fossa, 230
Manubrium, 304
Mass effect, 88
Masseter muscle, 246, 247f
Mass lesions of vocal folds, 204f
Mastication, 281
Mastoid air cells, 230

Mastoiditis, 337
Mastoid process, 126
Matrix, 23
Maxillae, 222–224, 223f
Maxillary alveolar ridge, 239
Maxillary paranasal sinuses, 224
Maximum minute volume, 137
Mechanical ventilation, 156–157, 156f
Medial compression, 189
Medial lemniscus pathway, 77
Medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF), 74, 74f
Medullary rhythmicity center, 150
Memory, 99–100
Ménière’s disease, 345–346
Meninges, 52
arachnoid granulations, 53, 54f
layers, 53f
arachnoid mater, 53–54
dura mater, 52–53
pia mater, 54
subarachnoid space, 54
Meningiomas, 86
Meningitis, 86
Mesencephalic nucleus, 77
Mesencephalon, 41
Mesothelial tissue, 22
Metamemory, 100
Metencephalon, 41, 48–50, 48f
anterior lobe, 48
cerebellar peduncles, 48
dentate nucleus, 48, 50f
fastigial nucleus, 48, 50f
flocculonodular lobe, 48
interposed nuclei, 48
posterior lobe, 48
right and left hemispheres, 48
vermis, 48
Michel dysplasia, 340
Microfilaments, 20, 21f, 21t
Microtia, 330
Microtubules, 20, 21f, 21t
Midbrain. See Brainstem
Middle cerebral artery (MCA), 57, 58f, 93
Middle ear muscle reflex arc, 326
Minute volume, 137
Mitochondria, 20, 21f, 21t
Mixed dentition stage, 237
Mondini dysplasia, 340
Monophthongs, 260–261
Motion sickness, 315

Motor homunculus, 76, 76f
Motor speech disorders, 101–103
apraxia of speech, 101–102
definition of, 101
dysarthria, 102–103
Motor speech system, 74–75
corticospinal and corticobulbar tracts, 75–76, 76f
facial nerve, 77–78
glossopharyngeal nerve, 78
hypoglossal, 80
spinal accessory nerve, 79
trigeminal nerve, 76–77
vagus nerve, 78–79
Mouth, functions of, 235
Mucoperiosteum, 235
Mucosal wave, 206
Multiple sclerosis (MS), 84–85, 85f, 145, 152–153, 287–288, 287f
Multipolar neurons, 27, 60, 61f
Muscle
action of, 120
cells, 21
tissue, 26–27
types of, 26, 26f
Muscles of expiration, 127
origins, insertions, and actions of, 128t
primary muscles, 127–130
secondary muscles, 130
Muscles of facial expression, 250, 250f
Muscles of inspiration, 120
origins, insertions, and actions of, 121t
primary muscles, 120–123
diaphragm, 122, 122f
external intercostals, 123, 123f
internal intercostals, 123, 123f
secondary muscles, 123
dorsal thorax, 125–126, 125f
neck muscle, 126–127, 127f
ventral thorax, 123–125, 124f
Muscular dystrophy (MD), 145, 147–148, 288
Muscular process, 170
Musculus uvulae, 240, 240f
Myelencephalon, 41
Mylohyoid line, 224
Myoelastic Aerodynamic Theory of phonation, 189–190
Myringotomy, 336, 337
N

Nasal bones, 224, 226f
Nasal cannulae, 146
Nasal cavity, 250, 252–253
landmarks of, 252, 252f
muscles of nose, 252–253, 252f, 253t
nasal cartilages, 252, 252f
nasopharynx, 250
nose, 250
Nasal murmur, 259
Nasal septum, 23, 24f
National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, 299
National Scoliosis Foundation, 148
Natural resonant frequency, 262
Nebulizer, 146
Negative pressure breathers, 135
Neglect, 97
Neocortex, 65
Neologisms, 95
Neonatal herpes, 342–343
Neoplasms, 86
Nerve cells, 21–22
Nerve fibers, 60
Type A, 60
Type B, 60
Type C, 60
Nervous system, 38, 113
anatomical orientation, 39–41
anatomical views and sections of brain, 40f
anatomy of
brain, 43–50
CNS, 43–52
neurons and glial cells, 59–61
spinal cord, 50–52
brain, 38
central nervous system, 38
neurodevelopment, 41–43
of central nervous system, 41, 41f
of spinal cord, 41, 42f
organization of, 41–43, 42f
brain, 42–43
CNS, 42–43
PNS, 43
spinal cord, 43
pathologies of
affix and part-word related to, 83–84
communication disorders, 93–103
neuropathologies, 84–93
swallowing disorders, 103–105
physiology of, 61
auditory and vestibular systems, 71–74

cerebral function, 65–67
cranial nerves, 68, 68t
electrochemical communication, 61–65
motor speech system, 74–80
neural systems, 68–81
swallow function, 80–81
visual system, 69–71
stages in growth of, 41
differentiation, 41
induction, 41
migration, 41
proliferation, 41
supporting systems to, 52–58
blood supply, 56–58
meninges, 52–54, 53f, 54f
ventricular system, 55, 55f, 56f
terminology related to, 38–39, 39t
Nervous tissue, 27
Neural crest, 41
Neural plate, 41
Neural tube, 41
Neurectomy, 345
Neuroectoderm, 41
Neurogenic dysphagia, 104
Neurological disorders, of articulatory/resonance system, 279–289
cranial nerve damage, 279–281, 280t
facial nerve, damage to, 281–282
glossopharyngeal nerve, damage to, 282
hypoglossal nerve, damage to, 282–284
trigeminal nerve, damage to, 281
vagus and spinal accessory nerves, damage to, 282–284
motor speech disorders, 284–286
apraxia of speech (AOS), 285–286
dysarthria, 286
other neurological disorders, 286–289
nonprogressive neurological disorders, 289
progressive neurological disorders, 287–288
Neurologic communication disorders
aphasia, 93–96
cognitive-communicative disorders, 96–101
motor speech disorders, 101–103
Neuromuscular junction, 27, 60–61
Neurons, 27, 29f
anatomy of, 59, 59f
axon, 59, 59f
axon hillock, 59, 59f
cell body, 59, 59f
dendrites, 59, 59f
nodes of Ranvier, 59
telodendria, 59

classification of, 60, 61f
and glial cells, 60
Neuropathologies, 84
cerebral hemispheres, 90–93
disruption of supporting systems, 86–89
nerve cells and glial cells, 84–86
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 84, 85f
multiple sclerosis, 84–85, 85f
neoplasms, 86
Parkinson’s disease, 85–86, 85f
Neurotransmitter, 64, 64t
steps involved in release of, 64
Newton’s Third Law of Motion, 135
Noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL), 347–349
Nondeclarative memory, 99–100
Nucleus, 20, 21f, 21t
O
Obstructions of ear canal, 333–334, 333f
Occipital bones, 227–228, 232f
Occipital condyles, 228
Oculomotor cranial nerve, 70–71, 71f
Odontoid process, 115
Olfactory nerve, 81
Olivocochlear pathways, 326
Optic canals, 234
Optic chiasm, 70
Optic radiations, 70
Optic tract, 70
Oral cavity, 235–250
alveolar ridge, 239
cheeks, 236
function of, 235
hard palate, 239
lips, 235–236
mandible, 245–247
muscles of facial expression, 250, 250f
teeth, 236–239
tongue, 241–245
tonsils, 248
velopharyngeal (V-P) mechanism, 248–249
velum (soft palate), 239–241
Oral transit time, 80
Orbicularis oris muscles, 258
Organelles, 20, 21f
Organic disorder and functional disorder, distinction between, 273
Organization of human organism

cells, 20–22
medical terminology related to, 19–20
organs, 27–29
and speech processes, 30–31
systems, 29–30
tissues, 22–27
Organs, 27, 29
Orientation to human body
anatomical position, 10, 10f
planes of reference, 10–11, 11f
terminology with spatial position and orientation, 11, 12–13t, 13, 14f
Osteoclasts, 237
Osteoma, 334
Osteoporosis, 148
Otitis externa, 334, 334f
Otitis media (OM), 86, 275, 334–337
acute OM, 335
adhesive OM, 335
in children, 334
complications of, 337
contributing factors, 335
gender and family history, role of, 334
myringotomy, 336
OM with effusion, 335
PE tube placement, 336, 336f
serous OM, 335
stages of, 335
surgical treatment of, 336
Otoacoustic emissions (OAEs), 320
Otolaryngologist, 328
Otologist, 328
Otosclerosis, 308, 337–339
stapedectomy for, 338f
Otoscopy, 302, 303
Outer hair cells (OHCs), 318, 319
P
Palatal consonants, 265
Palatine bones, 224, 227f
Palatoglossus muscle, 240, 240f, 243, 244
Palatopharyngeus muscle, 240, 240f, 255
Papilloma, 204, 204f
Paradoxical vocal fold movement (PVFM), 145–146. See also Asthma
Parietal bones, 226–227, 231f
Parietal–temporal–occipital (P-T-O) region, 67
Parkinson’s disease (PD), 85–86, 85f, 153, 153f, 288, 288f
Passive forces, 135

Pathology, 10
Pectoral girdle, 117–118, 118f
Pectoralis major muscle, 124, 124f
Pectoralis minor muscle, 124, 124f
Pelvic girdle, 118, 118f
acetabulum, 118
coxal bones, 118
inguinal ligaments, 118
pubic symphysis, 118
Pericardial cavity, 22
Perichondrium, 26
Perimysium, 27
Periodic sounds and aperiodic sounds, distinction between, 263
Periosteum, 24
Peripheral chemoreceptors, 150
Peripheral nervous system (PNS), 42, 43
somatic nervous system, 43
visceral nervous system, 43
Peristalsis, 266
Peristaltic movement, 81
Perisylvian language zone, 93, 93f
Peritoneal cavity, 22
Phagocytosis, 60
Pharyngeal aponeurosis, 254
Pharyngeal cavity, 254–256
mucous membrane, 256
pharyngeal aponeurosis, 254
pharyngeal muscles, 254–256, 254f, 255t
regions of, 256
Pharyngeal fricative, 275
Pharyngeal transit time (PTT), 81
Pharyngeal tubercle, 228
Pharynx, 182, 261
role in speech production, 261–262
Phonation, 113, 200
Cover–Body Model, 190–191
mechanics of, 192–193
attack phase, 193
prephonation phase, 193
process, 192–193
Myoelastic Aerodynamic Theory, 189–190
Phonation breaks, 209
Phonatory system, 30f, 164, 165f, 218
affix and part-word related to, 163
anatomy of, 164–187
framework of, 164
hyoid bone, 165, 165f
laryngeal membranes, 170–173
larynx, 165–170
laryngeal cavity, 185–187

mucous membrane, 182
muscles of, 173–182
extrinsic laryngeal muscles, 177–182
intrinsic laryngeal muscles, 173t, 174–177
neural innervation of, 182–184
pathologies associated with, 199–211
and affix and part-word, 199
parameters of voice, 205–209
voice perspective, 201–205
voice production, 200–201
physiology of, 187–197
basic concepts, 187–189
falsetto, 196
phonation process, 189–193
vocal tone frequency and intensity, modification of, 193–197
whisper, 196–197
Phonemic regression, 347
Phrenic nerve pacer, 151, 152f
Phrenic nerves, 131–132
Phrenology, 65
Physiology, 9–10
Pick’s disease, 93
Piebaldism, 340
Pierre Robin sequence, 277, 277f
Pitch, 188, 205–206
Pitch breaks, 209
Planes of reference, 10–11, 11f
coronal plane, 10, 11f, 12t
sagittal plane, 10–11, 11f, 13t
transverse plane, 11, 11f, 13t
Plasma membrane, 20, 21f, 21t
Plethysmograph, 136
Pleural cavities, 22
Plosives (stops), 265
Pneumotachometer, 136
Pneumotaxic area, 150
Pneumothorax, 144
Positive pressure breathers, 135
Posterior cricoarytenoid (PCA) muscles, 175, 176f
Postsynaptic cells, 63, 63f
Pragmatics, 98
Prefrontal cortex, 67
Presbycusis, 346–347
Pressure equalization (PE) tube, 303, 310
Presynaptic cells, 63–64
Primary motor cortex, 66
Primary progressive aphasia (PPA), 101
Primary somatosensory cortex, 66
Primary visual pathway, 70, 70f
Priming, 100

Procedural memory, 99–100
Propagation, 62
Prosencephalon, 41
Prosopagnosia, 97
Prospective memory, 100
Protoplasm, 20
Pseudobulbar palsy, 103
Ptosis, 70
Puberphonia, 205
Pulmonary pressure, 135
Pulp cavity, 237
Pulse oximeter, 147
Pure tones, 187
Pyramidal tracts, 75
Q
Quadratus lumborum muscle, 130, 131f
R
Rancho Los Amigos Levels of Cognitive Functioning Scale, 98, 99t
Recruitment, 345
Rectus abdominus muscle, 129, 129f
Recurrent laryngeal nerve, 184
Recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis, 208
Reissner’s membrane, 318, 345
Relative refractory period, 63, 63f
Residual volume (RV), 136
Resonance, concept of, 262, 270
Resonator, 262
Respiratory anatomy, 113–134
framework, 113–114
pectoral girdle, 117–118
pelvic girdle, 118
rib cage and sternum, 115–117
trachea and bronchial tree, 118–120
vertebral column, 114–115
lungs and pleurae, 132–134
muscles of respiration, 120–130
expiration, muscles of, 127–130
inspiration, muscles of, 120–127
neural innervation of, 130–132, 132t
Respiratory pathologies, 144–145, 144t
affix and part-word related to, 143

airway obstruction, 145–147, 146f
musculoskeletal conditions, 147–148
neurological pathologies, 149–154
tracheotomy and mechanical ventilation, 154–157
Respiratory physiology, 134
breathing and exchange of air, 137
lung volumes and capacities, 135–137
passive forces, 135
vegetative breathing, process of, 137–139
expiration, 139
inspiration, 137–138
respiratory cycle, 139
vocal activity and, 139–142
continuous phonation, 139–141
conversational speech, 141–142
respiratory cycle, 142
volume, pressure, and airflow, 134–135
Respiratory system, 30f, 113, 164
anatomy of (See Respiratory anatomy)
pathologies associated with (See Respiratory pathologies)
physiology of (See Respiratory physiology)
and speech production mechanism, 113, 113f
Resting lung volume, 139
Resting membrane potential (RMP), 61
Resting volume, 135
Retinitis pigmentosa, 341
Retrospective memories, 99
Rhombencephalon, 41
Rib cage, 115–117, 116f
arthrodial joints, 116
rib, 115
articulation with thoracic vertebrae, 115–116, 116t
landmarks of, 115, 116f
sternum, 116–117
vertebral ribs, 117
vertebrochondral ribs, 117
vertebrosternal ribs, 117
Right hemisphere syndrome (RHS), 96–98
affect and prosody, 97
higher cognitive functions, 97–98
visuospatial deficits, 97
Rods, 69–70
S
Sacral foramina, 115
Saddle joint, 26, 26f
Sagittal plane, 10–11

Saltatory conduction, 62
Scalenus muscles, 126, 127f
Scapula, 117–118, 118f
Scheibe dysplasia, 340
Schwann cells, 60
Schwartze’s sign, 338
Scoliosis, 148
Sella turcica, 234
Semantic memory, 99
Semicircular canals, 73, 74
Semivowels, 266
glides, 266
liquids, 266
Sensory disorders, of articulatory/resonance system, 289–291
Sensory-neural system, 316
cochlea, 316–318, 317f
neural pathways
afferent auditory pathway, 323–326
efferent auditory pathway, 326
middle ear muscle reflex arc, 326
neurotransmission, 320–323
organ of Corti, 318–320
Septal cartilage, 252
Septum pellucidum, 55
Serratus anterior muscle, 124f, 125
Serratus posterior inferior muscle, 130
Serratus posterior superior muscle, 126, 126f
Silent aspiration, 104
Sinusitis, 235
Skeletal muscle, 26–27, 28f
Smooth muscle, 26
Sodium–potassium pump (SPP), 62
Somatic nervous system, 43
Source-Filter Theory, 263–264, 264f
consonant, production of, 265–266
source function, 264
transfer function, 264
vowels, production of, 264–265
Spasmodic dysphonia, 204, 208
Spatial summation, 65
Speaking valve, 155, 156, 156f
Spectrogram, 263, 263f
Speech–language pathologists (SLPs), 145
Speech perception and production, 5–6
systems involved in, 4, 4t (See also Specific systems)
Speech processes, 30
articulation/resonation, 30–31
phonation, 30
respiration, 30
Speech production, mechanics of, 257–262

alveolar ridge, 259
English vowels and consonants and IPA characters, 258t
hard palate, 259
integration of oral structures, 262
lips, 258–259
mandible, 261
pharynx, 261–262
teeth, 259
tongue, 260–261
velum, 259–260
Sphenoid bone, 231, 234–235, 234f
Sphenoid paranasal sinuses, 235
Spinal accessory nerve, 79
Spinal cord
anatomy of, 50–52
gray and white matter, 52, 53f
longitudinal axis, 52
segmental axis, 50–52, 52f
Spinal cord injury (SCI)
case examples, 151
cause of, 150
cervical, 150f
complete, 151
incomplete, 151
Spinal nerves, 42, 51
Spinal trigeminal nucleus, 77
Spirometer, 136
Sporadic syndrome, 275
Squamous cell carcinoma, 332–333, 333f
Stapedectomy, 338, 338f
Stapedius muscle, 305
Stenosis, 87, 331
Sternocleidomastoid muscle, 126, 127f
Sternothyroid muscle, 180, 182
Sternum, 116–117, 117f
Stickler syndrome, 277–278
Stoma, 154
Strabismus, 71
Stria vascularis, 318
Stroke, 56, 87
hemorrhagic, 87–88
ischemic, 87
risk factors for, 88
Structural disorders, of articulatory/resonance system, 273, 274
Apert syndrome, 276, 276f
cleft lip and palate, 274–275, 274f
Crouzon syndrome, 276, 277f
ectrodactyly-ectodermal dysplasia-clefting syndrome, 276–277
glossectomy, 278–279
Pierre Robin sequence, 277, 277f

Stickler syndrome, 277–278
velocardiofacial syndrome, 278
velopharyngeal incompetence, 278
Styloglossus, 244
Stylohyoid ligaments, 165
Styloid process, 230
Stylopharyngeus muscle, 255–256
Subclavius muscle, 124–125, 124f
Subcostal muscles, 130
Subglottic pressure, 140, 146, 188–189
Substantia nigra, 85
Sulcus limitans, 41
Superior laryngeal nerve, 184
Superior olivary nucleus, 73
Superior thyroarytenoid muscle, 175
Swallowing, 80–81, 266–267
esophageal stage, 81, 267
neural circuitry for, 80–81
oral preparatory stage, 80, 266–267
oral stage, 80, 267
pharyngeal stage, 80–81, 267
Swallowing disorders, 103–105
treatment for, 267
Swimmer’s ear, 334
Symptom, defined, 84
Synapse, 27, 61, 61f, 63–65, 63f
chemically gated channels, 64
EPSP, 65
graded potentials, 64
IPSP, 65
neurotransmitters, 64, 64t
postsynaptic cells, 63, 63f
presynaptic cells, 63–64, 63f
Synarthrodial joints, 24
Synchondrosis joint, 25, 25f
Syndrome, definition of, 104
Synovial joint, 25–26
Syphilis, 344
System, 3, 29–30, 29t
definition of, 29
for speech production, 29, 29t
T
Teeth, 236–239
deciduous set, 236, 237, 238f
development of teeth, 237–239
and development of speech, 238–239

permanent teeth, 236, 237, 238f
role in speech production, 259
structure of tooth, 236–237, 236f
types of, 236
Tegmen tympanum, 230
Telencephalon, 43, 44f
amygdala, 46
association fiber tracts, 47
basal ganglia, 46–47, 47f
calcarine sulcus, 45
callosal sulcus, 45
central sulcus, 44
cingulate sulcus, 45
corpus callosum, 44
gyri and sulci, 43–44, 44f, 45t
hippocampus, 46
inferior frontal gyrus, 45
insula, 46
internal capsule, 47
lateral sulcus, 44
limbic lobe, 46
lobes in, 43
longitudinal fissure, 44
medullary centers, 47
operculum, 46
parahippocampal gyrus, 46
parietal lobe, 45
precentral gyrus, 45
temporal lobe, 45–46
Temporae, 220
Temporal bones, 228–230, 233f
Temporalis muscle, 246, 247f
Temporal summation, 65
Temporary threshold shift (TTS), 348
Temporomandibular joint (TMJ), 224, 245, 261
Tendons, 23
Tensor tympani muscle, 77, 305
Tensor veli palatini (TVP) muscle, 77, 240, 240f, 249
Terminal boutons, 59
Terminology associated with anatomy and physiology, 11–17
anatomical structures/parts, 15, 359–361t
auditory/vestibular system, 16, 366–367t
bones, cartilages, cavities, membranes, or spaces, 15, 364t
color, form, location, relative size, or shape, 15, 361–363t
miscellaneous terms and affixes, 16, 367–368t
movement, 15, 359t
nervous system, 364–366t
planes of reference and spatial relationships, 12–13t
Thrombosis, 87, 89f
Thyroarytenoid muscles, 174–175, 174f

Thyroid cartilage, 166–168
Thyroid notch, 166
Tidal volume (TV), 136
Tissues
connective tissue, 23–26
epithelial tissue, 22–23, 23f
muscle tissue, 26–27
nervous tissue, 27
types and subclassifications, 22t
TMJ dysfunction syndrome, 245
Tongue, 29, 241–245, 270–272
anatomy of, 241–242, 242f
foramen cecum, 241
glossoepiglottic fold, 242
lingual frenulum, 242
longitudinal median sulcus, 241
papillae, 242
sulcus terminalis, 241
valleculae, 242
as muscular hydrostat, 242–245
extrinsic tongue muscles, 243–244, 245t, 261
intrinsic tongue muscles, 243, 243t, 244f, 261
role in speech production, 260–261
unilateral paralysis of, 243
Tongue muscles, 28f
Tonotopic organization, 325
Tonsillar fossa, 248
Tonsils, 248
TORCH complex, 341–343
Total lung capacity (TLC), 136
Toxoplasmosis, 341
Trachea, 118–119, 119f
bronchi, 119
and bronchial tree, 119–120, 119f
carina, 119
cartilaginous rings, 119
cricotracheal ligament, 119
goblet cells, 119
intratracheal membrane, 119
Tracheostomy tube, 154–155, 154f, 155f
Tracheotomy and tracheostomy, 154, 154f
Transcortical motor aphasia, 95, 96t
Transcortical sensory aphasia, 95, 96t
Transduction, 321
Transformer action of middle ear, 310–311
Transient ischemic attack (TIA), 56, 87
Transverse foramina, 115
Transverse plane, 11
Transversus abdominus muscle, 129, 129f
Transversus thoracis muscles, 130, 131f

Traumatic brain injury (TBI), 90, 98–100
categories of, 90
mechanisms of, 90t
Trigeminal nerve, 76–77
Trochlear cranial nerve, 71, 71f
Tuberculosis, 144
Tuning curve, 322–323
Turbinates, 220
Tympanic membrane (TM), 301
Tympanogram, 336
Tympanoplasty, 303
Tympanosclerosis, 337
U
Unilateral upper motor neuron (UUMN) dysarthria, 102
Unipolar neurons, 27, 60, 61f
Universal newborn hearing screening, 299
Upper esophageal sphincter (UES), 81, 267
Upper motor neuron (UMN), 75, 84, 281
Upper respiratory infections (URIs), 309
Usher’s syndrome, 341
V
Vagus nerve, 78–79
Vagus nerve damage, 184, 208, 283, 283f
Valsalva maneuver, 187, 309
Velar muscles, 241t
Velocardiofacial syndrome, 278
Velopharyngeal incompetence, 278
Velopharyngeal (V-P) mechanism, 248–249
functions of, 249, 259
Passavant’s pad, 248–249
V-P closure, 249, 259–260
V-P opening, 249, 259–260
Velum (soft palate), 239–241
role in speech production, 259–260
Ventilation, 144, 146
Ventral fasciculus, 52
Ventral posterior medial (VPM) nucleus, 77
Ventricular folds, 172
Ventricular ligaments, 172
Ventricular system, 52, 55
Verbal paraphasia, 95

Vertebral arteries, 56
Vertebral (spinal) column, 114–115, 114f
cervical region, 115
coccygeal region, 115
intervertebral discs, 114
lumbar region, 115
neural arch, 114
odontoid process, 115, 115f
sacral foramina, 115
sacral region, 115
spinous process, 114
thoracic region, 115
transverse foramina, 115
transverse processes, 114
vertebra, 114, 114f
vertebral foramen, 114
Vestibular rehabilitation therapy (VRT), 315
Vestibular schwannoma, 60
Vestibular system
semicircular canals, 313–315
ampulla, 314, 314f
crista ampullaris, 314
cupula, 314
vestibular nerve pathway
internal auditory canal (IAC), 315
Scarpa’s ganglion, 315
vestibulo-ocular reflex, 315
vestibule, 312–313, 313f
hair cell, 312–313
kinocilium, 313
macula, 312
otoconia, 313
otolithic membrane, 313
saccule, 312
stereocilia, 313
utricle, 312
Vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR), 315
Vestibulospinal tracts, 74
Videostroboscopy, 190
Visceral nervous system, 43
Visual system, 69–71
cranial nerves involved in eye movements, 70–71, 71f
primary visual pathway, 70, 70f
retina, role of, 69–70
rods and cones, 70
secondary visual pathways, 70, 70f
structure of eyeball, 69–70, 69f
Vital capacity (VC), 136
Vocal fold length, 175
Vocal fold paralysis, 207f

Vocal folds, mass lesions of, 204f
Vocal fold symmetry, 207f
Vocal fold vibration, 190–191, 191f
Vocal intensity (loudness), 195–196
and vocal tone frequency, relationship between, 196
Vocal ligaments, 172
Vocal nodules, 201, 208
Vocal pitch, modifications of, 193
higher pitch, regulation of, 193–194
lower pitch, regulation of, 194
vocal registers, 194–195
Vocal process, 170
Vocal registers, 194–195, 206
loft register, 195, 206
modal register, 195, 206
pulse register, 194–195, 206
Vocal tone, 188, 218, 262, 263
Voiced and unvoiced speech sounds, distinction between, 263
Voice disorders, 202–203t
causes, 201
clinical perspectives on, 209
communication, 211
documentation, 210
emphasis, 211
listening, 210
medical clearance, 210
duration, 204
life span, 205
organic, 201
prevalence, 201, 204
psychogenic, 201
Voice production, 200–201, 200f
Voice, psychological parameters of, 205
flexibility, 209
loudness, 206–207
pitch, 205–206
quality, 207–208
secondary characteristics, 208–209
Voice quality, 207–208
Voltage-gated channels, 62
Vomer bone, 226, 229f
Vowel quadrilateral, 260, 260f
W
Waardenburg syndrome, 341
Waldeyer’s ring, 248
Watershed area, 57, 58f

Wernicke’s area, 46, 67
Whisper, 196–197
Working memory, 100
Y
Yawn, 137
Z
Zygomatic arch, 220
Zygomatic bones, 224, 228f

