 Agent, Person, Subject, Self  
 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   i
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   i
7/25/2012   2:52:42 PM
7/25/2012   2:52:42 PM

 FOUNDATIONS OF HUMAN INTERACTION 
 General Editor: Nick Enfi eld 
Max Planck Institute of Psycholinguistics 
 Agent, Person, Subject, Self  
 Paul Kockelman  
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   ii
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   ii
7/25/2012   2:52:42 PM
7/25/2012   2:52:42 PM

 Agent, Person, Subject, Self 
 A THEORY OF ONTOLOGY, INTERACTION, 
AND INFRASTRUCTURE  
 Paul   Kockelman 
 1 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   iii
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   iii
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM

 3
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 
and education by publishing worldwide. 
 Oxford New York 
 Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi 
 Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi 
 New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto 
 With offi ces in 
 Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece 
 Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore 
 South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam 
 Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press in the UK and certain other 
countries. 
 Published in the United States of America by 
 Oxford University Press 
 198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016 
 © Oxford University Press 2013 
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior 
permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted by law, 
by license, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reproduction rights organization. 
Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the 
Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above. 
 You must not circulate this work in any other form 
 and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer. 
 [Insert Cataloguing Data] 
 [Insert ISBN] 
 [Insert Impression Number] 
 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 
 Printed in the United States of America 
on acid-free paper 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   iv
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   iv
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM

 For Lara and Zeno 
 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   v
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   v
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM

OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   vi
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   vi
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM

vii
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 John Lucy was a major infl uence in the writing of this book. As a graduate student, I 
took a course with him on the self, as seen through the lens of social relations, semi-
otic practices, and psychological processes, with particular attention to the prag-
matist tradition, that still infl uences my thinking. I am also particularly indebted 
to Nick Enfi eld, who has been a constant interlocutor and source of support since 
the beginning of this project: probably nobody else contributed more directly to it 
in terms of stimulating ideas, questions, and criticisms. While this book is, in some 
sense, precisely not about language and culture as seen through the lens of linguis-
tic anthropology, the concepts, claims, and commitments of Michael Silverstein 
were formative in my own training. More generally, both the analytic framework 
developed here and the range of topics it is used to treat should be understood 
as drawing on, as much as diverging from, the great twentieth-century linguistic 
anthropology tradition. I am particularly lucky to have received my training during 
a period when so many generous and transformative scholars were working more 
or less contemporaneously. In this regard, many of the arguments in this book were 
infl uenced by my readings of, or interactions with Stephen Levinson, Asif Agha, 
Jane Hill, Susan Gal, Judith Irvine, Bill Hanks, Alan Rumsey, Bruce Mannheim, 
Vincent Crapanzano, John Haviland, Webb Keane, Paul Manning, Miyako Inoue, 
Laura Ahearn, Richard Parmentier, Paul Friedrich, Michael Tomasello, Norman 
McQuown, Joel Sherzer, Dan Sperber, and Jim Wilce. Julia Elyachar has for fi ve 
years or so been a constant interlocutor on a project directly related to this one 
(with a particular focus on economic value, as a particular kind of meaningful-
ness), and so many of the ideas generated in our interactions have also found their 
way into this project. Bill Maurer not only gave very helpful critical feedback on 
two essays that were incorporated into this book, but he also provided a forum in 
which certain key ideas germinated in conversations with himself and with his stu-
dents and colleagues. Jane Guyer, Naveeda Khan, and Juan Obarrio organized an 
incredible conference on number, where the last two sections of chapter 6 (on value) 
were fi rst presented. Since the fi rst semester of graduate school, conversations with 
Michael Cepek have transformed my understanding of value, and conversations 
with Stephen Scott have transformed my understanding of technoscience. Severin 
Fowles organized an amazing panel on what he calls ‘thing theory’, and so traces 
of my participation in that have found their way into this book. Zoe Crossland gave 
me crucial feedback on parts of this project at key junctures, and her own work 
on archeology, history and semiotic process has been very stimulating. My under-
standing of Peirce owes a great deal to Vincent Colapietro’s beautiful book,  Peirce’s 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   vii
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   vii
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM

 viii 
Acknowledgments
Approach to the Self: A Semiotic Perspective on Human Subjectivity . Finally, while 
I was fi nishing this project, feedback from Stefan Helmreich, Eben Kirksey, and 
Gary Tomlinson was particularly valuable. 
 Many of the ideas in this book were fi rst sounded out in a seminar I have 
been holding since 2003, also entitled Agent, Person, Subject, Self. Undergraduate 
and graduate students from Barnard College and Columbia University served as 
particularly important sources of insight and inspiration. My colleagues there, 
though perhaps as different as can be from me in their own ontologies, have also 
been incredibly supportive in allowing me to let my thinking run its course—Nadia 
Abu El-Haj, Paige West, Severin Fowles, Brian Larkin, Lesley Sharp, Elizabeth 
Povinelli, Zoe Crossland, Brian Boyd, Angie Heo, Stephen Scott, Brinkley Messick, 
Val Daniels, and Nan Rothschild. Some of the roots of the work presented here 
came about while I was a post-doctoral fellow in the Department of Anthropology 
at Dartmouth College. My interactions with John Watanabe, Deborah Nichols, 
Hoyt Alverson, and Kirk Endicott made my time there very rewarding. And some-
thing about the sudden change of place from the shore of Lake Michigan to the 
Appalachian Trail was particularly stimulating. 
 Finally, I have been blessed with an incredible circle of close friends: Jessica 
Jerome, Erik Thogerson, Brett KingMike Cepek, Stephen Scott, Paja Faudree, Nick 
Enfi eld, Antina von Schnitzler, and Julia Elyachar. And I have been blessed with an 
incredible family. In particular, I want to thank everyone in said family who con-
verges on Grannie Valerie’s home at least twice a year: my brothers and sisters, their 
children, spouses, and sweethearts (and most of all Grannie Valerie and Big D). 
 I want to thank the staff of the journals  Current Anthropology and 
 Anthropological Theory, and their editors, for allowing me to incorporate the fol-
lowing two articles into this book (themselves relatively transformed in content and 
style, as chapter 2 and sections 4 and 5 of chapter 6):
2010. Value is life under a description: Instrumental values, existential commit-
ments, and disorienting metaphors.  Anthropological Theory 10.1: 149–162. 
 2011. Biosemiosis, technocognition, and sociogenesis: Selection and sig-
nifi cance in a multiverse of sieving and serendipity.  Current Anthropology 52.5: 
711–739. 
 Additionally, I want to thank the staff of the journal  Semiotica , and its editor, 
Marcel Danesi, who originally published a set of my articles entitled The Semiotic 
Stance (2005), Agent, Person, Subject, Self (2006), Residence in the World (2006), 
and Representations of the World (2006). While the present work borrows some of 
these titles, and incorporates material frompieces of each of these essays, the ideas 
presented here have transformed radically enough that these early works should 
really be understood as (slightly slippery) steppingstones. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   viii
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   viii
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM

ix
  TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 Figures    xi  
 Tables    xii  
 1.  Semiotic Ontologies   1 
 1.  
  Signs, Minds, and Meaning-in-the-World    1 
 2.  
  Ontology, Interaction, and Infrastructure    3 
 2.  Biosemiosis, Technocognition, and Sociogenesis   12 
 1.  
  Relations between Relations    12 
 2.  
  Signifi cance and Selection    17 
 3.  
  Communication between Conspecifi cs    19 
 4.  
  The Organization of Cognitive Processes    20 
 5.  
  Framing    24 
 6.  
  Artifi cial and Natural Selection, Sieving and Serendipity    27 
 7.  
  Lawn Mowers and Logic Gates    30 
 8.  
  Relations between Relations Revisited    36 
 9.  
  Networks of Interconnected Envorganisms    39 
 10.    The Evolution and Epidemiology of Culture    43 
 3.  Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds   45 
 1.  
  The Neo-Organon    45 
 2.  
  Semiotic Processes, Social Theories, and Obviated Ontologies    46 
 3.  
  Social Statuses, Material Substances, and Mental States    68 
 4.  
  Relatively Emblematic Indices    74 
 5.  
  Semiotic Agents and Generalized Others    81 
 6.  
  From Performativity to Transformativity    88 
 4.  Residence in the World   96 
 1.  
  From Being-in-the-World to Meaning-in-the-World    96 
 2.  
  Heeding Affordances    110 
 3.  
  Wielding Instruments    116 
 4.  
  Undertaking Actions    121 
 5.  
  Inhabiting Roles    125 
 6.  
  Fulfi lling Identities    129 
 7.  
  From Acting under a Description to Comporting within an 
Interpretation    133 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   ix
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   ix
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM

 x 
Table of Contents
 5.  Representations of the World   136 
 1.  
  Intentionality Reframed    136 
 2.  
  Cognitive Representations    139 
 3.  
  Discursive Practices    149 
 4.  
  From Theory of Mind to the Interpretation of Signs    159 
 5.  
  Intentionality and Emblemeticity    164 
 6.  Selfhood, Affect, and Value   171 
 1.  
  I Err, Therefore I Am    171 
 2.  
  From Subjectivity to Selfhood    172 
 3.  
  From Cognition to Affect    177 
 4.  
  Maps, Terrains, and Travelers    183 
 5.  
  From Meaning to Value    188 
 Notes    201  
 References   217  
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   x
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   x
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM

 FIGURES  
    2.1  
  Aristotle’s Relations between Relations    13 
    2.2  
  Marx’s Relations between Relations    13 
    2.3  
  Saussure’s Relations between Relations    13 
    2.4  
  Peirce’s Relations between Relations    13 
    2.5  
  Veblen’s Relations between Relations    14 
    2.6  
 Selecting Agent and Signifi cant Object    17 
    2.7  
  Communication between Conspecifi cs    19 
    2.8  
  Indexical and Inferential Enchaining of Cognitive Processes    21 
    2.9  
  Relations between Relations Revisited    37 
  3.1 
 Semiosis as a Relation between Relations  47 
  3.2 
 Object as Correspondence-Preserving Projection  55 
  5.1 
 Embedding  146 
  5.2 
 Flexibility and Displacement  148 
  5.3 
 Noncommunicative Action  155 
  5.4 
 Conventional Communicative Action  156 
  5.5 
 Nonconventional Communicative Action  157 
  5.6 
 Roots, Fruits, and Mediating Propensities  161 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   xi
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   xi
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM

OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   xii
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   xii
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM

 TABLES  
  1.1 
 Some Key Constituents of Kindedness  5 
  1.2 
 Some Key Modes of Ontological Transformativity  8 
  2.1 
 Material Culture and Semiotic Processes  31 
  3.1 
 Typology of Semiotic Distinctions  47 
  3.2 
 Examples of Semiotic Processes  50 
  3.3 
 Various Factors Determining the Relative Enclosure (or “Objectivity”) 
of an Object  56 
  3.4 
 The Objects of Inferentially Articulated Signs  57 
  3.5 
 Some Key Constituents of Kindedness  72 
  3.6 
 Four Dimensions of Relatively Emblematic Indices  77 
  3.7 
 Various Modes of Ontological Transformativity  93 
  4.1 
 Constituents of the Residential Whole and Their Semiotic 
Components  97 
  4.2 
 Types of Embedded Interpretants  99 
  4.3 
 Theories of Roles Compared  128 
  5.1 
 Inference and Indexicality  141 
  5.2 
 Varieties of Inference  144 
  5.3 
 Types of Framing  150 
  5.4 
 Features of Representations  151 
 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   xiii
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   xiii
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM

OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   xiv
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   xiv
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM

 Agent, Person, Subject, Self  
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   xv
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   xv
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM

OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   xvi
00_Kockelman_Prelims.indd   xvi
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM
7/25/2012   2:52:43 PM

1
 1 
 Semiotic Ontologies  
 1.  Signs, Minds, and Meaning-in-the-World 
 As the title of this book suggests, the key topics turn on four seemingly human-specifi c 
and individual-centric capacities that are essential for understanding modern 
social processes, and constitute the traditional grist for critical theory. For exam-
ple, agency might be understood as a causal capacity, say, fl exibly wielding means 
toward ends. Subjectivity might be understood as a representational capacity, say, 
holding mental states or expressing speech acts. Selfhood might be understood as a 
refl exive capacity, say, being the means and ends of one’s own actions or being the 
object of one’s own private and public representations. And personhood might be 
understood as a sociopolitical capacity, say, rights and responsibilities attendant on 
being an agent, subject, or self. (Suffi ce it to say, these are  not defi nitions we will be 
building toward; rather, they are merely a quick-and-dirty way to characterize sev-
eral trends in a vast literature.) 
 But this is just one way of framing the contents of this book, and so there 
are fi ve possible subtitles: (1) Reconstructing the Individual in Social Theory; (2) 
Taking a Semiotic Stance toward Language, Culture, and Mind; (3) Outline of a 
Theory of Thirdness; (4) Signifi cance and Selection in a Multiverse of Sieving and 
Serendipity; and (5) A Theory of Ontology, Interaction, and Infrastructure. As the 
fi rst subtitle suggests, this book provides a reconstructive rather than a deconstruc-
tive theory of the individual, one which both analytically separates and theoreti-
cally synthesizes a range of “facilities” that are often confused and confl ated (e.g., 
agency, personhood, subjectivity, selfhood). As the second subtitle suggests, these 
facilities are fundamentally related to three rich theoretical and empirical traditions 
(exemplifi ed by the disciplines of linguistics, anthropology, and psychology) whose 
concerns and claims may be articulated in a semiotic idiom that supersedes the 
usual intentional idiom. As the third subtitle suggests, this book provides a theory 
of thirdness—or a pragmatism-grounded approach to meaning and mediation that 
is general enough to account for processes that are as embodied and embedded as 
they are articulated and enminded. As the fourth subtitle suggests, while this the-
ory is thereby focused on human-specifi c modes of meaning, it also offers a general 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   1
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   1
7/23/2012   9:25:03 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:03 PM

 2 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
theory of meaning, such that the agents, subjects, and selves in question need not 
always, or even usually, map onto persons. And as the fi fth and actual subtitle sug-
gests, not only should ontology, interaction, and infrastructure be understood as 
the roots and fruits of each other, but, relative to agents, persons, subjects, and 
selves, they may also often be framed as grounds to fi gures, relations to relata, and 
processes to precipitates. Broadly speaking, then, this book offers both a naturalis-
tic and a critical theory of signs, minds, and meaning-in-the-world. 
 OVERVIEW OF CHAPTERS 
 Chapter 2 argues for a general and naturalistic theory of meaning, one that turns on 
selection as much as signifi cance, as well as sieving as much as serendipity, and one 
that synthesizes the key concerns of a wide range of otherwise disparate disciplines 
and perspectives. It uses this theory to understand the relation between biosemiosis, 
technocognition, and sociogenesis. And it shows how this theory is applicable to 
any life form (be it natural, artifi cial, or anything outside or in-between), on any 
time-scale (e.g., phylogenetic, historical, developmental, or interactional). 
 Chapter 3 uses this theory to characterize human-specifi c modes of mean-
ing, articulating the relation between power, knowledge, and semiotic process. It 
shows how various “kinds” (such as mental states, social statuses, and material sub-
stances) get indexed and interpreted, constructed and naturalized, and, more gener-
ally, enclosed and disclosed in human interaction. And it argues that interaction, so 
framed, constitutes the roots and fruits of culture—itself a particularly important 
semiotic ontology. 
 Chapter 4 extends the concerns of chapter 3 by focusing on relatively non-
propositional semiotic processes: heeding affordances, wielding instruments, 
undertaking actions, inhabiting roles, and fulfi lling identities. It argues that such 
processes, while usually untheorized as the infrastructure or “context” for more 
stereotypic signs (such as discursive practices), are fundamentally semiotic, pos-
sess a specifi c organizational logic, and constitute the grounds for more canonical 
modes of meaning. 
 If chapter 4 focuses on what may be called residence in the world, chapter 5 
focuses on representations of the world. It thereby extends the concerns of chapter 3 
by accounting for relatively propositional semiotic processes, namely, language and 
mind, in their stereotypic sense, as relatively public and private forms of intention-
ality, respectively. It argues that the intentional stance of human kinds is grounded 
in a more fundamental semiotic stance. 
 Chapter 6 uses the foregoing framework to move from meaning to value and 
from cognition to affect. In part, it focuses on value in an existential sense, namely, 
the fundamental commitments of identity that constitute the ultimate grounds for 
human action. And, in part, it moves from semiotic processes to semiotic actors, 
focusing on the evaluating agents, persons, subjects, and selves that constitute the 
roots and fruits of residence in, and representations of, the world. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   2
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   2
7/23/2012   9:25:04 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:04 PM

 
Semiotic Ontologies 
3 
 The rest of this chapter introduces the concept of semiotic ontologies. In part, 
it unfolds some of the overarching categories and commitments of this book, focus-
ing on the relation between ontology, interaction, and infrastructure. And, in part, 
it refl exively frames this project in terms of its own categories and commitments, 
and, thus, it attends to some of its own conditions of possibility. In this way, it may 
be read as a conclusion as much as an introduction. And, for these reasons, it may 
be slightly hard going for readers new to meaning, who are encouraged to start with 
chapter 2, which builds a theory of meaning from the ground up. 
 2.  Ontology, Interaction, and Infrastructure 
 Ontologies might initially be understood as ensembles of assumptions regarding 
the underlying constitution of, or salient patterns in, the world. Crucially, in articu-
lating the nature of ontologies, one is simply evincing some of the assumptions of 
one’s own ontology, where these assumptions are both grounded in and grounding 
of one’s own worlds. And thus, not only do such assumptions frame one’s experi-
ence in such worlds, but they are also subject to reframing through one’s experience 
in such worlds. Any ontology, including this meta-ontology, is necessarily provi-
sional (and probably provincial). 
 With this refl exive critique aside, my own interests lead me to foreground two 
attributes of ontologies. First, ontologies are a condition for, and a consequence of, 
semiotic processes. In this way, I focus on ontologies insofar as they relate to sem-
iosis, as inaugurated by the American Pragmatist Charles Sanders Peirce (1992a 
[1868], 1992b [1868], 1992c [1868]), and more broadly understood as turning on 
both signifi cance and selection or, as will be detailed in chapter 2, relations between 
relations more generally. Phrased another way, such ontologies are both an out-
come of meaningful interaction and a condition for meaningful interaction, where 
the interactants in question may include self and other, people and things, and any-
thing outside or in-between. In short, just as one interprets in light of an ontology, 
one ontologizes in light of an interpretation. 
 Second, the assumptions that constitute ontologies are not only the roots and 
fruits of representations of the world (e.g., speaking and thinking with proposi-
tional contents), but they are also the roots and fruits of residence in the world 
(e.g., interacting with others, and meaning-in-the-world more generally). And, 
hence, while the usual focus is on ontological assumptions that are articulated or 
enminded in propositional contents, the focus will include ontological assumptions 
that are embodied in interactional practices and institutions as well as ontologi-
cal assumptions that are embedded in material environments and infrastructures. 1 
Indeed, usually one and the same interaction will involve residence in the world and 
representations of the world, and, hence, will both presume and propose a variety 
of such assumptions, with more or less strength and explicitness, and with various 
degrees of logical, normative and causal coherence. 2 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   3
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   3
7/23/2012   9:25:04 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:04 PM

 4 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
 In short, the crucial issue with ontologies is how they (1) are both root and fruit 
of semiotic processes, and thus relate to such processes as both condition and con-
sequence; and (2) do this in a way that may be embedded and embodied as much as 
articulated and enminded. Or, as the American Pragmatist George Herbert Mead 
(1934) would see it from his fi rst-person, human-specifi c perspective, ontologies may 
be refl exive (or “gestural”) as much as refl ective (or “symbolic”), oriented to the past 
(“Me”) as much as orienting of the future (“I”). Thus, while we celebrate the prag-
matists’ insights in this way, our goal is to include perspectives other than the human, 
entities other than the individual, systems other than the linguistic, modalities other 
than the ideational, and scales other than the cultural and historic. 
 INDICES, KINDS, INDIVIDUALS, INTERPRETANTS, AND AGENTS 
 More concretely, such  semiotic ontologies may turn on interpretation-licensed and 
interpretation-licensing assumptions about the nature and distribution of various 
“kinds” (a few of which may be reifi ed for the moment as mental states, social 
statuses, and material substances). In particular, at any given moment, an interpret-
ing agent’s ontology may include assumptions (more or less easily articulated, if 
articulable at all) regarding (1) the kinds that constitute a particular individual; (2) 
the indices that constitute a particular kind; (3) the indices, kinds, and individuals 
that constitute a particular world; and (4) the range of possible worlds that could 
be constituted. 3 
 For example, an ontology is stereotypically evinced in the following kinds 
of assumptions (which are here explicitly proposed by utterance contents for the 
sake of explication):  That guy is a policeman ;  this stuff is water ; and  her cat is sad . 
 Policemen arrest people ;  water ices up at zero-degrees Celsius ; and  sadness leads to 
tears . In this world, there are individuals such as  that guy ,  this stuff , and  her cat ; as 
well as kinds such as  policemen ,  water , and  sadness ; as well as indices such as  arrest-
ing ,  icing , and  crying . In other worlds (nations, cultures, eras, planets, imaginaries, 
infrastructures, institutions, interactions, etc.), there may be other sorts of individu-
als, other sorts of kinds, and other sorts of indices. 
 In this way, an index is a relatively perceivable quality (however complex, rela-
tional, instrumentally mediated, meta-semiotic, and so forth). A kind is a projected 
propensity to exhibit particular indices (however imaginary, erroneous, tenuous, or 
idiosyncratic). And an individual is whatever can exhibit indices (to an agent) and 
thus be a site to project kinds (by that agent). (See Table 1.1.) In particular, inso-
far as something is interpreted as a kind, it may be understood by the interpreting 
agent as more or less entangled in, or evincing of, a range of patterns, and thus 
more or less effected by a range of causes, or causal of a range of effects, as well as 
more or less amenable to, or capable of, a range of actions. 
 A key issue, then, is this: in sensing the indices of an individual, 4 an agent (who 
has such an ontology) may interpretwhat kind of individual it is (as a propensity 
to exhibit a range of indices), 5 and thereby come to expect other indices from that 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   4
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   4
7/23/2012   9:25:04 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:04 PM

 
Semiotic Ontologies 
5 
individual, and patterned behaviors more generally, that would be in keeping with 
its kind. Reciprocally, such interpretations might only indexically or inferentially 
emerge as transformations in the sorts of actions that such an agent is itself more 
or less likely to undertake or transformations in the sorts of qualities that such an 
agent is more or less likely to exhibit. In particular, such interpretations can con-
stitute transformations in one or more of the kinds that constitute the interpreting 
agent (itself an individual), and thus transformations in the kinds of indices (pat-
terns, causes, actions, etc.) it is likely to exhibit. In this way, the process may con-
tinue reciprocally and indefi nitely. 
 Note, then, that whenever an agent engages in a semiotic process—whereby 
a sign (such as an index) stands for an object (such as a kind) and gives rise to 
an interpretant (such as an expectation, inference, affect, or action)—that agent is 
exhibiting, and often transforming, a semiotic ontology. 
 For example, assuming one’s ontology involves policewomen, badges, and billy 
clubs, in perceiving an individual’s billy club, one may infer that she is a police-
woman, and thereby come to expect her to have a badge (as well as make arrests, 
write tickets, and drive a police car), where such expectations are evinced in one’s 
subsequent law-abiding behavior. 6 Or, assuming a child’s ontology includes indices 
such as communicative gestures and kinds such as ostensibly shareable experiences, 
when a parent points, the child may turn to look at where the parent is pointing 
(a semiotic process known as joint-attention). Or, assuming an animal’s ontology 
involves kinds such as predators-that-come-from-above, as indexed by wing spans, 
as well as kinds such as predators-that-come-from-below, as indexed by hiss sounds, 
upon sensing one index or the other, the animal may instigate evasive actions that 
make sense in terms of the relationship between its own interests and the predatory 
characteristics of such kinds (such as fl eeing into the underbrush or climbing into 
the trees). Or, assuming a machine’s ontology, however “derivative,” includes kinds 
such as genuine coins and spurious coins, as indexed by qualities such as weight, 
diameter, and width, upon “sensing” that a coin is genuine, such a machine may 
“instigate” the giving of a candy bar. Or, assuming an immune system’s ontology 
involves particular kinds of harmful or foreign substances (as well as a distinction 
between foreign and nonforeign substances), it produces antibodies that bind with 
TABLE 1.1
Some Key Constituents of Kindedness
Index
Any quality that is relatively perceivable (to an agent).
Kind
Any projected propensity to exhibit particular indices.
Agent
Any entity that can perceive such an index and project such a kind (itself often an 
individual).
Individual
Any entity that can evince indices (to an agent) and thereby be a site to project 
kindedness (by that agent).
Ontology
The assumptions an agent has as to the indices, kinds, and individuals that 
 constitute a particular world.
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   5
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   5
7/23/2012   9:25:04 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:04 PM

 6 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
(and are triggered by) only particular antigens, as embodied in their complemen-
tary molecular structures. 
 Note from these examples that the “assumptions” that constitute ontologies 
may be embedded and embodied as much as enminded and articulated. Indeed, 
anything that is signifi cant and selected, as these terms will be defi ned in chap-
ter 2, embodies an ontology: not only organs and organisms, but also actions and 
instruments; and not only lexicons and worldviews, but also life choices, design 
preferences, and engineering standards; not only scientifi c theories and computer 
programs, but also bodies and artifacts. And note that just as different forms-of-life 
( à la “cultures”) may exhibit different ontologies, so may different life forms ( à  la 
“species”). And just as different living kinds ( à la “animals”) may exhibit different 
ontologies, so may different artifi cial kinds ( à la “machines”). That is, ontology-
exhibiting agents include children and adults, animals and humans, artifacts and 
organs, individuals and institutions, interactions and infrastructure, dollar bills 
and genes, linguistic structures and immune systems,  inter alia . Finally, it cannot 
be emphasized enough that all of these entities (cultures, species, adults, children, 
animals, machines, organs; individuals, indices, agents, and kinds; signs, objects, 
interpretants; and so forth) are themselves just kinds, evincing our own ontology 
(however provincial and provisional). 
 ONTOLOGIES ENSEMBLED, ENTANGLED, AND ENFRAMED 
 Note, then, that for a particular agent, a given individual (such as a specifi c person 
or thing or a particular entity or event) may exist as an ensemble of such kinds, for 
example, a complex bundling of social statuses, mental states, and material sub-
stances. And each kind in such an ensemble may be more or less fl eeting or endur-
ing, more or less recognized by self or others, more or less directly perceived or 
indirectly inferred, more or less “constructed” or “natural,” and more or less coher-
ently entangled with other kinds within the ensemble or with other such ensembled 
individuals within the world. Indeed, just as semiotic processes are distributed 
across signs (such as indices), objects (such as kinds), and interpretants (such as 
inferences), so is any given individual. And just as semiotic processes are distributed 
across actors (qua signers, interpreters, objecters) as much as actions (qua signs, 
interpretants, and objects), so is a given individual. In this way, each individual is 
temporally and spatially entangled in an ensemble of other individuals, who are as 
likely semiotic agents as semiotic objects, as likely signs as interpretants, as likely 
signers as interpreters, as likely ontologized as ontologizing. 
 Concomitantly, these defi nitions are necessarily frame-dependent: indices may 
often be reframed as kinds or individuals, just as kinds may often be reframed as 
indices or individuals, just as individuals may often be reframed as indices or kinds, 
and so forth. Indeed, the (higher-order) indices that constitute a kind may them-
selves be complicated semiotic processes (or the absence thereof), and thereby turn 
on the relations between (lower order) indices, kinds, and interpretations. To return 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   6
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   6
7/23/2012   9:25:04 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:04 PM

 
Semiotic Ontologies 
7 
to our earlier example, a doctor may use the fact that a child of a certain age does 
or does not engage in joint-attention—as a temporally unfolding relation between 
a sign, object, and interpretant—as evidence that the child is or is not normally 
developing (and, hence, counts as a particular kind of child, or has a particular 
kind of disability or genetic structure, and, thus, should or should not be subject to 
a particular kind of legal regimentation). As will be discussed below, and detailed 
in later chapters, processes of semiotic framing are as important to analyze as the 
semiotic products so framed. 
 Or, building up instead of down, and looking somewhat ahead, identity may 
sometimes be understood as a sort of meta-kind. For example, a person might be 
imagined as a more or less uniquely identifi able ensemble of mental states, social 
statuses, and material substances, where such states, statuses, and substances ensure 
that the person in question has a particular ontology. To return to section 1, for 
example, such an ontology might involve recognizing the existence of persons, 
including itself, as particularly important kinds, say, beings capable of producing 
complex indices that are refl exive, fl exible, and representational (such as language) 
or beings that are accountable for their words and deeds to god, the law, themselves, 
and other such persons. 
 Finally, putting all this together, and as intimated above, in this ontology the 
interpreting agents may themselves be just relatively individualized and complicated 
ensembles of various kinds (such as social statuses, mental states, and material sub-
stances), and hence meta-kinds (qua identities), where their signifying, objectifying, 
and interpreting practices are the key indices of their underlying kinds to other 
interpreting agents (including themselves). In short, such ontologies are not only 
embodied and embedded, and as much as articulated and enminded, but they are 
also recursive, refl exive, and reframable. 
 TRANSFORMING WORLDS 
 Just as ontologies are a condition for interpretation, they are also a consequence of 
interpretation. In particular, when we interact with others, or observe or learn about 
others’ interactions, our ontologies may be transformed in the following kinds of 
ways: (1) our assumptions regarding the kinds that constitute a particular individ-
ual may be strengthened or weakened (confi rmed or rejected, called into question, 
and so forth), (2) as may our assumptions regarding the indices that constitute a 
particular kind, (3) as may our assumptions regarding the individuals, kinds, and 
indices that constitute a particular world, (4) as may our assumptions regarding 
the possibilities of other worlds that could be constituted. Finally, for many sorts 
of kinds (and not just the human), such processes are necessarily performative: 
Changes in our assumptions about the world may change the world about which we 
make assumptions. (See Table 1.2.) 
 That said, different sorts of assumptions may be more or less entrenched (usu-
ally depending on the degree to which they indexically or inferentially presume 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   7
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   7
7/23/2012   9:25:05 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:05 PM

 8 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
other assumptions or, more generally, require them for their coherence) and thus 
more or less likely to be transformed by experience. 7 And such transformations may 
occur on various time scales: interactional, biographical, historical, phylogenetic, 
and cosmological,  inter alia . For example, while assumptions of the fi rst sort often 
change on interactional time scales (an agent comes to assume some individual 
inhabits a particular status or is composed of a particular substance), assumptions 
of the fourth sort often change on historical time scales (a community of agents 
comes to assume that the world involves statuses and substances of a particular 
sort). But other changes on other time scales are also possible. For example, at some 
point in biographic time, one may realize that individuals of a particular kind do 
not exhibit the indices one initially expected (assumption of the second sort) or one 
may learn about other worlds, with other sorts of kinds, one could not have previ-
ously imagined (assumption of the fourth sort). 
 Crucially, while such transformations may often seem to be grounded in indi-
vidual-centric and intentionality-specifi c processes (as evinced in, say, transforma-
tions in the beliefs of particular human agents at particular moments), it is best to 
understand them as interactionally and infrastructurally distributed phenomena, 
often grounded in enormous ensembles of minimally aligned, unevenly scaled, and 
unhappily entangled agencies. 
 EMBLEMETICITY AND EMBEDDEDNESS 
 The foregoing claims have many consequences, one of which is the fundamentally 
embedded nature of any particular assumption in one’s ontology and, concomi-
tantly, the fundamentally context-bound nature of interpretation. That is, for an 
interpreting agent to treat something as an index, kind, or individual is possible 
only in a network of other assumptions (regarding other indices, kinds, and indi-
viduals). Likewise, a given quality or event may index a particular kind of a given 
individual (to a given interpreter) only in the context of already present and active 
assumptions about the individual’s other kinds (given other such indices). In short, 
something counts as an index of an individual’s kind to an interpreting agent only 
in a context that includes not only the agent’s ontology (as a set of assumptions 
TABLE 1.2
Some Key Modes of Ontological Transformativity
1) Indices may change an individual’s kind irrespective of an agent’s ontological assumptions.
2)  Indices may change an agent’s ontological assumptions regarding the kinds that constitute a 
particular individual.
3)  Indices may change an agent’s ontological assumptions regarding the indices that constitute a 
particular kind.
4)  Indices may change an agent’s ontological assumptions regarding the indices, individuals, or 
kinds that constitute a particular world.
5)  Changes in an agent’s ontological assumptions about a world (in any of the foregoing ways) may 
change the world about which the agent makes assumptions.
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   8
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   8
7/23/2012   9:25:05 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:05 PM

 
Semiotic Ontologies 
9 
about the world), but also other more or less co-present indices, kinds, and indi-
viduals (themselves often other interpreting agents), as well the framing processes 
that have as their precipitate such fi gured, and potentially reconfi gurable, indexical 
co-presences. 8 
 Phrased in a contrastive fashion, while analysts often focus on relatively emblem-
atic indices of kinds, such as speech acts (as, say, indicating mental states), uniforms 
(indicating social statuses), and assays (indicating material substances), most indi-
ces are relatively nonemblematic, and, hence, relatively ambiguous, context-bound, 
fl eeting, and diffi cult to discern. This means that the kinds so indexed may be mini-
mally “objective,” and so diffi cult to characterize as a particular sort of kind in the 
fi rst place (and thus diffi cult to reify as something like a social status, mental state, 
or material substance). Of course, assumptions regarding the relative emblemetic-
ity of an index, or the relative objectivity of a kind, are themselves part of one’s 
ontology. 
 Relatively emblematic indices, then, are probably overrepresented in analysis 
precisely because of their emblematic function: they allow interpretation to pro-
ceed as if it were relatively symbolic, or convention-based, such that interpretation 
would be a relatively deductive process of using sign-tokens to get to object-tokens 
via “codes” (qua intersubjectively shared mappings that relate types of signs to 
types of objects). In contrast, rather than seeing such widely distributed, relatively 
stable, and easily recognized emblematic signs as the condition for semiosis (qua 
“semiotic sovereigns,” or intersubjectively recognized signs of, and arguments for, 
power, contract, or convention), they should be understood as the consequence of 
semiosis. They should be understood not as something that is used as an explana-
tion but rather as something that is in need of explaining. Language, in its ster-
eotypic sense, and culture, in the strong sense, are as much the consequence of 
communication as its condition. 
 FROM IDEAL TYPE TO PRAGMATIC TYPOLOGY 
 Such ontologies have a further set of properties that are particularly important in 
the context of human agents. First, as argued at length above, such assumptions, 
as well as the interpretive inferences they give rise to, are not only enminded in and 
articulated by those who represent a world, but they are also embodied in those 
who reside in such a world as well as embedded in the world itself. Relatedly, the 
assumptions that constitute an ontology may be more or less easy to articulate (if 
they are articulable at all by the agent in question), and, hence, more or less easy 
to make explicit to oneself and others via an assertion (or symbolic description 
more generally). As per the ideas of Putnam (1975) and Rosch (1975), a key way 
such assumptions are made explicit is via stereotypes (properties typically predi-
cated about referents) and prototypes (referents typically treated as exemplary). 
Assumptions may be held with more or less commitment, from simply entertained 
to deeply committed to,; from treated as a fi rmament of the world to treated as a 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   9
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   9
7/23/2012   9:25:05 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:05 PM

 10 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
fi gment of an imagination. As mentioned above, assumptions vary as to the degree 
to which they are grounding of other assumptions or grounded in other assump-
tions, a fact that probably correlates with the time- scales on which they are trans-
formed, the social scales on which they are entertained, and the material scales 
in which they are embedded. Assumptions may be more or less specifi c as to the 
contexts in which they apply and, thus, have more or less deictic anchoring: from 
 gold is a metal to  that one was the hottest . Any assumption, or set of assumptions, 
within an ontology may be more or less widely shared and, in particular, more or 
less assumed to be widely shared: just as we may characterize the social scale of 
an ontology (or subset of its assumptions) in terms of which interpreting agents 
have it, so we may characterize the refl exive scale of an ontology (the subset of its 
assumptions that are assumed by such agents to be shared on a given scale). As will 
be taken up at length in later chapters, ensembles of assumptions at different scales 
are often best theorized in terms of modes of inferential and indexical coherence 
(and incoherence), namely, ways in which particular assumptions (be they embod-
ied, embedded, articulated, or enminded) make sense only in the context of other 
assumptions via relations such as incorporation (part-whole), complementation 
(fi gure-ground), and creation (cause-effect). In these ways, we may speak of the 
relative portability of an ontology, namely, the degree to which the meaningfulness 
(and means-ends-fulness) of its assumptions seems applicable to many contexts and 
applicable in many contexts. In particular, to say that an ontology is applicable in 
many contexts means that its assumptions are relatively independent of context or 
that the context they are dependent on is widely distributed (a key function of infra-
structure) or that they establish their own context wherever they go. Assumptions 
may turn on categories ( this is a book, that is a person ) as much as values ( this book 
is worth reading, that person is worthy of respect ); indeed, this relatively spurious dis-
tinction is itself grounded in the assumptions of a particular ontology. Assumptions 
may be grounded in theories as much as in experiences and may be grounding of 
theories as much as of actions—indeed, it is usually impossible to separate these 
domains. Relatedly, ontologies are concomitant with epistemologies: One’s set of 
assumptions includes assumptions about what constitutes good evidence (indexical 
or inferential) for an assumption (usually other kinds of assumptions), and what 
a given assumption provides good evidence for. As will be treated at length in later 
chapters, ontological assumptions may be grounded in (and grounding of) affect 
and bodily experience as much as inference and cognition. Finally, as a function 
of all of these properties, ontologies are tightly coupled to (if not indistinguishable 
from) moral, political, and existential commitments. 
 In short, as understood here, semiotic ontologies have certain properties that 
make them similar to, but not the same as, the epistemes of Foucault (1991 [1968]), 
the ideologies of Marx (1978 [1845]), the epistemic cultures of Knorr Cetina (1999), 
the paradigms of Kuhn (1962), the commens of Peirce (1998 [1906–1908]), the 
ontologies and epistemologies of Quine (1969), the imaginaries (reals and sym-
bolics) of Lacan (1981 [1968]), the linguistic and semiotic language ideologies of 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   10
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   10
7/23/2012   9:25:05 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:05 PM

 
Semiotic Ontologies 
11 
anthropologists (Silverstein 1979; Gal and Irvine 1995; Keane 1993; Schieffelin, 
Woolard, and Kroskrity 1998; inter alia), the frames of Goffman (1986 [1974]), the 
cultures of Boas (1911), the historical ontologies of Hacking (2002), the relevance 
wholes of Heidegger (1996 [1927]), the hegemonies of Gramsci (1971), the general-
ized others or “intersubjects” of Mead (1934), the idols of Bacon (2000 [1620]), the 
actors and networks of actor-network theorists (Callon 1986, Latour 1988 [1984]), 
and so forth. Depending on the analyst’s commitments and inclinations (and, hence, 
the analyst’s own ontology), they may be pushed further (or pulled back) in any of 
these (or other) directions. Phrased another way, which itself points back to Max 
Weber’s (1949 [1904]) seminal articulation of the necessarily refl exive epistemology 
of the social sciences, semiotic ontologies wielded as ideal types function as prag-
matic typologies. Thus, semiotic ontologies are objects to be analyzed (indeed, they 
are a particular kind of kind), as much as semiotic ontology (as outlined in this 
chapter and developed in this book) is a method of analysis. 
 ENCLOSURE AND DISCLOSURE 
 While it is, of course, diffi cult to talk about ontologies without talking about ontol-
ogies, it should be stressed that most assumptions never get talked about as such. 
And so in describing ontologies in the foregoing ways, we are very likely project-
ing too much coherence, stability, and explicitness onto them.  9   Indices get treated 
as emblems; kinds get treated as essences; interpretation gets treated in terms of 
inference, if not deduction; individuals get treated as subjects (or objects); worldli-
ness gets treated as worlds; and some worlds get treated as  the world . Whenever we 
attempt to disclose an ontology, including our own, we all too easily enclose it. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   11
01_Kockelman_Ch01.indd   11
7/23/2012   9:25:05 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:05 PM

12
 2 
 Biosemiosis, Technocognition, and Sociogenesis  
 1.  Relations between Relations 
 A core idea of twentieth-century social theory is  relations between relations, which 
is an insight into how various systems, themselves involving disparate kinds of 
meaning or value, are organized. While this phrase was fi rst introduced by Evans-
Pritchard (1969 [1940]) in the conclusion of his classic study on Nuer social rela-
tions, the concept goes back to Aristotle’s discussion of various forms of justice in 
the  Nicomachean Ethics (2001a). In particular, Aristotle argued that equivalence 
of value should turn on geometric ratios. (See Figure 2.1.) For example, if we are 
engaged in a system of redistribution (say, what kinds of people should be given 
what proportion of goods from the collective share), then the following relation 
between relations should hold: as my status is relative to yours (e.g., you are a 
knight and I am a knave), so should my share be relative to yours (e.g., you receive 
ten jugs of wine and I receive one). Aristotle generalized this logic of equivalence to 
forms of exchange more akin to reciprocation than redistribution and to forms of 
value turning on discipline and punishment (e.g., an eye for an eye or a Hail Mary 
for an impure thought) as much as utility and price (e.g., how many bottles of wine 
for a pair of shoes or how much wage for how much work). Building on Aristotle, 
Marx (1967 [1867]) characterized value in similar terms, but with a focus on capital-
ist economies in which the people were (formally) equal and the goods were (qual-
itatively) different. In particular, value was a relation between people (say, different 
kinds of roles within a division of labor) mediated by a relation between things (say, 
different kinds of commodities within a market). (See Figure 2.2.) Marx, of course, 
was not just interested in where value comes from or why people strive for it, but 
also in how the systematic misrecognition of the origins of value is both cause and 
effect of the very relationality that mediates it. 1 
 The idea of relations between relations was not just crucial to understanding 
value in the sense of what someone strives for, it was also crucial for understand-
ing meaning in the sense of what something stands for. Saussure (1983 [1916]), for 
example, famously introduced this idea with regard to linguistic structure: within a 
given language, the relation between any particular linguistic form and its meaning 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   12
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   12
7/23/2012   9:25:25 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:25 PM

 
Biosemiosis, Technocognition, and Sociogenesis 
13 
(e.g., a word and a concept) must be analyzed in relation to the relations between 
other linguistic forms and their meanings (say, other words and concepts within a 
particular grammatical construction or semantic fi eld). (See Figure 2.3.) Peirce, in 
contrast to Saussure, focused on semiotic processes instead of semiological struc-
tures and on inference and indexicality rather than convention and code. But he, 
too, defi ned such processes in terms of relations between relations: A sign stands 
Status #1         Share #1
————   =   ————
Status #2         Share #2
 FIGURE 2.1:  Aristotle’s Relations between Relations 
Thing #2
Thing #1
Person #2
Person #1
 FIGURE 2.2:  Marx’s Relations between Relations 
Signifier #1
Signifier #2
Signified #1
Signified #2
 FIGURE 2.3:  Saussure’s Relations between Relations 
Sign
Object
Interpretant
 FIGURE 2.4:  Peirce’s Relations between Relations 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   13
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   13
7/23/2012   9:25:26 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:26 PM

 14 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
for its object on the one hand, and its interpretant on the other, in such a way as 
to make the interpretant stand in relation to the object corresponding to its own 
relation to the object (Peirce 1992a [1868]). (See Figure 2.4.) As introduced in chap-
ter 1, joint-attention is perhaps the exemplary semiotic process: A child turning to 
observe what her father is observing involves an interpretant (the child’s change 
in attention), an object (what the parent, and later the child, is attending to), and 
a sign (the parent’s direction of attention or gesture that directs attention). Here 
the relation between relations, what Peirce called “correspondence,” is the relation 
between the parent’s direction of attention and the object and the child’s direction 
of attention and the object. 
 The economist Veblen, himself a student of Peirce, merged both of these 
visions (1971 [1899]), theorizing the relation between seemingly nonpecuniary val-
ues (such as social status) and seemingly noncommunicative signs (such as indices 
of effort). Inspired by Darwin’s account of sexual selection (1981 [1871]) and the 
expression of emotions in man and animals (1965 [1872]), and providing the basic 
template for many infl uential theories (such as Bourdieu’s [1984 account of distinc-
tion and Labov’s [2001] account of hypercorrection), his vision of pecuniary emu-
lation was an attempt to explain the selection (and sieving) of social processes over 
historical time by relatively unintentional pathways. For example, he argued that 
any nonintentional or “natural” sign of one’s ability to produce some original value 
(e.g., a large store of yams that, by happenstance, indicates one is a good farmer) 
may become a derivative value insofar as it gets framed as a sign of one’s distinc-
tion from other farmers. And, therefore, this sign may be intentionally sought in 
addition to, or even at the expense of, the object for which it originally stood (e.g., 
people strive to have large yam houses, even if this no longer correlates with having 
lots of yams). In short, the same entity can be a sign of two different objects: both 
a natural or happenstance sign of sustenance and a non-natural or covertly com-
municative sign of status. And the relation between these two simultaneously active 
semiotic processes was a condition of possibility for complex forms of sociogenesis. 
(See Figure 2.5.) 
 This Veblenian process bears a pronounced family resemblance to its 
Nietzschean cousin (1989 [1887])—the imposition of new values on old objects, 
Sign
Object #1
Object #2
 FIGURE 2.5:  Veblen’s Relations between Relations 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   14
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   14
7/23/2012   9:25:26 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:26 PM

 
Biosemiosis, Technocognition, and Sociogenesis 
15 
new functions on old forms, and new meanings on old signs. Indeed, one particu-
larly colorful quote of Nietzsche’s might serve well as the epigram for this chapter 
(serving as it does both to detour more optimistic readings and to counter poten-
tial misreadings); indeed, it seems to presciently capture the lion’s share of insight 
generated by twentieth-century critical theory:
  But purposes and utilities are only  signs  that a will to power has become mas-
ter of something less powerful and imposed upon it the character of a func-
tion; and the entire history of a “thing,” an organ, a custom can in this way 
be a continuous sign-chain of ever new interpretations and adaptations whose 
causes do not even have to be related to one another but, on the contrary, in 
some cases succeed and alternate with one another in a purely chance fashion. 
The “evolution” of a thing, a custom, an organ is thus by no means its  progres-
sus toward a goal, even less a logical  progressus by the shortest route and with 
the smallest expenditure of force—but a succession of more or less profound, 
more or less mutually independent processes of subduing, plus the resistances 
they encounter, the attempts at transformation for the purpose of defense and 
reaction, and the results of successful counteractions. The form is fl uid, but the 
“meaning” is even more so (77–78). 
 PARASITES AND THIRDNESS 
 Or, to generalize and develop as much as exploit and perturb this Nietzschean 
insight, we may combine the insights of Peirce (1955a) with those of Serres (2007 
[1980]). As defi ned in Kockelman (2010b), and as will be explored at length in 
the chapters that follow, a n object (action, sign, agent, etc.) considered as a means 
to an end (or infrastructure considered as a path to a destination) is a second (or 
intermediary), but insofar as it implies (embodies or indexes) other ends it might be 
diverted to serve or indeed implies any way it may fail to serve an end (whether orig-
inal or diverted), it is a third (or mediator). The parasite is whatever inhabits such 
implications. 
 ANALYTIC OVERVIEW 
 The fi rst part of this chapter builds on these ideas in arguing that the key unit of 
analysis underlying the various subfi elds of anthropology, as well as allied disci-
plines, is a relation between two kinds of relations between relations. It thereby 
theorizes, as concomitant processes, the way signs and interpretants relate to signifi -
cant objects and the way sensations and instigations relate to selecting agents. After 
carefully defi ning such a unit, it develops the consequences of such a defi nition 
for various domains—ranging from biosemiotic processes such as animal-signal 
systems and natural selection to technocognitive processes such as lawn mowers 
and Turing machines. It thereby foregrounds the environment-organism relation at 
any level of complexity and with respect to any kind of life form. More generally, 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   15
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   15
7/23/2012   9:25:26 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:26 PM

 16 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
it shows how an expanded typology of relations between relations is necessary to 
 analyze processes of signifi cance and selection at disparate scales—from the nervous 
system to the Internet, from the evolution of species to the interaction of  signers. 
While such disparate processes, on such different scales, are radically different as to 
their details, this chapter aims for a level of (diagrammatic) generality that captures 
their similarities. 
 Framed another way, this chapter attempts to synthesize a number of seem-
ingly disparate processes. It offers a theory of signifi cance in conjunction with a 
theory of selection, as grounded in a broader theory of relations between relations, 
and thereby provides a general theory of meaning, or “mediation.” It treats such 
processes of signifi cance and selection in conjunction with processes of sieving and 
serendipity, and thereby systematically interrelates the key factors underlying emer-
gent forms of organized complexity. And it theorizes codes in conjunction with 
channels, and thereby links shared cultural representations and networked social 
relations. In making such conjunctions, it necessarily obviates many of the usual 
divisions—semiosis versus cognition, mind versus body, human versus animal, 
nature versus artifi ce, meaning versus mechanism, interpretation versus explana-
tion, and so forth. Its ultimate goal is to clarify and interrelate modes of biosemio-
sis, technocognition, and sociogenesis at various levels of scale. 
 As just seen, this chapter borrows extensively from some of the key theorists 
of the mid- to late nineteenth century—Darwin, Marx, Nietzsche, Saussure, Peirce, 
and Veblen— all of whom might be considered “shadows” of the Enlightenment. 
And while most of the ideas it brings together have thus been around for more than 
one hundred years, it offers a condensation, synthesis, extension, and—perhaps 
most importantly—perturbation of such ideas. In part, it is meant to meaningfully 
reframe the relations among the subfi elds of anthropology: linguistic, biological, 
cultural, and archaeological. In part, it is meant to show the nonreductive relations 
between the concerns of anthropologists and a variety of allied disciplines: lin-
guistics and psychology, cognitive and computer science, evolutionary biology and 
complexity theory. 2 And, in part, it is meant to introduce and synthesize some of 
the key concerns of this entire book. 
 SECTION CONTENTS 
 Section 2 theorizes two kinds of relationality, selection and signifi cance, and shows 
their symmetry and complementarity. Section 3 shows how such processes may 
be concatenated to describe communication between individuals, be it of humans 
engaging in discursive practices or animals engaging in signal responses. Section 4 
shows how such processes may be enminded and embodied to describe cognitive 
and affective processes within individuals. Section 5 generalizes sections 3 and 4, 
showing how the very same process of signifi cance and selection may be framed 
differently by investigators working with different units on disparate scales. Section 
6 shows the relation between these processes and classic understandings of natural 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   16
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   16
7/23/2012   9:25:27 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:27 PM

 
Biosemiosis, Technocognition, and Sociogenesis 
17 
and artifi cial selection as well as their connection to less-celebrated processes of 
sieving and serendipity. Section 7 shows the relation between these processes and 
material artifacts, such as hammers and logic gates. Sections 8 and 9 show how all 
the foregoing relations between relations play out in any ensemble of signifying and 
selecting agents, focusing on the network of channels, or infrastructure, that inter-
connects such agents. And the conclusion relates these concerns to evolution- and 
epidemiology-inspired theories of culture. 
 2.  Signifi cance and Selection 
 Two processes need to be defi ned: selection and signifi cance. If our stereotype of 
the fi rst process is a tool, our stereotype of the second process is a symbol. More 
specifi cally, selection involves an agent wielding a means for the sake of an end. 
And signifi cance involves a sign standing for an object and giving rise to an inter-
pretant. As will be seen, each process makes reference to three distinct entities; each 
turns on a relation between relations; and each is intimately linked to the other. 
 We may start with a simple example. To understand  selection , focus on the 
bottom half of Figure 2.6. Let S be the sight of a predator, I be a fl ight from that 
predator, and A be the prey that both sees and fl ees. In other words, there is a sensed 
event (S), there is an instigated event (I), and there is a sensing and instigating agent 
(A). We may say that I makes sense in the context of S from the standpoint of A. 
 To understand  signifi cance , focus on the top half of Figure 2.6. Let O be the 
predator, S be a sign of that predator (as sensed by the prey), and I be an interpre-
tant of this sign (as instigated by the prey). In other words, there is a sign event (S), 
there is an interpretant event (I), and there is a signed and interpreted object (O). 
We may say that I makes sense in the context of S given the properties of O. 
 For present purposes, being an  agent means two things. 3 First, A is capable 
of sensation and instigation. More specifi cally, A is capable of being affected by 
events (that have causes outside of A) and capable of being causal of events (that 
I
S
A
O
 FIGURE 2.6:  Selecting Agent and Signifi cant Object 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   17
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   17
7/23/2012   9:25:27 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:27 PM

 18 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
have effects outside of A). Second, A is capable of selecting or capable of being 
selected. In other words, to say something makes sense from the standpoint of A 
is to say that there is a reason that A would have selected it or have been selected 
for it. Selection may range from natural selection through cultural sanctioning to 
self-conscious intention. It may involve processes as “dumb” as brute sieving and 
as “intelligent” as rational choice, as embodied as heeding an affordance and as 
enminded as proving a theorem. 
 Objects are dependent on agents. In particular, an object is just a bundle of 
features (or projected propensities to exhibit certain features, as per our defi nition 
of kinds in chapter 1) relative to which an agent’s sensations and instigations make 
sense (given some process of selection). In other words, an agent senses a feature (S) 
that is reliably correlated with an entity (O) that has a host of other features, and the 
event that the agent instigates (I) makes sense only in the context of one or more of 
those other features. Thus, while one may see that it is a bear from its size and shape, 
one fl ees from it because of its speed and strength. 
 More carefully defi ned, the key idea is this:  Given the relation between the O-S 
relation and the I-O relation (which may be external to A), the A-I relation makes 
sense in the context of the S-A relation (from the standpoint of A) . This demon-
strates the indivisibility of organism and environment (and, indeed, the very obvia-
tion of this distinction): There exist two relations between relations (the dotted lines 
in Figure 2.6) neither of which may be understood without reference to the other. It 
also demonstrates the symmetry between our theory of the object (and our theory 
of signifi cance) and our theory of the agent (and our theory of selection). Selection 
and signifi cance are concomitant processes. 
 This last point deserves a longer discussion. Terms such as  meaning and 
 information  are usually defi ned in terms of an O-S relation.  4   In particular, S is reli-
ably correlated with O within some domain (or is at least projected to be, given the 
ontology of the interpreting agent) such that knowing something about S allows 
one to know something about O. Phrased in Peircean terms (1955a, 1998a [1903]), 
S is both an index and an icon of O. As an index, it is causally or normatively 
connected to O (no matter how long or short, simple or complicated, the chain 
of connections). As an  icon , it has properties in common with O (at the very least 
its time and place, with more or less leeway and displacement). Thus, the causal 
and normative domain may be relatively large or small (spatiotemporally) and rela-
tively complicated or simple (interactionally). 5 What matters is that the correlation 
between qualities be reliable enough for A’s selection to make sense. 
 However, S could provide information about every single causal and norma-
tive process it is caught up in so that to defi ne information in terms of only the O-S 
relation is not helpful. As shown above, to specify the O-S relation one must specify 
the I-O relation, and to specify the relation between these relations one must specify 
the relation between the S-A relation and the A-I relation. That is, the properties 
of objects make sense only relative to the interests of agents. Moreover, given the 
fact that much selection is ultimately grounded in natural selection, we may also 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   18
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   18
7/23/2012   9:25:27 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:27 PM

 
Biosemiosis, Technocognition, and Sociogenesis 
19 
say that agents make sense only in the context of objects. In short, there are no iso-
lated environments and organisms, there are only  envorganisms.  This last point is, 
to be sure, well rehearsed by scholars such as Darwin, Uexkull, Gibson, Heidegger, 
and Lewontin. 6 The point here is to frame it in an explicit theory of meaning, and, 
thereby, to show its natural emergence from more basic, and more well-defi ned, 
processes. 
 3.  Communication between Conspecifi cs 
 Communication between conspecifi cs is readily described. (See Figure 2.7.) Suppose 
A 1 and A 2 are genetically related agents (such as shrieking monkeys or thumping 
bunnies). 7 Suppose O 1 is a predator, S 1 is the sight of that predator, and I 1 is a dan-
ger call. And suppose S 2  (= I 1 ) is the sound of that call, I 2 is fl eeing from the context 
of that call, and O 2 is just O 1 as stood for by a different sign. Indeed, just as O 1 
and O 2  are essentially instances of the same object (or two relatively overlapping 
objects) as stood for by different signs (the latter indexically “inherits” its meaning 
from the former), A 1 and A 2 are really instances of the same agent as instantiated 
in different individuals. Genetically speaking, they are both parts of a single  unit of 
accountability  (a concept we will come back to). With communication of this kind, 
an individual not only gets eyes in the back of its head, but it also gets legs detached 
from its body. The sensing and instigating agent is extended. 
 We may examine the animal danger call from several perspectives. First, what is 
crucial about this example is that both interpretation and signifi cation were selected 
for. That is, not only was A 1 ’s interpretation of S 1  (as well as A 2 ’s interpretation of 
S 2 ) selected for, but also A 1 ’s expression of S 2 . Here then we have made the critical 
move from natural meaning to  non-natural meaning , from “natural information” to 
“intentional information.” However, unlike Grice’s classical formulation of this dis-
tinction (1989a), which was focused on signs that were selected on interactional time 
scales by intentional human agents, we are focused on information that was selected 
S1
A1
A2
I2
O1
O2
I1
S2
 FIGURE 2.7:  Communication between Conspecifi cs 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   19
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   19
7/23/2012   9:25:27 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:27 PM

 20 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
on evolutionary (and historical) time scales by agents that may not be intentional 
(or may have been intending other effects). 8 While the predator’s giving off signs of 
itself to the prey was not selected for (in the case of the bear example, above), one 
prey’s giving out signs of a predator to another prey was selected for. This is what 
it means to say that the O 1 -S 1  relation constitutes natural or nonselected informa-
tion and the O 2 -S 2 relation constitutes non-natural or selected information. Many 
human speech acts are the exemplar of non-natural information insofar as they are 
addressed or intentionally expressed for the sake of others’ interpretants of them (a 
point we will return to,expand on, and complicate in section 4). 
 Second, the danger call has  roots and  fruits : it is simultaneously the interpre-
tant (I 1 ) of a sign (S 1 ) and a sign (S 2 ) with an interpretant (I 2 ). In this way, it is 
both retentive and protentive, oriented to both the past and the future. Moreover, 
insofar as it was selected, it may fail in either of these functions: any one of the 
sign-object-interpretant relations may go awry. Just as a sign may (be taken to) 
stand for the wrong object, a sign may also give rise to the wrong interpretant. In 
this way, to return to our parasites, the  tokens instantiated may fail to conform 
to the  types selected. In the tradition of Austin (2003 [1955]), one might compare 
human speech acts, and interactional moves more generally (Goffman 1981a, 1983), 
whose immediate roots and fruits may be framed as particular kinds (say, mental 
states and social statuses); 9 and which, by failing to have the right roots and fruits 
on a given occasion, may be inappropriate in context and ineffective on context. 
 Third, the  mapping  between the object (O 2 ) and the sign (S 2 ), and the  remap-
ping between the sign (S 2 ) and the interpretant (I 2 ), is relatively simple. The mapping 
in question has one kind of content (there is a single type of object to be stood for 
by a single type of sign: snake here-now => scream here-now ). However, one could imag-
ine a more elaborate mapping, depending on whether the object was a terrestrial, 
arboreal, or airborne predator. And the remapping in question has one kind of 
mode (there is a single type of interpretant to be created by a single type of sign: 
scream here-now  => scram here-now ). However, one could imagine a more elaborate remap-
ping, depending on whether the interpretant should be freezing, fl eeing, or fi ghting. 
One might contrast the relative complexity of human speech acts, as traditionally 
understood, whose mode consists of an illocutionary force (e.g.,  I order you to . . .  ) 
and whose content consists of a proposition (e.g.,   . . . shut the door ), both of which 
may be subject to enormous variation. 10 
 4.  The Organization of Cognitive Processes 
 Just as our diagram may be extended to account for objects and agents that are 
“larger” than the individual, it may also be extended to account for objects and 
agents that are “smaller” than the individual. As an example, we may focus on a few 
stereotypic properties of  mental states as a particularly important sort of kind. 11 
(See Figure 2.8.) A sensation (S 1 ) is caused by a state of affairs (O 1 ) and indexically 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   20
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   20
7/23/2012   9:25:27 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:27 PM

 
Biosemiosis, Technocognition, and Sociogenesis 
21 
(or “causally”) gives rise to a perception (I 1 ). A perception (S 2 ) represents a state of 
affairs (O 2 ) and inferentially (or “logically”) gives rise to a belief (I 2 ). 12   A belief (S 3 ) 
represents a state of affairs (O 3 ) and inferentially gives rise to an intention (I 3 ). And 
an intention (S 4 ) represents a state of affairs (O 4 ) and indexically gives rise to an 
instigation (I 4 ), which may itself either immediately constitute or eventually cause 
the state of affairs so represented. In other words, between the original “sensation” 
and the ultimate “instigation” may be any number of other cognitive processes, 
themselves frameable as signifi cant and selected processes. 
 It is worth discussing in detail the intentions underlying noncommunicative 
actions—opening a door, making a U-turn, scratching one’s chin, and so on. In 
particular, an intention (S 4 ) represents a state of affairs (O 4 ). For example, one 
intends  to start the engine . It indexically gives rise to an instigation (I 4 ) that either 
immediately constitutes or eventually causes the state of affairs represented. For 
example, whereas the agent’s instigation ends at turning the key (I 4 ), this is itself the 
cause of a further effect, such as the engine’s actually starting (which is mediated by 
considerations outside the agent’s immediate control: wiring, batteries, etc.). And 
the intention (S 4 ) is itself the conclusion (I 3 ) of an inference involving a contextual-
ized belief (S 3 ) and a contextualizing pro-attitude (such as a desire, obligation, or 
value). 13   For example, one believes that starting the engine is a means to driving to 
the cinema as an end, and one wants to drive to the cinema (because one wants to 
see a movie, and so on). This is what it means to say an intention has inferential 
roots (practical reasoning) and indexical fruits (causal chaining). 
 Crucially, none of these steps need be consciously represented. And our evi-
dence for their existence comes from attending to unsatisfi ed outcomes, or parasitic 
processes more generally: the times one turned the key (but the battery was dead); 
the times one started the car (but couldn’t remember where one wanted to go or 
why one wanted to go there); the times one’s fi ngers slipped (in turning the key); the 
times one turned the key and started the car (but unintentionally so); and so on. At 
the very least, all are but potential moves in explicitly articulated and temporally 
retrospective rationalizations. 
S1
A1
A2
I2
O1
O2
I1
S2
S3
A3
A4
I4
O3
O4
I3
S4
Perception
Belief
Intention
Sensation
Instigation
 FIGURE 2.8:  Indexical and Inferential Enchaining of Cognitive Processes 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   21
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   21
7/23/2012   9:25:27 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:27 PM

 22 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
 Though not shown in Figure 2.8, a belief (S 3 ) may also give rise to any number 
of other beliefs before giving rise to an intention (S 4 ). That is, the “innards” of such 
a process could be extended indefi nitely. Moreover, the instigation (I 4 ), or whatever 
state of affairs it ultimately brings into being, may itself constitute an object that 
causes a sensation, and so such processes could continue indefi nitely. That is, the 
“output” of one such process could become the “input” of another such process, ad 
infi nitum. Cognitive processes are the roots and fruits of other cognitive processes. 
 In particular, the agent (A), shown at different stages in the process (A 1 , A 2 , 
A 3 , A 4 ), is not a homunculus. Rather, it might be thought of as a set of “devices” 
that have been selected to process representations in a manner that is causally and 
logically coherent (from the standpoint of that agent). 14 Such selection may involve 
neurological processes selected for on evolutionary time scales as much as cultural 
processes selected for on historical time scales as much as personal processes selected 
for on biographical time scales as much as intersubjective processes selected for on 
interactional time scales. Moreover, given the potential enchaining of outputs to 
inputs, maximally intensifi ed with the introduction of speech acts, and discursive 
practices more generally, the agencies involved are as likely to be interpersonal as 
intrapersonal. In short, the relations (between relations between relations) intro-
duced above may embed and scale indefi nitely. Kockelman (2010a) uses a similar 
framework to analyze mental states and speech acts, or cognitive representations 
and discursive practices, in all their indexical and inferential detail, focusing on 
human-specifi c modes of intersubjectivity and agency. This work also attempts to 
account for, leverage, and critique the range of folk-psychological assumptions that 
are built into this kind of framework—in particular, the way they are mediated by 
particular semiotic ontologies. 
 Indeed, if you are wary of cognitive or enminded processes (in the context of 
human speech acts, themselves framed in intentionalist terms), you may focus on 
affective or embodied ones. For example, the facial expressions described by Darwin 
(1965 [1872]), or the affect programs studied by Ekman (2006), are frameable in 
similar terms—from their roots, involving an appraisal of a situation (qua “sensa-
tion”), through autonomic nervous system arousal to their fruits, involving a set of 
behaviors (qua “instigation”). Moreover, whether the agent is framed in enminded, 
intentionalist terms (e.g., as a believing and intending “subject” via Descartes) or in 
an embodied, habitus-like idiom (e.g., as a circumspecting and associating “Dasein” 
via Heidegger) is of no concern here. As will be taken up in section 4, whether the 
focus is representations of the world (chapter 5) or residence in the world (chapter 
4) there is signifi cance and selection. To be sure, the time scales on which selection 
occurs may be different, the degrees of agency of the individual may be smaller, the 
signifi cant features of objects may be more constrained, and the unit of accounta-
bility may be larger. Accounts of affect and embodiment are no less dependent on 
signifi cance and selection than accounts of cognition and mind. 
 In short, human cognitive processes and semiotic practices are easily compared 
to (and contrasted with) animal signal systems. One assimilating and accommodating 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   22
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   22
7/23/2012   9:25:28 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:28 PM

 
Biosemiosis, Technocognition, and Sociogenesis 
23 
agent relates to another assimilating and accommodating agent, where each of the 
agent’s interests is caught up with the other’s interests. Such interactions are shot 
through with selectional processes from evolutionary selection of cognitive capaci-
ties through historical selection of linguistic constituents to individual selection of 
actual utterances (which incorporate such constituents and actualize such capaci-
ties). Indeed, even those emblems of human cognition,  symbols  (i.e., conventional 
relations between signs and objects, which seem to be minimally motivated and max-
imally arbitrary) are subject to selection. Human-specifi c cognitive processes and lin-
guistic practices are just particularly complex modes of signifi cance and selection. 
 GRICE AND PEIRCE 
 It is worth pausing a moment to return to human-specifi c modes of intentional 
communication (or “non-natural” meaning), and to thereby link some of the con-
cerns of this section with some of the concerns of the last by synthesizing some 
insights of the two most important theorists of inference and indexicality, Peirce 
and Grice.  15 In particular, reframing Grice’s insights (1989c; and see Strawson 
1971) in a semiotic idiom, there are at least four (signifi cant) objects of interest 
in non-natural meaning: (1) My intention to direct your attention to an object (or 
bring an object to your attention); (2) The object that I direct your attention to (or 
bring to your attention); (3) My intention that you use (2), usually in conjunction 
with (1), to attend to another object; (4) The object that you come to attend to. 
 The details of this process can be looked at in several ways. In focusing on the 
relation between (2) and (4), there are two conjoined joint-attentional processes 
(recall the Peircean example from the introduction), the fi rst as means and the second 
as ends. Using some kind of pointing gesture as a sign, I direct your attention to some 
relatively concrete or proximal object (and thus relatively indexically recoverable, say, 
some gunk on the bottom of your shoe), and this object, or any of its features, is then 
used as a sign to direct your attention to some relatively abstract or distal object (and 
thus relatively inferentially recoverable, say, my desire that you take off your shoes 
before you come in). Loosely speaking, if the fi rst sign causes your head to turn, the 
second sign,  itself the object of the fi rst sign , causes your mind to search. 
 Objects (2) and (4), then, are relatively foregrounded. They are akin to what 
Peirce would call  immediate objects : objects that signs represent (and, hence, that 
exist because the sign brought some interpreter’s attention to them). 16 Objects (1) 
and (3) are, in contrast, relatively backgrounded. They are akin to what Peirce 
would call  dynamic objects : objects that give rise to the existence of signs (and, 
hence, are causes of, or reasons for, the signer having expressed them). In other 
words, whenever someone directs our attention there are (at least) two objects: as 
a foregrounded, immediate object, there is whatever they direct our attention to 
(2); and, as a backgrounded, dynamic object, there is their intention to direct our 
attention (1). Grice’s key insight is that, for a wide range of semiotic processes, 
my interpretant of your dynamic object is a condition for my interpretant of your 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   23
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   23
7/23/2012   9:25:28 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:28 PM

 24 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
immediate object. In other words, learning of your intention to communicate is a 
key resource for learning what you intend to communicate. 
 A crucial commitment of both Peirce and Grice is that communication, and 
meaning more generally, does not rely purely on codes (in, say, the stereotypic 
Saussurian sense, qua relatively conventional pairings between signs and objects) 
but is highly inferential or abductive in some of the ways just described. What is 
not stressed enough is the simple fact that the key constraint guiding our indexical 
and inferential searches within such concrete and abstract spaces (such that we may 
interpret our interlocutor’s signs correctly, or at least more or less adequately) is 
context, co-occurring text, and culture (and thus relatively intersubjectively shared 
semiotic ontologies of various scales). And so no matter how sophisticated your 
formal model of inference and cognitive processing is (for example, relevance the-
ory and formalist approaches to pragmatics more generally), the real devil remains 
in the nonreductive details of such contents—themselves often best analyzed by 
classic holistic interpretive techniques from disciplines such as discourse analysis, 
cultural anthropology, textual hermeneutics, and social history. 
 FREUD AND GRICE 
 Note, then, that the preceding section is, in some sense, a generalization of Grice-like 
ideas in which the dynamic object (or “communicative intention”) in question need 
not be evinced in human agents only on interactional time scales. For example, one 
way to playfully reread the Freudian oeuvre is to reframe repressed wishes as a kind 
of dynamic object. Such a dynamic object relates to a dream (parapraxis, neurosis, 
etc.) as cause to effect, in which the dream itself has an immediate object (whatever 
it most transparently points to, for example, the manifest dream content), and this 
object itself constitutes a sign of a more mediate object (the latent dream content), 
which can be inferred only by reference to the dynamic object (repressed wish) that 
set the whole process in motion. 
 More generally, the immediate object of any sign can itself constitute a sign of 
a more mediate object, itself easily attended to (by an interpreting agent) only by 
reference to the dynamic object (or original cause) of the initial sign. In this wide 
framing, “ostensive-inferential communication” of the Gricean sort is very similar 
to “psychoanalysis” of the Freudian sort—a fact that is destined to be repressed 
by neo-Griceans. Such a rich account of interpretation, suitably reframed (as well 
as widened as to ontological specifi city), is perhaps Freud’s most prescient, lasting, 
and unconscious contribution. 
 5.  Framing 
 The last two sections brought the issue of  framing to the fore, namely, how the 
very same process of signifi cance and selection may be described, diagrammed, or 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   24
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   24
7/23/2012   9:25:28 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:28 PM

 
Biosemiosis, Technocognition, and Sociogenesis 
25 
theorized in a wide variety of relatively compatible ways (Kockelman 2005). In sec-
tion 2, for example, we showed the ways in which the same event, qua sign, may be 
reliably correlated with a range of other events, qua objects. In section 3, we exam-
ined an animal-signal system from the standpoint of two signing and interpreting 
agents, and from the standpoint of a single agent composed of two conspecifi cs. 
Moreover, the very same event (the uttering of a predator cry) was treated as an 
interpretant from one agent’s perspective and as a sign from the other’s perspective. 
In section 4, for example, we opened up the agent, diagramming the putative men-
tal states—themselves signifi cant and selected processes—that lie between any two 
publicly available speech acts or signal-responses. And in chapter 1, we showed the 
ways indices, kinds, individuals, agents, and worlds could be reciprocally reframed 
in terms of each other. Thus, just as one can focus on smaller or larger kinds of 
agents (which may overlap), one can focus on public or private kinds of processes 
(which may enchain). And just as one can frame the same event as an object, sign, 
or interpretant, one can focus on either the roots or fruits of an event. 
 Framing may always creatively refi gure, and thereby potentially obviate, the rela-
tions presupposed by any particular frame (and thus the reifi cations such relations are 
otherwise subject to) . 17 
 To take an extended example from my own subdiscipline, one may take speech 
acts (or discursive moves more generally) to be the roots and fruits of mental states, 
or one may take mental states (or cognitive processes more generally) to be the roots 
and fruits of speech acts. Either view is tenable, like the two faces of a Necker Cube. 
In the context of such variant frames (and, in particular, their concatenations), two 
brilliant and antagonistic traditions have arisen (alluded to at the end of the last 
section). On the one hand, there are those who argue that “meaning is public” (and 
tend to focus on public representations, such as speech acts, and discursive practices 
more generally). On the other hand, there are those who argue that “meaning is 
private” (and tend to focus on private representations, such as mental states, and 
cognitive processes more generally). The fi rst group, best exemplifi ed by conversa-
tional analysis (with roots in George Herbert Mead, as practiced by scholars such 
as Harvey Sacks and Emanuel Schegloff), has attempted to deal with communi-
cation without reference to mental states. Such a tradition treats speech acts, or 
interactional moves more generally, as begetting speech acts, never mind any inter-
mediate mental states. And the second group, exemplifi ed by relevance theory (with 
roots in Paul Grice, as undertaken by scholars such as Dan Sperber and Diedre 
Wilson), has attempted to deal with communication with primary attention to men-
tal states and minimal reference to actual interactions, or all the dirty little details 
of semiotic processes more generally. Perhaps not surprisingly, to their detractors 
the former has remained a highly “empirical” discipline (meaning not very theo-
retical), and the latter has remained a highly “theoretical” discipline (meaning not 
very empirical). 
 In short, the same event may be understood as a component of different pro-
cesses of signifi cance and selection depending on the interests of an actor or the 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   25
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   25
7/23/2012   9:25:28 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:28 PM

 26 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
stance of an observer (themselves both selecting agents caught up in  signifi cant 
objects). In particular, what is a sign-component in one frame may be an 
interpretant-component in another frame (giving rise to a future-oriented versus 
a past-oriented perspective). What is an object-component in one frame may be 
a sign-component in another frame (lower-order versus higher-order perspective). 
Figure 2.6 may be iterated to produce Figure 2.7 or Figure 2.7 may be subsumed 
by stretching Figure 2.6 (proximal versus distal perspective). One may switch from 
a private to a public frame (actor-centered versus observer-centered perspective). 
And fi nally, when analyzing some complicated process, some agents and objects 
may be treated as fi gures, thirds, or mediators (often because the mapping from 
sign/sensation to interpretant/instigation is relatively fl uid or poorly understood), 
while others may be treated as grounds, seconds, or intermediaries (often because 
this mapping is relatively fi xed or carefully studied).  Our analyses of signifi cance and 
selection are themselves signifi cant and selected . 
 The issue with framing, then, is not so much what does a sign stand for or give 
rise to, or how do an agent’s instigations make sense in the context of its sensa-
tions, which are often essentially empirical questions. Nor is it so much an issue 
of whether such questions are answered correctly or incorrectly by a particular 
investigator nor whether they count as “knowledge” or “ideology” to an epistemic 
community. (Though to be sure, various analytic approaches often relate to each 
other as Flatland to Textureville, one subsuming the others as to scale of purview, 
degree of theoretical sophistication, wealth of empirical backing, scope of practi-
cal applications, and so forth.) The crux issue is which time scale, empirical locus, 
vector of causality, agency, or objectivity is most relevant to the investigator  given 
their own semiotic ontologies . Does one zoom in to focus on cognitive processes or 
neurological signals? Does one zoom out to focus on implicated meanings rather 
than encoded ones or distal ends rather than immediate ones? Does one look back-
ward toward the roots of an event or forward toward its fruits? Does one ask ques-
tions about selection on interactional, biographical, historical, or evolutionary time 
scales? Does one focus on agents that are neurons, organs, instruments, individuals, 
dyads, groups, or species? 
 Framing, then, not only makes explicit the co-constructive nature of the relation 
between the organism and the environment, it also makes explicit the co-constructive 
nature of the relation between the analyst and the organism-environment relation . 18 
 On the one hand, such claims have relatively prosaic implications. For exam-
ple, much of what counts as intradisciplinary divides and interdisciplinary differ-
ences are essentially questions of framing or different ways of dividing up what are 
otherwise hopelessly complex processes of signifi cance and selection into individ-
ually manageable and institutionally fundable projects. On the other hand, such 
issues are at the center of human-specifi c modes of signifi cance and selection. For 
example, given the fact that, for humans at least, Nietzschean and Veblenian pro-
cesses are constantly parasitic on (and generative of) our semiotic practices, our 
interpretant-sign relations are tightly coupled to our object-sign relations. (Not to 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   26
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   26
7/23/2012   9:25:28 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:28 PM

 
Biosemiosis, Technocognition, and Sociogenesis 
27 
mention Marxist ones—in particular, the fact that any envorganism, or process of 
signifi cance and selection more generally, may become the use-value of a commod-
ity, and, hence, be shaped or sought for the sake of its exchange-value.) In other 
words,  how we frame our own and others’ processes of selection and signifi cance (as 
well as relations between relations more generally) is often a key factor in the creation, 
spread, and stability of those very processes . 19 
 LIFE-FRAMES AND FRAMES-OF-LIFE 
 It is worth summarizing what is perhaps the dominant frame in both cultural and 
linguistic anthropology: (1) just as the social formations studied by anthropologists 
are historically emergent and particular; (2) so are anthropologists’ epistemological 
formulations of those formations; (3) in part, this is because they too constitute 
a social formation; (4) in part, this is because both social formations are usually 
mediated, however unwittingly, by other social formations and epistemological for-
mulations, themselves historically emergent and particular, at various degrees of 
remove; and (5) only critical theorists working at the level of, say, Foucault or Marx 
are really ever witty enough to meta-formulate such meta-formations. 20 
 Note, then, that whenever we frame an event (entity, relation, process, etc.) as 
the outcome of signifi cance and selection, as much as sieving and serendipity, our 
framing of the event is itself the outcome of signifi cance and selection as much as 
sieving and serendipity (not to mention all the other relations between relations 
detailed in this chapter). In this way, both the framing of the event (entity, process, 
relation, etc.) and the event so framed are historically emergent and particular, and, 
hence, should be studied  in tandem and  as such . 
 Such moves hold for forms-of-life as much as for life-forms, not to mention that 
particular form-of-life that postulates life-forms, and that particular life-form—us 
(and those, such as chickens, with whom we are inextricably entangled)—that exists 
only as distinct forms-of-life. More pointedly, we are better off dropping received 
and problematic notions such as life-forms and forms-of-life altogether and using 
notions like  life-frames and  frames-of-life instead. The notion of framing, then, is 
meant to be a term of art. Frames enclose as they disclose, reify as they reveal, and, 
hence, their refl exive centrality to this project (Kockelman 1999, 2007a). I hope this 
way of framing framing invites scholars to inquire into the aesthetics and ontolo-
gies of such processes as much as their pragmatics and epistemologies. 
 6.  Artifi cial and Natural Selection, Sieving and Serendipity 
 It may now be argued that the terms  artifi cial selection and  natural selection are 
 misnomers: such processes involve signifi cance as much as selection, and they are 
readily described using the foregoing framework. To treat artifi cial selection fi rst, 
take the object (O) to be an ensemble of genotypes (or distribution of alleles) within 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   27
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   27
7/23/2012   9:25:28 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:28 PM

 28 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
an interbreeding population. And take the agent (A) to be an individual (or group 
of individuals) who are interested in transforming the genotype of the population 
over a series of generations. This agent senses aspects of the phenotype, which are 
signs (S) of the genotype, being reliably correlated with it by causal processes of 
development. And this agent instigates actions (such as selective breeding, isola-
tion, etc.), which are essentially interpretants (I) of those signs: on the one hand, 
they point to the genome (by causal processes of inheritance and reproduction) as 
reliably as the phenotype; on the other hand, they make sense in the context of the 
signs (and the objects these index) given the interests of the agents. 
 In particular, selection at this level may often be understood in individualist 
intentional terms: The agent may have beliefs about how the sign is caused by the 
object (qua generation N) as well as beliefs about how the interpretant is causal 
of the object (qua generation N + 1); and the agent may have desires about what 
the sign, and, thus, the object (and, thus, ultimately, the interpretant), should be. 
To invoke Weber (1978; and see chapter 6), these desires, however tacit, may be 
grounded in instrumental values (e.g., the price that a petunia of a certain color, 
size, or shape will fetch) as well as existential values (e.g., an aesthetic sensibil-
ity regarding what constitutes the ideal dachshund) as well as traditional values 
(e.g., achieving results consistent with those of one’s mentors). And these beliefs 
(about the causal processes underlying the mechanism, qua means) in conjunction 
with these desires (about the outcome of those processes, qua ends) may lead to 
an intention that gives rise to an instigation, for example,  I shall breed this one with 
that one . 
 To be sure, the beliefs may be untrue and the desires may be unsound, such that 
the outcome in the short run or long run may be bizarre, self-defeating, unintended, 
and even unimaginable. Moreover, different agents can have radically different 
ontologies (or “theories”), however tacit, about the object and its causal connec-
tions to what they sense and instigate and yet still do so effectively. Consider, for 
example, the theories of Darwin or Mendel, an American farmer or a Mayan peas-
ant. Indeed, it may even be the case that the selection was entirely unintentional, 
occurring by processes akin to sieving and serendipity, as will be discussed below. 
 Note, then, that it is not just the case that one cannot offer an account of sig-
nifi cance without an account of selection; it is also the case that one cannot offer an 
account of selection without an account of signifi cance . 
 SIEVING AND SERENDIPITY 
 Indeed, it is possible to push these ideas further, showing the similarity between 
the relations embodied in these diagrams and processes such as natural selection. 
For example, we may take the object (O) to be the ensemble of genomes (or fre-
quency of alleles) within a population of (interbreeding) organisms. Through the 
causal pathways of development (however complicated), this object gives rise to an 
ensemble of phenotypes, or distribution of traits (S). The environment then acts as 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   28
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   28
7/23/2012   9:25:28 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:28 PM

 
Biosemiosis, Technocognition, and Sociogenesis 
29 
an agent (A) that sieves through these phenotypes so that some fraction (I) manage 
to survive, meet, and mate. Finally, through the causal pathways of reproduction, 
however complicated, these survivors then give rise to the ensemble of genomes 
(O-prime) that constitute the next generation. 
 Notice from this example that the ensemble of genomes is being framed as the 
object, having a loose identity (truly a family resemblance) with itself over gener-
ations. And notice that this object is simultaneously instigative of a new ensemble 
of phenotypes (via developmental pathways) and sensitive to an old ensemble of 
phenotypes (via reproductive pathways). To be sure, it is probably wrong to say that 
the environment “senses” and “instigates,” and thereby treat it as an agent, however 
original or derivative, as something that was selected to sense and instigate in pre-
cisely this way. Instead, we may invert the frame for a moment, such that what the 
organism-qua-agent instigates (via developmental pathways) and senses (via repro-
ductive pathways) is perhaps best treated as the input and the output, respectively, 
of an environment-qua-object that is essentially a  sieve, giving rise to consequences 
for no other reason than  serendipity . 21 
 For example, the environment might involve a gradient (constituted by gravity, 
temperature, illumination, etc.), and so individuals who make it further along the 
gradient (e.g., up the hill or into the winter or toward the light) are more likely to 
reproduce and thereby contribute to the next generation. Thus, while we may say 
that some aspect of some organism was naturally selected (by complex processes of 
sieving), that which sieves is not necessarily, of course, an artifact, or consciously 
designed instrument, that has this selecting of phenotypes as its intended function. 
 (Though it should be noted that the environment of any organism is, in part, 
constituted by other organisms, themselves selected. Moreover, the environment 
of any organism is also, in part, constituted by the products of that organism as 
well as the products of other organisms—from bat excrement to bird nests, from 
shade to oxygen. This means that whatever is doing the sieving may itself have been 
selected—though not necessarily to sieve in this manner. Moreover, one should not 
discount the possibility that an ability to be sieved in such a way was selected for. In 
short, it is just as easy to underestimate the degree of signifi cance and selection in 
the world, qua reifi cation, as it is to overestimate it, qua fetishization.) 
 Such selection is, as it should be, merely a dumb “letting through,” and, hence, 
the idea of agent as a sieve operating for reasons of serendipity. Nonetheless, note 
that this letting through is fundamentally relational: It is not a function of the phe-
notype per se, but rather a function of the phenotype’s relation to the affordances 
of the environment, a point we’ll take up below. And notice that this relation may 
turn precisely on the sensory and instigatory capabilities of the population of 
organisms as phenotypes: the better they can sense and instigate within an environs 
(i.e., be agentive), and the better these sensations and instigations take into account 
the “real” features of objects (qua signifi cance), the better they can forge up those 
gradients to reproduce; and so what is selected by brute sieving may be precisely 
nonbrutish selectivity and nonarbitrary signifi cance. In this way, the processes 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   29
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   29
7/23/2012   9:25:29 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:29 PM

 30 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
represented by this diagram act as an initial cause of the processes represented by 
the other diagrams. Signifi cance and selection are best friends with, if not bedfel-
lows of, sieving and serendipity. 
 7.  Lawn Mowers and Logic Gates 
 Through the work of psychologists such as Vygotsky (1978) and philosophers such 
as Austin (2003 [1955]), it has long been known that symbols are tools. Less well 
understood are the various ways that instruments are semiotic processes, a point we 
may now consider. 
 In this view, an instrument is not a material artifact per se (say, the confi g-
uration of wood and steel that we call a “hammer”). Rather, an instrument is a 
relational process of selection and signifi cance. (See Table 2.1 [middle row].) In par-
ticular, the sign is the confi guration of wood and steel that may be sensed by an 
agent. The interpretant is an action instigated by the agent (say, hitting a nail). And 
the object is the function of the instrument: both the form of the tool (qua sign) 
and the wielding of the form (qua interpretant) point to this function. The agent, 
then, is simply someone who can sense and instigate, such that what is instigated 
(pounding in a nail) makes sense in the context of what is sensed (the assemblage of 
wood and steel) from the standpoint of the agent given the features of the object. 
 Whether or not the agent wields the form for the sake of its creator’s intended 
function is not that important: sometimes the intended and actual functions con-
verge, sometimes they diverge. An agent with different interests (say, someone una-
ble to reach the small of their back to scratch) could, of course, fi nd (or, rather, 
“frame”) a very different function in the same assemblage of wood and steel. 
Though, to be sure, not anything goes. To use a distinction that will be called into 
question in chapter 3, both causes and norms regiment the possible interpretants 
of material objects, guiding what counts as appropriate and effective uses (norma-
tively) and what counts as feasible and effi cacious uses (causally). For example, try 
pounding in a nail with a diaper and you will be sanctioned by “nature,” and try 
wearing a diaper as a hat and you will be sanctioned by “culture.” 
 To be sure, the same assemblage of wood and steel can enter into more obvi-
ous processes of selection and signifi cance. In one framing, for example, such an 
assemblage may be the object referred to by a word such as “hammer.” In another 
framing, it may be a natural or noncommunicative sign that the one holding it has a 
certain skill or plies a certain trade. In another framing, it may be an emblem of sol-
idarity, a sign of manual labor, or a symbol of status. In another framing, it may be 
a sign that some group had contact with another group, was connected to a trading 
route, or possessed the knowledge to mine a certain ore. 22 In another framing, along 
with an ensemble of other indices (such as other tools, in some particular arrange-
ment), it might be a sign that someone was building a particular kind of contrap-
tion (or was plotting revenge or had lost their mind). Finally, this assemblage of 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   30
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   30
7/23/2012   9:25:29 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:29 PM

 
Biosemiosis, Technocognition, and Sociogenesis 
31 
wood and steel may not be just a sign or object, it may also be the interpretant 
of a prior relation of signifi cance and selection. For example, just as an action of 
wielding a hammer may constitute an interpretant of the function of a hammer, a 
hammer may itself constitute an interpretant of the purchase afforded by the wood 
and metal that it incorporates. That is, a larger instrument, as a whole, provides 
an interpretant of the smaller instruments and affordances that it incorporates as 
parts: its sign-component (or “form”) relates to their sign-components as whole to 
part; and its object-component (or “function”) relates to their object-components 
as ends to means. 
 But instruments enter into a more interesting relation of signifi cance and selec-
tion. In particular, instruments are not just signs, objects, and interpretants and 
instruments are not just means and ends; instruments are also agents that process 
signs to produce interpretants, however derivatively. This is true not just of relatively 
complicated instruments (such as computers and robots), it is also true of relatively 
simple instruments (such as hammers and lawn mowers), as may now be seen. 
 In particular, while it is perhaps too much to say that a lawn mower “senses” 
and “instigates,” lawn mowers are also agents—not because they select per se but 
because they were selected (as per the defi nition of an agent in section 2). In par-
ticular, a lawn mower was selected (in part, through some original process of fabri-
cation and, in part, through some subsequent process of pushing) to take in uncut 
grass (qua sensation) and to turn out cut grass (qua instigation). (Indeed, as will 
be shown in chapter 3, such selectional agency is distributed across a long lineage 
of envorganisms, which include designer, fabricator, instrument-wielding actor, and 
actor-wielded instrument, among others.) And this process makes sense only from 
the standpoint of the agent given the features of the object. 
 So if we treat a lawn mower as something that senses and instigates, however 
derivatively, that which is sensed must itself be a sign and that which is instigated 
must itself be an interpretant, such that each point to that set of correlated features 
we call an “object.” This means that we may frame grass as a semiotic process as 
surely as hammers—but perhaps best understood as an affordance rather than an 
TABLE 2.1
Material Culture and Semiotic Processes
 Semiotic Process 
 Sign 
 Object 
 Some Possible Interpretants 
 Affordance 
Natural Feature
Purchase
Action That Heeds Feature, or Instrument That 
Incorporates Feature (in Light of the Purchase 
It Provides)
 Instrument 
Artifi ced Entity
Function
Action That Wields Entity, or Instrument That 
Incorporates or Complements Entity (in Light of 
the Function It Serves)
 Action 
Controlled Behavior
Purpose
Action That Reacts to Behavior, Instrument 
That Is Created by Behavior, or Instrument That 
Complements Behavior (in Light of the Purpose 
It Undertakes)
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   31
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   31
7/23/2012   9:25:29 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:29 PM

 32 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
instrument. In particular, the sign is a set of natural features that may be sensed, 
the object is a set of purchases provided by those features (or something that relia-
bly correlates with those features), and key interpretants are actions that heed those 
features because of the purchases they provide. (See Table 2.1 [fi rst row].) This is a 
retheorization of Gibson’s famous notion of affordances (1986 [1979]) in terms of 
more basic processes of signifi cance and selection. 
 Of course, different agents, in different contexts, may fi nd (or frame) different 
purchases (qua objects) in the same features (qua signs). For example, one may use 
the same grassy fi eld to play golf or feed sheep. Lawn mowers, then, are oriented 
toward a particular subset of the purchases provided by (or ontologically project-
able onto) grass. For example, with their blades they are oriented to the fact that 
grass allows cutting by certain shaped things; with their wheels they are oriented to 
the fact that uncut grass affords passage for pushing; with their handles they are ori-
ented to the fact that human hands will be doing the pushing; and so on. While it is 
well known from the work of Gibson (1986 [1979]) and Uexkull (1926) that an envi-
ronment has different purchases depending on the agent that senses and instigates 
within it, it is also true that an environment provides different purchases for the very 
same agent depending on the instruments that they are currently wielding and the 
actions they are currently undertaking. To generalize the key Boasian insight: one 
both apperceives (or ap-senses) and apintends (or ap-instigates) through one’s instru-
ments, be they “tools” or “symbols,” actions or roles, affordances or identities. 
 INTRODUCTION TO EMBEDDEDNESS 
 It is worth pausing a moment to make clear the foundational importance of holism 
as a staunchly nonreductive analytic stance and to relate some of the foregoing 
issues to phenomenological and textual concerns. There is  incorporation : certain 
signs, as parts, make sense only relative to other signs, as wholes.  23   For example, to 
understand the meaning of a word, we may need to know the sentence in which it 
occurs (Frege 1955); and to understand the meaning of a sentence, we may need to 
know the speech genre in which it occurs (Bakhtin 1986). There is complementa-
tion: Certain signs, as fi gures, make sense only relative to other signs, as grounds. 
For example, to know who “I” refers to may require that we know who is speak-
ing, qua context (Jakobson 1990), and to know who “he” refers to may require 
that we know who was previously spoken about, qua co-occurring text (Halliday 
and Hasan 1976). And there is creation: Certain signs, as effects, make sense only 
relative to other signs, as causes. For example, Mead (1934) and Goffman (1981a) 
were hyper-sensitive to the ways in which the meaning of an utterance may make 
sense only in the context of its roots (for example, the utterance it is in response to) 
and fruits (for example, the utterance that will respond to it). Indeed, much of the 
work of interpretation turns on an interpreter’s constant tracking of, and tacking 
between, such causes and effects, parts and wholes, and fi gures and grounds. (Recall 
our discussion of framing more generally.) When we speak of a text (qua framed 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   32
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   32
7/23/2012   9:25:29 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:29 PM

 
Biosemiosis, Technocognition, and Sociogenesis 
33 
fi guring of indexical co-presence, as discussed in chapter 1) as having “texture,” it 
is, in part, precisely the infi nitely rich criss-crossing of such incorporating, comple-
menting, and creating relations that we are referring to. And when we described, 
at the end of section 5, some of the ways in which context, co-occurring text, and 
culture constrain indexical and inferential spaces, these were some of the relations 
we were describing. 
 Indeed, we just generalized such patterned relations from symbolic texts and 
interactional sequences to material culture, and  meaning-in-the-world more gener-
ally, as a relatively coherent (or “textured”) ensemble of affordances, instruments, 
and actions (as well as roles and identities). As an example of incorporation (qua 
part to whole), the function served by a spoke may make sense only in relation to 
(the function of) a wheel. Or the purchase provided by clay may make sense only 
in relation to a pot. As an example of complementation (qua fi gure to ground), 
the function served by a sheath may make sense only in relation to a sword. Or the 
function served by ice skates may make sense only in relation to ice. Such relations 
can be shown to structure not just modes of residence in the world (see chapter 4), 
but also representations of the world (chapter 5)—or the way mental states and 
speech acts acquire coherent contents only in relation to each other (and, indeed, 
in relation to modes of residence in the world). Moreover, such relations arguably 
hold for biological entities in the stereotypic sense (e.g., organs in relation to other 
organs within the organism and organisms in relation to other organisms within an 
ecological niche). At this level of analysis, psychologists, linguists, archaeologists, 
and biologists ( inter alia ) are engaged in very similar—and fundamentally holis-
tic and interpretive—projects. Note, then, that the classic techniques of so-called 
humanistic scholarship are often precisely the tools needed for studying “nonhu-
man,” “prehuman” and “posthuman” modes of signifi cance and selection. 
 BEING-IN-THE-WORLD 
 It is worth pausing a moment to review some of Heidegger’s ideas, insofar as they are 
a fundamental source for philosophical understandings of embeddedness. In offer-
ing his account of worldliness in  Being and Time  (1996 [1927]:59–106) Heidegger 
began by focusing on practical things, or “equipment,” such as hammers and shoes. 
To describe the nature or meaning of such things, he introduced the concept of ref-
erences (die Verweisungen), which may be loosely understood as the relation things 
have to each other by virtue of being caught up in practical concerns. With his the-
ory of references, Heidegger was critiquing a tradition that focused on representa-
tions (for example, the mental states and speech acts discussed in sections 3 and 4). 
For Heidegger, references are a more originary mode of meaning than representa-
tions: They are not meant to replace them so much as displace them. 
 To best exemplify references, we may focus on instruments. An instrument 
refers to the action it is used to undertake (what Heidegger called its “in-order-to”). 
For example, a hammer makes reference to the action of pounding in a nail. An 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   33
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   33
7/23/2012   9:25:29 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:29 PM

 34 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
instrument refers to the other instruments that complement it (in-terms-of). For 
example, a hammer makes reference to nails and wood as well as vices and benches. 
And an instrument refers to the work it will create (what-for), itself often another 
instrument. For example, a hammer makes reference to the desk that the actor is 
making. This work, in turn, refers to whoever will use it as an actor (for-whom). 
For example, the desk makes reference to one’s son or daughter as the person who 
will one day sit there. This work refers to whatever materials it incorporates, them-
selves often other instruments (from-what). For example, the desk makes reference 
to legs and a surface, lumber and paint, struts and joints. And this work refers, after 
a potentially long chain of intermediate works, to a fi nal work (for-the-sake-of-
which). For example, the work makes reference to the role of the actor, say, as a 
carpenter inhabiting a workspace with familiar tools. And, more distally, the work 
makes reference to the identity of the actor, say, as a father incorporating the role of 
carpenter while making a desk for his son or daughter for the sake of being a good 
parent (subject, citizen, etc.). 24 
 Crucially, Heidegger’s references are self-embedding and indefi nitely reticu-
lated. For example, the instrument may itself be the work created by a prior action, 
and the work may itself be the instrument wielded by a subsequent action. Similarly, 
the materials may themselves be the work created by prior actions, and the work 
may itself be the material incorporated by a subsequent work. Finally, the user 
may herself be the actor who wields the work as an instrument, and the actor was 
herself the user of the work created by a previous action. For Heidegger, coherence 
of references (the way affordances, instruments, actions, roles, and identities make 
sense in the context of each other) is more originary than correspondence of repre-
sentations (the way a subject is adequate to an object, or a mental state is adequate 
to a state of affairs). 
 As should be clear, the account of affordances, instruments, and actions (roles 
and identities) sketched above is meant to replace Heidegger’s account of refer-
ences. 25 Rather than frame such entities as “referring to” each other, we think of 
them as semiotic processes that complement, create, and incorporate each other. 
Chapter 4, in relation to chapter 5, will take up these concerns at length, incorporat-
ing them as much as critiquing them. 
 SHIFTY AGENTS 
 We may now turn to more explicitly technocognitive instruments such as logic gates 
(e.g., AND), algorithms (e.g., Archimedes sieve), artifi cial languages (e.g., LISP), 
and computers per se. In particular, consider a logic gate that has two inputs and 
a single output. In a limited sense, it senses its inputs and instigates it outputs, and 
it was selected (by some other agent, of which it is derivative) to instigate in a cer-
tain fashion in the context of a certain sensation. For example, if both its inputs 
register voltages above a certain threshold, its output is to create a voltage above a 
certain threshold. And just as the inputs may be reliably correlated with events in 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   34
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   34
7/23/2012   9:25:29 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:29 PM

 
Biosemiosis, Technocognition, and Sociogenesis 
35 
the world, so may the output be reliably correlated with events in the world. Indeed, 
the latter should make sense in the context of the former from the standpoint of the 
agent, given the features of these events. For example, perhaps the inputs reliably 
correlate with high humidity and high wind, and the output reliably correlates with 
the closing of a house’s shutters. Thus, while the creator of the logic gate (as one of 
the more original agents contributing to this scenario) may have had a very general 
object in mind, whoever later places the gate in a particular circuit (as a subsequent 
agent) projects a much more specifi c object onto the inputs and outputs of the logic 
gate—in this example, bad weather. 
 One might, therefore, think of such devices, and any function with inputs and 
outputs more generally, as shifters semiotically akin to words such as  here ,  now , 
and  us (Jakobson 1990). Their meaning (qua signifi cant features of the object) 
and motivation (qua interests of the agent who selected them) are only relatively 
specifi ed only in a larger context, say, one that takes into account a longer circuit 
(e.g., accumulator), a complementing affordance (e.g., electrons), an incorporating 
instrument (e.g., personal computer), a creative action (e.g., uploading a fi le), and a 
performed identity (e.g., a playful and irreverent hacker). 
 Indeed, all the usual questions of framing arise. For example, the same gate 
(along with many identical siblings) might be used in a latch (a very basic form of 
memory), itself used in an accumulator (a very basic kind of adder), itself used in 
a CPU (e.g., a Turing machine built with a von Neuman architecture). And just 
as a bicycle (as a relatively large instrument) provides an interpretant of the func-
tion of the smaller instruments that make it up (e.g., spokes, pedals, chains, and so 
forth), and just as these smaller instruments provide interpretants of the purchases 
provides by the affordances they incorporate (such as steel, plastic, and rubber), an 
accumulator provides an interpretant of each of the logic gates that make it up, and 
each of these logic gates in turn provides an interpretant of the purchase provided 
by the affordances it incorporates (from silicon to solder, depending on the current 
state of technology). In short, just as one can zoom out to the function served by 
many interconnected digital computers (qua Internet), however wide, one can zoom 
in to the purchase provided by many incorporated silicon atoms, however narrow. 
 The logic gate, then, is a relatively derivative agent (its own placement in a 
circuit, and sensing and instigating function, being determined by whoever made 
it and whoever connected it). While it may have a far smaller degree of agency 
than such more originary agents, it should be remembered that those more com-
plicated agents (that seem to select) were themselves selected to serve various func-
tions (however broad) on other time scales (however long) as parts of other units 
of accountability. In other words, don’t get hung up on the fact that instruments 
are “derivative” agents. There is no life- form that isn’t a derivative agent in this 
account. Indeed, there is probably nothing that isn’t at root selectionally grounded 
in the dumbest of agencies—sieving and serendipity. 
 (Which is not to say that human agency, be it understood from an intentional 
or a semiotic stance, isn’t spectacularly unique and effi cacious in its practical and 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   35
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   35
7/23/2012   9:25:30 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:30 PM

 36 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
theoretical agency [as will be foregrounded in later chapters]. Indeed, human beings 
were selected to have the widest of functions, oriented to different meanings for dif-
ferent motivations depending on the context of their cultures:  Homo sapiens should 
be renamed  Homo shifters .) 
 Finally, while the focus has been on logic gates and lawn mowers, one could 
probably give a similar, albeit much more complicated, account of neurons. And 
one could give a similar account of the functions that make up computer programs 
(and perhaps many mathematical formulas as well). And just as we shifted frames 
in section 3, above, to focus on the cognitive processes that mediate between speech 
acts, we could also shift frames to focus on the neurological processes that mediate 
cognitive processes. All of these are input-output devices, or sensing and instigating 
agents, that can be scaled up, and sometimes down, to infi nite degrees of complex-
ity, with such wholes and their parts functioning as relatively derivative agents and 
having a variety of more or less specifi c objects, given the shifting contexts of their 
circuitry. Moreover, they themselves are “hooked up” with speech acts and cognitive 
processes and material practices, such that the entire “circuit” (qua network of inter-
connected envorganisms) functions as a single system of selection and signifi cance, 
with a huge number of inputs and outputs and with the entire ensemble sensing 
and instigating “differences that make differences,” to use Bateson’s (1972) famous 
phrase, whether or not the original or ultimate agents are selected, and whether or 
not the original or ultimate objects are signifi cant. In other words, while our focus 
has been on selection and signifi cance, sieving and serendipity may be operative on 
any scale within such a network, a point we will return to in the next section.  
 8.  Relations between Relations Revisited 
 We just saw how we may take more basic processes of signifi cance and selection and 
interconnect them to any degree of complexity imaginable, from a neuron to the 
nervous system, from a logic gate to the Internet, from an organism to an ecologi-
cal niche, from a signer to a semiotic community. In the context of such intercon-
nections, it is worthwhile reviewing some of the simpler kinds of relations between 
relations that are always present as well as describing a more complicated kind of 
relation between relations that is simultaneously at play. 
 Figure 2.9 shows the interrelations among the various relations between rela-
tions that are discussed in this chapter. As may be seen, it is meant to be an expan-
sion, or blowup, of a tiny piece of a much larger network, say, a small piece of a 
conversation that is currently in the frame of an investigator, itself a fi ve-minute 
swatch in the life of two members of a particular speech community. Moreover, just 
as it is meant to represent the fi ne structure of some link in the top network, any 
of its own links could be expanded to reveal their fi ne structure, say, the cognitive 
processes that mediate between what the speaker just heard and what she is about to 
say, or the material infrastructure of the digital environs that connects this speaker 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   36
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   36
7/23/2012   9:25:30 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:30 PM

 
Biosemiosis, Technocognition, and Sociogenesis 
37 
to an addressee some 5,000 miles away. Dashed lines indicate the ways in which this 
kind of interrelationality may fractal in or rhizome out indefi nitely. 
 The subset of relations between relations marked (a) are the classic Saussurian 
kind: The relation between any sign and object (or signifi er and signifi ed) makes 
sense only in the context of other sign-object relations within a semiological struc-
ture or code. While these relations are made explicit only in one part of the dia-
gram, they should be understood as potentially holding along any object-sign (and 
interpretant-object) relation within the diagram. As may be seen, while such rela-
tions were an object of awe and contempt in structuralist and poststructuralist circles, 
respectively, they are at best only a tiny sliver of onion in the whole enchilada. Perhaps 
never before was the aim of an entire generation of critical theorists thrown so far off 
mark in thinking they had understood or undermined the foundations of meaning. 
 The subset of relations between relations marked (b) are those linking signs, 
objects, and interpretants as introduced by Peirce with his notion of correspond-
ence. 26   In chapter 3, I will argue for the centrality of this kind of relationality and for 
its paradoxical elision from much of twentieth-century social theory; moreover, in 
chapter 3, we will use it to sketch a semiotic ontology of commodities (Kockelman 
2006a) to analyze the distribution of semiotic agency, and, more generally, to pursue 
some of the stakes of such analyses for (post)humanist framings of self and society. 
 The subset of relations between relations marked (c) are those linking agents to 
sensation and instigation. In some sense, these go back to Aristotle’s theory of the 
soul (as that which “senses” and “moves”) and should be intuitable to anyone who 
ever thought about organisms. But Uexkull’s account of the disinhibiting ring and 
drive organ in animals (1926), along with his exquisite diagrams, comes closest to 
this conception. In this chapter, such relations between relations were also general-
ized to describe more “derivative” agents, such as instruments and environments. 
 The subset marked (d) are the relations between the foregoing two relations that 
have been the central focus of this chapter: the essential complementary and sym-
metry of sign-object-interpretant relationality (b) and sensation-agent-instigation 
ON
Oj
ON-1
ON+1
AN+1
AN-1
AN
ON-1
N-1
SN-1
IN+1
a
Sj
Sk
b
c
Ok
d
e
f
 FIGURE 2.9:  Relations between Relations Revisited 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   37
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   37
7/23/2012   9:25:30 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:30 PM

 38 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
relationality (c). This is the relation between relations that constitutes the 
organism-environment interface, or, rather, the envorganism itself. As made explicit 
in this chapter, such envorganisms are subject to various modes of framing via 
processes such as complementation (fi gure versus ground), creation (cause versus 
effect), and incorporation (part versus whole). Where such a boundary is drawn is 
a function of the relation between the analyst and envorganism being analyzed, 
which is itself an agent-object (analyst-envorganism) relation. 
 The subset marked (e) are the social relations introduced by Aristotle and 
Marx, namely, a relation between people mediated by a relation between things, 
where both these modes of relationality are themselves grounded in signifi cance 
and selection. Crucially, this chapter has generalized this kind of relationality, 
namely, a relation between agents (which can also be “things”) mediated by a rela-
tion between objects (which can also be “people”). More generally, the people so 
related may be not only buyers and sellers, speakers and addressees, selves and oth-
ers, they may be also interactors at any scale, from afferent neurons to ecological 
niches, from communities to corporations. For example, the interrelated agents and 
objects can be vervet monkeys and predators, logic gates and bad weather, a woman 
and her lawn mower in relation to her purpose and its function. 
 The subset of relations marked (f) are a kind different from the subset marked 
(e), even though they seem similar. They may be understood as relations between 
relations of type (d) as constituted by an ensemble of interconnected envorganisms—
be they neurons or logic-gates, speech acts or mental states, instruments or actions, 
intentional individuals or sieving gradients. These relations, then, are mediated by 
actual and possible confi gurations of channels, such that the sensations and instiga-
tions, or signs and interpretants, of one such envorganism make sense only in the 
context of the sensations and instigations, or signs and interpretants, of other such 
envorganisms. 27 In some sense, this is a way of generalizing Saussure’s insights from 
codes or “languages” (qua relation between signs and objects) to channels or “infra-
structure” (qua relation between signers and interpreters), a point that requires some 
unpacking. 
 MEDIA 
 But before continuing, it should be emphasized that this chapter is a theory of media 
in the wide sense (as that which mediates). In particular, any relation in Figure 2.9 
is such a site of mediation. In this way, this essay incorporates and extends more 
narrow senses of media, for example, technological and/or aesthetic forms of medi-
ation (such as fi lm, radio, print, and so forth) that will be theorized in chapter 3. 
Indeed, if one takes selection (on any scale) to constitute function, and if one takes 
framing (of any scale) to constitute aesthetics, then the distinction between a wide 
and narrow defi nition of media actually disappears. Thus, most theories of “media,” 
as the very term suggests, are really theories of a handful of reifi ed products of 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   38
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   38
7/23/2012   9:25:30 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:30 PM

 
Biosemiosis, Technocognition, and Sociogenesis 
39 
mediation.  All life forms, including that life form that only exists as forms- of-life, 
are simultaneously forms-of-mediation and media-in-formation (and maybe even vice 
versa, if only increasingly so). 
 9.  Networks of Interconnected Envorganisms 
 To understand this last kind of relation between relations, one needs to notice 
the fundamental similarity between codes and channels. A  code  in the traditional 
sense is a set of type-type relations: Signifi ers (or signs) of one type are paired with 
signifi eds (or objects) of another type. For a natural language, such as English, 
it takes an entire dictionary to fully specify the code, namely, a set of mappings 
between words and concepts. And for a logic-gate, such as NOT, there may be only 
two sign-object relations to specify: what voltage range counts as “true” and what 
voltage range counts as “false.” In contrast, a  channel, in the traditional sense, is 
a connection between the speaker and the addressee (or between the signer and 
the interpreter) such that signs expressed by the former (via processes that include 
instigation) may be interpreted by the latter (via processes that include sensation). 
Channels include synapses, air, and Ethernet cables—some of which are naturally 
occurring affordances and some of which are artifi cially designed instruments (rel-
atively speaking). 28 Note, then, the fundamental symmetry: just as codes connect 
signs and objects, channels connect signers and interpreters. Rather than focusing 
on what signs to send, we now focus on where to send them. 29 
 Now while Saussure had very little to say about channels, he had a lot to say 
about codes. In particular, he made a famous set of distinctions that was grounded 
in his understanding of codes, and grounding of his structuralist theory of language: 
selection versus combination,  langue  versus  parole, synchrony versus diachrony, and 
arbitrary versus motivated. With two key caveats, each of these distinctions may be 
extended to think about channels, infrastructure, and networks more generally. 
 As for the fi rst caveat, the point is not just to generalize Saussure’s categories 
from codes to channels (which would simply give us a structuralism of the channel, 
thereby privileging  langue over  parole , synchrony over diachrony, and the arbitrary 
over the motivated). Rather, the point is to take his categories to be poles of a con-
tinuum and to understand social theory as requiring every range of positions within 
this continuum, and, thus, to focus on the motivated as much as the arbitrary, on 
practices as much as structures, on selection as much as combination, on transfor-
mation as much as stasis. 
 As for the second caveat, our focus is not on a channel per se, but on a network 
of channels linking an ensemble of envorganisms. The problem with a word such as 
“network” is that its referent is often envisioned as a two-dimensional surface occu-
pying a three-dimensional space (both like a “net” and somewhat like the Internet), 
where one should, rather, try to imagine an N-dimensional substance (itself chock 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   39
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   39
7/23/2012   9:25:30 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:30 PM

 40 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
full of brains and fangs) crammed into a four-dimensional space time. With these 
caveats in mind, we may begin the generalization. 
 FROM CODE TO CHANNEL 
 First, rather than think about selection (of paradigmatic alternatives within a 
code, e.g., whether one says  he ,  she , or  it ; or whether one says  was ,  is , or  will be ; or 
whether one says  happy ,  sad , or  angry ), think about which channels (to which inter-
preters) are simultaneously accessible to a single signer (within a given network). 
And rather than think about combination (of such selections in linearly ordered 
syntagms, e.g.,  she is angry ,  he was sad ,  it will be happy , etc.), think about which 
channels may be sequentially accessed from a single signer. That is, operations like 
selection and combination are at work in the domain of channels as much as in the 
domain of codes. And just as the “value” of a sign (qua signifi er-signifi ed relation) 
for Saussure is dependent on its role in a grammar’s code, the value of an envorgan-
ism is dependent on its role in a network of channels, where, by “value,” we mean 
how exactly, given this larger context, the features of its object or the interests of its 
agent should be understood (itself dependent on the frame at issue). 
 Just as the complementary notions of combination and selection may be 
extended from codes to channels so may the complementary notions of  langue and 
 parole , understood here in the wider sense of “structure” and “practice.” For mod-
ern students of language as code, structure has two very different valences. On the 
one hand, it is pure potentiality: with a fi nite number of words and rules one can 
create an infi nite number of different sentences. On the other hand, it is pure neces-
sity: a grammar specifi es how one should speak or what counts as an acceptable sen-
tence. Practice is thereby subject to two different valences as well. On the one hand, 
it refers to any actual sentence said in a particular context—a singular entity usually 
called an “utterance.” On the other hand, it refers to all the ways in which such an 
utterance can parasitically fail to go according to plan: It may be ungrammatical 
for serendipitous reasons (a butterfl y tickles our throat), or it may be ungrammati-
cal for aesthetic or political reasons (a poet uses an adjective as a noun, a subcom-
munity inverts the meaning of  tu  and  vous ). Indeed, in this last sense, practice may 
be to structure as David is to Goliath or crime is to police. Poetic meter, from the 
structure of Petrarchan sonnets to the suite of Internet protocols, has both of these 
properties:  A fi nite domain of constraints leads to an infi nite range of confi gurations, 
and any such confi guration can both instantiate and undermine the set of constraints . 
 To focus on the structure and practice of a network of channels interconnect-
ing an ensemble of envorganisms, then, is to foreground the tension between these 
valences. In certain cases, so long as the outputs, or instigations, of one envorgan-
ism match the inputs, or sensations, of another, the two can be combined. And 
meeting such constraints may involve a relatively simple matching of signals—of 
voltages (across logic-gates), of codes (across speech communities), of neurotrans-
mitters (across synapses), and so forth. Selection and combination of such simply 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   40
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   40
7/23/2012   9:25:30 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:30 PM

 
Biosemiosis, Technocognition, and Sociogenesis 
41 
matched channels may then give rise to confi gurations of unimaginable complexity. 
Think, for example, of the simplicity of train tracks understood as a small set of 
identically gauged segments (I’s, C’s, Y’s, and X’s, for example) and the complexity 
of train tracks when such segments are interconnected. In short, the structure of 
channels refers to a relatively small set of principles or protocols that determine 
how envorganisms may be interconnected (via processes such as combination and 
selection), thereby giving rise to a relatively large set of confi gurations. And the 
practice of channels refers to an actual confi guration, itself usually an instantia-
tion, and sometimes an undermining, of the principles that gave rise to it. 
 Third, rather than think about synchrony (or stasis) in terms of the code that 
constitutes a grammar at a particular moment, think about the selected and com-
bined channels, and governing principles and instantiated practices, that intercon-
nect an ensemble of envorganisms at a particular time scale. And rather than think 
about diachrony (or transformation) as changes in grammatical structure over his-
torical time, think about the changes in the selection and combination, structure 
and practice, of channels that occur on various time scales: evolutionary, historical, 
biographical, interactional, and so forth. Temporally, such scales may range from 
eons to nanoseconds; spatially, they may be interstellar or subatomic. For example, 
these ensembles are not static: Objects and agents may be born or die, may be intro-
duced or taken away, may start up or break down at a moment’s notice. Indeed, 
in more human terms, and given present concerns, a fundamental interpretant 
nowadays is connecting or disconnecting a channel (think Twitter and Facebook), 
that is, the fundamental mode of real-time instigation by human actors is selecting 
what (and whose) instigations one will sense and what (or who) will sense one’s 
instigations. 
 Finally, we may turn to Saussure’s distinction between the arbitrary and the 
motivated, itself going back to Aristotle’s distinction between convention and 
nature. For Saussure, such a distinction was meant to describe the relation between 
a sign and an object: why was a particular sound pattern (e.g., the word  rat ) paired 
with a particular concept (e.g., domestic vermin)? In this chapter, in contrast, we 
have been focusing on motivation in the sense of selection: not only how a sign 
stands for its particular object, but also why an agent produces a particular inter-
pretant (which may itself, in another frame, be a sign). Moreover, in Peircean terms, 
Saussure thought language was mainly symbolic (with such relations grounded in 
convention) and minimally iconic and indexical (with such relations grounded in 
similarity or contiguity, respectively). In contrast, we have been foregrounding the 
essential link between selection and signifi cance, or “meaning” and “motivation,” 
and we have been focused on a much wider set of selected and signifi cant processes 
than natural languages. 
 With these caveats in mind, we may use the pairing between the arbitrary 
and the motivated, in an expanded sense, to think about the network of channels 
connecting an ensemble of envorganisms. In particular, the central move is this: 
while any envorganism is, by defi nition, caught up in relations of signifi cance and 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   41
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   41
7/23/2012   9:25:31 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:31 PM

 42 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
selection, envorganisms may have their effects channeled out to other envorganisms 
at great distances of remove, and any envorganism may have its causes channeled 
in from other envorganisms at great distances of remove, and these causes and 
effects—however large and lasting, splendid or devastating—may not have been 
selected for their signifi cance. In some sense, then, the most interesting questions 
lie at the edge of (and often far beyond) processes of signifi cance and selection. 
Sieving and serendipity are not just operative in natural selection, at the roots of 
the system, but they are also operative in the mediating relations between any two 
interconnected envorganisms, as some of the fruits.  Just as selection and signifi cance 
(qua “the motivated”) are at work, sieving and serendipity (qua “the arbitrary”) are 
at play for every unit and at any scale . 
 AGENCY AND THE UNITIZATION OF ACCOUNTABILITY 
 Note, then, that the way the term  agent has been defi ned and implemented in this 
chapter should ensure that properties such as free will, subjectivity, cognition, and 
so forth are  not  presumed. Rather, agency is a wide term, defi ned in relation to 
objects, on the one hand, and signs and interpretants, on the other, where any bun-
dling of all of these, qua envorganism, gets its value only in relation to an ontolo-
gized and ontologizing world, or - verse , of other envorganisms, and where all of 
these relations, insofar as they are the projection of a particular framing and ontol-
ogy, are themselves already subject to the demands of enclosure. Figure 2.9 is an 
attempt to frame all of this at once. 
 Moreover, such relations between relations are fundamentally rooted in  selec-
tion —a term that is meant to range over a very wide set of processes, some of which 
look quite a lot like classic notions of free will (qua intentional actors, selecting 
instruments and actions on interactional time scales, with potentially huge amounts 
of freedom and foresight); some of which look like sieving in combination with 
serendipity, and thus processes such as natural selection; some of which look like 
the circumspection and association, or the  umsehen and  umgehen , of Dasein-like 
entities; and some of which don’t look like any of these at all. 
 Finally, the agents (or envorganisms) in question are fundamentally widely 
distributed, multidimensional, and, by degrees, notions—only sometimes coincid-
ing, under certain framings, with stereotypically agentive entities—such as ani-
mals, people, instruments, environments, cultures, and life-forms. In particular, our 
attempts to designate “agents” are usually only quixotic efforts to  enclose agency , 
which really only ever exists, as it were, in the wild, outside of any frame, in ways 
that are as murky, fl eeting, and distant as the modes of mediation that constitute 
it. That said, the temptation to move from agency to agents or from mediation to 
mediators and intermediaries will always be great, for they allow one to treat the 
agent at issue as a  unit of accountability (Kockelman 2007b, 2007c) in all of its 
extended senses—not only that which is responsible (and hence potentially subject 
to praise or punishment), but also that which is worthy of an account, a locus of 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   42
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   42
7/23/2012   9:25:31 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:31 PM

 
Biosemiosis, Technocognition, and Sociogenesis 
43 
selection, potentially typifi able and quantifi able, and so forth. We will return to 
these points in chapter 3. 
 10.  The Evolution and Epidemiology of Culture 
 Sieving and serendipity, especially when understood in relation to a network of 
interrelated envorganisms and as giving rise to complex and emergent code-like pat-
terns (such as “language” and “culture,” understood in the traditional sense of rel-
atively stable and group-specifi c linkages between signs, objects, and interpretants), 
should be understood as playing key roles in several other traditions, which I only 
touch on here. First, the relation between sieving and computer languages (and, 
more generally, fi nite automata, context-free grammars, and Turing machines) is 
profound. When framed in their generality, the key issue underlying such processes 
is that of a fi ltering device that accepts certain strings (and thereby “recognizes” cer-
tain languages, qua sets of strings) and rejects others (Sipser 1996). To foreground 
the power of such a vision, note the infi nitely wide range of things that can be rep-
resented by such strings (mod the frame of relevance and degree of resolution): all 
media, DNA, and the computer programs themselves. To be sure, most computer 
programs in the stereotypic sense are selected (written and implemented) precisely for 
the effects of their sieving. However, much research is ongoing on cellular automata 
and similar processes, namely, complex, organized, and often useful patterns gener-
ated by sieve-like processes involving large arrays of relatively simple agents that do 
not seem to have been selected in any traditional sense. The fi eld is enormous, but 
early highlights in theoretical biology include Kauffman on self-organizing systems 
(1993, 1995).In the fi eld of anthropology, recent highlights include Lansing (2006) 
on water temples in Bali. Ironically, in Mitchell’s (2009) careful and accessible over-
view of this fi eld of complexity studies, the question of meaning receives only a 
paragraph (184).  The present chapter’s focus on meaning, or rather signifi cance, is 
thereby meant to complement that tradition’s focus on sieving and selection—to take 
up a similar set of questions from a very different starting point . 
 Second, there is a relation between sieve-like processes and the research agenda 
carved out by the proponents and opponents of memes (Dawkins 1976;, Hull 
1988; Sober 1992; Sterelny 1994; and see Sterelny and Griffi ths 1999 for a review), 
epidemiology-inspired scholars of language and culture (Atran 2002; Boyer 1994; 
Enfi eld 2003; Sperber 1996;  inter alia ), anthropologists interested in the relation 
between cultural evolution and genetic change (Boyd and Richerson 1985, 2005; 
Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman 1981; Tomasello 1999;  inter alia ), and linguistic anthro-
pologists and sociolinguists interested in the relation between the circulation of 
sign-forms and the establishment of dialects and registers (Labov 1994, 2001; Agha 
2007). For example, Sperber (1996) makes the compelling argument that cognitive 
processes, themselves probably selected on other time scales for other purposes (say, 
navigating the social and environmental affordances of the Pleistocene), may come to 
Note: Please 
ensure 
the word 
"mod". Is 
this OK?
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   43
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   43
7/23/2012   9:25:31 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:31 PM

 44 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
bias the kinds of representations (qua “beliefs” and “concepts”) that spread easily and 
stabilize widely, giving rise to the patterns many would call “culture.” In the frame-
work offered here, such cognitive biases are just one kind of sieve among many. 
 Indeed, it is worth making one relatively arch-Boasian aside:  the representations 
we already have (qua sign-object relations or “cultures,” “codes,” and “contexts”), 
and the relations we are already implicated in (qua signer-interpretant relations or 
“networks,” “channels,” and “infrastructures”) are perhaps the two most important 
sources of sieving (and selection) underlying the representations and relations we will 
come to have . 30 This fact is perhaps the real barrier to any nonholistic, reductionist 
understandings of the “evolution” or “epidemiology” of culture. 
 MULTIVERSE 
 Indeed, given all the different ways in which signifi cance and selection may be ontol-
ogized and framed such that the universe is really a multiverse—each actor caught 
up in, and each analyst oriented to, a different web of interrelationality—we may 
say this: where we draw the boundary between the motivated and the arbitrary, or 
how we frame the divide between what is selected and signifi cant and what is sieved 
and serendipitous, is itself grounded in processes of selection and signifi cance and 
processes of sieving and serendipity. 31 To paraphrase Wallace Stevens: The aim, 
however unachievable, is to see nothing that isn’t there and the nothing that is. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   44
02_Kockelman_Ch02.indd   44
7/23/2012   9:25:31 PM
7/23/2012   9:25:31 PM

45
 3 
 Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds  
 1.  The Neo-Organon 
 In the  New Organon (2000 [1620]), Francis Bacon made his fateful distinction 
between knowledge and power: if the task of knowledge is to fi nd for a given nature 
the source of its coming-to-be, the task of power is to super-induce on a given body 
a new nature. In making this distinction, Bacon offered his vision of an empiri-
cal science of material substance, itself grounded in the inferential processes of 
the human mind and the normative practices of an epistemic community. And he 
theorized the range of “idols”—from human-specifi c capacities to culture-specifi c 
practices—that could both guide and mislead such modes of inquiry. 
 This chapter tacks between the “natures” investigated by natural scientists 
such as Bacon and the “second natures” analyzed by anthropologists as well as by 
behavioral scientists and critical theorists more generally. It returns to the notion of 
semiotic ontologies, as introduced in chapter 1, and thereby focuses on the relations 
between three  kinds that may be loosely described—and, alas, potentially reifi ed—
as material substances (e.g., gold, plastic, bacteria, and snowfl akes), social statuses 
(e.g., vagabonds, uncles, sellers, and addressees), and mental states (e.g., beliefs, 
desires, hopes, and fears). In particular, it treats such kinds as (projected) propensi-
ties for being that admit to interpretive reasoning, where such reasoning is grounded 
in semiotic processes that turn on indexicality and inference. It analyzes the ways 
such kinds get indexed and inferred, constructed and naturalized, transformed and 
stabilized, “found” and “super-induced,” and, more generally, enclosed and dis-
closed in interaction. And it widens the notion of interaction to include not only 
the relations between people, but also the relations between things and the relations 
between people and things (and anything outside or in-between). In some sense, 
then, this chapter theorizes the interaction of kinds through the lens of knowledge 
and power, on the one hand, and semiosis and ontology, on the other. 
 OVERVIEW OF SECTIONS 
 The fi rst and longest section of this chapter enumerates, defi nes, and interrelates 
key analytic concepts from Peirce’s semiotic theory insofar as they intersect with 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   45
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   45
7/25/2012   12:26:32 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:32 PM

 46 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
public, human-centered, and community-specifi c processes. In part, this is done 
to introduce a theory of semiosis and a metalanguage for doing semiotics, and, 
in part, this is done to argue against certain pervasive and erroneous assumptions 
about signs. The goal, then, is neither to expound nor to espouse Peirce, but rather 
to use his work as a starting off point to develop a broader theory of semiosis—
itself a key part of the more general theory of signifi cance and selection that was 
presented in chapter 2. 1 After semiotic processes in their generality are defi ned and 
exemplifi ed, this section discusses their various components (signs, objects, inter-
pretants), and various relations between these components, as these intersect with 
classic concerns of social theory, such as objectivity, mediation, motivation, value, 
and fetishization. 
 The next three sections use these concepts, in conjunction with ideas developed 
in chapters 1 and 2, to build up a theory of kinds as mediated by semiotic ontolo-
gies, paying particular attention to agency and performativity. Section 3 treats the 
relation between kinds, indices, and inference, focusing on the construction and 
naturalization of social statuses, material substances, and mental states. Section 4 
focuses on emblemeticity, or relatively public and predictive indices of underlying 
kinds. Section 5 treats the relation between semiotic agents and generalized others, 
and thus the factors that enable and constrain various modes of knowledge about, 
and power over, such kinds. And section 6 theorizes six types of performativity 
that such kinds are subject to vis- à -vis their interactions with such agentive oth-
ers, where such agents are themselves understood as a certain sort of meta-kind, 
and where performativity is itself understood in terms of transformations in and 
through semiotic ontologies. 
 2.  Semiotic Processes, Social Theories, and Obviated Ontologies 
 Semiotics is the study of semiosis, or “meaning,” a process that involves three com-
ponents:  signs (whatever stands for something else),  objects (whatever a sign stands 
for), and  interpretants (whatever a sign creates insofar as it stands for an object). 
(See Table 3.1 [row 1]).) In particular, any  semiotic process relates these three com-
ponents in the following way: A sign stands for its object on the one hand, and its 
interpretant on the other, in such a way as to make the interpretant stand in relation 
to the object corresponding to its own relation to the object (compare Peirce 1992a 
[1868]). What is at issue in meaningfulness, then, is not one relation between a sign 
and an object (qua “standing for”), but rather a relation between two such relations 
(qua “correspondence”). The logic of this relation between relations is shown in 
Figure 3.1 (and recall the top- half of Figure 2.6). 
 As we saw in chapter 2,  joint-attention  is a semiotic process. In particular, a 
child turning to observe what her father is observing, or turning to look at where 
her mother is pointing, involves an interpretant (the child’s change of attention), an 
object (what the parent is attending to or pointing toward), and a sign (the parent’s 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   46
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   46
7/25/2012   12:26:33 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:33 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
47 
direction of attention or gesture that directs attention). Indeed, for human kinds on 
developmental time scales, such a process is perhaps the primordial form of objec-
tifi cation: within a particular kind of intersubjective space, or enclosure, something 
is disclosed. 
 As Mead noted (1934), any interaction is a semiotic process. For example, if 
I pull back my fi st (fi rst phase of an action, or the sign), you duck (reaction, or 
the interpretant) insofar as my next move (second phase of action, or the object) 
would be to punch you. Generalizing interaction, and reframing one of the key 
concerns of conversational analysis, the so-called pair-part structures of everyday 
interaction—the fact that questions are normatively followed by answers, offers by 
acceptances, commands by undertakings, assessments by agreements, and so forth 
(Goffman 1964, 1981a;, Sacks et al. 1974)—consist of semiotic processes in which 
two components (the sign and interpretant) are foregrounded. In particular, a type 
TABLE 3.1
Typology of Semiotic Distinctions
 Firstness 
 Secondness 
 Thirdness 
 Semiotic Process 
Sign
Object
Interpretant
 Sign (Object, Interpretant) 
Quali-
Sin- (Token)
Legi- (Type)
 Ground 
Iconic
Indexical
Symbolic
 Interpretant 
Affective
Energetic
Representational
 Semiotic Community 
Commonality
Contrast
Consciousness
 Social Relation 
Role
Status
Attitude
 Practical Agency 
Control
Compose
Commit
 Theoretical Agency 
Characterize
Thematize
Reason
Interpretant
Object
  Sign
(a)
(b)
(c)
correspondence
 FIGURE 3.1  Semiosis as a Relation between Relations 
 A sign stands for its object on the one hand (a), and its interpretant on the other (b), in such a 
way as to bring the latter into a relation to the former (c)  corresponding to its own relation to 
the former (a). 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   47
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   47
7/25/2012   12:26:33 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:33 PM

 48 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
of utterance (or action) gives rise to another type of utterance (or action) insofar as 
it is understood to express a proposition (or purpose). 
 As exemplifi ed by joint-attention, this formal defi nition of a semiotic process 
provides a preliminary description of  intersubjectivity : a self (or “subject”) stands 
in relation to an other (or “object”), on the one hand, and an alter (or “another 
subject”), on the other, in such a way as to make the alter stand in relation to the 
other in a way that corresponds to the self’s relation to the other. Phrased in terms 
of pronouns: I stand in relation to it on the one hand, and to you on the other, in 
such a way as to make your relation to it correspond to my relation to it. In par-
ticular,  not only are we mutually aware of “it,” we are mutually aware of this mutual 
awareness . As will be seen in later chapters, many human-specifi c semiotic processes 
have as their roots and fruits intersubjective relations: on the one hand, semiosis 
presumes that signer and interpreter, qua self and alter, already stand in intersub-
jective relation to a range of objects, on the other hand, semiosis creates these very 
intersubjective relations (or at least the semblance of them). For example, one and 
the same utterance may have a topic or “old information” (often the subject of the 
sentence, say,  my son ) and a focus, or “new information” (often the predicate of the 
sentence, say,  just had his second birthday ). Loosely speaking, just as the topic was 
already intersubjectively known before the utterance, the focus will be intersubjec-
tively known after the utterance. Crucially, such a process is true not only of lin-
guistic communication. To return to our example of joint-attention, having drawn 
your attention to some entity, I may now draw your attention to some feature of 
that entity. As will be shown, semiosis builds such intersubjective assumptions by 
building on such intersubjective assumptions, which themselves constitute a key 
part of many semiotic ontologies. 
 As was introduced in chapter 2, and as will be discussed at length in chapter 4, 
the constituents of so-called material culture are semiotic processes. For example, 
an  affordance is a semiotic process whose sign is a natural feature, whose object 
is a purchase, and whose key interpretant is an action that heeds that feature or 
an instrument that incorporates that feature (insofar as the feature “provides pur-
chase”). For example, walking carefully over a frozen pond (as an action) is an 
interpretant of the purchase provided by ice (as an affordance) insofar as such a 
form of movement heeds the slipperiness of ice. An  instrument  is a semiotic process 
whose sign is an artifi ced entity, whose object is a function, and whose key interpre-
tant is an action that wields that entity or another instrument that incorporates that 
entity (inso-far as it “serves a function”). For example, a knife (as an instrument) 
is an interpretant of the purchase provided by steel (as another instrument) insofar 
as such a tool incorporates the hardness and sharpness of steel. In this way, affor-
dances, instruments, and actions can be the signs and interpretants of each other. 
 The  commodity  may be understood as a semiotic process whose sign is a 
use-value, whose object is a value, and whose interpretant is an exchange value 
(Kockelman 2006a; Marx 1967 [1867]). In particular, borrowing terms from classi-
cal political economy, anything that can be used or consumed by humans in some 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   48
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   48
7/25/2012   12:26:33 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:33 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
49 
way may be called a use-value (e.g., a loaf of bread, a jug of wine, two machetes), 
any use-value of a given quantity and unit may be exchanged for another use-value 
of a given quantity and unit, which may be called its  exchange-value (e.g., a loaf of 
bread may be exchanged for three sticks of butter, a leg of lamb, or 100 sheets 
of paper). The fact that such radically different things as machetes, bread, butter, 
lamb, and paper can be proportionally equated in exchange is evidence that these 
things have different quantities of a common substance, which may be called  value 
(for example, the intensity of desire for, or the amount of labor in, a use-value). 
Finally, anything that has both use-value and value (where the latter is expressed 
in its exchange-value) is a  commodity . To phrase all this in a semiotic idiom, if the 
object of a sign is that to which all interpretants of the sign correspondingly relate 
(see below), then the value of a use-value is that to which all exchange-values of the 
use-value  collaterally relate. 
 Given that a use-value can be any sort of kind, or semiotic process more gen-
erally (such as an instrument, affordance, or action), as well as any component of 
a semiotic process (such as a sign, object, or interpretant), a commodity is thus 
a  meta-semiotic process . That is, the object-component of an embedding semiotic 
process is itself an embedded semiotic process. As we saw in chapter 2, the fact that 
any semiotic process can be parasitically embedded in another semiotic process, 
where the object of the embedding semiotic process (value) trumps the object of the 
embedded semiotic process (say, the function of an instrument, or the purpose of 
an action, or the status of a role), has profound consequences for sociogenesis. 
 Finally, to be suggestive, the  oedipal triangle  may be framed as a semiotic pro-
cess. In particular, the boy comes to stand in relation to his mother in a manner 
that corresponds to, and is caused by, the way the father stands in relation to the 
mother. Here the sign is the father’s directed desire (as embodied, say, in the direc-
tion and tumescence of his penis), the object is the mother (as a possible destination 
of this directed desire), and the interpretant is the change in the direction of the 
boy’s desire (and, in particular, the ways in which this is subsequently evinced and 
embodied). 
 Notice from these examples that signs can be eye directions, pointing gestures, 
controlled behaviors, utterances, natural features, artifi ced entities, use-values, and 
bodily processes. Objects can be the foci of attention, purposes, propositions, pur-
chases, functions, values, and “objects of desire.” And interpretants can be changes 
in attention, reactions, other utterances, instruments, actions that heed and wield, 
exchange-values, and embodied dispositions. (See Table 3.2.) Notice that very few 
of these interpretants are “in the minds” of the interpreters; yet, all of these semi-
otic processes embody properties normally associated with mental entities, includ-
ing attention, desire, purpose, propositionality, thoughts, values, and goals. Notice 
that very few of these signs are addressed to the interpreters (in the sense of pur-
posely expressed for the sake of their interpretants), so that most semiotic processes 
(such as wielding an instrument) are not intentionally communicative. And notice, 
as per our discussion of framing in chapter 2, that the interpretant component of 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   49
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   49
7/25/2012   12:26:33 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:33 PM

 50 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
each of these semiotic processes may itself be the sign-component of an incipient 
semiotic process, and, hence, the threefold relationality may continue indefi nitely. 
 Reciprocally, the sign-component of one semiotic process is usually itself the 
interpretant-component of a prior semiotic process, and thus not only a relatively 
direct sign of its object proper, but also a relatively indirect sign of the sign-object 
relation that gave rise to it. In this way, semiosis—when properly understood 
as a relation between relations involving three components—is always already 
meta-semiosis. And, hence, the need to theorize a “meta-level” (or “n + 1 th order”) 
is, in part, a symptom of having improperly theorized an “object level” (or n th 
order). In particular, most theories that strongly rely on such a level usually for-
get to theorize interpretants along with signs and objects, and so they keep reach-
ing up for a meta-level to make up for their oversight. To be sure, some signs are 
expressly meta-signs in that their direct objects are other signs (or semiotic pro-
cesses more generally); however, most signs are potentially meta-signs in that their 
indirect objects may include any component, or relation between components, of 
other semiotic processes. 
 Semiosis, then, involves a relation between two relations—a relation, that is, 
between the relation between an object and a sign and the relation between an inter-
pretant and an object where the second relation arises because of the fi rst rela-
tion. In other words, meaning must be framed not in terms of a single relation (of 
standing for), but in terms of a  temporally unfolding  relation (of correspondence) 
between two relations (of standing for). Such an understanding of meaning maxi-
mally contrasts with the stereotypic defi nition of a sign, say, the Saussurean pairing 
of a signifi er and a signifi ed (1983 [1916]), whether understood as internally articu-
lated (a pairing between a sound image and a concept) or externally articulated (a 
pairing between a word and a thing). 2 
 While many theorists take semiotic objects to be relatively “objective” (things 
such as oxen and trees), these examples show that many objects are relatively 
TABLE 3.2
Examples of Semiotic Processes
Semiotic Process
Sign
Object
Interpretant
Joint-Attention
Gesture That Directs 
Attention
Object Directed To
Change in Attention
Interaction
Question
Proposition (and Purpose)
Answer
Affordance
Natural Feature
Purchase
Action That Heeds Feature 
for Sake of Purchase
Instrument
Artifi ced Entity
Function
Action That Wields Entity 
for Sake of Function
Action
Controlled Behavior
Purpose
Another’s Reaction
Intersubjectivity
Self
Other
Alter
Commodity
Use-Value
Value
Exchange-Value
Oedipal Triangle
Sign of Directed Desire
Direction of Desire
Change in Direction of 
Desire
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   50
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   50
7/25/2012   12:26:33 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:33 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
51 
intersubjective (a shared perspective, turning on correspondence, in regard to a 
seemingly intangible entity, such as a function, value, or purpose). An object, then, 
can be whatever a signer and interpreter can correspondingly stand in relation to. It 
need not be continuously present to the senses, taking up volume in space, detach-
able from context, conceptually mediated, or “objective” in any other sense of the 
word. And while many theorists take interpretants—if they consider them at all—
to be relatively “subjective” (say, a thought in the mind of an addressee), these 
examples show that, within a particular framing, most interpretants are as objective 
as signs. 
 It may be argued, then, that the typical focus on sign-object relations (or 
“signifi ers” and “signifi eds”), at the expense of sign-interpretant relations, and 
this concomitant understanding of objects as “objective” and interpretants as 
“subjective”—and, hence, assimilating meaning to mind rather than ground-
ing mind in meaning—is the fatal fl aw of twentieth-century theories of meaning 
(Kockelman 2005). These claims will be further fl eshed out in what follows. 
 QUALI-SIGN, SIN-SIGN, LEGI-SIGN; REPLICA, SINGULARITY;  TELOS , FAILURE 
 Peirce theorized three kinds of sign modalities (1998a [1903]). As used here, a 
quali-sign is a quality that could possibly be paired with an object. That is, any 
quality that is accessible to a given semiotic agent’s sensorium—and, hence, could 
be used to stand for something else (to this agent). A  sin-sign is a quality that is actu-
ally paired with an object (in some semiotic event). Sometimes these are referred to 
as  tokens . And a  legi-sign is a type of quality that must necessarily or obligatorily 
be paired with a type of object (across all semiotic events, within some semiotic 
community, and given some particular ontology). Sometimes these are referred to 
as  types . (See Table 3.1 [row 2].) 
 For example, in the case of utterances, a quali-sign is a potential cry (say, 
whatever is conceivably utterable by a human voice and audible to a human ear); a 
sin-sign is an actual cry (say, the interjection  ouch  uttered at a particular time and 
place); and a legi-sign is a type of cry (say, the interjection  ouch in the abstract or 
what every token of  ouch has in common as a phonological type). 3 
 Any sin-sign that is a token of a legi-sign as a type may be called a  replica . 
Replicas, then, are just run-of-the-mill sin-signs: any utterance of the word  ouch . 
And, in keeping within this Peircean framework, we might call any unreplicable 
or unprecedented sin-sign a  singularity,  that is, any sin-sign that is not a token of 
a type. Singularities, then, are one-of-a-kind sin-signs: Nixon’s resignation speech 
(in the case of speech acts) and even the gun used to kill Lincoln (in the case of 
instruments). Crucially, just like the distinction between quali-, sin-, and legi-signs, 
the distinction between replicated and singular signs is dependent on the ontology 
of the agent making the distinction and sensitive to the ways a semiotic process is 
being framed. As will be shown, such divisions can be drawn in different places, 
subject to more or less strain. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   51
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   51
7/25/2012   12:26:34 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:34 PM

 52 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
 Since most sign events involve a contingent multiplicity of meaningfully inter-
dependent signs (sometimes called “context”), any sign event, or meaningful expe-
rience more generally, is a singularity (even if one or more focal signs within this 
event are framed as replicas). And thus, while semiosis is stereotypically considered 
a deductive process, in which one gets the meaning of a token (qua replica) through 
an abstract type or decodes a “message” (qua sign token) with a “code” (qua pair-
ing of sign type and object type), this is not so. Rather, the fact that singulari-
ties are so common means that much of semiosis turns on nondeductive processes, 
themselves grounded in ontological assumptions: one gets the meaning of a type 
through a token (often via inductive processes) or one gets the meaning of one 
token through other co-occurring tokens, perhaps only later abstracting to a type 
(often via abductive processes). Recall, for example, our discussion of non-natural 
meaning and inference in chapter 2 and our discussion of ontological transforma-
tions in chapter 1. These points are so important that section 6 and chapter 5 will 
treat them at length. 
 Finally, what is so important about types is not so much that tokens must con-
form to them but that tokens may fail to conform to them (Colapietro 1989). On 
the one hand, then, types usually imply something akin to a  telos (if only natural 
selection, qua sieving and serendipity), indicating that some selective process may 
be at work, which inaugurated the type in the fi rst place, or enabled its spread and 
stabilization, such that it could become normatively obligatory or causally neces-
sary (relatively speaking). On the other hand, failure is the fl ip side of function: a 
 telos implies that such an end, or selected outcome, may not be met, from reasons 
ranging from eventive contingency to conscious strategy. As was stressed in chapter 
2, such parasites are thus the fl ip side, and perhaps more honest face, of semiotic 
processes: each needs to be understood in terms of the other. In particular, in light 
of chapter 2, the parasite is usually best understood not as a relation to a relation 
(Serres 1997) but rather as a relation to a relation between relations. 
 PEIRCE, SAUSSURE; MEDIA, ONTOLOGY 
 Crucially, these notions of quali-, sin- (token), and legi- (type), as well as the related 
notions of singularities and replicas, not only apply to the sign-components of 
semiotic processes, but they also apply to the object- and interpretant-components 
of semiotic processes. In some sense, this follows from semiotic framing: for exam-
ple, what is an interpretant-component of a prior semiotic process is usually the 
sign-component of a subsequent semiotic process, and so the categories that apply 
to one carry over to the other. Moreover, with certain caveats, these notions also 
apply to the relations between objects and signs (as well as the relations between 
signs and interpretants and between interpretants and objects), and they apply to the 
relations between such relations and, hence, to semiotic processes more generally. 
 For example, while Saussure had no principled distinction between token and 
type, his distinction between  langue and  parole maps onto something similar. In 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   52
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   52
7/25/2012   12:26:34 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:34 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
53 
particular, from the standpoint of  langue (or “structure”), Saussure’s signifi ers 
and signifi eds map onto legi-signs and legi-objects, or sound images and con-
cepts, respectively. And, from the standpoint of  parole (or “practice”), his signi-
fi ers and signifi eds map onto sign-tokens and object-tokens, or words and referents, 
respectively. 
 Indeed, just as there are legi-signs (say, the phonological form of a word, 
abstracted across all instances of usage), there are sin-objects (say, the actual ref-
erent of a word, on some particular occasion of usage). Just as we can investigate 
types of sign-object relations (say, the grammar and lexicon of a language), we can 
investigate tokens of interpretant-sign relations (the relation between one’s actual 
utterance and another’s immediate response, and thus discursive interaction). And 
just as we can focus on semiotic processes as replicas (qua actual tokens of oblig-
atory, necessary, or at least relatively stabilized types), we can focus on semiotic 
processes as singularities (qua unprecedented, non-normative, or irreproducible 
tokens). In short, we can focus on tokens that either instantiate or undermine such 
types and on the repercussions this has on the semiotic agents who express and 
interpret them as well as on the semiotic ontologies they hold (and usually hold 
dear). 
 In short, what we said about channels in chapter 2 applies equally to codes and 
should itself evoke Humboldt’s insights:  a fi nite domain of constraints leads to an 
infi nite range of confi gurations; and any such confi guration can both instantiate and 
undermine the set of constraints. 
 More generally, and to return to our discussion of signifi cance and selection 
from chapter 2, if a  quali-sign is whatever could be sensed by a semiotic agent (and 
thus possibly stand for an object to that agent), a  quali-interpretant  is whatever 
could be instigated by a semiotic agent (and, hence, be created by a sign inso-far as 
it stands for an object). And a  quali-object is whatever could organize the quali-signs 
(or sensations) and quali-interpretants (or instigations) of a semiotic agent: what-
ever could be a signifi cant feature in the context of its selecting interests. From 
this standpoint, a key function of  media  in the narrow sense (from telescopes and 
guns to gloves and sunglasses, from telephones and Internets to calculators and 
computers) is precisely to extend (as well as diminish, buffer, and mask) the sen-
sory and instigatory capabilities of semiotic agents (as well as their communicative 
and cognitive abilities more generally). In this way, earplugs, blindfolds, wetsuits, 
skateboards, camoufl age, and handcuffs are media as much as gramophones, fi lm, 
and typewriters. They transform the quali-signs and quali-interpretants of semiotic 
agents and, hence, the quali-objects of semiotic agents—and, hence, the semiotic 
agents per se, insofar as the features of such objects are so tightly coupled to the 
interests of such agents. This implies that there are  quali-agents  as well as sin-agents 
and legi-agents and, hence, singular and replicated agents as well. 
 We might then reframe our use of the word  ontology,  in comparison to how it 
was used in chapter 1, to mean the objects (signs and interpretants) projected from 
(and generating of) Peircean semiotic processes (qua object-sign relations analyzed by 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   53
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   53
7/25/2012   12:26:34 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:34 PM

 54 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
their relation to sequential unfoldings of interpretant-object relations) and Saussurian 
semiological structures (qua sign-object relations analyzed by their relation to virtual 
assemblages of other sign-object relations). 4 Anything that signifi es and interprets 
has an ontology in this sense, whatever its degree of semiotic agency. And anything 
that is signifi ed or interpreted is ontologized in this sense, whatever its degree of com-
plicity. Finally, ontologies are concomitant with ontogenies: the latter delimit how 
the former develop—either as process (as the conditions and consequences of their 
coming-to-be) or as event (as the contexts, practices, and relations through which 
their being is constituted).  Ontologies, then, mediate assemblages, processes, and scales 
far beyond the human-specifi c, linguistic, or ideological (Kockelman 2011a). And just 
as there are legi-ontologies (grounded in the legi-signs, legi-objects, and legi-interpre-
tants of a semiotic community), so there are quali-ontologies, as explored in genres 
as diverse as science fi ction and scientifi c theorization. This is another way of show-
ing the constitutive relation between ontology and semiosis: semiotic processes are 
not only grounded in, and grounding of, ontologies (as per the arguments in chapter 
1),; they are also the key signs of, and thus evidence for, ontological categories, such 
as what counts as an individual, kind, index, agent, or world.  
 OBJECTS AND OBJECTIVITY 
 Peirce offered a wonderful defi nition of the object: “that which a sign, so far as it 
fulfi lls the function of a sign, enables one who knows that sign, and knows it as a 
sign, to know” (quoted in Parmentier 1994:4). In chapter 2, we offered a careful def-
inition of the features of objects in relation to the interests of agents, as mediated 
by signs and interpretants, on the one hand, and sensations and instigations, on the 
other. And in chapter 1, we focused on a particular sort of object, or a particular 
framing of any object, namely, the kind. Framed yet another way, the object of a 
sign may often be understood as that which organizes (and, as we will see, is organ-
ized by) the range of (normatively) appropriate and effective and (causally) feasi-
ble and effi cacious interpretants of that sign. To return to our initial examples, in 
some cases (such as the tree the parent points to) objects seem relatively objective. 
In other cases (such as the punch that has yet to land) they seem putative or latent. 
And in still other cases (such as the function of an instrument or the value of an 
identity) they seem highly abstract or intangible. 
 Indeed, from the standpoint of an external observer (say, someone studying 
the semiotic community in question), it is often best to think of the object as a  cor-
respondence-preserving projection from all interpretants of a sign. (See Figure 3.2.) 
For example, if a cat’s purr is a sign, the object of that sign is a correspondence-
preserving projection from the set of behaviors (or interpretants) humans may or 
must do, or could and should do, in the context of a cat’s purr (within some par-
ticular semiotic community): pick it up and pet it, stroke it under the chin, exclaim 
“oh, that’s so cute!” offer a sympathetic low growl, stay seated petting it even when 
one needs to pee, and so on. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   54
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   54
7/25/2012   12:26:34 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:34 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
55 
 Needless to say, humans tend to objectify such objects by describing them in 
terms of physiology (say, “the purr-organ has been activated”), emotion (say, “she 
must be content”), or purpose (say, “she wants me to continue petting her”). Such 
relatively objectifying interpretants, as will be discussed below, are also relatively 
representational interpretants in that they seem to refer to, and predicate qualities 
about, the object, or sign-object relation, in question. Concomitantly, such repre-
sentational interpretants may also be true or false as well as justifi ed by and justi-
fying of other representations. They are a key means for articulating, or making 
propositionally explicit, the assumptions that constitute an ontology. 
 More generally, just as we may project semantic meaning or “truth-value” 
onto objects in this way, so too may we project “use-value” and “exchange-value” 
onto them. For example, one and the same instrument may not only be represented 
(“that’s a hammer”), but also used (to pound in a nail) or exchanged (for some 
other good, if not a quantity of money). In certain contexts, such representing, 
wielding, and exchanging, interpretants can be quite quotidian; in other contexts, 
often taken to be indicative of “modernity,” they may get systematized and reg-
imented in well-known ways via complicated ensembles (involving semiotic pro-
cesses, agents, and ontologies) that are often lumped together under the rubrics of 
science, technology, and economy. 
 In short, semiotic objects may be more or less precisely delimited, and more or 
less consistently exhibited, as seen by the dotted portion of Figure 3.2. They may 
be more or less intersubjectively shared (being more or less normatively spread, and 
recognized as being shared, across a population). They may be more or less contin-
uously accessible to the senses of an agent or more or less amenable to an agent’s 
size, shape, and strength more generally. As will be discussed in the next section, 
they may be more or less inferentially articulated and, concomitantly, more or less 
caught up in the reference-and-predication machinery of language or in the rea-
son-giving practices of a speech community. They may be more or less coherently 
entangled with other use-values and exchange-values or more or less implicated 
                       Object
(objectified as ‘pain’)
Interpretant #2
(say, don’t be so sensitive)
Interpretant #1
(ask, are you okay?)
Interpretant #3
(turn to look)
Sign
(exclaim, ouch!)
 FIGURE 3.2  Object as Correspondence-Preserving Projection 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   55
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   55
7/25/2012   12:26:34 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:34 PM

 56 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
in instrumental and economic practices more generally. They may be more or less 
entangled with, and reciprocally regimented by, other semiotic processes via relations 
such as incorporation, complementation, and creation. And, as will be explored in 
later sections, such objects may be more or less regimented by causes (versus norms) 
and, relatedly, their effects may be more or less independent of context or portable 
across contexts. In all of these (and other) interrelated ways, then, such objects may 
be more or less  enclosed (Kockelman 2006a, 2007a, 2010b), and thereby seem more 
or less “objective” (in various stereotypic senses of this word). (See Table 3.3.)  
 Finally, it must be stressed that objectifi cation (or enclosure more generally) is 
both a condition of possibility for, and a consequence of, high degrees of agency—
and so is usually “a good” as much as “a bad.” And so, while we may sometimes 
speak about “running the risk” of objectifi cation, it should be remembered that we 
are also constantly reaping its benefi ts. 
 LEGI-OBJECTS; PROPOSITIONS, CONCEPTS; MEDIATION; INFERENTIAL 
RELATIONALITY; INTENTIONALITY 
 While the relatively intangible nature of objects should seem evident for semiotic 
processes such as instruments and actions, it is less evident for words such as “cat” 
or utterances such as “the ball is on the table,” which seem to have “objects” (in the 
Cartesian sense) as their objects (in the semiotic sense). To understand the mean-
ing of such signs, several more distinctions need to be made. First, recall that just 
as there are sin-signs (or sign-tokens) and legi-signs (or sign-types), there are also 
sin-objects and legi-objects. Thus, in one key framing, an assertion (or a sentence 
with declarative illocutionary force, say, “the cat is under the table”) is a sign whose 
object-type relates to its object-token as a  proposition  relates to a  state of affairs . A 
word (or a substitutable lexical constituent of a sentence, say, “cat” and “table”) is 
TABLE 3.3
Various Factors Determining the Relative Enclosure (or “Objectivity”) of an Object
Relatively Detachable Object of Semiotic Process
Relatively Representational Interpretants of It (Semantic-Value, or “Concept”)
Relatively Economic Interpretants of It (Exchange-Value, or “Price”)
Relatively Instrumental Interpretants of It (Use-Value, or “Function”)
Relatively Precisely Delimited
Relatively Ubiquitously Evident
Relatively Continuously Perceivable
Relatively Detachable from Context
Relatively Portable Across Contexts
Relatively “Handy” (Given Sensory and Instigatory Capacities of Agent)
Relatively Legislated (in Peircean Sense)
Relatively Emblematically Indexed
Relatively Intersubjectively Recognized
Relatively Strong or Extended Intersubject (or Generalized Other) That Recognizes It
Propensity Relatively Regimented (by Causes versus Norms)
Relatively Coherently Entangled with Other Semiotic Processes (via Relations such as Incorporation, 
Complementation, and Creation)
Relatively Subject to High Degrees of Practical and Theoretical Agency
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   56
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   56
7/25/2012   12:26:34 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:34 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
57 
a sign whose object-type relates to its object-token as a  concept relates to a  referent . 5 
Finally, the set of all possible states of affairs of an assertion—or what the asser-
tion could be used to represent—may be called an  extension  (or, more suggestively, 
a “world”). And the set of all possible referents of a word—or what the word could 
be used to refer to—may be called a  category . (See Table 3.4.) 
 As is well known, many battles have been fought over the direction of infl u-
ence: words infl uencing concepts and categories and, thus, language infl uencing 
mind and world (a species of nominalism), concepts infl uencing words and catego-
ries and, thus, minds infl uencing language and world (a species of conceptualism), 
categories infl uencing words and concepts and, thus, worlds infl uencing language 
and mind (a species of realism). For example, so-called natural kinds (a particular 
kind of kind) are often understood, at least in certain ontologies, as material sub-
stances whose existence and properties are relatively impervious to, or untouched 
by, the mediating effects of language, culture, and mind.  6   In general, as will be seen 
below in our discussion of determination and regimentation, contributions come 
from all sides—for material substances as much as for social statuses and mental 
states. Indeed, we have yet to bring modes of residence in the world into the picture 
(and nonpropositional semiotic processes more generally). 
 The seemingly objective nature of the object-tokens of such words (referents) 
and sentences (states of affairs) is itself partially grounded in the inferential articu-
lation of their object types (concepts and propositions, respectively). In particular, 
there is a key species of correspondence that may be called  propositional relation-
ality  (to be further developed in chapter 5), namely, when the object of a sign is 
related to (the objects of) the interpretants of that sign, and these are themselves 
related to each other, via inferential relations (such as material and formal deduc-
tion and induction) and via linguistic relations (such as substitution for, and com-
bination with, the other grammatical and lexical categories in a language). And, 
hand in hand with this logical and linguistic mediation, there seem to be actual 
events that an assertion “represents,” such that there can be discrepancies between 
the state of affairs as represented and the state of affairs per se, so that such signs 
can be “false,” and their signers can even be “wrong” (not to mention “insincere”), 
which are very particular kinds of failure. 
 In short, as will be further developed in chapter 5, sentences and words have the 
property of  aboutness that characterizes intentional phenomena more generally—
not only “speech acts” such as assertions and promises, but also “mental states” 
such as beliefs and intentions. While all signs have a property of directedness by 
TABLE 3.4
The Objects of Inferentially Articulated Signs
Sign
Sentence
Word
Object (Type)
Proposition
Concept
Object (Token)
State of Affairs
Referent
Object (Set of Tokens)
Extension (World)
Category
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   57
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   57
7/25/2012   12:26:34 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:34 PM

 58 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
defi nition (i.e., they stand for objects or have signifi cance), and while most signs 
have an ability to fail (insofar as they were selected), signs whose objects are propo-
sitions (and concepts) have received extensive characterization—for their objects 
seem to be “of the world” in a very particular way, such that metaphysical worries 
about language-mind-world mediation can fl ourish. As will be shown, many such 
worries often turn out to be misplaced as soon as one starts to focus on sign-inter-
pretant relations as much as on sign-object relations (and thus inference as much 
as  representation and coherence as much as signifi cation), and on residence in the 
world as much as on representations of the world (and thus on modes of meaning 
that are as embodied and embedded as they are articulated and enminded). 
 DETERMINATION AND REGIMENTATION; OBVIATING THE DISTINCTION 
BETWEEN CAUSES AND NORMS 
 It is often very diffi cult to say which component of a semiotic process (sign, object, 
or interpretant)  determines the others. In a certain empirical sense, we may know 
of objects only by way of signs and interpretants (certainly in the public framing 
of semiotic processes emphasized above). For example, in the case of semiotic pro-
cesses that are instruments, we may stereotypically understand the function of a 
hammer by reference to the action of the agent who wields it (and the subsequent 
effect this has on the world) as well as by reference to the hammer itself (as an 
artifi ced entity, whose form more or less iconically relates to its function). However, 
it is the material properties of the sign component (e.g., an assemblage of wood 
and steel) that further determine what actions could wield it. And it is the material 
properties of the sign components of other complementary instruments in an envi-
ronment that further determine such actions: to use a hammer to pound in nails, 
one needs something equally hard (such as nails) and something somewhat softer 
(such as wood). Furthermore, the judgments of distributed actors, themselves com-
mitted to particular ontologies, who are possible witnesses to one’s action, may also 
determine what one does with a hammer: while it might be (causally) feasible to 
use a hammer to play pool, it would not be (normatively) appropriate. And these 
judgments as to the proper function of a hammer might themselves be determined 
by other judgments as to its proper use-value, exchange-value, or semantic-value, 
which may themselves be backed up by powerful institutions and grounded in per-
vasive infrastructures that help generate, disseminate, and stabilize such judgments 
and actions. Note, then, that all of these latter constraints can be as important in 
determining the function, as limiting or enabling, as the purposes of the original 
actors themselves—those who created such instruments, whatever their ends. 
 In short, while it may be the range of interpretants that empirically determine 
the function (for some observer), it is such  modes of regimentation that determine 
the range of interpretants. And these modes may themselves involve other semiotic 
processes, related via modalities of indexical and inferential coherence at different 
degrees of remove (such as incorporation, complementation, and creation), that 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   58
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   58
7/25/2012   12:26:35 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:35 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
59 
are as embedded and embodied as they are articulated and enminded. For these 
reasons, it is sometimes useful to talk about the legi-functions of instruments (as 
typically regimented, such as by norms or causes), their sin-functions (as actual 
usages, be these replicas or singularities), and even their quali-functions (the possi-
ble, permissible, or even imaginable uses of a given instrument in a particular con-
text or a given environment). 
 Given all this complexity, and as a convenient shorthand, it is sometimes 
tempting to say that, relatively speaking, some semiotic processes are regimented 
by permission and obligation (or “norms” and, more generally, thirdness), whereas 
some semiotic processes are regimented by possibility and necessity (or “causes” 
and, more generally, secondness).  7   In the fi rst case, a given semiotic process is more 
or less appropriate and effective in a given context (depending on who is watching 
as mediated by normative practices, which are themselves historically contingent 
and community-specifi c). In the second case, a given semiotic process is more or less 
feasible and effi cacious in a given context (regardless of who is watching as medi-
ated by causal processes that seem relatively timeless and general). 
 For example, note that the ground of many instruments (as the relation between 
their form and function, qua sign-object relation) may be just as “motivated” as it 
is “arbitrary.” Thus, whether or not an interpretant of such an instrument is appro-
priate and effective (as regimented by norms) is partially determined by whether it 
is feasible and effi cacious (as regimented by causes). As we saw in chapter 2, while 
one  can  use a screwdriver as a knife, it is less feasible to use a screwdriver as a ham-
mer; and, conversely, while one  may use scissors at a ribbon-cutting ceremony, it 
is less appropriate to use a switchblade. (To be sure, not all instruments are regi-
mented equally: tire spikes are to “no entry” signs what causes are to norms.) That 
is, instruments, insofar as they exist at the boundary between the arbitrary and the 
motivated, or the normative and the causal, can be inappropriately wielded (nor-
matively speaking) and still be causally effi cacious, and they can be feasibly wielded 
(causally speaking) and still be normatively ineffective. 
 But, as this example intimates,  such a distinction dissolves as soon as one makes 
it . For example, given our discussion in chapter 2 of the complex enchaining of rela-
tions between relations (and related notions such as incorporation, complementa-
tion, and creation), either of these modes of regimentation may itself be grounded in 
(mediated by, entangled with) the other at various degrees of remove. In part, this is 
because causes may mediate norms at various degrees of remove. For example, even 
the most “arbitrary” of signs may ultimately be “motivated” when framed in terms 
of selectional processes occurring on long time scales. In part, this is because norms 
may indirectly mediate causes. For example, while infrastructure may regiment 
behavior when nobody is watching, it is often built while someone was watching (if 
not to help someone watch, or stop someone from watching). In part, it is because 
human actors are, in some sense, always watching themselves (even when no one 
else is watching). In particular, we refl exively sanction our own behavior in light of 
the imagined responses of others—be these others gravitational fi elds and chemical 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   59
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   59
7/25/2012   12:26:35 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:35 PM

 60 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
reactions or fathers and gods. In part, it is because where we draw the line between 
cause and norm is itself often grounded in norms (as well as causes). In part, it is 
because thirdness encompasses much more than human-specifi c modes of language, 
culture, and mind. As we saw in chapter 2, for example, there is signifi cance and 
selection wherever there is life, however humble, and so many, perhaps most, of 
the most seemingly “natural” processes are grounded in meaning. And in part, it is 
because every semiotic process is potentially subject to both forms of regimentation, 
depending on the frame at issue and, hence, the scale of purview. For example, the 
meaningfulness of any utterance is grounded in processes involving selection and 
signifi cance (not to mention sieving and serendipity) that unfold on interactional, 
historical, and phylogenetic time scales. And so what seems fi xed, permanent, and 
independent in one frame, may seem fl uid, fl eeting, and dependent in another. 
 When we speak then of regimentation by norms (or thirdness) versus regi-
mentation by causes (or secondness), these should really be understood as relative 
notions—or poles of a continuum rather than positions in an opposition. And, 
indeed, even this characterization is optimistic: in some sense, such terms are but 
admissions of ignorance as to the actual micropractices and macroprocesses that 
are involved in the genesis, spread, stabilization, and maintenance of semiotic pro-
cesses. As intimated above, to really handle the conditions and consequences of 
action, we need to account for the modes of coherence that organize not only res-
idence in the world (chapter 4) and representations of the world (chapter 5), but 
also the agents, persons, subjects, and selves that reside and represent (chapter 6). 
For the moment, however, we may sometimes use the distinction between norms 
and causes, and the distinction between thirdness and secondness more generally, 
as conceptual shortcuts—so long as we realize that, loosely speaking, there is a lot 
of fi rstness, or  ontological wiggle room , in where we frame the distinction between 
secondness and thirdness. 8 
 REGIMENTATION AS SELECTION 
 Finally, and perhaps most importantly for what follows, there is one key reason 
that the distinction between causes and norms is so easily obviated. And this reason 
turns on the temporality of action as much as the embeddedness of agency. On the 
one hand, every action more or less conforms to context (insofar as it is feasible and 
appropriate, and only in certain respects); on the other hand, every action more or 
less transforms context (insofar as it is effi cacious and effective, and only in certain 
respects). Just as every action has as its roots a normative and causal context (that 
was itself the fruits of prior actions), every action has as its fruits a normative and 
causal context (that will itself be the roots of subsequent actions). And thus, how-
ever strongly or weakly a context normatively and causally regiments our actions, it 
could always be otherwise (more or less) by means of our actions. 
 In particular, for human agents on interactional time scales (and probably for 
a wide range of nonhuman agents as well),  this mode of regimentation is a key form 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   60
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   60
7/25/2012   12:26:35 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:35 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
61 
of selection (and sieving more generally): our semiotic processes unfold in both con-
scious and unconscious, enminded and embodied conformity to (and transforma-
tion of) such an embedding context. Just as we can often anticipate, or commit to, 
the effects of our behaviors (as causes), we can anticipate the interpretants of our 
behaviors (as signs). In other words, semiotic agents can often take into account, 
with more or less accuracy, the reactions and responses of others to their semiotic 
processes (be these others people or things or anything outside or in-between), and 
thereby shape those semiotic processes accordingly, and thereby conform to the 
assumptions that constitute ontologies, and the kinds that populate them, at the 
same time that they play a role in their transformation. As we will seen in sections 5 
and 6, this is a way of generalizing Mead’s generalized other. 
 GROUNDS; ICONS, INDICES, SYMBOLS; REGIMENTATION REVISITED 
 The relation between signs and objects is fundamental, and will be referred to here 
as the “ground” (compare Peirce 1992a [1868]; and see Peirce 1998a [1903]). In the 
case of relatively iconic signs, this relation is based in similarity of qualities (such as 
shape, size, color, or texture). Examples include portraits and diagrams. In the case 
of relatively indexical signs, this relation is based in spatiotemporal contiguity or 
causal connection. Examples include exclamations such as “ouch” and symptoms 
such as fevers. And in the case of relatively  symbolic signs, this relation is arbitrary 
(meaning neither iconic nor indexical) and is usually thought to reside in “conven-
tion” (or norms more generally). Examples include words such as “boy” and “run.” 
Notice, then, that the same object (loosely speaking) may be stood for by a symbol 
(say, the word  dog ), an index (say, pointing to a dog), or an icon (say, a picture of a 
dog). When Saussure speaks of the “arbitrary” and the “motivated” (1983 [1916]), 
he is usually describing semiotic processes whose sign-object relations are relatively 
symbolic versus relatively iconic or indexical (such as onomatopoeia and interjec-
tions, respectively). See (Table 3.1 [row 3].) 
 It should be stressed that most semiotic processes partake of each kind of 
relation to some degree (as used by interpreters to infer the objects of signs, if not 
by signers to indicate them). It should also be stressed that there are potentially an 
infi nite number of ways any two entities, qua sign and object, could be related by 
qualities, contiguities, or conventions. And, thus, which possible quality (contiguity 
or convention) happens to be foregrounded by a signer or interpreter when relat-
ing an object to a sign may itself be grounded in convention. By crossing Peirce’s 
categories, then, we might, therefore, say that there are legi-grounds (say, typical 
relations between a sign and an object, as recognized by a given semiotic commun-
ity), sin-grounds (actual relations used by signers, or attended to by interpreters, 
in a given semiotic event), and quali-grounds (possible grounds—be they iconic, 
indexical, or symbolic—that might be found in, projected on, or used to establish 
a given sign-object relation). Thus, we may repeat the classic (and, as we will see 
below, relatively simple-minded) relativist mantra: where we draw the line between 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   61
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   61
7/25/2012   12:26:35 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:35 PM

 62 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
the iconic-indexical and the symbolic (as well as where we draw the line between the 
iconic and the indexical-symbolic) is itself often grounded in the symbolic. 
 As noted above, in our example of the function of instruments, there is an inti-
mate relation between grounds (as the relation between a sign and object) and regi-
mentation (as that which maintains such a relation). More generally, there is a tight 
coupling between the qualities, contiguities, and conventions an interpreter uses to 
fi gure out the object of a sign (or a signer uses to draw an interpreter’s attention to 
an object) and the various factors that contribute to the creation, spread, and stabili-
zation of semiotic processes (qua sign-object-interpretant relations). Indeed, the very 
same set of embedded, enminded, and embodied processes that allowed us to heavily 
qualify the distinction between norms and causes (as two kinds of regimentation) 
also allows us to heavily qualify the distinction between icons, indices, and symbols. 
In some sense, the distinction between the motivated and the arbitrary is as necessary 
to obviate as the distinction between causes and norms, and for all the same reasons. 
 That said, while it is tempting to resort to the usual relativist mantras (where we 
draw the line between nature and convention is grounded in convention, or where 
we draw the line between the motivated and the arbitrary is grounded in the arbi-
trary, or where we draw the line between causes and norms is grounded in norms, 
or, to return to the concerns of chapter 2, where we draw the line between interme-
diaries and mediators is grounded in mediators, or, most generally, where we draw 
the line between seconds and thirds is grounded in thirds), these do not really hold. 
In part, this is because they can easily be reversed: where we draw the line between 
nature and culture is itself grounded in nature. And, in part, it is because the more 
important point is to obviate the distinctions. Instead of reifying normative regi-
mentation and causal regimentation, or arbitrary grounds and motivated grounds, 
or thirds and seconds, more generally, let us focus instead on two other kinds of 
processes. First, as will be undertaken in subsequent chapters, we need to theorize 
the actual modes of coherence (and incoherence) that may organize (and disrupt) 
residence in the world and representations of the world as well as those who reside 
and represent. And second, as was undertaken in chapter 1, and will be explored 
more below, we need to theorize the semiotic ontologies and modes of semiotic 
framing that both license and are licensed by such analytic distinctions. 
 SEMIOTIC ONTOLOGIES REFRAMED 
 In one framing, every interpretant of a sign-object relation is itself a sign of the 
interpreter’s understanding, however tacit, of the relation between the sign and the 
object. 9   In particular, for a sign to give rise to an interpretant insofar as it stands 
for an object requires that the interpreter (and often the signer) be able to relate the 
sign to the object in some way. And, as just described, Peirce theorized three kinds 
of sign-object relations: iconicity (when sign and object share a quality), indexical-
ity (when sign and object are contiguous or causally connected with each other), 
and symbolism (when sign and object are related by something like convention). In 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   62
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   62
7/25/2012   12:26:35 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:35 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
63 
short, every interpretant evinces the interpreter’s understanding of such interrela-
tions and, hence, is a (relatively indirect) sign of the interpreter’s semiotic ontology. 
 More broadly, for an interpreter to interpret (or a signer to signify) requires 
that the interpreter (and often the signer) has a set of “assumptions” regarding: 
(1) the qualities entities have; (2) the contiguities qualifi able entities have with each 
other; and (3) the conventional entities signers and interpreters share (i.e., signs, 
themselves ensembles of qualifi able contiguities) for pointing to (contiguity) and 
providing information about (quality) other entities (i.e., objects), which themselves 
may be any component of a semiotic process or any relation between such com-
ponents. Such assumptions are both condition for and consequence of semiotic 
processes. And they constitute a key part of any agent’s ontology. 
 Not only, then, are the entities that play the role of signs, objects, and inter-
pretants in our semiotic processes fundamental constituents of our ontologies, so 
too are the underlying assumptions that allow semiotic agents to relate such entities 
to each other (i.e., qualities, contiguities, and conventions). This is another way of 
showing how the assumptions that constitute semiotic ontologies may be implicitly 
embodied in semiotic processes as much as explicitly articulated through semiotic 
processes. And it is another way of showing how ontologies license interpretations 
as much as interpretations license ontologies. 
 FETISHIZATION, REIFICATION; STRAIN, LEAKAGE 
 In the Baconian tradition alluded to at the beginning of this chapter, itself most 
famously developed by Marx (1967 [1867]), fetishism and reifi cation are concomi-
tant processes that may initially be characterized in terms of the systematic misinter-
pretation of the conditions for, and the consequences of, meaning (which includes 
value in the more narrow economic sense, as noted at the beginning of chapter 2). 
This misinterpretation is itself conditioned, in part, by a discrepancy between the 
experiential horizons of semiotic agents and the existential worldlines of semiotic 
processes. And this misrecognition is itself conditioning of a range of effects that 
may easily be described in terms of the foregoing categories: (1) treating a natural 
(or happenstance) sign as a non-natural (or “intentional”) sign, or vice versa, (2) 
treating a nonselected (or merely sieved) process as a selected process or treating 
natural selection as intentional or artifi cial selection, or vice versa, (3) treating an 
immediate object (itself caused by the sign) as a dynamic object (itself causal of 
the sign), or vice versa, (4) treating an arbitrary ground as a motivated ground, or 
vice versa, (5) treating relatively incoherent semiotic processes as relatively coherent 
semiotic processes, or vice versa, (6) treating a second (or intermediary) as a third 
(or mediator), or vice versa, (7) treating causes as norms, or vice versa, (8) treating 
a signer or interpreter as having too much or too little agency over the semiotic pro-
cess in question (a point we’ll return to in section 5). 
 As mentioned above, given the frequent diffi culty a scholar or semiotic com-
munity may have determining the causes of, and the reasons for, a particular semiotic 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   63
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   63
7/25/2012   12:26:35 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:35 PM

 64 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
process, it is tempting to take a relatively nonrealist stance and argue that where 
the line is drawn between “nature” and “culture” (or “objects” and “subjects”) is 
itself often grounded in culture (or subjects). Realists, on the other hand, might argue 
that the line cannot be drawn just anywhere—nature fi ghts back as much as cul-
ture, objects as much as subjects. Just as certain kinds of coherence are  relatively 
frame-independent, certain sorts of propensities are relatively indifferent to the desires 
and norms of human agents. For example, whether we try to treat people as mindless 
automatons, or thunder booms as communicative signs, there will be “strain” (to use 
Brandom’s (1979) suggestive term). In particular, there will be signs of this strain, or 
what we may call ontological leakage. (Note then that, as defi ned here, strain relates 
to leakage as kind relates to index, and so strain and leakage are themselves subject 
to semiotic ontologies, framings and so forth.) From such a relatively realist stance, 
another sense of fetishization (and reifi cation) is that which elides signs of strain, 
while enabling the treatment of seconds as thirds (or thirds as seconds). 
 In any case, note how all these issues are fundamentally mediated by ontolo-
gies. In particular, for something to be a sign of strain there must be at least two 
ontologies involved, one belonging to the actor (itself specifying where to draw the 
divide between nature and culture, objects and subjects, things and people, second-
ness and thirdness, etc.) and one belonging to the analyst (itself not only specifying 
where the actor draws the divide, but also where the divide should really be drawn). 
In this way, claims regarding fetishization or reifi cation are closely related to inten-
sionality (notice the spelling), a notion that will be analyzed in depth in chapter 5: 
one’s ability not only to represent another’s representation (for example, by having 
a belief about another’s belief), but also to represent how their representation is 
wrong (or incoherent, more generally), why this is so, and what are its ramifi cations 
(such as bad science, faulty technology, superstitious behavior, human error, and 
ontological leakage, more generally). For present purposes, note that an analyst 
may frame some event as a sign of strain insofar as it indicates to them that the 
actor’s ontology is at odds with the world (which is itself in conformity with their 
own ontology). Crucially, as summarized in chapter 1, and as will be further devel-
oped in section 6, interpretations can transform ontologies just as much as ontolo-
gies can transform interpretations—transformations that are often driven by events 
that may be framed as signs of strain or ontological leakage (for example, signs that 
some ontology is at odds with a world). This means that notions such as fetishiza-
tion and reifi cation, just like the notions of natural kinds and social constructions 
on which they depend, are usually far too simple-minded to understand anything. 
 INTERPRETANTS; AFFECTIVE, ENERGETIC, REPRESENTATIONAL, 
ULTIMATE; BELIEF; HABITUS; EMOTION 
 As inspired by Peirce (1998 [1907]), there are three basic types of interpretants. An 
affective interpretant is a change in one’s bodily state. It can range from an increase 
in metabolism to a blush, from a feeling of pain to a feeling of being off-balance, 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   64
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   64
7/25/2012   12:26:35 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:35 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
65 
from sweating to an erection. This change in bodily state is itself a sign that is 
potentially perceptible to the body’s owner, or to others who can perceive the own-
er’s body. And, as signs themselves, these interpretants may lead to subsequent, and 
perhaps more developed, interpretants. 
 Energetic interpretants involve effort and individual causality; they do not nec-
essarily involve purpose, intention, or planning. For example, fl inching at the sound 
of a gun is an energetic interpretant, as is craning one’s neck to see what made a 
sound, as is saluting a superior when she walks by, as is wielding an instrument (say, 
pounding in a nail with a hammer), as is heeding an affordance (say, tiptoeing on 
a creaky fl oor). 
 And  representational interpretants  are signs with propositional content, such 
as an assertion (or explicit speech act, more generally). They may be used to make 
explicit the assumptions that constitute one’s ontology. Stereotypically, such repre-
sentations can be true or false, exhibit functions such as reference and predication, 
and constitute the premises and conclusions of inferences more generally. Thus, to 
describe someone’s movement as “he raised his hand” is to offer an interpretant of 
such a controlled behavior (qua sign) insofar as it has a purpose (qua object). And, 
hence, while such representations are signs (that may be subsequently interpreted), 
they are also interpretants (of prior signs). This again foregrounds our claim that 
even non-meta-linguistic linguistic signs (e.g., assertions) are already meta-semiotic, 
having semiotic processes such as actions, roles, and instruments (as well as their 
interrelations) as their objects. 
 Finally, it should be emphasized that the same sign can lead to different kinds 
of interpretants—sometimes simultaneously and sometimes sequentially. For exam-
ple, upon being exposed to a violent image, one may blush (affective interpretant), 
avert one’s gaze (energetic interpretant), or say “that shocks me” (representational 
interpretant). (See Table 3.1 [row 4].) 
 Crucially, framing may be involved in determining where affective interpre-
tants end and energetic interpretants begin or where energetic interpretants end and 
representational interpretants begin. In other words, the boundary between differ-
ent kinds of interpretants (affective, energetic, representational) is like the bound-
ary between norms and causes discussed above: it may be drawn in different places, 
subject to more or less strain and leakage, as differentially framed by different kinds 
of actors depending on their semiotic ontologies. Stereotypically, though, as one 
moves from affective interpretants to representational interpretants, the interpreter 
has, or is at least accorded, more agency over the components of the semiotic pro-
cess in question, more fl exibility in determining them, and more accountability for 
having determined them. We will return to these points in section 5. 
 Finally, each of these three types of interpretants may be paired with a slightly 
more abstract double, known as an ultimate interpretant (compare Peirce 1998 
[1907]). In particular, an ultimate affective interpretant is not a change in bodily state 
per se, but rather a disposition (or propensity) to have one’s bodily state change—
and, hence, is a disposition to express affective interpretants (of a particular type). 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   65
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   65
7/25/2012   12:26:35 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:35 PM

 66 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
Such an interpretant, then, is not itself a sign but is only evinced in a pattern of 
behavior (as the exercise of that disposition or a playing out of that propensity). 
These correspond, in certain respects, to vernacular notions, such as “mood,” and 
expert categories, such as agoraphobia. Analogously, an  ultimate energetic inter-
pretant  is a disposition to express energetic interpretants (of a particular type). In 
short, it is a disposition to behave in certain ways—as evinced in purposeful and 
nonpurposeful behaviors. Mauss’s (1973 [1935]) techniques of the body are good 
examples of this. And fi nally, an ultimate representational interpretant is the prop-
ositional content of a representational interpretant, plus all the propositions that 
may be inferred from it, when all of these propositions are embodied in a change of 
habit, as evinced in behavior that conforms to these propositional contents. 
 For example, a  belief  is the quintessential ultimate representational interpretant: 
in being committed to a proposition (i.e., “holding a belief”), one is also more or less 
committed to any propositions that may be inferred from it (and any states of affairs 
such propositions may indexically relate to as cause or effect), and one’s commitment 
to this inferentially articulated (and usually indexically embedded) set of proposi-
tions is evinced in one’s behavior: what one is likely or unlikely to do or say insofar as 
it confi rms or contradicts these propositional contents (and indexical contexts). 
 Notice that these ultimate interpretants are not signs in themselves: while they 
dispose one toward certain behaviors (affectual, energetic, representational), they 
are not the behaviors per se; rather, they are  dispositions to behave in certain ways. 
(Or, as will be seen in the next section, if we take the standpoint of the observer, 
rather than of the actor, and frame them completely in semiotic terms, as a par-
ticular sort of kind, they may be understood as  (projected) propensities to signify, 
objectify, and interpret in particular ways. ) In this way, they are both a consequence 
of semiotic processes and a condition for semiotic processes. And note, then, that 
while they cover much of the same ground, or extension, as the notion of a “habi-
tus” (Bourdieu 1977 [1972]), they offer a radical reframing of its origins, structure, 
and mechanism. 
 While such a sixfold typology of interpretants may seem complicated at fi rst, 
it should accord with one’s intuitions. Indeed, as will be elaborated in chapter 6, 
most  emotions  really involve a complicated bundling together of all these types of 
interpretants. For example, upon hearing a gunshot (as a sign), one may be suf-
fused with adrenaline (affective interpretant); one might make a frightened facial 
expression (relatively nonpurposeful energetic interpretant); one may run over to 
look at what happened (relatively purposeful energetic interpretant); and one might 
say “that scared the hell out of me” (representational interpretant). Moreover, one 
may forever tremble at the sight of the woods (ultimate affective interpretant); one 
may never go into that part of the woods again (ultimate energetic interpretant); 
and one might forever believe that the woods are fi lled with dangerous men (ulti-
mate representational interpretant). In this way, most so-called emotions may be 
decomposed into a bouquet of more basic and varied interpretants. And, in this 
way, the seemingly most private, subjective forms of experience may be reframed 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   66
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   66
7/25/2012   12:26:35 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:35 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
67 
in terms of their public, intersubjective effects, and they may be grounded in, and 
grounding of, the most far-fl ung or overarching assumptions of one’s ontology 
(Kockelman 2011a).  
 FIRSTNESS, SECONDNESS, THIRDNESS; NATURALISM; 
EMBODIMENT, EMBEDDEDNESS 
 Putting all the foregoing ideas together, a set of threefold distinctions may be enu-
merated. First, any semiotic process has three components: sign, object, interpretant. 
There are three kinds of signs (as well as three kinds of objects and interpretants): 
quali-, sin-, and legi-. There are three kinds of object-sign (sign-interpretant and 
interpretant-object) relations, or grounds: iconicity (quality), indexicality (contigu-
ity), and symbolism (convention). And there are three kinds of interpretants: affec-
tive, energetic, and representational (along with their ultimate variants). Finally, 
Peirce’s categories of fi rstness, secondness, and thirdness (1992 [1887–1888], 1998a 
[1903]), while notoriously diffi cult to defi ne, might be best understood as genus 
categories, which include the foregoing categories as species. (See Table 3.1.) In 
particular, fi rstness is to secondness is to thirdness, as sign is to object is to inter-
pretant, as iconic is to indexical is to symbolic, as affective is to energetic is to rep-
resentational. Thus, fi rstness relates to sense and possibility; secondness relates to 
force and actuality; and thirdness relates to understanding and generality. Indeed, 
given that thirdness presupposes secondness, and secondness presupposes fi rstness, 
Peirce’s theory assumes that human-specifi c modes of semiosis (thirdness per se) 
are grounded in modes of fi rstness and secondness. Peirce’s pragmatism, then, pro-
vides a naturalistic account of meaning—one in which semiosis is as embodied and 
embedded as it is enminded and articulated. 
 Finally, it must be emphasized that Peirce’s categories themselves constitute an 
ontology—one we loosely hold onto, in part, because of the incredible fl exibility it 
affords when crossed with a notion of framing and the obviations this generates, 
and, in part, because of the incredible refl exivity it affords insofar as it can be used 
to both understand and undermine its own assumptions. That said, it is only a small 
part of the larger story. As was shown in chapter 2, there are (at least) fi ve other 
kinds of relations between relations (besides semiotic processes, or correspondence 
proper) that need to be taken into account—not the least of which is selection, 
about which Peirce had relatively little to say. 
 SEMIOTIC COMMUNITY; SEMIOTIC COMMONS; CULTURE 
 We might end this section by defi ning a  semiotic community as a group of semiotic 
agents (often people) who, relatively speaking, have semiotic processes in common 
(or a shared semiotic ontology, more generally), in contrast to one or more other 
groups (who have other semiotic processes in common) where each of these groups 
is self-conscious of this contrastive commonality. (See Table 3.2 [row 5].)  Culture , 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   67
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   67
7/25/2012   12:26:36 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:36 PM

 68 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
as an ideal type (and often a projected fantasy, if not an imaginary kind, however 
densely enclosed as a  semiotic commons ), would then be the ensemble of semiotic 
processes that (relatively speaking) both evince and enable (or immediately and 
dynamically index) such relatively refl exive modes of group-identity and difference.   
 3.  Social Statuses, Material Substances, and Mental States 
 For the Boasian Ralph Linton (1936), a status (as distinct from the individual who 
holds it) was a collection of rights and responsibilities attendant upon inhabiting a 
certain position in the social fabric. That is, the rights and responsibilities that go 
with being a parent or child, a husband or wife, a citizen or foreigner, a king or a 
subject. For example, the right to wear a crown, or the responsibility to bow. A role 
was any enactment of one’s status. That is, the behavior that arises when one puts 
one’s status into effect by acting on one’s rights and according to one’s responsibili-
ties. For example, actually wearing a crown or taking a bow. And, while untheo-
rized by Linton, an attitude might be understood as another’s response to one’s 
status by having perceived one’s role. For example, bowing before a person who 
wears a crown. In particular, many attitudes are themselves statuses: upon inferring 
another’s status (by perceiving their role), one adopts a complementary status (and 
its attendant roles). 
 In this section we return to the theory of kinds that was introduced in chapter 
1 during our discussion of semiotic ontologies. We use this theory to reframe a 
range of relatively complicated semiotic processes that may be loosely described as 
social statuses, mental states, and material substances. And just as social statuses 
will be reframed as one sort of kind among many, roles will be reframed as one 
sort of index among many, and attitudes will be reframed as one sort of interpre-
tant among many. As will be seen, what is particularly salient about all of these 
kinds is that they are simultaneously semiotic processes in themselves and ways of 
organizing relatively coherent ensembles of semiotic processes (as well as nonsemi-
otic processes, as it will turn out). Indeed, such kinds may be the most interesting, 
important, and undertheorized modes of meta-semiosis there are: a semiotic pro-
cess whose object is a projected propensity to exhibit certain semiotic processes, 
whose sign is any such semiotic process or any one of its components (insofar as it 
indexes this propensity), and whose key interpretant is an inference that some indi-
vidual (related to the index in question) constitutes such a kind, and thus is likely 
to exhibit other indices (qua semiotic processes) that would be in keeping with this 
projected propensity. As argued in chapter 1, such kinds (as well as such indices, 
individuals, inferences, and worlds) are the roots and fruits of semiotic ontologies 
and, thus, heavily mediate the semiotic processes of the agents who orient to them. 
 Finally, a key point of clarifi cation. While kinds are taken to be fundamental, 
the division of kinds into social statuses, mental states, and material substances is 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   68
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   68
7/25/2012   12:26:36 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:36 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
69 
merely a rhetorical shortcut. These are vernacular terms, grounded in both folk and 
expert ontologies, that will be redefi ned in relatively technical ways. As will be seen, 
so-called mental states are just as “social” and “material” as they are status-like 
and substance-like; social statuses are just as “mental” and “material” as they are 
state-like and substance-like; and material substances are just as “social” and “men-
tal” as they are status-like and state-like. (Or, more to the point: words such as 
“social,” “mental,” and “material” don’t get you very far.) The vernacular terms are 
maintained because their extensions are relatively complementary and, together, 
cover a wide range of phenomena. Other ontologies would offer other sorts of 
kinds and other ways of framing these kinds of kinds. And so the important thing 
to foreground in what follows is the theory of kindedness (which relates kinds to 
indices, individuals, inferences, agents, ontologies, emblemeticity, and transforma-
tivity) rather than the taxonomy of kinds per se (which could easily be otherwise, 
and as the theory predicts, usually is). 
 ROLE, STATUS, ATTITUDE; SOCIAL RELATION 
 More carefully defi ned, we may argue that roles, statuses, and attitudes should 
really be understood as three components of the same semiotic process—mapping 
onto signs, objects, and interpretants, respectively. (See Table 3.1 [row 6].) In par-
ticular, as will be used here, a  status  is a (projected) propensity to signify, objectify, 
and interpret in particular ways. (Compare the defi nition of ultimate interpretants 
offered above. And note that anyone or anything that may be framed as signifying, 
objectifying, or interpreting may thus have a status in this sense.) A  role (or index 
more generally) is any sign of this propensity, itself often a particular mode of sig-
nifying, objectifying, or interpreting. 10 And an  attitude is another’s response to, or 
interpretant of, a status by having perceived a role or index, itself often another sta-
tus. A key social process is, therefore, a semiotic process: having perceived another’s 
role (qua sign), I may infer their status (qua object) and thereby come to expect them 
(qua interpretant or attitude) to perform other roles, or exhibit other indices, that 
would be in keeping with that status. Loosely speaking, then,  a status (qua “iden-
tity”) is propensity personifi ed; a role or index (qua “performance”) is personhood 
actualized; and an attitude (qua “recognition”) is another’s persona internalized . 
 In making this move, then, we may not only understand social relations in 
terms of semiotic processes, we may also understand semiotic processes in terms 
of social relations. Recall, for example, Marx’s and Aristotle’s account of relations 
between relations from chapter 2: a relation between people is mediated by a rela-
tion between things. Such a process may be generalized:  the social relation between 
a signer and an interpreter is itself mediated by the semiotic relation between a sign 
and an interpretant (and vice versa) . In particular, as will be generalized in section 
5, our intersubjective recognition of our relevant statuses is both condition for and 
consequence of our ongoing interaction. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   69
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   69
7/25/2012   12:26:36 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:36 PM

 70 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
 SOCIAL STATUSES AS IMAGINED AND REGIMENTED; 
MODALITY AND PROPENSITY 
 With these basic defi nitions in hand, several fi ner distinctions may be introduced 
and several caveats may be established. First, Linton’s original defi nition focused on 
rights and responsibilities, with no indication of how these were to be regimented. 
For present purposes, the modes of permission and obligation that make up a sta-
tus may be regimented by any number of means: while stereotypically grounded 
in norms (as commitments and entitlements to act in particular ways), they may 
also be grounded in rules (as articulated norms) or laws (as legally promulgated 
and politically enforced rules). Or, as per our more general defi nition of kinds, they 
may turn on projected and potentially internalized propensities to signify, objectify, 
and interpret in particular ways—propensities that are just as easily (and perhaps 
more often) imagined as grounded in causes (or “nature”) rather than norms (or 
“culture”). And thus while statuses often exist at the intersection of meaning (signi-
fi cation and interpretation) and modality (commitment and entitlement), they may 
be imagined in other terms and regimented in other ways. 
 While the four classic types of status come from the  Politics  of Aristotle (hus-
band/wife, parent/child, master/slave, human/animal), statuses are really much more 
varied, much more basic, and often much less objectifi ed. For example, kinship rela-
tions involve complementary statuses: aunt/niece, father-in-law/daughter-in-law, 
and so forth. Positions in the division of labor are statuses: spinner, guard, nurse, 
waiter, etc. Positions within civil and military organizations are statuses: CEO, pri-
vate, sergeant, secretary. Social categories of the more colorful kind are statuses: 
geek, stoner, slut, bon vivant, fair-weather friend, noob. As are social categories of 
the more politicized kind: male, black, Mexican, rich, gay. What Marx called the 
dramatis personae of economic processes (1967 [1867]:113) are also statuses: buyer 
and seller, creditor and debtor, broker and proxy. And Goffman’s “participant roles” 
(1981b) are really statuses: speaker and addressee,; participant and bystander, and 
animator, author, and principal. Finally, as will be further developed in chapter 
6, any form of possession is a status: one has rights to, and responsibilities for, 
the possession in question. That is, to own a home (qua use-value) or have $50.00 
(qua exchange-value) is a particular kind of status (Kockelman 2007c). Note, then, 
that statuses may be as permanent as one’s personhood (often lasting one’s entire 
life) or as fl eeting as one’s authorship (sometimes lasting less than the length of a 
single turn at talk). And they can be achieved as much as ascribed, encouraged as 
much as avoided, internalized as much as projected, recognized only by the bearer 
or regimented by an entire world. Finally, they may be more or less objectifi ed, or 
enclosed, in all the ways discussed in the last section. 
 Just as statuses can be quite diverse, so can the roles that seem to enact them 
and the indices that seem to reveal them. In particular, a role or index can be any 
semiotic practice and, hence, anything that one does or says, any symbol or ges-
ture, any sign that one purposely gives out or unconsciously gives off (compare 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   70
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   70
7/25/2012   12:26:36 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:36 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
71 
Mead 1934; Goffman 1959). Such status-indexing signs may range from wearing 
a particular kind of hat in public to visiting particular shrines on holy days, from 
standing at a certain point in a soccer- fi eld to sitting in a certain place at a dinner 
table, from deferring judgment when certain people are present to kneeling before 
certain kinds of icons, from evincing particular physical traits to wearing certain 
kinds of clothes, from expressing certain desires to espousing certain beliefs, and 
so on, and so forth. (Recall that such status-indexing signs need not always be 
expressed by, or exhibited on, the one whose status is in question: I may learn of 
your status by those who accompany you and that which surrounds you.) More 
carefully, roles—and status-indexing signs more generally—are often themselves 
relations between signs and interpretants or circumstances (qua eliciting context) 
and behaviors (qua elicited practice). Again, then, we are dealing with an inherently 
meta-semiotic process: It is because you express interpretant  I in the context of sign 
 S (or produce behavior  B in circumstance  C ) that I infer you are of a certain status 
(and thereby come to expect you to also express interpretant  I’  in the context of 
 S’ ,  I’ in the context of  S’ , and so on and so forth).  11   For this reason, as stressed in 
chapter 1, most status-indexing signs are maximally relational, context-bound, and 
frame-dependent, just as most statuses are minimally concrete and permanent, just 
as most attitudes are highly abductive and error-prone. 
 Finally, just as statuses are no more mysterious than any other object, and roles 
are no more mysterious than any other sign, attitudes are no more mysterious than 
any other interpretant. Hence, attitudes include affective interpretants (sweating 
when you infer your hitchhiker is an escaped convict), energetic interpretants (hug-
ging an old friend after a long absence), or representational interpretants (saying, 
“she must be a lawyer” when describing a passerby). In particular, attitudes may 
themselves be ultimate interpretants and, hence, often a kind of social status or 
mental state (and so the process may continue indefi nitely). This is a crucial point 
that we will return to below when we discuss performativity: from one framing, a 
status may be the (ultimate) interpretant of another’s sign, and from another fram-
ing, a status may be the (dynamic or immediate) object indexed by a sign. Statuses, 
then, may usually be framed as having both roots and fruits: not only may they be 
both cause and effect of other events, but, more generally, they may be sign, object, 
or interpretant of other semiotic processes. 
 STATUS VERSUS PRESTIGE; ROLE VERSUS STATUS SYMBOL 
 It should be emphasized, then, that the defi nition of status being developed here 
is not the same as the folk-sociological understanding of status as relative prestige, 
qua “high status” and “low status.” Moreover, the defi nition of role being developed 
here should not be confused with the folk-sociological sense of “status symbols” or 
“emblems of identity.” The issues being addressed here are much broader in scope, 
and only reduce to these lay notions in certain limits. And while we are incorporat-
ing Linton’s original terms (status and role), and adding a third one (attitude) as a 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   71
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   71
7/25/2012   12:26:36 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:36 PM

 72 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
kind of shorthand, they have been radically redefi ned. Nonetheless, using the old 
terms runs the risk of objectifying the components. And so, as per our discussion 
in chapter 1, it is usually best to speak about  putative indices ,  projected propensities, 
and  potential orientations (as mediated by particular ontologies, assembled in cer-
tain framings, held by specifi c agents, and attributed to certain individuals). (See 
Table 3.5.) 
 KIND DEFINED; MATERIAL SUBSTANCES; PROPERTIES; 
INTERPRETIVE REASON 
 Such an inherently inferential and indexical process is applicable to more than social 
statuses. To return to the concerns of Francis Bacon, a  material substance  (say, gold) 
exhibits a range of “properties” (or substance-indexing signs more generally): it melts 
at a certain temperature, it refl ects light of a certain wavelength, it exhibits a certain 
resistance when a voltage is applied, and so forth. Indeed, it is these very properties 
that permit us to say that it is gold. While we may not want to say that it “behaves” 
a certain way when in a certain “circumstance,” we would certainly say that it pro-
duces certain effects (or exhibits certain indices) when subject to certain causes (or 
put into certain contexts). In any case, the inferential possibilities offered by mate-
rial substances are similar to the inferential possibilities offered by social statuses: 
relatively perceptible roles or properties (or indices, qua circumstance-behavior or 
cause-effect relations) provide evidence for an underlying status or substance (or 
kind, qua projected propensity to exhibit other roles or properties). 
 In this wide sense, then,  a kind is a (projected) propensity for patterned being 
that admits of interpretive reasoning, where such reasoning is grounded in semiotic 
processes that turn on indexicality and inference (however large or small the world in 
which such a patterning persists or is ontologically projected to persist, and however 
large or small the world that fi nds or projects such more or less persistent patterns) . 
TABLE 3.5:
Some Key Constituents of Kindedness
 Index 
Relatively perceivable quality, set of qualities, or relations between qualities. May 
be more or less emblematic of particular kind. In one widespread ontology, roles 
are to properties what social statuses are to material substances.
 Kind 
Projected propensity to exhibit particular indices. Three often attributed, easily 
reifi ed, and ontologically problematic kinds are social statuses, mental states, and 
material substances.
 Individual 
Whatever can exhibit indices (to an agent) and thus be a site to project kinds (by 
that agent). Indices can be more or less closely related to, or evinced on, the indi-
vidual in question.
 Agent 
Whatever can perceive an index (or sense a sign) and orient to a kind (or instigate 
an interpretant). Itself often ontologized as an ensemble of kinds (e.g., a bundle of 
mental states, social statuses, and material substances).
 Ontology 
Set of assumptions used by agents, be they articulated and enminded or embod-
ied and embedded, that are both condition for, and consequence of, semiotic pro-
cesses involving attribution of kinds to individuals through indices.
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   72
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   72
7/25/2012   12:26:36 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:36 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
73 
 To be sure, the processes that regiment the relation between role and status, 
or property and substance, may be very different—one stereotypically grounded in 
norms and the other stereotypically grounded in causes. And, because of this, the 
worlds in which such regularities persist (or are ontologized as persisting) can be 
smaller or larger in space-time or more or less independent of historical and geo-
graphic context. Moreover, as we saw in section 1, classic trade-offs exist between 
the two domains, themselves problematically conceptualized, such as reifi cation 
(treating norms as causes or social statuses as material substances) and fetishiza-
tion (treating causes as norms or material substances as social statuses). And there 
are strange entities that seem to span the domains (or sit outside of either domain). 
And thus, just as different semiotic ontologies license particular subkinds of any 
kind (e.g., fruits versus vegetables, white collar versus blue collar, beliefs versus 
desires, etc.), they also support different kinds of kinds per se (e.g., material sub-
stances versus social statuses versus mental states). Different individuals, commu-
nities, and species may ontologically divide and defi ne the world in different ways. 
We will return to such issues in later sections. What matters for the moment are the 
broader parallels between social statuses (with their roles) and material substances 
(with their properties) and the indexical and inferential possibilities that may be 
simultaneously licensed by them and governing of them. 
 MENTAL STATES; INFERENCE AND INDEXICALITY; SUBJECTIVITY 
 So far the discussion has been about social statuses and material substances as par-
ticular sorts of kinds. However, with some caveats, the foregoing ideas also hold for 
 mental states (or cognitive representations and affective unfoldings, as will be treated 
in chapters 5 and 6). For example, following our discussion of ultimate representa-
tional interpretants at the end of section 2, holding a belief can be understood as a 
propensity to engage in certain behaviors in certain circumstances: normative ways 
of speaking and acting, or signifying, objectifying, and interpreting more generally, 
that would be logically and causally coherent with holding a particular assumption 
or being committed to the existence of a certain state of affairs. And just as there 
are relatively indexical signs of social statuses (such as roles), there are relatively 
indexical signs of mental states: actually speaking and acting, or signifying, objec-
tifying, and interpreting more generally, in ways that conform with, or provide evi-
dence for, that belief. And fi nally, an attitude is just another’s interpretant of one’s 
mental state by having perceived such an index (itself often another mental state). 
For example, I believe that you believe it will rain, as a mental state, insofar as I have 
seen you act like someone who believes it will rain (say, by carrying an umbrella to 
work); and as a function of this assumption (as to your mental state through your 
index), I come to expect you to act in certain ways—and perhaps sanction your 
behavior, as well as draw further inferences from your behavior, as a function of 
those expectations (and depending on whether or not they are met). Indeed, such 
sanctions and inferences are often the best evidence of my own attitude toward your 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   73
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   73
7/25/2012   12:26:36 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:36 PM

 74 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
mental state and, hence, would count, in one framing, as signs of my (meta-) mental 
state regarding your mental state or indices of my belief about your belief. 
 A key difference between mental states and social statuses, then, would be 
that, relatively speaking, mental states (e.g., beliefs, perceptions, and intentions) 
are inferentially articulated (their propositional contents stand in logical relation 
to other propositional contents) and indexically grounded (their propositional con-
tents stand in causal relation to states of affairs). Recall, for example, the discussion 
of cognitive processes from chapter 2: normatively speaking, a perception is caused 
by a state of affairs and may justify a belief, and an intention is causal of a state of 
affairs may be justifi ed by a belief. Moreover, as we will explore in depth in chapter 
5, the so-called subjectivity of mental states arises from the fact that they may  fail 
(normatively speaking) to be logically justifi ed (or logically justifying), and they 
may fail (normatively speaking) to be indexically causal (or indexically caused). 
There are non-stated intentions, false beliefs, invented memories, nonveridical per-
ceptions, unrealized plans, and so forth. 
 ROOTS AND FRUITS; IMPERCEPTIBLE MEDIATORS; 
THEORY OF MIND; SEMIOTIC STANCE 
 Just as social statuses (and material substances) may be the roots and fruits of other 
semiotic processes, so may mental states. That is, such kinds may be the (ultimate) 
interpretants and (dynamic) objects of signs. From a private framing, for example, 
any number of signs may lead to my belief that it will rain tomorrow (I hear it on 
TV, my farmer friend tells me, the sky has a certain color, I hear the croaking of 
the toads, etc.), and any number of signs may follow from my belief that it will rain 
tomorrow (I shut the windows, I tell your friends, I buy an umbrella, I take in the 
wash, etc.). And from a public framing, to interact with others is, in part, to predict 
fruits from roots and infer roots from fruits by way of the attribution, however tacit 
and however so imagined, of mental states (and social statuses and material sub-
stances). In this way, such kinds may be understood as complex modes of seemingly 
 imperceptible mediation that human beings are singularly adept at tracking. In this 
way, so-called theory of mind is really just a particular instance of “the interpreta-
tion of signs” (through the mediation of ontologies, the framing of indices, and the 
projection of kinds). And, in this way, the so-called intentional stance of human 
beings is itself grounded in a more foundational and more encompassing  semiotic 
stance . We will return to these concerns in chapter 5. 
 4.  Relatively Emblematic Indices 
 Crucially, the same index (such as a role or property) may often correlate with, or 
be taken to stand for, many different kinds, and the same kind (such as a mental 
state, social status, or material substance) may often be correlated with, or taken 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   74
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   74
7/25/2012   12:26:36 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:36 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
75 
to be stood for by, many different indices. For this reason, it is worth theorizing 
a quality that may be called  emblemeticity . Loosely speaking, an index (or sign 
more generally) is relatively emblematic for a given interpreting agent if,  given par-
ticular assumptions within the agent’s semiotic ontology , it constitutes a relatively 
good and handy ground for inferring the kind (or object) in question—such as 
being strongly predictive and readily perceived. For example, in the case of mate-
rial substances, a relatively emblematic index is a diagnostic sign (e.g., symptoms 
that provide strong evidence for an illness). More generally, we have litmus tests, 
dipsticks, assays, and so forth. In the case of social statuses, a relatively emblem-
atic index is a uniform (e.g., dressing as a police offi cer). More generally, we have 
trophies, certifi cates, varsity letters, deeds, fl ags, tattoos, scarlet letters, and so forth. 
And in the case of mental states, a relatively emblematic index is a speech act (e.g., 
asserting one’s belief or declaring one’s intention). Indeed, as we will see in chapter 
5,  the so-called privateness of mental states is really no different from the privateness 
of social statuses : each is known only through the indices that provide evidence for 
them and incontrovertibly known only when such indices are relative emblematic. 
In the rest of this section, four overlapping kinds of emblemeticity will be defi ned 
and compared: epistemic, deontic, relational, and phenomenological. Curiously, 
just as mind has often been understood as the emblematic sign of the status (or 
substance) human, linguistic practices and cultural patterns have often been under-
stood as the emblematic signs of mind. 
 EPISTEMIC, DEONTIC, RELATIONAL, AND PHENOMENOLOGICAL 
EMBLEMETICITY 
 Epistemic emblemeticity means that, prototypically speaking, the presence of an 
index (or sign more generally) provides necessary and suffi cient criteria for the exist-
ence of a kind (or object more generally). (See Table 3.6[(row 1].) In other words, 
in the interpreting agent’s ontology, all individuals  12   who are instances of the kind, 
and only individuals who are instances of the kind, evince the index. Loosely speak-
ing, this framing of emblemeticity takes the perspective of the observer, focusing on 
logical and empirical grounds for inferring and/or ascribing the kind in question. 
This may be the most general form of emblemeticity, applying as it does to social 
statuses, mental states, and material substances. Crucially, certain indices may be 
epistemically emblematic because they are criterial: Their presence constitutes the 
very defi nition of the kind in question (often because, in the terms of chapter 2, their 
objects are both dynamic and immediate). For example, while a material substance 
may be known to be water through a range of relatively emblematic properties (say, 
it is colorless, tasteless, good to drink, melts at zero degrees Celsius, boils at 100 
degrees Celsius, and so forth), a chemical assay that determines that its molecular 
structure is H 2 O is criterially emblematic. Indeed, all the other properties of water, 
whether relatively emblematic or not, are thought to follow from this fact (at least 
by those committed to a particular ontology). In this way, indices that are criterially 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   75
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   75
7/25/2012   12:26:37 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:37 PM

 76 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
emblematic may establish, rather than simply refl ect, the presence of a particular 
kind. That said, as this example should also highlight, many emblems of this sort 
are made, rather than found, and often through a lot of hard work. For example, 
most chemical assays, while seemingly as simple as “reading a meter,” are actu-
ally dependent on long chains of intermediate semiotic processes (see, for example, 
Latour and Woolgar 1986 and Scott 2009 on inscription practices), themselves reg-
imented by particular ontologies, interactions, and infrastructures. We will return 
to this tension (establish/refl ect) in section 6 when we take up the related notion of 
transformativity, and we will return to these forms of mediation in section 5 when 
we take up the distribution of semiotic agency. 
 Deontic emblemeticity means that, prototypically speaking, all instances of 
a certain kind (such as all individuals who have a particular status) must evince 
the index, and only instances of the kind may evince the index (given assumptions 
within the interpreting agent’s ontology, including assumptions about the relative 
sharedness of this ontology). (See Table 3.6 [row 2].) Loosely speaking, this framing 
of emblemeticity takes the perspective of the actor, focusing on social and politi-
cal grounds (e.g., rights and responsibilities or “mays” and “musts”) for behaving 
in certain ways (or imitating and sanctioning the behavior of others). This mode 
of emblemeticity requires that the bearer be more or less capable of normative 
regimentation—such as imitation of others and sanctioning by others (but also 
rule-based and law-based regimentation,  inter alia ). Crucially, if all instances of 
some kind must express some index, and only instances of that kind may express 
that index (and these facts are known to an interpreting agent), then the expres-
sion of the index becomes a necessary and suffi cient criterion for inclusion in that 
kind (or ascription of that kind) for that interpreting agent (assuming everyone 
is behaving as they “should”). This is how deontic emblemeticity may license epi-
stemic emblemeticity. As will be discussed below, the other direction is also pos-
sible: because an individual or instance satisfi es certain epistemic criteria (say, as 
to their material substance: they have a certain chromosome structure or primary 
sex characteristic), they are subject to deontic regimentation (for example, they are 
expected, or disciplined, to behave in certain normative ways). Deontic emblemetic-
ity also has a transformative dimension: in certain cases, one may or must be of a 
certain status if one has performed a certain role (say, the status of warrior and the 
role of vanquishing a foe), and, in other cases, when one is of a certain status one 
may or must perform certain roles (say, wearing a bear pelt in a public forum as an 
index of one’s warrior status). 
 Relational emblemeticity means that, prototypically speaking, all instances of 
a kind (such as all members of a species, team, ethnicity, or community) have the 
index in common, in contrast to instances of other kinds (who have other indi-
ces in common), and instances of all these kinds are conscious of this contrastive 
commonality (again, given assumptions within the interpreting agent’s ontology, 
including assumptions as to the relative sharedness of these assumptions). (See 
Table 3.6 [row 3].) In some sense, this framing of emblemeticity foregrounds the 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   76
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   76
7/25/2012   12:26:37 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:37 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
77 
relations between kinds (in a fi eld consisting of multiple kinds) and the refl exive 
(rather than normative) capacities of the individuals or instances that bear them. 
The fi rst two dimensions of this mode of emblemeticity (commonality and con-
trast) may be grounded in deontic emblemeticity (may and must) and grounding 
of epistemic emblemeticity (necessary and suffi cient). The last dimension obviously 
requires that one be able to self-refl exively relate to its own indices—in the sense of 
being able to internalize (or, in the idiom of section 5, commit to) the attitudes of 
other interpreting agents toward them (and thereby know what kind these others 
will assume one holds).  13   Just as the deontic regimentation of an emblematic index 
among instances of a kind may be internally or externally imposed (e.g., by mem-
bers of the kind, or by members of other kinds), the epistemic utilization of the 
index by instances of a kind may be internally or externally applied. Here we see 
how individuals in, or instances of, different kinds, within a fi eld of possible kinds, 
may ascribe kinds to each other (as well as themselves) and regiment the indices of 
each other (as well as themselves) based on these ascriptions. Recall our discussion 
at the end of section 2: culture, in one framing, is a relatively emblematic index of 
one’s membership in a semiotic community. In the next section, we will deal with 
some of these issues at length. 
 Phenomenological emblemeticity means that, prototypically speaking, the index 
is maximally public and minimally ambiguous (again, given assumptions within the 
interpreting agent’s ontology, including assumptions as to the relative sharedness 
of these assumptions). (See Table 3.6 [row 4].) By minimally ambiguous is meant 
that the index is relatively emblematic in any of the other three ways: epistemic, 
deontic, relational. Maximally public means that the index is both ever present and 
easily perceived. These two criteria provide a key means by which individuals in, 
or instances of, a kind may be more or less self-conscious of their own kindedness 
and more or less intersubjectively aware of each other’s kindedness. In particular, 
by ever present is meant that the index is relatively context-dependent, or dependent 
on relatively ubiquitous contexts (however artifi cial). 14   By easily perceived is meant 
that the index is not only perceptible to others (with minimal artifi cial extensions 
of their sensorium), but also perceptible to the bearer, where both self and other, or 
index-bearer and index-interpreter, perceive that it can be perceived by each other. 
TABLE 3.6
Four Dimensions of Relatively Emblematic Indices
Epistemic
An index that provides necessary and sufﬁ cient criteria for inferring (and/or 
ascribing) the kind in question.
Deontic
An index that may (only) be expressed by instances of a particular kind; 
and an index that must (always) be expressed by instances of a particular 
kind.
Relational
An index that all instances of a kind have in common; an index by which 
instances of different kinds contrast; and an index of which all such 
instances are conscious.
Phenomenological
An index that is maximally public (e.g., perceivable and interpretable); and 
an index that is minimally ambiguous (e.g., one-to-one and onto).
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   77
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   77
7/25/2012   12:26:37 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:37 PM

 78 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
This is a way of assuring mutual knowledge of the index (and its diagnostic rela-
tion to the kind). In the case of mental states, this dimension is crucial for inter-
subjectivity: asserting a belief or declaring an intention, for example, is a key way 
of making that belief or intention intersubjectively known, such that we may both 
know that we both know what we both know—setting aside issues of deception, 
false-consciousness, theater, and parasitic semiotic processes more generally (points 
we will return to in chapter 5). 
 RELATIVE EMBLEMETICITY; FEIGNABILITY AND MASKABILITY 
 Crucially, while these modes of emblemeticity were defi ned in relatively stark terms, 
the defi nitions themselves are meant to capture prototypic properties of emblems. 
Most emblems will not evince all the properties to perfection. And thus, the issue 
is not so much, “is this index emblematic,” but rather what is the relative emble-
meticity of one index in comparison to other indices (given a particular semiotic 
ontology and framing of emblemeticity). Thus, while there are indeed exemplary 
emblematic indices (such as wearing a uniform), most indices are only more or less 
emblematic in comparison to other available indices, insofar as they more or less 
satisfy the foregoing kinds of criteria. For example, in some ontologies, wearing 
a badge may be more emblematic than carrying a billy club in the case of social 
statuses; or having a penis may be more emblematic than having a deep voice in the 
case of material substances; or saying “I agree” may be more emblematic than nod-
ding one’s head in the case of mental states. Partly for these reasons, perhaps, rather 
than attending to a single relatively emblematic index, agents may usually attend to 
a range of relatively nonemblematic indices, which, only when occurring together, 
constitute relatively good evidence for the inference of a kind and, thus, a relatively 
good reason to regiment the indices of an individual in light of its kindedness. For 
example, as will be shown in chapter 4, usually the best indice of one’s kinds is the 
world in which one is embedded. 
 Finally, an index may be less deontically, relationally, or phenomenologically 
emblematic (say, less ever present and easily perceivable or less self-consciously 
evinced or not deontically regimented at all) and yet be more epistemically 
 emblematic—providing relatively incontrovertible evidence precisely because it 
is less easy to become self-conscious of, and thus more diffi cult to parasitically 
manipulate, and ultimately dissemble with. We might call this last feature  nonfeign-
ability  (or  nonmaskability , when it runs in the other direction). An index that is 
nonfeignable (whether or not it is easily thematized), in addition to being emblem-
atic in one or more of the other ways, often provides a kind of gold standard for 
identifi cation. 15  
 Finally and perhaps most severely, as carefully laid out in chapter 1 it cannot 
be emphasized enough that emblemeticity is itself often best understood as a conse-
quence of semiosis rather than a condition for semiosis, such that most semiotic pro-
cesses proceed by minimal reference to emblems (and explicit, deduction-like modes 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   78
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   78
7/25/2012   12:26:37 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:37 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
79 
of interpretation), and maximal reference to ambiguous indices, context-dependent 
objects, tentative interpretants, fl uid ontologies, and fl exible (if anxious and error 
prone) signifying, objectifying, and interpreting agents.  Enclosure and emblemetiza-
tion are often concomitant processes. 
 GENDER AND SEX; ASCRIBED AND ACHIEVED STATUS; 
CRITERIAL ROLES AND ESSENCES 
 Finally, there is the usual set of tensions between social statuses and mate-
rial substances. For example, in one relatively widespread semiotic ontology, or 
“world-view,” gender is a social status and sex is a material substance. In such an 
ontology, there are many roles, more or less emblematic, of gender; and these are 
relatively context-dependent, grounded in the imitating and sanctioning practices 
of a community—techniques of body, forms of dress, fashions of speaking, and 
so forth. Similarly, in such an ontology, there are many properties, more or less 
emblematic, of sex; and these are relatively context-independent, grounded in the 
biochemical constitution of our species—chromosome structure, primary and sec-
ondary sex characteristics, propensity to succumb to certain diseases, and so forth. 
(With something like chromosome structure usually understood as being criterial, 
however ambiguous it may sometimes be.) 
 Moreover, given such ontologies, the fact that one group of people is subject 
to deontic regimentation of their social status—whether via relatively tacit pro-
cesses such as imitation and sanctioning or via relatively explicit processes such as 
politically promulgated and legally enforced rights and responsibilities—may itself 
be grounded in their putative material substance, and the fact that this substance 
seems to have highly emblematic properties (such as being ever present and easily 
perceived). Such assumptions ground Linton’s (1936; and see Maine 2004 [1866]) 
famous distinction between “ascribed statuses” (or statuses, such aslike age, gender, 
and race, that one seems to be born into) and “achieved statuses” (or statuses, such 
as property rights, occupations, and so forth, that are often voluntarily performed 
or contracted into). In particular, social statuses such as age and gender seem to be 
grounded in material substances, and so, in a given social formation with a particu-
lar ontology, one may be automatically ascribed a particular status (whether or not 
one likes it, or wanted it). 
 To be sure, what is ascribed or achieved is usually an historical-anthropological 
question, and there will be constant battles over whether some behavior or feature 
is a property or a role or whether some kind is a “natural kind” or a “social con-
struction.” And, indeed, as we saw in section 2, many want to say that where we 
draw the line between social statuses and material substances, or “culture” and 
“nature,” is itself grounded in culture—qua local beliefs, or normatively regimented 
ontological assumptions, about where such a divide should be. (A division that is 
itself subject to reframing through processes that may turn on ontological strain 
and leakage.) 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   79
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   79
7/25/2012   12:26:37 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:37 PM

 80 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
 Finally, there will also be attempts to fi nd criterial roles (or properties) to 
explain other roles (or properties)—the single behavior that indicates that one is 
gay, qua social status (say, sleeping with members of the same sex), or the sin-
gle property that indicates one is homosexual, qua material substance (say, some 
genetic marker). To someone committed to such an ontology, such a role or prop-
erty may then become the essence of the status or substance itself, all other roles 
or properties seemingly following from it.  16   In section 6, we will theorize the ways 
ontologies are not only a condition for such interpretations, but also are themselves 
the consequence of such interpretations. Hence, we will focus on the ways such 
ontologies get transformed over time as much as deployed in time. 
 In short, just as the political stakes of kindedness are incredibly high (indeed, 
ontologies and politics are in essence equivalent), the personal consequences of 
kindedness can be incredibly cruel. 
 THE PORTABILITY OF ONTOLOGY 
 Table 3.3 lists some of the ways semiotic objects, such as kinds, may become rel-
atively objectifi ed, or enclosed. As discussed, one particularly important route to 
objectifi cation is through relatively representational interpretants. Such interpre-
tants project propositional contents onto objects: They can be true or false, stand 
as premises and conclusions of inferences, and make states of affairs (or referents) 
relatively explicit. It should now be stressed that such relatively objectifying inter-
pretants may also function as relatively emblematic signs in their own right (by 
being, for example, relatively public and unambiguous), and thus constitute a key 
way of making explicit our ascription of indices to individuals (“Pat blushed”), our 
ascriptions of individuals to kinds (“Pat is a sensitive soul”), and the contents of 
our ontologies more generally. 
 Crucially, such interpretants, which in essence characterize sign-object relations 
(are so are really meta-signs), may often “circulate in” more distal contexts than the 
original signs they were originally interpretations of (e.g., the event of Pat’s blush-
ing). In the terms of chapter 1, they often constitute relatively  portable semiotic 
processes, in that their meaningfulness (which includes their means-ends-fulness) is 
applicable to many contexts and applicable in many contexts. To say that they are 
applicable  to  many contexts does not so much mean that the states of affairs they 
represent are relatively general or pervasive, but rather that they are relatively fl exible 
and displaceable in their ability to represent states of affairs. As will be developed at 
length in chapter 5, human-specifi c modes of language and cognition offer precisely 
such a potential. Concomitantly, to say that they are applicable  in many contexts 
means that their expression and interpretation is relatively independent of context, 
or that the context they are dependent on is widely distributed, or that they establish 
their own context wherever they go (often via ontological transformativity, and selec-
tive framing, as will be discussed below). In some sense, relatively portable semiotic 
processes seem to slip through the sieve of context (and the need to be adequately 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   80
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   80
7/25/2012   12:26:37 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:37 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
81 
entangled in relations such as incorporation, complementation, and creation) and so 
can be coherent (or at least not found incoherent) in and across many worlds. 
 Crucially, this often ensures that the ontological assumptions in question are 
“widely known” (or at least pervasively ontologized) even when the entities, events, 
and relations they describe are not frequently experienced (and often do not even 
exist or occur at all). Stereotypes in the nontechnical sense (qua prejudices, of the 
kind just discussed), as well as stereotypes and prototypes in the technical sense, are 
classic examples of this phenomenon. 
 5.  Semiotic Agents and Generalized Others 
 Agency sits at the intersection of fl exibility and accountability. With respect to fl ex-
ibility, one can have more or less power over, or knowledge about, some process. 
Loosely speaking, one may be more or less able to control, or be conscious of, its 
unfolding. And with respect to accountability, depending on how much power over, 
or knowledge about, a process one has, one can be held more or less responsible for its 
repercussions or be accorded more or less rights to its effects. For example, one may 
be more or less subject to processes such as praise and blame, ownership and impris-
onment. While there are many ways to think about fl exibility and accountability, this 
section theorizes agency in terms of semiotic processes (and, hence, a Peircean ontol-
ogy) while foregrounding the concerns of Bacon. It is meant to be compatible with, 
though narrower than, the characterization of agents offered in chapter 2. 
 FLEXIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY; PRACTICAL AND THEORETICAL AGENCY 
 In particular,  practical agency (or “power”) may be defi ned as the degree to which 
one can control the expression of a sign, compose a sign-object relation, and com-
mit to an interpretant of this sign-object relation.  17 And  theoretical agency (or 
“knowledge”) may be defi ned as the degree to which one can thematize a process 
(event, entity, property, relation, etc.), characterize a feature of this theme, and rea-
son with this theme-character relation. 
 Regarding practical agency, to  control  the expression of a sign means to deter-
mine where and when it occurs, to  compose a sign-object relation means to deter-
mine what object is stood for and what sign stands for it, and to  commit to (or 
“internalize”) an interpretant means to determine what effect a sign will have (inso-
far as it stands for a particular object, and is expressed in a particular time and 
place). (See Table 3.1 [(row 7].) In particular, commitment turns on the degree to 
which one may anticipate an interpretant of one’s sign (or the effect of one’s insti-
gation), where this anticipation is evinced in being surprised by, or disposed to sanc-
tion and draw inferences from, nonanticipated interpretants. This last dimension 
loosely corresponds to Mead’s (1934) defi nition of symbols (as opposed to gestures) 
as inherently self-refl exive semiotic processes, in which the signer can stand in the 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   81
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   81
7/25/2012   12:26:37 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:37 PM

 82 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
shoes of the interpreter and thereby know their response, insofar as they know how 
they would respond in a similar situation. I say loosely, because this defi nition is 
broader: just as one can more or less anticipate, and thereby orient to, the interpre-
tants of one’s signs in a social world (or a space of thirdness), one can differentially 
anticipate the effects of one’s causes in a material world (or a space of secondness). 
Crucially, as with control and composition, commitment is a graduated notion. For 
example, as will be developed further in section 6, one can have more or less com-
mitment, depending on how well one can attend to, and perhaps represent, the rela-
tion between one’s sign and the context it is effective of (and appropriate in),; and, 
thus, how exactly others will react to it as a function of how it is so placed. 
 Regarding theoretical agency, to  thematize a process (event, entity, relation, 
etc.) means to refer to it or to treat it as the topic of a representation (such as an 
assertion or belief), to  characterize a process means to predicate a quality about it 
or to treat it as the focus of a representation, and to  reason  with a theme-character 
(or topic-focus) relation is to justify such a representation or use such a representa-
tion to justify. (See Table 3.1 [row 8].) In particular, reasoning turns on the degree to 
which one may provide relatively logical (inferential) or empirical (indexical) grounds 
for a representation (or use one’s representation as logical or empirical grounds). 
This last dimension loosely corresponds to what philosophers such as Brandom 
(1994) call “knowledge,” or beliefs (qua representations, themselves consisting of a 
theme-character relation), that are both “justifi ed” (and thereby grounded in prior 
inferential and indexical processes) and “true” (and thereby grounding of subse-
quent inferential and indexical processes). 
 In the case of practical agency, one has power over a process “from the inside” 
(by shaping the unfolding of its components); in the case of theoretical agency, one 
has knowledge about a process “from the outside” (by representing the unfolding 
of its components, usually via another semiotic process). Crucially, the processes 
in question are quite general—turning on any individual component of, or com-
plicated relation between, instruments and actions, joint-attention and interac-
tion, commodities and oedipal triangles, material substances and social statuses, 
discourse practices and cognitive representations, facial expressions and affective 
unfoldings,  inter alia . And both modes of agency may be present in the same prac-
tice: in representing a state of affairs, for example, one has some degree of theo-
retical agency over the state of affairs so represented, and one has some degree 
of practical agency over the representational process per se. In this way, practical 
agency relates to theoretical agency as residence in the world (chapter 4) relates to 
representations of the world (chapter 5). 
 In one widespread ontology, and perhaps as a general tendency, the greater 
one’s degree of control, composition, and commitment, and the greater one’s 
degree of thematization, characterization, and reasoning, the more responsible one 
is held, or the more rights one is accorded, for the result of some process. And the 
more responsibility or right one is accorded for some process, the more one can 
be praised or blamed for it, the more one can feel pride or shame for it, and the 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   82
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   82
7/25/2012   12:26:37 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:37 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
83 
more one can be rewarded or punished for it. This is how fl exibility (power and 
 knowledge) scales with accountability (rights and responsibility, or normative and 
causal regimentation, more generally). 
 As a function of framing, just as the interpretant of one semiotic process may 
be the sign of an incipient semiotic process, so too may the sign of one semiotic 
process be the interpretant of a prior semiotic process. And just as the character 
of one representation (qua focus) may be the theme of a subsequent representa-
tion (qua topic), so too may the truth of one representation be the justifi cation for 
a subsequent representation. More generally, in the tradition of Hilary Putnam 
(1975), there is a division of practical and theoretical agency, as distributed across 
long chains of temporally, spatially, and social distal actors and institutions. This 
shows that it is not usually a concrete entity—qua participant in an interaction—
that determines participants’ practical and theoretical agency, but rather the tempo-
rally unfolding, historically contingent, institutionally grounded, infrastructurally 
embedded, and ontologically imaginedframed interaction itself. (Compare this 
point with our discussion of regimentation in section 2.) 
 For example, if my sign (to be subsequently interpreted by you) is itself an 
interpretant (of your previously expressed sign), as is the case in much discursive 
interaction, then my semiotic agency is locally constrained in at least two funda-
mental ways. Framed retentively, my control, composition, and commitment are 
constrained by the sign-object relation I am reacting to (and, hence, the sign-object 
relation that you expressed). For example, if you just asked me a question (qua fi rst 
pair-part), my response must more or less conform to your question—be it in pre-
ferred ways (I give you an answer), or in dispreferred ways (I tell you why I don’t 
know, I ask you a related question in turn, and so forth). Framed protentively, you 
will in turn respond to my response, treating my answer (or lack thereof) to your 
question as more or less adequate and relevant; thus, I also shape my answer to 
your (imagined) reaction. Reciprocally, your behavior is mediated by mine, in pre-
cisely the same ways, if only in the next move and through the previous move. (That 
said, relatively speaking, and with many caveats, agents whose utterances fall in 
fi rst pair–part slots typically have more practical agency than agents whose utter-
ances fall in second pair–part slots.) Note, then, that each of the three dimensions—
control, composition, and commitment—is shaped by retentive forces as much as 
protentive ones. This means that the practical agencies of signer and interpreter 
are inherently entangled. Note that this example focuses only on some of the more 
immediate, or local, factors. Issues such as sequential position, situational context, 
the channeling of causes and effects (as per chapter 2), and so forth could also be 
added, indefi nitely. And note that analogous issues hold for theoretical agency. 
 In short, agency is defi ned as two sets of three distinct dimensions, each varia-
ble by degree. The reason for these dimensions is motivated by a particular under-
standing of meaning. Various degrees of agency, along any one of these dimensions, 
depend on semiotic properties of signs, social properties of semiotic communities, 
and cognitive properties of signers. Accountability often scales with the degree of 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   83
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   83
7/25/2012   12:26:38 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:38 PM

 84 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
fl exibility one has (or is accorded) over each of these dimensions (itself subject to 
the ways in which a particular semiotic community frames the relation between fl ex-
ibility and accountability, given their own semiotic ontology). And, as implied in 
these defi nitions, agency—as the relation between fl exibility and accountability—
does not necessarily (or even usually) adhere in specifi c people: The “one” in ques-
tion can be distributed over time (now and then), space (here and there), unit (group 
of people and part of person), number (one and several), entity (human and non-
human), and individual (Tom and Jane). In this way, agency involves processes that 
are multidimensional, by degrees, and distributed, and it is necessarily contextually 
contingent, interactionally emergent, and ontologically framed. 
 Finally, note how this particular  ontology of agency  resonates with, but cannot 
be reduced to, a long tradition of critical humanism (Kockelman 2007b; Marx 1967 
[1867]), whose basic insights may be summarized as follows: (1) we make ourselves, 
just not under conditions of our own choosing; (2) this self-creating capacity is 
human-specifi c (and sometimes imagined to be grounded in some putative faculty 
such as “language” or “imagination”); and (3) there is an ethical injunction not to 
let this capacity lie dormant and, hence, to seize control over the mediating con-
ditions under which we self-create. Needless to say, other ontologies are possible 
(Kockelman 2006b, 2007b, 2011a). 
 To frame certain aspects of this critical tradition in the foregoing categories, we 
may link performativity and agency to the discussion of regimentation as selection 
from section 1: insofar as actors have more or less practical or theoretical agency 
over their semiotic processes, they have more or less semiotic agency over the worlds 
(contexts, situations, or conditions) that constitute the causal and normative roots 
and fruits of such processes. In semiotically acting, then, we can both widen or nar-
row the capacities of ourselves and others to semiotically act; thus, we should be 
differentially accountable to ourselves and others for these actions. 
 ENCLOSING THE AGENT; FETISHIZATION AND REIFICATION; 
UNITS OF ACCOUNTABILITY 
 As we saw in section 2, one way to think about processes such as fetishization and 
reifi cation is as the unwarranted projection of either too much or too little agency 
onto an actor—attributing to them more or less fl exibility than one should and/or 
holding them more or less accountable than they are. 18 As may now be seen, such 
processes often turn on enclosure (Kockelman 2007a): putting an artifi cial analytic 
boundary (or “frame”) around one particular semiotic process (or bundle of semi-
otic processes), and thereby eliding (or emphasizing) the many other semiotic pro-
cesses (and attendant agents) that had a hand (or say) in its genesis or outcome. 
 Indeed, a key enclosure is often the skin of the semiotic agent itself—the “per-
son” as a signer who seems to simultaneously control, compose, and commit, and/or 
thematize, characterize, and reason (and, hence, constitutes a prototypic “speaker,” 
“actor,” or “thinker”). However, such an agent is often a corporate entity. And, in 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   84
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   84
7/25/2012   12:26:38 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:38 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
85 
this regard, the notion of a  unit of accountability,  as defi ned in chapter 2, is essen-
tial (Kockelman 2007b; and see Maine 2004 [1866]). In an ethnographic context, it 
often corresponds to that entity in which commitments and entitlements adhere, 
and to that entity to which sanctioning is applicable (depending on its degree of 
implication in, or agency over, a semiotic process). For such corporate entities, a 
key idea is this: if a unit of accountability (or one or more of its individual parts, 
members, or moments) satisfi es or, more typically, fails to satisfy a commitment or 
entitlement to signify or interpret (or violates its projected propensity, or status, 
more generally), the unit of accountability (or one or more of its individual parts, 
members, or moments) may be sanctioned for it. For example, if a family cannot 
pay its annual tribute to the king, all members, or any individual member, may be 
punished; or if a parent incurs a debt, the children may inherit it. Of course, this 
holds for “individuals” (qua particular people) as well: I can be praised tomorrow 
for what I did or said today; my back can be scourged for what my mouth said 
(or my mind believed or my gesture belied). And, often, the individuals who, or 
instances that, collectively constitute such a unit are not equal: One or more may 
speak for, or more generally represent, the others, often precisely because they are 
understood to have more practical and theoretical fl exibility than the others and, 
concomitantly, should be held more accountable than the others. In short, such 
units of accountability usually constitute a particular and particularly important 
kind of status, a kind of status that is not just ascribed to anyone (or anything), but 
rather only to those entities who, individually or collectively, manifest some degree 
of practical or theoretical agency (often imagined as “reason,” or a “critical fac-
ulty”). Indeed, in a tradition that really comes to the fore in Hobbes (1994 [1651]), 
this is one classic way of defi ning the “person.” 
 Finally, as we saw in chapter 2, while the focus here is on sociohistorical units 
of accountability, such units also occur on phylogenetic time scales with relatively 
causal mechanisms of accountability (often best theorized via concepts such as inclu-
sive fi tness, units of selection, and so forth). Recall, for example, our discussion of 
communication between conspecifi cs and the way two seemingly individual agents 
(qua signer and interpreter) could be framed as a single larger agent when processes 
of selection were taken into account along with processes of signifi cance. In this way, 
mutual interests coupled with distributed agency and a shared fate are key factors 
constituting units of accountability on phylogenetic and historical time scales (and 
probably on cosmological, interactional, and developmental time scales as well). 19  
 COMMITMENT VERSUS ADDRESS; COVERT AND OVERT ADDRESS; 
INTERNALIZING ATTITUDE; SELFHOOD 
 As used here, an  addressed  semiotic process is one whose interpretant a signer com-
mits to, and one whose sign is purposely expressed for the sake of that interpretant. 
Address may be  overt  or  covert  depending on whether or not the interpreter is meant 
to (or may easily) infer the signer’s commitment and purpose. And just as one can 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   85
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   85
7/25/2012   12:26:38 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:38 PM

 86 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
commit to others’ interpretants of one’s signs, one can commit to others’ attitudes 
toward one’s kinds (such as mental states, social statuses, material substances) 
through one’s indices (such as roles and properties). For example, one can antici-
pate what attitude an interpreter will adopt toward one’s social status through one’s 
role, where this anticipation is evinced in being surprised by, disposed to sanction, 
or prone to draw inferences from nonanticipated attitudes. In cases of self-refl exive 
semiosis, where the interpreter is the signer at one degree of remove, one can even 
self-sanction or shape one’s own roles as conforming, or not, with one’s refl exively 
ascribed, or self-attributed, status. And fi nally, one can also overtly and covertly 
address one’s roles (or indices more generally) for the sake of others’ attitudes (or 
interpretants more generally) toward one’s statuses (or kinds more generally). All 
such processes are, of course, crucial aspects of selfhood (as a refl exive capacity) 
as explored most presciently by George Herbert Mead (1934), and developed most 
extensively by Erving Goffman (1959). Here they have been reframed (and general-
ized) in terms of kindedness, on the one hand, and practical agency, on the other. 
 For the moment, it should be noted that such processes probably turn on rela-
tively human-specifi c capabilities and relatively sign-specifi c properties. For exam-
ple, it seems that only humans (or at least mainly humans), and only humans at 
a particular age, can commit to others’ attitudes (toward their social statuses and 
mental states, through their roles or indices), and that this commitment is differen-
tially possible as a function of what kind of role or index, and hence sign, is being 
committed to. 20 As we saw, for example, relatively emblematic indices are easy to 
commit to by defi nition (and often by design). Crucially,  this interactional capacity 
potentially destabilizes the meaning of any semiotic process for such semiotic agents : 
insofar as we may commit to (predict or internalize) the attitudes of others toward 
our kinds (through our indices), and orient to the fact that others are probably doing 
the same, we may strategically shape our indices (and kinds) for the sake of those 
interpretants (and assume others are doing the same). Such parasitic processes—
from outright dissembling to strategic sincerity—are fundamental to (if not the 
essence of) human-specifi c modes of semiosis, and they are probably a driving force 
of sociogenesis. They will be further elaborated in subsequent chapters. 
 GENERALIZED OTHERS; PUBLICNESS OF MEANING; 
CONSCIOUS AND UNCONSCIOUS SELVES; SIGN EVENTS 
 As Mead (1934) saw it, each individual has many statuses (and kinds more gen-
erally), and each of these statuses is regimented via the attitudes of different sets 
of others. Usually, these sets are institution-specifi c (indeed, this is one of the key 
criteria of any institution). For example, as a mother, my status is regimented by the 
attitudes of my children, my husband, the babysitter, several close friends, my own 
parents, and so forth. As a bank- teller, my status is regimented by the attitudes of 
my boss, my co-workers, my customers, and so forth. As a shortstop, my status is 
regimented by the attitudes of the pitcher, the basemen, the fi elders, the batter, the 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   86
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   86
7/25/2012   12:26:38 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:38 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
87 
fans, and so forth. As someone committed to the claim that you had ice- cream for 
dessert last night, my social status (or mental state) is regimented by your attitude 
(insofar as you just informed me of this), perhaps the attitudes of any other par-
ticipants in the speech event, and so forth. And, within each of these interactions 
or institutions, my attitudes reciprocally regiment the statuses of my children and 
husband, my boss and customers, my basemen and batters, the participants in our 
speech event, and so on. In short, for many of our statuses (as for many of our men-
tal states and material substances), there is usually a set of others whose attitudes 
help regiment it, and whose statuses (states and substances) our attitudes help regi-
ment. And just as generalized others can be relatively big or small (in terms of how 
many others’ attitudes they include), the kinds in question may be relatively fi xed 
or fl eeting—from relatively institutional statuses such as “mother” and “banker” to 
relatively interactional statuses such as “addressee” and “animator.” 
 Recall that many attitudes are themselves ultimate interpretants. More gener-
ally, the attitudes of others toward our social statuses and mental states (as well as 
material substances) are evinced in their modes of interacting with us: they expect 
certain modes of signifi cation, objectifi cation, and interpretation from us (as a 
function of what they take our social statuses and mental states to be), and they 
sanction certain modes of signifi cation, objectifi cation, and interpretation from us 
(as a function of these expectations). Thus, we usually perceive others’ attitudes 
toward our social statuses and mental states (and kindedness, more generally) in 
their modes of interacting with us (just as we perceive others’ social statuses and 
mental states by their patterns of behavior). In this way, if one wants to know 
where social statuses and mental states reside, or where ultimate (representational) 
interpretants are embodied and embedded, part of the answer is as follows: in 
the sanctioning and inferring practices of a semiotic collectivity; as embodiedin 
the dispositions of its members; as embedded in the affordances they heed and the 
instruments they wield; as mediated by their semiotic ontologies and frames; as reg-
imented by their reciprocal attitudes toward each other’s social statuses and mental 
states; and as evinced in their roles, or indices more generally.. If there is any sense 
to the slogan  meaning is public , which probably best belongs to Mead rather than 
to Wittgenstein, this is it. 
 In cases in which one has committed to the regimenting attitudes of ensembles 
of others toward one’s social status or mental states (within some institution, how-
ever loosely defi ned or inadequately imagined), the sets of committed to (or “inter-
nalized”) attitudes may be called a  generalized other , loosely building on Mead’s 
famous defi nition (1936:154). Most of us have a huge number of generalized oth-
ers: some being wide enough to encompass most of humanity (say, our status as 
a person—at least we hope so), some being so narrow as to encompass only our 
lovers (say, as holding a certain awkward desire that we have shyly informed them 
of);, and, thus, some of which may endure our whole lives and some of which may 
emerge and fade within the same instant of interaction. Moreover, we also have 
social statuses and mental states, as well as kinds more generally, as regimented 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   87
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   87
7/25/2012   12:26:38 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:38 PM

 88 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
by the attitudes of others, that we have not internalized. For example, others may 
attribute kinds to the self that the self does not (yet) recognize (even though it is 
subject to their regimentation). Animals and children,  inter alia , are often subject 
to such forms of other-regimentation without self-recognition. These form one part 
of what may be called an unconscious self. These questions—of different kinds of 
multiply overlapping generalized others, and of conscious and unconscious selves 
(via committed to and uncommitted to or the internalized and uninternalized atti-
tudes of others)—are crucial for understanding agency and selfhood. 
 Here, then, a key function of emblematic roles comes to the fore: They are 
often our best means of securing mutual recognition of, or rather intersubjectively 
regimented reciprocal attitudes toward, our social statuses and mental states (not to 
mention our material substances, and kinds more generally).  In some sense, in addi-
tion to representational interpretants of social statuses and mental states (or ontolog-
ical assumptions made propositionally explicit), this is a fundamental way projected 
propensities, qua kinds, may become reifi ed: by being intersubjectively recognized and 
emblematically regimented, often through relatively large and relatively permanent 
generalized others, as quasi-essences . And, more generally, any sort of kind may be 
more or less “objectifi ed” insofar as it is more or less subject to various modes of 
enclosure, as discussed in section 2. 
 As we will take up below, a sign event or interaction constitutes one of the 
minimal generalized others. Loosely speaking, as a signer and an interpreter, we 
each regiment the social statuses, mental states, and material substances of the 
other: what we intersubjectively know (and come to know) about each other given 
the immediate context, what we intersubjectively know about each other given the 
ongoing interaction, and what we intersubjectively know about each other given 
our shared culture or, more generally, our semiotic ontologies. In chapter 5, we will 
return to such generalized others as they relate to relatively inferential semiotic pro-
cesses (such as ostensive-inferential communication), themselves typically couched 
in the idiom of shared intentionality. 
 6.  From Performativity to Transformativity 
 We may now revisit John Austin’s (2003 [1955]) theory of performativity. To suc-
cinctly (and loosely) characterize a few of his core claims, for a speech act to be 
“felicitous” it must be appropriate in context and effective on context. And speech 
acts are only appropriate if participants already have certain social statuses and 
mental states, and they are only effective if participants come to have certain social 
statuses and mental states. For example, normatively speaking, a wedding ceremony 
is appropriate only insofar as the two people to be married have the social statuses 
of unmarried, adult, man, and woman ( inter alia ) and insofar as the one doing 
the marrying has a social status such as priest, rabbi, or captain at sea ( inter alia ). 
And a wedding ceremony is effective only insofar as the two people come to hold 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   88
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   88
7/25/2012   12:26:39 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:39 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
89 
the statuses of husband and wife ( inter alia ). Similarly, normatively speaking, an 
 assertion is appropriate only if the speaker believes what she is saying ( inter alia ), 
and an assertion is effective only if the addressee comes to believe what was said 
( inter alia ). For Austin, such already existing and subsequently existing social sta-
tuses and mental states are the roots and fruits of speech acts, insofar as they are 
presupposed, entailed, and implicated by them. 
 As will be shown in chapter 5, in addition to this foregrounding of felicity 
conditions, Austin’s key move was to explicate function by reference to failure, and 
he thereby detailed a range of ways such acts could go awry. Ironically, while he 
foregrounded such parasitic processes in his mode of explication, he limited his 
objects of analysis to nonparasitic speech acts. In particular, he left aside what he 
called “etiolations” of usage, and thus focused only on acts that were used in con-
ventional ways, with minimal allowance for the Veblenesque processes that may be 
built upon them (an elision that Goffman was destined to exploit). In the rest of 
this section, we will use ideas from the fi rst four sections of this chapter to rebuild a 
theory of performativity, taking inspiration from Peirce and Mead as much as from 
Austin. In this way, we will revisit the various modes of ontological transformation 
that were introduced in chapter 1. 
 ME/I, SYMBOL/GESTURE (MEAD); APPROPRIATE/EFFECTIVE, 
EXPLICIT/IMPLICIT (AUSTIN); INTERACTION 
 Framed another way, given our characterization of social statuses and mental 
states in section 3 (with its focus on attitudes, or interpretants), appropriateness 
means that a space of intersubjectively recognized commitments and entitlements 
to signify, objectify, and interpret is already in place; and effectiveness means that a 
change in the space of intersubjectively recognized commitments and entitlements 
to signify, objectify, and interpret takes place. (As mentioned above, reference to 
kinds such as social statuses and mental states are ways in which actors and analysts 
alike may objectify, or more generally enclose, such a space.) Thus, just as we inter-
act within a given space of commitments and entitlements, our interaction changes 
the space of commitments and entitlements. This is often the essence of any ritual 
process (which includes modern forms of contract). Indeed, it is a key way of fram-
ing the “meaning” of any semiotic process more generally. As will be shown, such 
transformations cannot be understood except by reference to interpretants (indexi-
cality by itself gets analysis only so far, however many meta-levels are added); it 
pertains to sign events in general, and not just to speech acts or discursive practices; 
and it is easily generalized to include causal processes (turning on feasibility and 
effi caciousness) as much as normative processes (turning on appropriateness and 
effectiveness). 
 In addition to making a distinction between the relative appropriateness and 
effectiveness of speech acts, Austin also made a distinction between relatively explicit 
and implicit speech acts. 21 For example, a relatively explicit speech act encodes both 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   89
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   89
7/25/2012   12:26:39 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:39 PM

 90 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
its illocutionary force and its propositional content with lexical categories (for 
example, “I order you to shut the door”); whereas a relatively implicit speech act 
may achieve the same effect with minimal encoding and maximal inference (for 
example, “shut the door,” “it sure is cold in here,” or simply “brrr”), usually by 
reference to its position in an ongoing sequence of actions and by its placement 
in context more generally. In the idiom of section 4, the former count as relatively 
emblematic signs of a speech act’s illocutionary force and propositional content 
(and often, concomitantly, of participants’ social statuses and mental states, be they 
already in place or coming to be in place). 
 But prior to Austin’s understanding of performativity in terms of explicit-
ness versus implicitness and appropriateness versus effectiveness, and the legions 
of scholars infl uenced by it, Mead (1934) made an analogous distinction between 
symbols versus gestures, on the one hand, and the Me versus the I, on the other. 
As already discussed, the symbol/gesture distinction is really a distinction between 
semiotic processes whose interpretants the signer can or cannot commit to (and 
thereby turns on issues related to self-refl exivity, conventionality, explicitness, and 
emblemeticity). But it may be generalized, as per section 5, to turn on semiotic 
processes over which one has relatively large or relatively small amounts of semi-
otic agency (and is thus best understood as a graded notion). Cross-cutting this 
distinction, the I is the “response of the organism to the attitudes of the others” 
and the  me is the “organized set of attitudes of others which one himself assumes” 
(1934:175). That is, the me is the self as regimented by the attitudes of some poten-
tially generalized other (however wide or narrow, lasting or fl eeting, actual or imag-
ined, causal or normative). And the I is the self that transforms this other. 
 More carefully, using the idiom introduced in the last three sections (itself a 
semiotic and temporal reading of Peirce, Mead, and Austin),  the Me is the self as 
appropriating, having taking into account others’ attitudes toward (or interpretants 
of) its mental states and social statuses (or kinds more generally); and the I is the 
self as effecting, enacting roles (or expressing indices) that change others’ attitudes 
(and often others’ kinds) . Such a process—itself partly gestural and partly symbolic, 
partly agentive and partly unagentive, partially oriented to material environments 
(or secondness) and partially oriented to social environments (or thirdness), partly 
accommodating to the past and partly assimilating of the future—is foundational 
to human-specifi c forms of interaction.  22   (Though, as we will see later, the agents or 
selves in question don’t need to be individuals, or even humans.) In some sense, we 
already generalized this way of framing interaction in section 2, in relation to the con-
cerns of chapter 2, during our discussion of regimentation as a form of selection.  
 EFFECTIVENESS AND EFFECTING APPROPRIATENESS; INVERTING THE FRAME 
 Classic understandings of performativity thereby focused on two issues. First, there 
is the effectiveness of discursive practices (that is, the idea that such performances 
not only refl ect the world but also actually transform it). This is essentially the 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   90
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   90
7/25/2012   12:26:39 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:39 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
91 
unmarked form of performativity and constitutes one of Mead and Austin’s key 
insights. And second, there is the self-grounding aspects of discursive practices: the 
idea that certain performances can actually effect their appropriateness conditions, 
or have their roots as their fruits. This kind of performativity has been the focus 
of more recent critical theory via ideas such as Althusser’s interpellation (1971), 
Arendt’s performativity of foundations (1963), and Hacking’s historical ontology 
(1995, 2002). And, as just seen, it was implicit in Mead’s theory via the self’s ability 
to internalize the attitudes of others towards its social statuses and mental states: 
not, who will others assume one is given how one acts, but rather,  how will one act 
given who others assume one is . 
 In the rest of this section, we discuss various kinds of semiotic performativity 
or, better,  ontological transformativity  (which include these two at their extremes). To 
do this, we need to reframe the foregoing concerns in the following way. Rather than 
understanding social statuses and mental states (or kinds more generally) as the roots 
and fruits of performances (or indices more generally), as per the Austinian framing, 
we want to understand performances as the roots and fruits of relatively intersub-
jectively recognized social statuses and mental states. More carefully, in the idiom of 
chapter 1, we want  to understand putative indices (qua signs) as the roots and fruits 
of possible orientations (qua interpretants) to projected propensities (qua objects), as 
mediated by and potentially transformative of semiotic ontologies and frames .  
 VARIOUS MODES OF ONTOLOGICAL TRANSFORMATIVITY 
 From the standpoint of a particular semiotic agent (and focusing, for the moment, 
on social statuses as a particular sort of kind), a role (or index more generally) may 
be more or less “transformative” in a variety of ways. First, it may lead to your social 
status (irrespective of my assumptions). Second, it may strengthen or weaken (if not 
create or destroy) my assumption that you belong to that social status. Third, it may 
strengthen or weaken my assumption that members of that social status perform roles 
(or exhibit indices) of this sort. Fourth, it may strengthen or weaken my assumption 
that there exists such a social status (as a propensity to perform such roles, or exhibit 
such indices, that you belong to). More broadly, it may strengthen or weaken my 
assumptions regarding the individuals, kinds, or indices that constitute a particular 
world. Fifth, it may strengthen or weaken my assumptions regarding the possibilities 
of other worlds (involving other sorts of indices, kinds, and individuals). And fi nally, 
my assumption that there exists such a status (as a propensity to perform certain 
roles, or exhibit certain indices, which you belong to), may more or less lead to your 
performing such a role or exhibiting such an index (and, concomitantly, belonging to 
such a status, itself constituted by a particular propensity to perform certain roles or 
exhibit certain indices). More broadly, changes in my assumptions about a world (in 
any of the foregoing ways) may change the world about which I make assumptions. 
 The fi rst kind of transformativity corresponds, more or less, to the unmarked 
classic sense of performativity. For example, taking part in a wedding ceremony 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   91
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   91
7/25/2012   12:26:39 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:39 PM

 92 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
may transform your status from unmarried adult male to husband. While your 
transformation may be recognized in, and regimented by, the attitudes of many 
others (including your own attitude), and thereby exist only through such attitudes 
(and the performative signs that brought them into being, as well as the institu-
tional frameworks that usually organize such relations, and so forth), it is relatively 
unaffected by my attitude, or interpretants, per se. The second kind of transforma-
tivity corresponds, more or less, to the quotidian practice of using another’s role, or 
index, to infer their status. For example, when I see your wedding ring, I may come 
to assume that you are married. The third kind of transformativity corresponds, 
more or less, to a change in one’s assumptions about the propensities of a particu-
lar status (to perform certain roles, or exhibit certain indices). For example, seeing 
how a particular husband behaves may change my understanding of the normative 
behavior of husbands. If this third kind of transformativity is relatively quantita-
tive (a change in assumptions, or strength of assumptions, about  propensity ), the 
fourth kind of transformativity is relatively qualitative (a change in assumptions, or 
strength of assumptions, about  kindedness itself) . For example, seeing how a par-
ticular husband behaves may lead one to postulate a new status—the adulterer, or 
perhaps the cad. If the second kind of transformativity often involves  deduction-like 
processes (e.g., using the relative emblemeticity of an index to deduce a status), and 
if the third kind of performativity often involves  induction-like processes (e.g., using 
the relative frequency of an index to infer the propensity of a status), this fourth 
kind of performativity often involves what Peirce called  abduction-like processes 
(e.g., hypothesizing a new status, or a new role or index for an old status). And the 
fi fth kind of transformativity turns on the ways transformations in assumptions 
about one world may affect assumptions about other worlds (and thus, for exam-
ple, possible or permissible arrangements of individuals, kinds, and indices). Note, 
then, that as per our discussion of the transformation of worlds in chapter 1, all of 
these are ways that semiotic processes turn on, and potentially transform, the semi-
otic ontologies of particular agents. (See Table 3.7.) 
 Finally, as per our discussion of the distribution of practical and theoretical 
agency in section 5, note that such transformations are often best understood not 
so much as intentional and individualist phenomena (qua changes in the beliefs of 
a particular person at a particular moment, though they are that too), but as  inter-
actionally emergent and infrastructurally distributed phenomena . In particular, they 
are evinced in and regimented by all the modes of coherence and incoherence, on 
all the various scales, that were introduced in chapter 2 and will be detailed in the 
following three chapters. 
 THE TRANSFORMATIVITY OF MATERIAL SUBSTANCES 
 Before treating the sixth sense of transformativity, the foregoing framework should 
be generalized from social statuses (and mental states) to material substances. For 
example, a chemical reaction (which has products as its fruits and reactants as its 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   92
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   92
7/25/2012   12:26:39 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:39 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
93 
roots) is akin to ritual transformation, but one undertaken in the realm of material 
substances rather than in the realm of social statuses and mental states. In other 
words, if something is already a particular substance, it is likely to take part in cer-
tain processes (or exhibit certain properties); and if something takes part in certain 
processes, it is likely to become a certain substance. Notice, then, that we are treat-
ing the material substance as the fi gure, and properties (and processes) that lead to 
it, and follow from it, as the ground. 
 Framed as such, at least the fi rst fi ve kinds of transformativity also hold for 
material substances. In particular, we can say that a process or property is “trans-
formative” in one of fi ve ways:  It more or less creates a substance (irrespective 
of some interpreting agent’s assumptions); it strengthens (or weakens) an agent’s 
assumption that an individual is an instance of that substance; it strengthens (or 
weakens) an agent’s assumption that a substance should exhibit properties of that 
sort; it strengthens (or weakens) an agent’s assumption that there exists a substance 
with such properties; it strengthens (or weakens) an agent’s assumption that there 
may exist worlds with such individuals, properties, and substances.  These are the kinds 
of relations that most interested Francis Bacon, themselves turning on an agent’s 
power over, and knowledge about, a given substance:  what is it; what caused it to 
become what it is; and how to wield such becomings to effect such beings . 
 Notice that, by our usage of the terms  strengthens and  weakens , many indices 
simply confi rm (or conform to) prior assumptions. While this fact is interesting in 
itself, our focus here and above is on the ways our interpretations of indices, as medi-
ated by ontologies, may both strengthen and weaken, and even create and destroy, 
the assumptions that constitute our ontologies—and thereby transform those very 
ontologies. And again it must be emphasized that ontological assumptions in ques-
tion may be as embedded and embodied as they are articulated and enminded. 
Thus, while it may seem that representations of the world are being foregrounded 
in this account, the transformations in question involve modes of residence in the 
world as well. And, in both cases, the practical and theoretical agencies involved are 
usually radically distributed. 
TABLE 3.7
Various Modes of Ontological Transformativity
1)  Indices (and signs more generally) may change an individual’s kind irrespective of an agent’s 
ontological assumptions.
2)  Indices may change an agent’s ontological assumptions regarding the kinds that constitute a 
particular individual.
3)  Indices may change an agent’s ontological assumptions regarding the indices that constitute a 
particular kind.
4)  Indices may change an agent’s ontological assumptions regarding the indices, individuals, kinds, 
and agents that constitute a particular world.
5)  Indices may change an agent’s ontological assumptions regarding the possibilities of other worlds 
that could be constituted.
6)  Changes in an agent’s ontological assumptions about a world (in any of the foregoing ways) may 
change the world about which the agent makes assumptions.
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   93
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   93
7/25/2012   12:26:39 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:39 PM

 94 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
 Finally, it should be emphasized that “things,” in the stereotypic sense, may 
be understood to have social statuses (and sometimes even mental states) as much 
as material substances (e.g., a salt shaker that we have decided will play the role 
of king in our chess game, an animal that has been deemed the scapegoat, and so 
forth). And they may thus be entangled in, if not constituted by, all the ontolog-
ical transformations discussed above that stereotypically apply to “people.” (Just 
as people, insofar as they are usually also composed of material substances, are 
subject to the foregoing kinds of material transformations.) As will be discussed 
below, while such “things” may not be able to self-regiment, or refl exively adopt 
attitudes toward their own statuses (at least most things in many ontologies), other 
agents can regiment their statuses (and mental states) for them. This is another way 
of framing the claim that the functions of instruments are regimented by norms 
as much as causes, and thereby caught up in appropriateness and effectiveness as 
much as feasibility and effi caciousness. 
 PEOPLE AND THINGS; THIRDS AND SECONDS; 
REFLEXIVITY AND RELATIONALITY 
 Of course, people are different from things in many ways (at least in many wide-
spread ontologies, when understood in their stereotypic senses), two of which 
are particularly relevant for this discussion (and follow directly from the forego-
ing reading of Mead). First, one’s index-kind relations (for example, what statuses 
one holds and what roles one performs) are tightly coupled to one’s interpretants 
of one’s index-kind relations (for example, the attitudes one has toward one’s sta-
tuses and the assumptions one holds about their attendant roles). In other words, 
“ identity” is inherently refl exive . And second, one’s index-kind relations are tightly 
coupled with others’ interpretants of one’s index-kind relations (for example, the 
assumptions others have about who one is and how such a person should behave). 
In other words, “ identity” is inherently relational . Phrased another way, just as there 
is a tight coupling between signs (i.e., roles, or indices), objects (i.e., statuses, or 
kinds), and interpretants (i.e., attitudes, or inferences), there is also a tight cou-
pling between signers (e.g., status- and state-bearing agents who speak), “objecters” 
(e.g., status- and state-bearing agents who are spoken about, perhaps best labeled 
“topics”), and interpreters (e.g., status- and state-bearing agents who are spoken 
to). Such coupling, itself an entailment of the semiotic nature of interaction, and 
relations-between-relations more generally, insures that the causal dynamics, or 
transformative dimensions, of human behavior are enormously complicated. And 
while claims regarding the refl exivity and relationality of “identity” are at least as 
old as Marx, if not much older, the point here is to reframe them in terms of ontol-
ogy, interaction, kindedness, and coupling. 
 In many cases, to be sure, the interpretants and assumptions of the actor and 
observer, or signer and interpreter, are similar—oftentimes precisely because of the 
relative emblemeticity of the index in question. (Recall that a highly emblematic 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   94
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   94
7/25/2012   12:26:40 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:40 PM

 
Enclosing and Disclosing Worlds 
95 
index, such as a uniform, often insures that not only are both the actor and the 
observer, or signer and interpreter, aware of the kind in question, but they are also 
intersubjectively aware of this awareness. Indeed, in many cases, that is precisely 
the function of such indices; and this is one reason emblemeticity is so important.) 
But in many interesting cases the sixth sense of transformativity arises, which is 
akin to the classic critical sense of performativity mentioned above: cases in which 
the regimenting attitudes of an observer (and their ontological assumptions more 
generally) lead to the self-regimenting attitudes of the actor (rather than, say, vice 
versa), and thus ultimately to the index-kind relation of the actor (however this pro-
cess may unfold interactionally). 
 For example, and loosely speaking, the status I assume you have in my manner 
of interacting with you (qua appropriateness conditions, or “roots”) may be created 
by those very interactions (qua effectiveness conditions, or “fruits”). For example, 
in our interaction, instead of my learning what status you are (or how members of 
such statuses behave), you internalize my attitude toward your status, and thereby 
come to behave accordingly. Crucially, such internalizations may turn on the second 
kind of transformativity: for example, assumptions as to what statuses you hold 
(e.g., this individual is a busboy). They may turn on the third kind of transformativ-
ity: for example, assumptions as to how members of such statuses behave (e.g., bus-
boys will act in the following ways). And they may even turn on the fourth and fi fth 
kinds of transformativity: for example, what statuses exist (e.g., maitre d’) and/or 
what indices they involve (e.g., taking orders, but not clearing dishes) and/or what 
individuals evince them (e.g., Pierre but not Hannah) and/or what worlds involve 
them (e.g., nineteenth- century France, but not fourteenth-century Mesoamerica). 
 Such a process seems to be the most human-specifi c mode of transformativity, 
in that  relatively speaking the bearers of social statuses and mental states are more 
or less subject to it, whereas the bearers of material substances are not (almost by 
defi nition)—taking into account, as always, the various ways these distinctions may 
be ontologically framed, the kinds of strain and leakage that may accompany such 
ontologies, and the issues treated at the end of the last section. More specifi cally, 
the ability of something to be subject to such a process is, at least in many a wide-
spread ontology, an emblematic, if not criterial, index of its  personhood: a particular 
ensemble of material substances; that is itself a bearer of social statuses and mental 
states; with a reasonable degree of practical and theoretical agency over its own 
semiotic processes; itself recognized and self-recognizing, as a relatively enclosed 
unit of accountability; whose essence—and essential burden—is to enclose and dis-
close worlds, through practices (however parasitic) that may both conform with, 
and be transformative of, its own and others’ ontologies. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   95
03_Kockelman_Ch03.indd   95
7/25/2012   12:26:40 PM
7/25/2012   12:26:40 PM

 4 
 Residence in the World  
 1.  From Being-in-the-World to Meaning-in-the-World 
 This chapter treats residence in the world, or more or less coherent ensembles of rel-
atively nonpropositional semiotic processes, including heeding affordances, wield-
ing instruments, undertaking actions, inhabiting roles, and fulfi lling identities. It 
is meant to complement chapter 5, which treats representations of the world, or 
more or less coherent ensembles of relatively propositional semiotic processes, such 
as mental states and speech acts, or cognitive processes and discursive practices 
more generally. Residence in the world and representations of the world are thus 
separated only for analytic and expository purposes. Taken together, as irreducibly 
interrelated, these semiotic modalities constitute  meaning-in-the-world . 
 Thus, this chapter may be understood as bringing the foregoing theory of mean-
ing to bear on Heidegger’s critique of mind, thereby articulating being-in-the-world 
in terms of semiotic processes.  1   In some sense, then, we are taking up where we left off 
in section 7 of chapter 2. It may also be understood as a theory of  material culture , or 
the meaning of “objects” and “things” (in their stereotypic sense). And it may even 
be understood as offering a theory of  context , or that ensemble of relatively unrec-
ognized semiotic processes that remains in the background of, or serves as the infra-
structure for, more stereotypic signs, such as speech acts and communicative moves 
more generally. To these ends, the rest of this section outlines some of the overarching 
principles that organize residence in the world: coherence and incoherence, embed-
dedness and embodiment, intimacy and complementarity, disturbances and para-
sites, and so forth. Moving from a synthetic frame to an analytic frame, the next fi ve 
sections treat each of the key constituents in detail: affordances, instruments, actions, 
roles, and identities. And the conclusion takes up Anscombe’s idea of “acting under a 
description” (1957), and generalizes it to  comporting within an interpretation.  
 EMBEDDED SEMIOTIC PROCESSES AND THE GARBAGE BIN OF MEANING 
 The fi ve constituents of the residential whole—affordances, instruments, actions, 
roles, and identities—have a number of properties in common. Most importantly, 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   96
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   96
7/23/2012   9:26:19 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:19 PM

 
Residence in the World 
97 
they are all semiotic processes consisting of relations between signs, objects, and 
interpretants. Many key facts follow from this simple claim, which the rest of this 
section will unpack and develop at length. 
 In particular, an  affordance is a semiotic process whose sign is a natural feature 
and whose object is a purchase. An  instrument is a semiotic process whose sign is 
an artifi ced entity and whose object is a function. An  action  is a semiotic process 
whose sign is a controlled behavior and whose object is a purpose. A  role is a semi-
otic process whose object is a status and whose sign is an expression of that sta-
tus (itself often an instrument or an action). And an  identity  is a semiotic process 
whose object is a value and whose sign is an expression of that value (itself often 
an action or a role). 2 (See Table 4.1.) Note, then, that each of these fi ve terms can 
refer broadly to a semiotic process or narrowly to the sign-component of such a 
semiotic process. 
 Crucially, as semiotic processes, the interpretants of these constituents may 
range over any of the embodied and enminded interpretants discussed in chap-
ter 3: affective, energetic, and representational (along with their ultimate variet-
ies). Not only, then, are such constituents caught up in (mediated by, entangled 
with, or regimented through) feelings, behaviors, and utterances, they are also 
caught up in moods, habits, and beliefs. Moreover, as will be shown below, the 
TABLE 4.1
Constituents of the Residential Whole and Their Semiotic Components
 Constituent 
 Object 
 Sign 
 Incorporating 
Interpretants 
 Created 
Interpretants 
 Complementing 
Interpretants 
 Representational 
Interpretants 
Affordance
Purchase Natural Feature
Affordance, 
Instrument, 
Action, Role, 
Identity
N.A.
Affordances, 
Instruments, 
Actions, 
Roles, 
Identities
Utterances 
involving words 
like:  leaf, hand, 
air, cloud, wind, 
rock 
Instrument Function
Artifi ced Object
Instrument, 
Action, Role, 
Identity
Instrument, 
Action, Role, 
Identity
Affordances, 
Instruments, 
Actions, 
Roles, 
Identities
Utterances 
involving words 
like:  hammer, 
nail, pen, chair, 
shoe 
Action
Purpose
Controlled 
Behavior
Action, Role, 
Identity
Instrument, 
Action, Role, 
Identity
Affordances, 
Instruments, 
Actions, 
Roles, 
Identities
Utterances 
involving 
words like: 
 run, walk, sit, 
dream, cajole 
Role
Status
Expression of 
Status (often by 
undertaking an 
action)
Role, 
Identity
Instrument, 
Action, Role, 
Identity
Affordances, 
Instruments, 
Actions, 
Roles, 
Identities
Utterances 
involving words 
like:  mother, 
banker, 
plumber, thief 
Identity
Value
Expression of 
Value (often by 
performing a 
role)
Identity
Instrument, 
Action, Role, 
Identity
Affordances, 
Instruments, 
Actions, 
Roles, 
Identities
Utterances 
involving words 
like:  Armenian, 
Christian, 
Latino ,  Ifaluk 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   97
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   97
7/23/2012   9:26:19 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:19 PM

 98 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
sign- and-interpretant components of each of these constituents are typically the 
interpretant- or sign-components of other such constituents (at different degrees 
of remove, and if only as the material trace of more stereotypic interpretants). 
That is, such semiotic processes signify, interpret, and objectify each other, such 
that their meaning is maximally  embedded . In this way, residence in the world 
(like representations of the world, and meaning-in-the-world more generally) is 
maximally  refl exive . And, as a refl exive form of infrastructure, it may be under-
stood as self-regimenting. In some sense,  residence in the world is its own best 
interpretant . 
 As semiotic processes, these constituents may thereby seem very different from 
stereotypic signs, such as speech acts and communicative moves more generally, 
which are usually foregrounded in analysis. For example, in the terms of chapter 
3, their sign-components are not usually addressed (in the sense of purposefully 
expressed for the sake of others’ interpretants). Their grounds are often relatively 
iconic and indexical rather than symbolic. Their object types are usually not propo-
sitions or concepts (and thus not inferentially articulated in stereotypic ways). And, 
as just seen, their interpretants are just as often embedded in other such constitu-
ents, as they are embodied, articulated, or enminded. While such nonpropositional 
semiotic processes are typically understood as an unmarked category, having no 
intrinsic structure outside of not being propositional and, hence, constituting a 
kind of garbage bin of meaning (sometimes called the “hurly-burly,” the “back-
ground,” what “cannot be said,” “context,” and so forth), this chapter argues that 
they are relatively fi nite, structured, intuitive, and articulable. 
 CONTEXTUALIZATION: INCORPORATION, CREATION, AND COMPLEMENTATION 
 As we saw in chapter 2, to say that one semiotic process  contextualizes  another semi-
otic process is to say that the meaning of the latter is dependent upon the meaning 
of the former. More specifi cally, what constitutes the sign, object, or interpretant 
of the latter is dependent upon what constitutes the sign, object, or interpretant of 
the former (say, to a given semiotic agent, as tokens, or to a given semiotic com-
munity, as types). The two semiotic processes in question may relate to each other 
 spatially (e.g., elements in the same situation),  temporally  (e.g., elements in the same 
sequence), and  categorically (e.g., elements of the same type),  inter alia . (Where 
what counts as a situation, sequence, or type is itself subject to various framings, by 
both actors and analysts alike.) Moreover, they may  incorporate each other (being 
related as part to whole, or means to end),  create  each other (being related as cause 
to effect, or process to product), and more generally  complement each other (being 
related as item to accessory, lock to key, hand to handle, and so forth),  inter alia . 
(See Table 4.2.) Typically, the same semiotic process is contextualized by many 
other semiotic processes and, in turn, contextualizes many other semiotic processes 
(any of which can relate to it at various degrees of spatial, temporal, or categori-
cal remove). Such co-contextualizing relations among semiotic processes, and the 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   98
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   98
7/23/2012   9:26:19 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:19 PM

 
Residence in the World 
99 
meaningful coherence they both enable and constrain, is what should be meant by 
 holism in the hermeneutic sense. 
 Take, for example, an instrument (such as a hammer). What seems at fi rst to 
be merely a “thing” is really a semiotic process: The sign is the assemblage of wood 
and steel; the object is the function such an assemblage serves; and the canonical 
interpretant is an action (itself an incipient semiotic process) that wields the sign 
(form) for the sake of the object (function). While the sign component is relatively 
fi xed, the object and interpretant components are relatively fl uid—their meaning 
is dependent upon other contextualizing semiotic processes. In particular, whoever 
interprets the sign-object relation (say, by wielding the hammer while undertak-
ing an action) does so in a larger context—and their comportment is usually both 
shaped by, and shaping of, that context—a process referred to as  regimentation as 
sieving and selection in chapter 3. 
 Looking back in time, the function of a hammer is partially determined by the 
roles and identities of the actors, as well as the purposes of the actions, that created 
it. For example, who designed and produced it, and why it was designed and pro-
duced. Looking forward in time, the function of a hammer is partially determined 
by the purpose of the action that wields it as well as the role and identity of the 
actor who undertakes that action. For example, a carpenter making a chair, a hand-
yman making repairs, or a factory worker making widgets. 
 Looking at the wider situation, the function of a hammer is partially deter-
mined by the other instruments that complement it, for example, the function 
TABLE 4.2
Types of Embedded Interpretants
Incorporation
For any two semiotic processes, A and B, A will 
be said to incorporate B (and, hence, be an 
interpretant of it) if the sign of B relates to the 
sign of A as part-to-whole, and the object of B 
relates to the object of A as means-to-ends. 
For example, in the case of instruments, a 
wheel incorporates a spoke.
Creation
For any two semiotic processes, A and B, A will 
be said to create B (and, hence, be interpreted 
by it) if B is an objectifi cation of the object of A. 
That is, the things that people create provide 
interpretations of the purpose of their acts of 
creating. For example, baking (as an action 
with a purpose) creates a pie (as an instru-
ment with a function), and thus a pie is an 
interpretant of baking.
Complementation
For any two semiotic processes, A and B, A will 
be said to complement B, if A is required to 
interpret B, or at least assists in interpreting B. 
For example, a hammer contextualizes a nail. 
And a sword contextualizes a sheath. That is, 
nails make no sense without the existence of 
hammers; and sheaths make no sense with-
out the existence of swords.
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   99
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   99
7/23/2012   9:26:19 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:19 PM

 100 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
served by nails and benches, gloves and garages (not to mention the purposes, roles, 
and identities of the actors who create or wield these). And the function of a ham-
mer is partially determined by the purchases and functions of the affordances and 
instruments that it incorporates; for example, the handle and head of the hammer, 
and the wood and metal these are made of. 
 Finally, looking across possible worlds (say, as potentially navigated by those 
who inhabit this one), the function of a hammer is partially determined by the 
other instruments that might substitute for it—insofar as they serve similar func-
tions or provide comparable purchases. For example, a club, a ball-peen hammer, 
a screwdriver held upside down, a length of pipe, a pneumatic punch, and so forth. 
In this way, contextualization may be temporal, spatial, and categorical ( inter alia ); 
and, concomitantly, it may turn on creation, incorporation, and complementation 
( inter alia ). 
 (Note that such contextualizing semiotic processes not only constrain the 
use-value of the hammer [not to mention its “truth value,” or conceptual content, 
as a referent in the representational whole], but also its value and exchange-value. 
Recall, for example, our discussion of commodities as semiotic processes from 
chapter 3. In particular, the price of an instrument is, among other things, par-
tially determined by the price of the instruments and affordances it incorporates, 
partially determined by the price of the instruments and actors [or “labor”] that 
went into creating it, and partially determined by the price [and existence] of other 
instruments and actors that complement it.) 
 To go back to our original model of signifi cant objects and selecting agents 
from chapter 2, within such a framing the sensible sign is the hammer (qua assem-
blage of wood and steel), and the instigated interpretant is the action that wields the 
hammer (say, by hitting a nail). As we have just seen, both the features of signifi cant 
objects (say, the purchases and functions of “things”) and the interests of selecting 
agents (say, the statuses and values of “persons”) are contextualized by other semi-
otic processes (involving other objects and agents, signs and interpretants, sensa-
tions and instigations). In this way, semiotic processes enable and constrain, and 
thus they “select” and “sieve,” each other. 
 In short, to understand the meaning of any affordance (purchase), instru-
ment (function), action (purpose), role (status), or identity (value), both actor and 
analyst alike must take into account (however tacitly) other contextualizing con-
stituents and, hence, the meaning of other affordances, instruments, actions, roles, 
and identities. Such constituents relate to it by processes such as creation, incor-
poration, and complementation. Such relations are evinced on different temporal, 
spatial, and categorical scales—themselves constituted by, and constituting of, the 
features of objects and the interests of agents. And, as we saw in chapters 1 and 2, 
such indexical relations are themselves the fi gured, and potentially reconfi gurable, 
precipitates of framing processes, which are themselves modes of residence in, and 
representations of, the world.  Actions —as fl owing from sensation to instigation and 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   100
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   100
7/23/2012   9:26:20 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:20 PM

 
Residence in the World 
101 
from instigation to sensation—seem to stand at the center of all these processes (a 
point we will return to). 
 OBJECTS OF RESIDENTIAL WHOLE ARE NONOBJECTIVE AND 
NONOCCURRENT—YET PERFECTLY PERCEIVABLE 
 What is the nature of the objects of these semiotic processes—those purchases, 
functions, purposes, statuses, and values? Semiotically speaking, as per the ideas of 
chapter 3 and as shown in the example above, the object of any such constituent 
may be framed as that which organizes (and is organized by), or more generally 
mediates, the range of appropriate and effective (normative), or feasible and effi ca-
cious (causal), interpretants of that sign (to a particular semiotic agent or semiotic 
community, given a particular ontology). Framed another way, the object of any 
such constituent may often be usefully understood as a correspondence-preserving 
projection from all normatively and causally regimented (or relatively coherent) 
interpretants of that constituent—as evinced in the sanctioning practices of a 
community, as embodied in the dispositions of its members, as embedded in an 
environment of other such constituents, as enminded in the representations of the 
inhabitants of this environment, and so forth. Moreover, this may be true both 
at the level of tokens (say, the particular function of an instrument as wielded by 
a particular semiotic agent) and at the level of types (the typical function of an 
instrument as caught up in the practices of a semiotic community). Insofar as the 
objects of all constituents of the residential whole are holistically determined in this 
way, it ensures that the ground of any constituent is as iconic-indexical (or “moti-
vated”) as it is indexical-symbolic (or “arbitrary”); it implies that regimentation 
may turn on causes as much as norms; and it means that residence in the world is 
as embedded as it is embodied. 
 That said, as we saw in chapter 3, the distinction between norms and causes, 
like the distinction between motivated and arbitrary meaning, is usually far too 
simple-minded to understand modes of residence in, and representations of, the 
world (even if it often serves as a useful shorthand). In its stead, as per our above 
example of a hammer, throughout this chapter and the next we focus on incorpora-
tion, complementation, and creation (on spatial, temporal, and categorical scales) 
as ubiquitous modes of inferential and indexical contextualization that regiment 
the actual meaning of any particular semiotic process. Such modes of contextuali-
zation both refl ect and regiment the ontologies of those who reside in and represent 
such worlds. 
 If the fi ve constituents are semiotic processes, whose objects may be framed 
as correspondence-preserving projections (and, hence, are relatively “nonobjec-
tive”) and whose interpretants are often other such constituents (and, hence, as 
“objective” as any sign), then the objects—though at fi rst seeming to be the most 
“objective”—drop out of sight. That is, one does not “see” purchases, functions, 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   101
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   101
7/23/2012   9:26:20 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:20 PM

 102 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
purposes, statuses, or values. One cannot ask “Where is its function?” or “Can 
you point out its purpose?” Insofar as objects are nonperceptible entities, these 
are non-nonsensical questions. 3 Rather, the only evidence one usually has for the 
existence of such objects are the signs that express them and the interpretants 
these create—most typically, the constituents of the residential whole themselves. 
That is, signs and interpretants may be thought of as sites where objects surface.  4 
Indeed, and only somewhat paradoxically (given the intense iconic-indexicality of 
their grounds), such signs and interpretants are essentially  pictures  of their objects.  5 
(Where the objects pictured don’t exist except as pictured!) Phrased another way, 
the world, as sign, is its own best interpretant (and object). 
 This claim is itself a critique of the relatively inferential theory of kinds (such 
as social statuses, mental states, and material substances) that was offered in chapter 
3. Here, with context fully restored, we see that “inference” in the strong cognitive 
and logical sense may be overrepresented. If signs (and sign-interpretant relations 
as signs) are highly iconic (as well as indexical), we are, in effect, often directly 
“perceiving” (or rather “experiencing”) purchases, functions, purposes, statuses, 
and values. As will become more and more clear in what follows, not only are we 
generalizing some of Edward Gibson’s ideas (from affordances to residence in the 
world more generally), we are also reframing them (from environmental psychology 
to semiotic ontology). In any case, as we saw in chapter 1, the word  interpretation 
may be used to refer to a range of processes, which include processes such as (so-
called) direct experience and indirect inference at the extremes. 
 PROCESSES THROUGH WHICH OBJECTS BECOME 
“OBJECTIVE” AND “OCCURRENT” 
 Just as objects are relatively  nonobjective (from the analyst’s point of view), they 
also tend to be relatively  nonoccurrent (from the actor’s point of view). That is, dis-
cursively they may not be a topic of conversation, phenomenologically they may 
not be a focus of consciousness, and cognitively they may have no propositional 
content. In other words, just as the constituents themselves (affordances, instru-
ments, actions, roles, and identities) are often put in the background as “context” 
for other, more stereotypic semiotic processes (such as speech acts, and discursive 
moves more generally), so too are the objects of these constituents (purchases, func-
tions, purposes, statuses, and values) often elided from actors’ and analysts’ refl ec-
tion. In some sense, if they are framed at all, they are framed as being-out-of-frame, 
or framed as frame, and thus ground rather than fi gure. This is not because they are 
too far away from experience; rather, it is because they are too close. In some sense, 
they are to humans what water is to fi sh: the medium through which we sense and 
instigate and, concomitantly, that which organizes our signs, interpretants, objects, 
and agencies. 
 Nonetheless, these objects, and the relations between relations that constitute 
them, may become objective or occurrent by many routes—sometimes becoming 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   102
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   102
7/23/2012   9:26:20 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:20 PM

 
Residence in the World 
103 
distorted, or misinterpreted, in the process. Recall Table 3.3. For example, there are 
 disturbances (malfunctions, mistakes, glitches, etc.) that bring objects to the fore, 
making them topics of discussion or foci of consciousness. Hammers can break 
or go missing, be too heavy to handle or too poorly designed to function well, and 
so forth. Heidegger (1996 [1927]) was perhaps the foremost theorist of such objec-
tifi cation through disruption. In particular, he argued that the kind of conscious-
ness that arises in the context of failure leads to a misrecognition of the nature of 
the “functioning” that was there before the failure. In particular, rather than being 
framed in its own terms, residence in the world gets fi gured in terms of representa-
tions of the world. 
 Such objects can give rise to relatively  objective interpretants . For example, an 
action can create an instrument, thereby objectifying the purpose of the action in 
the instrument. Indeed, much of the built environment, qua instruments, as well as 
the institutional environment, qua roles, may be framed as objectifi ed purpose in 
this sense (itself thereby causally and normatively regimenting the future actions of 
those who inhabit such environments). Recall our discussion of regimentation by 
infrastructure in chapter 3. 
 There is  performance : when one seizes control of one’s appearance, by internal-
izing another’s interpretant of one’s comportment and thereby comporting for the 
sake of their interpretant. For example, one wields a hammer to (covertly) inform 
another of one’s purpose or status (rather than, or in addition to, driving a nail 
through a board). In this way, they are caught up in the third dimension of practical 
agency (commitment) and Veblenesque and parasitic processes more generally. 
 Such objects can have  conceptual content  conferred upon them by propositional 
signs of the representational whole. For example, there are words and concepts that 
refer to them ( tree ,  glove ,  slap ,  mother , and  Armenian ) as well as sentences and 
beliefs that represent them ( my Armenian mother slapped the tree with her glove ). In 
this way, they are caught up in the particular indexical and inferential articulation 
of mental states and speech acts, and theoretical agency more generally. 
 And fi nally, perhaps concomitant with the foregoing processes, such objects 
may be implicated in  theoretical representations ,  empirical observations , and  prac-
tical interventions —thereby becoming the relatively fi gured “objects” of scientifi c 
theories, laboratory analyses, and technological practices. For example, any attempt 
to ascertain the values of another people (e.g., friends or enemies) or the chemi-
cal purchases provided by a novel substance (e.g., poisonous or profi table) may 
partake of this mode of objectifi cation. The social and natural sciences often do 
precisely this. Indeed, the disciplinary regimes that interested Michel Foucault—
prisons, factories, clinics, and sanitariums—were devoted to all of these modes of 
objectifi cation at once. In some sense, such regimes were institutions devoted to 
disclosing and enclosing, having practical and theoretical agency over, a particular 
frame-of-life, with its particular modes of residence in the world and its particu-
lar ways of representing the world; concomitantly, such regimes were themselves 
frames-of-life.  
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   103
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   103
7/23/2012   9:26:20 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:20 PM

 104 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
 WHY ARE THERE FIVE CONSTITUENTS? THE NATURAL KINDS 
OF SOCIAL CONSTRUCTIONS 
 Why is the residential whole composed of  fi ve constituents and not some other 
number, say, three or seven, one or ten? For example, one could make further divi-
sions and produce more constituents. Instruments might be divided into tools and 
machines or roles might be divided into those that are ascribed and those that are 
achieved. In principle, there is no end to the number of subdivisions one could 
make. Alternately, one could unite some of these divisions and produce fewer con-
stituents. For example, affordances and instruments might be united as might roles 
and identities. In principle, one could go all the way and subsume all the constitu-
ents under the term  comportment (not otherwise specifi ed). 
 The reasons for using fi ve constituents, and these fi ve constituents in particular, 
are practical as well as theoretical.  Lexically , there are propositionally contentful 
signs in the representational whole that refer to and, hence, confer propositional 
content upon the constituents of the residential whole. For example, as we saw 
above, there are words such as  tree  and  cliff  (affordances),  hammer  and  ax (instru-
ments),  run and  walk (actions),  husband and  daughter (roles) , Mormon  and  Armenian 
(identities). These form a key site of intersection between, or entanglement of, resi-
dence in the world and representations of the world. 
 Ontologically , they are often privileged kinds: semiotic processes implicated in 
many different norms and causes, or coherently contextualized by many other semi-
otic processes and, hence, acquiring a kind of facticity, such that all of their compo-
nents may become types: legi-signs, legi-objects, and legi-interpretants. Berger’s and 
Luckmann’s (1967) notion of typifi cation, and Brandom’s (1979) notion of sorts, 
are related concepts. 
 Phenomenologically , they have an intuitive or “experience near” status, which 
is, of course, implicated in their lexical and normative status. In this way, there is 
arguably nothing obscure about these semiotic processes, in any semiotic commun-
ity or at any point in human history. 
 Anthropologically, they constitute a subset of the basic theoretical building 
blocks and descriptive metalanguage that any particular ethnography or general 
theory of sociality must be articulated in terms of. For example, it may be argued 
that Evans-Pritchard’s (1969 [1940]) description of modes of livelihood and politi-
cal structure among the Nuer, by tacking between structural and oecological levels, 
tried to account for local behavior in terms of the purchases, functions, purposes, 
statuses, and values of a particular semiotic community. Thus, he accounted for 
local modes of residence in the world (as well as local representations of the world). 
To give another example, one aspect of archaeology that makes it so captivating 
and challenging is (at least stereotypically) its attempt to learn from the affordances 
and instruments of another people and, in particular, the material traces of the 
sign-components of such semiotic processes (qua “built environment” or “material 
culture”) their actions, roles, and identities (not to mention their beliefs, desires, 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   104
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   104
7/23/2012   9:26:20 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:20 PM

 
Residence in the World 
105 
and intentions). Finally, classic debates (Marx versus Weber), as well as vulgar ones 
(nature versus nurture), may be understood as arguments as to which kind of con-
stituent (or cluster of constituents) is more determining than others and, hence, 
should have the upper hand in our understandings and explanations of human 
behavior. For example, do certain affordances more or less condition identities, do 
certain modes of residence in the world more or less condition certain representa-
tions of the world, and so forth. 
 Epistemically , these constituents have the structure of an ideal type (Weber 
1949 [1904]). Thus, they should be judged for their usefulness, not their truthful-
ness, and they should be used to generate caveats and counterexamples rather than 
held onto tightly as claims. Moreover, as theoretical terms, their conceptual struc-
ture is prototypic rather than classical. Thus, the defi nitions given of them above, 
and in what follows, should be understood not as necessary and suffi cient criteria, 
but rather as conceptual stereotypes with leeway and give. 
 And  practically , fi ve constituents is a middle way, providing gradation without 
degradation. In short, it is tempting to call the constituents of the residential whole 
 basic kinds of social theory: they might have been chosen so that the number of 
characteristics shared by tokens of each type is maximized and the number of char-
acteristics shared across types is minimized. 6 
 Finally, it cannot be emphasized enough that these fi ve constituents, as kinds, 
refl ect the (meta-) ontology of this author. And thus all the caveats and claims 
about kindedness elaborated in chapters 1 and 3 are operative here. In particu-
lar, we are for the moment leaving aside ways in which residence in the world is 
entangled in representations of the world and, in particular, the way local ontologi-
cal categories (and, in particular, representational interpretants) mediate and frame 
such basic kinds—in part, refl ecting them, in part, regimenting them, and, in part, 
redrawing them. 
 WHAT ORDERS THE FIVE CONSTITUENTS? AN ONTOLOGICAL CONTINUUM 
 Why order the fi ve constituents of the residential whole in this way, with affordances 
on one end, identities on the other end, and actions in the middle? Indeed, why can 
they be projected onto a single dimension at all? In part, it is because of the relative 
inclusion of incorporation (as one kind of embedded interpretant discussed above): 
Affordances may be incorporated by instruments, instruments may be incorporated 
by actions, actions may be incorporated by roles, and roles may be incorporated by 
identities. Given the way incorporation was characterized, this form of interpreta-
tion maintains a loose means-ends hierarchy in the domain of objects and a loose 
part-whole hierarchy in the domain of signs. That is, for any two terms on this scale 
(affordance < instrument < action < role < identity), the term on the left may relate 
to the term on the right as means to ends and part to whole. 
 In this light, and with many caveats that will be discussed below, affordances and 
identities are at the poles of an ontological continuum. In particular, affordances 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   105
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   105
7/23/2012   9:26:20 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:20 PM

 106 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
are stereotypically constituted by a kind of ontological bottoming out—means that 
are not themselves ends, qua “nature,” “object,” or “thing.” Similarly, identities are 
stereotypically constituted by a kind of ontological topping in—ends that are not 
themselves means, qua “culture,” “subject,” or “person.” Action, as we saw earlier, 
is indeed somewhat special in its being ontologically centered—both incorporating 
of affordances and instruments, qua ends, and incorporated by roles and identities, 
qua means. Again, the caveats to these claims are more important than the claims 
themselves. Like any other ontology, this meta-ontology is itself provisional and 
provincial.  
 UPGRADING AND DOWNGRADING ALONG THE CONTINUUM 
 For example, any constituent can be bumped up or down this ontological continuum, 
or reframed more generally, in a variety of ways. Perhaps most famously, any instru-
ment may be reduced to its affordances or heeded for the purchase it provides rather 
than wielded for the function it serves. For example, we may use a book to prop open 
a door, a hammer to weight a plumb-line, or a screwdriver to serve as a knife. 
 Similar processes, often historical in nature, may simply transform the function 
of a given instrument, however unconsciously. For example, in a complex linkage 
between a new function replacing an old function, and functions being understood 
as purposes, the new function is taken by users to be the raison d’être, or “intended 
function,” of the old form. Maine (2004 [1866]), in his  Ancient Law , and Nietzsche 
(1989 [1887]), in his  On the Genealogy of Morals , made much of this point. 
 And, indeed, there will always be the Marquis de Sades who go sprinting ahead 
with imaginative interpretations of the possible functions of that instrument of 
instruments, or the possible purchases of that affordance of affordances, the human 
body. Not to mention creative functions for everyday items, such as candlesticks 
and candy, as well as novel statuses for spouses and valets and even novel values for 
nobles, for example,  sadism . 
 As will be argued in chapter 6, one characteristic of an “emotion” or “mood” 
is to shift the affordances and instruments (and actions, roles, and identities) one 
fi nds in the environment. For example, if one is nervous every alley becomes a hid-
ing place, if one is paranoid every action becomes malevolent, if one is in love the 
whole world’s Irish (or Korean, and so forth, depending on who “one” happens to 
identity with). 
 In all of these ways, the object-token of some constituent (for some semiotic 
agent) may not be a replica of the object-type (in some semiotic community) but 
perhaps be a singularity altogether. Indeed, it may have a semiotic object that is 
normatively associated with a different constituent altogether (e.g., a controlled 
behavior may be treated as a sign of the value underlying an identity rather than of 
the purpose underlying an action).  7   As we saw in chapter 2, Veblen’s (1971 [1899]) 
account of pecuniary emulation is just one of the ways this comes about: the instru-
ment realized by an action (if relatively permanent and public) comes to stand for, 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   106
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   106
7/23/2012   9:26:20 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:20 PM

 
Residence in the World 
107 
or publicize, the identity of the actor, and subsequently becomes sought for the sake 
of this publication (rather than its original function). 
 Also important is the process whereby one identifi es with a role, coming to treat 
it as more important, or context-dependent, than any other role—its object more like 
a value than a status. Relatedly, a particular role may become the emblematic sign of 
an identity, say, the role of father in a given religion. And, more generally, any action 
(e.g., pilgrimage or question), instrument (e.g., weapon or uniform), or affordance 
(e.g., place or climate) may become the emblematic sign of a role or identity. 
 Just about any constituent can be instrumentalized—or designed, produced, or 
wielded—for the sake of its use-value, or function. And, perhaps more often, it may 
even be manufactured or sought for the sake of its exchange-value, or price. Indeed, 
as we saw in chapter 2, this process is perhaps the most pervasive kind of revalua-
tion that instruments, as well as other constituents, may undergo. 
 Finally, one may parasitically exploit the purchases afforded by some mode 
of residence in the world: relating, at one or more degrees of remove, to others’ 
modes of heeding affordances, wielding instruments, undertaking actions, inhabit-
ing roles, and fulfi lling identities. Hackers do this, as do ninjas, pirates, assassins, 
skateboarders, arch-capitalists, fl imfl am artists, and anthropologists. Indeed, part 
of what makes these fi gures so interesting is that the values of their identities are 
often framed in terms of such parasitic processes. And, more generally, any human 
actor, with some degree of practical agency (especially commitment) over the semi-
otic processes they are implicated in, does this constantly, if only in dramatizing this 
or that role. Thus, many modes of strategy and artistry, to say nothing of deception 
and insincerity, turn precisely on such processes. 
 In short, our ontological continuum, which at fi rst looks like a one-dimen-
sional line, is really a thread, itself subject to fraying, knotting, and netting, and 
out of which the cloth of human conduct is stained, stolen, and torn as much as 
woven and worn. 
 COHERENCE AND INCOHERENCE; WHOLES AND PARTS; 
SEMIOTIC COMPENSATION AND SCALE 
 As its name suggests, the residence in the world is fundamentally governed by 
 holism : The meaning of any constituent in the whole is enabled and constrained by 
its contextual relation to the meaning of many other constituents in the whole via 
embedded interpretants turning on incorporation, complementation, and creation, 
which themselves refl ect and establish signifi cant and selective (as well as sieved and 
serendipitous) relations at different temporal, spatial, and categorical scales. When 
such enabling and constraining relations confi rm rather than contradict each other 
(such that the meaning of any constituent is redundantly determined by many other 
constituents), such a whole may be called  coherent . 
 Crucially,  incoherence  is the fl ip side of coherence. And just as it is easy to 
fi nd too much coherence, it is easy to fi nd too little. Indeed, as a function of how 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   107
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   107
7/23/2012   9:26:21 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:21 PM

 108 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
coherent or incoherent any whole seems to be (to a given analyst or actor), different 
metaphors have been invoked to describe it: structure (Saussure), tapestry (Margaret 
Mead), pattern (Sapir), quilt (Lacan), octopus (Geertz), rhizome (Deleuze and 
Guattari), mangle (Pickering), network (Latour), assemblage (Callon), or patch-
work (see chapter 6). In many cases, it is really a question of scale: There may be 
local coherence, but not global coherence, or there may be global coherence, but not 
local coherence (where the relative size of parts and wholes, or the designation of 
the local vis- à -vis the global, is an analytic decision, and mode of framing). Indeed, 
oftentimes a situation can simply be reframed, or rescaled, for coherence to be 
restored or discovered. Moreover, our only real evidence of coherence is often  fail-
ure-to-cohere or, more specifi cally, the failure of one or more constituents to incor-
porate, create, or complement other constituents (and vice versa). And, to be sure, 
semiotic agents (and their observers) are prone to  semiotically compensate, often 
evincing a seemingly unjustifi ed will to coherence that is closely related to fetishiza-
tion (and is itself subject to processes such as ontological strain and leakage). 
 Indeed, part of the lesson of chapter 3 was that any  interaction  is both grounded 
in and generating of more or less locally centered, more or less globally extended, 
and more or less intersubjectively shared swatches of coherence: both what counts 
as context (qua ground) and how a move or semiotic process (qua fi gure) relates to, 
or is entangled with, such context. (Where, it may now be emphasized, the semiotic 
process in question can be the heeding of an affordance or the fulfi lling of an iden-
tity, as much as the making of an utterance or the taking of a turn.) And, as we 
saw in chapter 3, and will see again in chapter 5, such a claim is no less true for the 
residential whole than it is for the representational whole. 
 Moreover, there are many different wholes as a function of the analytic cri-
teria used to establish such part-whole relations. In particular, wholes typically 
exist at different nested and nesting levels of structure, which do not so much 
scale in space, time, and category as provide the scales for spatiality, temporality, 
and categorization. In particular, one might minimally distinguish between the 
following nested and nesting wholes (or parts): a  residential whole, such as a cul-
ture or semiotic community (grounded in an era, semiotic community, or semiotic 
commons); an  institutional whole, such as a family or corporation (grounded in a 
generation, discipline, or generalized other); a  situational whole, such as a work-
shop or bedroom (grounded in a place or activity); a  joint-attentional or  intersub-
jective whole , such as a communicative interaction (grounded in a we-here-now); 
and an  experiential  or  subjective whole , such as an individual-centric swatch of 
the residential whole (grounded in an I-here-now). For example, infrastructure 
(as well as institutions and channels), in its vernacular sense, may be understood 
as that which is designed to distribute and facilitate (as well as staunch or erad-
icate) certain kinds of coherence across space, time, person, and possible worlds 
(if only within the confi nes of the infrastructuring system itself), thereby enabling 
certain modes of residence in the world (and representations of the world) and 
constraining others. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   108
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   108
7/23/2012   9:26:21 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:21 PM

 
Residence in the World 
109 
 Different kinds of analysis have traditionally foregrounded different kinds of 
wholes, and then scaled up, down, or across them to generate their insights or make 
their arguments, often tacking between residential wholes, or radically different 
worlds, that come to resonate, overfl ow, and intersect as much as invade, conquer, 
and kill. Such epistemological enclosures, or wholes, are thus simultaneously ana-
lytic and synthetic, and they themselves constitute a key mode of semiotic framing 
(as per our discussion in chapter 2). Note, then, that ethnographers, and critical 
theorists more generally, will always be precariously positioned: on the one hand, 
they seek to interpret local modes of enclosure and disclosure and, on the other 
hand, their interpretations at once enclose and disclose (Kockelman 2007a). 
 EMBEDDEDNESS, COUPLING, COMPLEMENTARITY, 
COINTERPRETATION, AND INTIMACY 
 Embeddedness—or “worldliness” as it is sometimes called—has a variety of impor-
tant and interrelated entailments.  8   To review, there is  holism : The meaning of any 
constituent is determined by its relation to other constituents within some whole. 
And there is  motivation : Most of the constituents of the residential whole have 
iconic-indexical grounds such that “context” (meaning other such constituents) 
both evinces and regiments, is both condition for and consequence of, how they are 
to be interpreted. 
 As a function of these fi rst two points, there is  meaning in the environment : one 
does not need to carry huge sources of information “in one’s head” (as, say, the 
propositional contents of beliefs); rather, one usually fi nds it embodied within one 
and, in particular, embedded around one. 
 This point implies that an organism and its environment are maximally  cou-
pled  (a point made in chapter 2): the organism, if stripped of its environment, is 
stripped of its opportunities to meaningful act, and an environment, if stripped of 
its organism(s), is stripped of its opportunities to be meaningful. Phrased another 
way, one’s comportment is complex precisely because the environment in which one 
comports is complex. 
 There is  complementarity : Purchases, functions, purposes, statuses, and values 
stand at the intersection of the organism and its environment. That is, characteris-
tics of both the organism and the environment (not to mention characteristics of 
other organisms within the environment, as well as other environments with other 
organisms) must be specifi ed for these constituents to make sense. More strongly 
phrased, and in the idiom of chapter 2, there are no organisms and environments, 
only framed and framing envorganisms or life-frames and frames-of-life. 
 There is  intimacy : We organisms  are our affordances, instruments, actions, 
roles, and identities, and the environment  is other (and  others’ ) affordances, instru-
ments, actions, roles, and identities. 
 And lastly, there is  cointerpretation and  cosignifi cation : Every time one inter-
prets or signifi es a constituent one cointerprets or cosignifi es oneself. 9 Moreover, 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   109
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   109
7/23/2012   9:26:21 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:21 PM

 110 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
one understands the self’s place relative to the signs it comes across: as they change, 
it registers and, hence, orients to its own change. For example, each time one heeds 
an affordance or wields an instrument, one is offering an interpretation or provid-
ing a signifi cation of oneself—one’s own affordances and instruments (and one’s 
own actions, roles, and identities). Each of these processes will be further explored 
in the sections that follow. 
 THE RAW, THE COOKED, AND THE OBVIATED 
 Using dichotomies reminiscent of the “raw” and the “cooked,” or “nature” and 
“culture,” scholars often contrast “experience” and its “articulation,” or what is 
perceptually “given” and what is cognitively “taken.” While this chapter doesn’t 
have any particular stakes in confl icts over these dichotomies, the foregoing points, 
as well as the longer discussions in chapters 1 and 2, should have long since desta-
bilized such simple-minded, and hopefully obviated, distinctions. In particular, 
as just seen, conceptual structure, or propositional content more generally, is not 
required for meaning: most objects are not inferentially articulated; the grounds 
of most semiotic processes are not symbolic, but rather iconic-indexical; and most 
signs, while often selected, are not intentionally expressed for the sake of their 
interpretants. This is not to say that the distinction between representations of 
the world and residence in the world is not important; it is to say that the mean-
ingful mediation of affordances, instruments, actions, roles, and identities has not 
received nearly enough attention from a semiotic stance (though it has received 
no end of attention from a phenomenological stance, which itself never really had 
an adequate theory of meaning, as we saw in chapter 2 during our discussion of 
Heidegger). More generally, there is no presemiotic or unmeaningful domain of 
experience; the residential whole, in conjunction with the representational whole, is 
all there is to experience. Indeed, with certain caveats, it  is experience just as much 
as it is  the world .   
 2.  Heeding Affordances 
 An affordance is a semiotic process whose sign is a natural feature, whose object 
is a purchase, and whose canonical interpretant is an action that heeds that fea-
ture insofar as it provides purchase. To say the sign-component is a natural fea-
ture is to say that it consists of a more or less complex assemblage of relatively 
perceivable qualities that was not itself assembled for the sake of the purchase it 
provides. Such a natural feature is said to provide purchase insofar as it enables 
or constrains certain actions, however directly or indirectly. While affordances are 
highly signifi cant semiotic processes, they are thus minimally selected and mini-
mally symbolic. In what follows, each of these criteria will be unpacked, qualifi ed, 
and expanded. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   110
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   110
7/23/2012   9:26:21 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:21 PM

 
Residence in the World 
111 
 THE SIGN-COMPONENT: MODALITY INDEPENDENCE; PERCEPTION AND 
INFERENCE; NATURAL FEATURES 
 As for the sign-component, the qualities in question need not be visibly percep-
tible. While affordances are stereotypically associated with vision via the seminal 
work of Gibson (1986 [1979]), they are not meant to be limited to any particular 
mode of perception: vision, audition, gustation, olfaction, and tactition, inter alia. 
Moreover, we are also being relatively noncommittal as to whether an interpreting 
agent directly perceives or indirectly infers the purchase provided by such a natural 
feature. It may be more or less directly iconic-indexical of the actions it enables or 
constrains (as per our discussion of the perceivability of objects in section 1) or it 
may be more or less indirectly iconic-indexical (as per our discussion of material 
substances in chapters 1 and 3). For the moment, we will assume there is a contin-
uum of possibility. 
 As for selection, the point is not that the natural feature is “natural” in the 
stereotypic sense (qua untouched by human intention); the point is that it was not 
designed or built for the way in which it is being used. More carefully phrased, the 
sign of an affordance is not the creative interpretant of an action, where this action 
has as its purpose the pairing of the sign (as a natural feature) and its object (as a 
purchase). Nor do affordances incorporate other affordances (in the technical sense 
of incorporation): They may include them (as the result of natural composition or 
happenstance), but they are not an interpretant of them (as the creative interpre-
tant of some human action). This means that while affordances are signs (that can 
be subsequently interpreted), they are not usually interpretants (of signs that were 
previously signifi ed). 10 Hence, their position at the “bottom” of our ontology, qua 
means that were not themselves ends. 
 THE OBJECT-COMPONENT: PROVIDING PURCHASE; ENABLING AND 
CONSTRAINING ACTION 
 In everyday terms, the  Oxford English Dictionary (second edition, 1989) provides 
one useful description of a purchase: “Hold or position for advantageously exerting 
or applying power.” As used here, a purchase might be loosely understood as the 
way in which a natural feature (or sign) either directly or indirectly enables or con-
strains an organism’s actions, allowing or disallowing them from exerting power, 
permitting or prohibiting various modes of behavior, or providing organism-specifi c 
succors and perils. In this way, a purchase is constituted as much by the possibili-
ties for action that it opens up as by the possibilities for action that it closes off. In 
particular, the purchase provided may include “lack-of-purchase.” As will be shown 
below, while we tend to focus on relatively purposive energetic interpretants (or 
actions), affordances may enable or constrain any other kind of interpretant. And 
while we tend to focus on more or less causally regimented interpretants (especially 
for nonhuman animals), affordances are also caught up in normative regimentation 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   111
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   111
7/23/2012   9:26:21 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:21 PM

 112 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
(as well as all the other modes of regimentation discussed in chapter 3 that do not 
fi t easily into either of these two categories). 
 It is sometimes useful to understand a purchase as a certain sort of kind: the 
(projected) propensity of a perceivable feature, or any of its iconic indexical accom-
paniments, to enable or constrain various modes of action (or semiotic processes 
more generally). Indeed, the material substances theorized in chapters 1 and 3 can 
themselves be understood as affordances: the natural feature is the property per-
ceived and the purchase provided is the bundle of other properties the substance has 
insofar as these constrain or enable the actions of the interpreting agent. Typically 
we use the idiom of material substances (with properties) when we are dealing with 
relatively inferential processes (or theoretical agency more generally, qua represen-
tations of the world), and we use the idiom of affordances (with purchases) when 
we are dealing with relatively experiential processes (or practical agency more gen-
erally, qua residence in the world). This is another site where residence in the world 
and representations of the world are most transparently entangled, and where the 
same process may be framed in terms of one or the other. (And similar kinds of 
framing shifts are possible with the other constituents of the residential whole, as 
well as with the other sorts of kinds.) 
 FRAMING NON-AFFORDANCES AS AFFORDANCES 
 As we saw in section 1, any other constituent of the residential whole, or selected 
sign more generally, can be reduced to an affordance insofar as it is parasitically 
co-opted for the purchase it otherwise provides. Indeed, even the actions of oth-
ers can be reduced to affordances: their controlled behavior is the natural feature, 
their purpose is the purchase, and one heeds their behavior insofar as it provides 
purchase (by having purpose): one avoids it, lies in wait, springs a trap, speculates, 
sells tickets, engages in participant observation, and so forth. Humans do this all 
the time in making traps for animals (as well as feeders and shelters). Moreover, we 
(mis-) use instruments for their affordances. Skateboarders, for example, are notori-
ous for fi nding skateboard-specifi c purchases in the built environment—sidewalks, 
handrails, empty pools, and so forth. Indeed, this willful reduction of the built envi-
ronment to a set of affordances that complement the function and purchase of pol-
yurethane wheels of a particular diameter and durometer may be a defi ning value 
of their identity. 
 THE GROUND OF AFFORDANCES: CAUSAL REGIMENTATION AND 
CONTEXTUALIZATION 
 Semiotically speaking, the purchase of an affordance is an object and, hence, may 
often be framed as that which organizes the range of appropriate and effective 
(normative), or feasible and effi cacious (causal), interpretants of that sign (to a 
given semiotic agent or community and within a particular ontology). As shown 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   112
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   112
7/23/2012   9:26:21 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:21 PM

 
Residence in the World 
113 
in section 1, what counts as appropriate and effective, or feasible and effi cacious, is 
determined by many interrelated factors, as a function of that affordance’s embed-
ding in the residential whole (not to mention the representational whole). Foremost 
among these is the purpose of the action that heeds the affordance (and, hence, the 
emphasis on enablement and constraint, or permission and prohibition, above). 
But other constituents serve as embedded interpretants as well. 
 Insofar as the purchases of affordances are holistically determined (as well as 
ontologically mediated and frame-dependent) in this way, it ensures that the ground 
of any affordance is as iconic-indexical as it is indexical-symbolic. Indeed, one 
might say that the ground of any affordance, in comparison to the ground of any 
other constituent, is maximally iconic-indexical and minimally indexical-symbolic, 
or maximally “motivated” and minimally “arbitrary.” In terms of sanctions, or the 
regimentation of interpretants of affordances, this means that norms involving 
affordances are maximally regimented by causes (if they operate at all). In this way, 
an interpretant’s being appropriate and effective may often be phrased in terms of 
being feasible and effi cacious, mod various degrees of ontological strain and leak-
age (as well as the host of caveats discussed in chapter 3). Loosely speaking, one 
can do anything one wants with affordances so long as they allow one to do what 
one wants. 
 Such regimentation by the causal order ensures that affordances are widely 
shared across human communities and, indeed, across primates and mammals 
more generally. Nonetheless, insofar as environments differ as a function of geog-
raphy, insofar as purchases are themselves holistically determined by functions, 
purposes, statuses, and values (as well as other purchases, and the constituents of 
the representational whole, more generally), and insofar as such objects are them-
selves determined by the semiotic community in question (and are regimented by 
the normative order more generally), these points in no way entail any kind of envi-
ronmental determinism, but rather a kind of environmental enablement (or, indeed, 
obviation of the organism-environment divide, as was argued in chapter 2). 
 For example, the exact same swatch of wall space may provide very different 
purchases depending on the purpose of one’s action (hanging an emergency exit 
sign versus scrawling obscene graffi ti), depending on the status of one’s role (civil 
engineer or gang member), depending on the value of one’s identity (family man 
versus rebellious teenager), depending on the functions of one’s instruments (pre-
fabricated sign versus spray paint), and so on. Or the exact same swatch of terrain 
can provide very different purchases if one is walking or running, in a wheelchair or 
on crutches, wearing shoes or going barefoot, an expert gymnast or crawling baby, 
camping or hunting. This resonates with Gibson’s point that an affordance (or 
rather purchase) exists at the intersection of the organism and the environment—
what was called “complementarity” in section 1. Here, however, the organism itself 
is further understood as a nexus of affordances, instruments, actions, roles, and 
identities. And the environment is further understood as a nexus of other (and, in 
particular,  others ’) affordances, instruments, actions, roles, and identities. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   113
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   113
7/23/2012   9:26:21 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:21 PM

 114 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
 THE INTERPRETANTS OF AFFORDANCES: BEYOND THE ACTIONS 
THAT HEED THEM 
 The interpretants of affordances are manifold. Insofar as an instrument incorpo-
rates an affordance, the former is an interpretant of the latter. For example, a roll-
ing pin is an interpretant of wood, and a wall is an interpretant of rocks and mud. 
Insofar as an action heeds an affordance, the former is an interpretant of the latter. 
For example, looking through a window is an interpretant of the transparency of 
glass, grabbing a hammer is an interpretant of the grip provided by its handle, and 
spitting is an interpretant of saliva (and gravity and wind, not to mention lips and 
lungs). Indeed, while ice skating (as an action) is itself an (energetic) interpretant of 
the purchase provided by ice, the skates themselves (as instruments) are embedded 
interpretants of this same purchase. In a world without ice, ice skates would literally 
“make no sense.” More generally, any instrument, action, role, or identity that turns 
on, or presumes, the existence of an affordance is an interpretant of the affordance. 
For example, the role (or identity) of a rock climber is an interpretant of mountains 
just as the role (or identity) of a scuba diver is an interpretant of the sea. (Indeed, 
various emblematic signs, qua actions, of such roles and identities are often pre-
cisely modes of heeding such affordances.) In short, if an interpretant is whatever a 
sign gives rise to insofar as it stands for an object, than the relation “gives rise to” 
may be understood in a variety of ways: from directly creating to being a condition 
of possibility (or intelligibility) for. 11 
 The representational interpretants (or signs with propositional contents) of 
affordances are also manifold. For example, there are words for many relatively 
segmentable affordances:  cliff ,  water ,  air ,  rock ,  tree ,  bird ,  fi re ,  leaf ,  twig ,  paw , and so 
forth. In this way, many relatively detachable “natural objects” in our environment, 
or their parts, have words that refer to them. Indeed, there are even words for pur-
chases per se:  traction ,  sharpness ,  rigidity ,  heft ,  passage ,  leverage ,  mobility , and  grip . 
In general, affordances tend to be less objective and occurrent than instruments 
because they are “found” rather than purposely created, because they are often 
continuous rather than discrete, and because they are often fi xed rather than port-
able. One typically notices purchases only when something affords no purchase—
or, rather, when a feature’s purchase is what it prohibits or constrains (rather than 
permits or enables). Indeed, there exists a multitude of widely addressed signs with 
propositional content that turn on the existence of prohibiting or perilous pur-
chases: not only  hot ,  fl ammable , and  sharp , but also  soft shoulder ,  slippery when wet , 
and  harmful if swallowed. 
 Finally, while the focus here has been on embedded interpretants in the residen-
tial whole, or lexical interpretants in the representational whole, the interpretants 
of affordances, like any other constituent, include any kind of sign more generally. 
Two interpretants, in particular, are salient here: affective interpretants (or “feel-
ings”) and ultimate affective interpretants (or “moods”). In particular, many affor-
dances (such as blood, dirt, alleys, and caves) lead to affective responses (such as 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   114
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   114
7/23/2012   9:26:22 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:22 PM

 
Residence in the World 
115 
disgust, fear, desire, and anxiety), often because of actions the same natural feature 
would afford other kinds of identities (such as robbers and assassins). Moreover, 
these reactions may themselves be directly tied to various roles and identities—to 
whom something can be construed as dirty or desirable, delicious or disgusting. To 
understand such interpretants properly, they need to be grounded in a theory of the 
self, and in a wider understanding of affective unfoldings, as will be undertaken in 
chapters 5 and 6. 
 THE HUMAN BODY AS AFFORDANCE AND INSTRUMENT 
 The human body relates to affordances and instruments in a number of compli-
cated ways. In particular, the human body is itself somewhere between a nexus of 
affordances and a nexus of instruments (not to mention a nexus of actions, roles, 
and identities). It is somewhere between because, in a particular framing, it is par-
tially constituted by relatively natural features with purchases, and it is partially 
constituted by relatively artifi cial entities with functions. (And all the more so with 
artifi cial extensions of the human sensorium and instigatum, or media more gener-
ally.) Moreover, as noted in the introduction, any interpretant of an affordance or 
instrument (say, the action of heeding or wielding it, respectively)  cointerprets and 
 cosignifi es  the affordances and instruments of the body—its purchases and func-
tions. The hand must meet the handle halfway (except, of course, when it doesn’t—
with jammed knuckles or dropped tools as a result). And fi nally, one might go to 
the extreme, as we did in chapter 2, and say that the human body is a phylogenetic 
interpretant of the earth’s affordances (as well as of other humans’ bodies: Breasts 
and mouths, for example, are in part phylogenetic complements of each other). In 
this way, not only does the causal order regiment the feasibility and effi cacious-
ness of interpretants of affordances, but also it can do that in interactional time 
(regimenting the behavior and demeanor of an individual), in historical time (regi-
menting the practices of a community), or in phylogenetic time (regimenting the 
phenotype of a species). This should serve as a useful reminder that many, if not 
most, affordances are caught up in, if not constituted by, processes of signifi cance 
and selection—just not necessarily on the human-specifi c interactional and inten-
tional time scales being foregrounded here. 
 ANIMALS BEHAVE PURPOSIVELY AND EXPERIENCE PURCHASEFULLY 
 Gibson’s use of affordances was meant to characterize what any animal (as a sen-
tient and animate entity) fi nds in its environment, and so it is worthwhile hypoth-
esizing how affordances differ,  relatively speaking and  from a particular frame , 
depending on whether the animal in question is human or not. In particular, for the 
simple reason that (nonhuman) animals are less likely to create instruments, they 
are less likely to incorporate affordances into instruments. While classic borderline 
cases include bird nests and beaver dams, these are only the most obvious examples. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   115
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   115
7/23/2012   9:26:22 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:22 PM

 116 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
The affordances of animals are minimally regimented by norms (in the sense of 
sanctions imposed by others as a function of their judgment as to the propriety of 
one’s actions). Domestic animals are interesting exceptions, as are captive chimps. 
Perhaps most importantly, animals do not have representational interpretants and, 
hence, do not confer propositional content upon affordances (in the strong logical 
and linguistic sense discussed in chapter 3). In this way, the purchases of affordances 
for animals are not inferentially articulated and, hence, are always “given.” And 
fi nally, insofar as human instruments, actions, roles, and identities are much more 
varied and numerous than those of other animals (if present among animals at 
all), the affordances we fi nd are much more variable, numerous, and group-specifi c. 
Crucially, none of this entails that animal behavior is meaningless or noncognitive: 
purchases still stand at the intersection of the animal and its environment (as do 
purposes), and animals can misinterpret affordances (and undertake “ill-advised” 
actions) and thereby err in their interpretations of the world. In short, as framed 
here, all animals experience purchasefully just as they behave purposefully, and thus 
comport meaningfully. 
 3.  Wielding Instruments 
 An  instrument is a semiotic process whose sign is an artifi ced entity, whose object 
is a function, and whose canonical interpretant is an action that wields that entity 
insofar as it serves that function. To say the sign component is an artifi ced entity is 
to say that it consists of a more or less “objective” assemblage of affordances (and 
other instruments) that was itself assembled for the sake of the function it serves. 
And such an artifi ced entity is said to serve a function insofar as it relatively directly 
(causally) or indirectly (normatively) brings about certain effects in the world when 
wielded in certain ways. While instruments are thus similar to affordances in many 
respects, they are also relatively selected and symbolic (on human-specifi c interac-
tional and intentional scales). 
 THE SIGN-COMPONENT: ARTIFICED ENTITIES 
 Saying that the sign-components of instruments are artifi ced entities explicitly con-
trasts them with the sign-components of affordances, which are natural features. 
By  entity is meant that the sign is relatively “objective.” For example, borrowing 
notions from Gibson (1986 [1979]), the sign-components of instruments tend to be 
continuously present to the senses, detachable (from context), portable (across con-
texts), and handy (relative to the dimensions and capacities, or size and strength, 
of humans). Nonetheless, it should be stressed that the notion of entities as “objec-
tive” is just a stereotype: many instruments, from computer programs (and any of 
their subroutines) through infrastructure in the stereotypic sense to artifi cial snow, 
do not have this characteristic. Indeed, at the extreme of what may be called an 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   116
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   116
7/23/2012   9:26:22 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:22 PM

 
Residence in the World 
117 
instrument is a realized state (state-change or event). For example, one might use a 
boulder to break down a wall and then use the broken-down wall as an instrument 
(qua “means”) to storm a building. In this way, instruments can be singularities as 
much as replicas, fl eeting events as much as stable “objects,” the products of “labor” 
and “action” as much as of “work.” 
 By  artifi ced  is meant that the instrument was created by an action, where this 
action had as its purpose the pairing of the artifi ced entity (as a sign) and its func-
tion (as an object) such that the creating agent commits to certain usages (qua inter-
pretants) of this form (qua sign), thereby conferring a particular function (object) 
on it. For example, a pot is the created interpretant of the action of throwing clay, 
and a pie is the created interpretant of baking. Relatedly, unlike affordances, instru-
ments often incorporate affordances (in the guise of “raw materials”) and other 
instruments. For example, hammers incorporate affordances such as wood and 
metal, bicycles incorporate instruments such as seats and wheels, and so on. In 
short, instruments are not only signs to be interpreted by the actions that wield 
them or the words that refer to them, they are also interpretants of the affordances 
and instruments they incorporate and the actions that created them. 
 THE OBJECT-COMPONENT: SERVING A FUNCTION; ENABLING AND 
CONSTRAINING ACTION 
 In everyday terms, a function usually refers to what an instrument was designed to 
do. For example, the  Oxford English Dictionary  (second edition, 1989) provides the 
following description: “The special kind of activity proper to anything; the mode of 
action by which it fulfi lls its purpose.” In this light, the function of a pen might be 
to transfer ink onto paper in a consistent, nonsmearing, fi ne-lined fashion. That is, 
a pen wielded appropriately has this transference of ink as the purpose (i.e., object) 
of the wielding action, and a pen wielded effectively has this transference of ink 
as the created interpretant of the wielding. Functions of specifi c instruments are 
sometime defi ned by describing how or why one uses the instrument in question. 
In particular, most defi nitions of functions are really representational interpretants 
of either typical energetic interpretants (e.g., “a hammer is used to pound in nails”) 
or typical creative interpretants (e.g., “this machine makes sausages”). Hence, func-
tions in the lay sense are often simply descriptions of what to do with an instru-
ment, or what an instrument does (both normatively and by design). 12 
 THE GROUND OF INSTRUMENTS: MOTIVATED AND ARBITRARY; 
DYNAMIC AND IMMEDIATE 
 Semiotically speaking, the function of an instrument is an object and, hence, may 
often be framed as that which organizes the range of appropriate and effective (nor-
mative), or feasible and effi cacious (causal), interpretants of that sign (to a given 
semiotic agent or community and within a particular ontology). Of course, what 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   117
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   117
7/23/2012   9:26:22 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:22 PM

 118 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
counts as appropriate and effective, or feasible and effi cacious, is determined by 
many interrelated factors as a function of that instrument’s embedding in the res-
idential whole. Foremost among these is the purpose of the action that wields the 
instrument (and, hence, the emphasis on enablement and constraint or permission 
and prohibition, above) as well as the purpose of the action that created the instru-
ment. 13 But other constituents serve as embedded interpretants as well. For exam-
ple, the function of a hammer is determined by the purpose of the one who wields 
it (pounding in a nail to make a table versus breaking a window to steal jewelry). It 
is determined by the status of one’s role (carpenter versus looter). It is determined 
by the value of one’s identity (mensch versus no-goodnik). It is determined by other 
instruments that contextualize the hammer: nails versus windows, workshops ver-
sus storefronts. And it is determined by the affordances that are simultaneously 
heeded: the strength of steel versus the fragility of glass, the clarity of daylight ver-
sus the cover of darkness,  inter alia . 
 Insofar as the functions of instruments are holistically determined (ontologi-
cally mediated and frame-dependent) in this way, it ensures that the ground of any 
instrument is as iconic-indexical as it is indexical-symbolic. In terms of sanctions, 
or the regimentation of appropriate and effective interpretants of instruments, this 
means that the norms involving instruments are highly regimented by causes. Thus, 
being appropriate and effective is partially determined by being feasible and effi ca-
cious. To return to our example from chapter 3, while one  can  use a hammer as a 
screwdriver, it is less feasible to use a hammer as a chair. Conversely, while one  may 
use scissors or shears at a ribbon-cutting ceremony, it is not appropriate to use a 
switchblade. In short, with varying degrees of ontological strain and leakage, and 
with a variety of caveats, instruments can be inappropriately wielded and still be 
effi cacious, and they can be feasibly wielded and still be ineffective. 
 Recall our discussion of dynamic and immediate objects from chapter 2: the 
former brings the sign into being (or to the attention of the interpreter), and the 
latter is brought into being by the sign (or by its interpretants). In the context of 
instruments, it is often the purpose of the action that created the instrument that 
determines the subsequent function of the instrument. For this reason, we might 
say that the function of an instrument is a dynamic object at one degree of remove. 
Moreover, assuming an instrument is well designed, an agent can read its function 
(or object) directly off its form (or sign). For example, assuming an instrument is 
well designed, merely by looking at it one knows how to wield it appropriately or 
feasibly (e.g., where to hold it, how to move it, what to expect from it). Moreover, 
when wielded appropriately, such an instrument is transparently effective or effi -
cacious (e.g., the light goes on, the nail goes in). Compare Norman (2002 [1988]). 
Well-designed instruments that are used for their original purposes, then, are 
akin to symptoms, ironically enough: their immediate objects maximally overlap 
with their dynamic objects. Finally, as discussed in section 1, actors and analysts 
alike are prone to treat relatively derived immediate objects as relatively original 
dynamic objects—a point that holds for functions as much as purposes, statuses, 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   118
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   118
7/23/2012   9:26:22 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:22 PM

 
Residence in the World 
119 
values, and even purchases, and a process that is one kind of fetishism discussed 
in chapter 3.  
 SYMBOLS AND TOOLS 
 Semiotic instruments (or “symbols” in the stereotypic sense) should be distinguished 
from nonsemiotic instruments (or “tools” in the stereotypic sense). In particular, a 
semiotic instrument, such as a speech act (or communicative sign more generally), is 
stereotypically wielded to change a social status or mental state: in baptism, a child 
acquires a name and a social status; in assertion, a person acquires a belief; and, in 
any discursive move more generally, a space of intersubjectively recognized com-
mitments and entitlements (to signify, objectify, and interpret in particular ways) 
is transformed. In contrast, a nonsemiotic instrument, such as a hammer, is stere-
otypically wielded to change a material substance or physical state: a nail is driven 
into a board with a hammer, a light goes on with a switch, and, more generally, a 
relatively objective space of possible and necessary causal processes is transformed. 
Moreover, in comparison to semiotic instruments, nonsemiotic instruments have 
relatively iconic-indexical (or “motivated”) grounds, and they are subject to rela-
tively causal (or feasible and effi cacious) regimentation. Concomitantly, and per-
haps most importantly, semiotic instruments have their effects brought about by 
someone’s interpretation of them, whereas nonsemiotic instruments have their 
effects brought about by something’s reaction to them. For nonsemiotic instru-
ments, then, there is one interpreter and one reactant: the one who interprets the 
nonsemiotic instrument by wielding it, and that which undergoes a change in state 
by reacting to the wielding of the nonsemiotic object. On the other hand, For semi-
otic instruments, in contrast, there are two interpreters: the one who interprets the 
semiotic instrument by wielding it, and the one who interprets the wielding of the 
semiotic instrument by undergoing a change in social status or mental state. 
 It should be stressed that, while semiotic and nonsemiotic instruments are being 
contrasted as starkly as possible, the difference between them is really one of degree 
and not one of kind. For example, as we saw in chapter 2, there is a wide range of 
agents between “persons” and “things” in their canonical senses and, hence, a wide 
range of sensing and instigating, as well as signifying and interpreting, entities that 
quickly blur such distinctions. Indeed, as with norms and causes, or social statuses and 
material substances, each can often be framed as the other with more or less degrees 
of ontological strain and leakage. Moreover, most complex technologies nowadays 
turn on, or are entangled with, a large range of semiotic and nonsemiotic instru-
ments, not to mention other kinds of constituents, and they cannot properly function 
without such an embedding, or they function in strange and unexpected ways. 
 Finally, as per the discussion of embeddedness in chapter 2, it must be empha-
sized that utterances, and communicative signs more generally, are instruments. 
And thus they have most of the properties discussed in this chapter (as well as many 
other properties that are specifi cally linguistic, or symbolic, in nature). In particular, 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   119
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   119
7/23/2012   9:26:22 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:22 PM

 120 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
their meaning is highly regimented by embedded interpretants (via  relations such 
as incorporation, complementation, and creation) that turn on the other kinds of 
constituents (not only affordances, actions, roles, and identities, but also relatively 
nonsymbolic instruments). Representations of the world not only presuppose resi-
dence in the world, but they also partake of the very same principles. 
 THE INTERPRETANTS OF INSTRUMENTS: BEYOND THE ACTIONS 
THAT WIELD THEM 
 The interpretants of instruments are manifold. Insofar as an instrument incorpo-
rates another instrument, the former is an interpretant of the latter. For example, 
a bicycle is an interpretant of a bicycle seat. Similarly, insofar as one instrument 
complements another instrument, such that each has the other as a condition of 
possibility (if not intelligibility), they may be interpretants of each other. For exam-
ple, a hammer is an interpretant of a nail (and vice versa) and a jar is an interpre-
tant of a lid. Insofar as an action wields an instrument, the former is an interpretant 
of the latter. For example, writing is an interpretant of a pen.  14   And climbing is an 
interpretant of a ladder. Finally, as we saw above, roles and identities frequently 
incorporate and complement instruments, often by having relatively emblematic 
actions that involve wielding the instrument in question. 
 Representational interpretants of instruments are also manifold. Any word 
that refers to an instrument (e.g.,  hammer ,  nail ,  skateboard ,  kettle ) provides an 
interpretant of that instrument. As is well known (Keil 1989), the concepts of such 
words, or their inferentially articulated object-types, usually turn on the functions 
of the instruments they refer to. These concepts can be quite complex. For exam-
ple, Wierzbicka’s (1985) defi nition of the word tea cup goes on for several pages 
and—from the standpoint of this theory—really consists of representational 
interpretants of common energetic, creating, incorporating, and complementing 
interpretants involving tea cups in certain social milieus. The fact that there are 
so many words for instruments, as well as productive morphology for deriving 
them from verbs, expresses the fact that much of our environment consists of 
instruments, most of our actions require instruments, and instruments are often 
foregrounded in discourse (e.g.,  she tripped him with her cane and dispatched him 
with her knitting needle ). 
 To be sure, with expertise and the rise of complicated and specialized instru-
ments more generally, there are many instruments that only experts can name. 
Relatedly, there are useful shifter-like words such as  thingamajig ,  gizmo , and  doo-
hickey  for the rest of us. Conversely, many people may know the function of a par-
ticular instrument but not be able to interpret it themselves: they can appropriately 
wield the right representational interpretant (e.g., “that’s a car”) but not the right 
energetic or ultimate energetic interpretant (e.g., actually driving a car). In any case, 
what is crucial about representational interpretants of instruments is that they can 
confer conceptual contents on the functions of instruments themselves, such that 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   120
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   120
7/23/2012   9:26:22 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:22 PM

 
Residence in the World 
121 
instruments can be caught up in cause-effect and property-substance reasoning as 
well as theoretical agency more generally. 
 4.  Undertaking Actions 
 An  action  is a semiotic process whose sign is a controlled behavior, whose object is a 
purpose, and whose canonical interpretant is an instrument that is created by it, or 
another action that incorporates or complements it. As we saw in the introduction, 
actions are special in that they seem to sit in the middle of our ontology: simulta-
neously signs to be interpreted and interpretants of signs, simultaneously incorpo-
rating of affordances and instruments and incorporated by roles and identities. As 
will be seen in this section, if affordances are akin to natural instruments, actions 
are akin to embodied instruments—their signs are more fl eeting, their objects are 
more contingent, and their artifi cers are the actors themselves. 15 Indeed, just like 
instruments, actions can be inappropriately undertaken and still be effi cacious, and 
they can be appropriately undertaken and still be ineffi cacious. Finally, just as there 
are semiotic and nonsemiotic instruments, there are “symbolic” and “instrumen-
tal” actions. Given these parallels between affordances and instruments, on the one 
hand, and between instruments and actions, on the other, many of the points devel-
oped in the last two sections regarding regimentation, strain, and so forth should be 
understood as carrying over to actions in the appropriate limits. 
 THE SIGN-COMPONENT OF ACTIONS: CONTROLLED BEHAVIORS 
 Saying that the sign of an action is  controlled means that the actor more or less 
determined when and where the behavior would happen. While not necessarily 
“intentional,” “chosen,” “self-conscious,” or even “desired,” the behavior was not 
an accident or a mistake, nor did it happen in the actor’s sleep or as a refl ex arc. In 
chapter 3, control (as the expression of a sign) was just one component of prac-
tical agency, and thus our defi nition of action does not presume composition (of 
the sign-object relation). For example, undertaking another’s command is still an 
action. That said, as will be discussed below, actions do presume a certain degree 
of commitment, in that the actor would be surprised by, and disposed to sanc-
tion or draw inferences from, nonanticipated effects (qua reactions of things or 
interpretants of people). Crucially, control (like composition and commitment) is 
a graduated notion, turning on the relative leeway of when and where a behavior 
may be expressed. Moreover, communities may have different judgments regarding 
what behaviors are controlled and uncontrolled. Borderline cases include interjec-
tions, emotional reactions in the stereotypic sense, and behaviors undertaken while 
drunk, asleep, hypnotized, catatonic, spellbound, and so forth. 
 By  behavior is meant any state (sitting, kneeling, standing), state-change (get-
ting up, going to sleep, killing a bear, taking out the trash), or activity (running, 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   121
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   121
7/23/2012   9:26:23 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:23 PM

 122 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
eating, walking a dog, feeding a child).  16   As may be seen from these examples, such 
behaviors are not passive (contrast  he was killed or  he became afraid ) or experi-
ential (contrast  he saw her  or  she believes him ). Such behaviors do not necessarily 
involve muscular activity, or the effects of muscular activity; indeed, they might 
involve activities such as thinking, worrying, pondering, calculating, imagining, 
and remembering. Controlled behaviors might last a moment (he shot her a look of 
pure hatred) or go on for years (she built a surface-to-air missile). Prototypic behav-
iors are probably a position change of the biological body, or any one of its limbs: 
from an origin, along a path, to a (projected) destination. Indeed, as we will see in 
chapter 6, metaphors of the life-journey are often built from this prototype. 
 THE OBJECT-COMPONENT OF ACTIONS: PURPOSES; INTENTIONS; 
AND “INTENTIONS” 
 Semiotically speaking, the purpose of an action is an object and, hence, may often be 
framed as that which organizes the range of appropriate and effective (normative), 
or feasible and effi cacious (causal), interpretants of that sign (to a given semiotic 
agent or community, and within a particular ontology). Of course, what counts as 
appropriate and effective, or feasible and effi cacious, is determined by many inter-
related factors, as a function of that action’s embedding in the residential whole. 
Foremost among these are the function of the instrument that is wielded by that 
action, and the function of the instrument that is created by that action (where such 
“instruments” may be state-changes as well as artifi ced entities per se). But, as will 
be discussed below, other constituents serve as embedded interpretants as well. 
 Thus, while the term  purpose is being used here to mean the (semiotic) object 
of a controlled behavior, there are three other closely related terms that should 
be kept separate. The terms “intention” and “purpose” (in scare quotes) will be 
used to mean the putative psychological states that seem to cause controlled behav-
iors (as articulated, say, in the folk psychology of a semiotic community). These 
are often understood as the desired end that some controlled behavior is meant 
to bring about (itself often understood as a cause of, or reason for, the behavior). 
The term  intention (without scare quotes) will be used to mean a particular type of 
purpose: one that involves a representational interpretant that the actor commits to 
and, hence, has propositional content refl exively projected onto it. Note, then, that 
most descriptions of actions are really representational interpretants of controlled 
behaviors as signs, and so are also relatively explicit signs of purposes:  she was 
sharpening her skates ;  he was walking to school ; and so forth. 
 While a proper account of both intentions and “intentions” will have to await 
chapter 5, it is worthwhile briefl y enumerating the differences between purposes and 
intentions—for it is one key site where residence in the world and representations 
of the world are most clearly entangled. If an action is a semiotic process whose 
sign is a controlled behavior and whose object is a purpose, such a purpose counts 
as an intention when the actor herself (qua controller of the behavior) commits 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   122
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   122
7/23/2012   9:26:23 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:23 PM

 
Residence in the World 
123 
to a representational interpretant of the sign-object relation in question. In other 
words, she would be surprised by, or disposed to sanction or draw inferences from, 
representations of her controlled behavior that did not (inferentially) conform with 
her own representation, say, “I’m raising my hand (to ask a question).” Intentions, 
then, are purposes with propositional contents conferred upon them (thereby mak-
ing them inferentially articulated, grounded in language, subject to reasons more 
generally, and, in particular, caught up in theoretical agency). And intentions are 
self-refl exive purposes (such that the actor can self-regiment her own behavior in 
relation to its effects). 17 
 We already dealt with communicative and noncommunicative intentions in 
chapter 2, and we will return to them in chapter 5. For the moment, note that some 
philosophers (in particular, Davidson 1984) think that intentions are stereotypically 
justifi ed with (or have as their inferential roots) a belief and a pro-attitude, where the 
latter may include personal preferences (desire), social obligations (status), or ethi-
cal commitments (value). To take the most mundane of examples, my opening an 
umbrella when it rains (as an action) may be justifi ed by a belief (say, that an open 
umbrella will keep me dry) and some kind of pro-attitude: for example, a personal 
preference (to stay dry), a social status (to keep my uniform clean), or a moral com-
mitment (that dryness is godliness). In this way, even at the inferential level, intentions 
are often caught up in roles and identities (not to mention desires, however brute or 
refi ned) and, hence, residence in the world, as much as representations of the world, 
and refl exive modalities of selfhood more generally. In short, intentional actions not 
only have causal or indexical fruits, they also have logical or inferential roots. 
 It is a fair question to ask what kinds of evidence observers look for to deter-
mine whether a behavior was purposeful, or intentional, or not (and, hence, whether 
it constitutes an action). Perhaps the key diagnostic is a high degree of practical 
agency: if I think you controlled (and composed) your behavior, qua cause, and 
could have committed to its effects (as well as desired them), then it is reasonable 
for me to assume that the behavior was a means for those effects as an end, such 
that you were a purposeful agent in the stereotypic sense. (Such reasoning can be 
applied to human and nonhuman animals.) Moreover, as we just saw, assuming all 
this is true, and that you are also a human animal with a high degree of theoretical 
agency (e.g., language), then you should also be an intentional agent: someone who 
can explicitly represent their own action, be able to offer a reason for it, and be sur-
prised by, or disposed to sanction and draw inferences from, representations that 
don’t inferentially conform with these representations and reasons. 
 THE INTERPRETANTS OF ACTIONS: BEYOND THE INSTRUMENTS CREATED 
 The interpretants of actions are manifold. Insofar as an instrument is created by 
an action, it may be an interpretant of that action. For example, a portrait may be 
an interpretant of painting and a bottle may be an interpretant of blowing glass. 
As discussed in section 3, this is one reason the functions (of created instruments) 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   123
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   123
7/23/2012   9:26:23 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:23 PM

 124 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
are often framed in terms of the purposes (of creating actions). More generally, 
any change in state brought about by an action may be a created interpretant of 
that action. For example, if one breaks a window (and subsequently uses the hole 
to unlock a door), then the broken window is an instrument that itself constitutes a 
created interpretant of the action of breaking it. Insofar as an action incorporates 
another action, the former is an interpretant of the latter. For example, scratching 
one’s nose may be an interpretant of lifting one’s hand. And going to the park (as 
a relatively long-term action) may incorporate getting on the bus (as a relatively 
short-term action). Insofar as one action reacts to another action, the former is an 
interpretant of the latter. As we saw in chapter 3, for example, my action of step-
ping back or ducking may be an interpretant of your balling your hand into a fi st. 
Many actions are complemented by roles and identities, and thus they “make sense” 
only in the context of them (as one of their conditions of possibility or intelligibil-
ity), often as one of their relatively emblematic roles. Finally, any role or identity 
may incorporate an action, and thereby serve as an interpretant of it. Again, incor-
poration means that the action relates to the role as part to whole and means to 
ends. For example, being a teacher may constitute an incorporating interpretant of 
grading homework or disciplining children. And being a lawyer may constitute an 
incorporating interpretant of writing briefs or questioning witnesses. That is, such 
actions are some of the many ways one may satisfy such roles. 
 The representational interpretants of actions are manifold. As mentioned, 
most descriptions of controlled behaviors count as representational interpretants 
of them: “he was going to the store,” “she grabbed her hat,” “I raised my hand,” 
“she was slowly poisoning him,” and so on. To see this, note that only in cer-
tain degraded conditions (themselves quite interesting to theorize) is a behavior 
described  as a behavior: “his palm turned upward and his arm moved forward” 
(versus “he held out his hand for change”). Indeed, when we described the sign-
component of actions, we were already describing lexical classes and (intentional) 
actions per se. That is, descriptions of behavior are usually already relatively explicit 
signs of the purpose of that behavior and, hence, representational interpretants of 
the action per se. In this way, the action verbs of any language (qua representational 
whole) are themselves interpretants of the action types of any community (qua 
residential whole). Finally, as shown above, what is crucial about representational 
interpretants is that they confer propositional content upon purposes, such that if 
internalized (or committed to) by the actor, they turn purposes into intentions and 
thereby ground actions in reasons (and actors in accountability). Note, then, that 
we can undertake as many actions, in the strong intentional sense, as there are rep-
resentable behaviors in a language—and thus an infi nity of different actions. 
 DO ANIMALS HAVE INTENTIONS? 
 In a particular framing, animals (and perhaps so-called prelinguistic infants) do not 
have intentions as just defi ned, which would require both propositional content (via 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   124
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   124
7/23/2012   9:26:23 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:23 PM

 
Residence in the World 
125 
representational interpretants) and internalization (via self-refl exive commitment). 
They may, of course, be ascribed intentions insofar as their behavior is subject to 
interpretive reasoning of others (but not themselves). And they may or may not 
have “intentions,” as folk-psychological entities of a particular sort, depending on 
whether a given semiotic community is willing to confer these upon them.  18 But they 
certainly have purposes, as intimated in section 2, with the following qualifi cations. 
First, as with all constituents of the residential whole, they lack representational 
interpretants and, hence, propositional contents. Not only does this mean that they 
do not have intentions, but it also means that the purposes they have are much sim-
pler and circumscribed (insofar as they are not inferentially articulated through the 
infi nitely generative mechanisms of a natural language, and higher-order reason-
ing processes more generally). Moreover, while humans may normatively regiment 
animals (via their sanctioning practices), most animals do not normatively regi-
ment themselves (via historically mediated processes of sanctioning and imitation). 
Thus, their actions should be understood in terms of feasibility and effi caciousness 
rather than appropriateness and effectiveness. Finally, in comparison to humans, 
nonhuman animals are relatively unable to commit to others’ interpretants of their 
actions. That said, none of this means that many animals cannot self-refl exively 
commit to their own incorporating and creating interpretants, and thereby be sur-
prised or frustrated when such interpretants fail to come about. In this way, many 
nonhuman animals are consummate interpreters of their own actions. 
 5.  Inhabiting Roles 
 A  role is a semiotic process whose object is a status, whose sign is an expression of 
that status, and whose canonical interpretant is another role that complements it, or 
an identity that incorporates it. The relation between roles, statuses, and attitudes 
(and between indices, individuals, kinds, agents, and ontologies, more generally) 
was treated in great detail in chapter 3. Therefore, this section focuses only on roles 
insofar as they relate to the other constituents of the residential whole. Before begin-
ning, recall that the term  role can be used narrowly to refer to the sign-component 
of a semiotic process (qua expression of a status), as was done in chapter 3, or it 
can be used broadly to refer to the entire semiotic process (qua role-status-attitude 
relation itself). In what follows, we will tack between both of these uses. 
 ROLES AS ANY POSSIBLE EXPRESSION OF A STATUS 
 As introduced in chapter 3, a status may be framed as a projected propensity to 
signify, objectify, and interpret in particular ways, or to exhibit particular indices 
more generally (itself often imagined as a bundle of normatively regimented com-
mitments and entitlements). A role (in the narrow sense) is any relatively indexical 
sign of such a propensity—itself usually some particular mode of signifi cation, 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   125
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   125
7/23/2012   9:26:23 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:23 PM

 126 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
objectifi cation, or interpretation. And an attitude is another’s interpretant of one’s 
status (having perceived one’s role). In this way, any constituent of the residence 
whole (as well as the representational whole) can be a role, qua relatively indexi-
cal sign of a status. And thus any instance of heeding an affordance, wielding an 
instrument, undertaking an action, inhabiting another role, or fulfi lling an identity 
can index a status (to some interpreting agent, with a particular ontology, who is 
disposed to project the relevant propensity). 
 For this reason, roles (in the narrow sense) are much more heterogeneous signs 
than, say, natural features (in the case of affordances), artifi ced entities (in the case 
of instruments), or controlled behaviors (in the case of actions). And this is one 
reason relatively emblematic roles are so important. Indeed, the emblematic roles of 
many statuses are usually particular affordances, instruments, and actions (as well 
as other roles and identities) that seem to strongly correlate with the status in ques-
tion (to a given semiotic agent or community and within a particular ontology). In 
any case, the crucial point is this: through your role (as well as through the roles of 
others who interact with you), I may infer your status, and, having inferred your 
status, I may come to expect other roles from you that would be in keeping with that 
status. As characterized in chapter 3, just as a status may often be framed as pro-
pensity personifi ed, a role (in the narrow sense) may often be framed as personhood 
actualized, and an attitude may often be framed as another’s persona internalized. 
 THE INTERPRETANTS OF ROLES 
 As we saw in chapter 3, while the canonical interpretant of a role (in the wide sense) 
is probably another’s adoption of a complementary status, attitudes include affec-
tive, energetic, and representational interpretants (as well as their ultimate variet-
ies). As should now be clear, attitudes may also include any relatively embedded 
constituent of the residential whole. For example, insofar as an instrument is cre-
ated by a role (or, more precisely, created by an action that is itself grounded in 
the commitments and entitlements, or projected propensity more generally, which 
constitute the status of the role), the former is an interpretant of the latter. A loaf 
of bread is thus as much an interpretant of being a baker as it is a sign of being a 
baker. This framing of roles also captures the meaning of the lay expression: “inter-
preting a role.” In particular, many of our actions, and our comportment more 
generally, may be understood as individually and creatively acting within the possi-
bilities our social (intersubjectively regimented) position affords us (often, thereby, 
changing that position). Similarly, insofar as a role is created by another role (or, 
more precisely, by a set of actions that are themselves grounded in the propensity 
which constitutes the status of the role), the former is an interpretant of the latter. 
For example, a socialized child (or disciplined being more generally) may constitute 
an interpretant of being a socializing parent (or disciplining being more generally). 
The future propensities of the former (such as dispositions to signify, objectify, and 
interpret in particular ways) are created by actualizing the current propensities of 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   126
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   126
7/23/2012   9:26:23 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:23 PM

 
Residence in the World 
127 
the latter. And insofar as another role or identity incorporates a role, the former 
counts as an interpretant of the latter. For example, being a Q’eqchi’-Maya (as an 
ethnic affi liation, with a particular value orientation) may provide an interpretant 
of a man’s role in a cave ritual or a godparent’s role in a baptism ceremony. The 
latter can count as means of fulfi lling the values of the former as ends, and parts 
of such larger life-projects as wholes. More canonically, undergoing a change in 
status, qua ultimate interpretant, may constitute an interpretant of another’s role. 
For example, one’s assuming the role of husband is an interpretant of the role (wide 
sense) of the civil or religious offi cial who presided over one’s wedding—and, in 
particular, their civil or religious role (narrow sense), qua ritual performance. Or, 
assuming the role of patient is an interpretant of encountering another in the role 
of doctor. Indeed, just as one cannot understand a sheath without reference to a 
sword, one cannot usually understand a priest without reference to a parishioner 
or an addressee without reference to a speaker or a lawyer without reference to a 
client (and vice versa). Linton characterized such complementary relations in terms 
of “congruence” and “reciprocation” (1926). Finally, one and the same action may 
be a creative interpretant of a status (constituting, say, one of its rights or responsi-
bilities), and serve as an emblematic role of that status. Such roles are thus similar 
to symptoms: their immediate object is their dynamic object—what they bring to 
another’s attention (qua rights and responsibilities, or propensity more generally) 
is what caused their expression. This is probably the stereotype of a role, and it is 
closest to Linton’s original formulation. (See Table 4.3.) 
 In any case, a crucial point is this: given the embedding of any actual role in 
the residential whole, any one of the statuses that one is currently inhabiting may 
be indexed by many signs simultaneously (and, indeed, may exist only by way of 
such indices). These may be embodied and embedded in one’s own behavior, as well 
as embodied and embedded in the behavior of others (not to mention enminded in 
and articulated by one’s own and others’ representations)—the affordances being 
heeded, the instruments being wielded, the actions being undertaken, the other 
roles being inhabited, and the identities being fulfi lled (at any degree of indexical 
remove, via framed and framing processes such as incorporation, complementa-
tion, and creation). 19   And anyone of these indices may have its particular meaning 
(in the sense of indexing a particular status, qua projected propensity) only in that 
context (and thus may disappear when removed from that context). In this way, 
as was argued in chapter 3, relations between roles and statuses (or indices, kinds, 
individuals, agents, and ontologies more generally) are incredibly context depen-
dent—not to mention potentially fl eeting, fragile, and faint. Nonetheless, in certain 
cases—for reasons of emblemeticity as much as contextual redundancy—statuses 
may be more or less directly perceivable (rather than being indirectly inferable) in 
the way this was defi ned during the discussion of objects in section 1. 
 Finally, representational interpretants of roles are also manifold. In particu-
lar, any label provides an interpretant of a role:  mother ,  speaker ,  doctor ,  husband , 
 worrywart , and so forth. The conceptual structure of such words may often be 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   127
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   127
7/23/2012   9:26:23 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:23 PM

 128 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
characterized in terms of an underlying status (itself often imagined, or ontolo-
gized, as a bundle of rights and responsibilities, or normative commitments and 
entitlements, or habits and dispositions): what a mother or a priest may or may not 
do, should or should not do, is unlikely or likely to do, and so forth. In this way, 
words such as  may  and  must,  in conjunction with various representational interpre-
tants of actions (as well as representational interpretants of other complementary 
roles), can be used to make explicit the normative entitlements and commitments 
that compose statuses in their stereotypic and reifi ed sense, as well as the inference-
licensing projected propensities that may or may not actually underlie them (and 
theoretical agency more generally). In this way, one may reside in the world only 
within a particular representation, such that one’s indexical signs may both license, 
and be licensed by, relatively propositional inferences about one’s identities. This is 
yet another site where residence in the world and representations of the world are 
most transparently entangled. 20 
 PUTTING ROLE-INHABITANCE ON A PROPER FOOTING: BEYOND THE 
DRAMATURGICAL SELF 
 That one is always at the  intersection of multiple roles (father and husband, speaker 
and overhearer, innocent bystander and friend), is a rather obvious point, and yet 
one that still needs to be stressed for several reasons. First, most comportment is 
semiotically frameable relative to many roles (though, to be sure, only some are 
particularly critical, explanatory, or coherent at any given moment, to a given inter-
preting agent, that may include the role-performing self in question). In a particular 
context, some of these roles may be relatively fl uid or quickly shifting (say, speaker 
and addressee), and others may be relatively fi xed (say, gender or marital status)—
and, of course, vice versa, in the right circumstance. This multiple inhabitance 
TABLE 4.3
Theories of Roles Compared
 Linton’s Theory 
 Theory Offered Here 
 Role (sign) 
Any action that conforms with 
one’s rights and responsibilities.
Context-dependent index of one’s 
projected propensity (given particu-
lar interpreting agent, their ontology, 
other indices, etc.).
 Status (object) 
Collection of rights and 
 responsibilities to act in certain 
ways.
Projected propensity to exhibit cer-
tain indices (sometimes framed as 
commitments and entitlements to 
signify, objectify, and interpret in 
 particular ways).
 Attitude (interpretant) 
Nothing in Linton per se, but 
would probably be something like 
a representational interpretant, 
such as a belief that “so and so 
is a banker” (or a relatively lexical 
role- or status-designator).
Embodied, embedded, articulated, 
and enminded interpretants, rang-
ing from affective, energetic, and 
 representational interpretants 
to incorporating, creating, and 
 complementing interpretants.
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   128
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   128
7/23/2012   9:26:23 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:23 PM

 
Residence in the World 
129 
can lead to confl icts, resonances, cancellations, reframings, and so on. And fi nally, 
given the intersection of role inhabitance and residential agency (in particular, the 
dimension of  commitment ), the otherwise straightforward inhabitance of any role 
is always parasitically subject to strategizing, enclosing, aestheticizing, and dissem-
bling practices. (Amen.) 
 Indeed, given the ambiguity of being implicated in multiple roles, some actu-
ally inhabited and some only projected, some held close and others worn lightly, 
role-inhabitance is a fraught and essential part of being human. Erving Goffman 
(1959, 1981b), that arch-Meadian, probably understood the microdynamics of such 
interactional processes better than anyone—arguing, for example, that the per-
formed self (qua immediate object) is often taken, by self and other alike, to be the 
performing self (qua dynamic object). Rather than reviewing his well-known argu-
ments, the next section, in conjunction with chapter 6, will offer a theory of that 
constituent which organizes roles, and about which Goffman had relatively little to 
say, namely, identity and, in particular, value. Indeed, the fact that he had so little to 
say about identity (and related processes, such as affective unfoldings) is probably 
the key reason his theory of personhood, for all its brilliance, never got much past 
the dramaturgical self, a relatively monodimensional realm of motivation in which 
everyone is either vying for status (in the sense of “distinction”) or saving face. 
 6.  Fulfi lling Identities 
 An  identity is a semiotic process whose object is a value, whose sign is an expres-
sion of that value, and whose canonical interpretant is an action or role that is 
created by it, or another identity that incorporates or complements it. 21 Because 
identity maximally interacts with representational interpretants (and, hence, with 
language and mind more generally), because identity is so closely linked to agency 
and selfhood, and because value is a particularly strange and important kind of 
object, it cannot be adequately understood until these topics are treated at length 
in subsequent chapters. In this section, we will frame value in relation to statuses 
and purposes, and thereby frame identities in relation to roles and actions. In par-
ticular, sometimes value can be framed as a particularly important or pervasive 
status, and sometimes value can be framed as a long-term or higher-order purpose. 
As will be seen in chapter 6, identity may also be framed as a meta-kind that refl ex-
ively incorporates the other sorts of kinds discussed in chapters 1 and 3 (e.g., social 
statuses, mental states, material substances). In particular, it involves most of the 
same principles (indices, inferences, individuals, etc.), and it is mediated by most 
of the same processes (enclosure, emblemeticity, ontology, etc.). For these reasons, 
much of what was said above (in section 1) and in chapters 1 and 3 also holds for 
identity—in particular, the various kinds of emblemeticity, the context-dependence 
of its indexical values, the conceptual structure conferred upon it by representa-
tional interpretants, the tension between inference and perceivability, the relations 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   129
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   129
7/23/2012   9:26:24 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:24 PM

 130 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
between practical and theoretical agency, the regimentation by generalized others 
on various scales, the ways one may be implicated in many identities at once, the 
constant temptation to reify it, the ways in which it is both condition for and con-
sequence of various framing, and so forth. And readers are invited to extend those 
claims, and draw out these commitments, themselves. 
 IDENTITY AS SIGN AND IDENTITY AS SEMIOTIC PROCESS 
 The term  identity , like the term  role , has two basic senses: as a semiotic process, it 
is the relation between a sign, an object, and an interpretant. And as the sign-com-
ponent of such a semiotic process, it is the expression of a value. In this latter, more 
narrow sense, identities are thus to values what roles are to statuses. And, therefore, 
an identity can be any mode of comportment, or perceivable feature more generally, 
that indexes one’s value(s): wearing a certain kind of hat, undergoing a certain kind 
of surgery, reading a particular book, holding a certain belief, waving a certain fl ag, 
espousing a certain desire, shouting certain slogans when drunk, knowing a certain 
handshake or song, speaking a particular language, making a pilgrimage, avoiding 
certain foods, expressing a certain feeling, saying “I am an X” or “thou shall not 
Y,” and so on and so forth. In other words, under the right semiotic frame (within 
a particular semiotic community, to a given interpreting agent, in the particular 
context of other signs, as mediated by a particular ontology, etc.)  any practice, 
property, or process may be an expression of one’s values and, hence, a relatively 
indexical sign of one’s identity. And thus any constituent of the residential or rep-
resentational whole (belief or action, instrument or wish, affordance or memory, 
gesture or utterance, etc.) can be the sign-component of one’s identity. For these 
reasons, aside from certain relatively emblematic indices of identity (e.g., dietary 
restrictions, holy books, icons, jewelry, pilgrimages, clothing, hats, etc.), themselves 
suitably generalized from the last section and from chapter 3, the sign-component 
of an identity does not help defi ne what is meant by identity. It is far too heteroge-
neous. Rather, the interesting question is what is meant by  value  (as a particular sort 
of projectable propensity). 
 KINDS OF IDENTITY: DIMENSIONS, LOCI, AND CONTENTS 
 Before tackling value, we need to introduce three more distinctions, which are addi-
tional ways of characterizing the value-identity relation and which go back to our 
defi nition of relational emblemeticity in chapter 3. In particular, identity (in an 
unmarked sense, as the relation between value and its expression) may be initially 
understood as  being-in-common . In particular, there is a self-sameness of contents 
across a range of contexts (where the criteria for establishing contents and contexts 
are themselves subject to various framings). For present purposes, three kinds of 
being-in-common are possible. Values can be (more or less) held in common. Values 
can be held in common, and in contrast to another entity that holds other values 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   130
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   130
7/23/2012   9:26:24 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:24 PM

 
Residence in the World 
131 
in common. And values can be held in common, in contrast to another entity that 
holds other values in common, and with a refl exive sense of this contrastive com-
monality. In short, there can be substantive, contrastive, and refl exive senses of 
identity. Saussure got the fi rst two senses of identity (sometimes called “identity” 
and “difference,” respectively); but, as we saw in chapter 3, for human kinds the 
refl exive sense is probably the most important. 
 Moreover, each of these three senses of identity can be localized in a differ-
ent kind of entity, such as an individual, a group, or a species. For example, an 
individual may hold a certain set of values (which contrast her with other indi-
viduals and which the individual refl exively understands). Or the members of a 
group may hold a certain set of values (which contrast it with other groups and 
which members of the group refl exively understand). While most scholars focus on 
group identity (or individual identity insofar as it is articulated in terms of group 
identity:  I am an Armenian), some also focus on species identity. This may turn 
on various forms of humanism (say, Marx on species being, discourses regarding 
universal human rights, and so on). It may turn on animal rights (say, Peter Singer’s 
work). And it may even be outside of conventional understandings of  zoe per se 
(for example, cyborgs, robots, Gaia, the universe, alien life forms, biophilia, and so 
on). Notwithstanding these tendencies, many would argue that only certain species 
have the refl exive sense of identity (regardless of the locus of identity). And, indeed, 
some scholars (and states) will grant identity to a group or individual purely in 
terms of refl exivity (one considers oneself X), even when there is no substantive or 
contrastive reason to justify such a claim: one’s refl exive identity  is one’s substantive 
or contrastive identity. 
 For present purposes, the interesting questions turn on individual and group 
identity in the refl exive sense (thereby incorporating the substantive and contras-
tive sense). And then an almost bewilderingly wide and historically specifi c range 
of possible contents exists. For example, the group or community in question can 
be religious (Christian, Jewish, Muslim), political (Democrat, Republican, green), 
national (German, American, Japanese), regional (East Coast, Midwest, Hoosier), 
philosophical (empiricist, rationalist, realist, nominalist), or sociopolitical in the 
lay sense (turning on affi liations based on class, gender, sexuality, race, ethnicity, 
etc.). It may have to do with the division of labor (guilds and professions), the dis-
tribution of kin (moeities and clans, parents and lineages), or the distribution of 
kith (sororities, clubs, gangs, and teams),  inter alia.  Such dimensions (commonality, 
contrast, refl exivity), loci (individual, group, species), and contents (ethnicity, reli-
gion, etc.) aside, we may now turn to value. 
 IDENTITIES AND ANALOGIES: VALUE IN RELATION TO STATUS AND PURPOSE 
 Insofar as values (and identities more generally) are heavily mediated by represen-
tational interpretants of them, it is useful to develop several analogies that may be 
used to characterize them, and which turn on other constituents of the residential 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   131
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   131
7/23/2012   9:26:24 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:24 PM

 132 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
whole. These are “shortcuts” to identity—ways of sneaking up on identity by means 
of metaphors, which are themselves grounded in more easily understood constitu-
ents. They allow us to take what we already know about roles and actions and apply 
it to identities, and thereby understand a relatively abstract relation (identity-value) 
in terms of relatively concrete relations (role-status and action-purpose). In some 
sense, then, they are not actual theories of identity or value, but rather relatively 
enticing folk theories, themselves heavily dependent on particular semiotic ontolo-
gies, that need to be made explicit so that they do not unconsciously guide theoriz-
ing later on. Such a warning is not meant to discount such metaphors; indeed, in 
the realm of social constructions, one often  is one’s folk theory. In some sense, then, 
the task is to simultaneously explicate, generalize, leverage, and undermine such 
metaphors. 
 If the relation between identity and value is understood in terms of the rela-
tion between action and purpose, several widespread analogies are possible. First, 
a value might be understood as a long-term purpose: not planning a route to work 
but charting a course through life. For example, rather than a journey from home 
to the store, it is a journey from birth to death (compare Lakoff and Johnson 1980). 
Second, a value might be understood as a second-order purpose: a standard that 
allows one to choose between paths (e.g., do I take the fast route or the scenic route). 
Thus, it guides our (second-order) action of choosing among different (fi rst-order) 
actions (Frankfurt 1971; Taylor 1989). Third, a value might be understood as a 
fi nal purpose: if any purposeful action may be undertaken as a means to undertake 
any other purposeful action as an end (and so on indefi nitely), a value is the ter-
minal point of such a means-ends chain of purposes. This is closest to Aristotle’s 
(2001b) understanding of the summum bonum, or highest end—and this is one 
reason identity stands at the “top” of our ontology (qua end, which is not itself 
a further means). And fourth, somewhat incorporating all these other metaphors, 
rather than a path through physical space (from home, through the park, to the res-
taurant), a value underlies a path through a space of mental states, social states, and 
material substances (or kinds more generally). For example, values help us decide 
which social statuses we should inhabit and which mental states we should hold 
over the course of our lives, or, in cases in which we have little choice, they help us 
determine how we should feel about our own and others’ social statuses and men-
tal states. In short, a value might be understood as a meta-purpose that enables us 
to position ourselves (and others) in, as well as move ourselves through, a space of 
possible kinds. 
 If the relation between identity and value is understood in terms of the rela-
tion between role and status, additional analogies are possible. First, an identity 
is just a relatively complex set of roles, and a value is just a relatively complex set 
of statuses. In this way, a role is to an identity, and a status is to a value, what a 
part is to a whole. For example, one is simultaneously a loving husband, a devoted 
father, a dedicated civil servant, and a committed Buddhist. Second, an identity is 
just a role that one “identifi es with”—taking it as more important than one’s other 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   132
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   132
7/23/2012   9:26:24 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:24 PM

 
Residence in the World 
133 
roles (i.e., its commitments and entitlements, or propensities more generally, trump 
their commitments and entitlements in cases of confl ict) or as more overarching 
and context-independent (i.e., one inhabits it in more places, with more people or 
more important people, for longer or more crucial periods of time). For example, 
one may be a banker only during the day or an addressee only during particular 
swatches of conversation, but a Christian 24–7 or an Armenian all one’s life, espe-
cially among intimates or on holy days. Third, an identity is just a role whose status, 
now understood as a value, is discursively articulated (like a rule) or politically rele-
vant (like a law). Examples of such values would include the Ten Commandments, 
the Hippocratic oath, the Golden Rule, the Bill of Rights, and the Categorical 
Imperative. And fourth, an identity is a meta-role and a value is a meta-status. That 
is, if a status is a propensity to signify, objectify, and interpret in particular ways, 
then a value is a propensity to inhabit particular social statuses and hold particular 
mental states (or be implicated in particular kinds more generally). And, if a role (in 
the narrow sense) is just an expression of a status, an identity is just an expression 
of a value—or whatever indexes such a (projected) propensity to exhibit, or hold 
dear, particular propensities. 
 PROMISSORY NOTE 
 In short, the value underlying an identity may be usefully framed by analogy to 
both the status underlying a role and the purpose underlying an action. There can 
be substantive, contrastive, and refl exive senses of identity: three different ways of 
“being-in-common” with respect to value. This locus of identity, whatever has some 
kind of evaluative coherence, may be located in an individual, group, or species. 
And the contents in question can be imagined in a variety of ways (national, reli-
gious, philosophical, personal, political, etc.). All of these ideas will be incorporated 
in chapter 6, in which value will be theorized by unfolding a metaphor that turns 
on the relation between a map, a terrain, and a traveler, where the terrain turns on 
kinds such as social statuses, mental states, and material substances (or residence 
in, and representations of, the world more generally), where the map fi gures such 
a terrain in terms of differentially valenced origins, paths, and destinations, and 
where a traveler’s interpretations of such a map are equivalent to charting a course 
through such a terrain. In some sense, value will be turn out to be  life itself (subject 
to a particular framing or within a particular ontological interpretation). 
 7.  From Acting under a Description to Comporting within an Interpretation 
 The analytic philosopher G. E. M. Anscombe (1957; and see Davidson 1984) 
famously defi ned an intention as “acting under a description.” That is, to have 
an intention requires that the actor (and others) be able, at least retroactively, to 
provide a description of the action (e.g., “I was walking to work”), and offer a 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   133
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   133
7/23/2012   9:26:24 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:24 PM

 134 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
reason for it more generally. In section 4, we retheorized this insight in terms of 
self-refl exive representational interpretants of controlled behaviors, a key kind of 
entanglement between residence in and representations of the world. In particular, 
we characterized intentions as inferentially articulated and refl exively recognized 
purposes. In this way, intentions are the objects of semiotic processes that partake 
of both practical agency (via the dimension of commitment) and theoretical agency 
(via the dimension of reasoning). And thus, while all animals may act purposely, 
only particular kinds of animals act intentionally. 
 Anscombe’s account is groundbreaking, in part, because it moves intentions 
from a purely private psychological realm to a relatively public and discursive one. 
It also offers, in Hacking’s subsequent analysis (1995, 2002), an account of how 
old behaviors may come to be viewed through new descriptions, giving rise to new 
intentions and actions (and, we may add, to new roles and identities—especially 
when such actions are their most emblematic, if not criterial, signs). Or, as we 
might see it, it shows how old signs (controlled behaviors) may get new interpre-
tants (descriptions), and thus new objects (intentions). This creation-via-ascription 
of new intentions for old behaviors is important insofar as it brings into being new 
opportunities for praise or blame (especially since intentional actions so often cor-
relate with accountability, given their agentive nature), and insofar as it brings into 
being new modes of being a person (given that modes of personhood—qua types 
of roles and identities—so often correlate with, or are emblematized by, particular 
types of actions). Finally, it provides an account of how we may internalize others’ 
descriptions of us, come to act under new descriptions, and thereby come to have 
new intentions for acting. In all of these ways, it constitutes an important mechan-
ism for the transformativity of ontologies laid out in chapter 3. 
 Nevertheless, as may be seen from the foregoing analysis, Anscombe’s the-
ory, as well as Hacking’s, fails to account for meaningful behavior along a number 
of different dimensions. In particular, it focuses on representational interpretants 
(“descriptions”), whereas there are many others kinds of interpretants we may be 
“acting under” or rather committing to: creating, incorporating, and complement-
ing as well as affective, energetic, representational, and ultimate,  inter alia . It takes 
actions (and thus intentions and purposes) to be the primary locus of subjectiv-
ity, whereas there are many other constituents that are just as crucial: affordances 
(and purchases), instruments (and functions), roles (and statuses), and identities 
(and values) not to mention constituents of the representational whole (memories, 
perceptions, plans, beliefs, promises, assertions, offers, questions, etc.) and affective 
unfoldings more generally. 22 Indeed, none of the fundamental objects at stake in 
this chapter (purchases, functions, purposes, statuses, values) exists outside of a 
particular framing, and, thus, all are subject to the contingencies of interpretive 
reappraisals. It offers no account of the relative embedding, and thus strength of 
regimentation, of particular constituents (such as actions) in a residential whole 
(of other actions, affordances, instruments, roles, and identities) nor in a represen-
tational whole, and thus no account of why some actions (or constituents more 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   134
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   134
7/23/2012   9:26:24 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:24 PM

 
Residence in the World 
135 
generally) are easier or harder to reinterpret in these ways. It does not distinguish 
clearly enough between others’ attitudes (qua regimenting interpretants) toward 
an actor’s intentions (or rather purposes) and the actor’s own attitudes. Hence, it 
cannot make sense of degrees of irrationality, weakness of the will, and modes 
of incoherence and strain more generally. It offers no account of degrees of com-
mitment to an interpretant: how well one can internalize another’s interpretant of 
one’s sign, or how much practical agency one has over one’s behavior (and others’ 
interpretants of it, more generally). It takes actions to be primarily signs to be inter-
preted, rather than interpretants of other signs. In contrast, one needs a theory 
that accounts for “experience” (or interpretation) at the same time, and in the same 
idiom, that it accounts for “behavior” (or signifi cation). 23 And fi nally, as seen by 
the use of the preposition  under  in “acting under a description,” it takes interpre-
tation to be a secondary projection or auxiliary lamination onto a behavior. While 
this may sometimes be okay in the case of representational interpretants, many 
key interpretants are embedded in the residential whole. Thus, one resides  within 
an interpretation. Indeed, one  is an interpretation. In short, what is taken to be a 
monodimensional account of behavior (acting under a description) is actually just 
a fl attening out of a multidimensional space—what would best be characterized as 
 comporting within an interpretation. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   135
04_Kockelman_Ch04.indd   135
7/23/2012   9:26:24 PM
7/23/2012   9:26:24 PM

136
 5 
 Representations of the World  
 1.  Intentionality Reframed 
 Intentionality is traditionally understood to be that quality of mental states whereby 
they are directed at objects or states of affairs. For example, Brentano, one of the 
fi rst to theorize this quality, thought that each mental state includes an “object 
within itself” (1995 [1874]:88), but not necessarily corresponding to something exist-
ing outside of the mind. As he phrased it, “In presentation something is presented, 
in judgment something is affi rmed or denied, in love loved, in hate hated, in desire 
desired and so on” (ibid.). Through Brentano’s infl uence on Frege and Husserl, 
and their infl uence on Wittgenstein and Heidegger, respectively, many of the most 
important categories and cleavages within analytic and continental philosophy can 
be traced back to intentionality in one guise or another (Dummett 1994). 
 Modern scholars usually take Brentano’s  object within itself  to be some kind of 
propositional content, which may represent some state of affairs. And the entities 
that exhibit intentionality (or express propositional contents more generally) are 
taken to be either psychological kinds (such as mental states) or linguistic kinds 
(such as speech acts). Besides having propositional contents, speech acts and mental 
states have propositional modes—or ways of relating to the propositional contents 
in question. Thus, just as one may  assert ,  promise, and  forgive in the case of speech 
acts, one may  hope ,  believe, and  want in the case of mental states. 
 While there is some agreement that the propositional contents of mental states 
and speech acts are more or less equivalent, there are long-standing debates regard-
ing which kind of intentionality (psychological or linguistic) is originary and which 
is derivative (insofar as it is inherited from the kind that is originary).  1 Indeed, 
there are even degrees of derivativeness. For example, in the case of linguistic inten-
tionality, the intentionality of written language might be derivative of the inten-
tionality of spoken language. And in the case of psychological intentionality, the 
intentionality of intentions and perceptions might be derivative of the intentional-
ity of beliefs. 
 In addition to distinguishing between propositions and states of affairs, prop-
ositional modes and propositional contents, speech acts and mental states, and 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   136
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   136
7/24/2012   5:28:18 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:18 PM

 
Representations of the World 
137 
originary and derivative intentionality, several other salient dimensions are found 
within this tradition. First, keep distinct the notions of intentionality (as just char-
acterized) and intentions (as purposes with propositional content, as characterized 
in chapters 2 and 4). Intentions are just one species of intentionality, taking their 
place alongside other species such as belief, perception, and memory. 
 Second, intersecting the philosophical literature on intentionality is a more recent 
literature on theory of mind and ethnopsychology, stemming from disciplines such as 
psychology, primatology, and anthropology (see Lillard 1998; Premack and Woodruff 
1978;  inter alia ). Loosely speaking, theory of mind refers to a putative species-specifi c 
capacity to understand others in terms of intentionality (usually by making sense of 
their behavior by reference to some underlying mental state—their belief, desire, or 
intention). And ethnopsychology refers to culture-specifi c ways of understanding oth-
ers in terms of intentionality, as well as culture-specifi c beliefs about the mind more 
generally. (In this framing, owing to the disciplines that take it up, intentionality is usu-
ally understood in terms of mental states and not speech acts.) 
 And fi nally, keep distinct the capacity to have one’s behavior understood in 
terms of intentionality (regardless of why or how one actually behaves) and the 
capacity to understand others’ behavior in terms of intentionality (regardless of why 
or how they actually behave). For example, many of us might be inclined to under-
stand the behavior of a rabbit (or robot) from an intentional stance, and understand 
it predictably well (say, in terms of wanting carrots, fearing predators, envying the 
Easter Bunny, and so forth). However, we would probably be less inclined to expect 
a rabbit (or robot) to understand the behavior of others, including that of its con-
specifi cs, from an intentional stance—Bugs Bunny (and C3PO) aside. 
 BREAKING FROM THE TRADITION 
 The concerns of this important tradition (and widespread and long-standing ontol-
ogy) notwithstanding, it may be argued that the quality of  directedness is exhibited 
by any sign insofar as it stands for an object. In this wide sense, every chapter in 
this book has been devoted to intentionality. And, indeed, chapters 2 and 3 may 
be understood as arguing that the classic sense of intentionality (as a single rela-
tion of directedness between two entities, qua mental state and state of affairs) is 
essentially wrong, and the actual processes at play can be understood only within a 
broader framework of signifi cance and selection (and the various kinds of  relations 
between relations more generally). Such a framework was meant both to broaden 
the phenomenon of intentionality (to meaningfulness and mediation in all their 
generality) and to ground this phenomenon in naturalistic processes that occur on 
a wide variety of scales. In short, while this chapter focuses on seemingly public and 
private representations with propositional contents and, hence, intentionality in its 
classic and modern guise, it does so in conjunction with a larger theory of kinds 
(chapter 1), through the lens of signifi cance and selection as much as sieving and 
serendipity (chapter 2), within a broader understanding of interaction, ontology, 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   137
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   137
7/24/2012   5:28:18 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:18 PM

 138 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
and infrastructure (chapter 3), and in relation to the nonpropositional semiotic pro-
cesses characteristic of residence in the world (chapter 4). 
 More specifi cally, rather than understand intentionality (or semiosis more gen-
erally) in terms of representation (qua sign-object relations), it will be understood in 
terms of sign-object-interpretant interrelations that partake of both inference and 
indexicality. Rather than offer an account of propositionally contentful signs and 
either ignore nonpropositionally contentful signs, or state that they are important 
without offering a complementary account, this essay builds on chapter 4 with its 
theorization of residence in the world. Rather than arguing about the originariness 
or derivativeness of intentionality in human-centric and historically static terms, 
such issues will be treated in terms of interactions among processes occurring on 
phylogenetic, historical, developmental, and interactional time scales. Rather than 
understand theory of mind and ethnopsychology (in the restricted sense) in terms 
of psychological kinds, both psychological and linguistic modes of intentional-
ity will be treated in terms of broader cognitive processes and cultural practices. 
Rather than focus on having intentionality and understanding the intentionality 
that others have, the focus will be on sharing intentionality with others, building on 
Mead’s insights about generalized others and Peirce’s insights about communicative 
commons. And rather than focus exclusively on what are stereotypically “cognitive” 
processes, the next chapter treats affective processes as well. In this way, seemingly 
enminded and articulated processes are entangled with embedded and embodied 
processes, seemingly subjective processes are understood in relation to intersub-
jective practices, and the intentional stance is treated as one important modality 
within a more general  semiotic stance . 
 REVIEW OF INTENTIONALITY AS TREATED IN OTHER CHAPTERS 
 Indeed, we have already dealt explicitly with intentionality in a number of places; 
therefore, it is worth reviewing some of the claims of earlier chapters insofar as 
they intersect with the concerns of this one. In chapter 2, for example, after defi n-
ing signifi cance and selection, some key properties of mental states and speech acts 
were outlined: their inferential and indexical roots and fruits (and coherence more 
generally); the relation between conventional, inferential, and ostensive communi-
cation; the nature of failure as the fl ip side of function; and the similarities between 
logical, theoretical, and textual coherence, on the one hand (qua representations of 
the world), and causal, practical, and material coherence, on the other (qua resi-
dence in the world). 
 In chapter 3, mental states were theorized in terms of social statuses and speech 
acts (or kinds, indices, individuals, agents, and ontologies, more generally). Framed 
from the standpoint of an observer, a mental state was understood as a projected 
propensity to signify, objectify, and interpret in particular ways, where the modes 
of signifi cation, objectifi cation, and interpretation in question were inferentially 
articulated and indexically grounded. For example, one perceives a behavior, infers 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   138
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   138
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM

 
Representations of the World 
139 
a mental state, and comes to expect future behaviors (or infer past experiences) that 
would be in keeping with the mental state (assuming it is inferentially and indexi-
cally coherent, given the ontologies and frames of particular interpreting agents). 
Moreover, as with social statuses, there are relatively emblematic indices of mental 
states: behaviors, and signs more generally, that provide relatively good reasons for 
inferring or ascribing the mental state in question. In this way, intentionality was 
understood as not only an enframed and ontologized phenomenon, but also a pro-
cessual and interactional phenomenon—distributed not only over signs, objects, 
and interpretants, but also across signers, objecters, and interpreters. 
 And in chapter 4, we saw how representations of the world could confer prop-
ositional contents on modes of residence in the world. We saw how modes of res-
idence in the world could constitute the key indexical grounds of mental states 
and speech acts—not just as the states of affairs so represented, but also as rela-
tively emblematic indices of participants’ representations (and, hence, signs of, and 
resources for, shared intentionality). And we saw how a central tension was between 
the relative inferrability or perceivability of meaning. In particular, it was argued 
that, given the embeddedness of meaning, purposes and statuses (as well as pur-
chases, functions, and values) were just as often “perceived” as “inferred”—a claim 
that may be made, in certain limits, for mental states more generally. 
 OVERVIEW OF SECTIONS 
 Sections 2 and 3 frame intentionality from the standpoint of the agent or sub-
ject, returning to the issues raised in chapter 2. They focus on the inferential and 
indexical properties of mental states and speech acts, and their modes of coherence 
more generally, as well as on the wide range of human-specifi c modes of creative 
agency such properties evince and enable, in addition to their syntactic generativ-
ity. Together, they build up a theory of ostensive-inferential communication that 
shows the relation between semiocognitive processes and sociohistorical commons, 
tacking between interaction, ontology, and (shared) intentionality. Sections 4 and 
5 frame intentionality from the standpoint of the observer or alter, returning to 
the issues raised in chapter 3. They focus on the public face of cognitive processes 
(qua indices of intentionality, or signs of mind), and on some of the evolutionary, 
historical, developmental, and interactional conditions of possibility for theory of 
mind via the interpretation of signs. And they theorize the relation between inten-
tionality, emblemeticity, agency, and parasites. 
 2.  Cognitive Representations 
 Signifi cance and selection are arguably the essence of both language and mind. 
From one perspective, intentionality may be understood in terms of  representation , 
which is a species of signifi cance : just as signs stand for objects, mental states and 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   139
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   139
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM

 140 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
speech acts represent states of affairs. For example, one may believe or assert that 
it is raining; one may intend or promise to go shopping. From another perspec-
tive, intentionality may be understood in terms of  satisfaction , which is a species 
of selection: just as a means may fail to serve the end for which it was selected, the 
conditions represented by a mental state or speech act may fail to be satisfi ed. For 
example, beliefs and assertions can be false; intentions and promises can be frus-
trated. 2 Of course, as we saw in chapter 2, language and mind are just two possible 
modes of signifi cance and selection:  selecting agents and signifi cant objects exist 
wherever there is life, whatever its level . Nonetheless, given the importance of lan-
guage and mind to human concerns, it is worth reframing some of their key features 
in terms of the foregoing categories. 
 To this end, the rest of this section explicates a few stereotypic properties of 
mental states (and speech acts, as it will turn out): causality, rationality, coher-
ence, incorporation, complementation, enchaining, embedding, intensionality, 
fl exibility, and displacement. All of these properties allow human specifi c modes 
of cognition to be uniquely agentive in ways that resonate with, and take us far 
beyond, Humboldt’s classic characterization of language: an infi nite number of 
ends are possible with a fi nite number of means (1999 [1836]; and see Hockett 
1958; Jackendoff 2002;  inter alia ). In particular, rather than focus on a narrow 
sense of linguistic generativity, this section and the next will highlight some of the 
meaningful ways human-specifi c cognitive processes evince and enable unprece-
dented degrees of practical and theoretical agency. Moreover, while many of these 
properties have been the focus of scholarship by analytic philosophers and cog-
nitive scientists, they are here reframed in the idiom of signifi cance and selection, 
and semiotic ontology more generally. In this way, while we highlight and celebrate 
some of the key claims of modern understandings of intentionality, we show their 
motivated emergence from the more general framework of meaning articulated in 
previous chapters. 
 COGNITIVE PROCESSES AND MODES OF COHERENCE 
 As we saw in chapters 1 and 2, semiotic processes (which might just as well have 
been called “cognitive processes”) have three components. 3 A  sign  is whatever 
represents. An  object is whatever is represented by a sign. And an  interpretant is 
whatever a sign gives rise to insofar as it represents an object. Recall Figure 2.1. 
Canonical signs are mental states and speech acts, which are also known as pri-
vate and public representations, respectively. Canonical objects are states of affairs, 
involving relations between people and things as well as actions and events. And 
canonical interpretants are themselves signs, such as other mental states and speech 
acts. For example, a speech act may represent a state of affairs and gives rise to a 
mental state. And a mental state may represent a state of affairs and gives rise to 
a speech act. Such  semiocognitive processes  may thus partake equally of language, 
mind, and world. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   140
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   140
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM

 
Representations of the World 
141 
 Like the constituents of the residential whole, the constituents of the repre-
sentational whole (mental states and speech acts) are holistically interrelated by 
various modes of coherence. In particular, each is  inferentially articulated relative 
to other constituents of the representational whole (being able to stand as a rea-
son or stand in need of a reason), and each is  indexically articulated relative to 
other constituents of the residential whole (being caused by, or causal of, such con-
stituents). That is, mental states exhibit a logical coherence with each other and a 
causal coherence with states of affairs. Recall Figure 2.8. In particular, some sign-
interpretant remappings are relatively inferential (for example, logical processes 
linking perceptions to beliefs or beliefs to intentions); others are relatively indexical 
(for example, causal processes linking states of affairs to perceptions or intentions 
to states of affairs).  4   Furthermore, such indexical (and inferential) processes can 
be more or less displaced. In particular, just as some kinds of memories may be 
understood as displaced perceptions, some kinds of plans may be understood as 
displaced intentions. For example, relative to the state of affairs perceived and the 
perception per se, the state of affairs remembered can be displaced in time and 
space from the memory per se. Such properties are summarized in Table 5.1. In 
short, not only are cognitive processes the roots and fruits of other cognitive pro-
cesses (where such processes may be intrapersonal as much as interpersonal), but 
also the components of cognitive processes are as likely to be premises and conclu-
sions as causes and effects. 5          
 To invoke coherence presumes the possibility of  incoherence : such causal and 
logical processes may go parasitically awry. This is what was referred to above as 
“failure to be satisfi ed.” Just as an intention may be frustrated (by not causing the 
state of affairs it represents), a perception may be nonveridical (by not being caused 
by the state of affairs it represents). Indeed, the relative displacement of plans 
and memories, in comparison to intentions and perceptions, may allow for greater 
degrees of “wiggle room” as to what counts as failure. In addition to such indexical 
TABLE 5.1
Inference and Indexicality
Perceeption
Belief
Intention
 
inference
indexicality
Effect
X
Env
accomodation
Premise
X
X
Org
Conclusion
X
X
assimilation
Cause
X
Env
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   141
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   141
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM

 142 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
incoherence, there is also inferential incoherence: the reasoning that links percep-
tions to beliefs (empirical), beliefs to beliefs (theoretical), and beliefs to intentions 
(practical) may involve false premises, erroneous conclusions, fallacious arguments, 
and faulty logics. 
 Finally, there are three more kinds of coherence and, hence, incoherence that 
are worth considering. Building on Austin’s notion of felicity conditions (see section 
4 and chapter 3), there is intrasubjective coherence: does an agent believe what they 
say, intend what they promise, and so forth. In some sense, this turns on the relative 
overlap between public and private selves or the conformity of one’s speech acts 
to one’s mental states. Building on the notion of self-ascription described above, 
there is intersubjective coherence: do others attribute to me the same mental states 
I attribute to myself (or rather refl exively commit to, as per the third dimension 
of practical agency), and vice versa. Or, more narrowly, do we each share similar 
beliefs about what beliefs (intentions, perceptions, etc.) we share and, hence, have 
a shared understanding of our common ground. In such cases, we would each be 
prone to sanction my behavior, or draw inferences from my behavior, in similar 
ways, for conforming or not to the other types of coherence. Finally, the philoso-
pher Brandom (1994) has fruitfully theorized a mode of coherence that is distrib-
uted: do others use my mental states (and speech acts) as reasons for their mental 
states, and do my mental states use the mental states of others as reasons. As we saw 
in chapter 3 during our discussion of theoretical agency, knowledge (as opposed to 
belief) turns on precisely such modes of distributed coherence: are my claims justi-
fi ed by the claims of others, and do others use my claims to justify their own. 
 Insofar as the constituents of the representational whole are holistically gov-
erned, such modes of coherence can exist (or not) at many different nesting and 
nested scales: representational whole, institutional whole, situational whole, inter-
subjective whole, experiential whole, and so forth. (Recall our discussion of analo-
gous scales within the residential whole, where such holistic coherence means that the 
value of any constituent (sign, object, interpretant) is determined by its relation to 
other constituents within some greater whole, if only within an ontology-dependent 
and frame-specifi c totality.) 
 Again, by detailing various modes of coherence, we are not implying that rep-
resentations of the world are usually coherent—they may be massively incoherent, 
locally or globally, depending on the frame of interpretation and the ontology of the 
interpreter. (Indeed, recall our discussion in chapter 4 regarding fetishization and 
the projection of coherence.) Rather, the point is threefold. First, coherence and, 
in particular, the possibility of failure-to-cohere is an essential property of men-
tal states (at least in one ontology held by experts and lay folk alike). Indeed, this 
is precisely what should be meant by the “subjectivity” of intentionality.  6 Second, 
coherence is itself multidimensional, graded, distributed, intersubjective, norma-
tive, ontology-mediated, and frame-dependent. And third, not only do modes of 
coherence organize residence in the world as much as representations of the world, 
but both kinds of semiotic processes exhibit coherence in relation only to each 
other. Our residence in the world is inextricably entangled with our representations 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   142
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   142
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM

 
Representations of the World 
143 
of the world. In any case, by understanding intentionality in terms of coherence, 
and thus by examining the ways different kinds of semiotic processes (such as affor-
dances and instruments as much as beliefs and intentions) are entangled with each 
other via different kinds of contextual relations (incorporation, creation, comple-
mentation, etc.), the gulf between behavior and belief, or residence in the world and 
representations of the world more generally, disappears: we are left with meaning-
in-the-world. 
 INFERENCE 
 Insofar as inferential articulation is a central property of intentionality, it is worth-
while sketching a few elementary features of inferential processes. Suppose that, 
loosely speaking, there are concepts delimiting individuals ( John ,  Fido ), classes 
( dog ,  plumber ), and properties ( strong ,  furry ). (And recall the related discussion of 
individuals, kinds, and indices in chapter 1, when we discussed semiotic ontolo-
gies.) And suppose that just as individuals may belong to different classes ( Fido is 
a dog ), members of different classes may have different properties ( dogs are furry ). 
Here, then, we have the stereotype of a propositional content: the relation between 
a theme or “subject” (whatever is being represented:  Fido, dogs ) and a character or 
“predicate” (however what is being represented is being represented:  is a dog, are 
furry ). Such a theme-character relation, or representation, may be used as a reason 
(for another such relation) or may be in need of a reason (by another such relation). 
Recall, in particular, our discussion of theoretical agency from chapter 3, with its 
focus on the ways such inferential processes—themselves both generating of, and 
generated by, representations—may be distributed (or not) across long chains of 
temporally and spatially displaced agents. 
 In a Peircean framing, three forms of reasoning are exemplary of inference 
and may thereby serve as the roots and fruits of representations: deduction, induc-
tion, and abduction. As shown in Table 5.2, deduction is often understood to go 
like this: dogs are furry and Fido is a dog, so Fido must be furry. Induction is often 
understood to go like this: Fido is a dog and Fido is furry (and likewise for Bowser, 
Fluffy, and Rex), so dogs must be furry. And abduction is sometimes understood 
to go like this: Fido is furry, dogs are furry, so Fido must be a dog. However, rather 
than being merely an instance of affi rming the consequent, abduction is actually 
a generator of hypotheses. Or, to write out this inference in less abstract terms: a 
surprising fact comes to light (Fido is furry); if some other fact were true (say, Fido 
were a dog), this fi rst fact wouldn’t be so surprising (because we already know that 
dogs are furry); thus, we may adduce that Fido is a dog (a hypothesis that could 
guide further investigation, and one worth entertaining even if eventually rejected). 
If induction is about generalization (one uses features of one or more tokens, or 
instances, to infer features of a type or class), abduction is about creation (invent-
ing an hypothesis to explain an observed fact). All these forms of inference played 
a crucial role in the theory of transformativity offered in chapter 3 (and previewed 
in chapter 1), where it was shown that abduction can even generate new imaginaries 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   143
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   143
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM

 144 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
or entertainable ontological possibilities: who or what individual has which mental 
state, social status, or material substance, and what indexical propensities do such 
kinds entail. (And recall how our own reliance on inference was criticized in chap-
ter 4, when it was argued that objects may just as often be directly perceived in the 
Gibsonian sense as indirectly inferred.) In any case, note that code-based forms of 
communication are stereotypically deductive, whereas most forms of communica-
tion (including those that are stereotypically code-based) are inductive and abduc-
tive in complicated ways that are massively entangled in context, and the modes of 
coherence that it evinces and organizes (as was intimated in chapter 2, and as will be 
developed in section 3, when ostensive-inferential communication is discussed). 
 Such are some classical understandings of inference.  7   As we saw in chapter 3, 
representations are particularly interesting signs insofar as they have propositional 
contents or  inferentially articulated objects (in the semiotic sense). That is, the object 
(qua propositional content) of a representation may often be usefully framed as a 
correspondence-preserving projection from all the representations that could logi-
cally follow from it (and their propositional contents). Here we may note that such 
inferential articulation has some interesting conditions and consequences. In par-
ticular, if an object is a correspondence-preserving projection from all interpretants 
of a sign (in one framing), and if such interpretants may relate both to each other 
and to the original sign in logical ways (e.g., as conclusion to premise, proposition 
to presupposition, claim to entailment, and so forth), then the object in question 
is logically rich in a way that the purrs of cats, the interjections of people, and the 
functions of instruments are not. 8 (Though, to be sure, such nonpropositional semi-
otic processes get caught up with, or entangled in, propositional semiotic processes 
in complicated ways—most transparently through representational interpretants.) 
Interestingly, the logical relations in question are often made explicit in paraphrases 
of the meta-linguistic kind: “a dog is a kind of animal,” “mutt is a pejorative word 
for dog,” and so forth. Here, then is one site where public meta-representations make 
TABLE 5.2
Varieties of Inference
 Deduction  
 If  something  belongs to class  C , then  it has property  P ; 
 The individual  I belongs to class C; 
 Thus,  I  has property  P . 
 Induction  
 The individual  I belongs to class  C ; 
 I  has property  P ; 
 Thus, if  something  belongs to class  C , then  it has property  P . 
 Abduction as Affi rming the Consequent (early Peirce)  
 The individual  I  has property  P ; 
 If  something  belong to class  C , then  it has property  P ; 
 Thus,  I belongs to class  C . 
 Abduction as Inference to Best Explanation (late Peirce)  
 Some surprising fact (F) is observed; 
 If some hypothesis (H) were true, F would readily follow; 
 Thus, there is reason to believe that H is true. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   144
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   144
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM

 
Representations of the World 
145 
explicit inferential articulations via the relative substitutability of the constituents 
in linguistic constructions. Note, then, that inferential articulation of propositional 
contents turns on both logical relations (such as material and formal deduction and 
induction) and linguistic relations (such as selection and combination, paraphrase 
and translation, synonym and antonym, and so forth). Indeed, it is often quite dif-
fi cult, if not impossible, to separate out the two kinds of processes. 
 Crucially, this inferential richness of propositional contents (qua object types) 
may ground our folk intuitions that the states of affairs in question (qua object 
tokens) are “objects” in the stereotypic, reifi ed Cartesian sense.  9   In particular, the 
representational interpretants of signs, inso-far as they are inferentially articulated 
in this way, project propositional contents onto the objects of signs, thereby making 
those objects relatively explicit, concrete, precise, and bounded—or enclosed in the 
various ways this term was defi ned in chapter 3. Contrast, for example, the object 
of a cat’s purr when the interpretant of such a sign is energetic (e.g., continuing to 
pet her) versus representational (e.g., saying “the cat must be content”), with all the 
latter’s possible logical and linguistic presuppositions and entailments. 10 
 CREATION, INCORPORATION, AND COMPLEMENTATION REVISITED 
 As may be seen from these examples, besides involving creation (as signs that beget 
interpretants) inferential processes involve  incorporation . In particular, to continue 
with our example, propositions are composed of concepts (delimiting individuals, 
classes, and properties) and arguments are composed of propositions (such as prem-
ises and conclusions, as well as antecedents and consequents). To understand the 
inferential articulation of representations, then, one needs an account of both the 
conceptual structure of propositions and the propositional structure of arguments. 
For the moment, such structures are being treated in relatively simple terms—when 
speech acts are introduced, the lexical and grammatical structure of propositional 
contents, as well as the discursive structure of arguments, will be further clarifi ed. 
In short, like the constituents of the residential whole, the components of cognitive 
processes may be both incorporated parts and incorporating wholes. 
 Moreover, inferential processes involve  complementation . For example, to move 
from one relatively foregrounded belief (qua premise) to another relatively fore-
grounded belief (qua conclusion) requires a network (context or infrastructure) of 
relatively backgrounded assumptions (qua auxiliary premises), and thus an ontol-
ogy more generally. For example, one cannot get from a belief that it is raining to an 
intention to open one’s umbrella without a belief that opening one’s umbrella would 
keep one dry (as well as a desire to stay dry). That is, the same belief may require 
other beliefs (perceptions and intentions) or be required by other beliefs (perceptions 
and intentions), to make an inference. In short, the components of cognitive pro-
cesses may be both complemented fi gures and complementing grounds. Note, then, 
that just as creation, incorporation, and complementation organize the residential 
whole, so too do they organize the representational whole. And again, residence 
in the world, and modes of shared intentionality and cooperative communication 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   145
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   145
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM

 146 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
more generally, are often key factors determining which beliefs (intentions, percep-
tions, etc.) get framed as the complementing ground of any inference. 
 FROM ENCHAINING TO EMBEDDING 
 So far we have focused on the  enchaining of cognitive processes and, hence, crea-
tion more generally: a sign gives rise to an interpretant, which is itself a sign. With 
human agents, cognitive processes may also  embed : a sign stands for an object, 
which is itself a sign, or semiotic process more generally. This is diagrammed in 
Figure 5.1. For example, a mental state may represent another mental state: I may 
have beliefs about another’s beliefs, perceptions, or intentions; I may have inten-
tions to change your beliefs or intentions, and so forth. In other words, whatever is 
represented may itself be a representation, or include one or more representations 
within it. Indeed, not only may I represent what you believe and that you believe 
it (qua sign-object relation, or content and mode), I may also represent what your 
belief will give rise to (qua interpretant of it as a sign-object relation, or reasons 
that follow from it) as well as what gave rise to your belief (qua sign-object relation 
of which it is an interpretant, or reasons that lead to it). In short, cognitive pro-
cesses may refl exively make reference to themselves. 
 With embedding, the propositional contents of inferential processes incorpo-
rate relatively complex concepts such as  belief ,  perception , and  intention . For exam-
ple, in addition to having representations such as  Fido is a dog and  dogs are furry , 
one has representations such as  John believes that Fido is a dog , and even  belief is a 
weak form of knowledge . That is, just as mental states may be predicated of people, 
properties may be predicated of mental states. Our mental states, like our social 
statuses and material substances, can be both fi gure and ground of our ontologies. 
And just as representations are caught up in reasoning, so too are representations 
of representations. For example, one may make deductions, inductions, and abduc-
tions about the mental states of others. To return to our earlier example:  Jake took 
his umbrella; if Jake believes it will rain, taking his umbrella would be a matter of 
course; so Jake probably believes that it will rain . That is, we may reason about the 
S1
S0
I0
I1
O0
O1
I2
O2
S2
 FIGURE 5.1  Embedding 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   146
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   146
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM

 
Representations of the World 
147 
reasoning behind both our own and others’ representations (which plays a key role 
in the transformation of ontologies). 
 Just as the enchaining of cognitive processes is often called “thinking,” the 
embedding of cognitive processes is often called “thinking about thinking” (and, 
in the case of speech acts, “speaking about speaking”). A phenomenon known as 
 intensionality (notice the spelling) may arise because of this (see Frege 1997 [1892]). 
In particular, one can represent the incoherence or “subjectivity” of another’s repre-
sentation (relative to one’s own standard of coherence or one’s own sense of “objec-
tivity”). For example, not only may I believe that the man over there is a spy, I may 
also believe that John believes that the man over there is a waiter. Indeed, I may 
represent why John believes this (given his past perceptions and beliefs); and I may 
represent what John will say and do (given his future beliefs and intentions). That is, 
I may represent where exactly his representations went awry as well as the ramifi ca-
tions of this. Tests turning on intensionality are the classic locus for theory of mind, 
for example, the ability to pass a false-belief task (cf. Wimmer and Perner 1983). 
 Such issues are so important for understanding and sharing intentionality that 
sections 3 and 4 will be devoted to them. For the moment, it is worth noting one 
related property of certain mental states: the degree to which one is “conscious” of 
holding them. Crucially, as we saw in chapter 4 when we reinterpreted Anscombe’s 
idea of acting under a description, to have an intention in the stereotypic sense is 
to self-refl exively commit to a representational interpretant of one’s purpose (such 
that one can self-sanction accordingly). It is not enough that others attribute to 
one the mental state in question; rather, one must refl exively attribute it to oneself. 
Similar claims may be made about other mental states: for one to have a belief (per-
ception, memory, plan, and so forth), in the stereotypic sense, requires that one be 
able to refl exively commit to a representational interpretant of it, such that one can 
self-sanction depending on whether one’s actual behavior conforms to the norms of 
coherence that would be in place, and such that one can make it explicit (via a speech 
act) if the situation calls for it.  11   Such semiotic self-refl exivity is a pragmatic way of 
reframing self-consciousness (regarding the mental state in question). And it also 
shows a key way that one may be  unconscious of one’s mental states (social statuses or 
material substances): to be constituted by kinds that are caught up in coherence rela-
tions (logical, causal, normative, etc.), but to which one is not refl exively committed. 
 In this regard, Peirce had a beautiful critique of Descartes: the issue is not, 
I think therefore I am; rather, it is  I err therefore I am (1992b [1868]). In particu-
lar, such explicit and self-conscious representations of our own mental states, and, 
hence, our sense of a private self may come to the fore only in the context of error. 
In particular, perhaps it is only in contexts of manifest incoherence (between, say, 
my beliefs and the world, or my beliefs and your beliefs, or my beliefs and my asser-
tions, or my assertions and your assertions), that we become conscious of, or have 
a large degree of practical and theoretical agency over, our own cognitive processes. 
Note the direct relation to intensionality, as just described: you err, therefore you 
are (in contrast to me). We will return to these issues in chapter 6 when selfhood is 
theorized. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   147
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   147
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:19 PM

 148 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
 FLEXIBILITY AND DISPLACEMENT 
 Two other kinds of leeway are both enabled by and refl ective of cognitive processes. 
First, there may be multiple mappings between a representation and whatever it 
represents, and there may be multiple remappings between a representation and 
whatever it gives rise to. This is diagrammed in Figure 5.2, if understood as a space 
of possible mappings and remappings. That is, there are many possible signs (S 1 , S 2 , 
S 3 ) of the same object (O), and many possible interpretants (I 1 , I 2 , I 3 ) of the same 
sign (S). In part, this is due to different indexical and inferential enchainings; in 
part, this is due to different conceptual contents; and, in part, this is due to different 
complementing and incorporating cognitive processes. For example, the same state 
of affairs may be represented by many different beliefs (though we both saw the 
same event, we remember it in different ways), and the same belief may give rise to 
many different intentions (though we both believe it’s going to rain, we undertake 
different preparations). Cognitive processes are  fl exible . 
 And second, there may be more or less spatial and temporal distance between a 
representation and whatever it represents, and there may be more or less spatial and 
temporal distance between a representation and whatever it gives rise to. This is also 
diagrammed in Figure 5.2, if understood as a manifold of space and time. That is, a 
sign may be spatiotemporally displaced from an object, and an interpretant may be 
spatiotemporally displaced from a sign. For example, the intention that a belief gives 
rise to may be more or less distal from the perception that gives rise to the belief, and 
the state of affairs that the intention gives rise to may be more or less distal from the 
state of affairs that gives rise to the perception. As was discussed in chapter 3, media 
function as both sign-object (code) and signer-interpreter (channel) buffers, allowing 
differing degrees of displacement along both these relations (not to mention all the 
other relations diagrammed in Figure 2.9). Cognitive processes are  displaceable .  
 FRAMING REVISITED 
 Implicit in the foregoing analysis is the idea of  framing that was introduced in 
 chapter 2: the same entity or event may be understood as a component of different 
O
S1
S2
S3
I3
I1
I2
 FIGURE 5.2  Flexibility and Displacement 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   148
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   148
7/24/2012   5:28:20 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:20 PM

 
Representations of the World 
149 
semiocognitive processes, depending on the interests of an actor or the stance of 
an observer. See Table 5.3. To briefl y review some of the kind of frames in ques-
tion, what is a sign-component of one cognitive process may be the interpretant-
component of another cognitive process. This is akin to a future-oriented versus 
past-oriented perspective. What is the object-component of one cognitive process 
may be the sign-component of another cognitive process. This is akin to a lower-
order versus higher-order perspective. Just as cognitive processes can be successively 
enchained to produce longer cognitive processes, the entire process may be framed 
as a single cognitive process (or vice versa). This is akin to taking a distal versus a 
proximal perspective. We may take certain propositional wholes as complemented 
fi gures, leaving out their conceptual parts and complementing grounds. There are 
other fi gure-ground and other part-whole perspectives to be taken; thus, it is usually 
an analytic decision as to what is incorporated and what is incorporating, or what is 
complemented and what is complementing. And fi nally, one may switch from a pri-
vate frame to a public frame—the usual arena where anthropologists (and etholo-
gists) try to work given the kinds of data they have access to in the fi eld. This is akin 
to taking an actor-centered versus an observer-centered perspective. Crucially, no 
perspective is primary: our diagrams of generativity are themselves generative; our 
analysis of signifi cance and selection is itself signifi cant and selected (not to men-
tion sieved and serendipitous). 
 In short, when subject to various framings, the foregoing claims fall out as 
natural entailments of the theory of meaning developed in earlier chapters. Our 
theory of signifi cance and selection, though much broader in scope, easily handles 
all the stereotypic features of mental states, and cognitive processes more generally. 
The semiotic stance effortlessly incorporates the intentional stance, and goes far 
beyond it. 
 3.  Discursive Practices 
 It should be emphasized that most of the properties discussed in the last section 
are also characteristic of speech acts—that other form of intentionality, qua rep-
resentation (signifi cance) and satisfaction (selection). Indeed, so much of what we 
think about thinking arises by way of how we think about speaking or speak about 
thinking (Kockelman 2010a). We are so often only minding language when we talk 
about mind. While this section focuses on discursive practices, or semiocognitive 
processes whose sign-components are public representations, it will thus necessarily 
tack back to cognitive representations. 
 MODE AND CONTENT, SUBSTANCE AND STRUCTURE, ROOTS AND FRUITS 
 Stereotypically, whatever represents has both a  content  and a  mode . If the content 
specifi es what conditions must be satisfi ed, the mode specifi es how those conditions 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   149
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   149
7/24/2012   5:28:20 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:20 PM

 150 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
must be satisfi ed. The content is usually understood to be a proposition. In the 
case of speech acts, it is whatever can be asserted, questioned, commanded, and 
so forth. And in the case of mental states, it is whatever can be perceived, believed, 
intended, and so forth. What is crucial, however, is that there exists a systematic 
mapping between whatever represents and whatever is represented. The mode is 
usually understood to be a speech act or mental state shorn of its propositional 
content. In the case of speech acts, it is a kind of illocutionary force: such as declar-
ative, interrogative, or imperative. And in the case of mental states, it is a kind 
of psychological attitude, such as perception, belief, or intention. What is crucial, 
however, is that there exists a systematic remapping between a representation and 
whatever it will give rise to (or whatever has given rise to it). In short, if the content 
foregrounds the O-S relation, the mode foregrounds the S-I relation. 12 These rela-
tions are shown in Table 5.4. 
 The content stereotypically turns on the interaction of  substance  and  structure . 
In the case of speech acts, substantive content is due to lexical categories: words 
such as  boy  and  dog ,  chase  and  see ,  mean and  little . And structural content is due 
to grammatical categories: words such as  I  and  some, affi xes such as  –ed  and – ing, 
and abstract construction types more generally: noun phrase, transitive verb, and 
dependent clause. 13 Crucially, many such abstract construction types have the prop-
erty of being  self-incorporating : any whole can have as one of its parts another such 
whole, and so on infi nitum:  I believe that she thinks that he intends that I remember ; 
 the boy’s mother’s friend’s sister. Sometimes the distinction between substance and 
structure is phrased in terms of lexicon and grammar (Talmy 2000). For present 
purposes, what matters is that, with such substance and self-incorporating struc-
ture, a speaker may generate an infi nite number of more or less complex sentences 
representing an infi nite number of more or less complex states of affairs: I saw 
a little dog being chased by some mean boys. (Contrast the scope of object-sign 
mappings possible with animal signal systems, as per our example in chapter 2.) 
While this is the most famous kind of generativity (essentially an O-S mapping, 
turning on incorporation), each of the other kinds of generativity (fl exibility, crea-
tivity, or agency) discussed above (themselves involving both O-S mappings and S-I 
remappings, turning on complementation and creation as much as incorporation, 
TABLE 5.3
Types of Framing
Some Possible Frames
Component as sign versus interpretant
 Future 
 Past 
Component as sign versus object
 Low-Order 
 High-Order 
Diagram iterated versus stretched
 Distal 
 Proximal 
Component incorporated versus incorporating
 Part 
 Whole 
Component complemented versus complementing
 Figure 
 Ground 
Cognitive process is private versus public
 Actor 
 Observer 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   150
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   150
7/24/2012   5:28:20 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:20 PM

 
Representations of the World 
151 
and grounded in indexicality as much as inference) is just as important and yet 
often neglected in celebrations of human-specifi c cognitive and communicative 
capabilities. 
 The mode turns on the interaction of  roots and  fruits . As a public represen-
tation, a speech act stereotypically follows from a private representation (say, an 
intention of the speaker) and stereotypically leads to a private representation (say, 
a belief of the addressee). That is, a speech act is at once the interpretant of a sign-
object relation and a sign-object relation to be interpreted. Moreover, the speak-
er’s intention may itself have roots (such as other beliefs, perhaps following from 
past perceptions), and the addressee’s belief may itself have fruits (such as further 
beliefs, perhaps leading to future intentions). Such remappings may be more or 
less complex, often as a function of complementation. (Contrast the scope of sign-
interpretant remappings possible with animal sign systems, as per our example in 
chapter 2.) In this way, the conditions for, and consequences of, any speech act 
radiate out in two directions—generated by and generating of further representa-
tions, themselves more or less subject to substantive and structural transformations 
and more or less grounded in and grounding of modes of residence in the world. 
Representations may both develop and devolve. 
 TOKEN AND TYPE, TYPICALITY AND ATYPICALITY, 
REGIMENTATION AND SELECTION 
 Both the content and the mode are subject to the distinction between  token (instan-
tiated) and  type (selected) that was introduced in chapter 3. For example, whatever 
represents, qua sign (S), exists as both type (sentence) and token (utterance). And 
whatever is represented, qua object (O), exists as both type (proposition) and token 
(state of affairs). Thus, just as the same sentence (“it’s raining”) may be instantiated 
by many different utterances (each said on a different occasion), the same prop-
osition may represent many different states of affairs (any situation that fi ts the 
proposition). Moreover, whatever a representation gives rise to (qua interpretant 
TABLE 5.4
Features of Representations
 Whatever Represents  
 Mental States or Speech Acts 
 Content  
 What Conditions 
 Must Be Satisfi ed 
 Mode 
 How Conditions 
 Must Be Satisfi ed 
 Substance  
 “Words” or Open 
Class Categories 
 Structure  
 “Rules” or Closed 
Class Categories 
 Roots 
 Conditions,   both 
Logical and Causal 
 Fruits  
 Consequences   both 
Logical and Causal 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   151
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   151
7/24/2012   5:28:20 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:20 PM

 152 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
relative to which it is a sign), or whatever gives rise to a representation (qua sign 
relative to which it is an interpretant), exists as both type and token. In returning 
to Austin’s classic account of performativity (2003 [1955]), to focus on the felicity 
conditions of a speech act is to focus on its typical roots and fruits, whereas to focus 
on the communicative intention of the speaker (or “speaker meaning”) is to focus 
on the tokened roots. And to focus on the perlocutionary effect on the addressee 
(or “addressee response”) is to focus on the tokened fruits. In some sense, then, to 
focus on types is to foreground the general properties of sign-object-interpretant 
relations (such as how and why they were selected on sociohistorical scales, or their 
legi-function), and to focus on tokens is to foreground the specifi c properties of 
sign-object-interpretant relations (such as why and how they were instantiated on 
interactional scales, or their sin-function). 14 
 To invoke types, and thereby presume  typicality , opens the possibility of  atypi-
cality : tokens not conforming to types due to the strategy of actors or the con-
tingency of events. In the case of mental states, this was already discussed under 
the heading of incoherence: perceptions can be nonveridical, beliefs can be false, 
intentions can be frustrated. But it is just as applicable to speech acts: a speaker 
may not believe what she asserts or not intend what she promises, and an addressee 
may not believe what he is told or not behave as he is commanded. In other words, 
the tokened roots and fruits of a speech act need not conform to the typical roots 
and fruits: The communicative intention (of the speaker) may be at odds with the 
conventional felicity conditions (of the sentence), and both of these may be at odds 
with the perlocutionary effect (on the addressee). As noted in chapter 3, speech act 
theory, as inaugurated by Austin, is in part the elucidation of types by attending 
to the ramifi cations of atypical tokens. One explains what something does, or why 
it was selected, by reference to the possibilities of its going awry—being framed 
as inappropriate in context, ineffective on context, or incoherent more generally. 
Falsity is only one mode of failure among many. Parasites proliferate. 
 In some sense, then, Austin’s notion of felicity conditions was a way of getting 
at relatively conventional forms of pragmatic coherence (as well as semantic, gram-
matical, and phonological coherence) by attending to a variety of highly salient (if 
imagined) failures-to-cohere. And, again, some of Goffman’s key insights focused 
on the way speakers routinely and refl exively, as well as creatively and coherently, 
fl out such conventional felicity conditions. 
 As we saw in chapter 3, to invoke types requires an account of  regimentation : 
tokens conforming to types via processes that may range from causes to norms 
but which are usually most fruitfully analyzed in terms of intersubjective coher-
ence, as we saw in chapters 3 and 4. 15 And as we saw in chapter 2, natural selection 
is itself the ur-form of regimentation: most other modes of selection and signif-
icance spring from it. For example, the dispositionality of the human species, 
which underlies norms, was arguably selected for on evolutionary time scales and 
gives rise to cultural regimentation on historical time scales: types of behaviors 
that one may or must (not) do in types of circumstances. And the capacity to 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   152
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   152
7/24/2012   5:28:20 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:20 PM

 
Representations of the World 
153 
represent and communicate norms, thereby creating rules and laws, is itself argu-
ably grounded in our species-specifi c facility with mental states and speech acts. 
Moreover, even personal motivations, underlying practical reasoning and rational 
choice, may make reference to the norms, rules, and laws of one’s community (as 
well as its beliefs and values), and the inferential and indexical coherence under-
lying all such forms of reasoning arguably resides in neurocognitive processes 
(among other things, such as norms determining what counts as coherent) that 
are certainly adaptations. In short, semiocognitive processes are regimented on 
phylogenetic, historical, ontogenetic, and interactional time scales; and, there-
fore, they make reference to properties that are unique to species, cultures, indi-
viduals, and intersubjects (or generalized others). Such forms of regimentation 
are often akin to meter in poetry: they are simultaneously the source and shackle 
of human creativity.  
 SPEECH ACT THEORY, CONVERSATIONAL ANALYSIS, 
AND SEMIOTIC ONTOLOGY 
 It is worth stressing that here we are focusing on speech acts in their stereo-
typic sense, qua utterances whose propositional contents and illocutionary force 
are more or less explicit. As we saw in chapter 3, such speech acts are relatively 
emblematic signs of such propositional contents and illocutionary forces—and 
thus more or less emblematic of the actions being undertaken by the speakers 
in uttering them (though themselves often key sites of parasitic processes: irony, 
feigning, exaggeration, etc.). In contrast, most discursive practices are not so 
explicit (certainly in regard to what action is being performed and often in regard 
to their propositional contents as well). In this way, most discursive practices are 
not speech acts in the stereotypic sense, and their functions as instruments, like 
their purposes (or intentions) as actions, can be elucidated only by reference to 
their embedding in “context.” In particular, discursive practices are embedded in 
the residential whole and the representational whole: temporally, spatially, and 
socially distributed networks of other utterances and assumptions, as well as 
other affordances, instruments, actions, roles, and identities, that regiment their 
meaning via relatively reframable coherence relations such as incorporation, com-
plementation, and creation. For example, everything we said about instruments in 
the opening example of chapter 4 applies to discursive instruments (such as utter-
ances) as much as stereotypic instruments (such as hammers). Chapter 4, then, 
was as much a theory of (and a method for analyzing) discourse patterning and 
conversational structure as it was a theory of material culture. Note, then, that, 
pace the mantra of certain conversational analysts (see, for example, Schegloff 
2007), the meaning of any discursive practice is regimented by far more than sim-
ply its “composition” (qua linguistic categories) and “position” (qua placement in 
a sequence of other utterances). It is regimented by residence in, and representa-
tions of, the world.  
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   153
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   153
7/24/2012   5:28:20 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:20 PM

 154 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
 COMMUNICATIVE AND NONCOMMUNICATIVE ACTION REVISITED 
 Speech acts, and communicative moves more generally, are actions: instigations 
caused by intentions. One must therefore understand how they are similar to, and 
different from,  noncommunicative actions,  such as picking a lock, pushing a button, 
removing a spot, and so on. These are diagrammed in Figure 5.3 (itself an expan-
sion of the right-hand side of Figure 2.8). To review the discussion from chapter 2, 
an intention (S 2 ) represents a state of affairs (O 2 ). For example, one intends  to start 
the engine . It indexically gives rise to an instigation (I 2 ) that either immediately con-
stitutes (C 1 ) or eventually causes (E 1 ), the state of affairs represented. For example, 
whereas the agent’s instigation ends at turning the key (I 2 ), this is itself the cause 
(C 1 ) of a further effect (E 1 ), such as the engine’s actually starting (which is mediated 
by considerations outside of the agent’s immediate control: wiring, batteries, etc.). 
And, as we saw in chapter 4, following Davidson (1984), the intention (S2) may 
itself be the conclusion (I 1 ) of an inference involving a complemented belief (S 1 ) 
and a complementing pro-attitude (such as a desire, status, or value). For example, 
one believes that starting the engine is a means to driving to the cinema as an end, 
and one wants to drive to the cinema (because one wants to see a movie, neck with 
one’s sweetheart, and so on). 16 This is what it means to say an intention has inferen-
tial roots (practical reasoning) and indexical fruits (causal chaining). 17 
 All this may now be couched in slightly different terms. We said that whatever 
represents (such as an intention) has both a content and a mode: the content speci-
fi es what conditions must be satisfi ed, and the mode specifi es how those conditions 
must be satisfi ed. In particular, we may say that an intention represents its satis-
faction conditions: a certain state of affairs is to be brought about (content), this 
state of affairs is to be caused by the intention (fruits), and this intention is to be 
justifi ed by a reason (roots). 18 In short, as with the felicity conditions of speech acts, 
to specify the satisfaction conditions of an intention is to specify how it may go 
awry or fail to be satisfi ed. In chapter 4, such conditions were couched in terms of 
(self-refl exive) commitment to a representational interpretant of one’s actions—as 
hence an ability to self-sanction whenever one or more such satisfaction conditions 
are  not satisfi ed. 
 As diagrammed in Figure 5.4,  conventional communicative action  is more com-
plicated. Suppose, for example, one intends  to say that Jake got arrested . Here the 
instigation (I 2 ) is itself a public representation: a speaker (A Spkr ) utters a sentence 
with propositional content (Jake’s getting arrested) and illocutionary force (declar-
ative). That is, unlike the case of noncommunicative action, where the instigation 
either constitutes or causes the state of affairs in question, here the instigation is 
itself a sign (S 3 ), to be interpreted by an addressee (A Adr ), and thereby gives rise to 
a belief (I 3 ). As a public representation, the speech act itself has satisfaction con-
ditions (it should arise from a communicative intention and give rise to a belief). 
And to say that a communicative action is conventional is to say that the satisfac-
tion conditions of the speech act (qua “sentence meaning”) are in accordance with 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   154
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   154
7/24/2012   5:28:20 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:20 PM

 
Representations of the World 
155 
the satisfaction conditions of the intention (qua “speaker meaning”): the speaker 
is using the sentence as it would usually be used (cf. Austin 2003 [1955]). Finally, 
as before, the intention (S2) is itself the conclusion (I 1 ) of an inference involving a 
contextualized belief (S 1 ) and a contextualizing pro-attitude (such as a desire, obli-
gation, or value). For example, one believes that informing the addressee of Jake’s 
fate is a means of eliciting sympathy, and one wants to elicit sympathy (because one 
wants to obtain money, and so on). Thus, communicative actions also have infer-
ential roots (practical reasoning) and indexical fruits (causal chaining)—but their 
indexical fruits are designed to yield further fruits, which turn on both interper-
sonal and inferential modes of coherence. Recall our discussion of semiotic instru-
ments in chapter 4. 
 Crucially, as with noncommunicative actions, none of these steps need be con-
sciously represented. And our evidence for their existence comes from attending to 
unsatisfi ed outcomes, and the self- and other-sanctioning and inference-drawing 
practices that arise in such contexts: the times one tried to speak (but one’s tongue 
was tied); the times one started to speak (but forgot what one wanted to say); the 
times one spoke (but lied or was misunderstood); the times one blurted something 
out (but unintentionally so); and so on. At the very least, all are but potential moves 
in explicitly articulated and temporally retrospective rationalizations. To return to 
Heidegger’s critiques of modern forms of representationalism, the emphasis on 
explicit mental content may often be but a projection onto, or misreading of, the 
actual modes of residence in the world that were there before the disturbance, or 
failure-to-cohere (as framed). 
 NONCONVENTIONAL COMMUNICATION REVISITED 
 As shown in Figure 5.5,  nonconventional communicative action is even more compli-
cated. It involves several key ideas. First, the signer (A Sgn ) instigates some behavior 
(I 2 ), which is itself a fi rst-order sign (S 3 1° ), that brings a state of affairs (O 3 1° ) to the 
attention (I 3 1° ) of the interpreter (A Int ). For example, in being asked what happened 
C1
S1
A1
A2
I2
O1
O2
I1
S2
Intention
Instigation
Belief
E1
 FIGURE 5.3  Noncommunicative Action 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   155
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   155
7/24/2012   5:28:20 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:20 PM

 156 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
to Jake, one may point to a passing police car or pantomime a badge and gun. 
Second, this state of affairs (O 3 1° ) is itself a second-order sign (S 3 2° ) that brings 
another state of affairs (O 3 2° ) to the interpreter’s attention (I 3 2° ). For example, by 
attending to the police car that has been pointed to, or the badge and gun that have 
been pantomimed, and by attending to the fact that such points or pantomimes 
were intentionally addressed, the addressee may infer that Jake was arrested. And 
third, the inferential process from the fi rst belief (I 3 1° ) to the second belief (I 3 2° ) 
turns on the interpreter’s recognition of the signer’s communicative intention (S 2 ). 
In short, the satisfaction conditions of such an intention are quite complex. They 
stereotypically involve not just the sign event that the intention gives rise to (point-
ing or pantomiming), not just the belief that this sign event gives rise to (there’s a 
police car or there was a police offi cer), and not just the belief that this belief gives 
rise to by reference to the intention (Jake was arrested), but also the fact that these 
representations give rise to each other in this way (compare Grice 1989a, 1989c; 
Strawson 1971). 
 To return to our discussion of the inferential grounds of communication 
from chapter 2, and the Peircean reframing of Gricean inference, note the implicit 
 embedding : the signer expresses a sign whose relatively concrete object (the police 
car pointed to or the police offi cer pantomimed) is itself a sign of a more abstract 
object (Jake’s arrest)—and the interpreter can infer the second object only by attend-
ing to the fact that the fi rst sign was intentionally addressed. Unlike conventional 
speech acts, there are no codes to decode (in getting from a police car or offi cer 
to Jake’s arrest) and, hence, such modes of interpretation are relatively nondeduc-
tive. In other words, the fi rst inferential step (S 3 1° - I 3 1° ) is often relatively concrete 
and immediate: the interpreter looks where the signer points (indexically), imagines 
what the signer pantomimes (iconically), and decodes what the signer says through 
conventional means (symbolically), or some combination of all three. Whereas the 
second inferential step (S 3 2° - I 3 2° ) is relatively abstract and amplicative: the inter-
preter infers some further information from what was pointed out or pantomimed 
(or encoded), as contextualized by their recognition of the signer’s communicative 
S1
A1
Spkr
A2
Spkr
I2
O1
O2
I1
S2
S3
A1
Adr
O3
I3
Intention
Speech Act
Belief
Belief
S4
 FIGURE 5.4  Conventional Communicative Action 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   156
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   156
7/24/2012   5:28:21 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:21 PM

 
Representations of the World 
157 
intention (and, in particular, the broader context, which turns on residence in the 
world as much as representations of the world and, hence, potentially all the modes 
of coherence discussed in this chapter and the last). In this example, the inference 
is relative abductive: some surprising fact has come to light (the signer has pointed 
to a police car or pantomimed a police offi cer rather than directly answering my 
question); if the signer intended to inform me that Jake was arrested, pointing or 
pantomiming in such a way would be a matter of course (a relatively effi cient, and 
covert way, to get the information across, given what we both know we both know); 
thus, I may infer that Jake was arrested (which is subject to confi rmation or rejec-
tion in the ensuing interaction). 
 Such an ability to amplify the meaning of information by contextualizing 
it with a communicative intention is the heart of Gricean implicature (Enfi eld 
2009; Levinson 1983, 2000; Sperber and Wilson 1995 [1986]; Tomasello 2008). 
However, such a process is much broader than Gricean implicature. For example, 
any non-natural sign—be it naturally selected, culturally regimented, or conscious 
addressed—is easier to interpret if one knows that the expression of the sign was 
selected for the sake of securing an interpretant. Indeed, it is often impossible to 
interpret otherwise. As we saw in chapter 2, psychoanalysis was fundamentally 
committed to a kind of implicature: by attending to the overt or fi rst-order mean-
ing of a dream (parapraxis or neurosis), in the context of its having been causally 
mediated by a forbidden wish of a sexual nature, analysts may infer its covert or 
second-order meaning. 
 GENERALIZING THE GENERALIZED OTHER: SHARED INTENTIONALITY 
 Humans  have  intentionality: they interact with the world using representations of 
the world (I believe that . . . ). Humans  understand intentionality: they interact with 
the world using representations of others’ representations of the world (I believe 
that you believe that . . . ). And humans  share  intentionality: they interact with the 
world using overlapping representations of each other’s overlap in representations 
S 1 
A 1 
Sg n 
A 2 
Sg n 
I 2 
O 1 
O 2 
I 1 
S 2 
S 3 
A 1 
In t 
° ⋍ 
° 
O 3 
1 ° ( ⋍ S 3 
2 ° ) 
I 3 
1 ° ° 
1°
Intentio n 
Sign Even t 
Belief (1 ° ) 
Belie f 
A 2 
In t 
Belief (2 ° ) 
S 3 
2 
I 3 
2 ° ° 
S 4 
O 3 
2 ° 
°
 FIGURE 5.5  Nonconventional Communicative Action 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   157
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   157
7/24/2012   5:28:21 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:21 PM

 158 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
(we believe that we believe that . . . ). In this section, building on some ideas of Peirce 
and Mead, in the context of modern interpretations of Grice, we will see how 
language enlists shared intentionality as a means and offers shared intentionality 
as an end. 19 
 Recall Figure 3.2, which showed how semiotic processes turn on relations 
between relations. As the outcome of a semiotic process, there is a relation of cor-
respondence between the relation between a sign and an object, on the one hand, 
and the relation between an interpretant and an object, on the other. Or phrased 
in terms of representations and semiotic agents, the interpreter’s representation of 
an object more or less corresponds to the signer’s representation of an object. Such 
 correspondence of representations  is fundamental to human communication, not 
only as the ends of communication, but also as the means. In particular, for most 
forms of communication to succeed requires that the signer and interpreter already 
have many representations in correspondence. In particular,  one of the key represen-
tations they need in correspondence is what representations they have in correspond-
ence . And for this to happen, not only do they need relatively symmetric access to 
the same modes of residence in and representations of the world (ranging from the 
conceptual contents of words to the emblematic indices of kinds), but they also 
need relatively symmetric access to the fact of their relatively symmetric access. 
 In chapter 3, this process was framed in terms of intersubjective attitudes toward 
each other’s social statuses and mental states, or kinds more generally (qua gener-
alized others of various scopes and durations), and the importance of relatively 
emblematic indices (of such social statuses and mental states) was foregrounded (as 
well as the mediating effects of ontologies and frames more generally). And, in this 
chapter and the last, we saw that other kinds of objects were also important—from 
purchases and values to affects and moods. Crucially, correspondence of repre-
sentations (or intersubjectivity of attitudes) does not mean equality of representa-
tions. The relation in question is not between the representations themselves, but 
between the relation between the representations and their objects. What matters 
is that both representations relate to the same object in similar ways. Moreover, 
to have representations in correspondence does not require being “conscious” of 
them, or of their correspondence. What matters is that the signer and interpreter, 
or self and other, could commit to the truth of such representations (including the 
representation of the correspondence of their representations) if called upon by 
events in a given context. (Recall our discussion of the publicness of the privateness 
of meaning from chapter 3.) Finally, not all representations in correspondence are 
equally accessible or important to self or other in a given context. They may be 
more or less in focus, and more or less relevant, given ongoing concerns—in par-
ticular, current modes of residence in the world and representations of the world 
within particular framings. In some sense, all of this was a generalization of Mead’s 
generalized other. 
 While such processes are at issue in any form of communication, their funda-
mental importance is most transparent in inferential communication of the Gricean 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   158
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   158
7/24/2012   5:28:21 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:21 PM

 
Representations of the World 
159 
kind. To return to our discussion from chapter 2, as reframed above, the crucial 
point is this: to intersubjectively attend to the relatively concrete object, and then to 
use this object as a sign to intersubjectively attend to the relatively abstract object, 
requires already existing modes of intersubjective attention. Loosely speaking, to 
understand  what I’m pointing at (or to imagine what I’m pantomiming) and, in par-
ticular, to understand  why  I’m pointing at it (or why I’m pantomiming it), requires 
already existing intersubjective attitudes as to what we both perceive, believe, and 
intend (just as it produces subsequently existing intersubjective attitudes). In short, 
human interaction  builds up an intersubjective space by building with an intersub-
jective space : context, text, and culture are the roots and fruits of each other. In 
this way, having started from the relation between signifi cance and selection, qua 
intentionality, we have arrived at  the relation between semiocognitive processes and 
sociohistorical commons, qua interaction and infrastructure, or interpretation and 
ontology. 
 4.  From Theory of Mind to the Interpretation of Signs 
 If the fi rst three chapters of this book focused on  mind in signs , and if the last two 
sections of this chapter focused on  signs in mind , this section and the next focus 
on  signs of mind . In particular, we now return to some key concerns of chapter 3: 
how a mental state may be understood as an ultimate (representational) interpre-
tant: any number of different signs can lead to it (constituting its “roots”) or follow 
from it (constituting its “fruits”). Part of what it means, then, to understand the 
behavior of others as intentional (and semiocognitive more generally) is to be able 
to infer such fruits from such roots, or such roots from such fruits, by reference to 
the putative mental states that mediate between them. Crucially, unlike the last two 
sections in which intentionality was framed in relatively private, or actor-centered, 
terms, in this section and the next intentionality will be framed in relatively public, 
or observer-centered, terms. 
 ANTECEDENT EVENTS, CONSEQUENT EVENTS, AND MEDIATING PROPENSITIES 
 In chapter 3, it was argued that many interpretants are  ultimate interpretants : They 
involve a change in social status or mental state, where such statuses and states may 
be understood as projected propensities to signify, objectify, and interpret in partic-
ular ways.  20 Because such ultimate interpretants are not signs that stand for some-
thing else, but rather projected propensities to signify, objectify, and interpret, they 
are relatively imperceptible—being known only through the signs that  lead to them 
(insofar as they are interpretants) or the semiotic patterns that  follow from them 
(insofar as they are propensities to signify, objectify, and interpret, or exhibit indices 
more generally). 21 In particular, such ensuing patterns, as second-order signs of the 
mental states or social statuses in question, are themselves often relations between 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   159
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   159
7/24/2012   5:28:21 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:21 PM

 160 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
fi rst-order signs and interpretants. That is, because you do X (qua  interpretant) in 
the context of Y (qua sign), I infer you believe Z. For example, because you raise 
your hand when I ask a question, I believe you (think) you know the answer. Or 
because you open your umbrella when it starts to rain, I believe you want to stay 
dry. More generally, the fact that another engages in certain semiotic processes, or 
exhibits certain indices more generally, is a relatively indexical sign that one may use 
to infer their beliefs, intentions, memories, desires, and so forth. 
 For the sake of simplifi cation, the basic structure of these  mediating propensi-
ties , with their roots and fruits, is shown in Figure 5.6. There is a class of anteced-
ent events, or roots (labeled A1, A2, A3, etc.). This is the class of signs that lead 
to the mediating propensity (so far as it is an interpretant of them). 22 There is a 
class of consequent events, or fruits (labeled C1, C2, C3, etc.). This is the class of 
semiotic processes that follow from the mediating propensity (insofar as it disposes 
one to signify, objectify, and interpret in particular ways). And there is the nonper-
ceptible but inferable mediating propensity (MP) itself. This is the mental state in 
question—itself a particular sort of kind. In short, agents who understand others 
in intentional terms may perceive any root (or fruit), infer the mediating propensity, 
and thereby come to predict any fruit (or root) that would be relatively coherent in 
the context of that propensity (given the experience of the interpreting agent, the 
norms of some semiotic community, various modes of residential and representa-
tional coherence, and ontologies more generally). 
 In one sense, this is simply a generalization of one basic fact about kinds that 
was discussed in chapter 1: upon perceiving an index (and framing it as an index), 
an interpreting agent may infer a kind, and thereby come to expect other indices 
that would be in keeping with that kind (given the agent’s ontology, other indices, 
and so forth). Here, however, the agent is more or less attentive to the transforma-
tions of kinds that another agent may undergo (e.g., changes in its beliefs, feelings, 
desires, etc.) insofar as it too is an interpreting agent. Indeed, both agents may be 
more or less undergoing any of the kinds of transformativity discussed in chapter 3 
(and more or less attending to this fact in themselves and the other). 
 Notice, then, that the antecedent events, like the consequent events, are a rel-
atively heterogeneous lot. Their commonality is not sensual or substantive (qua 
tokens of a common type), but rather semiotic or functional (qua interpretants of a 
common sign-object relation). What is at issue, then, is not a set of pairings between 
individual antecedent events (qua causes or stimuli) and individual consequent 
events (qua effects or responses), but rather a mode of mediation between the class 
of antecedent events and the class of consequent events. And thus to infer fruits 
from roots, or roots from fruits, is not the same as inferring effects from causes or 
responses from stimuli (in the stereotypic sense of these terms). Rather, the triadic 
structure of mediating-propensities begins to look like dyadic structure of stimulus-
response pairings only in the limit that, relatively speaking, (1) all antecedent events 
are sensibly alike and all consequent events are sensibly alike, (2) the consequent 
sign events immediately follow the antecedent sign events, and (3) no mediating 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   160
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   160
7/24/2012   5:28:21 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:21 PM

 
Representations of the World 
161 
propensity is required to explain the relation. While many animals may be good at 
understanding intermediaries (qua various modes of secondness), our focus here is 
on the human animal’s particular ability to understand, or at least project, mediar-
ies (qua various modes of thirdness). 
 HAVING SEMIOTIC PROCESSES AND UNDERSTANDING THE SEMIOTIC 
PROCESSES THAT OTHERS HAVE 
 Note, then, that just as mediating propensities fall out naturally when semiotic pro-
cesses (and their agents) are framed in a particular way, inferring the mediating 
propensities of another, by reference to their roots and fruits, is itself a semiotic 
process. Thus, rather than speaking about having intentionality and understanding 
intentionality (in terms of representations with propositional contents), we may 
speak of  having semiosis  and  understanding semiosis (in terms of semiotic processes 
more generally). And just as there are agents who engage in semiotic processes, but 
do not understand others’ engagement with semiotic processes, there are also agents 
who understand relatively nonsemiotic agents in semiotic terms (and thereby proj-
ect potentially unwarranted semiotic abilities onto them). 
 In some sense, the ability to understand others’ understanding of semiotic 
processes is directly related to the third dimension of practical agency and, hence, 
Mead’s notion of the symbol: commitment to the interpretant of one’s sign-object 
relation, when the semiotic process in question has been displaced or deferred. In 
particular, the issue is not, how would I respond to my sign (and thus how would 
you respond), but how would I respond to the sign you are experiencing (but I’m 
not necessarily expressing) and, thus, how would you respond. Such inferences may 
be enabled by empathy-like processes: I know what you think (or how you feel) for 
I know what I would think (or how I would feel) if I were in your shoes (semioti-
cally speaking). And such an ability to defer and displace commitment is partially 
Root 1
Root 2
Root 3
Fruit 1
Fruit 2
Fruit 3
Predict
Infer
Perceive
(Sensed Events)
Mental 
State 
(Instigated Events)
 FIGURE 5.6  Roots, Fruits, and Mediating Propensities 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   161
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   161
7/24/2012   5:28:21 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:21 PM

 162 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
grounded in perceived overlaps between the signer and interpreter’s modes of resi-
dence in and representations of the world (Kockelman 2010a, 2011a). For example, 
the degree to which self and other are ontologically similar (e.g., both have the same 
types of inalienable possessions, or selfhood-as-ensemble more generally) or the 
degree to which self and other are  ontologically intimate  (e.g., both have the same 
tokens of inalienable possessions, often thereby constituting part of a single unit 
of accountability). 23 As we will see below, and in the next chapter, such abilities are 
graded rather than absolute. 
 MEDIATING PROPENSITIES AND MENTAL STATES 
 As theorized in chapter 4, such mediating propensities not only include the objects 
of the representational whole (qua mental states in the stereotypic sense), but also 
the objects of the residential whole (for example, purposes, statuses, and values). 
Indeed, as was discussed in chapter 3, and will be further discussed in chapter 6, 
the so-called emotions have a similar structure (albeit with potentially less fl exibil-
ity and displacement, which is one reason they seem to be more like seconds than 
thirds, or intermediaries rather than mediaries). For example, “anger” as a medi-
ating propensity can follow (as an interpretant) from any number of antecedent 
events (reading the headlines, not sleeping, spilling soup), and can lead to any num-
ber of consequent events, qua patterned semiotic processes (becoming irritated by 
car alarms, being brusque with the questions of children, taking personal offense 
at graffi ti, and so forth). 
 Crucially, then, mediating propensities need not be understood only in terms 
of mental states: social statuses and material substances, as well as modes of affect 
and value, and kinds more generally, are organized in similar ways. What is impor-
tant about mental states, rather, is that,  relatively speaking,  the relation between 
roots and mediating propensity, and between mediating propensity and fruits, is 
both indexically and inferentially articulated. Relatedly, mental states can be the 
roots and fruits of other mental states (without fi rst passing over into speech 
acts, or other public behaviors). And, hence, processes of inference may involve 
making reference to a range of inferentially and indexically interrelated mental 
states, themselves grounded in various modes of coherence, and all ostensibly 
private. Indeed, it is precisely the richness of such inferences that many forms of 
literature explore, and which the last two sections made explicit: causality, ration-
ality, coherence, incorporation, complementation, enchaining, embedding, inten-
sionality, fl exibility, displacement, intersubjectivity, and parasitism. Needless to 
say, these types of patterns make behavior exceptionally complicated, and they 
make interpreting behavior necessarily holistic and frame-dependent. Typically, 
the assumption of coherence enables certain modes of inference, including modes 
of inference that arise only in the context of manifest incoherence:  Why in the 
world would she do that?! (Well, if she believes X and wants Y, then doing that would 
made sense.)  
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   162
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   162
7/24/2012   5:28:22 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:22 PM

 
Representations of the World 
163 
 That said, given the claims of chapter 4 regarding the embeddedness of mean-
ing-in-the-world, it may be hypothesized that mental states, like social statuses (and 
the objects of the residential whole, as well as kinds more generally), are often rel-
atively perceivable (rather than inferable). Moreover, simply by attending to pur-
chases, functions, purposes, statuses, and values (and attending to how others are 
attending to them), we may be able to navigate much of the world just fi ne most of 
the time. And fi nally, it may be the case that we turn to such inferential processes 
(regarding the representations of ourselves and others) only in the midst of break-
downs and incoherence. And thus, while we may take intentionality (in the stereo-
typic sense) to be the rule, this may be because we attend only to the exceptions. 
 JAMES, NEWTON, NIETZSCHE, AND NONHUMAN PRIMATES 
 Building on Aristotle’s notion of a fi nal cause, and Peirce’s characterization of life 
(1955b:274–275), William James (1950 [1890]:6–8) had a prescient understanding 
of mediating propensities in relation to their fruits. Embellishing his famous exam-
ple, a desire or intention to woo Juliet (as a mediating propensity), leads Romeo to 
produce a relatively heterogeneous class of consequent events (ringing the door-
bell, knocking on the door, climbing the wall, sending a telegram, waiting for her 
to come outside, practicing the pole vault, and so on) such that if any one of these 
actions is frustrated, Romeo can try another, and such that an observer can explain 
Romeo’s many disparate behaviors or actions (qua means) by reference to a sin-
gle purpose or intention (qua ends). For James, then, any particular behavior (qua 
fruit) could lead an observer to infer an intention (qua mediating propensity), even 
if it failed to satisfy that intention, and the fl exibility of such behaviors (qua means) 
in the context of such an intention (qua end) was itself a relatively emblematic sign 
of the presence of mind (or “purpose”) in another for that observer. 
 For our purposes, in contrast, the question is not, what signs may be used 
to infer the presence of mind; rather, it is  what signs may be used to infer the pres-
ence of mind to infer the presence of mind . In particular, there is a major differ-
ence between an agent with the capacity to understand event-sequences in terms 
of stimulus-response pairings, or secondness, and an agent with the capacity to 
understand them in terms of mediating propensities, or thirdness. 
 For example, in the literature on primate cognition, processes akin to mediat-
ing propensities have been called “mediating variables” (Whiten 1993) and “tertiary 
relations” (Tomasello and Call 1997:383). While such ideas are not theorized in 
terms of semiotic processes, they are there usefully generalized to include physical 
causes as much as psychological states. 24 Moreover, some very large claims have 
been cast in terms of these categories. In particular, Tomasello (1999) argued that 
while a nonhuman primate may understand “the antecedent-consequent relations 
among external events in the absence of its own involvement,” it does not “under-
stand the mediating forces in these external events that explain ‘why’ a particular 
antecedent-consequent sequence occurs as it does—and these mediating forces are 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   163
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   163
7/24/2012   5:28:22 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:22 PM

 164 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
typically not readily observable” (23). While subsequent research has shown that 
this hypothesized cognitive distinction between human primates and nonhuman 
primates is not so clear-cut (see Tomasello 2008, and references therein) and that, 
indeed, the key difference between human and nonhuman primates may be their 
respective abilities to share intentionality rather than understand intentionality, it is 
still a useful distinction. Phrased in terms of mediating propensities, and in a more 
tempered fashion (say, as poles of continuum, rather than positions in an opposi-
tion): human primates (in contrast to nonhuman primates) are incredibly good at 
understanding the mediating relations between antecedent events and consequent 
events (even if they are all too prone to overproject). 
 As a mathematical analogy, imagine being given a set of numerical correla-
tions: 1 and 1, 2 and 4, 3 and 9, 4 and 16, and so forth. Someone who is not math-
ematically inclined may remember the set of individual pairings and, hence, come 
to expect that 1 goes with 1, 4 goes with 2, 9 goes with 3, and so forth. Whereas a 
mathematically inclined person (who can infer a mediating function, y = x 2 , from 
the set of pairings) will be able to predict pairings she has never seen: 25 and 5, 36 
and 6, and so forth. In short, as the nonmathematically inclined are to the mathe-
matically inclined in the realm of variables and mappings, “secondness-inferring” 
agents are to “thirdness-inferring” agents in the realm of sign-events and mediating 
propensities. Indeed, one suspects that there are differences between individuals as 
to degree, not just differences across species as to kind. For example, in the realm of 
mathematics and physical causes, we have our Newtons, and in the realm of inten-
tionality and psychological motivations, we have our Nietzsches. 
 Finally, note that such mediating variables look quite a lot like envorganisms 
from a particular framing. For example, by knowing something about the relation 
between the features of objects and the interests of agents, qua mediating variable, 
we can infer instigations from sensations, or fruits from roots (and vice versa). In 
this way, we return to the concerns of chapter 2, now seen from the standpoint of 
the analyst who postulates, or frames, an envorganism, qua features of an environ-
ment and interests of an agent, to make sense of some process, qua transformation 
of signs to interpretants, or sensations to instigations. 
 5.  Intentionality and Emblemeticity 
 The last section focused on the inferential and indexical nature of “mind-reading,” 
reframed as the interpretation of signs: when we semiotically attend to the semiotic 
attention of others. This section continues that discussion, focusing on relatively 
emblematic indices of intentionality, or relatively public and unambiguous signs of 
mental states and, hence, some of the signs that most transparently enable shared 
intentionality. It foregrounds the highly unstable nature of such indices, inso-far as 
they are prone to parasitic processes. And it foregrounds the ways features of such 
indices may be projected onto the objects they stand for, and thus the ways actors 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   164
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   164
7/24/2012   5:28:22 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:22 PM

 
Representations of the World 
165 
and analysts alike may ontologize mental states in terms of the (putative) properties 
of speech acts. 
 SOME CONDITIONS AND CONSEQUENCES OF EMBLEMETICITY 
 When theorizing kinds in chapter 3, it was noted that many different signs may 
index the same kind, and the same sign may index many different kinds. Such a 
claim is also true for mental states: there is usually no isomorphic mapping between 
the domain of potential indices and the domain of putative mental states, and thus 
nothing like a “code” that would unambiguously and intersubjectively pair such 
signs with such objects or such indices with such kinds. In the case of social sta-
tuses, we noted the exception of emblematic roles, or signs, such as uniforms, that 
provide relatively good evidence for the status in question—epistemically, deonti-
cally, relationally, and phenomenologically. And, as we saw, such a claim is also true 
for mental states. For example, with many caveats, speech acts are one of the ways 
we may “wear our hearts on our sleeves.” 25 
 More generally, any antecedent event or consequent event (as defi ned in the 
last section) may constitute a relatively emblematic index if it provides relatively 
good grounds for inferring (or ascribing) the mediating propensity (qua mental 
state) in question. Again, this is a graded question and can be answered only by 
reference to the range of possible mental states, as well as the range of possible 
antecedent and consequent events, that exist for a given semiotic agent or com-
munity with a particular ontology given a particular framing. In particular, given 
the assumptions of such an interpreting agent in such a signifi cant environment, 
one may ask whether a given event relates to a given mental state in ways that are 
relatively deontic (permitted and obligatory), epistemic (necessary and suffi cient), 
relational (intersubjectively recognized, or easy to commit to), and phenomenolog-
ical (maximally public). Recall Table 3.6. Everything else being equal (in particular, 
setting aside questions of feigning and masking, and semiotic parasitism more gen-
erally), the more such an index partakes of such modalities, the more emblematic 
it is. Again, what is so crucial about emblemeticity is that the interpretive process 
in question is  relatively  deductive, normative, public, or mutually known (and may 
thereby help constitute a mode of intentionality that is shared). 
 As a function of this, such relatively emblematic indices may permit one to 
ascribe to others the mental state in question. Indeed, the ascribing-via-inferring of 
mental states may become not just normatively permitted, but normatively obliga-
tory. That is, just as one can be held accountable for not recognizing that someone 
is a police offi cer (when they are wearing a uniform or displaying a badge), one can 
be held accountable (normatively, if not legally) for not recognizing the relatively 
easily inferred mental states of others.  How could you not have known what I was 
intending to do?! You must have known I wanted that!  (Such failures-to-infer may 
themselves constitute indices of the interpreting agent’s mental states, and thus be 
themselves subject to inference-drawing, sanctioning, and so forth.) 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   165
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   165
7/24/2012   5:28:22 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:22 PM

 166 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
 Crucially, as was discussed in chapter 4, except in relatively denuded, exotic, or 
high-stakes contexts (e.g., cross-cultural contact, courtrooms, and so forth), such 
issues may often be moot for the simple reason that context is so rich that there are 
many criss-crossing signs of the mental state in question (or nobody needs to make 
reference to the mental states of others in the fi rst place). While no one of these 
indexical signs may be emblematic in itself, the ensemble of them acting in concert 
makes any inference as to the mental state (purpose, status, or value) of others 
quite robust. Moreover, as mentioned above, it may also simply be the case that 
much of our comportment in the world does not require explicit reference to the 
mental states of others: we do just fi ne by signifying and interpreting objects such 
as purchases, functions, purposes, statuses, and values. Finally, given the embed-
dedness of meaning, it is tempting to argue that mental states may just as easily be 
“perceived” as “inferred.” That is, just as one may often more or less directly “see” 
the purchases provided by one’s material environment, one may often more or less 
directly “see” the mental states of one’s social environment. 
 Indeed, most modes of residence in the world (qua heeding affordances, wield-
ing instruments, undertaking actions, inhabiting roles, and fulfi lling identities) may 
indexically reveal not only the actor’s representations of the world, but also the 
actor’s representations of others’ representations of the world (including their rep-
resentations of the actor’s representations, and so on and so forth). In this way,  not 
only do modes of residence in the world constitute the key states of affairs that mental 
states and speech acts represent, they also, concomitantly, provide the richest indices 
of intentionality (qua evidence of the representations themselves) . For example, any 
mode of comportment (i.e., heeding an affordance, wielding an instrument, under-
taking an action, performing a role, or fi lling an identity) may follow from a mental 
state as a consequent event, or lead to a mental state as an antecedent sign event 
and, hence, constitute an index of intentionality. Modes of residence in the world 
are thus precisely the roots and fruits of mental states—not only in terms of having 
intentionality, but also in terms of understanding and sharing intentionality. 
 INTENTIONALITY AND PERFORMATIVITY 
 These important caveats aside, it is worthwhile enumerating some relatively emblem-
atic signs (in particular speech acts, and mental-state predicates more generally) 
and some general features that make certain signs more emblematic than others. In 
particular, explicit performatives (such as  I promise to slay the dragon ) and primary 
performatives (such as  I’ll slay the dragon ) are obvious candidates for emblemeticity 
in that they often make relatively public and unambiguous both the illocutionary 
force ( promise ,  will ) and the propositional content ( slay the dragon ) of the represen-
tation in question. Not only are such speech acts relatively emblematic indices of 
illocutionary force, they are often relatively emblematic of psychological modes. As 
Austin (2003 [1955]) argued, for example, one cannot (felicitously) say, I promise to 
go (but do not intend to), and one cannot (felicitously) say,  it’s raining (but I don’t 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   166
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   166
7/24/2012   5:28:22 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:22 PM

 
Representations of the World 
167 
believe it) . That is, speech acts often  imply mental states, and may thereby consti-
tute their fruits (semiotically speaking). More transparently, as Austin also argued, 
many speech acts  entail mental states, and thereby constitute their roots: for exam-
ple, being told that it is raining usually counts as a good reason to believe that it is 
raining, and being ordered to slay the dragon usually counts as a good reason to 
intend to slay the dragon. (In Austin’s formulation, assuming such speech act are 
felicitous, claims ascribing such mental states to the participants should be true.) In 
short, speech acts may emblematically imply, entail, and presuppose mental states 
as much as social statuses. 
 Their emblemeticity aside, such constructions are subject to parasitic processes 
such as etiolation and detachment (as Austin noted, and Goffman developed at 
length). That is, the same form may be used outside of its conventional context for 
reasons such as irony, theater, lying, exaggeration, and so forth. In particular, while 
maximally public and minimally ambiguous, such signs are also maximally feign-
able and maskable, detachable, and embeddable. Indeed, one may wonder whether 
such constructions are ever used in their conventional, nondetached sense. Aside, 
then, from courtroom contexts and so forth, it may be that the primary usage of 
such relatively explicit performatives is in regimenting and communicating (not to 
mention misrepresenting and mismanaging) the functionality of those semiotic 
processes that constitute more quotidian modes of interaction. Phrased another 
way, it might be argued that Goffman’s key insight, vis- à -vis Austin (and Veblen), is 
that  it is etiolation all the way down . That is, semiotic processes and semiotic agents 
are inherently parasitic, and unstably so—a point we will return to below. 
 OSTENSIVE INTENTIONALITY: FROM SYMBOL TO GESTURE 
 Another closely related kind of emblemeticity is ostensive rather than explicit, ges-
tural rather than symbolic, displayed rather than described. In particular, actually 
undertaking a controlled behavior is usually a relatively emblematic sign of having 
the intention in question. And actually observing a state of affairs is usually a rel-
atively emblematic sign of having the perception in question. Compare acting and 
observing with asserting, which is itself a relatively emblematic sign of having the 
belief in question. In particular, note that the fi rst two kinds of signs—being per-
ceived to act and being perceived to observe—are relatively ostensive, or gestural. 
Whereas the last kind of sign is relatively explicit, or symbolic, as to the proposi-
tional contents of the mental state in question. In all three cases, as noted above (and 
see Brandom 1994), such behaviors may more or less license others, normatively 
speaking, to attribute to the actor the mental states in question, and thereby sanc-
tion, and draw inferences from, their behavior accordingly (depending on whether 
it is coherent or not in such a context). Thus, while observing and acting may not 
be phenomenologically emblematic signs of perceptions and intentions (qua mini-
mally ambiguous), they are often relatively deontically and relationally emblematic. 
Crucially, in cases of inferential communication of the stereotypic Gricean kind, 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   167
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   167
7/24/2012   5:28:22 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:22 PM

 168 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
perception and intention prototypically come together: when I point or pantomime, 
we each perceive that we both perceive my communicative intention. 
 THE ONTOLOGY AND EPISTEMOLOGY OF INTENTIONALITY 
 Closely related to speech act verbs (and performative utterances more generally) 
are mental state predicates (and ascriptions of intentionality more generally). For 
example, in many languages there exist words such as  believe ,  desire ,  intend ,  want , 
 remember , and so forth. As with speech act verbs, constructions involving such 
predicates may be used to make relatively explicit and unambiguous both the psy-
chological mode and the propositional content of a private representation.  I believe 
that it is raining .  I intend to slay the dragon .  I remember when the circus came to 
town . Concomitantly, they allow speakers to separate and interrelate three kinds of 
events: the representational event (say, the event of desiring, believing, or feeling), 
the represented event (say, the event desired, believed, or felt), and the speech event 
(which itself provides the meta-representation of the representational event and the 
represented event). Finally, such predicates may be used to ascribe mental states to 
others (for example,  John believes that it is raining ) and predicate properties of men-
tal states (for example,  belief is a weak form of knowledge ). 
 Such constructions, and the lexical and grammatical mediation of mind more 
generally, as well as the discursive unfolding of such forms of mediation in real-time 
interaction, deserve a monograph of their own (Kockelman 2010a). For present pur-
poses, it will suffi ce to highlight several important processes that such constructions 
evince and enable that are relatively community specifi c and historically contingent. 
In particular, rather than thinking about “theory of mind” and “ethnopsychology,” 
we might focus on the relatively group-specifi c and relatively species-general ways 
that intentionality is entangled in local ontologies and epistemologies. 
 First, from the perspective of language structure, it may be argued that 
the lexical and grammatical categories involved in such constructions may be 
cross-linguistically organized and scaled as a function of the ontological distance 
between the speech event, the representational event, and the represented event. 
By ontological distance is meant the ways in which one of these events is logically 
(inferentially) or causally (indexically) implicated in the others. For example, the 
ways in which an event of desiring is causal of the event desired or an event of feel-
ing is causal of the public expression of that feeling. In particular, such distance 
may be gauged with relations such as semantic scope (between an operator and a 
predicate), morphosyntactic tightness (between a predicate and its complement), 
and pragmatic displacement (between a speech event and a narrated event). And 
such distance may also be tracked by the speaker’s tacit and explicit notions of 
logic and causality (as evinced in the types of implicatures they make and the types 
of meta-linguistic practices they engage in). By organized and scaled is meant the 
kinds of private representations there are (as locally construed), the relations such 
representations have to each other (via implicit taxonomies and partonomies), and 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   168
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   168
7/24/2012   5:28:22 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:22 PM

 
Representations of the World 
169 
their causal and logical connections to public behaviors. For example, this allows 
one to carefully describe the contours of different modalities of belief (such as 
doubt and knowledge), desire (such as love and lust), and feeling (such as anger and 
fear) as well as their relations to words and deeds. In short, through such processes, 
mental states (which otherwise seem to be the most “subjective” of processes) get 
construed as relatively “objective” and “eventive.” Here is where intentionality gets 
most transparently caught up in local ontologies. 
 And second, in the course of acquiring propositional content through the lexi-
cal predicates that refer to them, mental states may become the object of empirical 
investigations, theoretical representations, and practical interventions. In particu-
lar,  theoretical representations of mental states may be understood as assertions 
(or beliefs) that either represent people as having certain mental states or represent 
mental state as having certain properties. Such theoretical representations can stand 
as reasons and in need of reasons.  Empirical investigations of mental states may be 
understood as observations (or perceptions) of the mental states of people or the 
properties of mental states. These can stand as reasons for theoretical representa-
tions, and these are indexically caused by states of affairs. And  practical interven-
tions of mental states may be understood as actions (or intentions) that are directed 
toward affecting the mental states of people or the properties of mental states. 
These can stand in need of reasons, and these are indexically causal of states of 
affairs. For example, the following kinds of questions become salient: normatively 
speaking (given a frame-of-life that resides in and represents the world in particular 
ways), what observations or assertions would entitle or commit one to predicate 
property X of mental state Y, or predicate mental state W of person Z. And if one 
predicates property X of mental state Y, or predicates mental state W of person Z, 
what assertions or actions does this entitle or commit one to? In short, by taking 
the analysis of inferential and indexical roots and fruits put forth in section 2, and 
refl exively turning it back on itself at the level of propositional mode rather than 
propositional content, we see how intentionality gets caught up in  epistemology . 26 
Here we return to the issues raised at the end of chapter 3, regarding knowledge 
about and power over semiotic processes (and various kinds of ontological trans-
formativity), where the semiotic processes in question turn on private representa-
tions of the stereotypic sort. In particular, here is where more quotidian modes 
of transformativity (chapter 3) may get made more or less normative (and often 
explicit) via their institutionalization in an epistemic formation. 
 EMBLEMETICITY, AGENCY, AND MACHIAVELLI 
 This section has focused on relatively emblematic indices of intentionality. While 
any behavior may function as an index of intentionality, only some behaviors 
are caught up in epistemic, deontic, relational, and phenomenological modes of 
emblemeticity. Such relatively emblematic signs are useful to consider because they 
exhibit a range of dimensions along which less emblematic signs may be contrasted 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   169
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   169
7/24/2012   5:28:22 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:22 PM

 170 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
and compared. In particular, for any index of intentionality, we may ask the fol-
lowing kinds of questions. Is the sign a root (qua cause) or fruit (qua effect) of the 
mental state (qua mediating propensity or kind) in question? Does the sign indicate 
the mode, content, or mode and content of the mental state? Is the sign relatively 
propositional (and, hence, more or less inferentially articulated and linguistically 
mediated) or relatively nonpropositional? If the sign is propositional, is it relatively 
lexical (open) or grammatical (closed), mediated by content or structure (as per the 
terms in section 3)? And fi nally, is the sign relatively symbolic-indexical (or “arbi-
trary”) or relatively indexical-iconic (or “motivated”), relatively mediated by causes 
or norms? 
 Crucially, such distinctions not only map onto the relative emblemeticity of 
the sign in question, they also map onto the degree of practical agency one has 
over such semiotic processes: the capacity to control the expression of the index of 
intentionality in space and time, the capacity to compose what index is expressed, 
or what mental state it stands for, and the capacity to commit to, or internalize, 
another’s interpretant of this index-intention relation (e.g., what another will do 
regarding, or believe about, one’s mental state). And they probably map onto the 
degree of theoretical agency one has over such semiotic processes: the capacity to 
thematize them, characterize them, and reason with these theme-character rela-
tions. In this way, one may make more or less explicit one’s representations, as well 
as the reasoning processes they are caught up in, and thus more or less refl exively 
attend to the ways they are grounded in and transforming of one’s ontology. 
 Somewhat ironically, this fact may lead to unstable feedback loops. For exam-
ple, the more emblematic the sign, the more agency one has over its expression (con-
trol, compose, commit; thematize, characterize, reason); the more agency one has 
over its expression, the more dissembling becomes an option (stylizing, feigning, 
masking, etc.); and the more dissembling becomes an option, the less emblematic the 
sign. Indices of intentionality, at least for semiotic agents with self-refl exive capaci-
ties, will always be subject to, if not constituted by, etiolation and parasitism. 
 Such dynamic tensions have repercussions for developmental processes occur-
ring on phylogenetic, historical, biographical, and interactional time scales. Indeed, 
they are arguably at the heart of selectional (and sieving) processes, constituting 
both the roots and the fruits of more and more complex modes of sociogenesis, 
semiocognitive capacity, and semiotic structure. While related claims are legion in 
the social sciences (Byrne and Whiten 1988; Darwin 1965 [1872]; de Waal 2000; 
Veblen 1971 [1899]; Goffman 1959; Frank 1988;  inter alia ), they have not been suffi -
ciently theorized from the standpoint of semiosis, agency, and emblemeticity. We will 
return to them in the next chapter when we theorize selfhood, affect, and value.  
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/24/12, NEWGEN
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   170
05_Kockelman_Ch05.indd   170
7/24/2012   5:28:22 PM
7/24/2012   5:28:22 PM

171
 6 
 Selfhood, Affect, and Value  
 1.  I Err, Therefore I Am 
 The self may be understood in many different ways. As an ensemble of social rela-
tions and as a site of social relatedness. As a mutually implicated set of skills, tools, 
goals, and roles, and as that to which such a set is assigned. As possessions, and as 
possessor. As the site in which rights and responsibilities adhere, and as where dis-
cipline and punishment is applicable. As that which knits together intention, action, 
realization, and responsibility, and as that which unravels in the face of experience, 
desire, satiation, and guilt. As auto-aestheticizing, or able to give its own existence 
a coherent frame, and as error-induced, grounded in parapraxis rather than praxis, 
or  fallor ergo sum  rather than  cogito ergo sum . As auto-nomic, or self-suffi cient, 
self-grounding, and autonomous, and as auto-gnomic, or daemon, Id, onion-skin, 
mask, and cipher. As auto-thematic, or both fi gure and ground of reference, 
speaker and fi gure linked by the pronoun “I,” and as auto-tarchic, or continuous 
in time, cohesive in space, center of initiative, and recipient of impressions. As a 
relatively refl exive center of enclosure and disclosure, and thus as self-enclosing 
and self-disclosing. As ontologizing and ontologized. As autotechnic, or using 
itself as means, and as autotelic, or having itself as ends. As the embodiment of 
 zoe , or bare life shared by all living things, and as the personifi cation of  bios , or 
the “good life,” characteristic only of human beings. As life-frame and frame-of-
life. As self-refl exive, or caring for itself, and as self-refl ective, or knowing itself. As 
that which orientates to value, both measuring and measured, and as that which is 
beyond measure and incommensurable. As a soul, plus or minus the stakes, and as 
that for the sake of which one would go to the stake. As uniquely identifi able across 
all possible worlds (here, there, and in the hereafter), and as utterly undefi nable 
through any fi nite combination of words. 
 This chapter takes up this cluster of concerns in terms of the categories devel-
oped in the preceding chapters. More specifi cally, in contrast to chapters 4 and 5, 
with their focus on subjectivity (and the kinds of residential and representational 
modes of [in] coherence that constitute it), this chapter moves to selfhood (and 
the kinds of refl exivity and refl ectivity that characterize it). In contrast to chapter 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   171
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   171
7/23/2012   9:27:09 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:09 PM

 172 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
5, with its focus on relatively cognitive representations, this chapter builds on the 
foregoing understanding of selfhood to theorize affective unfoldings in relation to 
care and accountability. In contrast to the way the term  kind was used in chapters 
1 and 3 (qua projected propensity to be entangled in particular semiotic processes, 
such as mental states, social statuses, and material substances), here we return to 
the way the term  identity was used in chapter 4 (qua meta-propensity, or relatively 
coherent ensemble of such more basic kinds). In contrast to chapter 2, where we 
focused on selection and signifi cance in a very wide sense, here we focus on a key 
human-specifi c mode of selection sometimes referred to as “choice.” And, in com-
parison to the fi rst four chapters of this book, with their focus on meaning in the 
widest sense (qua relations between relations), this chapter turns to value, as a par-
ticular kind of meaning that is central to human-specifi c forms of selection and 
signifi cance and which may be understood as organizing the various kinds that 
constitute the identity of some particular self. Finally, and perhaps most generally, 
we return to the entities (agents, persons, subjects, selves) that, while seeming to 
stand at the center of semiotic processes, are only revealed by and created through 
those semiotic processes. 
 Before we begin, a word of warning. While I here foreground selves as a par-
ticular sort of meta-kind, the kinds that constitute it can be framed and ontolo-
gized in a wide variety of ways depending on the semiotic agent or community in 
question. In particular, different agents (may be ontologized to) have: (1) differ-
ent kinds of mental states, social statuses, and material substances; (2) different 
assumptions about the nature (or culture) of such kinds; and (3) different kinds 
per se. I foreground three sorts of kinds in this chapter and book (mental states, 
social statuses, and material substances), in part, because they are fundamental 
constituents of my own culture’s ontology (though different subcultures (say, psy-
chologists versus anthropologists, experts versus lay folks, “reductionists” versus 
“expansionists,” etc.) may ontologize them in different ways), and, in part, because 
together, as relatively complementary kinds, they highlight some of the key features 
that any analytically robust meta-ontology has to deal with (if it is to understand 
local ontologies, including itself). And thus, in what follows, all the warnings from 
chapter 1 should be understood as ever-present. 
 2.  From Subjectivity to Selfhood 
 William James offered a theory of the self that was as succinct and powerful as it 
was colorful and culture-bound: “ In its widest possible sense . . . a man’s Me is the 
sum total of all that he  CAN  call his , not only his body and his psychic powers, but his 
clothes and his house, his wife and children, his ancestors and friends, his reputation 
and works, his lands and horses, and yacht and bank-account. All these things give 
him the same emotions. If they wax and prosper, he feels triumphant; if they dwin-
dle and die away, he feels cast down—not necessarily in the same degree for each 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   172
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   172
7/23/2012   9:27:09 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:09 PM

 
Selfhood, Affect, and Value 
173 
thing, but in much the same way for all” (1985 [1892]:44). More carefully stated, and 
setting aside the obvious criticisms, the self for James consisted of an ensemble of 
constituents: not only body, mind, and soul, but also kith and kin, reputation and 
works, habits and appetites, properties and identities. And such constituents, which 
were otherwise a relatively heterogeneous lot, were similar not only with regard to 
the emotions they aroused (in one) and the actions they prompted (from one), but 
also with regard to the ways they were recognized as belonging (to one). In some 
sense, then, James’s theory of the self turned on an ensemble of constituents that 
was itself both indexed by and constituted through three modes of refl exivity: emo-
tion, action, and belonging. In what follows, we use his conception of the self as a 
building block for a more elaborate theory of selfhood, one that is powerful enough 
to handle not only the human-specifi c processes that James focused on, but also the 
agentive processes that all life forms exhibit (almost by defi nition). 
 SELFHOOD AS ENSEMBLE OF REFLEXIVELY COHERENT SEMIOTIC PROCESSES 
 While James defi ned the self as the sum total of all that one may call one’s own, 
we will defi ne it as an ensemble of refl exively coherent semiotic processes, a defi -
nition that needs to be unpacked. As for the constituents of such an ensemble, the 
semiotic processes in question may involve modes of residence in the world (such 
as affordances, instruments, actions, roles, identities) as much as representations of 
the world (such as mental states and speech acts, or cognitive processes and commu-
nicative practices more generally). Or, phrased in terms of semiotic ontologies, the 
constituents in question may involve any sort of kind (qua projected propensity to 
exhibit particular patterns), any index of such a kind, and any interpretant of such 
an index-kind relation. In this way, we can sometimes describe the self, in a kind 
of shorthand, as consisting of a relatively individuated ensemble of social statuses, 
mental states, and material substances. (Or, somewhat less reifi ed, as an ensemble 
of social relations, semiocognitive representations, and material processes.) Note, 
then, that just as such semiotic processes are as embodied and embedded as they are 
articulated and enminded, so are selves. Just as such semiotic processes consist of 
temporally unfolding signs, objects, and interpretants, so do selves. And just as such 
semiotic processes may be distributed across signers, objecters, and interpreters, so 
may selves. In this way, selves inherit many of the properties of semiotic processes, 
as detailed in preceding chapters, for the simple reason that they are themselves 
constituted by semiotic processes. 
 The modes of coherence (and potential incoherence) in question are, in part, 
those enumerated in the last two chapters: incorporation, complementation, and 
creation; causality and rationality, intersubjectivity and intrasubjectivity; and so 
forth. This means that the constituents of the self-as-ensemble, as semiotic pro-
cesses, get their meaning only in terms of other such constituents via semiotically 
mediated and frame-dependent relations such as part-to-whole, fi gure-to-ground, 
and cause-to-effect. The self-as-ensemble, then, is self-contextualizing. Indeed, one 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   173
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   173
7/23/2012   9:27:10 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:10 PM

 174 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
sense of the self is that which may be framed as ground, whole, and cause for the 
semiotic processes that constitute it, which may themselves be reciprocally framed 
as fi gures, parts, and effects (and vice verse). That is, depending on the frame in 
question, the semiotic processes that belong to the self-as-ensemble enclose that self 
as much as disclose it, reify it as much as reveal it. The self-as-ensemble, then, is also 
self-framing and, more generally, self-ontologizing. 
 Aside from these more quotidian modes of coherence, the modes of coherence 
(and potential incoherence) essential to selfhood are inherently refl exive in the three 
ways James described. For example, as for refl exive action, one’s behavior is ori-
ented toward the care of such constituents (one acts both for them and with them, 
such that one’s actions are both autotelic and autotechnic). As for refl exive emo-
tion, one’s moods are refl ective of the state or condition of such constituents (their 
fl ourishing or foundering registers on one as positive and negative affect). And as 
for refl exive belonging, one is held responsible for the effects of such constituents 
(they belong to one in ways that may be both normatively and causally, or “natu-
rally” and “culturally,” regimented). In all of these ways, then, a subject (or semiotic 
agent) relates to an object (or semiotic process) that is just the subject at one degree 
of remove. Indeed, it is this very refl exivity that constitutes the self-as-ensemble in 
the fi rst place: in one sense, refl exive coherence is a defi nition of selfhood, and, in 
another sense, it is a diagnostic of selfhood. And it is this very refl exivity that, rel-
atively speaking, separates out certain bundles of semiotic processes from others, 
and thereby separates out selves from alters (qua other selves) as well as selves and 
alters from others (qua non-selves).  1   In short, refl exive coherence is the relatively 
emblematic meta-index of selfhood as a meta-kind. 
 That said, it may be argued that James focused on action and emotion because, 
stereotypically, the former has a kind of mind to world direction of fi t (we assimi-
late the world to ourselves), and the latter has a kind of world to mind direction of 
fi t (we accommodate ourselves to the world). For our purposes, rather than focus 
on actions prompted and emotions aroused, we may focus on signs (that lead to 
interpretants) and interpretants (that follow from signs). That is, one and the same 
semiotic process may be framed protentively (with an eye toward its effects) and 
retentively (with an eye toward its causes). While these may sometimes be framed 
in a folk-psychological idiom as action and emotion, respectively, the processes 
involved are much broader and must be understood semiotically. In particular , our 
signs, objects, and interpretants are oriented, however tangentially, toward caring for 
the constituents of the self-as-ensemble; and our signs, objects, and interpretants are 
part of the self-as-ensemble, however peripherally, and so are cared for . 
 The third mode of refl exivity, belonging, is different in kind from the other 
two; indeed, it may be the defi nitional criterion for James. However, while James 
phrased it in terms of possession or belonging (whatever one can call one’s own), 
our focus is on accountability (as laid out in chapters 2 and 3). In particular, one 
is held accountable, as regimented by causes as much as by norms, for the semi-
otic processes that constitute one’s self-as-ensemble. For example, depending on 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   174
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   174
7/23/2012   9:27:10 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:10 PM

 
Selfhood, Affect, and Value 
175 
the causes and effects of one’s semiotic processes (however distal, sundry, or unex-
pected), and the ways these lead other organisms, qua alters, to judge one as good 
or bad, or actual environments, qua others, to determine whether one is fi t or unfi t, 
one may be subject to praise and blame as much as pleasure and pain—and thus 
to cultural sanctioning as much as natural selection,  inter alia . In some sense, what 
matters is that the semiotic processes in question fl ourish or founder together: any, 
and all, may be held accountable for the effects of any and all.  It is this very account-
ability that defi nes the contents and delimits the contours of the self-as-ensemble, as 
that which is refl exively cared for. 2  And it is this very accountability that shapes one’s 
protentive and retentive semiotic processes, insofar as they are refl exive modes of care 
(as well as constituents to be cared for) . 
 Note, then, how refl exive coherence (qua assimilation, accommodation, and 
accountability) looks a lot like regimentation as defi ned in chapter 3. Taking into 
account both causes and norms (as well as the limits of this dichotomy), we asked 
what are appropriate and feasible modes of assimilation (qua signs, or protentive semi-
otic processes) and what are effective and effi cacious modes of accommodation (qua 
interpretants, or retentive semiotic processes). Every signifying and interpreting agent, 
qua self, was simultaneously regimented by and, hence, accountable for both kinds of 
processes at once. Indeed, the organism was, in part, defi ned by its very internalization 
of, or orientation to, such modes of regimentation and, hence, the ways it is account-
able for its own semiotic processes, and to itself as a semiotic process, on time scales 
that may be interactional or biographical as much as historical or evolutionary. 
 It should be emphasized that the self-as-ensemble is thereby defi ned in terms 
of three relatively distinct modes of refl exivity, and that, with certain caveats, such 
refl exive relations hold for nonhuman life forms as well. Moreover, the relative coher-
ence, continuity, or boundedness of the self turns simply on the relative coherence, 
continuity, and boundedness of such an ensemble. While key characters in the history 
of literature, key identities in the ethnographic record, and key moments in the life 
course of any individual may diverge from one or more of these dimensions, while 
the actual constituents in the ensemble may be community-specifi c (as well as person-
specifi c and species-specifi c), and while the individual in question may be a corpo-
rate (and, indeed, incorporeal) entity, the dimensions per se seem relatively robust 
(Kockelman 2011a). Finally, as is the case with modes of residence in and representa-
tions of the world, incoherence is as important and generative as coherence, just as 
failure is as important and generative as function, and parasites are as important and 
generative as purposes. Indeed, its ever-present possibility, and frequent actualiza-
tion, is a defi ning characteristic of subjectivity:  we (in)cohere, therefore we are . 3  
 SELFHOOD AS REFLECTIVITY: POWER AND KNOWLEDGE OVER 
ONESELF AND OTHERS 
 Such refl exive relations are  not  the same as the refl ective relations that theories of 
the self usually foreground, qua self-consciousness and self-control. While such 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   175
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   175
7/23/2012   9:27:10 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:10 PM

 176 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
relatively human-specifi c refl ective relations are, to be sure, important, they are 
overemphasized in the literature in the guise of techniques of the self, performances 
of the self, narratives of the self, symbols of the self, and so forth. Indeed, it may 
be argued that such refl ective modes of selfhood presuppose the refl exive modes of 
selfhood theorized above—qua assimilation, accommodation, and accountability. 
In particular, for all the things one could be conscious of, or have control over, only 
some belong to the ensemble that constitutes the one who is conscious or has con-
trol. And, aside from the various modes of refl ectivity per se (and their criterial sig-
nifi cance for the constitution of human-specifi c modes of selfhood), it is really the 
fact that such things belong to the refl exive ensemble that gives them their impor-
tance in the fi rst place (such that refl ecting on them, or failing to refl ect on them, is 
so fraught). In this way, most analyses of various forms of refl ectivity presume, or 
elide altogether, refl exivity (and the kinds of (in)coherence it turns on), and thereby 
fail to account for the ensemble’s local contours (which may be community-specifi c 
and species-specifi c as much as self-specifi c,  inter alia ), as well as the conditions of 
possibility for, and consequences of, such contours. 
 For our purposes, such refl ective modes of selfhood are easily theorized by 
crossing our theory of agency, qua fl exibility and accountability, with our theory 
of selfhood, qua ensemble of refl exively coherent semiotic processes. In particu-
lar, the self as refl ectively may be framed in terms of having practical and the-
oretical agency over the semiotic processes that constitute one’s self-as-ensemble. 
As for practical agency, one is more or less able to control the signs, compose the 
sign-object relations, and commit to the interpretants of these sign-object relations. 
And, as for theoretical agency, one is more or less able to thematize such semi-
otic processes (or any of their components), characterize such themes, and reason 
about such theme-character relations. In short, if practical semiotic agency over the 
self-as-ensemble is a way of theorizing “self-control,” theoretical semiotic agency 
over the self-as-ensemble is a way of theorizing “self-consciousness.” In this way, 
all the claims made about agency in chapters 2 and 3 (such as its being multidi-
mensional, graded, and distributed or such as its turning on properties of signs, 
signers, and semiotic communities) may be made about refl ective selfhood, qua 
self-refl exive agency. For example, as with agency more generally, we can theo-
rize some of the conditions for, and consequences of, having relatively high or low 
degrees of agency over any particular semiotic process, if not the entire ensemble 
(Kockelman 2007b). 
 Indeed, canonical modes of domination consist of situations in which one 
self-as-ensemble has practical or theoretical agency and, hence, power over, or 
knowledge about, the semiotic processes that constitute another self-as-ensemble—
where this very linkage, ironically, often has the effect of coupling the two selves, 
such that they may even come to constitute a single unit of accountability, such that 
the difference between them, as ensembles of semiotic processes, may be elided. 
Phrased another way, and as a segue to the next section, we are often held account-
able for semiotic processes insofar as we have practical and theoretical agency over 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   176
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   176
7/23/2012   9:27:10 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:10 PM

 
Selfhood, Affect, and Value 
177 
them, and, insofar as we are accountable for them, they come to constitute part of 
our self-as-ensemble. Loosely speaking, the more power I have over you, and the 
more knowledge I have about you, the more I am accountable for what you do; and 
the more accountable I am for what you do, the more I become you. Indeed, such 
a process can cut both ways: when I fail to have control over some part of myself 
or fail to be conscious of some part of myself, the more they detach themselves 
as an “it” (or “you”) from my “I.” Freud’s Id, in the guise of uncontrolled and 
unconscious semiotic processes (such as parapraxes, neuroses, and dreams), is the 
quintessential  it . This shows how refl exivity and refl ectivity can be concomitant 
processes, each being the roots and fruits of the other, at least in human-specifi c 
forms of life. 
 (One often discussed mode of refl ective selfhood turns on the pronoun “I.” 
In particular, legions of scholars have been excited by the fact that this pronoun 
allows one to be both speaker and topic [or both ground and fi gure of discourse]. 
Unremarked upon, however, are three other fundamental modes of refl ective semi-
osis: when the one speaking is the same as the one spoken to, or when the one spo-
ken to is the same as the one spoken about, or when the one speaking is the same as 
the one spoken to and the one spoken about. [Think, for example, of Mr. Toad sing-
ing to himself about himself.] Or, framed in terms of residence in the world rather 
than representations of the world: when the performer is the same as the character 
or the performer is the same as the audience, or when the character is the same as 
the audience or when the performer, character, and audience are the same. [Where 
“is the same as” means  partially overlaps at the level of self-as-ensemble .] Note, for 
example, that whenever one looks in the mirror, there are three modalities of self-
hood at stake: the one who looks at the mirror, the one who looks from the mirror, 
and the one who looks in the mirror. In short, not only have the refl exive aspects 
of selfhood been elided with so much emphasis on refl ective modes of selfhood, 
but also key modes of refl ective selfhood have been elided with so much emphasis 
on its ego-specifi c centerings and its most obvious linguistic encodings. Kockelman 
(2010a, 2011a) details a range of other kinds of grammatical categories and discur-
sive practices whereby both refl exive and refl ective modalities of selfhood come to 
the fore: interjections, inalienable possessions, complement-taking predicates, ver-
bal operators such as mood and status, and so forth.) 
 3.  From Cognition to Affect 
 While the self-as-ensemble is at stake in any semiotic process, its fundamental rela-
tion to semiosis is perhaps most transparent in the context of affect, itself a par-
ticularly complicated kind of semiotic process. In particular, any  affective unfolding 
involves one or more of the following kinds of components. First, following James’s 
lead, the object in question prototypically involves a fl ourishing or foundering of 
the self-as-ensemble—however slight, incipient, or imagined. In other words, one or 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   177
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   177
7/23/2012   9:27:10 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:10 PM

 178 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
more of the semiotic processes for which one is held accountable, and about which 
one cares, is somehow at stake. In the case of foundering, for example, part of one’s 
self may be subject to threat or loss: one’s arm is injured, one’s child is hurt, one’s 
reputation in tarnished, one’s clothes are torn. Conversely, in the case of fl ourish-
ing, part of one’s self may be subject to growth or renewal: one’s work is praised, 
one’s crop is harvested, one’s wound has healed, one’s family is safe. 
 Indeed, if the self-as-ensemble consists of semiotic processes, and if some 
of these semiotic processes may be framed as kinds, then a key component of 
one’s self is other’s attitudes toward, or interpretants of, the kinds (e.g., men-
tal states, social statuses, and material substances) that constitute one’s self and, 
hence, their recognition of one’s semiotic propensities, or “power.” This means 
that the self-as-ensemble may fl ourish or founder depending on how it is inter-
preted by others precisely because it is, in part, constituted by the interpretants 
of others. And, indeed, many classic theories of the human-specifi c modes of 
selfhood, such as those offered by Hobbes (1994 [1651]) and Goffman (1959), 
see it as fundamentally directed towards securing (or staving off) certain forms 
of recognition, such as honor, face, renown, or fame. In the idiom of practical 
agency, insofar as we can commit to other’s interpretants of our index-kind rela-
tions, we may also strive to control when and where we express our indices, and 
we may strive to compose (mask, play down, exaggerate, etc.) the index-kind rela-
tions themselves. 
 Second, such a fl ourishing or foundering of the self-as-ensemble, qua object, is 
itself mediated by signs: the self-as-ensemble has access to the vicissitudes of itself 
through signs of itself. The signs may be nonverbal (I can see or feel that my wound 
is healing) as much as verbal (I am told that my work was praised, I overhear that 
my reputation is tarnished). They may be abductive as much as deductive (I predict 
that the harvest will be good). And they may be cryptic as much as transparent 
and private as much as public (one’s dreams may shed light on one’s desires). In 
short, while theorists of emotion often say that an emotion involves an appraisal 
of a situation (Averill 1985), this may be reframed by saying that affective unfold-
ings involve interpretations of sign-object relations, where the object in question 
involves the self-as-ensemble, and where the sign may be more or less immediate or 
direct: from dreams and omens to images and assertions, from explicit symbols and 
public pronouncements to unconscious gestures and private whispers, from resi-
dence in the world to representations of the world. 
 To return to Hobbes and Goffman, we are constantly attending to the indi-
ces of others (and attending to the fact that others are constantly attending to our 
own indices) for evidence of how we are recognized: every instant of interaction is 
replete with relatively recognizable (and often readily defeasible or deniable) indices 
of recognition: traces of envy and esteem, gestures of love and hatred, symptoms 
of affection and contempt. Indeed, Cooley’s theory of the looking-glass-self (1902) 
may be reframed as follows: our affective unfoldings often involve interpretants of 
others’ signs, qua attitudes, that are themselves interpretants of our own role-status 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   178
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   178
7/23/2012   9:27:10 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:10 PM

 
Selfhood, Affect, and Value 
179 
relations (or index-kind relations more generally). Loosely speaking, when I see 
you, I look at you for evidence of how I am seen, and how I am seen (qua interpre-
tant, or effect on you) is as much a part of my self-as-ensemble, and thereby subject 
to fl ourishing or foundering, as what there is to see (qua sign-object relation, as 
more or less caused by me). 4 
 Third, this sign-object relation may then give rise to a range of interpretants, 
perhaps simultaneously or perhaps sequentially. To return to the Peircean typology 
developed in chapter 3, there are affective interpretants: relatively involuntary trans-
formations in the state of one’s body that may be felt by the one embodying them 
(and even perceived by others, if only indirectly). There are energetic interpretants 
that range from voluntary actions to involuntary behaviors, some of which may be 
highly communicative, if not emblematic, such as response cries and facial expres-
sions. There are representational interpretants: signs, be they public or private, that 
frame such events (and their causes and effects) in terms of relatively propositional 
contents. And there are ultimate interpretants, or dispositional variants of any of 
these interpretants, qua habits or propensities to affectively, energetically, or repre-
sentationally interpret in particular ways in more distal contexts. 
 To return to our example from chapter 3, a single gunshot heard while one is 
alone in the forest may serve as a sign of potential threat to the self (if not to others 
who are part of one’s self), and this sign-object relation can give rise to a wide range 
of interpretants, some simultaneous, some sequential: a rush of adrenaline and the 
rapid beating of one’s heart (and perhaps a constriction in one’s throat, ever after, 
whenever one is alone in the woods at night), fl inching or freezing as well as draw-
ing one’s weapon or running the other way (and perhaps a future habit of hiking 
in more public places), an utterance such as “don’t shoot,” or “everyone down” 
(and a subsequently ineradicable belief that the woods are fi lled with dangerous 
beings). Finally, as will be further developed below, it must be emphasized that in 
other semiotic frames all of these interpretants may also be signs (or at least more 
or less indexically revealed projected propensities to signify, objectify, and interpret 
in particular ways) that can themselves be interpreted by others—indeed, they are 
often bundled together as evidence for a single ascription: “Paul must be terrifi ed 
of the woods.” 
 Note, then, that most of the processes described in preceding sections also 
apply to affective unfoldings. For example, reframing some of the foregoing inter-
pretants as signs, there are relatively emblematic signs of affective states—indices 
that make relatively public and unambiguous that one is scared (or, rather, that 
one is undergoing an affective unfolding that is stereotypically described as “being 
scared”). Thus, just as we often have emotion vocabularies (as relatively representa-
tional interpretants) that allow speakers to make explicit their own and others emo-
tions, we also have facial expressions (as relatively energetic interpretants), which 
are often understood as our most transparent icons of affect. Again, such emblems 
may be explicit as much as ostensive. And again, such signs enclose affect as much 
as disclose it, reifying it as much as revealing it. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   179
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   179
7/23/2012   9:27:11 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:11 PM

 180 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
 Relatedly, and as per our discussion in chapter 5, affective unfoldings can be 
framed as mediating propensities and, hence, can be caught up in intersubjective 
modes of inference and expectation via their roots and fruits. For example, from 
his facial expression or self-ascription, I may learn “he is angry” (or, more precisely, 
learn that he is in the midst of a certain kind of affective unfolding); and, having 
learned he is angry, I may expect him to engage in certain kinds of behavior (qua 
fruits) or predict that he has experienced certain kinds of events (qua fruits). In this 
way, I may infer that he has resided in (or represented) the world in particular ways, 
and that he will come to reside in (and represent) the world in particular ways. 
 Crucially, as interpretants, these are also potential sign-components in incip-
ient semiotic processes and, hence, they may be sensed and interpreted by the self 
(as much as by others) and thereby provide grounds for more elaborate  semiotic 
cascades . In this way, just as the roots of affective unfoldings may be indefi nitely 
extended, so may the fruits. In particular, the self-as-ensemble can interpret its own 
signs and judge its own semiotic processes more generally—often by committing 
to, or “internalizing,” the imagined or remembered judgments of others. Indeed, if 
one’s self-as-ensemble consists of semiotic processes, then the very affective unfold-
ings it gives rise to (when it founders or fl ourishes) are themselves part of the self 
and, hence, may themselves give rise to (refl exive, or higher-order) semiotic unfold-
ings. For example, one can be ashamed or angry with oneself for having been angry 
or ashamed. In this way, our very own affective interpretations of our affective 
interpretations may shape our affective unfoldings. 
 Framed another way, note that just as a sign may be more or less transparently 
related to its object, an interpretant may be more or less transparently related to a 
sign-object relation (Kockelman 2011a). And, therefore, just as there exists a range 
of more or less immediate interpretants (affective, energetic, representational, ulti-
mate), there also exists a range of more or less overt interpretants. Such relatively 
covert interpretants may arise for the simple reason that, as potential signs them-
selves, they are subject to one’s own and others’ subsequent interpretations (and the 
judgments these may entail). Freud, in a psycho-medical paradigm, Goffman, in a 
sociointeractional paradigm, and Foucault, in an institutional-historical paradigm, 
handled this in now canonical ways: there exists censoring agencies, whose presence 
may be internalized, that lead to the recoding and rechanneling of such poten-
tial signs—giving rise to minimizations and maskings, condensations and lies, ges-
tures and displacements, shifts in footing and slips of the tongue. (As well as a host 
of hermeneutic techniques, or interpretive epistemes, for recovering the original 
sign-object relations—from psychoanalysis through genealogy to linguistic anthro-
pology.) Such censoring agencies may be real or imagined, internally imposed or 
externally applied, consciously undertaken or unconsciously executed. And, in a 
Meadian idiom, they may be fi gured as any kind of generalized other (qua imag-
ined intersubjective ground)—not just fathers, wardens, and dictators, but also 
participants of speech event, unratifi ed bystanders, ego ideals, and evaluative stan-
dards. In short, with some caveats to be discussed below, affective unfoldings are 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   180
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   180
7/23/2012   9:27:11 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:11 PM

 
Selfhood, Affect, and Value 
181 
subject to regimentation, and thereby exhibit its consequences, like any other semi-
otic process. 
 THE ONTOLOGY AND EPISTEMOLOGY OF AFFECT 
 In short, affective unfoldings have been framed as semiotic processes consisting of 
signs, objects, and interpretants (where the latter may themselves constitute incipi-
ent signs). The key object in question concerns the self-as-ensemble. A sign can be 
any index, however slight, of a possible fl ourishing or foundering, however small, 
latent, or imagined, of that ensemble of semiotic processes for which the affecting 
self is accountable (which may include the affective unfolding itself), and the inter-
pretants involve a palette of simultaneous and subsequent possibilities (as well as 
second-order attempts to rechannel or recode these, depending on their regimenta-
tion by self and others): feelings, actions, and speech acts (or discursive practices, 
more generally) as well as moods, habits, and mental states (or cognitive processes, 
more generally). In this way, part of what is so crucial about such affective unfold-
ings, as semiotic processes, is that they fi gure the boundaries and loci of selves in 
relation to the categories and values and, hence, the semiotic ontologies of commu-
nities. In particular, affective unfoldings emerge from semiotic ontologies (having 
them as some of their roots) and give rise to semiotic ontologies (having them as 
some of their fruits). More generally, ontology, affect, and selfhood are concomi-
tant processes, and so attempts to understand any of them without reference to the 
others are doomed (Kockelman 2011a). 
 Note, then, that while emotion is often understood as a feeling (for example, 
affective interpretants in the strict sense), affective unfoldings are semiotic processes 
whose interpretant components may be very wide ranging. Note that no one compo-
nent (of these semiotic processes) is an emotion; rather, any affective unfolding may 
involve all of them, with different degrees of elaboration. Note that while emotion 
is sometimes understood as a relatively singular event, or a relatively rare process, 
there is probably no interpretant that does not partake of affective unfoldings to 
some degree. Note that while emotions are often understood as reactions, affective 
unfoldings are semiotic processes and, hence, involve signs as much as interpretants. 
Thus, they have roots as much as fruits and, hence, are causes as much as effects. 
Note that while emotion is often understood as passive or uncontrolled, many of 
the possible interpretants within affective unfoldings may involve highly agentive 
processes. Note that while emotion is often understood as a relatively private or 
subjective process, affective unfoldings are inherently semiotic, and usually highly 
intersubjective (if only through the internalization of others’ interpretants, through 
the third dimension of practical agency: commitment). And note that while emo-
tion is often understood as a kind of mediating propensity that is relatively immedi-
ate (i.e., certain roots lead to certain fruits with minimal buffering by stereotypically 
cognitive processes), this may be more or less true of affective unfoldings, depend-
ing on the kind of unfolding as well as the components in question. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   181
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   181
7/23/2012   9:27:11 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:11 PM

 182 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
 That said, as semiotic processes, affective unfoldings may themselves constitute 
the objects of other signs—in particular, relatively propositional signs that may refer to 
them (as objects) and ascribe them to self and others (as emotional states). For exam-
ple, as was argued in chapter 5, for the case of mental states more generally, not only 
do we have representations such as “Paul was frightened by the sound of the gun” and 
“that disgusts me,” but we also have representations such as “fear is an emotion” and 
“emotions are mental states.” In this way, any component within an affective unfold-
ing, and the entire unfolding itself, may have propositional contents conferred upon it 
insofar as it may itself be the object of a representational sign. Affective unfoldings are 
mediated by representations of the world as much as by residence in the world. 
 Concomitantly, such propositional contents and, hence, the referents of such 
representations can get caught up in all the modes of ontology and epistemology 
that intentionality is subject to more generally: empirical observations, theoreti-
cal representations, and practical interventions. In this realm, affective unfoldings 
may be subject to inculcation, extirpation, and analysis as much as medicalization, 
experimentation, and divination. And these propositional contents, and the infer-
ential articulation, conceptual structuring, and metaphoric elaboration they entail, 
may have the effect of reifying affective unfoldings as “emotions,” and thereby elid-
ing their contextual grounding, semiotic mediation, sociohistorical elaboration, 
(inter)subjective coherence, personal stakes, and so forth. 
 To return to some of the issues discussed in chapter 5, for example, affective 
unfoldings are implicated in  epistemic formations —thereby becoming the subject mat-
ter of empirical investigations (what we observe), theoretical representations (how 
we theorize what we observe), and practical interventions (how we act on what we 
observe as a function of our theories). Here is where affective unfoldings get caught 
up in discursive practices and disciplinary regimes that treat them as “emotions.” Such 
practices and regimes are legion: from psychoanalysis to the DSM IV’s attempts to 
standardize the diagnostic criteria for mental illnesses, from self-help guides to paren-
tal wisdom concerning how to soothe the feelings of a distraught child. 
 Indeed, our very understanding of affective unfoldings in terms of emotion, 
with all the logical implications this entails and all the stereotypic properties this 
invokes (such as being relatively uncontrolled, embodied, subjective, natural, cross-
species, pan-cultural, feminine, animal-like, etc.), is in some sense the product of 
our own discursive regimes—be they grounded in lay or expert ontologies, be these 
mediated by scientifi c or everyday epistemologies. This is another site where affect 
is mediated by semiotic processes, backed by potentially powerful institutions, and 
borne by pervasive infrastructures that can enclose them as much as disclose them. 
 AFFECT AS RELATIVELY UNCONTROLLED AND 
UNMEDIATED SEMIOTIC PROCESSES 
 These caveats notwithstanding, given all the ways in which affective unfoldings 
are similar to other intentional processes, we may ask why emotion is so often 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   182
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   182
7/23/2012   9:27:11 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:11 PM

 
Selfhood, Affect, and Value 
183 
contrasted with cognition (in psychological theory as much as folk psychology) 
or why affect deserves a section all to itself (immediately after a chapter on inten-
tionality). One reason, as argued by Griffi ths (1997; and see Averill 1985), is simply 
that stereotypically affective semiotic processes seem to be relatively uncontrolled 
and unmediated in comparison to stereotypically cognitive processes (in particular, 
intentional acts and reasoning more generally). 5 
 Or, phrased in terms of the analytic categories introduced here, the semiotic 
processes underlying affective unfoldings are, relatively speaking, less inferential and 
more indexical, less fl exible and more rigid, less intersubjective and more subjective, 
less displaced and more context-bound, less symbolic and more gestural, and so 
forth.  6 It is probably for these reasons that emotions are often theorized to function 
as buffers, or preconscious reactions to common kinds of situations, allowing the 
self to protect itself without wasting precious time reasoning. And it is probably for 
these reasons that emotions, in the reifi ed sense discussed above, may be so easily 
ontologized as natural, pre-rational, pan-cultural, and cross-species. 7   In all of these 
ways, then, affective unfoldings may often seem to be more like seconds than thirds. 
 As a function of these properties, and in terms of practical agency, the semiotic 
processes that constitute affective unfoldings, or at least some of their components,  8 
may thus be framed as relatively diffi cult to control (as to when and where they are 
expressed), relatively diffi cult to compose (as to what sign is expressed and what it 
stands for), and relatively diffi cult to commit to (as to what effect the sign-object 
relation will have when expressed in such a time and place). Concomitantly, they 
may be understood as more likely to reveal an authentic self (for they are less ame-
nable to censure). And one may be accorded less responsibility for their repercus-
sions (as they are less likely to be “intended”). 9 
 Indeed, this last point may often be the central point for human-specifi c affec-
tive unfoldings: while these may have as their roots some fl ourishing or foundering 
of the self-as-ensemble, as that which one cares about and is accountable for, they 
may have as their fruits repercussions that one is not held accountable for. And it is 
perhaps this very invitation (or demand) to slip out of reason and responsibility—
if only for a moment—that makes them such a powerful and seductive mode-of-
meaning-in-the-world. 
 4.  Maps, Terrains, and Travelers 
 In this section and the next we return to the promissory note that was offered in chap-
ter 4 at the end of the section on fulfi lling identities. In particular, this section unfolds 
the critical and conceptual implications of a particular metaphor—theorizing value in 
terms of the relation between maps, terrains, and travelers. As will be seen, a terrain 
turns on social statuses, mental states, and material substances (or, more generally, on 
any sort of kind that could help constitute an identity). A map fi gures such a terrain 
in terms of differentially weighted origins, paths, and destinations. And the traveler’s 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   183
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   183
7/23/2012   9:27:11 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:11 PM

 184 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
interpretations of such a map are equivalent to charting a course through such a ter-
rain. In section 5, this metaphor is then used to reframe various evaluative techniques 
by which we weigh the relative desirability of possible paths through a given terrain—
from instrumental values (turning on graded and contoured landscapes) to existen-
tial values (turning on stereotypic and prototypic paths). Broadly speaking, then, this 
framing of value is used to theorize the relation between selfhood, agency, and identity. 
And it may itself be understood as one possible way of ontologizing personhood. 
 Understood another way, these sections may also be understood as theorizing 
the temporal unfolding of selfhood. In particular, as a sign-event may be framed as 
establishing a  present , with a past and future, a signer may be framed as establishing 
a  presence , with a history and fate. Indeed, the life, biography, or  bios  of a signer 
may often be understood as the chaining together of such presences (into a fi nite 
length), which itself is located between two absences (of infi nite extent). From this 
perspective, then, we may focus on the signer’s presence as an ensemble of relatively 
coherent kinds (such as social statuses, mental states, and material substances), 
where this ensemble is simultaneously the transformative fruits of prior sign events 
that have led to it and the transformative roots for subsequent sign-events that will 
follow from it. And just as one may examine the kinds that constitute a signer’s 
identity at any moment, one may examine its changing kinds across moments—
providing each of its moments with “momentum” and, thereby, often projecting 
onto its multiple and fl eeting presences something that is sometimes enclosed as 
a unifi ed and enduring “essence.” In particular, as it unfolds over time,  selfhood as 
temporality  may be understood as a sort of movement through an abstract space 
of the kinds that can constitute an identity, and thus a movement through a space 
of social statuses, mental states, and material substances that once belonged to the 
signer, now belong to the signer, and will belong to the signer. (Where such modes 
of belonging [units of accountability or self-as-ensembles] may be more or less rec-
ognized and regimented by self, alters, and others; where such kinds are constituted 
by indices, interpretations, and ontologies; where such transformations may involve 
all the kinds of transformativity discussed in chapter 3; and where such kinds, and 
ontologies more generally, are subject to all of the caveats outlined in chapter 1. 10 ) 
 TOPOGRAPHIES EMBODIED AND EMBEDDED 
 To understand the nature of value, one must understand the relation between maps, 
terrains, and travelers.  11   As used here, a  terrain  is not a physical space, but a meaning-
ful space—one that turns on projected propensities to signify, objectify, and inter-
pret in particular ways (or various kinds more generally). More concretely, it may 
often be fi gured as a space of social statuses, mental states, and material substances 
that could be inhabited, held, or incorporated: an ensemble of possible mediations 
between selves and others, minds and worlds, organisms and environments. A  map 
is an understanding of, or set of ontological assumptions regarding, what are the 
places in, and paths through, such a terrain. Such assumptions may be tacit, such 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   184
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   184
7/23/2012   9:27:11 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:11 PM

 
Selfhood, Affect, and Value 
185 
as an embodied topography; they may be explicit, such as a mental map; or they 
may even be enclosed and objectifi ed, such as a bound atlas. Indeed, given the ways 
incorporation, complementation, and creation were defi ned in chapter 4, maps are 
usually not so much embodied as embedded:  the terrain is its own best map . And 
a  traveler is some kind of self-mind-organism situated in such a terrain: someone 
who inhabits a set of social statuses, holds a set of mental states, and incorporates 
a set of material substances; someone who semiotically and socially relates as a self 
to others and as a mind to world and as an organism to an environment; someone 
who may both orient the map relative to the terrain (via the existential equivalent 
of a compass) and orient itself relative to the map (via the existential equivalent of 
a you-are-here spot). In short, the map is equivalent to a sign, the terrain is equiv-
alent to the object stood for by that sign, and the traveler is equivalent to the one 
who interprets the map by moving through the terrain. 
 To talk about embodied and embedded topographies (not to mention mental 
maps and bound atlases, as their relatively explicit and enclosed equivalents) is to 
project certain features onto terrains. For example, if by  place we mean a particular 
set of social statuses, mental states, and material substances that could more or less 
simultaneously constitute a self-as-ensemble (in this terrain), there are  landmarks , 
or particularly salient and well-known places that other places, as positions in the 
terrain, are oriented relative to. Places themselves may sometimes be framed as 
 origins (where one sets out from),  destinations  (where one sets out to), and  paths 
(how one moves from origin to destination—usually relatively well-marked and 
often-trod ways of going from one place to another). In short, any place within 
this terrain should be understood as an ensemble of social statuses (or relations), 
mental states (or representations), and material substances (or processes). And any 
movement through this space, by moving between places  via ontological transforma-
tions , changes one or more of one’s social statuses, mental states, or material sub-
stances—and thus transforms the kinds of relations, representations, and processes 
that are assumed to constitute one (given a particular ontology). 12 
 The terrain that such a map delimits is potentially a very complex space—
having an infi nite number of dimensions, including a temporal vector. For exam-
ple, any person can potentially place themself in this space by reference to their 
current social statuses, mental states, and material substances. For example, all the 
social relations in which one is currently implicated: father, friend, husband, citi-
zen, employee, university alum, fi rst-baseman, speaker, addressee, buyer, seller, etc. 
All the different cognitive representations and affective unfoldings that one is cur-
rently holding or experiencing: beliefs, memories, desires, perceptions, intentions, 
plans, fears, shames, joys, sorrows, etc. And all the different biosemiotic and tech-
nocognitive affordances and instruments that constitute one via relations such as 
incorporation, creation, and complementation: body parts (big and small), cells 
and secretions, bones and bile, prosthetics and clothes, eyeglasses and earrings, pos-
sessions and physical position, warts and scars, exuvia and effl uvia, cancers and 
chromosomes, etc. Not only can one locate oneself on this map (only to a certain 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   185
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   185
7/23/2012   9:27:12 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:12 PM

 186 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
degree, needless to say, for self-knowledge is imperfect), but one can also potentially 
locate the positions of others (perhaps better than one can locate oneself). Not 
only can one locate one’s current position, but also one can potentially remember 
one’s past position and plan one’s future position—noting the paths that links these 
origins and destinations. And not only can one locate oneself and others on this 
map (where do we stand having taken stock of ourselves, where have we stood, and 
where will we stand), but one can also potentially map out the general layout of the 
terrain itself (where could one potentially stand in such a space). 
 Crucially, such a map indicates preferred and dispreferred places, or worthy and 
unworthy positions—where this indication, as will be discussed below, is sometimes 
direct and sometimes indirect, sometimes transparent and sometimes opaque, some-
times concrete and sometimes metaphoric. These are the social, cognitive, and mate-
rial equivalents of oases and deserts, sweet spots and dead ends. Loosely speaking, 
and thus framed in a way that will be partially overturned in what follows, places have 
something akin to primary and secondary properties: ontologies mediate not just what 
is the projected propensity (qua “power” or “patterning”) that constitutes a particular 
social status, mental state, or material substance, but also whether or not one would 
like to inhabit such a social status, hold such a mental state, or embody such a mate-
rial substance (given its propensity). For example, one does not just have a sense (in 
Vico’s sense) of what it would be like to be a plumber or a mother, but also a sense of 
whether one would like to be a plumber or a mother. One does not just have a sense 
of what it would be like to desire men or believe in god, but also a sense of whether 
one would like to have such a desire or hold such a belief. And one does not just have 
a sense of what it would be like to be thirsty or fast, but also a sense of whether one 
would like to experience such a feeling or have such a trait. In other words, given a set 
of paths and destinations available from some particular origin, one has a sense of not 
only where one could go, but also whether one would like to get there. How exactly 
such evaluation works will be the subject of the next several sections.  
 VALUE IS LIFE UNDER AN INTERPRETATION 
 If a map delimits the relative desirability of places in, and paths through, a terrain 
of social relations, cognitive representations, and material processes, and if a trav-
eler interprets the map by taking particular paths through, and occupying particular 
places in, the terrain, then their actual travels (including mere stasis) constitute an 
interpretant of the map (as a sign) insofar as it stands for the terrain (as an object). 
In other words, just as I know something about the question you were asked (qua 
sign) by your answer to it (qua interpretant), I know something about your map of 
a terrain by your travels through it. In short, as we saw in chapter 4, just as an inten-
tion may sometimes be understood as an “action under a description” (Anscombe 
1957), we might think of value as life under an interpretation: each of our life paths 
may be examined as the best evidence for the values we were following (or of our 
own ontologies of the terrains through which we were traveling). 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   186
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   186
7/23/2012   9:27:12 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:12 PM

 
Selfhood, Affect, and Value 
187 
 While there are many emblematic identities, many relatively public and unam-
biguous indices of one’s values—from self-ascriptions such as “I am a Christian” 
to bodily techniques such as dietary restrictions—nothing beats life itself. In some 
sense, biography and ethnography are precisely attempts—however misguided, 
naive, or romantic—to get such a view of the entire life of another person or the 
entire life-world of another culture (compare Arendt 1998 [1958]). They usually 
strive to be our most explicit and accurate pictures of the maps travelers were fol-
lowing through some particular terrain. However, at least in the case of biogra-
phy, such narrative-enabled meaningfulness doesn’t come without its own streak of 
meanness: for one usually does not get enough critical distance to enclose a life until 
that life has come to a close. 
 Questions about the nature and origins of maps usually presume a commun-
ity of travelers with a history, one whose members can both question and be called 
into question, can act or be acted on: a public or polis, culture or country, nation 
or ethnicity, institution or interaction. And just as an individual biography may be 
understood as a path through a space of social relations, cognitive representations, 
and material processes, so too may a collective history. In this way, not only can 
narratives of the self, but also national histories and chronotopes more generally 
give meaning to changes in (collectively imagined) social statuses, mental states, and 
material substances by tracking paths through this terrain or establishing a terrain 
for one’s paths (compare Bakhtin 1981, 1990). We were tinkers and tailors, and 
now we are offi cers and gentlemen. We were slaves and now we are citizens. Once 
we worshiped a golden calf, now we believe in an invisible man. In having turned 
the other cheek, we now live hand to mouth. Once we were warriors, and now we 
are drunk and on the dole. Once upon a time (say, during the Pleistocene), we were 
nasty, brutish, and short, but now we are tall, intelligent, and charitable. 
 In some sense, cultural translation, or the calibration of values, is really a way of 
comparing the maps of any two such collectivities. In this regard, one nice feature of 
this metaphor is it allows us to describe different  types of incommensurability : any two 
travelers (or collectivities traveling together) may have different maps, may be placed 
differently relative to the same map, may place the map differently relative to the same 
terrain, or may have different terrains to map. Indeed, a deep sense of shared identity 
between any individuals is the consciously contrastive commonality (recall our defi ni-
tion of culture from chapter 3) that comes with orienting by means of the same map, 
no matter how differently the two travelers are placed relative to the terrain. 
 In short, a map allows travelers to track their movements through such a ter-
rain (as well as the movements of real and imaginary others): from origins along 
paths to destinations—winding their way through preferred and dispreferred places, 
or worthy and unworthy social statuses, mental states and material substances. To 
say a map projects a set of values, or enables evaluation, is to say that, by indicating 
something akin to the secondary properties of places, a map allows a traveler to 
weigh the relative desirability of different positions in, and paths through, the same 
terrain. And from an observer’s perspective, biography and ethnography are often 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   187
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   187
7/23/2012   9:27:12 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:12 PM

 188 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
forms of abduction or hypothesis: if the values followed were like this, then the path 
taken or pattern evinced would make sense. 
 ESSENTIAL INCOHERENCE OF MAPS 
 A perfectly functioning or ideal map should allow one just enough of a vantage to 
give a positive or negative valence to each and every change in social status, mental 
state, or material substance.  But nothing is ideal . And maps are just as much inco-
herent as they are coherent, just as likely to malfunction as to function, just as often 
the victim of parasites as the champion of purposes. Indeed, just as in map-making 
more generally, the process leading to a map can go awry, or still be under con-
struction. For example, blank spots may be in the map: sections of space in which 
places and paths, perils and succors, are not yet mapped. Inconsistencies may be in 
the framework: circular paths, whose destination is their origin; paths that inexpli-
cably cross; places that are both pleasureful and painful. Obscure conventions may 
be used on the map: what’s a worthy and unworthy place may be up for debate. The 
map may stand for no actual terrain, or it may be based on faulty information, or 
the world may have changed in important ways since the framework was made. 
Indeed, the map one might articulate, or make explicit, might not conform to the 
topology one embodies or in which one is embedded. And different people, even if 
often in conversation with each other, or the same person at different moments, may 
have contradictory maps of the same terrain. 
 More insidiously, the map may not be in error, but the way of orientating with 
it may be erroneous. Thus, one may be “lost” in many different senses: One can 
lose sense of what the map stands for, one can lose sense of how the map is placed 
(relative to the terrain), and the traveler can lose sense of where they stand (rel-
ative to the map). Indeed, there are different modes of  semiotic compensation , or 
principles of explanation and justifi cation, whenever something goes awry in these 
ways: We may assume that the map is incoherent; we may assume that the terri-
tory is uncharted; we may assume that the travelers are incompetent. Judging the 
effectiveness of any interpretation of a “great book”—say, in alchemy, law, psy-
choanalysis, political economy, critical theory, or religion—often turns on exactly 
this mode of compensation. Much of the  work of narrative , from autobiography 
to national history, from editing to exegesis, is making jumps across maps contin-
uous, fi lling in gaps within maps, making circuitous paths straight and, perhaps 
all too often, projecting  telos  onto aimlessness, function onto failure, and purpose 
onto parasites.  
 5.  From Meaning to Value 
 Before further developing our metaphor, we need to review a few key ways of fram-
ing desire, value, preference, and choice. In particular, it is sometimes useful to 
distinguish between fi rst-order desires (or “wants”) and second-order desires (or 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   188
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   188
7/23/2012   9:27:12 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:12 PM

 
Selfhood, Affect, and Value 
189 
“preferences”). Desires are desires are desires: sometimes they are insanely com-
plicated; sometimes they are brutally simple. They have already been theorized in 
relation to action (in the guise of pro-attitudes), selfhood (in the guise of refl exive 
desire), and agents (in the guise of interests, objects, signifi cance, and selection), 
and so nothing more will be said about them here. Second-order desires, however, 
are at the heart of value. In particular, given a set of desirable things, we need a way 
to determine the relative desirability of any two things within the set. As used here, 
 values are not desires; values are a means of determining relative desirability . 13 They 
might be likened to logic underlying preferences (qua mental attitudes, or kinds) or 
a standard underlying choices (qua observable behaviors, or indices). 
 For microeconomists, the preference process is often imagined to go like this.  14 
Take a set of options. For example, whatever is available on the dessert menu: 
apple pie, ice cream, and banana pudding. Pair-wise compare all the options 
within the set, assigning one of three relations to each pair (more desirable, less 
desirable, equally desirable). For example, apple pie is more desirable than ice 
cream, banana pudding is less desirable than apple pie, and ice cream and banana 
pudding are equally desirable. Given such a set of relations, choose the most desir-
able option out of the set of available options. For example, “I’ll have the apple 
pie, please.” By determining relative desirability, values can establish preferences 
over a set, and, once such preferences are established, the highest ranked option 
may be chosen. 
 So what are some ways of weighing relative desirability, such that preferences 
over a set may be determined? The most famous one underlies utility functions: 
map a domain of options onto a range of numbers, such that preference relations 
may be framed in terms of relative magnitudes or ordinal rankings. For example, 
if one knows the calorie content of each dessert on the menu, and if one is try-
ing to maximize the calories one consumes, one may treat the numerical relation 
“greater than” (>) as the preference relation “more desirable than,” and so on for 
“less than” (<) and “equal to” (=). Thus, one fi nds apple pie more desirable than the 
other options because it has more calories than the other options (all other things 
being equal). Other relative magnitudes onto which preferences relations within 
this domain may be mapped include price, protein, chocolate to carbohydrate ratio, 
saturated fat, and so on. 
 Weber would call such utility-based evaluative techniques  instrumentally 
rational . 15 For domains other than dessert menus, the instrumental values under-
lying preferences may be tied to price, effi ciency, time, energy, volume, probability, 
profi t, relations between these, and so forth. Crucially, a great amount of work goes 
into making any domain amenable to instrumentally rational values—and, indeed, 
into simply “making a domain.” We need standardized numbers (three dozen, 
two giga-), standardized units (bushel, byte) and standardized substances (wheat, 
information). And we need a single dimension, or weighted set of dimensions, rel-
ative to which such a domain of standardized options may be mapped so that rel-
ative magnitudes along this dimension may be treated as preference relations. For 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   189
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   189
7/23/2012   9:27:12 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:12 PM

 190 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
example, not only do we need to agree on what calories are, and how to measure 
them, but we also need to have measured how many calories each of our options 
has. But once we have such standards and dimensions (not to mention the institu-
tions, infrastructure, and ontologies that back them), any set of options is easily 
enough managed such that an automaton can choose for us. 
 INSTRUMENTAL VALUES AS GRADIENTS AND CONTOURS 
 So how does this understanding of instrumental values relate to maps, terrains, and 
travelers? To say a map projects a set of values, or enables evaluation, is to say that 
a map allows a traveler to weigh the relative desirability of different places in, and 
different paths through, the same terrain (where a place, recall, may be framed as a 
more or less simultaneously available ensemble of social statuses, mental states, and 
material substances [or kinds more generally]). In particular, given an origin, which 
enables a set of paths to a set of destinations, a map should allow one to compare 
any two paths (qua means) or any two destinations (qua ends), and rate one relative 
to the other as more desirable, less desirable, or equally desirable. 
 For example, suppose a traveler is at a particular place (qua origin) within a 
terrain that is suitably standardized and dimensionalized. Then the relative desira-
bility of possible destinations may be determined by a utility function: in physical 
space, which bar has the strongest martini, or, in social space, which trade has the 
highest pay. And, once the most desired destination is chosen, the relative desirabil-
ity of possible paths to that destination may be determined by a utility function: in 
real space, which route is the fastest, or, in social space, whose apprenticeship is the 
shortest. 16 In other words, if the terrain to be navigated is amenable to an instru-
mentally rational mapping, then  the so-called secondary properties of places might 
be reduced to the multidimensional equivalent of gradients and contours : any two 
places on the same contour are equally desirable, any place on a higher contour is 
more desirable, and any place on a lower contour is less desirable. Life would con-
sist of trying to climb as high as one can (budget permitting). 
 While this vision of life may seem a long way from social relations and cogni-
tive representations, it should be remembered that property rights are just a certain 
kind of social status. To own a use-value (say, a pair of shoes) or an exchange-value 
(say, $5.00) is to have rights to (and often responsibilities for) the item in question. 
That is, to inhabit such a property status, by having such a possession, is to have 
a say in (or a good deal of practical agency over) how such a use-value is used or 
what such an exchange-value is exchanged for. In some sense, then, whenever one 
is confronted with a set of options (of the instrumental kind just described—from 
dessert menus to mutual funds), what one is really opting for is one transforma-
tion of social statuses over another: whether to give up one’s use-rights to $5.00 
in exchange for use-rights to banana pudding or use-rights to apple pie. In other 
words, any domain of options, no matter how instrumentally rational, is actually 
a domain of social relations: one does not so much acquire the item of possession 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   190
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   190
7/23/2012   9:27:12 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:12 PM

 
Selfhood, Affect, and Value 
191 
itself as one acquires others’ recognition of one’s rights to, and responsibilities for, 
the object in question (Kockelman 2006a, 2007c). 
 Crucially, in the case of exchange-values, the rights and responsibilities in 
question are relatively abstract and quantifi ed. They are abstract in the sense that 
my property right to an exchange-value of $5.00 may be transformed into a prop-
erty right to any use-value currently on the market that has such an exchange-value. 
And they are quantifi able in the sense that your property right to an exchange-value 
of $25.00 provides you with fi ve times the abstract right as my property right to an 
exchange-value of $5.00. It is precisely these properties of abstraction and quantifi -
cation that allow such social relations, qua property statuses, to be treated in terms 
of standards and dimensions (or perhaps vice versa). 
 Moreover, an economic transaction is very similar in function to a performa-
tive utterance as stereotypically conceived (recall our discussion in chapter 3): the 
participants must already hold certain social statuses (qua property rights) for the 
transaction to be appropriate, and the participants must come to hold certain social 
statuses (qua property rights) for the transaction to be effective. One gives up (oth-
ers’ recognition of) one’s right to $5.00 at the same time one acquires (others’ recog-
nition of) a right to banana pudding. And one does this using more or less explicit 
signs: from pointing to an item on a dessert menu to raising one’s hand at an auc-
tion, from bringing a grocery cart up to the check-out counter to clicking on a “pur-
chase item” icon. (Needless to say, other sorts of kinds are also being transformed 
in economic transactions, and often more importantly so. And the other kinds of 
ontological transformativity are also at play in economic transactions, and not just 
performativity in the stereotypic sense.) 
 In short, it is relatively easy to treat the circulation of use-values and 
exchange-values in terms of meaning, qua intersubjectively recognized trans-
formations of kinds, and thus to frame instrumentally rational techniques of 
evaluation in terms of social relations and semiotic processes. Indeed, one can 
easily imagine a mapping—very much like a  market —in which all the impor-
tant positions in a particular terrain are reduced to, or enclosed as, property 
statuses: abstract and quantifi ed rights and responsibilities to use or exchange 
various items of possession, with movements through the terrain being effected 
by economic transactions and with each item’s value emblematized with that fl ag 
of fl ags—the price tag. 
 Finally, just as social relations may be instrumentally rational, so may cogni-
tive representations: we can assess exactly how much one should desire something 
(usually via price) and exactly how much one should believe something (usually via 
probability). And the two of these together, in the sense of expected utility (a sum 
over the products of price and probability), allow one to make decisions. When the 
terrain is unknown or unstable, this may be the best way to minimize the risk of 
one’s travels. The trouble is, as most clearly seen by Peirce, that one gets only one 
life to make a choice, whereas such calculations are valid only when made across 
an infi nite number of lives, akin to an infi nite number of throws of a die. In other 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   191
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   191
7/23/2012   9:27:12 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:12 PM

 192 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
words, there is no better example of the  single case objection than life itself, a die we 
each get to roll (or rather “role”) only once. 17 
 HOMO-ECONOMICUS, INSTRUMENTAL VALUES, AND THE SELF-AS-ENSEMBLE 
(A BRIEF ASIDE) 
 In short, rather than focus on the circulation of items of possession, one may focus 
on the transformation of statuses of possessors (Kockelman 2007c). Analogously, 
rather than focus on what Marx called the “social circulation of matter” (1967 
[1867]:106), one may focus on the material circulation of sociality. In any case, as 
articulated in chapter 2, the two are intrinsically linked in Marx’s general sense of 
value as a relation between people (i.e., statuses of possessors) mediated by a rela-
tion between things (i.e., items of possession). To focus on one or the other is essen-
tially a question of framing. 
 That said, as was the case with linguistic performativity, one cannot understand 
economic transactions without reference to more or less intersubjectively recognized 
and regimenting interpretants. More generally, to understand value, one needs to 
take into account all the other relations between relations discussed in chapter 2, 
not just the kind foregrounded by Marx and Aristotle (or Veblen and Saussure). 
For this reason, it is worth returning to William James, who understood the self as 
an ensemble of all that one may (or must) call one’s own. Or, as it was retheorized 
in section 1, the self may sometimes be framed as an ensemble of social statuses, 
mental states, and material substances (or kinds more generally), the indices that 
evince them (which include items of possession), and the interpretants (by selves, 
others, and alters) that recognize and regiment them. Crucially, such an ensemble 
of semiotic processes is more or less refl exively coherent: just as desires are directed 
toward expanding the self and staving off its contraction (or, more generally, caring 
for the ensemble’s constituents), affective unfoldings are the embodied register of 
this expansion and contraction (or, more generally, key indices of the vicissitudes 
of care). In this expanded sense, then, value turns on securing the recognizing and 
regimenting interpretants of temporally, spatially, and socially distal alters (others 
and selves) toward one’s social statuses (mental states and material substances) as 
evinced in (and both caused by and causal of) one’s indices. 
 In this way, selfhood is a ground of motivation: one acts (and thereby signifi es, 
objectifi es, and interprets) both by means of (retention) and, for the sake of (pro-
tention), securing intersubjective recognition of one’s rights and responsibilities (or, 
more generally, projected propensities or “powers”) to signify, objectify, and inter-
pret. In short, and making no claims as to the proper unit of accountability, be it as 
small as the individual or as large as humanity, selfhood qua temporally unfolding 
intersubjectivity sometimes seems to be the original form of self-expanding value 
(Kockelman 2007c). Ontologized in this way, capital is akin to pure (projected) pro-
pensity, what Hobbes would have simply called “power.” 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   192
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   192
7/23/2012   9:27:13 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:13 PM

 
Selfhood, Affect, and Value 
193 
 From this perspective, one can see the tight connection between classic theo-
ries of economic value, such as those offered by Veblen, Malinowski, and Marx. 
Very roughly speaking, Veblen’s focus on pecuniary emulation (and theories of dis-
tinction more generally) foregrounded signs; Marx’s focus on capital foregrounded 
objects; and Malinowski’s focus on circulation foregrounded interpretants. While 
all of these components are necessarily coupled (in semiotic processes constituted 
by relation between relations), desires are often directed at a single component: (1) 
gaining greater and greater propensities, (2) expressing more and more emblematic 
indices of propensity, (3) securing more and more widely distributed interpretants 
of index-propensity relations. Again, quite presciently, Hobbes’s theory of power 
involved all three components as well as their interrelations. 
 FROM INSTRUMENTAL VALUES TO EXISTENTIAL VALUES 
 But evaluative techniques need not only or even usually be instrumentally rational 
(even in this last expanded sense), and so Weber theorized a wider range of evalu-
ative techniques (1978:24–25). Some are traditionally rational: the logic underlying 
our preferences makes sense for us because it made sense for those who came before 
us. I habitually order banana pudding because my father ordered it before me. Some 
are  affectively rational : our choices make sense given the fact that we were drunk 
or depressed, high or lonely, manic or sad, vengeful or horny, when we made them. 
And some are  value rational : our understanding of the relative desirability of two 
options makes sense because of some aesthetic, ethical, or religious ideal. Such 
ideals make unconditional demands on us, and we value them for their own sake, 
independently of our prospects for success. Weber’s description of this last type is 
worth quoting at length:
  Examples of pure value-rational orientation would be the actions of persons 
who, regardless of possible costs to themselves, act to put into practice their 
convictions of what seems to them to be required by duty, honor, the pursuit 
of beauty, a religious call, personal loyalty, or the importance of some “cause” 
no matter in what it consists (1978:25). 
 Each of these four evaluative techniques was an ideal type for Weber. Any 
actual decision, any interactionally or sociohistorically contextualized choice, may 
involve aspects of each of them. And any actual person may use all of these at dif-
ferent points in life, or in different domains of choice. In some sense, then, our maps 
are really  existentially rational : not only allowing for a range of evaluative tech-
niques (such as Weber’s big four), but even delimiting those regions within a terrain 
in which one technique is more appropriate than another. For example, regions 
to which instrumental rationality is restricted, regions in which we should let our 
hearts lead us rather than our minds, and regions in which ingrained habit is the 
best guide. Moreover, any of the other techniques may become value-rational: we 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   193
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   193
7/23/2012   9:27:13 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:13 PM

 194 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
may consciously adhere to tradition for the sake of tradition, or we may  consciously 
pursue or follow affective experiences for their own sake. Indeed, we may even value 
calculation, and profi t maximization, as a moral course. For example, as Weber 
saw it, the Protestant ethic, as a kind of value-rationality, was in part an injunc-
tion to follow an instrumental rationality: an ethical duty to increase one’s capital 
through rational calculation. Or, to go back to Peirce, who cares what number actu-
ally comes up so long as I die knowing I made the rational choice. 
 As will be developed below, Weber’s distinction between instrumental ration-
ality and value-rationality is very similar to what Charles Taylor (1985, 1989) calls 
weak and strong evaluation. By weak evaluation, Taylor means a type of value that 
turns on the qualities of an action or its outcome—qualities such as effi ciency and 
cost. And by  strong evaluation , he means a type of value that turns on the motiva-
tion for the action or the qualities of the actor—criteria such nobility and dignity. 
As Taylor phrases it, modes of strong evaluation “involve discriminations of right 
or wrong, better or worse, higher or lower, which are not rendered valid by our own 
desires, inclinations, or choices, but rather stand independent of these and offer 
standards by which they can be judged” (ibid.:4). 
 Notwithstanding the range of evaluative techniques we have access to, it is 
only instrumental rationality that is clearly and precisely theorized. The entire disci-
pline of economics is devoted to it, and social scientists, critical theorists, and rogue 
economists of all persuasions have described its excesses and limitations as well as 
its imaginaries and contradictions. For the purposes of this chapter, and as per the 
fi rst part of this section, what is important is to show how travelers may navigate 
certain regions within a terrain by means of maps that turn on it. In contrast, exis-
tential value—and especially value-rationality—while often considered the essence 
of what it means to be human, has not received such a precise and positive formu-
lation. While it is easy to assert how important it is, and to enumerate examples of 
its content, it is very diffi cult to give an analytically precise and empirically tractable 
account of its structure and function. The rest of this section focuses on this topic.
In some sense, this entire chapter is devoted to its explication. 
 VALUE AS STEREOTYPES AND PROTOTYPES 
 In the domain of semantics, many linguists and psychologists long ago gave up 
trying to account for the meaning of words in terms of necessary and suffi cient 
conditions. 18 Thus, while one may try to defi ne the meaning of the word  water as 
H 2 O, speakers may actually represent its meaning as a stereotype, say, a colorless, 
tasteless liquid that is good to drink. Similarly, while we may try to defi ne the mean-
ing of the word  uncle as fi rst-generation, ascending, male collineal relative, speakers 
may actually represent its meaning as prototype, say, one’s beloved uncle Willie. 
To decide whether something could be the referent of the word  water , or someone 
could be the referent of the word  uncle , we see whether it has properties that are 
similar to our stereotype of water or to our prototype (or “exemplar”) of uncle. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   194
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   194
7/23/2012   9:27:13 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:13 PM

 
Selfhood, Affect, and Value 
195 
(Where, crucially, none of this is possible except in the context of a larger “theory” 
as to the constitution of the kinds in question, or, as we would say, in the context 
of an  ontology .) 
 Insofar as stereotypes and prototypes have many properties, and insofar as 
most of these properties are diffi cult to quantify, unitize, and standardize, the sim-
ilarity metric we use to decide which of two things is more like water, or which of 
two people is more like an uncle, is quite unlike the utility metric we (allegedly) use 
to decide which of two options is more desirable. Thus, while we may be able to say 
whether one thing is more or less colorless or more or less tasteless than another, 
it is diffi cult to say how much more colorless or how much more tasteless it is. And 
while we may be able to say whether one man is more like our beloved uncle Willie 
than another, it is diffi cult to say how much more like our uncle he is.  19 Moreover, 
in different contexts, we may weight one property more than another in making our 
decision: when we have a cold, tastelessness is not as good a measure as colorless-
ness; when it is dark, colorlessness is not as good a measure as tastelessness; and 
so on. In short, if meaning turns on stereotypes and prototypes, relative similarity 
judgments should be qualitative (more or less, but not how much more or how 
much less), multidimensional (more or less colorless, more or less tasteless, more or 
less good to drink, etc.), contextual (under some conditions more, under other con-
ditions less), and ontological (grounded in broader understandings of the natures, 
and second natures, of the kinds in question). 
 To get back to the concerns of this chapter, then, a key claim is this:  one deter-
mines the relative desirability of possible paths through a given terrain by comparing 
them to a set of stereotypic or prototypic paths . Such paths may be long: what is 
the entire life-path of a righteous man. Such paths may be short: what would a 
righteous man do when faced with some particular decision. Such paths may be 
prototypic: our sense of the life-choices made by some particular, and particularly 
memorable, individual (with whom we “identity”). Such paths may be stereotypic: 
a melding together in our minds of the paths of different relatively righteous indi-
viduals. Depending on our current position (as an origin), and our current purview 
(as to frame or scale), we may use different stereotypes and prototypes to determine 
which path to take and which destination to get to. 
 Moreover, our stereotypes and prototypes are often grounded in decisions 
made in radically different terrains. For example, the world my father lived in, and 
thus the terrain through which he traveled, may be more or less like my own. And 
thus the best model for my current actions may not be how my father handled him-
self during the boom, but how my grandfather handled himself during the bust. 
That is, not only do we have to decide which of two paths is more like the stereotype 
or prototype, but we also have to decide which of two stereotypes or prototypes is 
most germane to this terrain. 
 To be sure, the models we use, the stereotypes and prototypes we deploy, spread, 
surface and stabilize via social, semiotic, and material processes, themselves turning 
on selection and signifi cance as much as sieving and serendipity. Our models may be 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   195
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   195
7/23/2012   9:27:13 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:13 PM

 196 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
taken from relatively widespread anecdotes, stories, novels, and movies, and they may 
be adopted from relatively narrow memories or personal experiences.  To study exis-
tential rationality is to study the long-dur é  e genealogy, translation and transformation of 
stereotypes and prototypes over history and across a population, as much as the real-time 
deployment and refi nement of such models by contextually situated agents making actual 
decisions .  20 To study existential rationality is to study semiotic ontology. 
 To be sure, instrumental rationality has a very large say in enabling and con-
straining circulation: such models may be disclosed and enclosed: not just explicated 
and inculcated, but also packaged and priced. My behavior under fi re is just as likely 
to be determined by my having heard grandpa’s war stories as by my having watched 
 Saving Private Ryan . In making any decision, or passing on any model, it is never 
entirely clear whether morality or money, custom or emotion, has the upper hand. 
 In sum, our map is not so much a framework as a patchwork, not instrumental 
but existential, not monochromatic but kaleidoscopic. Depending on the immedi-
ate terrain, our position in it, and the scope of our purview, we may use different 
stereotypes and prototypes to determine the relative desirability of possible paths 
and destinations. And in deciding which path to take (relative to a stereotype or 
prototype), or which stereotype or prototype to use (relative to a terrain), we make 
judgments that are qualitative, multidimensional, contextual, and ontological. 
 Finally, it is not just the case that our maps are existential rather than instrumental 
(the former including the latter as a special case), but that the instrumental parts are 
themselves grounded in stereotypes and prototypes—but now of numbers, units, and 
utilities (be it three bushels of wheat  or three euros of money ), as well as the trans-
actional frames and equivalence scales for converting these . In short, “values” are no 
less mediated by semiotic ontologies than “categories.” 
 AGENCY AND VALUE 
 Within the confi nes of the ongoing metaphor—value as a relation between maps, 
terrains, and travelers—we may inquire into the relation between value and agency. 
As defi ned in chapter 3, agency itself may be broadly understood in terms of fl ex-
ibility and accountability. Loosely speaking, and with many caveats, the more we 
have a say in what ends we vie for, and what means we vie with, the more agency we 
have. And, the greater our agency over an action, object, or event, the greater our 
accountability for that action, object, or event. The values underlying an identity are 
thereby important because, by guiding our actions, they enable and constrain our 
agency. We have so far been focused on how maps enable agency (loosely speaking, 
they give us a means to make choices or, more broadly, constitute one of the grounds 
of our practical and theoretical agency). We may now inquire into our agency over 
maps (loosely speaking, what choice do we have over our means of making choices 
or, more broadly, what agency do we have over the grounds of our agency). 
 To begin to answer this question, we may reframe some of the concerns of 
Francis Bacon (as they were introduced in chapter 3): if the task of power is to 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   196
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   196
7/23/2012   9:27:13 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:13 PM

 
Selfhood, Affect, and Value 
197 
superinduce on a given individual or collectivity a new existential mapping (or 
ontology more generally), the task of knowledge is to fi nd for a given existential 
mapping (or ontology more generally) the source of its coming-to-be. In the limited 
sense in which it is being used here, then, power turns on the design and creation of 
a map, and knowledge turns on the explication and interpretation of a map.  21 While 
these are separated here, it should be emphasized that knowledge and power, as two 
modes of agency, go hand in hand: our ability to “gauge” our paths is concomitant 
with our ability to “guide” our paths. 
 The more power one has, in this sense, the more one is able to determine the 
means by which one weighs relative desirability. In certain cases, this may have 
minor effects: one may use either price or time for the dimension; one may use one’s 
uncle Willie or one’s aunt Mary for the prototype. In other cases, this may have 
major effects: one may use instrumental or existential reasoning in some region; 
one may use Christianity or Scientology as one’s map. Indeed, once a set of maps 
exists—an enormous number of distinct religious texts, philosophical viewpoints, 
famous biographies, and historical personages (not to mention an endless number 
of idiosyncratic mishmashes and mash ups of stereotypes and prototypes)—we can 
inquire into one’s agency over the map at issue. Have we accepted the fi rst map 
we were offered? Do we mix and match one part of our map from this source and 
another from that source? Or did we invent the map wholesale? 
 The more knowledge one has, in this sense, the more one is able to articulate, 
or make public and unambiguous, the values underlying an identity. Part of the 
issue is to bring an embodied or embedded topography into relief, so that it may be 
treated as a mental map or even as a canonical text—or, at the very least, to describe 
one or more stereotypes and prototypes. And part of the issue is to be able to 
articulate where the values came from, historically, or why we should follow them, 
rationally. Stereotypically, this may involve disclosing values in a public setting, 
arguing for them, and communicating such values and arguments to others. More 
likely, it may involve telling stories in which models of action are animated and 
voiced. Such a process is not at all trivial: while such values are the ground of all 
interpretation, they are rarely a fi gure to be interpreted. Indeed, while meaning-in-
the-world always already embodies, and is embedded in, such a set of values, beings 
in the world barely and rarely articulate them in full form: the key to our residence 
in the world is often diffi cult to represent—partially because existential values are 
contextual, multidimensional, qualitative, and ontological. 22 
 Leading to such modes of theoretical agency may be any number of relatively 
parasitic processes. For example, think of the “life crises” that lead us to reevaluate 
our moral frameworks. Think of the “disturbances” that arise when one’s frame-
work breaks down. Think of “scientifi c” attempts to provide a framework: from 
rational-choice theory to utilitarianism. Indeed, once textualized—the semiotic 
objectifi cation of a “mental map”—frameworks have an artifi ced quality: they can 
be bought, stolen, forged, translated, mass-produced, preserved, lost, stained, and 
so forth. Indeed, just as one can inscribe the purpose of life on a grain of rice 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   197
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   197
7/23/2012   9:27:13 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:13 PM

 198 
Agent, Person, Subject, Self
(e.g., “look no further”), one can get a great price on the good life. In all of 
these ways, existential mappings, or evaluative frameworks, may be more or less 
enclosed. 
 Finally, returning to the limit of what we can choose or articulate, there is what 
Taylor has called “radical choice” (1985)—the question of whether we could choose 
not to have any values at all, or whether we could describe the path taken by such 
a traveler. 23 Most attempts to do this—nihilism being the most famous example—
are easily shown to be grounded in some value—and so don’t really count. Indeed, 
Taylor has not only argued that to have contradictory or fl eeting values is to have 
no character, he has also argued that to have no values at all is not to be human. 
 However, many famous fi gures from literature approach this limit, and this 
is precisely the quality that makes them compelling: Ulrich in Musil’s  The Man 
Without Qualities, Meursault in Camus’  The Stranger, Bartleby in Melville’s  Bartleby 
the Schrivener, Michael K in Coetzee’s  The Life and Times of Michael K , and so on. 
Most of these characters, however, never actually choose not to have values, they 
were just odd, marginal, or pathological enough to have never really had values in 
the fi rst place. Thus, it is not that they were so agentive that they choose not to have 
agency; rather, it is that they were so defective that they were never really agents 
originally: not really fl exible, not so accountable. To take a phrase from Plato, we 
might characterize such a being as  tribeless, lawless, and hearthless . To borrow a 
metaphor from Aristotle, such a being might be compared to  an isolated piece at 
draughts . 
 Radical agency is therefore a limit case—the case of a being who is agentive 
enough to have given up its own agency. Suicide—in the sense of killing one’s  bios 
rather than killing one’s  zoe , or tearing away one’s map and thereby rendering track-
less and nontrackable a terrain—may be its only real instantiation. 
 MAPS ARE PATCHWORKS RATHER THAN FRAMEWORKS 
 While one might be tempted to think that the overarching metaphor of these last 
two sections is forced, inapt, or overblown, consider Dante as the topographer of 
heaven, purgatory, and hell—providing later generations with a physical map, or 
textual artifact, of where various paths through a space of mental states, social 
statuses, and material substances may lead. For example, where exactly is the fi nal 
destination of the path taken by misers, gluttons, lovers, heroes, poets, liars, her-
etics, lepers, syphilitics, and politicians. To this day one could still plan one’s life by 
following Dante’s poem—though one would have to reframe its relation to modern 
terrains. 24 
 More generally, most great works of art, philosophy, religion, law, and fi ction 
provide such a framework. For example, one can meaningfully orient oneself in 
a world using Leopold Bloom’s day in Dublin or de Sade’s 101 Days of Sodom, 
Beowulf’s battles or Ulysses’ journeys, the autobiography of either Gandhi or 
Malcolm X, Saint-Exup é ry’s Little Prince or Machiavelli’s (Big) Prince, the Tanach 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   198
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   198
7/23/2012   9:27:13 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:13 PM

 
Selfhood, Affect, and Value 
199 
or the Koran, Lincoln’s speeches or Christ’s sermons,  Das Kapital or  The Wealth of 
Nations ,  To Kill a Mockingbird or  Blood Meridian . 
 Indeed, given the plethora of accessible texts, and given that one may just as 
easily embody such a text (as an ensemble of norms or propensities) as be able to 
articulate such a text (as a set of rules or codes), our maps are truly patchworks 
rather than frameworks—each swatch culled from a different source, their edges 
ragged, their origins now obscure. There are rips and tears, burst seams and sturdy 
stitches, sections still visible, and textures only palpable. For example, in Gramsci’s 
ashes you will fi nd his heritage and heirs at different degrees of remove—not only 
Machiavelli and Marx, but also Pasolini and Malcolm X, and not only Sorel and 
Croce, but also Williams and Negri—indeed, maybe even Paulo Freire and Saint 
Francis of Assisi. 
 And as a tree consumed by fl ames will leave only its roots and fruits, after we 
die traces of such patchworks are usually all that remains. Yet, nevertheless, in life 
they cling to us as comfortably and as unconsciously as a favorite shirt or suit—
such a palimpsest constituting a second skin, such a seemingly personalized ontol-
ogy creating our sense of self. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   199
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   199
7/23/2012   9:27:13 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:13 PM

OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/23/12, NEWGEN
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   200
06_Kockelman_Ch06.indd   200
7/23/2012   9:27:14 PM
7/23/2012   9:27:14 PM

201
 NOTES 
 Chapter 1 
 1  The term  infrastructure will be used in a variety of ways, three of which may be suc-
cinctly summarized here. First, as per the sentence that called forth this footnote, it may be 
used in the vernacular sense as a particular kind of instrument, often spatially diffuse or 
distributed, that is essential to, but remains in the background of, more focal interactions 
and events (e.g., from highways to electrical grids, from sewage systems to the Internet, 
from standardized weights and measures to legal and linguistic codes). This sense of infra-
structure has been the object of much sophisticated scholarship (Larkin 2008; Star 1999 ; 
von Schnitzler 2008;  inter alia ). Second, it may be used to refer to a wide range of semi-
otic processes, or modes of mediation more generally, that are a condition for (and often 
a consequence of) other, more stereotypic semiotic processes (such as discursive practices, 
economic transactions, and the like), but which are not usually understood as semiotic, or 
are understood to be conduits for meaning rather than sources of meaning, or conductors 
of agency but not agents in themselves (Elyachar 2005, 2010). While much truly outstand-
ing work has been written on “networks,” “assemblages,” and related topics (Callon 1986, 
2007; Latour 1988 [1984], 2007), their fundamental meaningfulness (which includes their 
means-ends-fulness) has not been carefully considered or has been framed in erroneous or 
inadequate ways (though see the important work of scholars such as Muniesa (2007) and 
Scott (2009) for key exceptions). And fi nally, most broadly, any of the kinds of relations 
between relations to be theorized in Chapter 2 (see Figure 2.9), however they may actually 
be instantiated, may count as a mode of infrastructure. In this last and most important 
sense, the expressions “modes of mediation,” “infrastructure,” and “relations between rela-
tions” have more or less identical referents (albeit different framings). While there are many 
other senses of infrastructure (Kockelman 2010b), some of which will be discussed in later 
chapters, these are enough for now. 
 2  Such assumptions are most transparently evinced in, and transformed by, our own 
assertions and others kinds of discursive practices whose propositional contents make 
explicit possible referents, predicates, and referent-predicate relations; and they are also 
evinced in, and transformed by, our ways of reasoning from one such relation to another 
(or our theoretical agency more generally, as will be discussed in Chapter 3). For this rea-
son, the contents of such assertions constitute ontologies in their most stereotypic sense. 
But that said, this only gets at the stereotype of ontologies, as being somehow “ideational” 
or even “ideological,” caught up in language, culture, and mind in canonical ways. Rather, 
as will be seen, ontologies are perhaps most often embedded in relations of  coherence (and 
 noncoherence ) between already highly relational entities (such as affordances, instruments, 
actions, roles, and identities) insofar as these incorporate, complement, and create each 
other vis- à -vis processes of selection and signifi cance (as well as sieving and serendipity). 
Crucially, while coherence and incoherence are relatively general concepts, they should also 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/20/12, NEWGEN
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   201
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   201
7/20/2012   1:15:06 PM
7/20/2012   1:15:06 PM

 202 
Notes
be understood as incorporating, complementing, and creating (!) more narrow (and often 
more pointed and poignant) concepts such as alignment, allies, and alliances (not to men-
tion enemies, enmity, and mis-alignment), as treated in, say, the work of Callon (1986) and 
Latour (1988 [1984]). 
 3  As will be shown in Chapter 3, and as should be clear to readers familiar with Peirce, 
such ontologies may also incorporate the following sorts of assumptions: what kinds of 
qualities exist, what kinds of contiguities do such qualities have with each other, and what 
kinds of conventions may be used to point to, and provide information about, the relations 
between such qualities, contiguities, and conventions. 
 4  Which, as will be discussed below, involves not only associating certain indices with 
certain individuals, but also framing the world in terms of relatively coherent bundles of 
“fi gurable” individuals and indices in the fi rst place (two processes that are themselves 
mediated by ontologies,  inter alia ). 
 5  As used here, interpretation includes processes that range from intuition to inference, 
grounded in action as much as perception, relying on affect as much as cognition, and so 
forth. For example, it may range from relatively indirect inference (as emphasized in this 
example) to relatively direct perception (in a modifi ed Gibsonian sense (1986 [1979]; and 
see Palmer 1999), as understood in terms of recent advances in vision science. For example, 
the sign may be an ensemble of qualities (qua surface layout), the object may be a purchase, 
and the interpretant may be an action that heeds the layout in light of the purchase it pro-
vides. Thus, as we will see in Chapter 4, the interpretants of such sign-object relations may 
include relatively indirect inferences as well as relatively direct perceptions, as evinced in not 
only heeding and wielding actions, but also the entities and events such actions might more 
or less immediately yield. As will be seen in later chapters, most forms of inference (like 
most forms of interpretation, more generally) are distributed phenomena, and thus often 
exist only in the relations between interacting agents. 
 6  Or, in hearing someone say something, I may infer that they are afraid of something 
and thereby expect them to undertake other actions that would be in keeping with this fear. 
Or, in perceiving that something ices up at a certain temperature, I may infer that it is a 
particular kind of substance and thereby come to expect that it will boil at a certain tem-
perature. And so on and so forth. 
 7  One reason for such relative entrenchment is that transforming an assumption of 
level 3 has implications for assumptions at the other two levels, and not only for the indi-
vidual, index, or kind in question, but also for a range of other individuals, indices, and 
kinds. 
 8  Concerning this last point, see the important essays collected in Silverstein and 
Urban (1996) for a careful theorization of complimentary processes as they play out in the 
production of ethnographic and linguistic texts. See Enfi eld (2009) for a key theorization 
of related issues as they play out in the bundling together of indices across distinct semi-
otic modalities, such as speech and gesture, in real-time and face-to-face interaction. And 
see Halliday and Hasan (1976) for classic early statements on texts and textuality, and the 
relation between coherence and cohesion.  Finally, and crucially, note that, as used here, the 
indexical (and inferential) co-presence in question is not restricted to relatively immediate or 
proximal relations (qua “presence” in a simplistic metaphysical sense)—all that matters is 
that the qualities, entities, processes, or events in question be framable as connected (causally, 
normatively, logically, etc.), whatever the degree of remove or kind of relationality in question . 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/20/12, NEWGEN
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   202
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   202
7/20/2012   1:15:07 PM
7/20/2012   1:15:07 PM

 
Notes 
203 
Such framing processes may thus be understood as linking distinct and potentially distal 
“texts” and “contexts” (across different points in space-time, so to speak) as much as con-
stituting any particular “text” or “context” (at some particular point in space-time). Indeed, 
such processes help constitute the space-time-person manifold itself (as that relatively inter-
subjectively shared background relative to which entities and events are semiotically fi gured 
in the fi rst place (Kockelman 2007c, in press)) 
 9  And so readers of a particular persuasion are invited to describe them as necessarily 
fl uid, emergent, contested, dialogic, relational, multiple, immanent, and so forth. 
 Chapter 2 
 1  I am, to be sure, glossing over the complexities of both thinkers. Indeed, it 
may be argued that Marx also had a prescient understanding of the other kinds of 
relations-between-relations discussed in this section (Kockelman 2006a). 
 2  Kockelman (2010b) serves as this chapter’s evil twin—focusing on parasitism, ene-
mies, and noise. It massively complicates the otherwise simple division made in section 9 
between code and channel. It undermines the nature of “function” or “purpose.” It theo-
rizes the range of entities that prey upon the products of selection and signifi cance. And it 
shows the relation between such ideas and foundational texts in computer science (in par-
ticular, Claude Shannon), linguistic anthropology (Roman Jakobson), and actor-network 
theory (Michel Serres). 
 3  This defi nition of agency will be expanded and transformed in later chapters. 
 4  Compare Dretske 1981 and Millikan 2004:31–46 and contrast Peirce 1955a (and 
see Colapietro 1989:6). Another widespread way to try to theorize meaning turns on signs, 
objects, and interpreters—and thus, from the standpoint of the framework offered here, 
elides sensation, instigation, and interpretants (and, more importantly, the relationality that 
mediates such components and the tight connection between signifi cance and selection). 
 5  In Chapter 3, we will complicate, and ultimately obviate, the distinction being drawn 
between norm and cause—itself dependent on a particular ontology. 
 6  For example, Developmental Systems Theory (Oyama, Griffi ths, and Gray 2003) is 
compatible with this approach. 
 7  See, for example, Cheney and Seyfarth’s (1990) classic studies. And note that while 
other evolutionary stories may be given for such behaviors, which have been highly simpli-
fi ed and stylized here for the sake of explication, they will still be framed in terms of signif-
icance and selection, and, hence, the logic of this kind of account will still hold. 
 8  See Enfi eld’s (2009) related notion of enchrony. 
 9  Or, as will be shown in Chapter 3, projected propensities to signify, objectify, and 
interpret in particular ways. 
 10  The term  mapping is often a misnomer (as will be seen in section 4, when we discuss 
inferential communication). 
 11  The causal and logical, or indexical and inferential, nature of mental states has been 
fruitfully analyzed by Anscombe (1957), Brandom (1994), Davidson (1984), Grice (1989b), 
and Searle (1983). (And see Sperber (1996) on cognitive causal chains.) More broadly 
speaking, the concatenation (and ramifi cation) of semiotic processes is a simple Peircean 
insight that the interpretant of one sign is usually itself a sign to be interpreted (and see the 
discussion of framing that, in effect, generalizes and destabilizes these sorts of issues).  
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/20/12, NEWGEN
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   203
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   203
7/20/2012   1:15:08 PM
7/20/2012   1:15:08 PM

 204 
Notes
 12  The distinction between indexical and inferential processes is not disjunctive. All 
inferential processes presuppose indexical processes. 
 13  As will be developed in chapters 4 and 5, a belief may give rise to an intention in 
the context of a pro-attitude such as a personal preference, a social obligation, or a religious 
commitment (Davidson 1984). 
 14  To be sure, via the unitization of accountability (as well as framing), this “set of 
devices” may together constitute the same “device.” 
 15  We are leaving aside key issues related to the intersubjective nature of such inten-
tions (Kockelman 2005; Sperber and Wilson 1996 [1985]; Tomasello 2008;  inter alia ), which 
will be treated at length in Chapter 5. 
 16  More generally, by the  immediate object , Peirce meant “the object as the sign itself 
represents it, and whose Being is thus dependent upon the representation of it in the Sign” 
(1998 [1906–1908]:482, cited in Colapietro 1989:15). This is to be contrasted with the 
 dynamic object , which Peirce took to be “the Reality which by some means contrives to 
determine the Sign to its Representation” (ibid.). In some sense, immediate objects exist 
only by virtue of the signs that represent them (qua objects of the interpretants signs give 
rise to), whereas dynamic objects exist independently of the signs that stand for them (qua 
objects that give rise to signs). 
 For Peirce, every sign has both an immediate and a dynamic object. In certain cases, these 
immediate and dynamic objects can overlap—at least in lay understandings. For example, an 
interjection such as  ouch  or a facial expression of pain may be understood as determined by 
pain (as their dynamic objects) and as representing pain (as their immediate objects): one 
may know about another’s pain only through their cry, yet their pain is what caused that 
cry. Moreover, just as the object brought to the attention of the interpreter can “exceed” 
the object that bought the sign into existence, so too can this existential and dynamic object 
exceed the attentional and immediate object. Indeed, a  symptom (as an ideal type) might be 
best defi ned as a sign whose immediate object is identical to its dynamic object, such that 
such modes of excess are minimized, at least in some interpreting agent’s ontology.  
 17  See Tomlinson 2011 for an elaboration. 
 18  In part, this claim is meant to analytically complement (as well as disciplinarily 
extend) classic refl exive stances toward (and in) the methodology of the social sciences 
(Weber 1949 [1904]). See, in particular, the edited collections of essays in Clifford and Marcus 
1986 and Lucy 1993 in relation to cultural and linguistic anthropology, respectively. 
 19  And, thus, often the very “truth” of the framing of the relations so framed. 
 20  See Helmreich 2011 for a set of insightful comments. 
 21  In a cybernetic idiom, sieving and serendipity are similar to enemies (or that which 
intercepts) and noise (or that which interferes), and both are closely related to the notion 
of a parasite (Kockelman 2010b; Serres 2007 [1980]; Shannon 1949; Shannon and Weaver 
1963 [1949]). 
 22  It may also be a sign in the Nietzschean sense—a symptom that some mode of 
power has been operative, perhaps by reframing the function of a form or the object of 
a sign. And it may also be a commodity in Marx’s sense, a use-value (sign), whose value 
(object) is evinced in its exchange-value (interpretant). 
 23  Loosely speaking, for a sign “to make sense” means that an actor (or analyst) can 
fi gure out what object it is meant to have and what interpretant it might give rise to. 
 24  Note how this example is in keeping with Heidegger’s premodern folksy imaginary, 
itself often as simplistic and sinister as it was naive and nostalgic. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/20/12, NEWGEN
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   204
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   204
7/20/2012   1:15:08 PM
7/20/2012   1:15:08 PM

 
Notes 
205 
 25  More boldly state, Heidegger had no theory of meaning (though he had brilliant 
intuitions regarding the need for such a theory), and many scholars working in this tradi-
tion (say, folks into “dwelling,” “being,” “embodiment,” “phenomenology,” and so forth) 
generally inherited his lack of a theory, and so tend to just use Heidegger mumbo-jumbo, 
or latter-day versions of it, as a substitute for “hammering out” an actual conceptual 
framework. 
 26  Notice how much this differs from the more widespread sense of correspondence as 
“truth” (in the sense of an assertion, or belief, being adequate to a state of affairs), which is 
essentially the signifi er-signifi ed relation all over again. Also note Geertz’s narrowly missed 
opportunity (not to mention the failure of generations of scholars—in anthropology, litera-
ture, religion, and so forth—who work under the banner of “the interpretation of culture”) 
to theorize, much less even notice,  the interpretants in culture . 
 27  It is tempting to claim that most scholars of social networks focus on relations (f)—
either mathematically (and thus often without reference to the other kinds of relations) or 
sociologically (and thus typically taking into account only relations of type (e)). In this way, 
they usually leave out relations (a–d) entirely and, hence, the actual meaningful contents of 
the interactions between the networked envorganisms. But this is another essay. 
 28  Note, then, that channels may themselves be affordances and instruments, and 
so the network connecting envorganism is itself composed of envorganisms. Where one 
frames the boundary between channel and envorganism is usually grounded in a decision 
about the relative salience, or agency, of the units involved. 
 29  Kockelman (2010b) highly qualifi es this simple symmetry between material transla-
tion (channel) and meaningful translation (code), and he develops its implications. 
 30  The term  representation is being used here in a very wide sense to mean public and 
private representations of the world (qua speech acts and mental states) as well as modes 
of residence in the world (qua affordances, instruments, actions, roles, and identities) as 
well as relatively stable sign-object-interpretant relations more generally (whether these be 
framed as codes, contexts, or co-occurring texts). And one key reason these have the sieving 
and selecting effects they do is the modes of incorporation, creation, and complementation 
that constitute them. Chapter 6 offers an account of the role of value (and “values”) in 
selection—qua human-specifi c modes of choice. 
 31  This claim is related to, but not the same as, an older claim: where we draw the 
boundary between nature and culture is itself grounded in culture—subject to various 
degrees of “strain” (Brandom 1979). See Chapter 3 for a longer discussion of this impor-
tant point. 
 Chapter 3 
  1   My own reading of Peirce owes a great debt to Parmentier 1994 and, in particular, 
Colapietro 1989. Kockelman 2005 details these, and other, intellectual debts; and, in gen-
eral, stays closer to Peirce’s categories. Here, in contrast, I’m writing in the spirit of Peirce, 
rather than to the letter. 
 2  As we saw in Chapter 2, Saussure does theorize value as a relation between relations: 
the relation between any signifi er and signifi ed is mediated via its relation to the relation 
between (all) other signifi ers and signifi eds. This is a different kind of relation between 
relations, and one that, while crucial for defi ning a  semiological structure, is not helpful for 
defi ning a  semiotic process . 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/20/12, NEWGEN
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   205
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   205
7/20/2012   1:15:08 PM
7/20/2012   1:15:08 PM

 206 
Notes
 3  To talk about quali-signs with any care, it is helpful to limit the possible kinds of 
signs by focusing on a particular semiotic agent (or sign-type). 
 4  As well as the other kinds of relations between relations discussed in Chapter 2. 
 5  Left aside for the moment are issues concerning the cognitive structuring of concepts 
(and propositions more generally) as well as the deictic grounding of sentences (and words 
more generally). 
 6  For example, Peirce offered the following characterization: “That which any true 
proposition asserts is  real , in the sense of being as it is regardless of what you or I may 
think about it. Let this proposition be a general conditional proposition as to the future, 
and it is a real general such as is calculated really to infl uence human conduct; and such the 
pragmaticist holds to be the rational purport of every concept” (1955:265). Bacon called 
the real “the true prints and signatures made upon creation” (2000 [1620]:37). And modern 
philosophers often understand natural kinds to be induction permitting: Properties of one 
member of the category, including a newly discovered property, may be reliably ascribed to 
other members of the category (Griffi ths 1997:174; and see Kitcher 1993 and Boyd 1991). 
 7  Here are some other ways of imagining the distinction between seconds and thirds, or 
intermediaries and mediators, that come up in this book: (1) One-to-one mapping between 
input and output versus interpretant of sign in relation to interests of agent and features of 
object; (2) Path connecting origin to destination versus every point along the path itself a 
possible origin to another destination; (3) Conventional pairing between signifi er and signi-
fi ed versus multiple interpretants of same sign-object relation, or multiple objects of same 
sign; (4) Relation between stimulus and response versus relatively imperceptible kind that 
mediates between wide range of possible roots and fruits. 
 8   And there is also a lot of thirdness in where we draw the line between fi rstness and 
secondness (and so on, iteratively and reciprocally, through the other combinations). 
 9  It may also be a sign of the relation between their interpretant and this sign-object 
relation, as well as the features of the object in relation to the interests of the agent, as well 
as various other assumptions. 
 10  Note that status-indices need not be expressed by, or exhibited on, the one whose 
status is in question. For example, my act of bowing before the king is, in one framing, a 
sign of the king’s status as much as my own. 
 11  More generally, it may be any quali-sign that an interpreter treats as a sign of one’s 
propensity to produce other quali-signs (or quali-interpretants). 
 12  Recall from Chapter 1 that an  individual is whatever can be related to an index, 
such that it can be ascribed a kind (by an agent with a particular ontology). While this tech-
nical use of the term  individual may often refer to an “individual” (qua particular human 
person), individuals can be groups of people as well as parts of people; they can be people 
as well as things; and they can be unbounded, uncountable, and ethereal kinds of things 
as well as bounded, countable, and concrete kinds of things. That said, the technical and 
lay uses of individuals often overlap in the phenomena described here: e.g., John (who is 
an individual in both senses) may be ascribed mental states and social statuses (as well as 
material substances) as a function of the indices he exhibits. 
 13  As we will see in Chapter 6, such projected propensities are often grounded in some 
relatively widespread and portable stereotype or prototype of the status in question. 
 14  More carefully stated, the circumstance (or sign) that would elicit the beha-
vior (or interpretant) is relatively context-independent, such that the behavior is also 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/20/12, NEWGEN
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   206
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   206
7/20/2012   1:15:08 PM
7/20/2012   1:15:08 PM

 
Notes 
207 
context-independent, such that the relation between the two (qua role, or index more gen-
erally) can be readily verifi ed in any context. 
 15  Veblen 1971 [1899] is probably the classic post-Darwin formulation of this issue. 
 16  See Durkheim’s (1947 [1912]) discussion of emblems, and the way they both create 
and clarify group sentiment. 
 17  Kockelman (2007b) details the relation between Goffman’s notion of participant 
roles (in particular, animator, author, and principal) and practical agency (control, compo-
sition, commitment), arguing that the former are grounded in an overly simplistic theory of 
meaning. And Kockelman (2004) argues that Goffman’s categories are themselves more or 
less equivalent to Varro’s (1938 [43 B.C.]) classic decomposition of actions into three stages. 
Both are themselves grounded in Roman-European legal understandings of personhood, 
and so presuppose a very particular and problematic set of ontological assumptions. 
 18  Note that it is typically impossible to make such judgments absolutely; rather, ques-
tions regarding the over-ascription and under-ascription of agency are always relative. For 
example, I attribute more agency to him than you do, and thus I over-ascribe (in contrast to 
you), and you under-ascribe (in comparison to me). 
 19  On issues related to units of accountability on interactional time scales, see Enfi eld 
2011. 
 20  While all life-forms may do this on phylogenetic time scales, as natural forms of 
camoufl age should make clear, we are here foregrounding its human-specifi c forms of 
real-time, intentionally mediated, and interactionally unfolding modalities. 
 21  Note, then, that we are not foregrounding the fact that such relatively explicit 
speech acts seems to simultaneously describe what they do (and do it only insofar as they 
describe it). While many scholars have been seduced by this issue, we think it has generated 
far too much discussion in relation to its actual importance. We focus instead on different 
modes and degrees of emblemeticity, as grounding in and of particular ontologies, in rela-
tion to the transformation of intersubjectivities. The more interesting issue, as Austin noted 
and Michael Silverstein (1976, 1979, 1981,  inter alia ) and his students and colleagues have 
developed at length, is that explicit performatives can be used not only to perform, but also 
to describe and report speech acts. Or rather, in terms of the theory put forth here, not only 
are such signs their own best interpretants, but they are often far more portable in their 
role as interpretants (describing actions) than they are in their role as signs (performing 
actions). And so, in this latter function, they may be used frequently and be distributed 
widely (even in the relative absence of their performative function), and thereby come to 
infl uence, and be infl uenced by, the linguistic ideologies of particular speech communities: 
the beliefs speakers have about language, its functions, and its users. Key works in this 
tradition include Agha 2007 and Lucy 1993. Crucially, the analytic framework developed 
by these scholars can easily be retrofi tted to complement the concerns of this section: in 
particular, they may be applied to relatively emblematic indices more generally (and not 
just language-based signs) as mediating semiotic ontologies more generally (and not just 
language ideologies). 
 22  Even scholarly traditions that attempt to make minimal reference to social statuses 
and mental states, such as the quietly brilliant craft of conversational analysis as prac-
ticed by its more orthodox adherents, spend much of their time making reference to the 
“actions” (undertaken by interactants, themselves composed of “practices”). And every-
thing said here can be applied to their fi ndings: some sets of practices (which involve both 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/20/12, NEWGEN
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   207
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   207
7/20/2012   1:15:09 PM
7/20/2012   1:15:09 PM

 208 
Notes
the composition of discursive moves, qua lexical and grammatical categories, and the posi-
tion of discursive moves, qua placement in a sequence of moves) are more or less emblem-
atic of particular actions. And such actions, in part, conform to context (qua intersubjective 
attitudes as to what signs are more or less appropriate and effective at a given moment, how 
so, and what inferences may be drawn when they are not) and, in part, transform context. 
That is,  practices are to actions (as these terms are used in that tradition) what indices are to 
kinds . Conversational analysts of this type are only weirdly unique for having limited their 
purview to one sort of kind (essentially a communicative intention), a relatively small num-
ber of indices, and (usually) co-occurring text (rather than immediate context and culture, 
or intersubjective ontological assumptions, more generally). For this reason, the frequent 
elision of Mead in their references (see, for example, Schegloff’s (2007) summary of his 
paradigm’s fi ndings) is quite telling. 
 Chapter 4 
 1  See  Being and Time (1996 [1927]: part 1, division 1, Chapter 3), and  The Basic 
Problems of Phenomenology (1988 [1975]: part 1, Chapter 3, §15). And see Brandom 1979; 
Dreyfus 1991; and Haugeland 1982, 1998a, 1998b. 
 2  Crucially, depending on the semiotic frame in question, the very same behavior, or 
mode of comportment more generally, may simultaneously be understood as heeding affor-
dances, wielding instruments, undertaking actions, inhabiting roles, and fulfi lling identities. 
For example, something as simple and innocuous as sitting down in a chair or fl ossing 
one’s teeth is implicated in all of these semiotic processes at once. Meaning, then, is not 
just as embodied and embedded as it is enminded and articulated, it is also ontologized 
and enframed. 
 3  Though note that, following our discussion of kinds in Chapter 1, by referring to the 
object-component in these ways (purchase, function, purpose, etc.), our analytic vocabu-
lary already runs the risk (and, of course, reaps the benefi ts) of objectifying them. 
 4  Notice that, insofar as such objects have their being in the interpretants they deter-
mine (as their conditional relata), and insofar as such signs often have iconic-indexical rela-
tions to their objects, the interpretants often have iconic-indexical relations to their signs. 
Therefore, many embedded interpretants of the constituents of the residential whole may 
be called  inverse iconic-indices , or “mirror-interpretants” of their signs, often having a kind 
of hand-to-handle, sword-to-sheath, or mold-to-cast relation to them. 
 5  As is well known, in contrast to Kant’s dictum that percepts without concepts are 
blind, Gibson thought that to perceive surfaces (and their layouts) was to perceive what 
they afford (1986 [1979]). And he noted that this “implies that the ‘values’ and ‘meanings’ 
of things in the environment can be directly perceived” and it explains “the sense in which 
values and meanings are external to the perceiver” (ibid.). Haugeland (1998b) offered a 
nice summary of the crux issue in Gibson: “What’s important (and controversial) here is 
not the idea of affordances as such, but the claim that they can be  perceived as opposed to 
inferred” (140). 
 6  See Taylor 1995:51 and Rosch 1975 for a discussion of this principle. 
 7  One might use the term  legi-function to refer to the standard function of an instru-
ment (irrespective of any particular interpretant of it), the  sin-function would refer to the 
specifi c function of any instrument (in some particular interpretation), and the  quali-function 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/20/12, NEWGEN
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   208
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   208
7/20/2012   1:15:09 PM
7/20/2012   1:15:09 PM

 
Notes 
209 
would refer to the potential function(s) of an instrument. (And such ideas may be general-
ized for purchases, purposes, statuses, and values; furthermore, one would do well to dis-
tinguish between sin-functions [or sin-purchases, etc.] that are replicas and singularities.) In 
some sense, the quali-functions of an instrument are precisely its possible purchases. 
 8  See, for example, Brooks 1997; Dreyfus 1991; Gibson 1986 [1979]; Norman 2002 
[1988]; Haugeland 1998a, 1998b; and Simon 1981 for elaborations of similar metaphors in 
non-semiotic idioms. 
 9  This term is adapted from Gibson (1986 [1979]:126), for whom  coperception meant 
that information available to perceivers reveals as much about themselves, and their relation 
to the environment, as it does about the environment itself. 
 10  We are here presuming human-specifi c modes of signifi cance and selection—in par-
ticular, human intentions underlying created interpretants. Many affordances (i.e., poten-
tially any living kind) may be still selected and signifi cant (on, say, phylogenetic time scales), 
but our focus is on human actions and intentions (as sources and scales of selection). That 
said, there are many interesting entities (say, cultigens sieved and selected on historical time 
scales by human populations) that are somewhere between affordances and instruments. 
 11  One affordance can even be an interpretant of another—in a very particular sense. 
In particular, some feature may provide a particular kind of purchase for some semiotic 
agent only because it is used in conjunction with some other feature that provides some 
other complementary purchase. Air, for example, may afford breathing only in the context 
of lungs. 
 12  In the theory offered here, so called “biological functions” are all really purchases. 
Hence, organs (originally meaning “instruments”) are really affordances, whose key interpre-
tants are incorporating (via other organs) and creating (via biochemical products). Typically, 
one has to specify the whole relative to which they are being assessed to assign any particular 
purchase (for all are massively “multipurchasive” with this defi nition). They are, needless to 
say, causally regimented by way of an organism’s continued existence (or its genes’) within a 
particular environment. And they themselves may be understood as phylogenetic interpre-
tants of a particular environment, which includes both other organs within a biological body 
and the larger environment in which the biological body, or organism, is found.  
 13  See Weber 1978:7 on artifacts in relation to means and ends. 
 14  Compare Mead 1934:104. 
 15  In this way, the difference between an action and an instrument is one of degree 
and not of kind: the degree to which it is a human-controlled behavior rather than a 
human-artifi ced entity, the degree to which the object of the sign is interpretable as a pur-
pose rather than as a function, the degree to which the function/purpose is personal (rele-
vant to one particular person) or interpersonal (relevant to any signer with a purpose), the 
degree of stability and persistence of the sign (instruments stereotypically outlive their use; 
actions exist in use), and the degree to which the action may be represented by a verb whose 
subject undertakes the action in question (rather than as a noun as that which is wielded 
while acting). 
 16  These are based on the well-known  Aktionsart classes, a kind of cross-linguistic 
typology of verbal predicates (see van Valen and LaPolla 1997). Crucially, this enumeration 
of controlled behaviors is really an enumeration of representational interpretants of con-
trolled behaviors (e.g., words used to describe controlled behaviors) and, hence, has already 
projected a purpose onto them. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/20/12, NEWGEN
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   209
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   209
7/20/2012   1:15:10 PM
7/20/2012   1:15:10 PM

 210 
Notes
 17  It should be stressed that all actions involve interpretants that the actor can commit 
to; what is important about actions whose objects are intentions (as opposed to purposes) 
is that the interpretants in question are representational interpretants. And, as per our def-
inition of commitment in Chapter 3, this does not mean that the action (purpose or inten-
tion) is conscious or planned in the stereotypic sense. In particular, indices of commitment 
to particular ends often arise retrospectively as the result of parasitic processes in which 
actions get thwarted or diverted. 
 18  To be sure, we observers can attribute intentions to them (say, by describing their 
behaviors with representational interpretants). We can offer reasons for those intentions 
and our attributions can be quite good and behavior-predicting. 
 19  Such contextualizing relations serve as key inferential chains, such that any constit-
uent may serve as a relatively inferential sign of another such constituent. 
 20  Indeed, Linton’s claims, however otherwise insightful, were limited by his attempt 
to theorize roles via representations of the world instead of residence in the world. Of 
course, he was not alone in this kind of representational reifi cation. Such processes plague 
much theorizing in the social sciences. Heidegger was perhaps the most prescient critic of 
precisely such a tendency in modernist thought more generally. 
 21  That is, just as actions and roles may more or less directly create instruments (and 
actions and roles), so may identities. 
 22  As will be discussed in Chapter 5, it also does not distinguish (in the important case 
of acting under a description) between intentions per se and reasons for the commitment. 
Such a distinction is crucial because it brings in new kinds of values, or “pro-attitudes,” 
that may be related to new kinds of beliefs, and that may be used to offer rationales for new 
kinds of intentions. In short, there is no account of how personal preferences, statuses, and 
values affect actions and, hence, no account of how new kinds of preferences, statuses, and 
values can introduce new kinds of (licensed) intentions. 
 23  If Sellars (1997 [1956]) says, in effect, perception is observation under a description, 
then most of these criticisms hold for his theory as well: experience is the fl ip side of beha-
vior just as perception is the fl ip side of intention. 
 Chapter 5 
 1  In particular, Brentano’s children—latter philosophers of language and mind such 
as Frege (1997 [1892]), Wittgenstein (1961 [1921]), Anscombe (1957), Austin (2003 [1955]), 
Sellars (1997 [1956]), Grice (1989b), Davidson (1984), Searle (1983), Brandom (1994), 
and Millikan (2004)—treat related concerns in a century’s worth of celebrated texts. See 
Haugeland (1998a) for a classic summary of various understandings of intentionality. 
 2  See Brentano 1995 [1874]) and Chisholm 1967. 
 3  Framed another way, cognitive processes are understood as fl exibly organized men-
tal representations, themselves grounded in neurophysiological mechanisms and ground-
ing of behavioral practices (Tomasello and Call 1997:8). And, in studying such processes, 
cognitive scientists—or “mentalists”—seek to determine the properties such mechanism 
exhibit and the functions they perform, without necessarily making reference to neurophys-
iology (Chomsky 1965:193). 
 4  There are many other kinds of mental states and speech acts that are not being 
discussed here. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/20/12, NEWGEN
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   210
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   210
7/20/2012   1:15:10 PM
7/20/2012   1:15:10 PM

 
Notes 
211 
 5  The causal and rational, or indexical and inferential, nature of mental states has 
been fruitfully analyzed in Anscombe 1957, Brandom 1994, Davidson 1984, Grice 1989b, 
and Searle 1983. 
 6  Subjectivity means different things to different people. For example, there are sub-
jects in the sovereign political sense, which most directly relates to agency: that which is 
simultaneously “subjective” (say, capable of decision) and “subjected” (say, vulnerable to 
coercion). Relatedly, there are subjects that relate to selves: the speaking subject, as that 
which can say “I” and, hence, be both speaker and topic, and the interpellated subject, as 
that which can be called “You” and, hence, be both topic and addressee. Here we focus 
on a generalized sense of subjectivity: the capacity to fail (to cohere). As we saw in earlier 
chapters, this sense of subjectivity is not unique to representations: residence in the world is 
more or less coherent. And this sense of subjectivity is not unique to humans: any process 
that is selected is “subject” to it. 
 7  See also Brandom 1994, Hacking 2001, and Sperber and Wilson 1995 [1986]) for 
more detailed theories of various forms of inference. 
 8  Compare such logical relationality of representations with the collateral relationality 
of commodities discussed in Chapter 3. 
 9  Money has a similar function in the domain of commodities. 
 10  To be sure, the action of petting the cat is itself caught up (as an action, insofar 
as it has an intention) in representations of the world, as well as modes of residence in the 
world via the kinds of incorporating, complementing, and creating relations it has to other 
semiotic processes (such as affordances, instruments, actions, roles, and identities). 
 11  Compare Brandom’s (1994) notion of acknowledgment, or self-attributing, a 
commitment. 
 12  Things are actually much more complicated, as both mode and content (and thus 
roots and fruits as well as substance and structure) can make reference to properties of 
the speech event. Moreover, many grammatical categories (status, mood, evidentials, etc.) 
sit somewhere between mode and content. For these reasons, there is often no clean sep-
aration between mode and content or between speech act and state of affairs. And, more 
generally, we are glossing over the nature of deictic anchoring of propositional contents as 
it has already received such extensive elaboration. Kockelman (2010a) treats these issues at 
length. 
 13  There is no hard and fast distinction between substantive and structural content or 
open- and closed-class categories. They should not be thought of as positions in an oppo-
sition, but rather poles of a continuum. 
 14  Compare Peirce 1998 [1906–1908]. 
 15  See Brandom 1979, Haugeland 1998a, Lewis 1969, Millikan 2005, and Weber 
1978:54. Millikan 2005 has redefi ned  convention , going against the grain of the famous 
defi nition in Lewis 1969. In particular, for a speech act to be conventional requires that it 
have several properties. First, its actual form is an instance of a more general form, that 
is, it is a replica, or a token, of a preexisting type. Second, it is proliferated by the weight 
of precedence, that is, it exists as a token by virtue of the fact that previous tokens of the 
same type existed. And third, there is an arbitrary relation between form and function—
between the object-component and the sign-component or between the sign-component 
and the interpretant-component. Together, these three properties are iconic, indexical, and 
symbolic, respectively. Finally, in the case of the proper function of speech acts, the form 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/20/12, NEWGEN
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   211
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   211
7/20/2012   1:15:10 PM
7/20/2012   1:15:10 PM

 212 
Notes
solves a coordination problem between two or more types of actors—and thus benefi ts 
both speaker and addressee, both signer and interpreter. 
 16  In other words, insofar as an intention is not just causal of a state of affairs, but 
also in need of a reason, its satisfaction conditions may include the belief (and perhaps 
pro-attitude) that justifi es it. In other words, an intention may be the conclusion of a prac-
tical inference: (1)  if I open the door, then I can enter the room; (2)  I want to enter the room; 
(3)  so I shall open the door . Such an inference has premises: a relatively foregrounded condi-
tional (a belief involving an if-then sequence), a relatively backgrounded pro-attitude (qua 
desire, status, or value). And such an inference has a conclusion: the intention itself (I shall 
open the door). If asked to provide a reason for one’s behavior, one may articulate such a 
sequence: both a belief (if-then) and a pro-attitude (a desire, status, value). 
 17  See Anscombe 1957, Brandom 1994, Davidson 1984, and Searle 1983. 
 18  From the standpoint of content, an intention represents the state of affairs that 
would result from the fulfi llment of that intention (for example,  that I opened the door ). In 
this way, the content of an intention is nearly identical to the content of the belief (or asser-
tion) that would truthfully describe the action instigated by the intention. 
 19  Sperber and Wilson’s (1995 [1986]) account of Gricean inference through the lens of 
cognitive processes, and especially their account of mutual manifestness, is fundamental here, 
as is Tomasello’s (2008) account of the phylogenetic and ontogenetic origins of such processes, 
with its focus on the pro-social attitudes that are involved. Mead 1934 is perhaps the earliest 
account of this idea. Other important works include Enfi eld 2006, 2009, Enfi eld and Levinson 
(2006), and Hanks 1991. Kockelman 2005 reviews the history of these kinds of claims.  
 20  For example, I know you are a husband insofar as (1) I saw the sign-event in which 
you were married (e.g., a wedding) or (2) I see the patterns of interaction you have with your 
spouse (e.g., exclusive love-making, shared credit cards, public intimacy, wedding rings, and 
so forth). 
 21  Indeed, it was noted that, as a function of semiotic framing, mediating propensities 
(or kinds more generally) could be understood in several ways: fi rst, as an (ultimate) inter-
pretant of another sign, second, as a (dynamic) object that gives rise to a sign, and third, as 
an (embodied) sign that gives rise to an interpretant (e.g., the way a role, qua performance, 
may be an interpretation of a status). 
 22  Crucially, these can be any kind of sign, including signs of other’s mental states, 
and, hence, sign-interpretant relations. 
 23  Relatedly, both may be constituted by the same kinds as types (similarity) or the 
same kinds as tokens (intimacy). 
 24  The primatologists Tomasello and Call (1997) note that intentionality and causal-
ity both involve “temporally ordered events” (antecedent-consequent relations), where the 
antecedent event and the consequent event are “external to the observer,” and where there is 
“some inferred intermediary cause or goal that organizes and ‘explains’ the event sequence 
such that different antecedents may lead to the same consequent . . . and the same anteced-
ent may lead to different consequents in different circumstances” (383). 
 25  Here we are leaving aside the seemingly direct mapping between words and con-
cepts, or the propositional contents of public and private representations more generally, 
and focusing instead on the mapping between public behaviors and mental states. 
 26  For example, knowledge claims about mental states (as made by disciplines 
such as psychology, anthropology, and philosophy) are grounded in historically specifi c 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/20/12, NEWGEN
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   212
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   212
7/20/2012   1:15:10 PM
7/20/2012   1:15:10 PM

 
Notes 
213 
epistemes that turn on empirical investigations, theoretical representations, and practical 
interventions. 
 Chapter 6 
 1  Note, then, that a self consists of a semiotic agent’s refl exive relations to her own 
semiotic processes: a subject (the agent) relates to an object (the processes) that is just the 
subject at one degree of remove. It is this refl exive relation that gives the ensemble of semi-
otic processes and, hence, the semiotic agent (qua self) its particular coherence. Given the 
kinds of coherence that we have detailed, the coherence (and potential incoherence) exhib-
ited by the self is temporal as much as spatial, inferential as much as indexical, intersubjec-
tive as much as intrasubjective, ontological as much as epistemological. 
 2  Crucially, this entails that the unit of accountability and, hence, the scale of the self 
in question need not be the same as a biological individual. As with agents more generally, 
just as selves may be interpersonal entities (a family, a community) as much as intraper-
sonal entities (such as organs and phantasms), non-persons (such as animals and life forms 
more generally) have selves, oftentimes at several scales at once given issues such as inclu-
sive fi tness, and the fact that the locus of selection may be, arguably, the individual as much 
as the gene, and the population as much as the individual. Indeed, many artifi cial forms of 
life have selves in this sense. In any case, selves, like agents, and envorganisms more gener-
ally are the products of framing (as foregrounded in Chapter 2). Indeed, another related 
way to characterize the self is that which refl exively encloses and discloses. In short, the 
very processes that signify, and thereby disclose, such ontologically refl exive ensembles tend 
to simultaneously enclose them—framing them as relatively bounded and coherent wholes 
(Kockelman 2007b, 2011a). 
 3  Indeed, as we saw in Chapter 3, while fetishization is often understood as the unwar-
ranted projection of agency, it may also be understood as the unwarranted projection of 
coherence—in this way, we are each consummate fetishists of ourselves. 
 4  As Cooley put it, “A self-idea of this sort seems to have three principal elements: the 
imagination of our appearance to the other person; the imagination of his judgment of that 
appearance, and some sort of self-feeling, such as pride or mortifi cation” (1902:152). And 
as James had earlier put it, “a man has as many social selves as there are individuals who 
recognize him and carry an image of him in their mind. To wound any one of these images 
is to wound him” (1985 [1892]:46). Note, then, that the semiotic processes in question can 
be imagined as much as perceived or inferred. 
 5  In particular, Griffi ths (1997) argues that the phenomena typically grouped under 
the term  emotion actually fracture into three ontologically distinct parts, such that the con-
cept itself does not delimit a natural kind. He thinks that such distinct pieces have been 
grouped together in the past only because they share a general feature of “passivity” in 
contrast to other cognitive phenomena (in particular, mental states underlying means-end 
reasoning, e.g., beliefs and intentions). And, in place of a single category, he argues that one 
must (minimally) keep separate affect programs (Darwin 1965 [1872]; Ekman and Davidson 
1994; Ekman 2006), irruptive motivational states (Frank 1988), and socially sustained pre-
tense (Averill 1980). In particular, for the purposes of expert reasoning (generalization, 
induction, etc.), it does not help scholars to group such forms of anger together—what one 
discovers about one form cannot be used to understand the others. It is for this reason that 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/20/12, NEWGEN
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   213
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   213
7/20/2012   1:15:11 PM
7/20/2012   1:15:11 PM

 214 
Notes
Griffi ths argues that the category delimited by our everyday concept of “emotion” does not 
constitute a natural kind. 
 6  In this way, one does not demand a reason for them, or invoke them if a reason is 
demanded. That is, relatively speaking, they fall out of the inferential articulation, and 
inter- and intrapersonal inheritance (of commitments and entitlements), that was seen to 
be fundamental to beliefs, perceptions, and intentions. 
 7  Relatedly, insofar as affect programs (Darwin 1965 [1872]; Ekman 2006; Griffi ths 
1997) involve what is perhaps the most emblematic sign of emotional statuses (facial expres-
sions), and insofar as affect programs are on the boundary of what is regimented by causes 
versus norms (and, hence, what is maximally motivated), properties of (and theories about) 
affect programs are easily projected onto other seemingly emotional phenomena: natural-
ness, motivation, uncontrollability, and so forth. 
 8  For example, affective interpretants, in the strict sense, and uncontrolled energetic 
interpretants. 
 9  Note, then, that, somewhat paradoxically, even though the object components of 
affective unfoldings are the semiotic processes that constitute one’s self-as-ensemble as 
objects (insofar as one is highly accountable for these semiotic processes and, concomi-
tantly, cares deeply about them), the interpretant components of affective unfoldings may 
constitute semiotic processes which one is less accountable for. 
 10  In some sense, then, this is a way of linking the insights of James with those of 
Mead, as developed in Chapter 3 during the discussion of performativity. In particular, 
what selfhood as temporality really bears a resemblance to is Mead’s theory of the self as 
a dialogue between an I and a Me: the Me is the self as appropriating, having taking into 
account others’ interpretations of the kinds that constitute it, and the I is the self as effect-
ing, evincing indices that change others’ interpretations of its kindedness. Crucially, how-
ever, neither James nor Mead had a theory of value per se—as that which, as per the ideas 
of Chapter 4, grounds the relative coherence of the kinds that constitute us and, hence, our 
identity over time. 
 11  Critiques of orienteering metaphors, their relation to orientalism, and so forth are 
well known, and so will not be rehearsed here. 
 12  Like any real map of any physical terrain, maps may be drawn to different scales: 
more or less detail may be shown, and more or less mental states, social statuses, and material 
substances may be delimited. In the context of this metaphor, the usual questions about medi-
ation and performativity arise. Does the interpreter project features of the sign (qua map) 
onto the object (qua terrain)? Or was the sign iconically designed to have features in common 
with the object? More generally, maps may give rise to terrains (just as words and concepts 
may drive categories), and terrains may give rise to maps (just as categories may drive con-
cepts and words). In a Peircean idiom, the terrain may be both a dynamic and an immediate 
object of the map as sign, thereby relating to it as cause to effect or as effect to cause.  
 13  As Taylor (1985) phrases it, “what is distinctly human is the power to  evaluate our 
desires, to regard some as desirable and others as undesirable” (15–16; and see Frankfurt 
1971). 
 14  See, for example, Rubinstein 2006 and Varian 2006 for crisp (and sometimes criti-
cal) articulations of relatively entrenched microeconomic ontologies. 
 15  As he phrased, it, people and things in the actor’s environment are used as means 
for “the attainment of the actor’s own rationally pursued and calculated ends” (1978:24). 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/20/12, NEWGEN
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   214
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   214
7/20/2012   1:15:11 PM
7/20/2012   1:15:11 PM

 
Notes 
215 
 16  Choices might still exist: there might be a variety of standardized dimensions rela-
tive to which one may weigh the relative desirability of paths and destinations. Choice, then, 
would come down to choosing which dimension, or weighted set of dimensions, to use to 
determine relative desirability. Moreover, we might imagine using different dimensions at 
different positions in life, or in different regions of the terrain. And we might imagine ter-
rains that are not yet subject to standardization and dimensionalization, such that other 
criteria, or no criteria, would have to apply. 
 17   As Peirce saw it, “death makes the number of our risks, of our inferences, fi nite, and 
so makes their mean result uncertain. The very idea of probability and of reasoning rests 
on the assumption that this number is indefi nitely great” (1955c:149). 
 18  See Taylor 1995 for a review; and see Putnam 1975 and Rosch 1975 for classic 
articulations. I am here boiling down some of the ideas to their essence for the sake of 
exposition. 
 19  Such standards might exist, but they might not be publicly available, or one might 
not have enough expertise to apply them. 
 20  Perhaps the works of Cepek (2008a, 2008b) and Guyer (2004), at once fi ercely the-
oretical and deeply empirical, most clearly resonate with these ideas. 
 21  These modes of agency should affect not only maps (qua signs), but also terrains 
(qua objects) and travelers (qua interpreters). 
 22  As Heidegger would put it: “what is thus nearest to us ontically is exactly farthest 
from us ontologically” (1988 [1975]:155). 
 23  Loosely speaking, just as value was framed as second-order desire in section 2, 
authenticity (qua agency over a map) may be framed as third-order desire (or second-order 
value) and radical choice might be framed as fourth-order desire. 
 24  Just as interpreters of a nation’s constitution or a religion’s holy book would have 
to reevaluate its outdated or ancient ideas in light of new events and experiences (or not, 
as some would argue the case often is—thereby getting more and more lost with each suc-
cessive generation). 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/20/12, NEWGEN
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   215
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   215
7/20/2012   1:15:11 PM
7/20/2012   1:15:11 PM

OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/20/12, NEWGEN
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   216
07_Kockelman_Notes.indd   216
7/20/2012   1:15:12 PM
7/20/2012   1:15:12 PM

217
 REFERENCES  
 Agha, Asif. 2007.  Language and social relations . Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. 
 Althusser, L. 1971. Ideology and ideological state apparatuses. In L. Althusser (ed.),  Lenin 
and philosophy and other essays . New York: Monthly Review Press. 
 Anscombe, G. E. M. 1957.  Intentions . Oxford: Blackwell. 
 Arendt, Hannah. 1998 [1958].  The human condition . Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press. 
 Arendt, Hannah. 1963.  On revolution . London: Penguin Books. 
 Aristotle. 2001a. Nicomachean ethics. In Richard McKeon (ed.),  The basic works of 
Aristotle . Pp. 935–1112. New York: The Modern Library. 
 Aristotle. 2001b. Politics. In Richard McKeon (ed.),  The basic works of Aristotle . Pp. 1214–
1310. New York: The Modern Library. 
 Atran, Scott. 2002.  In gods we trust: The evolutionary landscape of religion . Oxford: Oxford 
Univ. Press. 
 Austin, J. L. 2003 [1955].  How to do things with words . Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. 
Press. 
 Averill, James R. 1980. A constructivist view of emotion. In R. Plutchik and H. Kellerman 
(eds.),  Emotion: Theory, research and experience.  Vol. 1,  Theories of emotion.  Pp. 345–
367. New York: Academic Press. 
 Averill, James R. 1985. The social construction of emotion: With special reference to love. 
In Kenneth J. Gergen and Keith E. Davis (eds.),  The social construction of the person . 
Pp. 89–109. New York: Springer. 
 Bacon, Francis. 2000 [1620].  The new organon . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. 
 Bakhtin, Mikhail. 1981. Forms of time and of the chronotope in the novel. In Michael 
Holquist (ed.),  The dialogic imagination . Pp. 84–258. Austin: Univ. of Texas Press. 
 Bakhtin, Mikhail. 1986.  Speech genres and other essays . Austin: Univ. of Texas Press. 
 Bakhtin, Mikhail. 1990.  Art and answerability . Austin: Univ. of Texas Press. 
 Bateson, Gregory. 1972.  Steps towards an ecology of mind . New York: Ballantine. 
 Berger, Peter L., and Thomas Luckmann. 1967.  The social construction of reality: A treatise 
in the sociology of knowledge . New York: Anchor Books. 
 Boas, Franz. 1911.  The mind of primitive man . New York: Macmillan. 
 Bourdieu, Pierre. 1977 [1972].  Outline of a theory of practice . Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
Univ. Press. 
 Bourdieu, Pierre. 1984.  Distinction . Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
 Boyd, Richard. 1991. Realism, anti-foundationalism, and the enthusiasm for natural kinds. 
 Philosophical Studies 61:127–48. 
 Boyd, Robert, and Peter Richerson. 1985.  Culture and the evolutionary process . Chicago: 
Univ. of Chicago Press. 
 Boyd, Robert, and Peter Richerson. 2005.  Not by genes alone: How culture transformed 
human evolution . Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press. 
 Boyer, Pascal. 1994.  The naturalness of religious ideas . Berkeley: Univ. of California Press. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
08_Kockelman_References.indd   217
08_Kockelman_References.indd   217
7/25/2012   2:54:04 PM
7/25/2012   2:54:04 PM

 218 
References
 Brandom, Robert. 1979. Freedom and constraint by norms.  American Philosophical 
Quarterly 16:187–196. 
 Brandom, Robert. 1994.  Making it explicit: Reasoning, representing, and discursive commit-
ment . Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
 Brentano, Franz. 1995 [1874].  Psychology from an empirical standpoint . New York: 
Routledge. 
 Brooks, Rodney. 1997. Intelligence without representation. In John Haugeland (ed.),  mind 
design II . Pp. 395–420. Cambridge, MA: Bradford/MIT Press. 
 Byrne, Richard W., and A. Whiten. 1988.  Machiavellian intelligence . Oxford: Oxford Univ. 
Press. 
 Callon, Michel. 1986. Some elements of a sociology of translation: Domestication of the 
scallops and the fi shermen of St. Brieuc Bay. In John Law (ed.),  Power, action and 
belief: A new sociology of knowledge . Pp. 196–233. London: Routledge and Kegan 
Paul. 
 Callon, Michel. 2007. What does it mean to say that economics is performative? In Donald 
MacKenzie, Fabian Muniesa, and Lucia Siu (eds.),  Do economists make markets? 
Pp. 311–357. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press. 
 Cavalli-Sforza, Luigi L., and Marcus Feldman. 1981.  Cultural transmission and evolution: A 
quantitative approach . Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press. 
 Cepek, Michael L. 2008a. Bold jaguars and unsuspecting monkeys: The value of fearless-
ness in Cof á n Politics.  Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 14:331–349. 
 Cepek, Michael L. 2008b. Essential commitments: Identity and the politics of Cof á n con-
servation.  Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Anthropology 13(1): 1–27. 
 Cheney, Dorothy L., and Robert M. Seyfarth. 1990.  How monkeys see the world: Inside the 
mind of another species . Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press. 
 Chisholm, R. M. 1967. Brentano, Franz. In Paul Edwards (ed.),  The encyclopedia of phi-
losophy. Vol. 1. Pp. 365–368. New York: Collier Macmillan. 
 Chomsky, Noam. 1965.  Aspects of the theory of syntax . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Clifford, James, and George E. Marcus (eds.). 1986.  Writing culture: The poetics and politics 
of ethnography . Berkeley: Univ. of California Press. 
 Colapietro, Vincent M. 1989.  Peirce’s approach to the self: A semiotic perspective on human 
subjectivity . Albany: State Univ. of New York Press. 
 Cooley, Charles H. 1902.  Human nature and the social order. New York: Charles Scribner’s 
Sons. 
 Darwin, Charles. 1965 [1872].  The expression of the emotions in man and animals . Chicago: 
Univ. of Chicago Press. 
 Darwin, Charles. 1981 [1871].  The descent of man, and selection in relation to sex. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton Univ. Press. 
 Davidson, Donald. 1984.  Actions, reasons, and causes . New York: Oxford Univ. Press. 
 Dawkins, Richard. 1976.  The selfi sh gene . Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. 
 Dretske, Fred I. 1981.  Knowledge and the fl ow of information . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Dreyfus, Hubert L. 1991.  Being-in-the-world: A commentary on Heidegger’s being and time, 
division 1 . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Dummett, Michael. 1994. The legacy of Brentano. In  origins of analytic philosophy . 
Pp. 28–42. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
 Durkheim,  É mile. 1947 [1912].  Elementary forms of religious life . New York: Free Press. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
08_Kockelman_References.indd   218
08_Kockelman_References.indd   218
7/25/2012   2:54:04 PM
7/25/2012   2:54:04 PM

 
References 
219 
 Ekman, Paul. 2006.  Darwin and facial expressions . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. 
Press. 
 Ekman, Paul, and Richard J. Davidson (eds.). 1994.  The nature of emotions: Fundamental 
questions . New York: Oxford Univ. Press. 
 Elyachar, Julia. 2005.  Markets of dispossession . Durham, NC: Duke Univ. Press. 
 Elyachar, Julia. 2010. Phatic labor, infrastructure, and the question of empowerment in 
Cairo.  American Ethnologist 37(3): 452–464. 
 Enfi eld, N. J. 2003.  Linguistic epidemiology . London: Routledge. 
 Enfi eld, N. J. 2006. Social consequences of common ground. In N. J. Enfi eld and Stephen 
C. Levinson (eds.),  Roots of human sociality . Pp. 399–430. Oxford: Berg. 
 Enfi eld, N. J., and Stephen C. Levinson (eds.). 2006.  Roots of human sociality: Culture, cog-
nition, and interaction . New York: Berg. 
 Enfi eld, N. J. 2009.  The anatomy of meaning: Speech, gesture, and composite utterances . 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. 
 Enfi eld, N. J. 2011. Sources of asymmetry in human interaction: Enchrony, status, knowl-
edge and agency. In Tanya Stivers, Lorenzo Mondada, and Jakob Steensig (eds.),  The 
morality of knowledge in conversation. Pp. 285–312. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. 
Press. 
 Evans-Pritchard, Edward E. 1969 [1940].  The Nuer: A description of the modes of livelihood 
and political institutions of a Nilotic people . Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. 
 Foucault, Michel. 1991 [1968]. Politics and the study of discourse. In Graham Burchell, 
Colin Gordon, and Peter Miller (eds.),  The Foucault effect . Pp. 53–72. Chicago: Univ. 
of Chicago Press. 
 Frank, Robert H. 1988.  Passions within reason: The strategic role of emotions . New York: 
W.W. Norton. 
 Frankfurt, Harry G. 1971. Freedom of the will and the Concept of a person.  Journal of 
Philosophy 68(1): 5–20. 
 Frege, Gottlob. 1955.  The foundations of arithmetic . Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press. 
 Frege, Gottlob. 1997 [1892]. On Sinn and Bedeutung. In Michael Beaney (ed.),  The Frege 
reader. Pp. 151–171. Oxford: Blackwell. 
 Gal, Susan, and Judith T. Irvine. 1995. The boundaries of languages and disciplines: How 
ideologies construct difference.  Social Research 62(4): 967–1001. 
 Gibson, James J. 1986 [1979].  The ecological approach to visual perception . Boston: 
Houghton Miffl in. 
 Goffman, Erving. 1959.  The presentation of self in everyday life . New York: Anchor Books, 
Doubleday. 
 Goffman, Erving. 1981a. Replies and responses. In  Forms of talk . Pp. 5–42. Philadelphia: 
Univ. of Pennsylvania Press. 
 Goffman, Erving. 1981b. Footing. In  Forms of talk . Pp. 124–159. Philadelphia: Univ. of 
Pennsylvania Press. 
 Goffman, Erving. 1983. The interaction order.  American Sociological Review 48(1): 1–17. 
 Goffman, Erving. 1986 [1974].  Frame analysis . Boston: Northeastern Univ. Press. 
 Gramsci, Antonio. 1971.  Selections from the prison notebooks . New York: International 
Publishers. 
 Grice, Paul. 1989a. Logic and conversation. In  Studies in the ways of words. Pp. 22–40. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
08_Kockelman_References.indd   219
08_Kockelman_References.indd   219
7/25/2012   2:54:04 PM
7/25/2012   2:54:04 PM

 220 
References
 Grice, Paul. 1989b. The causal theory of perception. In  Studies in the ways of words. Pp. 
224–247. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
 Grice, Paul. 1989c. Utterer’s meaning and intentions. In  Studies in the ways of words . Pp. 
86–116. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
 Griffi ths, Paul E. 1997.  What emotions really are . Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press. 
 Guyer, Jane. 2004.  Marginal gains . Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press. 
 Hacking, Ian. 1995. An indeterminancy in the past. In  Rewriting the soul: Multiple person-
ality and the sciences of memory. Pp. 234–257. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press 
 Hacking, Ian. 2001.  An introduction to probability and inductive logic . Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge Univ. Press. 
 Hacking, Ian. 2002. Making up people. In  Historical ontology. Pp. 99–114. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
 Halliday, M. A. K., and Ruqaiya Hasan. 1976.  Cohesion in English . London: Longman. 
 Hanks, William F. 1991.  Referential practice . Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press. 
 Haugeland, John. 1982. Heidegger on being a person.  Nous 16(1): 16–26. 
 Haugeland, John. 1998a. The intentionality all-stars. In  Having thought: Essays in the met-
aphysics of mind. Pp. 127–170. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
 Haugeland, John. 1998b. Mind embodied and embedded. In  Having thought: Essays in the 
metaphysics of mind . Pp. 207–237. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
 Heidegger, Martin. 1988 [1975].  The basic problems of phenomenology. Bloomington: 
Indiana Univ. Press. 
 Heidegger, Martin. 1996 [1927].  Being and time . Albany: State Univ. of New York Press. 
 Helmreich, Stefan. 2011. Commentary.  Current Anthropology 52(5): 731–732. 
 Hobbes, Thomas. 1994 [1651].  Leviathan . Indianapolis: Hackett. 
 Hockett, Charles F. 1958.  A course in modern linguistics . New York: Macmillan. 
 Hull, David. 1988.  Science as a process . Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press. 
 Humboldt, Wilhelm von. 1999 [1836].  On language: On the diversity of human language con-
struction and its infl uence on the mental development of the human species . Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. 
 Jackendoff, Ray. 2002.  Foundations of language . Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. 
 Jakobson, Roman. 1990. Shifters and verbal categories. In Linda R. Waugh and Monique 
Monville-Burston (eds.),  Roman Jakobson: On language . Pp. 386–392. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
 James, William. 1950 [1890].  The principles of psychology . New York: Dover. 
 James, William. 1985 [1892].  Psychology: The briefer course . Chicago: Univ. of Chicago 
Press. 
 Kauffman, Stuart. 1993.  Origins of order: Self-organization and selection in evolution . 
Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. 
 Kauffman, Stuart. 1995.  At home in the universe: The search for the laws of self-organization 
and complexity . Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. 
 Keane, Webb. 2003. Semiotics and the social analysis of material things.  Language and 
Communication 23:409–425 
 Keil, Frank C. (1989).  Concepts, kinds, and cognitive development . Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press. 
 Kitcher, P. 1993.  The advancement of science . Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. 
 Knorr Cetina, Karin. 1999.  Epistemic cultures . Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
08_Kockelman_References.indd   220
08_Kockelman_References.indd   220
7/25/2012   2:54:04 PM
7/25/2012   2:54:04 PM

 
References 
221 
 Kockelman, Paul. 1999. Poetic function and logical form, ideal languages and forms of life. 
 Chicago Anthropology Exchange 29:34–50. 
 Kockelman, Paul. 2004. Stance and subjectivity.  Journal of Linguistic Anthropology 14(2): 
127–150. 
 Kockelman, Paul. 2005. The semiotic stance.  Semiotica 157:233–304. 
 Kockelman, Paul. 2006a. A semiotic ontology of the commodity.  Journal of Linguistic 
Anthropology 16(1): 76–102. 
 Kockelman, Paul. 2006b. Agent, person, subject, self.  Semiotica 162(1): 1–18. 
 Kockelman, Paul. 2006c. Residence in the orld: Affordances, nstruments, ctions, oles, and 
dentities.  Semiotica 162(1):19–71. 
 Kockelman, Paul. 2006d. Representations of the orld: Memories, erceptions, eliefs, lans, 
and ntentions.  Semiotica 162(1): 72–125.Kockelman, Paul. 2007a. Enclosure and dis-
closure.  Public Culture 19(2): 303–305. 
 Kockelman, Paul. 2007b. Agency: The relation between meaning, power, and knowledge. 
 Current Anthropology 48(3): 375–401. 
 Kockelman, Paul. 2007c. From status to contract revisited.  Anthropological Theory 7(2): 
151–176. 
 Kockelman, Paul. 2010a.  Language, culture, and mind: Natural constructions and social 
kinds . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. 
 Kockelman, Paul. 2010b. Enemies, parasites, and noise: How to take up residence in a 
system without becoming a term in it.  Journal of Linguistic Anthropology 20(2): 
406–421. 
 Kockelman, Paul. 2011. A semiotic ontology of poultry: Selfhood, affect, animals, and eth-
nography.  Language in Society 40(4): 427–454. 
 Kockelman, Paul. In press. Semiotic technologies, temporal reckoning, and the portability 
of meaning.  Anthropological Theory . 
 Kuhn, Thomas S. 1962.  The structure of scientifi c revolutions . Chicago: Univ. of Chicago 
Press. 
 Labov, William. 1994.  Principles of linguistic change: Internal factors . New York: Blackwell. 
 Labov, William. 2001.  Principles of linguistic change: Social factors . New York: Blackwell. 
 Lacan, Jacques. 1981 [1968].  The language of the self . Translated by Anthony Wilden. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press. 
 Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. 1980.  Metaphors we live by . Chicago: Univ. of Chicago 
Press. 
 Lansing, Stephen. 2006.  Perfect order: Recognizing complexity in Bali . Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton Univ. Press. 
 Larkin, Brian. 2008.  Signal and noise: Media, infrastructure and urban culture in Nigeria . 
Durham, NC: Duke Univ. Press. 
 Latour, Bruno. 1988 [1984].  The pasteurization of France . Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. 
Press. 
 Latour, Bruno. 2007.  Reassembling the social . Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. 
 Latour, Bruno, and Steve Woolgar. 1986.  Laboratory life: The construction of scientifi c 
facts . Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press. 
 Levinson, Stephen C. 1983.  Pragmatics . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. 
 Levinson, Stephen C. 2000.  Presumptive meanings: The theory of generalized conversational 
implicature . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
08_Kockelman_References.indd   221
08_Kockelman_References.indd   221
7/25/2012   2:54:04 PM
7/25/2012   2:54:04 PM

 222 
References
 Lewis, David. 1969.  Convention: A philosophical study . Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. 
Press. 
 Lillard, Angeline. 1998. Ethnopsychologies: Cultural variations in theories of mind. 
 Psychological Bulletin 123(1): 3–32. 
 Linton, Ralph. 1936.  The study of man . New York: Appleton, Century, and Crofts. 
 Lucy, John (ed.). 1993.  Refl exive language: Reported speech and metapragmatics . Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. 
 Maine, Henry Sumner. 2004 [1866].  Ancient law . New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction. 
 Marx, Karl. 1967 [1867].  Capital , Vol. 1. New York: International Publishers. 
 Marx, Karl. 1978 [1845]. The German ideology. In Robert C. Tucker (ed.),  The Marx-
Engels reader. 2d ed. Pp. 146–200. New York: Norton. 
 Mauss, Marcel. 1973 [1934]. Techniques of the body.  Economy and Society 52(5): 711–739. 
 Mead, George Herbert. 1934.  Mind, self, and society . Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press. 
 Millikan, Ruth Garrett. 2004.  Varieties of meaning . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Millikan, Ruth Garrett. 2005.  Language: A biological model . Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. 
 Mitchell, Melanie. 2009.  Complexity: A guided tour . Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. 
 Muniesa, Fabian. 2007. Market technologies and the pragmatics of prices.  Economy and 
Society 36(3): 377–395. 
 Nietzsche, Friedrich. 1989 [1887].  On the genealogy of morals / Ecce Homo . New York: 
Vintage. 
 Norman, Donald A. 2002 [1988].  The design of everyday things . 2d ed. New York: Basic 
Books. 
 Oyama, Susan, Paul E. Griffi ths, and Russell D. Gray (eds.). 2003.  Cycles of contingency: 
Developmental systems and evolution . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Palmer, Stephen E. 1999.  Vision science . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Parmentier, Richard J. 1994. Peirce divested for nonintimates. In  Signs in society: Studies in 
semiotic anthropology . Pp. 3–22. Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press. 
 Peirce, Charles S. 1955a. Logic as semiotic: The theory of signs. In Justus Buchler (ed.), 
 Philosophical writings of Peirce . Pp. 98–119. New York: Dover. 
 Peirce, Charles S. 1955b. Pragmatism in retrospect: A last formulation. In Justus Buchler 
(ed.),  Philosophical writings of Peirce. Pp. 269–289. New York: Dover. 
 Peirce, Charles S. 1955c. The doctrine of chances. In Justus Buhler (ed.),  Philosophical writ-
ings of Peirce. Pp. 142–154. New York: Dover. 
 Peirce, Charles S. 1955d. The essentials of pragmatism. In Justus Buhler (ed.), Philosophical 
writings of Peirce. Pp. 251–268. New York: Dover. 
 Peirce, Charles S. 1992a [1868]. On a new list of categories. In Nathan Houser and Christian 
Kloesel (eds.),  The essential Peirce. Vol. 1,  1867–1893. Pp. 1–10. Bloomington: Indiana 
Univ. Press. 
 Peirce, Charles S. 1992b [1868]. Questions concerning certain faculties claimed for man. In 
Nathan Houser and Christian Kloesel (eds.),  The essential Peirce. Vol. 1,  1867–1893. 
Pp. 11–27. Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press. 
 Peirce, Charles S. 1992c [1868]. Some consequences of the four incapacities. In Nathan 
Houser and Christian Kloesel (eds.),  The essential Peirce. Vol. 1 , 1867–1893. Pp. 28–55. 
Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press. 
 Peirce, Charles S. 1992 [1887–1888]. A guess at the riddle. In Nathan Houser and Christian 
Kloesel (eds.),  The essential Peirce. Vol. 1 , 1867–1893. Pp. 245–279. Bloomington: 
Indiana Univ. Press. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
08_Kockelman_References.indd   222
08_Kockelman_References.indd   222
7/25/2012   2:54:04 PM
7/25/2012   2:54:04 PM

 
References 
223 
 Peirce, Charles S. 1998 [1903]. Nomenclature and divisions of triadic relations, as far as 
they are determined. In Nathan Houser and Christian Kloesel (eds.),  The essential 
Peirce. Vol. 2,  1883–1913 . Pp. 289–299. Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press. 
 Peirce, Charles S. 1998 [1906–1908]. Excerpts from letters to Lady Welby. In Nathan Houser 
and Christian Kloesel (eds.),  The essential Peirce. Vol. 2,  1883–1913 . Pp. 477–491. 
Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press. 
 Peirce, Charles S. 1998 [1907]. Pragmatism. In Nathan Houser and Christian Kloesel (eds.), 
 The essential Peirce. Vol. 2,  1883–1913 . Pp. 398–433. Bloomington: Indiana Univ. 
Press. 
 Premack, D., and G. Woodruff. 1978. Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? 
 Behavioral and Brain Sciences 4:515–526. 
 Putnam, Hilary. 1975. The meaning of “meaning.” In  Philosophical papers. Vol. 2 , Mind, 
language and reality . Pp. 215–271, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. 
 Quine, W. V. 1969.  Ontological relativity and other essays . New York: Columbia Univ. 
Press. 
 Rosch, Elinor. 1975. Cognitive representations of semantic categories.  Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General 104:192–233. 
 Rubinstein, Ariel. 2006.  Lecture notes in microeconomic theory: The economic agent . 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press. 
 Sacks, Harvey, Emanuel Schegloff, and Gail Jefferson. 1974. A simplest systematics for the 
organization of turn-taking in conversation.  Language 50:696–735. 
 Saussure, Ferdinand, de. 1983 [1916].  Course in general linguistics . La Salle, IL: Open Court. 
 Schegloff, Emanuel. 2007.  Sequence organization in interaction. Vol. 1,  A primer in conversa-
tional analysis. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. 
 Schieffelin, Bambi B., Kathryn Ann Woolard, and Paul V. Kroskrity (eds.). 1998.  Language 
ideologies: Practice and theory . Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. 
 Schnitzler, Antina, von. 2008. Citizenship prepaid: Water, calculability, and technopolitics 
in South Africa.  Journal of Southern African Studies 34(4): 899–917. 
 Scott, Stephen. 2009. The metrological mountain: “Translating” tuberculosis in periurban 
Bolivia. Ph.D. Diss., Department of Anthropology, Univ. of Chicago. 
 Searle, John R. 1983.  Intentionality: An essay in the philosophy of mind . Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge Univ. Press. 
 Sellars, Wilfrid. 1997 [1956].  Empiricism and the philosophy of mind . Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard Univ. Press. 
 Serres, Michel. 2007 [1980].  The parasite . Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press. 
 Shannon, Claude. 1949. Communication Theory of Secrecy Systems. Declassifi ed 
Document. September 1, 1949. Pp. 656–715. 
 Shannon, Claude, and Warren Weaver. 1963 [1949].  The mathematical theory of communi-
cation . Urbana: Univ. of Illinois Press. 
 Silverstein, Michael. 1976. Shifters, linguistic categories, and cultural description. In Keith 
Basso and Ellen Selby (eds.),  Meaning in anthropology . Pp. 11–56. Albuquerque: Univ. 
of New Mexico Press. 
 Silverstein, Michael. 1979. Language function and linguistic ideology. In Paul R. Clyne, 
William F. Hanks, and Carol L. Hofbauer (eds.),  The elements: A parasession on lin-
guistic units and levels . Pp. 193–247. Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society. 
 Silverstein, Michael. 1981. The limits of awareness. In  Sociolinguistic working papers , no. 
84. Austin, TX: Southwest Educational Development Laboratory. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
08_Kockelman_References.indd   223
08_Kockelman_References.indd   223
7/25/2012   2:54:04 PM
7/25/2012   2:54:04 PM

 224 
References
 Silverstein, Michael, and Greg Urban (eds.). 1996. Natural histories of discourse. Chicago: 
Univ. of Chicago Press. 
 Simon, Herbert A. 1981.  The sciences of the artifi cial . 2d ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Sipser, Michael. 1996.  Introduction to the theory of computation . Boston: PWS. 
 Sober, Elliott. 1992. Models of cultural evolution. In Paul E. Griffi ths (ed.),  Trees of life: 
Essays in the philosophy of biology . Pp. 1–17. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer. 
 Sperber, Dan. 1996.  Explaining culture: A naturalistic approach . Oxford: Blackwell. 
 Sperber, Dan, and Deidre Wilson. 1995 [1986].  Relevance: Communication and cognition . 2d 
ed. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
 Star, Susan Leigh. 1999. The ethnography of infrastructure.  American Behavioral Scientist 
43(3): 377–391. 
 Sterelny, Kim. 1994. Science and selection.  Biology and Philosophy 9:45–62. 
 Sterelny, Kim, and Paul E. Griffi ths. 1999.  Sex and death . Chicago: Univ. of Chicago 
Press. 
 Strawson, P. F. 1971. Intention and convention in speech acts. In Jay F. Rosenberg and 
Charles Travis (eds.),  Readings in the philosophy of language . Pp. 599–614. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
 Talmy, Leonard. 2000. The relation of grammar to cognition. In  Towards a cognitive seman-
tics. Vol. 1,  Concept structuring systems . Pp. 21–96. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Taylor, Charles. 1985. What is human agency? In  Human agency and language . Pp. 15–44. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
 Taylor, Charles. 1989.  Sources of the self . Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
 Taylor, John R. 1995.  Linguistic categorization: Prototypes in linguistic theory . 2d ed. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
 Tomasello, Michael. 1999.  The cultural origins of human cognition . Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge Univ. Press. 
 Tomasello, Michael 2008.  Origins of human communication . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Tomasello, Michael, and Josep Call. 1997.  Primate cognition . New York: Oxford Univ. Press. 
 Tomlinson, Gary. 2011. Commentary.  Current Anthropology 52(5): 733–734. 
 Uexkull, Jakob von. 1926.  Theoretical biology . London: Kegan, Paul. 
 van Valin, Robert D., Jr., and Randy J. LaPolla. 1997.  Syntax: Structure, meaning, and func-
tion . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. 
 Varian, Hal. 2006.  Intermediate microeconomics. 7th ed. New York: W.W. Norton. 
 Varro, Marcus Terentius. 1938 [43 B.C.].  On the Latin language . Roland G. Kent (trans.). 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. 
 Veblen, Thorstein. 1971 [1899].  The theory of the leisure class . New York: Free Press. 
 Vygotsky, L. S. 1978.  Mind and society: The development of higher psychological processes . 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
 Waal, Franz, de. 2000.  Chimpanzee politics: Power and sex among apes. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins Univ. Press. 
 Weber, Max. 1949 [1904].  The methodology of the social sciences . New York: Free Press. 
 Weber, Max. 1978.  Economy and society. Vol. 1. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press. 
 Whiten, Andrew. 1993. Evolving a theory of mind: The nature of non-verbal mentalism in 
other primates. In Simon Baron-Cohen, Helen Tager-Flusberg, and Donald J. Cohen 
(eds.),  Understanding other minds: Perspectives from autism. Pp. 367–396. New York: 
Oxford Univ. Press. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
08_Kockelman_References.indd   224
08_Kockelman_References.indd   224
7/25/2012   2:54:04 PM
7/25/2012   2:54:04 PM

 
References 
225 
 Wierzbicka, Anna. 1985.  Conceptual and lexical analysis . Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. 
 Wimmer, H., and J. Perner. 1983. Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and constraining 
function of wrong beliefs in young children’s understanding of deception.  Cognition 
13:103–128. 
 Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1961 [1921].  Tractatus logico-philosophicus . London: Routledge and 
Kegan Paul. 
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – FIRST-PROOF, 07/25/12, NEWGEN
08_Kockelman_References.indd   225
08_Kockelman_References.indd   225
7/25/2012   2:54:04 PM
7/25/2012   2:54:04 PM

