THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980)3,535-571
Printed in the United States of America
Are central pattern generators
understandable?
Allen I. Selverston
Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
Calif. 92093
Abstract: Most rhythmic behaviors are produced by a specialized ensemble of neurons found in the central nervous system. These central
pattern generators (CPGs) have become a cornerstone of neuronal circuit analysis. Studying simple invertebrate nervous systems may reveal the
interactions of the neurons involved in the production of rhythmic motor output. There has recently been progress in this area, but due to
certain intrinsic features of CPCs it is unlikely that present techniques will ever yield a complete understanding of any but the simplest of them.
The chief impediment seems to be our inability to identify and characterize the total interneuronal pool making up a CPG. In addition, our
general analytic strategy relies on a descriptive, reductionist approach, with no analytical constructs beyond phenomenological modeling.
Detailed descriptive data are usually not of sufficient depth for specific model testing, giving rise instead to ad hoc explanations of mechanisms
which usually turn out to be incorrect. Because they make too many assumptions, modeling studies have not added much to our understanding
of ('PCs; this is due not so much to inadequate simulations as to the poor quality and incomplete nature of the data provided by
experimentalists.
A basic strategy that would provide sufficient information for neural modeling would include: (1) identifying and characterizing each
element in the CPG network; (2) specifying the synaptic connectivity between the elements; and (3) analyzing nonlinear synaptic properties
and interactions by means of the connectivity matrix. Limitations based on our present technical capabilities are also discussed.
Keywords: central pattern generator; motor patterns; neural circuits; neural modeling
Animal behavior is the result of sequential muscular contrac-
tions controlled by patterns of impulses generated in the
central nervous system. To understand how such motor
patterns are produced one must know what neurons are
involved, how they are turned on and off, and how they are
modified as the behavior progresses. Behavior which is being
continuously changed by both internal and external cues is
referred to as episodic. Capturing prey and playing the piano
are examples of such behaviors. Since these are by nature
nonrepetitive behaviors, they are extremely difficult to study.
New pools of motor neurons are constantly being shifted
around inside the CNS (central nervous system) so that the
motor patterns are never exactly the same. Repetitive
behaviors, on the other hand, are, by definition, relatively
consistent in their motor output patterns. Locomotion, flight,
chewing, and swimming use essentially the same groups of
motor neurons over and over again, and although the motor
pattern can be modified to meet changes which may be
encountered in the environment, the basic rhythm is reason-
ably consistent. Most of the progress in understanding the
neural control of behavior has come from studying rhythmic
behaviors in both vertebrates and invertebrates. In fact, it is
only rhythmic behavior which has the possibility of being
explainable in terms of all the neurons involved.
At the heart of the analysis is the concept of the central
pattern generator (CPG), a group of neurons which can
produce the rhythmic pattern. It is now well established that
almost all such CPGs can operate without the need of
peripheral sensory input (Wilson 1961; Grillner 1977). A
fundamental question, then, is how are the neurons which
comprise the CPG arranged and how are they able to
generate rhythmic patterns - i.e., how do they work? In the
light of our present knowledge the question could perhaps be
phrased: what constitutes our current understanding of a
CPG? We can begin with a more detailed look at the idea of
the CPG and the present limits on its neurophysiological
analysis.
The central pattern generator concept
The concept of a CPG arose from experiments which
demonstrated that a discrete group of neurons could produce
a rhythmic motor pattern when completely isolated from
sensory inputs (Wilson 1961); such an ensemble of neurons
represents a CPG. In some cases one CPG can drive several
structures, while in other cases there is a separate CPG for
each. When there are multiple CPGs, special pathways are
necessary to coordinate their activities (Stein 1976). Only in
rare instances do CPGs work in complete isolation (Selverston
et al. 1976). Usually some form of generalized excitation is
required (Grillner 1977; Wilson 1961).
The CPG has been found to be made up of motor neurons
(Maynard & Selverston 1975), interneurons (Getting et al.
1980), or some combination of the two (Mulloney & Selver-
ston 1974). When the CPG is made up of premotor inter-
neurons, some of them may also be a part of a CPG for other
rhythmic behaviors; that is, different CPGs may share
interneurons. For example, the CPGs for locomotion and for
scratching in the cat probably use neurons from the same pool
(Orlovsky and Shik 1976).
The CPG may be turned on by special input pathways
[command fibers - see Kupfermann & Weiss: "The
Command Neuron Concept" BBS 1(1) 1978], increased
activity of excitatory axons (Wilson 1961), or the action of
various circulating substances such as peptides [Barker and
Gainer 1974 - see also Dismukes: "New Concepts of Molec-
ular Communication" BBS 2(3) 1978], Once activity is under
1980 Cambridge University Press
0140-525X/80/040535-37/S4.00/
535
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Selverston: Central pattern generators
way, it is often modulated by sensory feedback or specialized
inputs from other areas of the CNS (Grillner 1977). Activity
of the CPG can be terminated by removal of the input
excitation (Wilson 1964) or by degradation of any neuro-
chemical agents (Barker et al. 1975).
Present strategies
Most of the recent progress in CPG analysis has come from
work on invertebrate preparations in which large, identifiable
cells can be easily penetrated. One can record from pairs of
pre- and postsynaptic cells while the pattern is being
generated. With the use of such "simple" systems, the goal of
"understanding" the mechanisms involved in the production
of rhythmic motor patterns at one time seemed theoretically
possible. The general approach consisted of attempting to: (1)
describe all of the components; (2) explain how these
components interact to produce a rhythmic motor program;
and (3) ultimately develop a model which not only replicates
the dynamic range of the motor output but also can predict
the results of altering any component of the system.
Component description
The CPG is a machine - a complex operating system made up
of interrelated parts. To understand its operation we must
know the number of parts it contains and as much as possible
about the characteristics of each part. Although this would
seem to be straightforward, there is enormous variation in
what workers consider to be an adequate description. The
most comprehensive list I have seen is that proposed by
Bullock (1976), which includes forty-six parameters for units
and groups that should be known in order to understand a
network's function. This list assumes that all the cells in the
network can be identified. For most CPGs, however, just
finding all the participating cells has proven to be an
enormous problem.
Locating the cell bodies of the motorneurons is not too
difficult, since soma potentials can usually be correlated with
action potentials in the motor roots, and all of the somata can
be located by backfilling through the motor roots with marker
dyes such as cobalt or Lucifer Yellow. If the CPG is made up
solely of motor neurons, then a complete description can, in
theory, be obtained. But for cases in which the CPG is made
up exclusively or partly of interneurons, the problem is much
greater. Such interneurons can often be quite small, which
makes them hard to find by intracellular probing. In addition,
the motor pattern must be operative during such probing for
the interneurons to be recognizable as components of the
CPG (this is not the case for motor neurons). Unless one knows
the total number of interneurons present, or their individual
properties, any circuit diagram will be incomplete. (One may
argue that some of the interneurons are less important than
others and so can be omitted from the circuit without much
harm. This is probably true. They may serve only minor
"tuning functions" or have redundant or overlapping activity
with other cells. In some cases, their omission will not affect a
first approximation of the circuit.)
A CPG does not produce a motor output pattern which is
either present or absent, but instead shows various levels of
activity. Ideally, the pattern produced by the preparation in
its experimental condition is equivalent to the pattern
observed in the freely behaving animal. When one searches
for interneurons which are part of the CPG, the identification
is based mostly on the fact that their activity correlates with
motor output. Unless one can account for every interneuron
present in a ganglion, it is never known with certainty that all
of the CPG interneurons have been found. Unless they are all
known, the formulation of any mechanism is difficult. But
what is more disturbing is that omissions may lead to a faulty
explanation of the mechanism, especially when some sort of
model is used to verify the circuit.
If the progress made in describing various CPG circuits is
examined carefully, it is clear that most descriptions are
incomplete, and, with our present tools, they are likely to
remain that way. That is, for most rhythmic circuits, the total
number of cells involved is not known.
But suppose we could identify all of the neuronal compo-
nents of a CPG. First, we would need to know each neuron's
cellular properties. If one did not know the elemental
properties of each component, providing a mechanistic
explanation of a network would be as difficult as assembling a
radio with unlabeled resistors and capacitors. Knowing the
properties does not lead directly to an explanation; however, a
reductionistic experimental approach can be valuable in
formulating a hypothesis. Again using the radio analogy,
although properties of the components do not explain the
overall function of the circuits, no mechanistic explanation
would be possible without them.
What properties of the component cells should be known?
A minimal list would include:
1. the excitability of their membranes, i.e., current-voltage
curve;
2. their thresholds relative to their resting potentials;
3. their firing characteristics - steady, irregular, bursty -
as well as the amount of accommodation they show;
4. any endogenous activity such as slow-wave generating
mechanisms;
5. stability or instabilities, such as plateauing properties;
6. extent of postinhibitory rebound.
Ideally, these values should be obtained from each cell in
isolation, but since this is often impossible, the values must be
referred to the particular activity state of the CPG at the time
of measurement - i.e., whether the elemental properties were
obtained during pattern-generating activity or during a silent
period.
Another area of purely descriptive information is the
connectivity between components. Connectivity can most
easily be determined by recording pairwise from the neurons
that make up the CPG. Spontaneous or elicited activity in one
cell can be correlated with some response in a synaptically
connected follower cell. Such paired recordings are the basis
for determining the functional relations between cells but do
not necessarily demonstrate that a monosynaptic pathway is
responsible.
While ascertaining the presence of monosynaptic connec-
tions is not technically difficult (Berry & Pentreath 1976),
most CPG circuits have been constructed without rigorous
testing for monosynapticity. At a minimum, one should be
able to demonstrate a clear, unitary postsynaptic potential
following a spike in the presynaptic cell. Showing that the
firing of one cell can excite or inhibit another cell without
showing postsynaptic potentials is poor evidence for a
monosynaptic connection (Friesen et al. 1976). Several other
tests can help to distinguish mono- and polysynaptic path-
ways. Raising the Ca++ concentration of the saline increases
synaptic effectiveness but at the same time raises the
threshold for firing (Berry & Cottrell 1974). With this
technique, neurons in multisynaptic pathways may be
blocked. Another method is to inject the presynaptic neuron
with TEA (tetraethyl ammonia) to block K+ channels (Hille
1967). Since this prolongs the action potential and augments
the release of transmitter from the presynaptic terminal, a
larger than normal postsynaptic response should occur if the
connection is monosynaptic.
An additional problem associated with determining the
536
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

monosynapticity of connections is the possibility of measuring
PSPs (postsynaptic potentials) from cell bodies which are
electrically distant from the postsynaptic site. This may
present difficulties, especially with some arthropod systems
which not only have electrically passive soma membranes,
but also have low resistance cables connecting the somata to
the neuropile synaptic regions (Selverston & Remler 1972).
This particular problem can be overcome by neuropile
penetrations closer to the synaptic areas, so I would not regard
it as an intractable difficulty.
The last type of information which must be obtained is a
description of the synaptic properties. I would include among
these:
1. Synaptic strength - determined functionally and not
merely by the size of a postsynaptic response measured
at a distant recording site. By functionally I mean the
effectiveness of presynaptic cell firing in changing the
ongoing activity in the postsynaptic cell.
2. An index of facilitation or antifacilitation.
3. Frequency-dependent conductance changes.
4. The strength of electrical coupling, if present.
The strength of the synapse is probably the most important of
these factors since an extremely weak synapse may, for all
practical purposes, be omitted from the wiring diagram.
(There are no generally accepted criteria for ignoring neurons
with weak synaptic interactions. Presumably such synapses
will play only minor roles; however, they may form part of a
pool of similar neurons which may sum their synaptic inputs.
On the other hand, as suggested earlier, they may perform
fine-tuning functions that are important but not critical to the
central pattern generating mechanism.)
It is hard for me to see how any explanation of mechanism
can be attempted without having all of this information, yet
many models are put forward based on the connectivity
alone. As in the determination of the basic cellular properties,
the synaptic parameters must be indexed to the activity or
lack of activity of the CPG network. Synaptic properties
measured in an inactive system are likely to be quite different
from those derived during normal activity (Spira et al. 1976).
Nonlinear interactions may play a crucial role for many
synaptic relationships. This is especially true for neurons
which have both electrical and chemical interactions. Bennett
and his colleagues have shown that the strength of a chemical
synapse may be altered by current flowing in nearby
electrical synapses. Similarly, chemical synapses can alter the
coupling coefficient of electrical synapses (Spira and Bennett
1972). These phenomena suggest that synaptic strength and
electrical coupling coefficients may vary continuously in
some networks so that any static description of these prop-
erties would be an oversimplification.
Mechanisms
Identifying and characterizing the components of a CPG will
not, except in the most trivial cases, explain how the CPG
works any more than - to use our earlier analogy - a similar
classification of its parts will tell us how a radio works. Such
information must be fitted into an existing model or, if
necessary, a new one must be formulated. Several models
have been proposed to account for the production of
rhythmic motor patterns. These fall into two principal
categories:
a. ensembles of neurons driven by cells with spontaneously
oscillating membrane potentials (endogenous bursters),
or
b. ensembles in which the synaptic and/or electrical
connectivity (circuitry) causes an oscillatory or "reso-
nant" mode of activity.
Selverston: Central pattern generators
Endogenous bursters
Endogenous bursters are cells whose membrane potential
oscillates rhythmically in such a way that bursts of impulses
are triggered on the depolarizing phase of the oscillation (see
Figure 1). Such cells have been well studied in mollusks, in
which the ionic mechanisms underlying the oscillations have
been examined by means of voltage clamping (Gola 1976).
All such cells show a negative resistance characteristic due to
an increased inward conductance during the depolarizing
phase. Repolarization appears to be caused by an increase in
K+ conductance.
Cells can be identified as endogenous bursters by showing
that their bursting continues when all synaptic input to them
has been blocked or removed. This can be done experimen-
tally by removing or tying off the soma (Alving 1968) or by
using high Mg2+ low Ca++ saline (Selverston 1976). In the
latter method, care must be taken to ensure that the ionic
imbalance does not affect the endogenous burst-generating
mechanism directly. Some cells can be converted into
endogenous bursters by certain peptides, so this property may
be under the control of humoral agents as well (Barker &
Gainer 1974).
Despite the widespread occurrence of endogenous bursters,
there are very few examples showing how they are used in
pattern generation. The cardiac ganglion of the lobster
contains only nine cells, some of which appear to be
electrically coupled bursters (Tameyasu 1976). The pyloric
rhythm of the lobster stomatogastric ganglion also contains
three endogenous bursters, which play an important role in
the generation of the pyloric rhythm (Maynard & Selverston
1976).
Endogenous bursters have been implicated in the control of
the heartbeat in both leech (Thompson & Stent 1976) and
Aplysia (Koester et al. 1974). Except in the case of the lobster
pyloric rhythm, endogenous bursters appear to be used
mainly as driving elements in the simplest rhythmic behav-
iors, such as the heartbeat. However, if the burster cells are
connected to other neurons with inhibitory synapses, then
tonically firing neurons will be interrupted during the
endogenously active cell burst and an antagonistic burst
pattern will be produced. An example of this type is the
pyloric rhythm generator of the lobster stomatogastric
ganglion (Maynard & Selverston 1976). In this system, a
group of three electrically coupled endogenous bursters
periodically inhibits other tonically firing neurons in the
circuit.
Although most cells of this type generate action potentials,
there are several examples in arthropods which may indicate
that no spikes are involved in their presynaptic functioning.
Mendelson has described cells in the lobster which drive
Figure 1. Hypothetical circuits for the production of rhythmic
motor output driven by an endogenously bursting cell. The burst-
er could (1) periodically excite two silent motor neurons; (2) peri-
odically inhibit two tonically active motor neurons; or (3) simul-
taneously excite and inhibit two follower neurons.
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
537
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Selverston: Central pattern generators
rhythmic activity of the gill balers by graded release of
transmitter (Mendelson 1971). Depolarization or hyperpolar-
ization of this cell can speed up or slow down the beat
frequency. During spontaneous activity, the cells show
membrane oscillations timed to the motor rhythm.
A similar type of cell can also drive locomotor patterns in
the roach (Pearson & Fourtner 1975) and locust (Burrows
1980). In both cases these cells appear to be part of a premotor
interneuronal pool.
Network models are considerably more diverse in scope
than those positing endogenous bursters. Such networks can
range from two to many hundreds of neurons (Friesen &
Stent 1978). Separately, these neurons can be silent or can
show some tonic activity. When synaptically connected and
properly excited, however, such networks are able to produce
complicated rhythmic patterns. Since no single cell is respon-
sible for the output, such rhythms are frequently referred to
as "emergent" properties of the network. It is not difficult to
explain how a network driven by endogenously bursting
neurons works; it is a completely different matter when
considering neural networks without burster cells. As in many
nonlinear systems, the output may not be equal to the sum of
its parts. Several network models have been suggested.
Reciprocal inhibition
The simplest possible network consists of two neurons coupled
to each other with inhibitory synapses (Figure 2). Such a
system requires only two properties for it to produce
alternating bursts: some form of tonic excitation, and the
property that the synapses fatigue or defacilitate. Harmon
was the first to show that two artificial neurons connected in
this way could oscillate (Harmon 1964). Wilson also used this
concept to suggest how it might drive the locust flight motor
system (Wilson & Waldron 1968). Subsequent modeling
studies have demonstrated that if postinhibitory rebound is
added to the system, the oscillations become more stable
(Perkel & Mulloney 1974). Brown was one of the pioneers in
the use of such a network, which he termed the half-center
model (Brown 1914). It has been applied to vertebrate
oscillatory systems such as locomotion (Brown 1911;
Jankowska et al. 1967) and respiration (Burns & Salmoraghi
1960), although no supportive experimental evidence has
been obtained.
Inhibitory loops
Szekely has suggested, based on theoretical modeling studies,
a system of closed loops of neurons connected by inhibitory
synapses (Szekely 1965). If each neuron is excited, then the
recurrent inhibitory pathways cause the neurons to fire in
sequential bursts. Unlike the reciprocal inhibitory networks,
these closed loops do not require the synapses to fatigue, since
each will fire until inhibited (Figure 3). Such loops are
capable of producing multiphasic burst patterns, depending
upon the number of neurons present. Stent and his colleagues
have suggested that this mechanism may underlie burst
production in the swim CPG of the leech (Friesen et al. 1976).
While this CPG was at first thought to rely on sensory
feedback and the entire chain of sequential ganglia for its
operation (Kristan 1974), subsequent work has failed to
support this and has shown instead that the pattern can be
produced with fewer and fewer ganglia.
The most recently proposed version of the mechanism
(Friesen et al. 1976) involves a loop of premotor interneurons
connected by recurrent cyclic inhibitory loops in the manner
suggested by Szekely (1965). According to Friesen et al.'s
Figure 2. Hypothetical network type of CPG. The rhythmic
motor output consists of alternating bursts in neurons B and C
when they are driven by tonic excitation in neuron A. The recip-
rocal inhibitory synapes must show fatigue for the system to
operate.
hypothesis, one complete loop spans two ganglia, with the
interneurons being connected by axons in the lateral part of
the interganglionic connectives. More recently, however,
Weeks has shown that if the lateral parts of the connective are
cut on both sides of the ganglion, leaving only excitatory
pathways intact, the swim rhythm can still be generated
(Weeks 1980).
This evidence indicates that the swim CPG is present in a
single ganglion and that the inhibitory loop mechanism
previously proposed was erroneous. These results also empha-
size how one can be misled by premature modeling studies
based on an incomplete analysis of the CPG circuitry and
preconceived ideas about how the CPG should work. Any
further analysis of the leech system, however, will run into
the same problem found in other small systems - how to find
all the premotor interneurons. Even if others are found, how
does one ever know that the circuit is complete? Clearly a
new approach is called for.
Excitatory networks
Networks based on mutual exictation have been proposed for
several invertebrate systems (See Figure 4). Willows (1976)
has suggested that a group of such neurons is involved in the
swim pattern generator of Tritonia. Excitation of this
network via sensory afferents can generate bursts of impulses
(Getting & Willows 1974). The precise role of this group in
Figure 3. The recurrent cyclic inhibition model does not re-
quire the inhibitory synapses to show fatigue and can produce as
many different phases as there are neurons in the ring. Each
neuron is active until it is inhibited by the preceding neuron in
the loop.
538
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Figure 4. Bursting can occur in a group of electrically con-
nected neurons if one or more is supplied with some form of ex-
citatory input. Spiking will spread to all the neurons by positive
feedback, but some built-in mechanism must be present to termi-
nate the bursts.
the swim pattern is not clear (Getting 1975), but the study
does show that such a positive feedback system can generate
bursts. Another example of this type of mechanism is found in
the feeding oscillator of the snail Helisoma (Kater 1974).
Here a group of electrically coupled premotor neurons
(cyberchron network) forms bursts as a result of regenerative
feedback.
Many networks do not fit into any particular model type.
For example, the gastric mill subset of the lobster stomato-
gastric ganglion has only twelve neurons, but each is
connected to practically all the others (Selverston et al. 1976).
Elements of reciprocal inhibitory loops are found, but the two
sets of antagonistic rhythms generated by the motor neurons
cannot be explained on this basis alone. Similarly, the
Tritoiiia CPG for swimming shows a wide variety of mixed
synaptic connections (Getting et al. 1980). Unlike the
stomatogastric CPGs, the swimming CPG has both excitatory
and inhibitory synaptic interactions. The burst timing may be
more dependent on excitation with an interplay of both
excitation and inhibition that produces proper phase relation-
ships between antagonists.
Will present strategies lead to an
understanding of CPG?
The models which have been cited are a good baseline for
assessing our present experimental strategies. These strategies
fall into two classes: descriptive and analytic. At the descrip-
tive level, CPGs are dissected into their component parts;
each part is characterized; and the relationships between the
parts are determined. This type of information cannot tell us
how a CPG works in a mechanistic sense, although it may
provide strong clues. For an explanation of mechanism we
must rely on a more analytic strategy such as computer or
neuromime modeling. However, it is premature and often
counterproductive to attempt modeling before a network is
physiologically characterized.
Selverston: Central pattern generators
Levels of mechanistic explanation
Knowing as many of the parameters as possible can suggest
mechanisms for particular CPGs; however, unless the
network is extremely small, ad hoc explanations are usually
oversimplified. All levels of explanation should have one
feature in common: the ability to predict the effects on the
final motor output when part of the CPG is perturbed. The
perturbation can take the form of hyperpolarizing or depo-
larizing one or more neurons. It may also consist of stimu-
lating some known input pathway or removing one or more
cells from a circuit by photodynamic inactivation (Miller &
Selverston 1979). No matter which of these methods is used, it
can help to narrow down the range of possibilities. For
example, a "network" type of CPG should cease operation if
all the synapses are temporarily blocked. If the endogenous
bursters are removed from a circuit one might expect similar
drastic results.
Resetting experiments, in which certain key cells are
suddenly depolarized or hyperpolarized for a brief period,
should be able to suggest the type of oscillatory system present
- endogenous burster or network (Kandel 1967). The question
of describing in mechanistic terms how any one of these
examples actually works will obviously require more than
knowing whether it is driven by an oscillator cell or whether it
emerges from a network property. Some have suggested that
virtually every property of the ensemble of neurons as well as
the unique properties of each individual cell must be taken
into account (Davis 1976). If this is true, then we face a
monumental task, because with present experimental tech-
niques a complete description is virtually impossible. There
are, however, some generalities which are beginning to show
up in the study of invertebrate CPGs which might be useful
in directing our overall strategies.
CPCs as distributed networks
One such generality comes from Grillner's idea (Grillner
1977) that the CPG is in fact part of a larger system and that it
should always be considered in this context. In particular, the
role of excitation must be considered carefully for all CPG
networks. Even for the simple, reciprocal inhibitory network
envisaged by Wilson, a source of tonic excitation was required
to drive the system (Wilson & Waldron 1968). More recently,
neurons have been found in invertebrate CPGs which sample
the ongoing rhythm and send a copy of the motor pattern to
other parts of the CNS where it phasically modulates
excitatory neurons. As a result, the CNS provides a phasically
modulated excitatory input back to the CPG. Examples of
such loops have been found in the lobster stomatogastric
ganglion (Selverston et al. 1976) and the Pleurobranchaea
feeding system (Gillette et al. 1978). Remarkably, a similar
system exists for the locomotor pattern generator of the cat.
Here the stepping rhythm is transmitted to higher regions of
the CNS via ascending spino-cerebellar pathways, and exci-
tation is sent to the pattern generator via a large number of
descending pathways (Grillner 1976). If the CPG will not
operate without input, should this input not be considered a
part of the CPG?
Modeling the CPG
Knowing the complete neural circuit of a CPG, even knowing
all of the cellular and synaptic properties, does not, except in
the most trivial cases, tell us how CPG works. Since a
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980). 3
539
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Selverston: Central pattern generators
mathematical model of a neural network does not appear
feasible at this time, phenomenological models may be the
best way of determining the validity of a proposed mecha-
nism. Such simulations can be obtained from digital computer
models or with artificial neuron analogs (neuromimes). The
rationale for using such models is that they may suggest ways
in which the circuit may work while at the same time ruling
out ways in which it could not.
The usefulness of modeling has probably been greatly
overestimated. Supplied with insufficient, often incorrect
information, the model will usually have enough variable
parameters for the modeler to produce any rhythm he desires
for any circuit he sets out to model. It has provided
"confirmatory" evidence for the operation of certain circuits
which were subsequently found to be fundamentally incor-
rect. For example, as mentioned earlier, the use of neuro-
mimes by Stent and his collaborators yielded an erroneous
understanding of the swimming CPG in the leech (Friesen &
Stent 1978). Their model requires a minimum of two ganglia
in order to produce rhythms analogous to the in vitro
rhythms. If the rhythm can be produced by one ganglion, as
Weeks has shown, then the CPG for the swimming pattern
must be located entirely in one ganglion and the previous
model judged incorrect. Again, this erroneous interpretation
resulted not only from the lack of data on elemental
properties and synaptic connections, but also from the
seriously incomplete nature of the circuit.
Similar modeling of an incorrect Tritonia network put
forward by Willows (Willows et al. 1973) once again seemed
to provide supporting evidence for a circuit which was
fundamentally incorrect (Harth et al. 1975). Willows had
suggested that the swimming pattern was generated by
simple reciprocal inhibition between dorsal and ventral flexor
motor neurons driven to activity by general excitatory
interneurons. When modeled this way, burst patterns similar
to the normal rhythm could be produced. However, this
network has also been shown to be incorrect. The new version
(Figure 5) utilizes interneurons rather than motor neurons to
generate the swimming behavior. It should be noted that,
although it too is probably still incomplete, preliminary
modeling studies have shown that this new circuit can also
generate normal rhythms (Getting, personal communica-
tion).
Modeling has its place. When the totality of a circuit is
established, with all the monosynaptic connections and all the
elemental properties of the cells and synapses known, then a
Figure 5. The erroneous CPG for the Tritonia swim pattern (A)
suggested reciprocal inhibitory connections directly between dor-
sal flexor motor neurons (DFN) and ventral flexor motor neurons
(VFN), both being driven by general excitatory cells (GEN). In a
more recent study, the CPG has been shown to be made up of
excitatory, inhibitory, and mixed synapses occurring among
premotor interneurons (B).
model should be able not only to replicate the motor output
pattern but also to accurately predict the effects of disturbing
the circuit. For example, if the activity of one cell is slightly
altered in the model and a change in the pattern is observed,
similar results should be obtained experimentally.
The heart of the modeling problem is that most models
cannot deal with the total complexity of a real neuronal
network. But even if they could, most of the available circuits
are not known in sufficient detail to be successfully modeled
anyway. This is merely an exercise if the modeler is left free
to guess at important parameters.
The usefulness of present strategies can be attested to by
the progress being made in the understanding of CPGs.
Nevertheless, given the limitations of our present techniques,
it seems that a rigorous explanation of many of the systems
currently being examined is really not possible. This is
especially true for systems that contain many small interneu-
rons which play an important role. With luck, enough of the
crucial elements can be characterized to enable the modeler
to describe and analyze the basic CPG, but the role of the
smaller cells will always remain a hidden factor. If we are
lucky, many of the smaller interneurons will not be crucial to
the CPG mechanism. If this turns out to be the case, we can
probably omit them from the analysis (as suggested earlier).
While this is an unsatisfactory prognosis, it will only matter if
the proposed models cannot accurately predict the networks'
functional properties. Since we are still far from this in most
systems, it is too early to tell whether not knowing a circuit
completely (i.e., down to the last interneuron) will be a
limiting factor.
If extremely complex networks, such as the walking CPG in
the cat, are to be understood, our present methods are clearly
inadequate. What is needed most is a technique of finding all
the interneurons involved, perhaps by some improvement of
the deoxyglucose technique (Sokoloff et al. 1974). This
method has been used to map brain pathways in vertebrates
while they are active under certain conditions. The activity,
which causes localized changes in glucose consumption, has
been used to identify functional regions in the brain and
spinal cord (Kennedy et al. 1975; Hubel et al. 1975). As
presently used, the technique does not have sufficient
resolution to localize the increased activity to one cell, but it
may be possible to improve its effectiveness with different
radioactive labels. It might also be possible to use a less
diffusible metabolite than deoxyglucose to identify neurons
showing increased levels of activity, particularly those
involved in neurotransmitter synthesis.
Another possible way of finding the CPG interneurons
would be to use some form of optical monitoring. Merocya-
nine dyes, developed by Cohen and his colleagues (Cohen
et al. 1978) have already been used to monitor activity in an
invertebrate ganglion (Grinvald et al. 1977). With present-
day optical signal strengths, neuronal ensembles of up to 100
cells can be observed. If signal strengths could be boosted by
perhaps a factor of 100, it would be feasible to routinely
monitor the activity of most invertebrate ganglia; so the
prognosis for this technique looks very good.
Finally, it may be possible to develop genetic probes for
localizing particular classes of interneurons. This research
direction is new and its potential is yet to be determined;
however, some mutations must certainly affect CPG systems.
Whether or not such methodology can help to identify
premotor interneurons remains to be seen.
So, while we may be close to our present technical limits in
defining CPG circuits, a number of promising new
approaches should become available before long. But even
without them, our present methods are describing more and
more CPG circuits. Hence, some limited understanding of
many such circuits may already be possible.
540
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES 
(1980), 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
Open Peer Commentary
Commentaries submitted by the qualified professional readership of
this journal will be considered for publication in a later issue as
Continuing Commentary on this article.
by Joseph Ayers
Department ol Biology and Marine Science Institute. Northeastern University, East
Point, Nahant, Mass. 01908
Do different behaviors require different central
pattern generators?
Selverston's focus on the components and operation of central pattern
generators neglects the fact that they must ultimately control behaviors
which adapt to changing environmental contingencies. He has limited
his discussion to CPGs which presumably underlie only one central
program (e.g., feeding, ruminating, locomoting, or scratching) and
typically occur by serendipity in the isolated CNS. The behavior,
however, is mediated by a peripheral machine composed of muscles
controlling a calcareous, chitinous, and/or hydrostatic skeleton, which
also oscillates and may provide cyclic sensory feedback. In response
to different central commands, some peripheral machines may partici-
pate in several different behavioral acts (e.g., walking, grooming,
righting). The behavioral acts may differ in the timing of their move-
ments or in the relative contributions of motor neurons controlling
different parts of the machine (e.g., distal joints versus proximal joints).
Given that motor neurons are ultimately the "final common pathway" in
the production of behaviors which utilize the same peripheral machine,
how are we to decide when the motor neurons are controlled by
different CPGs? Conversely, how are we to decide when a CPG is
capable of controlling more than one behavior?
These questions are of critical importance. Why should we assume
that the bursting produced by isolated roach thoracic ganglia is the
expression of the CPG for walking and not that for grooming or
righting? Are these acts generated by the same CPG? Conventional
wisdom holds that systems which are capable of generating different
behaviors must be driven by different "premotor drivers." The implica-
tion is that fixed neuronal connections (especially between motor
neurons) are incapable of the flexibility necessary for the production of
multiple behavioral acts. Indeed, in some systems, this is clearly the
case. For example, in the locust, Burrows (1975) has shown that many
motor neurons receive synaptic inputs characteristic of the flight
generator as well as of the ventilatory rhythm.
In my view, however, the evidence that behaviors which utilize
multijointed appendages are generated by different CPGs is much less
compelling. In such systems, the motor neurons can be subdivided into
several antagonistic subpopulations, each pair of which controls a
single joint of the limb. For example, in the lobster, walking in different
directions is achieved by a shift in the timing of discharge of motor
neurons controlling either the thoraco-coxal (ThC) or merocarpopodite
(MC) joints relative to the elevation/depression cycle of the motor
neurons of the coxo-basal (CB) joint (Ayers and Davis 1977; Ayers and
Clarac 1978). Independent of the direction of walking, the timing of
stepping is determined by the duration of the power stroke or
depression phase, and whether the behavior is forward or backward
walking is determined by whether the motor neurons controlling ThC
and MC joints discharge during elevation or depression. Is walking in
different directions controlled by different CPGs or the same CPG
which is modulated to shift motor neuron timing?
Due to technical difficulties, it has not been possible to demonstrate
that there is, in fact, a CPG that controls walking in Crustacea. Unlike
endogenous oscillators, walking must be initiated by stimulation of
command neurons [see Kupfermann & Weiss: "The Command Neuron
Concept" BBS 1(1) 19781 specific to the behavioral act (Bowerman
and Larimer 1974). If and when a central program is demonstrated,
however, the definitive test will be to show that current injected into a
cell which is capable of resetting the rhythm for walking in one direction
(caused by stimulating one command element) is incapable of reset-
ting the rhythm for walking in another direction (caused by stimulating
another command element). This test, however, is capable only of
distinguishing pattern generators which do not share interneurons, and
is possible only in systems where the command elements can be
selectively stimulated. If there is indeed a separate pattern generator
for each behavior, Selverston may be right. The numbers of behaviors,
CPGs, and interneurons may make comprehensive analysis unrealis-
tic.
An alternative and more parsimonious hypothesis is that walking in
different directions is generated by the same CPG which is modulated
to produce shifts in the timing of motor neuron discharge. Jack Davis
and I proposed such a model to explain metastable coordination in the
lobster walking system (Ayers and Davis 1977). This model proposes
that the timing of stepping is controlled by the elements which control
the elevation/depression cycle and that these elements also excite all
other motor elements in the limb. The shifts in coordination result from
selective inhibition of the inappropriate pathways. Candidate mecha-
nisms include presynaptic inhibition and chemical synaptic modulation
of electrotonic connectivity. This model is testable by examination of
synaptic strengths during command fiber stimulation. The command
should gate off inappropriate connections within the network.
More recently, working in Selverston's laboratory in San Diego, we
have identified yet another potential mechanism: modulation of motor
neuron timing by patterned synaptic input. By stimulation of both the
pyloric and gastric mill networks with trains of PSPs (postsynaptic
potentials) which repeat at the same frequency as the endogenous
rhythm, it was possible both to entrain the rhythm and to alter the timing
of motor neuron discharge in patterns similar to that which might
underly different behavioral acts (Ayers and Selverston 1977). Clearly
the ruminating actions of the stomach are difficult to compare with
those of walking legs, but the findings demonstrate considerable
flexibility in patterns produced by fixed networks. Where might such
cyclic inputs occur in the intact animal? As I mentioned before, CPGs
control a peripheral machine which oscillates and provides the CNS
with cyclic inputs. Thus cyclic inputs from sensory receptors in the
peripheral machine might be expected to increase the flexibility of the
CPG. Similarly, CPGs may receive cyclic coordinating inputs from the
CPGs of other limbs. The point is that investigation of the CPG in the
absence of these inputs might give an erroneous view of its capabili-
ties.
Perhaps the greatest experimental difficulty in the understanding of
pattern generators which may underlie different behavioral acts is the
need for selective stimulation of the commanding inputs. Indeed, if we
are to determine whether different behaviors are generated by one or
different CPGs, it will be necessary to selectively activate the
commanding inputs for at least two behaviors in the same experimental
preparation. Subsequent application of real-time digital signal-process-
ing technology and data-base management techniques should permit
the rigorous quantification necessary for accurate digital modeling of
testable hypotheses.
by Gene D. Block
Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Va. 22901
Snake oil and the modeling process in neurobiology
I find Dr. Selverston's comments on central pattern generators some-
what unsettling. The author apparently believes that modeling prior to a
"complete" circuit description places the process in the category of
snake oils. This concern leads him to suggest that ad hoc modeling will
inevitably be misleading. I find this position unsupportable for the
following reasons.
First, Selverston fails to make clear the distinction between the
model as a heuristic and the model as an exact circuit replicate.
Certainly no scientific field progresses far without a set of formal
models which provide the conceptual framework for asking scientific
questions. Indeed, many models are of limited usefulness post hoc;
deriving their primary value in the focusing of research strategy early in
the experimental effort. While poorly elaborated models can be
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
541
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
misleading, the study of physiology without these conceptual tools runs
the risk of degenerating into philatelism.
Surely Selverston agrees that there is a need for some type of
model, however privately maintained, during every stage of inquiry.
Perhaps his real concern is that the model shouldn't become too
formalized and publicized prior to a complete circuit description. If this
is his position, I would argue the contrary. The earlier the model can be
formulated and the more complete the description, the more likely that
it will be of some use in guiding research and aiding in the interpretation
of experimental data. Turning to Selverston's radio analogy, long
before the last grid resistor has been identified it will be apparent that
the circuit under study is a radio. At that point it seems logical, ethical,
and economical to label it as such and then to simulate and confirm its
operation via a radiomime. I am far less convinced of the value of
continuing the search until every last plastic knob on the face-plate has
been identified.
A second and more disturbing implication of Selverston's position is
that it calls into question the fundamental value of the invertebrate
preparation. The raison d'etre for invertebrates in neurobiology is their
value as model systems for addressing related problems in the
vertebrates. If, in fact, the "completeness principle" argues that
vertebrates too must be fully described before being modeled, then all
we are really obtaining from invertebrate preparations is practice
impaling neurons.
I think an important justification for using invertebrates is being
undermined. Simpler systems should provide opportunities for learning
how to separate wheat from chaff, distinguishing critical circuit
elements from specializations. Complete circuit descriptions, where
available, will aid in improving our trajectory, but the real aim should be
to learn how to deduce the operation of networks without penetrating
every cell within a ganglion. While we will certainly make errors along
the way, the strategy for invertebrate research must be directed
toward honing this ability. It is precisely this tool that we must ultimately
bring to bear on complex vertebrate systems, where recording from
every cell is unthinkable, if not impossible. Clearly this pursuit requires -
in fact demands - the elaboration of models. It is through the
opportunity they provide for the formulation of these models that
invertebrates will make their largest contribution to neurobiology.
by Ronald L. Calabrese
Department of Biology. Harvard University. Cambridge. Mass. 02138
Invertebrate central pattern generators:
modeling and complexity
In 1879 T. H. Huxley made an analogy between the rhythmic move-
ments of crayfish in response to sensory stimulation and the melody
which issues from a music box when the stop is pressed. He
concluded, "It is in the ganglia that we must look for the analogue of
the musical box. A single impulse conveyed by a sensory nerve to a
ganglion, may give rise to a single muscular contraction, but more
commonly it originates a series of such, combined to a definite end."
This statement, more than any other, epitomizes to me the sense of
wonder which has driven research on invertebrate CPGs over the past
twenty years. Starting with the pioneering discovery by Wilson (1961)
that CPGs do indeed exist, research on these neuronal circuits has
been at the intellectual forefront of behavioral neurobiology. Yet Allen
Selverston would put a damper on all our considerable achievements
(and fun) with his overly pessimistic outlook on the promise of current
and future research on CPGs.
His current crisis of confidence has occurred, I feel, because as yet
the gastric mill CPG remains inexplicable: it has not lived up to its
promise as "the preparation" in which we will finally understand a
"network" CPG. Perhaps the inexplicability of the system is attribut-
able to the discovery that more than the "thirty" neurons of the
stomatogastric ganglion participate in the gastric mill CPG (Selverston
et al. 1976), or that several of the neurons of the gastric mill CPG have
some of the properties of endogenous bursters (Russell & Hartline
1978). However, the majority of workers in the field, including myself,
have viewed these discoveries as breakthroughs rather than defeats,
so a more basic problem must exist.
The inexplicability of the gastric mill CPG, or any CPG for that
matter, derives primarily, I feel, from the reluctance of workers to
formulate truly testable models. Until such models are forthcoming, no
real progress can be made. Selverston correctly states that poking
cells and cataloging properties, though necessary, cannot of them-
selves lead to mechanistic understanding. What he fails to realize is
that the development of testable models is also a necessary step
because such models can guide experimentation that will lead to
mechanistic understanding. For all its flaws, Friesen and Stent's (1977)
model of the leech swimming CPG, which Selverston has criticized
repeatedly, has contributed significantly to our understanding of how
"network" CPGs work, both by alerting us to several important
possibilities and by stimulating creative research (Weeks 1980). The
further cataloging of a CPG's nuts and bolts without the guiding light of
a model can, I fear, only lead to further befuddlement. Without a
testable model in hand, Selverston is still scouting out the stomatogas-
tric's terrain, while Friesen and Stent have produced a tentative map
which can guide future research.
Models in biology cannot be viewed in a static sense; they must be
viewed in the same dynamic way in which they are viewed in physics.
No serious scientist would fault Niels Bohr for his view of the atom.
Rather, we realize the importance of his model in contributing to current
constructs, though few take the model per se seriously today. Without
a model to guide him, the physicist is lost. So too, I suggest, is the
connoisseur of CPGs.
Aside from its somewhat misguided notions about the usefulness of
models, Selverston's review contains several inaccuracies, omissions,
and mistaken notions that stem either from unawareness of parts of
the literature or a failure to cite certain authors. I will leave most of
these for others to comment on and restrict myself to one point which
concerns my own research. Armed only with his knowledge of his own
system and the lobster cardiac ganglion, Selverston states, "Except in
the case of the lobster pyloric rhythm, endogenous bursters appear to
be used mainly as driving elements in the simplest rhythmic behaviors,
such as the heartbeat." He further contends that "network" CPGs are
capable of producing more complicated motor patterns and are
therefore more interesting and difficult to understand.
The rhythmic beating of the leech's hearts, with their alternate
peristaltic and synchronous coordination modes (Thompson & Stent
1976a) is far more complicated than the movements of a lobster's
stomach. Moreover, the neural circuit which underlies the heartbeat in
the leech contains many more identified elements and produces a far
more complicated motor pattern (Thompson & Stent 1976a,b,c; Cala-
brese 1977) than even the hallowed gastric mill "network" (Selverston
et al. 1976). The bursting interneurons of the leech heartbeat CPG
(Calabrese 1979) make a rich set of inhibitory and excitatory synaptic
connections (Thompson & Stent 1976c; Calabrese 1977) with other
bursting and nonbursting (Calabrese 1979) interneurons of the circuit.
These synaptic interactions coordinate the independent activity cycles
of the heart interneurons into a precise pattern (Calabrese 1979) which
is imposed differentially onto a set of thirty-four motor neurons through
inhibitory synapses (Thompson & Stent 1976b,c). While the pyloric
circuit must be perturbed in a most unnatural way to demonstrate that it
is capable of internal phase shifts (Ayers & Selverston 1977), the leech
heartbeat CPG makes such phase shifts spontaneously every ten to
fifty heartbeat cycles (Thompson & Stent 1976c; Calabrese 1977).
One wonders if a lobster ever chews sideways, while it has already
been shown that the internal phase shifts of the leech heartbeat CPG
underlie observable spontaneous changes in the pumping of the
leech's hearts (Thompson & Stent 1976a,b,c; Calabrese 1977). More-
over, nonbursting interneurons directly implicated in the internal phase
shifts have been identified for the leech heartbeat CPG (Thompson &
Stent 1976c; Calabrese 1977, 1979).
Apparently CPGs which contain a preponderance of bursting
neurons, such as the one generating the leech heartbeat can display
much of the complexity of CPGs which do not. Thus the presence of
endogenous bursters in a CPG does not reflect on the complexity of its
output. However, their presence may indicate that the CPG will be in
continuous or nearly continuous use.
Lastly, most CPGs do not fit into the convenient "endogenous" and
542
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES 
(1980), 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
"network" cubbyholes which Selverston defines. Just as the presence
of nonbursting interneurons (Calabrese 1979) which are important in
coordinating the activity of bursting interneurons in the leech heartbeat
circuit dilute the concept of this CPG as "endogenous," so the
presence of plateau potentials (Russell & Hartline 1978) in the neurons
of the gastric mill circuit dilutes the concept of that CPG as a
"network." Whether a CPG is "endogenous" or a "network," and how
this classification relates to the complexity of its output, should not be
major concerns. Rather, we should concentrate our efforts on the
elaboration of CPG models which will lead to creative experimental
tests.
by Avis H. Cohen
Department ot Physiology and Biophysics, Washington University School ot Medi-
cine, St. Louis. Mo. 83110
A new generation of experimental and theoretical
methods is needed in neurobiology
Selverston is right in suggesting that present techniques are inade-
quate to provide a full understanding of CPGs. However, his conclu-
sions are unduly pessimistic. It may be more justifiable to say that we
need to replace the present generation of techniques and ideas with a
new generation of both experimental and theoretical methods. It is
helpful, in searching for new methods, to begin, as Selverston has, by
outlining current difficulties. Simple nervous systems should be the best
objects of study so that we can overcome these difficulties, just as they
have been the first preparations in which the problems have become
apparent. However, we must be wary of making too many assumptions
about their simplicity.
The difficulty Selverston raises with regard to studying vertebrates
can be circumvented by beginning with the lamprey. The nervous
system of the lamprey qualifies as a "simple system" (cf. Rovainen
1979), while retaining the vertebrate organization. Furthermore, the
isolated spinal cord of the lamprey, studied under in vitro conditions,
has been shown to be capable of generating stable and long-lasting
episodes of ventral root discharges whose temporal pattern is essen-
tially identical to the EMG (electromyogram) pattern seen during
swimming in intact fish (Cohen and Wallen, in press). Thus, during
active and quiescent conditions it should be possible to record from
interneurons suspected of being part of the generator. Using the
lamprey solves none of the problems raised for the invertebrate
systems, but it does mean that the analysis of a vertebrate CPG can be
conducted without adding additional problems.
A serious difficulty not raised by Selverston is that of recognizing a
neuron as an element of the CPG. At present there are no firm criteria
for unequivocally identifying a CPG neuron. The fact that a cell can
perturb the rhythm only points to the strength of its connections to
important members of the CPG - it does not prove that the cell is itself
an element. If the removal of a cell disrupts the pattern, this is strong
evidence, but lack of disruption proves nothing. And, unfortunately, in
more complex networks the removal of a cell is likely to have no effect.
Finally, there are no sets of connections which can firmly identify a cell
as part of the CPG. This problem, plus the problem raised by
Selverston of finding all the neurons involved, means that if you wish to
construct a model of the CPG you face the problem that you can be
sure neither of the role of the cells in the neural network nor of the
completeness of the putative population. The techniques he points out
for selectively labeling active cells will be helpful in both these
respects.
Characterizing the cells is also fraught with difficulties, as Selverston
indicates. Indeed, his list of required tasks should be extended to
include the characterization of membrane properties during the gener-
ation of the pattern. Russell and Hartline (1978) have shown that the
activity of specific synaptic connections in the stomatogastric ganglion
can unmask plateau potentials in cells not previously believed to be
involved in generating the bursting.
The example of Russell and Hartline strongly indicates that we must
stop thinking in terms of dichotomies between patterns generated as a
result of the "emergent properties" of networks and those generated
as a result of the "endogenous properties" of cells. Even in the
relatively simple stomatogastric ganglion, the pattern appears to be
the product of both. Such mixed systems will undoubtedly become
more frequent and more complicated as our analyses deepen.
It has been difficult enough to understand and predict how elements
interact in small uncomplicated networks. It will be next to impossible to
predict the effect of perturbing or removing a neuron in a large network
some of whose cells have the capacity for endogenous bursting. Only
by using models can we hope to make any progress - models not for
confirming the putative structure of a network, but as a tool for testing
our predictions and our understanding. If the known elements of a
network could be mathematically modeled with no essential loss of
their interesting characteristics or complexity we could simulate the
behavior of the network and test whether individual elements affect the
behavior of the system as we expect they should. However, no model
can prove the adequacy of a given neural network; it can only disprove
it.
Neuromimes, as currently constructed, are not rich enough to model
many examples of the present generation of neural networks. It may
not be possible at this time to construct electronic analogues for more
complex neurons, but the governing equations of the model neurons
can be used for predicting the qualitative behavior of a network or for
computer simulations. Unfortunately, mathematical models of neurons
which do encompass a more complete range of membrane properties
(e.g., Carpenter 1979) may also be too complex to form large
networks of such elements. At first, it may be necessary to construct
models using only a few elements, or to make some simplifications in
order to examine specific aspects of a CPG. For example, to study the
coordination between segments or ganglia, one could assume that the
unit oscillators were of some arbitrary type of stable nonlinear oscilla-
tor. As a first approximation, the nature and strength of the factors
controlling the coupling between them could then be investigated
separately (e.g.. Holmes, to appear; Rand and Holmes, to appear). All
the cells of the CPG need not be fully described before we begin such
mathematical modeling, but it is of course essential to state clearly the
assumptions being made. When a test of any assumption or prediction
invalidates the model, the model should be adjusted (if it can be done
naturally), or it should be abandoned.
A new generation of experimental results and techniques requires a
new generation of models. However, more sophisticated mathematical
models will require a higher level of mathematical training than most
neurobiologists have acquired. Thus, we should look to collaborative
efforts between neurobiologists and mathematicians in which the
partners are committed to solving the same problems. The biologist
must be willing and able to formulate and communicate the relevant
information clearly, and the mathematician must be interested, not in a
particular set of theoretical constructs, but in understanding the
biological systems at hand. Such partnerships, combined with experi-
mental innovations, should help us begin to unravel the complex CPGs
found in the "simple" systems.
by William J.Davis
The Thimann Laboratories, University of California, Santa Cruz, Calif. 95064
Neurophilosophical reflections on central nervous
pattern generators
Over the years I have arrived at essentially the same conclusion as
Selverston, but for somewhat different reasons. The chief impediment
to understanding pattern generators is not, in my view, "our inability to
identify and characterize the total interneuronal pool making up a
CPG," as Selverston writes. If this were the extent of the problem, it
could be solved simply by finding the relevant cells, which is feasible in
certain invertebrate nervous systems. The chief problem is much
deeper, transcending the bounds of conventional science and spilling
over into philosophy, epistemology, and logic. The fact is that even
when we have found every single neuron in a given network and
mapped all of their synaptic interconnections, it may still be impossible
to understand, in any rigorous sense, how the network performs its
function. The problem can be addressed in the context of two more
general questions: first, can we comprehend an "emergent" property
in elemental terms? and second, what is the nature of the "proof" that
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
543
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
we can adduce to convince ourselves and persuade our colleagues
that we have truly attained an unambiguous understanding of a
network's function?
The first question is instructively approached with a metaphor
introduced by Don Kennedy (1971) and taken up more recently by Ted
Bullock (1980) - namely, a baseball game. A stadium packed with
people observing a baseball game is analogous to a collection of brain
cells operating in concert to perform a specific neural function. In both
the stadium and the brain, the principal actors in the drama are
individual, repeated elements (people and neurons respectively). In
both cases there is a "purpose" to the ensemble of elements, and this
purpose is in principle knowable. And in both cases the purpose entails
coordination of the individual elements into specific activity patterns
according to certain ground rules that are likewise in principle defin-
able.
Now no one among us would attempt to learn the rules of baseball
by recording the utterances of a single fan, by observing the hand
signals of the defensive catcher, nor even by listening in on the dugout
chatter of the opposing team managers. A baseball game cannot, by
nature, be comprehended solely in terms of the behavior of single units
that compose it. It is the collective action of hundreds or thousands of
individual elements that both defines the game and gives it whatever
meaning it may have.
Can we expect less of the nervous system? Many of the most
interesting and basic functions of the nervous system may likewise be
unapproachable on the level of single elements that comprise it. The
example of human personality may serve to illustrate the point. If we
are materialists, then we subscribe to the view that our personalities
emerge from nerve cells, whose functions are in turn specified by the
genetic code and shaped by our individual learning histories. And yet it
must be self-evident that individual neurons do not possess "personali-
ty" in the same sense in which a human being does. Personality
emerges from the interactions of billions of neurons, in which case it
may be analyzable only on the level at which it emerges. The
mechanisms of human personality may simply not be addressable at
the cellular level. Selverston in essence argues that the same may be
true even for the vastly simpler problem of central pattern generation,
and, with major qualifications to be considered below, I agree.
The second question posed above is even more ethereal; what is
the nature of "acceptable proof" in the neurosciences? As illustrated
by the recent BBS treatment of the command neuron (Kupfermann &
Weiss 1978), even leaders in the field cannot agree upon criteria for
defining single elements of a motor network. In the case of central
pattern generators we likewise lack the terminology, the concepts, and
the criteria to decide what is acceptable proof for a particular neural
role or function. A salient example is phase shift experiments. The
capacity to reset a motor rhythm by an interpolated burst of activity in a
given neuron is considered by some neuroscientists as evidence that
the stimulated neuron is part of the pattern-generating network. This
criterion is met for members of a population of brain neurons that
participate in the feeding behavior of the mollusk Pleurobranchaea
(paracerebral neurons), and yet the feeding pattern can still be
generated when the same cell(s) is silenced. Are the paracerebral cells
part of the pattern generator or not? I claim that we lack the criteria to
decide; we cannot specify what is "acceptable proof" in this or many
other crucial cases. Perhaps problems such as these simply reflect the
embryonic state of our science; alternatively, they may reflect limita-
tions in the capacity of the human brain to comprehend its own
functions.
In view of these limitations, should we abandon the cellular approach
to understanding the nervous system? Obviously not. There are select
cases in which pattern generation will be understandable in terms of
elemental actions. Selverston's pioneering studies on pattern genera-
tion in the stomatogastric ganglion may furnish the best extant exam-
ple. Moreover, there is ample evidence that even more "complex"
behavioral phenomena, including choice and plasticity, are address-
able at the cellular level in certain favorable preparations. The opportu-
nities for truly successful cellular analyses of behavior may be limited in
number, but their very existence encourages continued exploration
using the cellular approach.
In the longer run what is clearly needed is a way to look at
ensembles of neurons as they perform their varied roles, much as we
might observe a baseball game from a blimp suspended high above
the stadium. Evoked potentials and brain waves represent primitive
versions of such holistic technologies, and more fantastic possibilities
haunt the imaginations of most neuroscientists at some stage of their
careers. One day such fantasies may be translated into technical
reality; until that time, the cellular approach to the function of the brain
is the best ball game in town.
by Fred Delcomyn
Department of Entomology and Program in Neural and Behavioral Biology, Univer-
sity of Illinois. Urbana, III. 61801
Even "simple'
than we think
systems are more complex
I like this paper. I think Selverston makes a good case for the view that
further progress in understanding neural oscillators at the cellular level
is going to be considerably slower than we might have hoped. But, in
addition, I believe that the pessimistic tone of the first part of the paper
has important implications for much current neuroethological work.
Many of us interested in the physiology of behavior elect to study
invertebrate animals. We do so at least in part because these animals
offer a relatively simple neural organization for analysis. In paper and
grant applications we stress the advantages of investigating such
simple model systems. But in so doing, I think, all of us sometimes lose
sight of the fact that simplicity is relative.
For example, in an insect, even a seemingly simple behavior such as
walking is in fact quite complex. An insect can walk forward or
backward, change direction, turn around without moving forward, and
of course start and stop, all at a variety of speeds, and with
well-coordinated movements. These movements require the properly
timed action of well over fifty muscles, in addition to others which act to
maintain posture during locomotion. It seems to me that only in
comparison to the motor skills of many vertebrates could insect
walking, or many other similar behaviors, be considered simple. And, in
fact, investigators usually do study only some part of a behavior - say
straight walking in this case - and ignore the rest, such as turning, etc.
To complicate matters, systems which, to the investigator, seem
quite distinct may interact in complex ways. For example, in
cockroaches, some giant interneurons in the ventral nerve cord which
had been thought only to trigger escape running (Roeder 1948), were
found to be activated by the insect during spontaneous slow walking
(Delcomyn 1976, 1977; Delcomyn & Daley 1979), thereby unex-
pectedly linking a casual motor act to a system which processes
information about potential predators (Westin et al. 1977). In locusts, it
has been suggested that flying and ventilation, two separate yet
interacting behaviors, share at least some driving interneurons (Bur-
rows 1975). And, at the level of single cells, there exist also in locusts
overlapping networks of nonspiking interneurons for the control of
different sets of leg motoneurons, so leg movements during one
behavior may be driven by some of the same neurons which drive
movements during other behaviors (Burrows 1980). In each of these
examples, the described interactions tend to make much more difficult
any investigation of one system apart from consideration of those
others with which it often interacts. In consequence, it seems to me
that there is often a serious mismatch between the perceptions of an
investigator who is studying only a part of what he already considers a
"simple" system and the complex reality.
I regard Selverston's paper as a symptom of this mismatch with
respect to the study of CPGs. Most investigators who study such
ensembles of neurons probably consider them simple systems par
excellence, and feel that with a knowledge of the functional interac-
tions of perhaps a dozen cells they ought to be able to describe fully
their CPG, and therefore understand how it works. The heroic attempts
of Wilson (1964) and Wilson and Waldron (1968) to determine the
smallest possible number of neurons theorectically necessary to allow
generation of properly timed motor output to wing elevator and
depressor muscles in locusts probably did more harm than good in this
544
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
respect, since this emphasis on a few cells acting in isolation led other
workers to concentrate on the most simple aspects of CPGs and to
overlook the more complex possibilities we are now being forced to
consider. But the discouragement which comes with an apparent lack
of progress as we begin to recognize the true complexity of these
systems should not blind us to the importance of what has already
been discovered, nor lead us to think that we will be stymied forever.
There seems little doubt that further progress will be slow as
investigators search for additional neurons which are part of, or whose
activity may significantly affect the operation of, the pattern-generating
network; but I think new techniques and additional skill with present
ones will probably allow progress to continue, as Selverston suggests.
However, one change in strategy might prove useful: to try to analyze
the system in functional parts rather than neuron by neuron. In terms of
Selverston's radio analogy, this means to think in terms of a receiver,
tuner, and amplifier rather than in terms of transistors, resistors, and
capacitors. Admittedly, this will be far from easy, but over the long term
it should give us a strong affirmative answer to Selverston's provoca-
tive question.
by John C. Fentress
Department ol Psychology, Dalhousie University, Helilax. Nova Scotia, Canada
B3H4JI
Bursting networks
As a longtime, if distant, admirer of the "simpler" systems approach to
patterned behavior (Fentress 1976), I was pleased to see Selverston
moving closer to both truly dynamic and relational perspectives on
central pattern generators. For discussion, however, I suggest that he
might go further yet. His dichotomies between episodic and rhythmic
behavior and between endogenous bursters and network properties
will be used as illustration. My concern is that compartmentalization in
thought may still exceed the compartmentalization of nature.
Make no mistake. The appeal of CPGs, at least traditionally, is that
of isolated compartments that are unitarily and intrinsically ordered. We
are still left with inadequate methods by which to conceptualize
neurobehavioral processes that are both interactive and self-ordered -
from both dynamic and relational perspectives (Fentress 1977).
A good place to start is at the beginning. Selverston defines episodic
behavior as that which is "continuously changed by both internal and
external cues," thereby becoming variable, unique, and apparently
complex. In contrast, rhythmic behavior is set up, initially at least, as
intrinsically structured, regular, repeatable, and with "the possibility of
being explainable in terms of all the neurons involved." Repeated
"episodes" are not treated, and only later are some of the variations
within rhythms, plus influences from the surround, addressed. Inside
versus outside is not in itself an appropriate distinguishing feature
between episodes and rhythms. It is a confusion of categories.
But what about bursters versus networks? The distinction seems
clear enough upon first glance: a single cell versus several of them.
Only later do we find that even the single cell may receive input from
outside: triggering, modulating, supporting, terminating, and perhaps
restructuring. These influences are not restricted to synaptic contacts,
monosynaptic or otherwise, but include chemical baths (e.g., various
peptides). Indeed, bursters may not be bursters at all without these
things. They are isolated in only a relative sense, the extent of which
remains to be defined in many cases. Individual neurons are not
themselves indivisible units (Shepherd 1974); their properties are the
result of network operations within the membrane as well as outside of
it.
The network of extrinsic influences working on bursters may involve
the cooperative interaction of several synapses, both chemical and
electrical, that influence each other as well as the CPG. The degree
and type of influence of these various factors can also vary as a
(unction of the state of the CPG at the moment, an obvious fact that
Selverston does not address in detail. He does correctly note that the
boundary between what is intrinsic and what is extrinsic can be elusive
- which is the point of the present exercise.
But what about intrinsic order within networks, as well as the
boundaries that separate one network from another? Sometimes
networks can be divided, as in the case of the leech ganglia, and
rhythms persist. From what Selverston states, at least this cannot be
taken, in itself, to indicate that the surgically separated pieces normally
work in isolation. We have all heard of coupled oscillators. And the
pieces within a network - do they all play an equally important role in
pattern generation? And what happens to our network definitions when
(1) a given behavior is influenced by "several" CPGs, (2) a given CPG
influences several patterns of action, or (3) the same element partici-
pates in more than one CPG? The fact that each of these things can
happen, both in different systems and in the "same" system at
different times, demonstrates that typological constructs are as
dangerous as the inadequate models upon which Selverston correctly
focuses (although it should be added, parenthetically, that models
should not be criticized just because they simplify mechanics in the
search for rules - that is one of their functions!).
The criteria for testing and evaluating are of the utmost importance.
To take but a single example, if perturbations of an element in an
interactive system do not produce observable changes in the system's
output, this could either be because (1) there is some redundancy in
the system in the sense that each of the remaining elements can
continue to operate normally with their summed action still producing
the expected output, or because (2) there may be some compensatory
reaction among remaining elements, so that the totaled output is
preserved. It is a matter for test, not assumption.
This possibility of compensation among elements leads me to my
last point of emphasis, that of the relational as well as dynamic nature
of participating neural circuits - at least in principle. We tend to think of
element properties and then of the rules of connection between them.
But if rules of connection, viewed within an appropriately dynamic as
well as relational context, can change the operational properties of the
elements (as when peptides create bursters, or chemical synapses
alter coupling coefficients of electrical synapses), then the assumption
of analytical gains to be obtained by looking at elements in isolation
must be tempered. Selverston approaches this realization when he
states: "Synaptic properties measured in an inactive system are likely
to be quite different from those derived during normal activity." Indeed,
after his several references to dissected radios he does address the
problem of distributed networks. But future thinking might go still further
toward the dissipative structures in biophysics, where intrinsic order is
generated through interactions, and system constancies can be main-
tained through various combinations of "elements" (e.g., Katchalsky
et al. 1974; Nicolis and Prigogine 1977; Fentress 1977).
The resulting stance becomes almost a bootstrap, with pieces
defining relations which define pieces, etc. In short, it is one that is both
relational and dynamic. The point I am arguing is that it can involve a
different class of models from the fragmented compartments of current
vogue. Would these be useful? Maybe so and maybe no, but they
should be looked at. Selverston's concerns may point in that direction.
After all, even from the perspective of description, pattern is
basically a relational construct: something changes in an ordered
manner with respect to something else. We may show that A changes
with respect to X as does B, but if A and B are two neural mechanisms,
the next essential question is how A and B are patterned with respect
to each other, with respect to C, etc. That is the way toward an
understanding of higher integrative functions within the nervous system
and behavior. It is precisely the problem that Selverston is having with
now outmoded, isolated, compartment models that encourages me to
think that simpler systems, viewed somewhat less simplistically, may
be of considerable relevance to the clarification of operational princi-
ples that apply to intact, behaving organisms. We shall have to wait to
see.
I shall conclude with a couple of specific summary questions and a
comment. (1) To what extent might properties of individual "bursters"
in a circuit be affected by either (a) action in other bursters or (b)
removal from the circuit? (2) Are there rhythmic modulations of
membrane properties in "nonburster" cells that, except for bursting,
mimic properties found in bursters? I expect that answers to such
questions may lead to a refinement in our categories, not only in the
sense of replacing dichotomies with finer distinctions, but by showing
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
545
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
that some ot the traditional distinctions will prove to be less clear than
currently anticipated.
by W. Otto Friesen
Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Va. 22901
Models, modeling, and the leech swimming rhythm
Models and Modeling. The goal ot research on neuronal
networks underlying animal movements is to achieve an understanding
of function in neuronal networks, not merely to obtain a catalog of
neuronal parameters. To understand the functioning of a neuronal
network means to have a conceptual model of the network - in other
words, to describe the network in terms of physical mechanisms.
Further, to show that a conceptual model is appropriate to the
neuronal network underlying a particular animal movement, it is neces-
sary to demonstrate the congruence between the model and the
physiological data. Verbal exposition of this congruence is convincing
only for the simplest models of the least complex neuronal networks; in
most instances mathematical demonstration, computer simulation, or
simulation with neuromimes is required. Congruence between the
concept and the data will, of course, never be perfect, but the
inevitable disparity, far from being lamentable, can serve as a guide to
additional experiments as well as to refinements of the model.
Dr. Selverston states that modeling should not be attempted before
a neuronal network is physiologically characterized. However, the need
for models in the analysis of animal movements, even in the absence of
extensive physiological data, has been realized since the time of
Descartes, who, in the seventeenth century, proposed a conceptual
model for human reflexes. Descartes's model, though employing bell
ropes and pipes as circuit elements, was important in that it empha-
sized the mechanistic nature of reflexes. More recently, McDougall
(1903) and Szekely (1965) have demonstrated their appreciation of
the importance of models by proposing the two most widely recog-
nized models for generating rhythmic activity in neuronal networks -
namely, reciprocal inhibition and recurrent cyclic inhibition, respec-
tively. (The concept of a central pattern generator, incidentally, dates
back at least to McDougall; it did not arise from experiments by Wilson,
as stated in Selverston's article.) The models proposed by Descartes,
McDougall, and Szekely were not based on electrophysiological data;
they were inferred from astute observations of animal behavior. We .are
led by Selverston's arguments to conclude that, because of their lack
of support by extensive physiological data, these models should never
have been proposed. If, on the other hand, we take Descartes,
McDougall, and Szekely as our exemplars, we may conclude that
network models can, and perhaps should, be formulated even in the
absence of any physiological data.
Models in general and neuronal models in particular are essential
precisely because our data are (and of necessity must always be)
limited. Unless our experiments are guided by models, there is no
evident basis for choosing among the nearly limitless types of experi-
ments that can be performed; and choose we must, because even in
restricted neuronal networks we are unlikely to have the resources for
more than a few types of experiments. With the aid of models, critical
experiments can be devised, data can be evaluated, and lacunae in
our current understanding can be discovered. A good illustration of the
latter is the prediction, from modeling studies, of a previously unsus-
pected long-lasting inhibition in the interactions of two lobster stomato-
gastric neurons (Hartline 1979). Experiments performed without a
conceptual model can have no intellectual content. I urge, therefore,
that we need more (and better) models to aid our analysis of neuronal
networks, not fewer. For, as Hartline's research demonstrates, it is
through the interplay between model and experiment that growth in
understanding occurs.
Leech Swimming. The research to understand the neuronal basis
of the leech swimming movement is criticized several times in Selver-
ston's article. These criticisms appear to be directed at a preliminary
report (Friesen et al. 1976; incorrectly cited by Selverston as our most
recent one) rather than at the three subsequent reports which present
in detail our physiological findings (Friesen et al. 1978; Poon et al.
1978) and our theoretical studies (Friesen and Stent 1977). In these
reports we showed that the swimming movements of the leech result
from the phasic activity of a set of interneurons which drive the motor
neurons commanding the contractions of the dorsal and ventral
longitudinal muscles. We proposed that the phasic activity of the
interneurons in turn arises from inhibitory interactions among the
interneurons by the mechanism of recurrent cyclic inhibition. Theoreti-
cal studies showed that this network of interneurons could generate
both periods and phase relationships appropriate for the swimming
movements. We showed, moreover, that a subset of the neuronal
network, an inhibitory inferganglionic loop comprised of only five of the
interneurons, could already generate a fair approximation of the
swimming rhythm. The remaining neurons and connections are then to
some degree redundant. Recent experiments by Weeks (submitted)
have revealed that rhythmic activity which has a period (but not phase
relationships) approximating the swimming rhythm of the leech can be
evoked in nearly isolated leech ganglia. Contrary to Selverston's
assertions, Weeks's results do not diminish the importance of the
"inhibitory loop mechanism;" instead they show that additional redun-
dancy exists in the swim generating network; that is, rhythmic activity
can be generated by additional subsets of the total network. Weeks's
new findings do mean that the model needs to be extended in order
also to incorporate a mechanism for rhythm generation in nearly
isolated ganglia. Our model predicts that the presently known neuronal
network cannot, in isolated ganglia, generate rhythmic activity with
physiologically long periods. Therefore additional oscillator neurons or
additional inrraganglionic interactions between the previously
described neurons remain to be discovered. (One such candidate
neuron has already been identified; Friesen et al. 1978). Here again,
the benefits of an interplay between modeling and experimentation are
evident; the findings of Weeks reveal that the model needs to be
extended, while the model provides guidance for performing additional
experiments.
by George L. Gersteln
Department of Physiology, University ot Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Penna. 19104
Models and multineuron recordings
In his paper Selverston rightly cautions against overenthusiastic model
building on inadequate or incomplete data. But there may be a logical
problem in providing a set of data defining the minimum CPG. An
analogy might be the observation that an arbitrarily small piece of heart
tissue down to a few sarcomeres preserves autonomous beating.
However, that is clearly not the way to study oscillatory phenomena of
the entire organ, where various types of local and direct couplings and
feedbacks must be invoked. Similarly, it is not enough to find that a
small piece of nervous system "beats," unless one takes into account
the other pieces. The small piece is not the same CPG as the larger
system. "The" central pattern generator seems to be like an onion of
many layers, which may or may not have a core.
It should be stressed that adequate descriptive data must involve
ever-larger numbers of neurons of the CPG or other neuronal
assembly. All these neurons must be recorded simultaneously, not
sequentially, in order to address questions of coordinated function.
The experimental approaches to such massive recording are just
becoming practical, both with optical methods (Cohen et al. 1978;
Salzberg et al. 1977) and with bundles of fine wire (Harper & McGinty
1973 and many others). However, Selverston has failed to mention the
resulting horrendous analytic problem.
Some aspects of the system connectivity and synaptic strength may
be addressed through spike-train analysis methods using the standard
cross-correlation-based calculations (Perkel et al. 1967, 1975;
Gerstein & Perkel 1972). However, these are analyses of the neural
system considered as pairs or triplets; if 100 neurons were originally
recorded we have a mere 9900 pairs to examine, a somewhat
unrealistic goal. The problem is presumably even worse if we want to
deal with some membrane potential and PSP data.
546
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
A more global analytic strategy is clearly necessary in order to
identify all those neurons among the recorded set that are related to
the CPG or other functional assembly under study, and subsequently to
analyze the details within such an assembly. A partial step in this
direction is provided by a calculation we have called the "group
tinder," which takes some number of spike trains as input and
produces a dynamic Venn diagram of neuronal associations as an
output (Gerstein et al. 1978). Neuronal grouping or association is
assessed by measuring firing coordination in excess of control values.
The calculation is fast, accurate, and enormously sensitive for neural
assemblies connected with excitatory synapses. It is, at present, less
sensitive for systems of neurons connected by inhibitory synapses, a
situation that probably will improve with modification of the fundamental
search calculation that we use.
Much work remains to be done on this and other analytic methods
for multineuron data. In developing such tools, we come full circle back
to modeling, because in order to assess the performance of a
calculation we must exercise it upon data from a known system - i.e., a
computer or neuromime simulation.
by Peter A. Getting
Department of Biological Sciences, Stanford University. Stanford, Calif. 94305
Central pattern generators can be understood
Dr. Selverston has written an interesting article outlining our current
strategies for understanding mechanisms of complex rhythmic motor
pattern generation. I particularly agree with his assessment of some
past "modeling" efforts as premature. In most cases these models
have been oversimplifications, and not well founded in physiological
data. I do not, however, share Selverston's apparent pessimism about
the future advances which can and should be made in understanding
central pattern generators. He implies that we have, in some sense,
reached the limits of our current strategies and techniques. I do not
believe this is so; particularly for the so-called simple systems. Our
major approach has been to specify synaptic connectivity and intrinsic
membrane characteristics using multiple microelectrode recordings.
The apparently slow progress in our understanding of even the
simplest CPGs resides not in the limits of our technical abilities but
rather in the complexity of the neuronal mechanisms involved in pattern
generation. It has taken years and several over-simplified or "errone-
ous" (as Selverston calls them) modeling efforts to evolve an apprecia-
tion for and identification of the relevant network, synaptic, and intrinsic
membrane properties.
The cellular network approach allows us to quantify not only what
cellular and synaptic properties are important but also what their
relative contribution to network function is. Currently, this is our only
proven method of specifying synaptic and intrinsic cellular properties.
The continued application of this approach promises to provide a
conceptual framework for an understanding of how complex rhythmic
patterns are generated. This is especially true for the "simpler
systems," in which the number of neurons is small and the cells are
uniquely identifiable. We clearly have not, as yet, achieved this goal in
any one system, but the prognosis for the future is encouraging. It may
not be possible or practical to take this cellular network approach in
systems with thousands or millions of cells. It is at this point that the
limitations of the approach may be reached and we may need other
ways of viewing or approaching these systems. There is some hope
that in the application of the "slice preparation" for the vertebrate CNS
some of the network, synaptic, and cellular properties of more
complex CPGs may be studied. For these cases a strong conceptual
basis will be necessary to properly interpret the evidence. This
conceptual basis will most probably come from studies of "simpler
systems" in which the relevant neuronal mechanisms can be specified
in biophysical terms and related to pattern generation.
In his section on Component Description, Selverston lists a set of
synaptic properties which must be determined. He has omitted one of
the most important synaptic properties, however: the time course of
the postsynaptic potentials. For the monosynaptic connections among
the interneurons demonstrated to participate in the Tritonia swim
pattern generation, we have found that the time course of the
monosynaptic potentials varies over nearly two orders of magnitude.
Some exert their major action during a single burst, while others are
confined to the duration of a single cycle or may act over many cycles.
This type of disparity in time course as well as in synaptic strength and
use-dependence must be incorporated into our thinking.
To complement our advances in specifying physiological mecha-
nisms, we will also have to evolve new simulation techniques to deal
with the wealth of physiological data. This will require a shift in the type
of modeling currently being done. Most modeling of CPGs has been at
the phenomenological level that is devising models based upon "state
variables" which describe the time course of a particular neuronal
process but have little basis in physiological function. For example,
threshold is commonly modeled as a variable which rises immediately
after a spike and falls exponentially. Whenever the membrane potential
equals the threshold, the model cell fires a spike. In neurons, threshold
is not a single, simple process but depends upon membrane potential
as well as conductance. Modeling threshold as a single variable may
be an oversimplification and may lead to an inaccurate representation
of the repetitive firing characteristics of a cell. This problem has been
circumvented in some cases by the use of electronic "neuromimes"
based upon the time and voltage-dependent conductances of the
squid axon as the unit cell membrane. The integrating regions and cell
bodies of central neurons, however, are considerably more complex in
their complement of ionic currents than the squid axon. These
additional ionic currents impart repetitive firing characteristics to
central neurons which are simply not observed in the squid axon.
The models based upon the squid axon as the exemplar excitable
cell are therefore not representative of central neurons and are
oversimplified. We will have to shift to models which replicate the
mechanisms underlying the processes of interest, be they synaptic or
intrinsic membrane properties, and to base the simulation of these
processes upon direct measurements of the same properties in the
real cells. Progress is being made in this direction with the development
of realistic neuron and network simulation programs like those written
by Drs. Donald Perkel and Brian Mulloney. We have been using this
simulation to reconstruct the Tritonia swim CPG with excellent success.
This type of reconstruction does require a level of specification of
physiological mechanisms not possible in many cases, however. If we
can succeed in only a few cases then we will be in a position to filter
out the conceptual constraints governing pattern generation in these
"simpler systems" and to apply them to other systems in which this
degree of specification may not be practical. I am, therefore, optimistic
about the future advances which can be made toward understanding
how rhythmic motor patterns are generated.
by Rhanor Gillette
Department of Physiology and Biophysics. University of Illinois. Urbana. III. 6 WO I
Adaptive significance, redundancy, and variance in
central pattern generators
Dr. Selverston has pointed out the complexity and difficulty of investi-
gating even small cyclic networks. Understanding neural mechanisms
of behavior is undeniably hard work. Models may be designed on the
basis of hard-won data and subsequently proven incorrect or incom-
plete, yet those models and data usually have at least heuristic value
and may eventually be woven into fuller context. An additional dimen-
sion of difficulty, or opportunity, may arise from the adaptive nature and
evolutionary significance of the central pattern generator (CPG) as a
neural stratagem or integrating the behavior of the organism with the
environment.
Central pattern generators for rhythmic behavior appear to be
ubiquitous among those animals which exhibit appreciable centraliza-
tion in their nervous systems (cf. Delcomyn 1980). The prevalence of
CPGs, to the apparent exclusion of mechanisms for pattern generation
by peripheral control (through sequential activation of different sensory
inputs during the movement cycle) suggests that the generation of a
rhythmic motor act by means of a central oscillator offers significant
adaptive advantage. The advantage of central pattern generation over
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
547
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
peripheral patterning may arise from the fact that the essential features
of CPG output are relatively tolerant of developmental or genetically
specified variance in the structure of the animal's periphery. The
genetic information required for construction of a workable central
pattern generator is then largely confined to specifying the physiolog-
ical identities of the network elements and their appropriate central and
peripheral connections. In contrast, if peripheral control were a primary
means of achieving precise organization of cyclic behavior the genome
not only would specify the central and peripheral connectivity of the
reflex circuits but would have the additional burden of encoding a
mechanism for reducing the effects of phenotypic and developmental
variation of appendage form and load on the activation of sensory
paths. This could occur either through loading the genome with the
responsibility to restrict rigidly its flair for producing phenotypic vari-
ance, or by including some failsafe mechanisms in the reflex circuitry to
compensate for variance of peripheral structure. The function of these
hypothetical failsafe mechanisms would be a servofunction. It would
compare the consequences of ongoing motor output with a prespeci-
fied adaptive pattern and make the appropriate corrections. This, of
course, is a description of sensory modulation of CPG function. The
adaptive significance of the CPG thus appears to be that it is a
genetically efficient, specifiable neural mechanism for producing
behavioral output which compensates for both phenotypic variation in
peripheral structure and unevenness in the environment.
There are increasing indications that in those small cyclic networks
which are amenable to detailed analysis the oscillatory properties of
CPGs are distributed at multiple levels within the networks. That is,
these networks appear to rely not entirely on one single mechanism for
producing cyclic output, instead incorporating several different mecha-
nisms working in concert. Thus, the potential for generating rhythmic
output is strongly reinforced by the redundancy in oscillatory proper-
ties. Some of these redundant aspects can be listed. For instance, not
only do synaptic connections transmit oscillatory activity between one
cell and another, but coordinated rhythm may emerge from the nature
of the connectivity, as in the case of reciprocal inhibition (Perkel and
Mulloney 1974), and, at least in principle, recurrent inhibition (Friesen
and Stent 1978). In some networks, specific endogenously bursting
neurons provide a large part of the motive force and timing of network
oscillation. The activity of some of these bursters is in some CPGs
modulated by reciprocal connections with the network they drive, as in
the case of the PD neurons of lobster stomatogastric ganglion (Selver-
ston et al. 1976) and the L10 neuron of the cardiac CPG of Aplysia
(Koester et al. 1974); reciprocal inhibitory connections between burst-
ers and network members are redundant in the sense that they
reinforce as well as coordinate oscillation in the network as a whole.
Raper (1979) has shown that in the pyloric pattern generator of
stomatogastric ganglion the pattern-generating potential of this
network, based on connectivity and intrinsic oscillatory properties of
the elements, is so strong that coordinated oscillations of membrane
potential persist in the neurons even when all action potential activity is
blocked by TTX. The genesis of patterned motor output in this system
is apparently affected by a duality of action on the synapse: both
impulse-mediated and continuously graded synaptic transmission.
Particularly intriguing has been the demonstration that certain inputs to
the pyloric and gastric networks of the lobster stomatogastric ganglion
induce bursting properties in most of the neurons of the two pattern
generators, and that induction of these properties makes a major
contribution to the rhythms (Russell & Hartline 1978). Rhythmic
patterned output can occur spontaneously in the gastric and pyloric
networks of the isolated stomatogastric ganglion, and the existence of
the extraganglionic pathways that potentiate the output is another
example of redundancy and reinforcement of oscillatory properties in
CPGs.
A similar phenomenon may occur in the CPG for feeding behavior of
Pleurobranchaea. Stimulated or spontaneous tonic firing of a pair of
white cells, the VWCs, in the isolated buccal ganglion, elicits vigorous
coordinated and cyclic activity in the motor neurons controlling retrac-
tion and protraction of the feeding apparatus (Gillette et al. 1980). In
about half of the preparations the cyclic activity of the network may
outlast the firing of the VWCs by 2 to 50 cycles over periods lasting up
to 5 minutes (unpublished data). This phenomenon suggests the
presence of a mechanism for enhancing the oscillatory nature of the
network.
Future studies of the details of different central pattern generators
may confirm that normal cyclic output commonly results from multiple
oscillatory properties acting in concert. This is the case in the lobster
stomatogastric ganglion and in several other invertebrate CPGs. Such
redundancy in oscillatory potential, existing at multiple levels within the
network, suggests that the network could tolerate a certain amount of
phenotypic variability in the properties and connections of the constitu-
ent neurons without seriously affecting the basic features of network
output. Indeed, the existence of redundancy in oscillatory properties
may be an adaptation to accommodate genetic variance in the
network elements. Significant variation at the level of the neuron is a
fact. Duplication of identified neurons in Aplysia is frequent enough to
permit serendipitous documentation (Treistman 1979). Duplications
and deletions of identified ocellar neurons in the locust are under
genetic control (Goodman 1977). Duplication or deletion ot PD
neurons of the homologous pyloric networks of lobsters and crabs
must have occurred in ancestral forms to leave them with two and four
PDs respectively (Maynard and Burke 1966). Variation in morphology
and synaptic connections occurs with a relatively high frequency in
identified neurons of the locust (Pearson and Goodman 1979). While
variability may usually be associated with weak connections, such
minor variability in connectivity occurring among many neurons in a
CPG may add up to cause measurable phenotypic differences in the
output properties of the homologous CPGs of a single species.
Genetically controlled variation in membrane properties of homolo-
gous neurons has not yet been well documented, but probably exists.
Because redundancy of oscillatory properties in CPGs may permit
toleration of minor variation within the neuron network, the rewiring of
CPGs during evolutionary speciation may be accomplished with a fair
degree of facility. The variables for selection to work with are multiple;
a partial list includes cell number, permutations in connectivity, relative
density and activation /inactivation characteristics of multiple kinds of
ion conductance channels in the membrane, intracellular ion buffering
systems which may affect channel activation (e.g., calcium-activated
K+ channels), and the activity of ion pumps. Moreover, redundancy in
oscillatory mechanisms in CPGs could permit a serious weakness in
function of one type of mechanism to be preserved in some pheno-
types if it were compensated for by relative strength in another.
In conclusion, while the adaptive significance of the CPG may lie in
compensation for variation in peripheral structure, redundancy in the
oscillatory properties of CPGs may result in functional tolerance of
variation in the elemental structure of the CPG itself. Documentation of
such variance and its potential contribution to behavior and evolution
of behavior seem compelling questions of neuroethology.
Acknowledgment
Support was provided during preparation of this commentary by NSF grant BNS
79-18329.1 thank Dr. M. Gillette for critical review.
by Louis J. Goldberg
Departments of Orel Biology and Anatomy, Schools of Dentistry and Medicine and
Brain Research Institute, Center for the Health Sciences, University ot California at
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, Calif. 90024
The failure of current strategies in the study of central
pattern generators
For those of us involved in studying CPGs in mammalian systems
Selverston does not paint a heartwarming picture. Current strategies
("descriptive and analytical") used in the attempt to understand
"simple" CPGs in invertebrates have serious deficiencies. New tech-
niques may help in identifying groups of interneurons in mammalian
CPGs, but certainly there is little possibility of identifying and character-
izing all of the components and their interactions. Even if we could
accomplish this task, it would not be sufficient to understand the
operation of the CPG.
Although Selverston concludes on a guardedly optimistic note,
stating that using our present methods we are "describing more and
548
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES 
(1980), 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
more CPG circuits," his essential message is that we will have a very
difficult time "understanding" them. Given all of the problems which
exist in attempting to analyze "simple" invertebrate systems, is there a
strategy that can be adopted by an experimenter investigating
complex CPGs in vertebrates which will provide a realistic promise of a
reasonable "understanding" of these networks? Is such a strategy
possible, or must one be content with simply adding one more
component of a machine to a never-to-be-completed inventory of
parts, or to characterize one more connectivity, or to add one more
incorrect computer model to the growing list?
In the search for a strategy satisfying to the scientific as well as the
personal goals of the experimenter, the views of philosophers who are
engaged in contemplating the complexities of "artificial" as well as
"natural" forms of intelligence are useful. I find the views of D. C.
Dennett (1978) particularly relevant in this regard. He has used the
chess-playing computer as an example to illustrate the different
strategies or "stances" that one might adopt in trying to predict its
operation. Parallels can be drawn between the chess-playing
computing machine and the behavior-producing CPG machine.
Obviously, in the former case all components and connectivities of the
machine are known.
It seems to me that those who believe that to understand the
operation of a CPG one is required to know completely the physical
properties of all the components have taken what Dennett calls the
"physical stance." Dennett writes, "From this stance our predictions
are based on the actual physical state of the particular object, and are
worked out by applying whatever knowledge we have of the laws of
nature." He points out that such an approach to predicting the
operation of the chess-playing computer would work in principle but
would be a "pointless and herculean labor." Selverston makes a
similar point in relation to CPGs when he concludes that a complete
description of the CPG would not be sufficient to understand its
operation. Dennett further states that "one seldom adapts the physical
stance in dealing with a computer just because the number of critical
variables in the physical constitution of a computer would overwhelm
the most prodigious calculator." The same appears to hold true even
for the most simple of invertebrate CPGs.
Apparently, then, the "descriptive" strategy of Selverston, or the
"design stance" of Dennett, is not going to result in an understanding
of CPGs; and it will not be necessary - in fact, it may be "pointless" -
to identify and completely characterize all components of the CPG. I
am not arguing that we should stop searching for, and characterizing
the properties of, the components of CPGs. It does not appear,
however, that "understanding" the operation of a CPG is necessarily
dependent on identifying and characterizing all of its components. If
this is true then we are not precluded from "understanding" the
complex CPGs of vertebrates simply because we cannot reasonably
expect to identify and characterize all of the components of the
system.
As Selverston points out in his introduction, it appears that the study
of CPGs holds great promise for moving us toward an understanding
of the neural control of behavior. Neuroscientists studying CPGs are
certainly aware of this promise. However, one must act with humility
and feel a great deal of trepidation when putting the two words neuron
and behavior in close proximity to each other. Great faith has been
placed in the "descriptive" strategy in the study of CPGs to make the
connection between neuron and behavior. If this strategy is found to
have certain inherent and fatal weaknesses, what is a viable alterna-
tive?
We don't have one. Although Selverston is critical of the usefulness
of the current strategies employed by neuroscientists in the study of
CPGs he does not suggest alternatives. He presents new methodolo-
gies which have the potential of identifying previously undiscovered
components of CPGs, but he himself states that such information,
"cannot tell us how a CPG works." One gets the impression from
Selverston's paper that the basic rationale used by neuroscientists for
justifying the significance of their experimental approach to CPGs is
eroding. I believe that it is important to develop and articulate alterna-
tive strategies.
Here again it is useful to look to thinkers such as Dennett who have
analyzed the modes of operation of many forms of complex systems.
CPGs appear to me to fit into Dennett's category of "intentional
systems" and can best be viewed with what he terms the "intentional
stance." It is not possible to pursue this argument here; however, I
mention it to point out that there are other strategies which have been
developed to assist in the study of complex systems similar to CPGs. I
believe that these strategies provide a framework within which experi-
mental approaches are developed and sustained. Selverston's paper
indicates that the strategies which have supported the current
approaches to the study of CPGs are rapidly losing their viability. They
need to be replaced if neuroscientists studying CPGs wish to continue
to believe that their experiments are leading us closer to a neuronal
understanding of behavior.
by Sten Grillner
Department of Physiology III, Karolinska Institutet, S-114 33 Stockholm. Sweden
Can mammalian pattern generators be understood?
A flash of insight or a key experiment may change the view in an entire
field, but as a rule the understanding of a biological system is built up
gradually. A complete knowledge is unheard of. I therefore object to
the title of Selverston's paper, "Are central pattern generators under-
standable?" In fact, the main mechanisms in some pattern generators
are already known. A more meaningful but perhaps less catchy title
would be "How far can we reach in the understanding of pattern
generators?" I sympathize otherwise with much of Selverston's general
line of thought, even if an emphasis on the difficulties may be as
counterproductive as an unbridled optimism.
In order to understand any motor behavior, we must know how its
neuronal circuitry operates. This includes possible sensory and "deci-
sion-making" elements, the process of initiation, the production of the
motor pattern and the possible peripheral feedback required. The term
motor behavior, as used in this context, can mean anything from a
simple withdrawal reflex to a complex verbal message. The area
relevant to Selverston's target article is only one restricted part of this
entire field: the neural control of inborn motor behaviors. Even this,
however, is a vast area, including simple patterns as well as eye
movement control and locomotion |see Lynch, this issue]. The latter are
adaptive behaviors and highly modifiable in practically all types of
animals. For instance, locomotion is composed of the basic synergism
for propulsion, including speed control and the adaptation of these
movements to the animal's objectives, such as avoiding obstacles,
turning, and prey catching. The basic locomotor synergism (e.g., in the
cat) can be further subdivided into the pattern of coordination of the
limbs, the pattern of coordination of the muscles within a limb, or even
the muscles operating at a joint. It is at these last levels that
Selverston's article becomes meaningful.
The vertebrate work has mainly addressed questions of general
neural organization, as in demonstrating the brain regions that are
important for the initiation of locomotion, the presence of central
pattern generators in the spinal cord, the nature of supraspinal and
cerebellar neuronal circuits, internal feedback loops, and peripheral
feedback systems acting on the pattern generators. This type of
information provides insight, but it is crude and cannot reveal, for
instance, how a pattern generator operates. As is rightly pointed out by
Selverston, it is inconceivable that we should be able to keep track of
all the interactions among all the neurons responsible for the control of
even one vertebrate limb. I am pessimistic about the possibilities of
drawing useful conclusions from interneuronal burst patterns unless we
know the various projections of all "relevant" - an important topic in
itself - types of neurons and the quantitative aspects of this connectivi-
ty. We have, however, other types of information about this particular
pattern generator. Strong evidence suggests that there are reciprocal
elements in it (Jankowska et al. 1967), and we know how it behaves
under a variety of conditions (Grillner & Zangger 1979).
Have we thus reached a dead end for meaningful research on
vertebrate pattern generators with the available experimental tech-
niques and concepts? I hope not. Let us first limit ourselves to the
motor pattern of one hindlimb and simplify the question further to only
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980). 3
549
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
the generation of an alternating pattern in a pair of antagonist muscles.
One hope is that "simple network" research, in addition to its intrinsic
value, will in the future provide an array of different solutions for
producing such specific motor patterns. In coming to know the
peculiarities of the complex pattern generator under investigation one
can ask which simple models could generate these patterns and which
could not. It is noteworthy that a conceptual model developed originally
to explain the respiratory CPG and its interaction with peripheral inputs
(Bradley et al. 1975) has recently been found to apply to Tritonia
swimming (Getting et al. 1980).
Another possibility is that the various model solutions may respond
in specific ways to certain perturbations. If so, we may be provided with
a tool to test how a certain vertebrate central pattern generator
responds to similar perturbations. This may allow us to exclude certain
models. If one solution is favoured, one can proceed with different
tests to disconfirm this possibility.
Perhaps future research on simple pattern generators for rhythmic
activity will even yield different classes of solutions for controlling
different types of behaviors. Networks in which the predominant role is
played by pacemaker neurons may be selected in situations which do
not require rapid phasic modifications of the output pattern (cf. the
hierarchy ot groups of electrically coupled pacemaker cells in the
human heart - the sino-atrial and the atrio-ventricular nodes etc. - or
the pyloric system in the lobster stomatogastric ganglion). In contrast,
network solutions may be preferred in systems which require rapid and
fine control to achieve rapid adaptation. Different solutions may be
preferred with varying environmental demands. Simple networks may
also tell us, for instance, how to modify a network to obtain a
somewhat shorter burst in one muscle group or move it earlier in
relation to other muscles - i.e., how to produce the entire varied
pattern. The phylogenetic evolution within the different phyla may
provide clues to how networks develop.
A somewhat trivial requirement is that of establishing the timing of
the various outputs in the full behavior (applicable even to the simplest
network) in order to establish whether or not the identical pattern is
produced after different experimental manipulations. Investigators
have tended to let a maintained rhythmicity be a sufficient criterion, and
they have not given due consideration to the normal output pattern. It is
common to regard the least possible network that can produce a given
rhythmic output pattern as the pattern generator proper, and the
remaining part as redundant. This may be very misleading; in the worst
case the remaining neurons could be of lesser importance although
nevertheless still able to produce the actual pattern under the prevail-
ing conditions. This is a general caution, not against this type of
experimental approach, but against simple-minded interpretations of
any type of lesion experiment. Two examples:
(1) Miller and Selverston (1979a and pers. commun.) were able to
kill the three pyloric burster cells (initially assumed to be solely
responsible for the pattern) in the pyloric stomatogastric network and
still have some remaining rhythmicity. Of course, this does not mean
that the three powerful bursters are normally unimportant, but that
there are additional mechanisms capable of promoting a rhythmic
output pattern.
(2) The finding that one leech ganglion can be made to oscillate in
isolation from the rest is important, but it does not automatically follow
that the previously demonstrated interganglionic connections are of no
significance for the ganglionic pattern generation (Weeks 1980 as
cited by Selverston 1980). In general, most pattern generators may use
several neuronal mechanisms to provide the highest possible safety
factor that allows the desired output pattern and adaptability to occur.
Modeling relevant to the nervous system can be performed at many
different levels. It can be used to find out the simplest strategy for
producing handwriting (Hollerbach 1977); it can be a pure mathemati-
cal description of a process or a network model of neurons. Clearly we
need a joint attack from all possible approaches if we are to
understand complex systems. In the context of "simple networks,"
modeling is, of course, very useful when the properties in a network
and all the different synaptic connections are known. When this is not
the case, Selverston deplores it. It is correct that models produced on
the bases of interneuronal burst patterns or patterns of activity of a
limited part of a network may be meaningless or misleading. Ideally, the
modeling work should interact with the experiments. The problem has
rather been that useful tentative models have been presented (or
understood) as the ultimate truth. No doubt models are useful, even at
an early stage, to test whether hypothetical neuronal mechanisms can
in fact produce the patterns or the effects that the investigator
expects.
It is also debatable which neurons constitute the minimal functional
entity. Many neurons send branches to vastly different parts of the
brain. A cell contributing a critical part of the pattern generator could
also subserve a coordinating function in relation to other pattern
generators as well as sending off corollary discharges to relevant parts
of the brain. Furthermore, local independent interneuronal interactions
may occur in different parts of a given neuron (Schmitt et al. 1976;
Siegler and Burrows 1980). This applies particularly to nonspiking
interneurons with large branching "dendrite-neurite" trees. Synapses
on different branches may be electrically "isolated" from each other
and a "local" small (a few mV) depolarization may lead to a gradual
release of transmitter. This clearlv introduces severe difficulties in the
functional connectivity analysis. For a change the vertebrate physiolo-
gist may perhaps be in a more favorable position here, since the
dendrites in the typical vertebrate neuron are located on one side of
the soma and the spike initiating zone on another. However, dentro-
dentritic synapses and nonspiking interactions cannot be discarded.
|See also Dismukes: "New Concepts in Molecular Communication
Among Neurons" BBS 2(3) 1979.1
Another problem in analyzing the effects of one neuron on another is
that the synaptic current produced by one synapse may have different
effects on the postsynaptic cell during different functional states. The
conductance changes of nearby synapses may cause shunting or
potentiation of the synaptic effect in a given synapse, or the state of
the entire cell membrane may change. In addition, receptors on the
presynaptic membrane may modify the amount of transmitter released,
possibly even in a phasic manner, during a cycle. Finally, we may have
to consider synaptic effects that are not causing the traditional short
lasting EPSPs or IPSPs (excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic poten-
tials). Unconventional synaptic effects may control the overall conduc-
tance of a neuron, for instance, changing the gain of all other
synapses; or it may cause a transition of the membrane properties
from those of a cell with stable membrane potential to pacemaker or
plateauing properties, or vice versa.
In conclusion, I hope that we shall be able to understand the basic
working principles of mammalian central pattern generators by a
careful characterization of their properties and a portion of their
neuronal components. The best we will ever achieve is probably a
neuronal model that can not only (1) account for the rhythmicity and
the detailed pattern, but (2) react in an appropriate way to the various
important peripheral control signals and input from other pattern
generators and the variety of relevant descending control signals, and
(3) account for all the properties that have been reported. In this
analysis simple vertebrate networks may also become useful for
understanding not only the pattern generation but also the general
strategy used in the CNS (at a neuronal level) to control our behavioral
repertoire. Perhaps the identification of the phylogenetically old loco-
motor system could be aided by identification of neurons with common
transmitters or peptide-transmitter combinations or possibly particular
immunological properties of these neurons.
Acknowledgment
Support has been provided by the Swedish Medical Research Council (project nr
3026). A useful discussion with Dr. Andrew McClellan is gratefully acknowledged,
as is the help of Mrs. I. Klingebrant.
toy Erich Harth
Physics Department. Syracuse University. Syracuse. N. Y. 13210
Must neural mechanisms be Newtonian?
The scope of Selverston's target article is limited. A single point is
stressed, mainly through repetition: models for central pattern genera-
tors (CPGs) are premature because of the insufficiency of experimen-
550
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
tal data. Selverston lists a set of requirements which include identifica-
tion of all cells involved, knowledge of all unit properties, complete
knowledge of neuronal connectivity and of all synaptic properties.
Barring such knowledge, he contends, all attempts at understanding
CPGs remain "counterproductive."
Such a notion, if accepted, would apply a fortiori to other, more
complicated neural systems. And, since little hope is held out that
present methods will ever provide the required information, this would
surely make neuroscience one of the gloomiest fields of human
endeavor.
What is at issue here is more than our ability or inability to
understand CPGs. Nor do I wish to enter into a controversy over
whether one or another neural circuitry proposed by physiologists in
the past has later turned out to be erroneous. The bigger question that
is raised here is what we mean by understanding, and what place
theory should occupy in a natural science. In this context Selverston's
paper demonstrates how wide a gap still separates theory and
experiment in neurobiology, to the detriment of both.
There is nothing monolithic about the scientific method. Different
disciplines have developed quite distinct styles, and when investigators
with different scientific backgrounds converge on a problem they are
frequently uncomfortable with each other's approaches. In the end
science can only be enriched by such mixing of viewpoints - if only we
are willing to learn from each other.
The distrust between theory and experiment in neuroscience is of
long standing and was perhaps best expressed by this statement
attributed to Ramon y Cajal: "I wish to warn young men against the
invincible attraction of theories which simplify and unify seductively."
Ramon y Cajal correctly assessed the inevitability of simplification in
theory, but he was probably too early to foresee any potential benefits
in his field from that direction. In physics it had become quite clear by
that time that the kind of intellectual satisfaction we call understanding
almost always involves both simplification and, of necessity, incom-
plete knowledge. The development of physics during the last century
and a half would have been unthinkable without close interaction and
trust between theorists and experimentalists.
But let us go along for a moment with Selverston's admonition to
wait for the complete picture. If we were optimistically to assume that -
let us say in the case of the leech - every one of his requirements had
been met, we would then know every cell, every synapse, and the
properties of every square micron of neural membrane. We should
now, at last, be ready to "model." The outcome of this cannot be in
doubt. If we manage to write a computer program that takes into
account all of our data we will obtain exactly the behavior of the leech.
The model is thus superfluous since we know the leech. It is, in fact, no
model at all because it conveys no understanding, except if our brain
were able to think through the dynamics of the maze of neural circuitry
and complicated unit behavior. It neither simplifies nor unifies.
There is another fundamental misunderstanding inherent in Selver-
ston's arguments. It concerns what he calls the description "in
mechanistic terms" of neural phenomena such as the generation of
rhythmic patterns. In his narrow conception of a mechanism, either a
neuron is "less important than others" and may perhaps be over-
looked without much loss, or else its omission would put the mecha-
nism in jeopardy. Selverston either does not understand or ignores
mechanisms of mass action or cooperative phenomena. This is
evident also from his repeated use of the "radio analogy," undoubt-
edly one of the poorest models of neural systems. It is very likely also
that, if Selverston were to carry out his program, he would find
significant differences from animal to animal in the microstructure and
microproperties he is trying to ascertain. Thus Macagno, Lopresti &
Levinthal (1973) report that in an isogenetic population of the crusta-
cean Daphnia details of connectivity varied from specimen to speci-
men. The effect of epigenetic factors on neuronal development has
been amply documented (Patterson 1979; Diamond 1979; Lynch &
Akers 1979; Gorski 1979). But many epigenetic factors are due to the
environment, hence unpredictable. What now? Are we to combine the
different neuronal circuits to arrive at the average leech? Clearly, a
mechanism of the type Selverston proposes could apply at most to a
single individual, a paltry gain for such a monumental effort.
Selverston has cited two models as examples of what should not
have been done. The model by Friesen and Stent (1978) of the
swimming CPG of the leech and the model by Harth, Lewis, and
Csermely (1975) of the swimming escape of Tritonia, which is based
on the experimental work of Willows, Dorsett, and Hoyle (1973). The
empirical foundations of both models were labeled by Selverston to be
fundamentally incorrect. I understand that WILLOWS will comment on the
physiology and neural circuitry of Tritonia. I wish to say a few words
about the model.
On the assumption that the scheme of two mutually inhibitory
populations of flexor motoneurons was essentially correct, and
accepting Willows's characterization of a third population of excitor
neurons (not an excitatory neuron as Selverston states), we felt that
the mechanism was likely to involve cooperative properties within
these populations.
It had been shown earlier (Harth et al. 1970; Anninos et al. 1970;
Wilson & Cowan, 1972; Wong & Harth 1973) that pools of intercon-
nected neuronlike elements exhibited dynamic qualities beyond those
possessed by individual neurons. These qualities, in particular hystere-
sis effects |cf. Toates: "Homeostasis and Drinking" BBS 2(1) 1979], do
not depend on the details of internal circuitry, nor specifically on the
dynamic properties of individual cells, but rather on parameters
expressing the general excitability of the net. They are thus coopera-
tive phenomena [cf. Arbib & Caplan: "Neurolinguistics Must be Compu-
tational" BBS 2(3) 1979|.
The three-net circuitry proposed by Willows strongly suggested that
these neural populations - i.e., the two antagonistic flexor neuron
groups and the pool of general excitor neurons - each act as
functional units. We then showed that the observed behavior of
Tritonia's swimming escape, as well as a good approximation to the
observed firing records of individual cells, could be obtained solely on
the basis of known cooperative properties of neural populations and
the particular gross coupling between nets reported by Willows. The
functioning of the whole system was relatively insensitive to such
parameters as multiplicity of connections, average coupling strengths,
firing thresholds, etc. One of the results noted then was the great
reliability with which the alternate setting and resetting of activities was
accomplished through this stochastic mechanism, even for net sizes as
small as 30-50 neurons.
These results are, I believe, significant, unless the fundamental
premises are totally in error. They point to the operation of neural
mechanisms other than those of the Newtonian kind, with its hopeless
requirements, as spelled out by Selverston. The hypothesis of mass
action holds out real hope of understanding at least some CPGs and
perhaps other neural phenomena.
by Daniel K. Hartline
Bikeay Laboratory ol Neurobiology. Honolulu, Hawaii 96822
Roles for models in understanding neural networks
Selverston's position regarding the supposed failure of neural modeling
to contribute to the understanding of networks even as simple as an
invertebrate central pattern generator represents a narrow view of the
situation. The failure resides more often in the misuse of the modeling
process, not so much by the modelers themselves as by those who
utilize modeling results without taking into account the latter's inherent
limitations. As an example, consider the contention that omission of
interneurons "may lead to a faulty explanation . . . especially when
some sort of model is used." A descriptive analysis (i.e., a qualitative
model) of how a network operates lacks both proof that it is capable of
explaining observed behavior and proof that it is in fact the way the
network operates. A concrete model (e.g., computer or neuromime-
based), even though fitted in an ad hoc manner (without violating
known facts), at least fulfills the former condition, and thus represents
an advance over the descriptive model. The misuse comes when
people confuse these two aspects. The "faulty explanation" is more
likely to occur if one does not demonstrate sufficiency with an explicit
model. To represent the modeling of leech swimming as producing
"erroneous understanding" is to confuse a demonstration of suffi-
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
551
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
ciency with a demonstration of necessity, and this despite the fact of a
known limitation on the information incorporated into the model.
It is also incorrect to assert that "if the [leech| rhythm can be
produced by one ganglion . . . then the CPG . . . must be located
entirely in one ganglion and the previous model judged incorrect." Just
as the model showed sufficiency but not necessity for a multiganglionic
site for the CPG, so does Weeks's (1980) finding for a single-ganglion
site. She has shown very elegantly that one ganglion can generate
some (but not all) aspects of the swim pattern under some (but not
necessarily all) experimental conditions. It is premature to label the
model of Friesen et al. (1976) "invalid" because conditions can be
found under which it fails. The invalidity is only relative (in the same
sense in which Newton's laws are "invalid" in the light of relativity and
quantum mechanics). It would not be surprising if another system
turned out to have several reinforcing mechanisms for promoting its
patterned bursting behavior. More work, both experimental and model-
ing, is needed before the limits on the "validity" of the Friesen et al.
model can be assessed and a more definitive statement can be made
on how much of the normal pattern is produced by how many ganglia
and under what conditions.
There are numerous potential values of modeling a neural net (see
also Perkel & Moore 1965). These increase in impact as the models
are made quantitatively more accurate, but they are still substantial
(given proper use) in more ad hoc cases, skeptics notwithstanding:
1. A concrete though ad hoc model (one with many free parameters
adjusted arbitrarily within a physiologically realistic range) is usually
more readily subject to test thun is a nebulous qualitative theory.
2. By offering a "testable hypothesis" (a key part of the scientific
method), such a model focuses research in a way that less readily
testable hypotheses cannot.
3. A successful ad hoc model establishes sufficiency, as already
discussed.
4. The success of an ad hoc model, even though "disproven,"
provides an alternative design for a network. The analysis of why the
network did not use that design can add much insight beyond that
gained from just knowing the actual design.
5. Simplified "theoretical" models can serve to broadly outline a set
of characteristics of a network (for example indicating parameter
ranges where instabilities or singularities might occur). Progressive
controlled simplification of a quantitatively accurate model can then be
used to link the simpler but mathematically more tractable models with
physiological reality, and to give the theoretical studies more physio-
logical meaning.
6. Quantitative success of a physiologically accurate model is a
requirement for ultimate acceptance of a theory for the operation of a
network.
7. In the course of developing an accurate model of a network, the
failures of the model can be used as a tool for identifying conceptual
errors, for pointing to areas requiring further research, and for suggest-
ing specific experiments to be performed. Such studies in turn lead to
modification of the model and to more tests, bringing about a dynamic
interaction of progressive refinement of physiological understanding
and model accuracy.
8. Once fairly established in accuracy, a model may serve as a
predictor for the internal state of a system that can be used without
detailed direct measurement of that state.
9. Instances may arise when the "inverse transform" of the input-
output characteristics of a model can be used to determine an
unobservable input from an observable output.
10. An accurate model can be used to gain direct insight into the
construction and functioning of a network, allowing parameters to be
changed at will in ways not possible to achieve experimentally and
permitting observation of the impact of such parameters on the
behavior of the net.
Modeling can and should play a key role in any research, including
neural network physiology. Without more dedication to accurate
modeling than is presently in evidence, our understanding of the
operation of CPGs is likely to remain limited. It seems to me that the
problem has been not so much with the limitations of existing models or
experimental techniques for obtaining parameters for them (albeit
these do pose valid problems) as with the fact that physiologists have
often been content to do the "easy" qualitative experiments instead of
investing energy in more tedious quantitative measurements. Unfortu-
nately, the scientific climate in the field seems to support this
approach. Also, those quantitative data which are obtained are often
not used in the context of a quantitative theory; they are left as
numbers only. A vital interaction between theory and experiment, as
exemplified by the field of physics, should be possible with the proper
application of quantitative analysis and modeling to the understanding
of neural networks.
by Graham Hoyle
Department of Biology. University of Oregon, Eugene. Ore. 97403
Expectation and achievement in analysis of motor
program generation
The study of the cellular bases of behavior is in its infancy and suffering
from the teething troubles of the recently born. The subject owes its
existence mainly to intracellular electrode technology, which is itself
advancing daily. A few years ago "experts" believed they had reached
the limits when they recorded from a 10 urn cell. Now a few skilled
operators are dye-filling from 2 tim dendrites and using 4 electrodes
simultaneously. The major thrust to do circuit analysis came from a
more philosophical direction, when the apparent simplicity and rulewor-
thiness of much behavior was pointed out by Niko Tinbergen (1951).
Major behaviors were seen to be subject to genetic control and
therefore dependent on hard wiring in the nervous system. The
publication of this book roughly coincided with the general availability
of intracellular electrodes, but there was a gap of one and a half
decades before there was any rush to use them for circuit analysis.
This was principally because there was so much to do first, by way of
studying basic cellular and synaptic properties.
When the time came to get into circuitry a hefty debate developed
regarding which animal species would be optimal for attack. But the
availability and ease of visualization of neurons rapidly pushed aside
logic, which compelled a starting point of significant behavior. A new
anarchy arose and, regrettably, still prevails. The field had its rush of
prospectors looking for the surface gold, who naturally rushed into
print with their first factual findings and elaborately decorated them with
a rash of partially digested ideas. Selverston justifiably criticizes many
of these earlier papers. Their overconfident authors, including myself,
gave the impression that in a few weeks of intensive work one could
locate the key neurons, work out their connections, and immediately
give a positive statement about how a particular behavior is produced.
We began to get uneasy, though, and not just because newcomers
were discovering key neurons that in our rush we had missed. Anxiety
was enhanced because each behavior studied turned out to be a law
unto itself. Both the manner in which the components are connected
and the clusters of their physiological characteristics were found to be
uniquely different for each bit of circuitry examined. The information
obtained from a particular bit of nervous tissue was simply not
applicable to any other. No principles emerged. This is great if you are
a splitter by nature. For those pursuers of the truth who have the
instincts of a stamp collector, nothing is nicer than knowing that more
and different stamps are forever going to be available to collect and to
contemplate ad infinitum. Those who by inclination are lumpers,
however, are quite rightly unwilling to accept this apparent state of
affairs. They feel quite sure that evolution is conservative in basic
aspects and that the principles are there, if only one has the wit to
recognize them. So far nobody has. Warren McCulloch and Walter
Pitts (1943) were quite wrong with the only general theory of neural
functioning ever published, but after almost half a century nothing is in
sight that might replace it.
There is another, deep-seated difficulty with this new field that
comes out strongly in the sense of frustration, rather than the hoped-
for deep satisfaction, that the investigator can feel about his own
results. Selverston, who has been very productive himself at detailed
circuit analysis, manages very well to convey the feeling that even after
quite extensive information collection on a numerically simple system
552
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
the desired result, that ol understanding the system, eludes the
investigator. Here one can, perhaps, resort to Webster; understanding
is "to get or perceive the meaning of" or "to grasp what is meant by."
This leads to meaning, which is defined as "to have in mind" or "to
have as opinion." We are obliged to recognize that there is no
absolute standard for understanding, only various levels, and that we
can at best advance our level progressively. We "understand" the
operation of the lobster stomatogastic ganglion largely as a result of
Selverston's research. Whether we understand it correctly or not
depends on the extent and accuracy of his and his associates'
published observations. In a larger system, with many more neurons,
no investigator could be expected to have a comparably extensive
knowledge of components. Selverston seems to question the right of
such an investigator to propose a model in print, citing examples of the
Tritonia brain neurons and of leech ganglia, determining swimming. I
concur that in the case of the early leech work modeling showing the
system as if driven by classical reflexes of peripheral origin was
inexcusable because the data did not exclude the possibility of pattern
generation in the absence of reflex inputs. Now the reverse is true,
since the undoubted demonstration of a central pattern generator in
leech ganglia does not exclude the option of controlling swimming by
chain reflex actions as an alternate. It is not unlikely that two or more
independent mechanisms for generating a specific behavior occur in
the same animal. These could comprise one or two different central
mechanisms on one hand, and one or two chain reflex mechanisms on
the other. The central mechanisms could include both triggered CPGs
and CPGs that require continuous driving, brain-located as well as
ganglion- or cord-located.
Other possibilities are that not all neurons involved in a CPG are
absolutely essential for its operation, as Selverston has found for the
stomatogastric ganglion. Or that the same circuit could operate on the
basis of emergent properties for some operations, but be dependent
upon dominance by certain neurons for others. The possibilities are
virtually limitless. Insofar as we are constrained experimentally to
recording from only a few neurons at a time (the current maximum is 6),
and insofar as neither the human mind nor mathematical processes
can handle all the simultaneously interacting variables, a comprehen-
sive description of the circuit operations is indeed impossible. But
because several ganglia are no longer the totally unknown "black
boxes" they were only two decades ago we can be said to have made
enormous progress in understanding them. It is no more necessary for
the neuroscientist to know all the voltage-dependent and independent
conductances of all the component nerve cells in a circuit than it is for
an electronic engineer to know in detail all the elements in the
computer he services.
The Tritonia brain remains our best example to date of the capability
of generation of a complex specific act of behavior by a central pattern
generator. Dorsett, Willows, & Hoyle (1969; 1973; also see Hoyle
1975, p. 60) found that neural patterns in identified neurons of the
intact animal during swimming are exactly matched in the same
neurons in the isolated brain, excited by electric stimulation of a nerve.
Peripheral input and feedback are not absolutely necessary for the
production of the motor pattern, although this does not mean they will
not play a role if they are available. Incidentally, this is a complete
behavioral sequence, with a characteristic beginning and a very
specific termination that outlasts the trigger stimulus a few hundredfold;
it is not just a sequence of regularly repeating patterns. In the latter
connection I should like to point out that it is not reasonable to equate
CPGs with rhythmic behavior, as Selverston does. CPGs determine
behavior ranging from events produced only once in the animal's
lifetime, through periodic molting, to escape behaviors. Rhythmic
movements used in walking and continuous swimming represent but a
small part of the spectrum.
There is another, and much more significant, basic error in Selver-
ston's approach. He rightly regards nervous systems as machines
whose components and circuitry need to be worked out. But he
ignores the tact that major parts of the central nervous systems of
higher molluscs, arthropods, and vertebrates are programmable
devices. Of course, the same motor circuitry is used for more than one
behavior, even though this circuitry is actively involved in the production
of each different behavior. But all parts of the system, including the
motor neurons, are plastic in two senses. First, their properties are
subject to short-term alteration by a variety of modulatory actions
which can be used to switch from one motor program to another, as
when a cricket changes its song from calling to courtship or aggres-
sion. Secondly, their properties are subject to long-term change as a
result of experience; i.e., they are programmable, and some are also
reprogrammable. The roles experiences play in determining the utiliza-
tion of stored sequences of sensory information ( - sensory "tapes")
and behaviorally appropriate motor sequences ( - motor "tapes")
represent as yet virtually uncharted research territory that belongs
squarely in the realm of central pattern generation study.
The in-depth pursuit of the neural basis of behavior can, it may be
argued, be considered the largest single scientific endeavor confront-
ing mankind. This topic will occupy investigators for many thousands of
years to come. If the current level of our approach and understanding
seem crude it is hardly surprising, because in a journey of a thousand
miles we have so far taken only the first hesitant step.
by Franz Huber
Max-Ptanck'lnstitut tur Verhaltensphyaiotogie. D 8131 Seewieaen, Weat Germany
Central pattern generators (CPGs) from the
viewpoint of a behavioral physiologist
According to my knowledge, the concept of central nervous automa-
tisms for controlling rhythmic motor acts goes back to the late Erich
von Hoist (1935; 1936a, b; 1937). Though he did not explicitly use the
term CPG, he showed experimentally that an assembly of central
neurons is responsible for the spatiotemporal coordination of fin
movements in certain fishes. This coordination persists after the spinal
cord is severed from the brain and from sensory input arriving via the
dorsal roots. Von Hoist's quantitative comparison of coordinated fin
movements in the naturally swimming fish with those occurring after the
operations allowed him to consider the latter as part of natural
locomotor behavior. He also noticed that only in rare instances do
central nervous automatisms work in complete isolation.
None of the recent important discoveries about CPGs in both
invertebrates and vertebrates have changed this basic view, but they
have added an invaluable body of information regarding the number of
neurons involved and their connections and interrelations, even down
to the synaptic level.
While I fully agree with Selverston's view and strategy, to the effect
that CPGs can only be understood as "naked CPGs" if the neuronal
components, their mutual interactions, and so forth are known, I must
note the complete absence of discussion of behavioral aspects in his
target article. Since behavior is considered to be the result of sequen-
tial muscular contractions organized by the nervous system, such
motor acts are part of natural behavior, independently of whether or
not they are programmed by CPGs. Thus, a first question arises: how
alike are the motor acts "driven" by a CPG which is isolated from the
rest of the body compared to the equivalent motor behavior in the
intact animal? There is no doubt that, by definition, CPGs can operate
without need of peripheral sensory input. But this does not eliminate
the fundamental question of whether we are studying a kind of "central
nervous artifact" or an important nervous constituent of rhythmic
behavior.
Insofar as I am aware, no animal in which CPGs have been closely
analyzed exhibits behaviorally relevant motor output based on CPG
activity alone. This holds, in my opinion, for the system properties of
the heart and stomatogastric ganglia in crustaceans, and even more
for insect flight, stridulation, and walking, as well as for vertebrate
locomotion.
What one sees in the isolated preparation is a kind of well-
coordinated pattern of activity, usually rather stable, in which variations
in the timing of components, gradual or sudden phase shifts, resetting,
and so on, are missing. Of course, one can ignore such parameters of
the system. However, aside from the need to know how a CPG is
adjusted to the animal's momentary needs, I think it would also be a
great help in our understanding of the CPG itself, not to ignore such
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
553
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
peripheral (or even central) influences. Independently of whether CPGs
are based on "endogenous bursters" or on a "resonant mode of
activity," one should determine the loci of adaptability within the
system, or, more concretely, the synapses that exhibit greater variabil-
ity in response to all possible influences on the intact system in which
the CPG is embedded. This may even reveal separate components or
subelements when one studies the isolated CPG. Since the timing of
the components is the most important property of all CPGs, it would
seem worthwhile to determine whether the whole CPG behaves
"isotropically," or whether we would find labile components that are
more affected than others. I consider these questions just as important
as fulfilling Selverston's requirements for a complete description of
components and properties of the "naked CPG."
There is another point I would like to bring up for discussion.
Behavior develops and the nervous system develops. There is no
reason to believe that CPGs don't develop. Here the question arises:
what can we learn about the structural and functional organization of a
CPG by studying its development? So far, nobody has undertaken this
enterprise. It is reasonable to assume that at the outset not all
components are acting in the same way as they do in the adult state.
What elements appear first? Are these endogenous bursters? How
many elements are needed to generate rhythmicity, if the system is
based on a resonant model? Do interactions among them stabilize with
ongoing development? The fewer elements one has to consider, the
easier it may be to describe the whole system satisfactorily.
by C. R. S. Kaneko
Regional Primate Research Center and Department of Physiology and Biophysics.
University ol Washington, Seattle. Wash. 99)95
A practical approach to understanding
central pattern generators
Before one can respond to the titular query "Are central pattern
generators understandable?" a number of points of clarification seem
in order. A central pattern generator (CPG) is, by definition, the neural
element that is responsible for generation of the repetitive motor
output. Thus we are referring to a variety of mechanisms which
subserve a class of behaviors. Since there is good factual and intuitive
reason to believe that these mechanisms are quite different one from
another, a search for some pervasive, underlying mechanism for all
CPGs seems unwarranted at best. Therefore, the question is really one
of understanding individual CPGs. In mechanistic terms the task is to
describe how the CPG converts summated input activity into an
oscillatory output.
Even in this simplified form the question is complicated. At the least,
we must establish criteria for defining what constitutes a sufficient level
of understanding. The task is overwhelming if the minimum, as Selver-
ston suggests, is to know all the membrane and synaptic properties
and all the connections of all neural elements that comprise the CPG.
Establishing such a criterion is like requiring an exact knowledge of
each of the transistors, diodes, resistors, and capacitors and their
connections as a minimum criterion for understanding an operational
amplifier. It is not a question, as Selverston contends, of understanding
function on the basis of a description of parts and connectivity. We
already know what it is supposed to do - a neural oscillator produces
rhythmic motor output. Granted someone, somewhere, designed the
operational amplifier circuit, but acknowledging that only he under-
stands it is like admitting that only he can understand a neural oscillator
(i.e., CPG), a conclusion that I for one am not ready to accept. On the
other hand, simply knowing that the small black chip will amplify is like
knowing that the neural oscillator will oscillate; it is a trivial level of
understanding. I would prefer a criterion of understanding that
conforms with the standard meaning of the term as defined in
Webster's Seventh New Collegiate Dictionary (1971). That is, a "com-
prehension of" and "thorough technical acquaintance" with the neural
element's components that lead to an "acceptable, plausible" expla-
nation of how it functions "without utter certainty."
The proposed criterion of understanding leads to a need for
objective tests to verify the plausibility of explanations. Modeling is a
means of providing a theoretical framework which can be tested. The
model should be used as part of a dynamic process of providing and
testing theories until one theory becomes widely accepted. As Selver-
ston points out, part of the criterion for acceptance of a model is that
the model have predictive validity in the face of perturbations of the
system. However, unlike Selverston, I do not see a model as an end
product but rather as part of the testing process, and I am not
discouraged by previous inaccurate models since they contribute to
the development of understanding.
The final aspect of the question seems to be whether or not, with
present techniques, we can achieve the level of understanding outlined
above for any system. I would like to suggest that the methods are in
hand and that it is simply a matter of time and effort. For example, the
recent work of Merickel and colleagues (Merickel et al. 1977, 1978;
Kaneko et al. 1978; Merickel & Gray 1980) has provided the basic
network and the neuron membrane characterization of a CPG as well
as models that fit the known data and generally explain the oscillatory
behavior of the system. The details that remain to be described are not
beyond our capabilities. We would like to have quantitative membrane
current and coupling coefficient measures that accurately predict burst
durations and interburst intervals. We would also like to be reason-
ably assured that there are no other types of neurons not yet
described. These and other characteristics can be described using
present techniques. Even though available evidence suggests that we
cannot now and may never be able to say with certainty that a
particular neuron has a particular functional role, we certainly have a
good idea of how the CPG generates the oscillatory output.
I am also convinced that a similar level of understanding can be
achieved for mammalian CNS motor systems. The vestibular and
oculomotor systems are exemplary for the use of modeling as a
quantitative theoretical framework for testing and expanding our
understanding of the neural basis of a motor output. For instance,
although the saccadic motor system does not produce rhythmic
behavior, repetitive stereotyped motor output can be achieved through
behavioral control (i.e., training the animal to make repeated saccades
of a given size). Quantitative analysis of the discharge patterns of
neurons recorded in alert animals as well as anatomical and electro-
physiological studies in acute preparations has provided a good deal
of information regarding the range and types of neurons and their
connectivity (see Baker and Berthoz 1977). Information on membrane
properties of the constituent neurons is certainly very limited, but the
techniques necessary to gather that information are available (e.g.
Schwindt & Crill 1980). Again, one cannot know what each neuron is
contributing to the motor output, but an understanding of how the
system produces the motor output is nevertheless evolving in the form
of testable models (e.g., van Ginsbergen & Robinson 1977).
To summarize, the question of understanding CPGs is really one of
understanding how they produce their output; it does not require an
exact knowledge of all components. Modeling provides a quantitative,
theoretical, testable framework for the understanding of both inverte-
brate and mammalian motor systems. Although I agree with Selverston
that we haven't achieved an understanding of any CPG yet, my
response to the original question is a definite yes.
by James L. Larimer and Wesley Thompson
Department of Zoology. University of Texas. Austin. Tex. 78712
Pessimism, models, and episodic behavior
We concur that central pattern generators, especially those of the
network type, have so far proven rather more unyielding to experimen-
tal analysis than might have been hoped some years ago. But we are in
disagreement with the spirit of pessimism and with some of the
arguments presented in the target article.
The discussion of what constitutes a "complete" understanding is
nebulous. Do we need to know the detailed information that Dr.
Selverston feels is necessary to "understand" a pattern generator, or
might it be sufficient to have a model which is based upon known
cellular elements and their interconnections, which produces the
appropriate patterned output(s), and which has withstood numerous
554
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary /Selverston: Central pattern generators
experimental tests? What if someone can succeed in obtaining all the
information about a single pattern generator that Selverston desires? In
what sense is this a "complete" understanding? In the absence of
some model, this mass of experimental detail will be unintelligible, and,
as the author himself argues, there is no guarantee that it will be
sufficiently complete to allow computer simulation.
A question which was not directly addressed is whether there are
likely to be any undiscovered principles for the operation of central
pattern generators. Regardless of their apparent complexity, do they
all use essentially the same known components and interactions, or
are we missing some key elements? What if they were all known now?
There would appear to be almost unlimited ways in which they could be
arranged to achieve a wide variety of patterned outputs. This has
serious implications because the "complete" understanding of any
one pattern generator might be truly ad hoc and might not reveal any
information about other ones even if they utilized the same compo-
nents and interactions!
Alternatively, if Selverston believes that a "complete" understanding
will give us new basic insights into how central pattern generators
work, then perhaps the central pattern generators which are now being
analyzed are too complex. The logical course of action might be to
select a simpler system, if it exists, even if it is apparently trivial in the
context of the central pattern generators in higher vertebrates that we
would like to understand.
The author makes quite clear his disenchantment with modeling at
our current state of knowledge of central pattern generators. We do
not share this disenchantment, believing that models have a utility in
the analysis of central pattern generators. Models, even those simple
ones presented in this target article, serve not only as a guide for
testing ideas but also indicate some of the combinations or permuta-
tions of neural elements which can achieve a known output. The very
fact that central pattern generators appear so very complex and that
the determination of specific properties of numerous single cells is so
technically difficult would seem to argue for the use of modeling as an
effective, efficient approach to the analysis of central pattern genera-
tors. Models generate predictions about the roles that particular
neurons, properties, and connections should play in the generation of
the patterned neural output. Experimental efforts can then be focused
on testing features crucial to the operation of the model. Certainly we
would argue that models should be based on known experimental data
and not solely on conjecture. Models also need not necessarily be
published, although publication of models together with new experi-
mental findings serves as a way of organizing the presentation of what
would otherwise appear to be disjoint data.
The ultimate decision about the completeness and validity of the
model depends on how well it stands up to further experimentation. If
some models fail, as they inevitably will, they have nonetheless served
a useful purpose. An example of this is the case of the model for leech
swimming discussed by Selverston. A crucial prediction of the model
was that the pattern generator operated via axons in the paired
interganglionic connectives. This model was not proposed without
experimental basis; interganglionic connections between neurons
involved in the central pattern generator (as determined by their ability
to reset the rhythm) were demonstrated, and a minimum length of
isolated nerve cord including several ganglia was found to be required
to obtain the patterned output. Weeks (1980) has now shown that as
long as a single ganglion is left attached to adjacent ganglia by the
medial, unpaired connective, the swimming rhythm can be generated in
a single ganglion. One wonders whether a primary motivation for this
experiment by Weeks was not a desire to test an essential element of
the model, especially in light of her previous work showing that a
neuron initiating swimming has an axon which runs in the unpaired
connective. It could be asserted that the model in question has served
to generate an important new piece of information about the central
pattern generator.
Finally, the assertion by Selverston that the neuronal basis of
episodic behavior cannot possibly be understood is simply too strong.
Granted that repetitive behavior may be easier to study, episodic
behaviors are certainly more common, and, in this regard, more
important. Escape behaviors in invertebrates and in lower vertebrates
are becoming rather well understood, perhaps more so than repetitive
behaviors. They are, to be sure, less complex than, for example,
playing a piano but are sufficiently complicated to be interesting. In
addition, if an episodic behavior is genetically stereotypic, or if in a
higher animal it is learned, the underlying motor program may be
repeated with great consistency. Similarly, certain episodic behaviors
can often be released repetitively by carefully controlled stimuli, making
their examination relatively easy.
by Charles M.Lent
Section of Neuroscionce, Division of Biology and Medicine, Brown University,
Providence, R.I. 02912
On neuronal nihilism
Allen Selverston has chosen the pessimist's answer to the question
"Are central pattern generators understandable?" He posits that a
rigorous understanding of many of the CPGs currently under active
investigation is simply not possible with existing techniques. Although
Selverston believes that a mechanistic explanation of the activity of
endogenously bursting neurons will be formulated in the foreseeable
future, he sees inherent problems with attempts to understand
networks of neurons whose oscillatory activity derives from their
synaptic interconnections.
I find nothing in his discourse which argues convincingly against the
possibility of achieving an understanding of a CPG with the methods
presently available. Many of these preparations are taken from inverte-
brate ganglia and they may well have small, yet-undescribed interneu-
rons whose activity is crucial to the generation of an oscillatory rhythm.
It may well be difficult to identify these cells; nevertheless, it can be
done, with effort (which might be Herculean), through existing tech-
niques; and I find increasing comfort in the fact that one or two new
techniques which can facilitate these researches (e.g., anatomical
dyes, cell killing, selective toxins, and markers for axonal transport) are
being described each year.
I do agree with Selverston that the use of electronic neuromimes to
validate a physiologically described CPG is fraught with problems
because the operator can "jiggle parameters" in order to obtain
virtually any desired output. However, the fact that neuromimes are not
presently good models for CPGs does not seem to me to be just cause
for assuming that this important field of experimental neurobiology
lacks substance. It lacks a good mechanistic, predictive model at this
juncture.
In the course of his argument, Selverston traces 
historical
sequences showing (1) the partial elucidation of some of the connec-
tions within a CPG, (2) the utilization of an electronic analogue of these
connections, and (3) the discovery of new data showing that, even
though the model worked, the physiology was, alas, imperfectly
described. Why such a sequence of events evokes his pessimism is
beyond my understanding. These sequences, it seems to me, consti-
tute the day-to-day doings of a formative science, such as neurobiolo-
gy, in its experimental phase. Because the study of the neuronal bases
of rhythmic behavior is still in its wet (laboratory) phase, those
sequences of events iterated by Selverston demonstrate continuous
progress and should therefore evoke optimism about the ultimate
understanding of a network CPG.
A critical point, not discussed in the paper, concerns the level of
knowledge required for acceptable understanding of a phenomenon. If
cellular and synaptic mechanisms are considered to be understood by
their phenomenological description, then I maintain that a full under-
standing of a CPG is indeed obtainable with existing techniques. For
example, a neuron may be shown to have an electrogenic sodium
pump as well as a synaptic receptor which increases cation conduc-
tance, and if findings at this level are sufficiently detailed to construct a
mechanistic model of the output function of the CPG, we can attain the
goal. If, however, we require more detailed information at the molecular
level, then there is substantial doubt as to reaching our goal of
understanding. If we require a description of the three-dimensional
conformation of the membrane-bound ATPase during activity and
quiescence, and if the molecular linkages between receptor proteins
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
555
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary /Selverston: Central pattern generators
and ion channels must be functionally described in order to obtain a full
understanding of a CPG, we will not have a detailed, mechanistic
explanation for some considerable length of time. A complete compila-
tion of the detailed molecular biophysics of neurons will long remain the
"quark" of cellular and integrative neurobiology.
The most disturbing feature of the Selverston paper is its pessimistic
tone and its final leap into nihilism. Science has been marked by the
episodic appearance of nihilists. Often these negative spirits have had
a positive influence upon empiricism by raising doubts regarding the
state of knowledge at the time, and the empiricists would respond with
better experiments, more rigorous controls, and more conclusive
results. Neurobiology has probably had more nihilism than most other
sciences simply because of its subject - the nervous system - and its
long-term goal, an understanding of brain function. As early as 1933,
Niels Bohr raised the fundamental philosophical question of whether
any brain was capable of understanding those connections which were
responsible for its functioning, including its ability to understand.
Gunther Stent (1969) examined a series of historic trends in both the
arts and the sciences and predicted an end to progress as we know it
(implying, of course, an end to the systematic investigation of neuro-
biological problems). Jerome Lettvin has repeatedly argued in public
forum that the nervous system is so complicatedly and redundantly
wired that no amount of experimentation will produce an understanding
of its functions, and we should, therefore, simply not try.
I will refrain from the temptation of waving the banner of neurobiol-
ogy by listing some of the (ever-increasing) examples of progress.
Putting philosophical and theoretical considerations aside, it is patently
clear that we can, and have, learned a great deal about the nervous
system in general and about CPGs in particular. While there may well
be some limit as to what we can understand about the functions of the
nervous system set by "uncertainty principles" or by "social evolu-
tion," it is nevertheless especially distressing when an experimentalist
such as Selverston embraces nihilism. One can but wonder what
motivated Selverston to write the target article: either he is playing
devil's advocate and attempting to evoke some patriotic response
from the neurobiological community, or he believes what he has
written. If the former is true, the article is unnecessary; if the latter is
true, one wonders why he persists in his chosen (futile) research
activities trying to understand the workings of a central pattern
generator in the lobster stomach.
by Gerald E. Loeb and William B. Marks
Laboratory of Neural Control. NINCDS, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md.
20205
Epistemology and heuristics in neural
network research
Dr. Selverston has arrived at a discouraging conclusion from which he
invites the reader to derive an even more discouraging implication -
namely, that we lack the methods to "completely understand" central
pattern generators (CPGs). He is understandably disappointed and
disillusioned by the failings of the neuromime approach to modeling
which, coupled with the seemingly transparent and invariant simplicity
of the invertebrate nervous system, once promised to cut through the
tedious experimental approach to understanding. Those of us who
have addressed the mammalian nervous system, where the neurons
are not individually numbered, would certainly have anticipated the
conclusion, yet we have resisted the implication and persisted along
rather different approaches to understanding. This is because both the
understanding (epistemics) and the approaches (heuristics) assumed
by Selverston are not the only ones possible, or even the most useful.
We shall examine briefly the epistemology by extending the analogy of
the radio receiver (as employed by Selverston) and the heuristics by
considering the emerging methodology of top-down design.
Selverston makes the tacit assumption that "understanding" a CPG
is equivalent to having a model whose components are in one-to-one
correspondence with the components found in the real CPG. In
understanding the operation of the class of devices known as radio
receivers, one would obviously have accomplished little by having a list
of the components and their individual specifications. One would
actually be little further ahead by having a complete circuit diagram
unless one were already familiar with the principles of resonant circuits,
superheterodyning, amplification, etc. that constitute how the thing
works |cf. Puccetti & Dykes: "Sensory Cortex and the Mind-Brain
Problem" BBS 1(3) 1978]. The principles of operation really constitute
the knowledge required for understanding, and they are disembodied
from the actual device (or its model). Once they are known, the
construction of a truly analogous model and its confirmation are
relatively trivial. It seems likely that a model which correctly embodies a
principle of operation would be insensitive to small variations in the
parameters or even in the numbers or connectivities of the compo-
nents. Furthermore, it seems possible that the network is development-
ally assembled in relation to the underlying principles - i.e., that genet-
ics will be found to be organized in relation to rules of operation.
A thorough understanding of the principles may, however, reveal
that there is more than one way to achieve a given performance. It is
then incumbent on the investigator to further specify the performance
to eliminate ambiguities in design. Most of the erroneous models cited
by Selverston arise from failures of specification. If you think a radio is
a device which makes static come out of a speaker, there will be many
ways to construct one, few of which will be viewed as satisfactory for
long. In applying the analogy of the radio receiver, one must remember
that we are trying to discover the actual principles of its operation, not
to invent them. The invention of radio proceeds rationally from a
thorough and imaginative understanding of the properties of the
available components. Once the device meets minimal specifications,
the refinement of those specifications and improvements of design will
necessarily proceed in an evolutionary manner. In discovery, it is not
possible to overspecify; any failure to completely specify invites
construction of an erroneous model.
It should be apparent from the above that there are many equally
valid and "rigorous" levels of explanation. In fact, there may be no limit
to the depth to which one might pursue the submolecular bases of a
given behavior. Selverston would seem content to know the membrane
properties of the component neurons, but surely the biophysics of the
iontophores are part of "understanding," and beyond that the stereo-
chemistry of membrane proteins beckons. Yet complete knowledge at
the deeper levels is of as little help in understanding an emergent
property like pattern generation as are the properties of semiconduc-
tor junctions in understanding radio reception. A thorough understand-
ing of the higher level must inform the investigation into the next deeper
layer. We submit that several levels of understanding (amenable to
higher-order modeling) exist between the simple behavioral observa-
tion and a neuromime model, and that even the first has barely been
scratched for most CPGs.
This orderly, gradual reductionism is becoming established as a
useful and efficient information handling technique most commonly
referred to as "top-down design." It is slowly becoming accepted in
computer programming but is likely to be resisted by scientists
because it imposes certain unusual disciplines and delayed gratifica-
tion. It also requires an almost blind faith that methodological problems
such as those Selverston mentions can be circumvented by more
careful and informed experimental designs and strategies at whose
actual methodological requirements we cannot yet guess. This carries
the risk that a great deal of effort will be expended before one
discovers that the methodological limitations really do prevent signifi-
cant progress, a situation not unprecedented in neurophysiology. On
the other hand, the leaping reductionism that tempts us to use any
available technique to study a process we can't even properly describe
in gross terms leads frequently to those dead ends which Selverston
finds so discouraging. (In mammalian neurophysiology, the cerebellum
is an example of a structure whose basic components and circuitry
were made available before there was any real experimental evidence
regarding its function, with the consequence that the literature is now
full of things that the cerebellum should be doing but is not.)
What we are suggesting is that the next step should not be the
development of ever-finer anatomical and electrophysiological tech-
556
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
niques to study those subcellular processes which, admittedly, do
underlie the behavior. Rather, we must develop better descriptions and
manipulations at the systems level and a lengthening list of possible
principles of operation. (Selverston's catalog of mechanisms is a
valuable beginning.) Ironically, this may best be done in vertebrates
with more complicated and malleable behavior. Their patterns tend not
to be expressed in the all-or-none fashion of invertebrate feeding or
escaping but rather to demonstrate experimentally useful ranges of
motivation, speed, load compensation, reflex modulation, conditioning,
learning, etc., etc. Furthermore, the behaviors do not emerge suddenly
and completely as invariant instincts, and thus they can be followed
through normal versus deprived or altered developmental stages,
starting more simply and adapting to fit their environment. Teleological-
ly, one expects that the places in the developmental program where
plasticity has been introduced should provide some useful insights into
the principles of operation.
This suggests another problem which may limit our present ability to
understand CPGs but which Selverston does not specifically mention.
The metaphor of the radio receiver may actually be quite misleading in
its assumption that neural circuits actually follow some wiring diagram.
An FM radio in an area which has only AM broadcasts does not learn
to extract meaningful information from the signals which it detects.
CPGs, particularly in vertebrates, may be inextricably enmeshed in
somatosensory perceptual systems whose wiring is specified by
accumulated experience operating on self-organizing feature detec-
tors. Our inability to completely specify many of the components and
their connections may accurately reflect their nonspecification by
nervous system genetics. While one does not usually think of the spinal
cord as a perceptual machine with plasticity, there is accumulating
evidence suggesting an anatomical substrate for adaptive changes in
synaptic projections (e.g. sprouting). Th ; nonlinear, state-dependent
signals from muscle and skin stretch rec Jtors might especially benefit
from processors which could interpret th )m in the total context of the
task in progress, a goal perhaps more suitable to an educable control
system than a servomechanism. Even in simple organisms with simple
behaviors, the nervous system often chooses to perform tasks with
hundreds or thousands of information processing elements, even
though the tasks, as we describe them experimentally, could be
performed by the small number of large elements which attract our
attention. We then have to consider the possibility that the understand-
ing we really seek is not of the principles of operation of the CPG but of
the rules of development and adaptation.
Obviously, we are digging in for a long siege before we can
seriously contemplate modeling at the neuromime level in the mamma-
lian CNS. Should this discourage us? No, because we are at this very
moment directly attacking the real questions regarding the principles of
operation of the CPGs. By the time that is completed, either the
methodological problems will be solved (or we will discover indirect
ways around them), or we will have realized that there are other
demonstrations of understanding at least as satisfying as a neuromime
model.
by J . V. Luco
Labormtorio dm Neurofisiologia, Univeraidad Catolica do Chile, Santiago, Chile
Central pattern generators and sensory input
Selverston emphasizes that "it is unlikely that present techniques will
ever yield a complete understanding of any but the simplest of |CPGs|."
He also remarks that "modeling studies have not added much," and
he claims that "this is due . . . to the poor quality and incomplete nature
of the data provided.. . ." He advises using a "simple" system.
Undoubtedly he is right, but a "simple system" only means that others,
which include a greater number of variables, are more complex.
I interpret Selverston's paragraph on "present strategies" as indi-
cating the necessity of fully understanding all the mechanisms involved
in the processes that evoke a rhythmic behavior. However, it is not
clear to me whether his purpose is to seek a model for a simple
preparation or to attain total knowledge of such preparation. Either can
constitute a useful model for the study of physiological mechanisms in
more complex preparations.
The author defines a central pattern generator (CPG) as a group of
neurons that can produce a rhythmic motor activity with a characteris-
tic pattern, independently of the sensory input. However, it has been
reported that a CPG can be turned on by special inputs. Our own
evidence supports the existence of an innate central pattern which
would be responsible for a rhythmic response (Luco 1963).
The third thoracic ganglion of Blatta germanica was stimulated in
vitro through the abdominal connectives and activity was recorded
from a single motor axon. The afferent input served only to trigger the
rhythmic response, and once this response had been initiated it
followed its course independently at the electrical stimulus.
by Michael Merickel
Department of Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Tex. 77030
Single-cell versus network properties
and the use of models
Selverston's target article provides considerable insight into CPGs and
our ability to understand them. I would like to point out some additional
considerations regarding the involvement of single-cell and network
properties in determining CPG output. The author, in a typical fashion,
divides the mechanisms underlying CPG functioning into two different
classes: (1) CPGs which depend on single-cell properties such as
endogenous bursters and repetitively firing neurons; and (2) CPGs
whose output "emerges" as a result of network interactions. The
problem with this classification system is that it is becoming apparent
that, in the case of the few CPG networks whose component cell
membrane properties have been studied, both mechanisms can be
essential and can interact to determine CPG output.
A good example of the involvement of single-cell properties in
determining the output of a CPG network involves the pyloric and
gastric systems in the stomatogastric ganglion of the lobster. The
pyloric system contains three electrically coupled endogenous bursting
neurons, and the remaining pyloric and gastric neurons have been
considered to be passive follower neurons. Russell and Hartline
(1978), however, have demonstrated that many of these passive
follower neurons have the ability to generate plateau potentials due to
intrinsic "burster" properties and may therefore be intermediate bur-
ster neurons. Plateau potentials could be elicited by a short depolariz-
ing pulse and were found to cause a membrane potential transition to a
more depolarized potential and concomitant repetitive firing. Central
synaptic input is required to unmask plateau potentials, which has
many implications regarding the involvement of plateau potentials.
Russell and Hartline conclude that the properties of individual cells of a
CPG network can be of paramount importance to the functioning of the
network.
Our own studies on the cyberchron system in the snail Helisoma
have also pointed out the importance of specialized single-cell proper-
ties in determining the output of a CPG network. The cyberchron
system is a CPG network consisting of approximately twenty electri-
cally coupled neurons which control the feeding behavior of the snail.
The cyberchron network was originally thought to burst as a result of
regenerative excitation mediated through the electrical coupling (Kane-
ko, Merickel, & Kater 1978). Further examination of the properties of
individual cyberchron neurons demonstrated that cyberchrons are a
heterogeneous population of neurons, some of which have endoge-
nous burster properties (Merickel & Gray 1980). Therefore, the
cyberchron CPG output now appears to be dependent on both
single-cell properties, which provide the driving rhythm, and network
interactions mediated through the electrical coupling, which provide
synchronization and probably plasticity.
The above two examples suggest that it is more appropriate to
consider the output of CPG networks in terms of mechanisms which
span a continuum from specialized single-cell properties to emergent
network properties rather than in terms of either single-cell or network
properties. Therefore, it may well be the rule rather than the exception
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
557
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
that it is necessary to take into consideration both the properties of
individual cells and the properties emerging from network connectivity,
as suggested by Davis (1976), in order to understand how any CPG
network works. This view is considerably different from the simpler
view proposed by Selverston that a CPG network needs to be
considered only in terms of single-cell or network properties. Even
though it may be difficult, as the author points out, to determine and
take into consideration the special properties of CPG network neurons,
this has been done in at least two CPG networks (stomatogastric
ganglion and cyberchron systems) as described.
Another point I would like to consider involves the use of modeling to
demonstrate or "validate" the mechanisms underlying a CPG network.
Models, by their very nature, can only demonstrate that a certain set of
theoretical membrane properties and network connectivity can
produce the observed CPG output. Unfortunately, many different
parameter values and connectivity combinations can produce a model
with the appropriate output and functional characteristics, which has
resulted in many models turning out to be "wrong" when more
physiological data become available. Selverston falls into this same
trap when he suggests that small cells need be considered only "if the
models which are produced cannot accurately predict the network's
functional properties." This temptation to conclude that we have
"validated" or "proven" our model when it produces the same basic
output and general functional characteristics as the physiological
system has detracted from the usefulness of many models.
At least two considerations can help insure the appropriateness and
usefulness of a model. A sound set of electrophysiological data, as
pointed out by the author, is required so that most parameters do not
have to be "guessed." Additionally, the model must be constructed at
a level that enables the questions of interest to be answered. For
example, a model can be created at a very general level in a situation
where a basic mechanism is explored, such as the ability of reciprocal
inhibition or electrical coupling to support repetitive bursting. As an
example of this, we have been interested in determining whether
electrical coupling between nonbursting neurons is capable of support-
ing repetitive bursting activity. Our simulations of electrically coupled
networks involved simple, generalized neurons and demonstrated that
electrical coupling can provide synchronization between neurons but
does not appear to be able to support repetitive bursting (Merickel,
Kater, & Eyman 1978). These simulation results led us to look at the
membrane properties of individual cells which were found to be
extremely important.
The biggest danger of modeling occurs when exploring specific
networks with a model such as reciprocal inhibition, which appears to
be able to support repetitive bursting under a wide variety of condi-
tions. If electrophysiological experiments do not demonstrate the
existence of reciprocal inhibitory synapses between neurons, then
erroneous conclusions may well result. I believe that the failure of
models in most situations is due to the fact that the models were
improperly conceived. Modeling can be extremely powerful; it is
one - perhaps the only - device available to us to test and explore the
mechanisms and general principles underlying a CPG network. I
therefore believe that modeling should not be discouraged, and that
more small networks, where appropriate, should be modeled on a level
which incorporates single-cell properties.
by Stacia Moffett
Department ol Zoology, Washington State University, Pullman, Wash. 99164
The comparative approach to understanding
central pattern generators
One aspect of CPG research which Selverston's otherwise thorough
target article has neglected is the contribution of comparative studies.
The comparative approach is helpful at two levels. First, at the level of
the difficulty encountered in completely defining a particular CPG,
comparing the elements found in one system with those discovered in
a related species can lead to the search for components which might
otherwise go undetected. This approach is based on the homologies
between elements of the CPGs that have been found to control
particular behaviors in related species. The examples below will be
drawn from investigations of feeding in gastropods, but a number of
other CPGs, including the crustacean cardiac ganglion and the control
mechanism for feeding movements in crustaceans, would illustrate the
points just as well.
There would undoubtedly be some contribution to the ultimate
understanding of a particular CPG if ten different laboratories were
working on it simultaneously and periodically sharing their results, but
the gain is much greater if each lab is studying the same phenomenon
in a different species because the prominence of particular elements
and their susceptibility to investigation will vary from species to
species. For instance, the reported role of MCG, the metacerebral
giant cell (Senseman & Gelperin 1974; Weiss & Kupfermann 1976;
Granzow et al. 1979), in gastropod feeding motor programs varies
from a modulatory one (Bulloch and Dorsett 1979; Weiss et al. 1975)
to a command-cell function (Granzow and Kater 1977) or an integral
part of the feeding oscillator (Gillette and Davis 1977). The discovery
of a modulation of the buccal muscle response properties in Aplysia
(Weiss et al. 1978) will undoubtedly lead to a search for similar effects
of MCG in other gastropods. The description of the role of paracere-
bral cells in the feeding CPG of Pleurobranchaea (Gillette, Kovac &
Davis 1978) is likely to result in a search for corresponding cells in
other gastropods and a more thorough understanding of the interac-
tions between cerebral and buccal elements in normal feeding behav-
ior. The point is that CPGs studied in the context of the comparative
approach are more likely to be completely evaluated because of their
differences as well as their similarities.
The second level at which understanding a CPG is facilitated by the
comparative approach can best be described by analogy with the
testing of a CPG model: as Selverston indicates, a model should
correctly predict the outcome if one element is "perturbed" - i.e.,
removed from the system or altered in function. Nature has provided us
with a series of model systems, each representing a set of perturba-
tions, when compared with the next. These perturbations are uncon-
trolled in the sense of experimental manipulation and yet controlled in
the sense that in each case a functional output has been achieved by
juggling the contribution of the various elements. Thus, insights into the
importance of a particular characteristic (e.g., endogenous bursting
capability) may be gained by observing the operation of a pattern
generator in which the homologous element lacks that characteristic.
For instance, it is likely that fundamental differences will be discovered
in the source of rhythmicity in the systems of electrotonically coupled
small cells described in many gastropod feeding CPGs. In Helisoma,
voltage clamping has revealed that the cyberchron system contains
two classes of cells; a few current generator cyberchrons with endoge-
nous bursting capabilities are responsible for initiating the bursts, which
spread throughout the electrotonically coupled system and are ulti-
mately terminated due to activation of a slow outward current in the
generator and follower cyberchrons (Merickel & Gray 1980). In Planor-
bis (Berry 1972), a similar system may be found, but, in Aplysia,
fundamental differences are apparent, in that the electrotonic connec-
tions are weaker and the cells also communicate via chemical
synapses (Geppetti and Fiore 1979). These differences will undoubt-
edly be correlated with other differences, such as the way modulatory
influences interact with the pattern generator. In Helisoma, the intensity
and timing of motoneuron bursts within the repeat cycle can be
affected by sensory feedback, but the repeat cycle itself is not altered
(Kater & Rowell 1973). In other gastropods {Pleurobranchaea: Siegler
1977; Umax: Reingold & Gelperin 1980) both the motoneuron burst
intensity and the repeat cycle timing are accessible to modulation.
Comparisons of this sort lead not only to an improvement of our
understanding of CPGs in general but they can suggest important
differences that need to be taken into account in the analysis of a
particular CPG.
The comparative approach is certainly not a quick or easy solution,
but it does add another dimension to the techniques we are already
using. The comparative approach is analogous to attempting to solve
a complex problem by solving many equations simultaneously. This is
558
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980). 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary /Selverston: Central pattern generators
certainly theoretically easier that the approach outlined by Selverston,
which is trying to find the solution to a complex equation by indepen-
dently arriving at a knowledge of all the unknowns.
by V. W. Pentreath
Dapartment of Biology. University of Salford. Sallord MS 4WT, England
At what level will pattern generators be understood?
It is valuable for many neuroscientists to be reminded that the search
for a satisfactory unifying explanation for an apparently simple aspect
of behavior is not always possible, but instead reveals greater levels of
complexity. The situation with pattern generators illustrates the point
with crystal clarity, for here the problems can be applied to the
relatively simple invertebrate nervous preparations, sometimes with
only a few dozen neurons participating. The work in fact demonstrates
clearly the complexities of even "simple" nervous systems.
Few realistic scientists could find serious fault with the analysis of
"the state of the art" reviewed by Selverston, although some might
differ in their baseline attitude from which they judge how far the work
has progressed. The use of models is of course limited because they
have to fit the existing data, but they do provide aid for clear thought
because they provide testable alternatives. They are helpful signposts
as long as they do not go too far beyond the experimental data, in
which case there may be a subsequent tendency to make the nervous
system fit the model, rather than the model the nervous system.
Ironically, Selverston suggests that modeling would have its place once
a generator is known in totality because it would then be possible to
replicate the output and any of its perturbations; but if the generator
were known in totality, what would then be the point of having a model
of it?
Providing an objective assessment of how far progress in under-
standing central generators has gone and will go is a very difficult task,
and the one which prompted the question heading this commentary.
The question titling the target article probably has a negative answer
because it is impossible to entirely understand or prove anything. On
the other hand, if one considers that only a few dozen scientists over a
period of ten years or so have seriously addressed the problem with
sophisticated techniques, it is apparent that much progress has been
made. Even the proper unraveling and formulation of the problem itself,
as described in the article, is worthwhile. Although current intracellular
techniques are inadequate for complete analysis, they have allowed
the difficulties to be clearly defined.
New techniques will undoubtedly aid our understanding of pattern
generators and reveal yet further complexities. The labeled 2-
deoxyglucose technique (2-DG). discussed by Selverston, provides a
good illustration. We have been analyzing differential activity among
nerves in snail and leech ganglia by this method (Kai-Kai & Pentreath,
in preparation), but find that the satellite glial cells are under certain
conditions also heavily labeled, thus significantly complicating the
interpretation.
by Harold M. Pinsker
Marine Biomedical Institute, Departments o< Physiology and Biophysics. Psychiatry
and Behavioral Sciences, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Tex.
77550
Neuroethological analysis of central pattern
generators
Selverston's thesis that CPGs are difficult to understand because
current experimental strategies and techniques are inadequate and
current models untestable raises important issues for neuroethological
research. I shall elaborate on several aspects that were not sufficiently
emphasized. My thesis is that new strategies and techniques are
becoming available that will enhance understanding of the emergent
properties of neuronal networks, including CPGs. I shall outline a
reasonable empirical strategy for approaching CPGs and discuss
related analytical, electrophysiological, and computer techniques (see
Pinsker 1980 for detailed discussion).
Current neurophysiological approaches to studying CPGs often lack
an appropriate ethological frame of reference (Bentley & Konishi
1978). Before we can obtain meaningful answers about neurophysio-
logical mechanisms underlying a given CPG we must have a detailed
description of the rhythmic patterns of behavior generated under a
range of natural conditions with all of their complex contingencies and
nonlinearities (e.g., Fentress 1980). The analysis must proceed from
the behavior inward because we are dealing with emergent properties.
Predicting the effect on final motor output when a single neuron within a
CPG is perturbed is difficult because the emergent properties of
self-organized systems depend on nonlinear interactions among the
components, which are, by definition, not predictable from knowing the
properties of the individual components in isolation (Bunge 1980).
However, to understand emergent properties, the normal pattern of
behavior generated by the oscillator must first be characterized in the
intact system. One advantage of the "simple systems" approach is
that many invertebrates can be analyzed at the systems level in the
intact behaving organism interacting with its environment.
Quantitative approaches to characterizing information processing in
rhythmic systems have been derived from oscillator theory (Pavlidis
1973; Pavlidis and Pinsker 1977) and are applicable at many levels of
analysis, from behavior to the membrane level. The experimental
paradigms involve stepwise changes in parameters that produce
enduring changes in ongoing period as well as transient perturbations
that reset or phase-shift the oscillator. Single perturbations generate
phase response curves and repeated inputs are examined in entrain-
ment paradigms (Ayers & Selverston 1977, 1979; Pinsker 1977a,b). In
addition to the time domain, oscillatory systems can be characterized
in the frequency domain. Topological phase plane techniques can be
used to portray limit cycles for both intracellular and behavioral
oscillations and to test theoretical models (Gola 1976; Winfree 1977;
Peterson & Jones 1979; Pinsker & Bell 1980). These approaches
cannot settle questions of mechanism without manipulation of appro-
priate physiological variables, but are invaluable for deciding what
experimental paradigm to use in the systems analysis and how to
quantify the rhythmic behavioral and neuronal activity. Furthermore,
oscillator theory might suggest somewhat different strategies for
analyzing information processing in a CPG. For example, cardiac
oscillators have now been shown to have a point of singularity at which
even a weak perturbation can bring rhythmic activity to a halt (Jalife &
Antzelevitch 1979). Also, the question that Selverston raises about
whether phasic feedback necessary for proper functioning should be
considered as part of a CPG might be resolved by considering that
oscillators can be self-entrained by direct (Calabrese 1979) or indirect
(Wendler 1974) inputs.
Having characterized the intact rhythmic system, one's next step is
to specify the correlated efferent neuronal patterns. The initial studies
must be done in the intact animal, since even simple rhythmic behav-
iors are disrupted by the restraint and surgery necessary to record
intracellularly or optically from a semiintact preparation. Furthermore,
the properties of individual neurons must be specified in a normal
internal environment with its full complement of circulating hormones
(e.g., Arechiga 1977). Selverston has noted that hormones can
modulate CPGs, but he has failed to mention that many critical
hormones have not yet been described, and consequently could not
be duplicated in an artificial perfusion system. It must be demonstrated
that no change in efferent firing pattern occurs when seawater
replaces hemolymph. When motor innervation is simple, EMG record-
ings from intact animals can be used to monitor the activity of identified
motoneurons (Ayers & Clarac 1978; Ayers & Selverston 1979). Record-
ings from large axons in intact peripheral nerves during normal
behavior can be used to monitor directly the neuronal pathways
mediating motor output as well as peripheral feedback. If the behavior
is well specified, nerve lesion studies can be used to determine which
peripheral pathways mediate different components of the rhythmic
behavioral pattern. These nerves can then be monitored to charac-
terize the phasic efferent output during normal behavior. This approach
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
559
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
has often been used to characterize neuronal activity in reduced
preparations, but has only rarely been extended to intact animals (e.g.,
Wine & Krasne 1972; von der Porten et al. 1980). The lobster
stomatogastric system (Selverston et al. 1976) has been monitored in
intact animals (Morris & Maynard 1970; Ayers & Selverston 1979) and,
not surprisingly, things were found to be more complicated than in
reduced preparations.
Simplifying a preparation is necessary to reduce variability in bio-
physical studies. However, a firm link must be established between
normal activity patterns in the intact animal and patterns seen in more
reduced preparations. With implanted cuff electrodes it is possible first
to record in normal hemolymph and then reduce the intact animal to a
semiintact preparation for simultaneous intracellular analysis while
continuing to record from the same population (Cobbs & Pinsker 1978;
Kanz et al. 1979). With two-channel cuff electrodes, if the basic
waveform properties of the recorded units do not deteriorate,
computer spike train analysis (Camp & Pinsker 1979) can be used to
trace the previous pattern of activity of an impaled unit back to the
intact animal. This has now been done in the case of the motoneurons
mediating siphon withdrawal in Aplysia (Eberly & Pinsker, unpublished).
Optical techniques (Cohen et al. 1978) are promising as a way to avoid
impaling many neurons simultaneously and may offer an additional
intermediate link in the semiintact preparation with the whole nerve
population recordings in the intact animal. Intracellular recording can
then be more selective, since the preparation is running downhill.
To characterize the unitary patterns of activity of a simple CPG even
at the motoneuron level, many individual units must be described
simultaneously. Selverston has lumped together two distinct technolog-
ical problems: (1) large numbers and (2) small sizes of neurons. Large
numbers per se are not an insurmountable problem. If the unitary
signals are above the noise level and are well behaved statistically,
computer algorithms can separate unitary spikes from whole nerve
recordings (Glaser & Ruchkin 1976; Camp & Pinsker 1979). The
importance of spike train analysis for neuroethological investigation
cannot be overemphasized. Implicit in Selverston's desire to record
from the total interneuronal pool is the necessity to quantify activity in
so many units simultaneously during normal functioning of the CPG.
The subtle phase relations among rhythmic electrical events occurring
in many different units comprising the CPG cannot be reconstructed on
the basis of serial recording, even if the normal pattern survives the
reduction of the intact animal to a preparation amenable to intracellular
or optical techniques. Current techniques for multiunit analysis,
although slow and imperfect, open up significant experimental and
conceptual possibilities. With whole nerve cuff electrodes we can
monitor perhaps 10-15 axons reliably, which is only a very small
percentage of the many thousands of axons in a typical Aplysia nerve.
However, at present the limitation is in the recording technique, not the
computer analysis.
In addition to experimental strategies and analytical techniques, our
theoretical models must also have as their frame of reference the
normal pattern of behavior and neuronal activity. The leech swimming
model (Friesen et al. 1976) was a noble attempt based on the best
information available at the time, and it served to generate better data.
The fact that the leech swimming oscillator resides in a single ganglion
is in keeping with data on locomotor oscillators in other species
(Herman et al. 1976). One problem with the model is that neuromimes
do not possess some of the complex properties that we must
understand in individual nerve cells, as Selverston emphasizes.
Another problem is that there was no specific way to test the model
electrophysiologically and it had to be disconfirmed by means of ,a
lesion study (Weeks 1980). The details of the synaptic connections
were determined by pairwise recordings in semiintact preparations,
and on this basis extremely subtle phase relations were ascribed in the
model to the entire population of neuromime components. However,
no test had been proposed in the intact system to see whether the
model had face value to begin with. Recent studies have recorded
neuronal activity in intact leeches with implanted electrodes (Magni &
Pellegrino 1978). This suggests the possibility that the critical periph-
eral and interganglionic central pathways mediating normal swimming
can be monitored in intact leeches. This approach could provide a
significant experimental test of the next generation of CPG models.
by Stephen C. Reingold and Alan Gelperin
Department of Biology, Princeton University. Princeton, W. J. 08544
Central pattern generators and neuroethology
Is behavior understandable? The problems in understanding
central pattern generators (CPGs) enumerated by Selverston are
relevant to understanding the physiological basis of any piece of
behavior, be it rhythmic or nonrhythmic. The circuitry of a CPG is only
one part of the control mechanism for a behavior. A neuroethologist
must consider not only efference copy, corollary discharge, and
pathways of excitation (Grillner 1977), but also phasic and tonic
sensory feedback, which may serve to initiate, prolong, and sculpt a
basic motor pattern generated by a CPG (Kater & Rowell 1973;
Susswein & Kupfermann 1976; Siegler 1977; Reingold & Gelperin
1980). Thus, the limitations on physiological analysis discussed by
Selverston apply to a CPG and to all of the modulatory influences on
the CPG as well, which interact to produce a final motor program.
Modeling of circuitry based on any fraction of this information can only
lead to an oversimplified, sometimes functionally irrelevant understand-
ing of the CPG circuit.
In vitro analysis and in vivo behavior. An understanding of the
physiological basis of behavior clearly requires the type of cellular
analysis summarized by Selverston. For this reason, "simple systems"
- usually invertebrates with well-defined rhythmic behaviors which can
be studied in vitro using the isolated central nervous system - have
been widely used for such neuroethological studies. However, the
physical condition of an in vitro preparation may critically alter the
performance of its constituent neurons and circuits. Isolated nervous
systems are usually removed from normal hormonal influences (Tru-
man 1978) and may be subject to ionic and thermal conditions different
from those that prevail in situ. To the extent that such conditions may
alter the performance of a CPG, circuit analysis using in vitro prepara-
tions may be misleading. To ensure that CPG circuit analysis is relevant
to its function in the whole animal, correlated behavioral and physiolog-
ical studies are essential - a point little stressed by Selverston.
A further consequence of in vitro analysis becomes apparent when
one is examining supposedly "weak" synapses or cells which seem to
have a minimal role in CPG circuitry. Cells which seem unimportant
under in vitro experimental conditions may be more central to the
actual performance of a rhythmic behavior by the intact animal. In light
of this, Selverston's suggestion that, as a shortcut, such seemingly
unimportant cells and synapses can be ignored may be quite mislead-
ing. To generate appropriate models, with a predictive value for an
animal's behavior, surely no functional cell or synapse can be
discounted.
How generalizable is a CPG? The concept of CPGs as a basis
for rhythmic behavior has become widely accepted (Grillner 1977).
Ideally, information gained from detailed mechanistic analysis and
modeling of CPGs would have wide applicability for a spectrum of
rhythmic behaviors in vertebrates and invertebrates. However, Selver-
ston's overview of the incomplete details known about a variety of
CPGs forces the conclusion that, for almost every rhythmic behavior, a
different CPG mechanism is employed. As more information is
collected - in particular about "distributed networks" and feedback
onto CPGs - it is likely that even more differences will emerge among
mechanisms controlling rhythmic behaviors. At first glance, it seems
impossible to correlate types of CPGs with either the phylogenetic
position of an animal or the complexity of the rhythmic behavior. In
short, beyond the concept of CPGs per se, and the role of feedback in
modulating them, studies of the type Selverston discusses do not seem
to have identified a general mechanism. Beyond the as yet elusive
ability to predict the behavior of any single CPG circuit, patterns of
broad applicability may never emerge from such studies.
Can anatomical studies provide answers? In the face of a
rather gloomy synthesis and prognosis for the future of CPG studies,
560
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary /Seiverston: Central pattern generators
Seiverston has proposed a variety of anatomical studies which might
bridge the current impasse. Unfortunately, each of these techniques -
optical monitoring and 2-deoxyglucose uptake studies - may lead
back to the same dilemma, for once the relevant cells are identified
there will exist the same level of necessary physiological analysis and
the same inherent problems in understanding interactions within popu-
lations of cells as the ones Seiverston has detailed.
Progress in 2-deoxyglucose studies indicates that it will be possible
to identify anatomically all neurons underlying a behavioral circuit.
Single-cell resolution has been achieved with [3H]-2-deoxyglucose in
goldfish retina (Basinger et al. 1979), in cultured mouse neurons
(Ornberg et al. 1979), and in our own studies of ganglia of the mollusk
Umax maximus (Reingold et al. 1980, submitted; Reingold &
Sejnowski 1980). In these studies, 3H-labeled 2DG shows a resolution
of about 0.5 M when special care is taken to eliminate water from tissue
processing steps by freeze substitution or dehydration in dry acetone.
In autoradiographs of sections of ganglia, silver grains are concen-
trated over cell somata (Figure 1) and may be seen in neuropil
processes as well. As a general rule, the number of cells labeled within
a ganglion is correlated with experimentally evoked or spontaneous
electrical activity of the brain. However, quiescent preparations - those
with no evidence of electrical activity recorded from peripheral nerve
roots - still show labeled neurons (Reingold et al. 1980). Such labeling
may occur due to active spiking or nonspiking interneurons or mono-
neurons which cannot be monitored with extracellular recording elec-
trodes. But it is possible that metabolic activity unrelated to membrane
excitability could be sufficient to result in increased uptake of 3H-
2-deoxyglucose. In Umax, it remains to be determined whether 2-
deoxyglucose accumulation occurs in nonspiking neurons and in
B
Figure 1 (Reingold & Gelperin). A: Brightfield micrograph of 5 n buccal
ganglion section, prepared for autoradiography and counterstained
with 1% toluidine blue. Dark somata at the periphery of the ganglion
are stained and some are also labeled with silver grains. Calibration
bar - 50 M-
B: Darkfield micrograph of the same section as A. Heavy concentra-
tions of silver grains show as bright spots in neuropil (central area of
ganglion) and cytoplasm of two neuronal somata. Three other somata
are less heavily labeled.
electrically inactive neurons before the potential for anatomical circuit
tracing can be exploited fully.
Contributions of neuroethology. 
Having described the limita-
tions inherent in attempts to define completely the neural substrate of a
behavior, it is important to clarify the positive and general contributions
which have emerged from such studies. A variety of new and subtle
synaptic interactions have been described during neuroethological
analyses of escape responses, courtship, singing, feeding, and learn-
ing in a variety of preparations. Studies of peptide transmitters,
modulatory transmitters, interactions of electrical and chemical synap-
tic inputs, nonspiking interneurons, and local circuit effects are a few
examples of important synaptic effects which have emerged from
neuroethological analysis (Kandel 1976). To use an example from
Selverston's favorite neural network, the synaptic mechanism by which
inputs from the CNS to the lobster stomatogastric ganglion (STG) can
cause STG neurons to generate plateau potentials (Russell & Hartline
1978) will be both a fundamental contribution to cellular and synaptic
neurobiology and a further step in understanding the overall behavior
of the STG as a CPG.
by Hugh Fraser Rowell
Zoology Department, University of California. Berkeley, Calif. 94720
Philosophy leads to pessimism, research to
understanding
I have no problem with Dr. Selverston's review of types of central
pattern generators and of current methods for their analysis. The only
difficulty arises from his goal of "complete understanding." If this term
is taken literally, as occasionally appears to be the case in his target
article, it raises many philosophical problems, and it is these, rather
than the scientific difficulties or the underlying biology, which seem to
inspire doubt in him.
A "complete understanding," pragmatically defined, must be the
level of understanding adequate to explain all current observations. A
deeper understanding than this is a philosophical abstraction; there is
always more to learn, but that fact does not hinder either the prospect
of future research or the assimilation of present knowledge. For
instance, almost all our knowledge of biological diversity comes from
the work of taxonomists working only with morphological characters;
the fact that our present understanding of the species is a synthesis of
molecular, ecological, and genetic concepts, and that the vast majority
of morphospecies have not been subjected to the experimental
genetics necessary to make sure that the morphologist is "right," does
not invalidate either the description of diversity or the theory of its origin
and maintenance. Just as wave mechanics were adequate for a
certain period of physics, and offered a "complete understanding" of
relevant phenomena at that time, so our current analytical techniques
and conceptualizations of CPGs are constraints of our present state of
knowledge: they will inevitably change and improve, provided only that
research continues.
Seiverston points out that errors occur in circuit analysis, but the fact
that we recognize them as errors can be interpreted as a sign of the
health of our research methodology, rather than of its weakness.
Although incomplete characterization and premature modeling do
indeed lead to inaccurate hypotheses, the important point is that these
hypotheses are falsifiable; the example he quotes, from the work of
Stent and coworkers, has already been shown erroneous by Weeks,
within only three years of its original publication, with consequent
improvement in our knowledge. This is exactly the process by which a
circuit becomes "completely understood," at a level appropriate to the
historical period. I do not accept Selverston's assertion that "clearly a
new approach is called for." On the contrary, the present approach is
working very well. The new data and techniques which Seiverston
himself and other workers are obtaining with the present approach will
ensure that the "complete understanding," for which we will still be
striving a decade on from now, will be as radically different from our
present understanding as ours is from that of Don Wilson in 1960.
In brief, I think the pessimistic overtones of Selverston's title and
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
561
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
summary are belied by the text of his article and the actual rapid
progress of his field.
by George Szekely
Department of Anatomy. University Medical School. H-4012 Debrecen. Hungary
Particulars and principles of nervous activity
Reading Selverston's fascinating paper, one cannot help sensing in it a
kind of epistemological uncertainty side by side with painstaking
methodological exactness; while admitting the need for models to
determine how a complex neural circuit, known completely, might
operate, the author shows that our present methods are inadequate to
provide complete knowledge of a circuit, and he warns against using
models in which "the modeler is left free to guess at important
parameters."
It is easy to agree with many of Selverston's statements, which
reflect the respectable meticulousness of his experimental work; the
only point to discuss is the "important parameters" that he proposes
as indispensable to an understanding of the function of CPGs. If, in an
effort to comply with Selverston's severe requirements, somebody
took the trouble to disentangle the complete connectivity pattern of an
invertebrate ganglion, and if he knew all the physiological properties of
every bit of the excitable membrane, he would not be able to describe
the function of the ganglion; nor would he be able to build a controlla-
ble model from this immense wealth of data. Let us suppose we had all
these data; we would have to make a reduction in order to obtain a
manageable number of parameters, and we would have no guarantee
that we had discarded only irrelevant data. In making such a selection,
"the modeler is left free to guess at important parameters." My first
premise, therefore, is that our understanding of the mode of operation
of the nervous system in general, and of a CPG in particular, is too
scanty to allow us to select the important parameters from the large
body of data we obtain from physiological and morphological experi-
ments. In other words, there is no guarantee that all items in
Selverston's "minimal list" component description represent important
parameters.
Selverston rightly says that only rhythmic behavior has the possibility
of being explainable in terms of neural circuits. Perhaps all, or at least
most, of the activities generated by invertebrate ganglia are rhythmic,
and the number of structures in which rhythmic activities have been
shown in the vertebrate nervous system is surprisingly large (e.g.,
spinal cord: Szekely and Czeh 1976; rhombencephalon: Viebert et al.
1976; diencephalon: Andersen and Eccles 1962; telencephalon:
Gogolak et al. 1968; Mitchell and Ranck 1980). The incredible
complexity of the vertebrate CNS discourages any neurobiologist from
pursuing a project which would comply with Selverston's "minimal list"
component description. Yet we need not give up our zeal for improving
our understanding of CPGs by means of phenomenological modeling
on the basis of available parameters - this we do irrespective of
whether our components are neuromimes or just words.
Far be it from me to make an advertisement for the network with
cyclic recurrent inhibition (Szekely 1965), but if it is supplemented by
interneurons (Kling & Szekely 1968), it can simulate all rhythmic
activities observed or recorded from the vertebrate CNS. Although we
still do not know for certain whether or not such networks exist in the
vertebrate nervous system, they illustrate the principle of how rhythmic
output may be generated in response to nonrhythmic input. The fact
that histology demonstrated that motoneurons could not be compo-
nents of such a CPG in the manner proposed (Szekely 1965), and thus
that the cyclic recurrent inhibitory circuit must be envisaged in some
premotor structures (Szekely and Czeh 1976) does not invalidate the
principle of operation. Phenomenological observations suggest that
this structure is distributed in the spinal cord (reticular formation?)
controlling swimming, the coordination of single limb movement, alter-
nating coordination of a pair of limbs, and diagonal coordination of the
four limbs (Brandle and Szekely 1973). The principle of recurrent cyclic
inhibition (and the model) is not contradicted by the finding that a single
ganglion of the leech is also capable of generating the swim rhythm
(Weeks 1980), although Friesen et al. (1976) proposed that one
complete loop of recurrent inhibition spans two ganglia. There must be
some kind of inhibitory mechanism inside a single ganglion as well (cf.
Fig. 4 of Selverston's target article), which escaped detection in
Friesen et al.'s experiment; and their finding that the recurrent inhibitory
loop extends to two ganglia may show the distributed character of the
network. The two apparently differing findings do not prove the
inhibitory loop mechanism erroneous, nor the modeling "counterpro-
ductive."
My second premise, therefore, is that with the aid of phenomenolog-
ical modeling we may learn the principle, or some of the many possible
principles, of how a neural structure may operate. Once a principle is
given, it can be confirmed, or rejected, on the ground of new results
obtained from improved experimental techniques. One cannot fail to
notice the interaction between parameters and principles; as the
former test the latter, the principle may eventually help in selecting the
important parameters.
Finally I want to emphasize my agreement with Selverston's obser-
vation that modeling without knowing particulars is merely an exercise.
But to set about collecting virtually every property of a neuronal
ensemble is just another exercise. It is very probable that there are a
number of "important" parameters that we do not appreciate, or
cannot even envisage, at present; and there are parameters that only
we think to be important. It is perhaps the appropriate balance
between investigating specific particulars and the principle of operation
which would most promote our understanding of the CNS. And it is
certain that there will always be particulars beyond our comprehension;
but, after all, the general gas law was formulated without any substan-
tial knowledge of the parameters of individual gas molecules more than
100 years ago.
by Janis C. Weeks
Department ol Biology, University of California. San Diego. La Jolla, Calif. 92093
The implications of recent experimental results for the
validity of modeling studies of the leech swim central
pattern generator
My experimental results regarding the ability of single leech ganglia to
produce swim activity were cited by Selverston as demonstrating the
inappropriateness of the modeling studies of Friesen and Stent. I would
like to elaborate briefly on the details of these experiments, and to
discuss how experimental accountability is essential if inaccurate
models are to be avoided.
Friesen et al. (1976) identified a quartet of premotor, intersegmental
"oscillator" interneurons in each ganglion, which, by standard criteria,
were judged to participate in swim pattern generation. Based on
neuromime modeling studies of these cells' intra- and ihterganglionic
connections with each other, the "unit" pattern-generating circuit was
proposed to span two ganglia, with a chain of minimally four ganglia
required for rhythm generation (Friesen & Stent 1977; Friesen et al.
1978). In this model, /n/e/tjanglionic connections among oscillator
interneurons were considered necessary for several reasons, not the
least of which being that the known /n/raganglionic connections
apparently did not form an oscillatory network (Friesen & Stent, pers.
comm.). At the time this model was developed, it was not possible to
test it experimentally (e.g., to compare the ability of single ganglia vs.
pairs of ganglia to produce the swim pattern), because no effective
way was then available to elicit swim activity from nerve cords
containing fewer than six to eight ganglia.
More recently, I identified two unpaired, segmentally iterated swim-
initiating interneurons, cell 204 and cell 205 (Weeks & Kristan 1978;
Weeks 1980a). Activation of a single swim-initiating interneuron by
injected depolarizing current initiates and maintains the swim motor
pattern in isolated nerve cords containing as few as two ganglia
(Weeks 1980). As nerve cords are shortened it becomes progressively
more difficult to elicit swim activity, however, and even with high levels
562
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
ot swim-initiating interneuron stimulation it has not been possible to
drive the pattern in acutely isolated single ganglia. This negative result,
while consonant with the model, does not unequivocally demonstrate
the necessity of /ntenganglionic loops.
A more direct test was recently possible based on the location in
different connectives of the interganglionic axons of swim-initiating
interneurons (medial connective) and oscillator interneurons (lateral
connectives). The test involved cutting both pairs of lateral connectives
adjoining a single midbody ganglion in an isolated nerve cord (contain-
ing twenty-one ganglia), thus depriving the ganglion of /nterganglionic
oscillator interneuron connections, while leaving swim-initiating inter-
neuron pathways intact. In such preparations, stimulation of a swim-
initiating interneuron anywhere in the nerve cord elicited rhythmic swim
activity in all three portions of the cord, with no phase coordination
between the swim cycles produced by each of the three portions
(Weeks 1980). Most features of the motor pattern produced by the
"nearly isolated" middle ganglion were unchanged by lateral connec-
tive sectioning; e.g., dorsal and ventral motor neurons produced
rhythmic bursts with normal durations, spike frequencies, and cycle
periods. Therefore, /nrerganglionic connections are not necessary for
generating these features. One pattern feature of middle ganglia
consistently altered by connective sectioning was the delay between
dorsal and ventral bursts within each cycle; after sectioning, ventral
bursts occurred at a phase of roughly 0.3 later in the cycle than usual,
and thus partially overlapped dorsal bursts. The observed effects of
cutting lateral connectives suggest that interganglionic loops may
contribute to pattern generation in two ways; first, by influencing
/nfraganglionic phasing of dorsal and ventral motor neuron bursts, and
second, by mediating intersegmental coordination between ganglia
(since metachronal phase coordination is lost across each set of cut
connectives). It is clear that while /nterganglionic loops may normally
participate in pattern generation, there is also a purely /n/raganglionic
circuit capable of generating a remarkably normal pattern.
As Selverston noted, these results cannot be accounted for by the
presently known circuity of the Friesen and Stent oscillator model.
Evidently, new pattern-generating neurons or new properties of known
neurons must be incorporated into the circuit. This eventuality was not
entirely unexpected (e.g., Friesen et al. 1978), but because their
model accounted tor the "major features" of the pattern, additional
neurons were not pursued. In this respect, I agree with Selverston that
"confirmatory" models, which give the impression that a circuit has
been "solved," are unfortunate when they deter further experimenta-
tion. Certainly, my testing of the model evolved only as an afterthought
of other experiments dealing with swim initiation, and not because I
thought there was much more to find out about the circuit. I would differ
with Selverston's conclusion that the inaccuracy of the Friesen & Stent
model is a case study in the worthlessness of modeling, however. The
model has been helpful in organizing and summarizing a topologically
complex set of neuronal connections, and with further refinement may
continue to be one ol the best characterized examples of a network
oscillator. With the development of the "nearly isolated" ganglion
preparation, it will now be possible to test directly the roles of intra- vs.
/n/erganglionic connections in generating specific features of the
pattern. The results of such experiments should be much easier to
interpret in the context ot a preexisting model.
Perhaps the biggest weakness of the swim oscillator modeling
studies was that the validity of several of the assumptions made in
constructing the model, as well as the contributions of various connec-
tions as predicted by the model, was immune to experimental testing.
Notably, it was necessarily risky to speculate on whether the basic
circuit resided in one vs. two ganglia when it was impossible to elicit
swim activity from cords containing fewer than six ganglia. To avoid
such "premature" modeling, Selverston would delay modeling until
every detail of every neuron is known. I prefer a more moderate
stance, in which circuit modeling serves to test the ability of known
neurons and their properties to account for features of the pattern,
while providing a conceptual framework helpful for suggesting addi-
tional experimental investigations. However, I feel that Selverston's
desire to make models more accountable in terms of experimentally
measurable physiological properties is a worthwhile one, and in this
respect the leech swimming model serves to point out the potential
problems inherent in constructing models which overstep experimental
verification.
by Gernot Wendler
Lehrstuhl Tierphysiologie, Zoologisches Institut der UniversitSt Kdln. D 5 Kdln,
West Germany
On the history and value of the central pattern
generator concept
Selverston points out that the concept of a central pattern generator
(CPG) arose from experiments performed by Wilson (1961) on locust
flight. Obviously the author was not taking into consideration the
experiments of von Hoist (1935). Von Hoist demonstrated that the
rhythmic and coordinated movements of fish fins are generated in the
spinal cord without the need of sensory feedback. Since 1935 the
existence of central nervous automatisms has been widely accepted.
Von Hoist also showed that fin movement rhythm is produced by
premotor elements (von Hoist 1936). He developed methods to
analyze the coupling mechanisms ("Magneteffekt") between the spinal
cord generators of individual fins (von Hoist 1939; English translation
1973).
In subsequent years it has turned out that there exist a broad variety
of locomotor systems. They range from the spinal generators in fish to
the insect walking system, in which most of the details of leg movement
and the precise phase between legs is determined by reflex action
(Wendler 1965; Bassler 1977). Thus we should not confine our view to
the CPGs, which are located at one extreme end of the variety of
existing pattern generators, since important properties of pattern
generators may be overlooked.
This can be demonstrated particularly in the locust flight system
(Wilson 1961) referred to by Selverston. Indeed, Wilson showed that
the rhythmic motor output can be produced by the ventral nerve cord.
But this output has neither the correct frequency nor a stable pattern.
Therefore the central elements of the flight generator do not operate
adequately without peripheral sensory input - a fact that has been
neglected for many years. In the meantime, the important role of
peripheral feedback has been well established by detailed behavioral
and electrophysiological analyses (see Wendler 1974; Burrows 1975;
Mohl & Nachtigall 1978). Peripheral feedback does not simply modu-
late the activity of a CPG but constitutes an integral part of the pattern
generator itself, explaining many of Wilson's results (Wendler 1978).
The flight motor pattern is therefore generated by a network of
transfer elements such as interneurons, motor neurons, muscles,
wings, and proprioceptors. Some of these generator elements function
to produce or receive outside signals and thus enable the whole
system to respond adequately to external pertubations.
Although I agree with most of Selverston's statements, I believe that
the restriction to central pattern generators is neither necessary nor
helpful in understanding the relevant properties of pattern generators.
by Theodore J. Wiens
Department of Zoology, University ot Manitoba. Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada R3T
2N2
Graded transmission, mechanistic multiplicity, and
modeling
Selverston thoughtfully identifies a number of obstacles to the under-
standing of pattern-generating circuits and offers a somewhat cheer-
less prognosis for that pursuit. I will take issue with this pessimistic
view, but not before making a personal contribution to the gloom
already evoked.
Selverston lists a number of neural and synaptic properties that must
be known and quantified in such studies. He omits one that may greatly
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
563
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Commentary/Selverston: Central pattern generators
complicate many neural circuits - the property of non-spike-mediated
or chemotonic chemical synaptic transmission |see also Dismukes:
"New Concepts of Molecular Transmission Among Neurons" BBS 2(3)
1979). A number of neurons are now known to release neurotransmit-
ter in a graded fashion upon depolarization, and to reduce or terminate
this release when hyperpolarized (e.g., Maynard & Walton 1975;
Burrows 1979). Some of these neurons are apparently incapable of
spiking, while others, though excitable, possess this further ability to
communicate at subthreshold voltages. This has several serious
implications.
First, a motoneuron (for example) may be exerting powerful central
influences even when its efferent activity (through spikes) is
suppressed. Indeed, Raper (1979) has demonstrated that the lobster's
pyloric rhythm (coordinated by synaptic interactions of excitable cells)
can still be generated when tetrodotoxin (TTX) is used to block all
action potentials. This suggests an important physiological role for
graded transmission, and necessitates a revised circuit analysis. One
can no longer regard chemical transmission as a necessarily discrete,
on-off type of phenomenon, contingent upon presynaptic spikes;
rather, it behaves in many cases as a continuous function of presynap-
tic terminal voltage. Selverston's operational description of "synaptic
strength" should be broadened to take this phenomenon into
account.
Secondly, nonspiking neurons pose problems for experimentalists
who attempt to detect their synaptic outputs. An important clue - the
distinct pairing of a presynaptic spike with a discrete postsynaptic
potential - is not available here, so more laborious and detailed
correlations of pre- and postsynaptic voltages are required. Conse-
quently, the already substantial problem that Selverston raises - that of
identifying all of the interneurons involved in a pattern generator - must
surely be compounded when many of these interneurons are nonspik-
ing. For example, Selverston and Mulloney (1974) postulated the
existence of their Interneuron 2 purely on the basis of its discrete and
correlated synaptic effects on other neurons; this inference would
probably have been impossible were Interneuron 2 a nonspiking
neuron.
Even so, and granting the very real nature of the other difficulties
outlined, I feel more optimistic that pattern generators are understand-
able than Selverston appears to be. Part of our difference may lie in
what we consider to constitute "understanding." Selverston seems to
demand that a single, exclusively correct modus operandi be estab-
lished for a given circuit (e.g., for leech swimming) before we can claim
to understand it. However, his own and other recent experimental
studies suggest to me a very different outlook: real neural circuits
operate through redundant mechanisms, none of which may be
indispensable, but which all cooperate in the production of an adapta-
ble and failsafe motor rhythm. The pyloric circuit, for instance, probably
oscillates through some combination of reciprocal inhibition, longer
recurrent inhibitory loops, rhythmic descending excitation correctly
phased through efference copy, postinhibitory rebound, plateau prop-
erties, and delaying conductances, in addition to the primary rhythmic
drive supplied by its three endogenously bursting member neurons
(Selverston et al. 1976; Russell & Hartline 1978; Hartline 1979). Miller
and Selverston (1979b), in fact, recently demonstrated that the remain-
ing circuit would oscillate (presumably through these properties and
interactions) when the bursting neurons were selectively killed. No one
would conclude from this that endogenous bursting is incorrect as an
explanation of pyloric rhythm; it is simply not the whole story. Similarly,
it seems questionable for Selverston to label as "erroneous" the
earlier, polysegmental, model of leech swimming (Friesen, Poon &
Stent 1976) simply because another, monosegmental, mechanism may
exist. It seems highly likely that both mechanisms could coexist and
interact, and that either explanation by itself is incomplete but partially
correct. Similar redundancy is evident in other neural systems, ranging
from the ionic conductance mechanisms of molluscan endogenous
bursters (e.g., Kandel 1976) to the distributed function characteristic of
our own brain (e.g., Pribram 1974). On this view, one can begin to
understand a circuit even though not all of the neurons and interactions
it comprises are known. It may be fruitful, then, to hold Occam's razor
in check while we identify and accept all of the individual forces
contributing to pattern generation, elucidate the potential separate
contribution of each, and examine how they may interact.
Here, modeling must play a crucial role, and I believe Selverston has
undervalued this source of insight. True, underspecified models are
notoriously compliant in supporting preconceived ideas. Still, simulation
can explore the potential capabilities and limits of a system in a useful
way: modeling showed Perkel and Mulloney (1974), for instance, that
postinhibitory rebound can make a reciprocally inhibitory pair oscillate,
and it allowed Warshaw and Hartline (1976) to predict that endoge-
nous bursters were not totally essential for pyloric oscillation, several
years before Miller and Selverston's (1979b) experiments. When
modeling has established limits within which various rhythmic mecha-
nisms can operate, it becomes much easier for us, with our limited
personal analytical capacity, to predict intuitively how a specified circuit
will behave. Further, a good model can establish how the redundant
oscillatory forces acting on a neural system may be reconciled, and,
when the model's prediction disagrees with actual circuit behavior, it
can suggest new experimental approaches (e.g., Hartline 1979).
In summary, while a unique and precise electrical description of a
neural circuit's behavior may well be unattainable, the circuit may still
be understandable, qualitatively, and to a varying degree quantitatively,
in terms of its individual oscillatory features and their interactions. By
way of analogy, we understand macromolecular interactions in terms
of derived concepts like hydrogen bonds, hydrophobicity, electronega-
tivity, and covalent bonds, not in terms of exact solutions of the
Schrodinger equation. If we are to understand neural circuitry, I expect
that most of us will do so through existing derived concepts, like that of
the recurrent cyclic inhibitory loop, as well as through new constructs
that may be recognized as experimental and analytical studies
proceed.
by A. O. Dennis Willows
National Science Foundation, Washington, D. C. 20550
Central pattern generator analysis is alive and well
There are at least two fundamental issues raised by Dr. Selverston's
article which I think are wrong or at least confused. First, I would argue
that he fails to understand the purpose of CPG models. Second, I think
that the suggestion that we should establish a far more complete
characterization of the interneuronal pools involved in CPGs before
trying to model them would be counterproductive at best.
To pick an absurd example to make the point, using the same logic
put forward in the target article it would have to be concluded that the
ionic basis of the action potential is not "understandable" in terms of
the Hodgkin and Huxley model. One would be forced to this unaccept-
able conclusion by the observation that there are undeniable, serious
discrepancies between the predictions of the H-H model and what is
observed, particularly in regard to the independence of ion selectivity in
different channel types, the independence of activation and inactiva-
tion processes, and the time constraints of gating currents. There are
at present several laboratories fully committed to experiments and
theoretical work to develop a new model to replace the H-H formula-
tion. The idea that the H-H model does not provide understanding,
because it makes wrong predictions (along with accurate ones) and
may be superseded by a better or more complete model, is clearly not
acceptable logic.
Although none of the CPG analysis efforts over the past decade
propose to predict the global range of nervous system characteristics
encompassed by the H-H model (that is one of the reasons that the
above example is absurd), all of them do improve our understanding of
the underlying processes in motor pattern generators. They suggest,
for example, that:
1. Inhibition and recovery from inhibition are likely to be more
564
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Response/Selverston: Central pattern generators
important fundamental features of such generators than previously
expected.
2. Evidence for the role of chain proprioceptive reflex drive as an
essential component of such systems is prominent by its absence.
Both interneuronal and motor neuronal network properties seem to
have the necessary and sufficient properties to produce the timing
information and regenerative drive to control such outputs.
3. The heart of some CPGs apparently includes a nonspiking
interneuronal oscillator - a novel and very helpful observation and
concept.
4. Impulse bursts are generated by surprisingly different mecha-
nisms, including electrical, chemically mediated synaptic interactions,
and endogenous membrane instabilities in different systems of
neurons. Specific models, available for testing and constructive revi-
sion for each process, are now in the literature.
If space permitted, a much longer list could be developed.
In a more general context, recent experiments and models of CPGs
are usefully integrated in the arguments of Chase (1979), for instance,
who maintains that the growing understanding of the neuronal basis of
behavior in invertebrate and simpler vertebrate model systems is
having a profound impact upon the understanding of brain by workers
interested in the relationship between mind, brain and behavior in all
animals. The point here is that our understanding of CPGs may be very
primitive and incomplete, yet there has been extraordinary progress,
and the resulting models strongly suggest a deterministic role for
individual neurons and networks in controlling behavior. This idea
clashes with the "mentalist" view that behavior can never be under-
stood in neural terms because it is an unknowable emergent property
of the nervous system. One senses an unresolved tension in the
Selverston article between these two views - the determinist and the
mentalist.
In regard to my second point of diversion with Selverston's article, it
would seem to me to be quite unproductive to expend substantial effort
trying to determine all the interneurons, and all their linear and nonlinear
properties in any CPG, in any nervous system as a prerequisite to
model building. It is much more efficient, in my experience, to model as
one goes even if the models persist only temporarily. If a model is any
good, it suggests experiments which point the investigator in directions
of critical tests of the system, and thereby save a lot of wasted effort in
purely descriptive activities. Without such guidance, one tends to fritter
away a lot of time and effort describing properties and phenomena
which subsequently may not prove to be relevant to the neural
machinery under examination.
The suggestion is made in the target article that we need to
"understand the total interneuronal pool" if we are to develop a useful
understanding of CPGs. Perhaps the author is arguing that, because
this is unrealistically difficult or impossible, we are wasting our time by
trying the analysis in the present experimental context. One cannot
deal with this because it is a self-fulfilling prophecy. But I would argue
that, even where it is possible to gather such a complete set of data
(and I think there are many systems where it is, provided one is willing
to spend the time and effort), it would not be a wise expenditure of
effort. First, we don't know a priori which neurons or properties to
research exhaustively. For example, it would be a very expensive and
wasteful mistake to focus on the identity and properties of say all 50 to
100 interneurons in a system, only to discover later that the timing and
burst-generating properties of the system resided elsewhere (e.g., in
the motor neurons) rather than in the interneuronal pool. A testable
model developed early on could easily prevent this mistake by focusing
experiments on the suspected critical neurons to find out whether
these interneurons or neurons (motor or sensory or whatever) were
indeed at the heart of the matter. The same kinds of mistakes could be
made in regard to membrane mechanisms, circuit parameters, or
properties of synaptic transmission.
In all, I react quite differently to the status of the hunt presently under
way for understanding of neuronal circuits. In my view, increasingly
penetrating models are emerging at an accelerating pace, and it is very
likely indeed that we will have during the next five or ten years a rather
good idea of how some interesting aspects of behavior are generated
in terms of nerve cells and their membranes.
Author's Response
by Allen I. Selverston
Department of Biology. University ot California, San Diego. La Jolla, Calif. 92093
Toward understanding central pattern generators
BBS's instructions for organizing the Author's Response indi-
cate that I should be both integrative and specific. Since there
were so many commentaries, I have found this quite a
challenging assignment. What I will do is to try to extract the
most common observations and present some general remarks
first, followed by more detailed responses to specific criti-
cisms. I will also try to address some of the points which were
rather unique and enlightening.
CPGs can be understood. The most common reaction to
the target article was that I had been too pessimistic in
evaluating both our current strategies and the future possibili-
ties for understanding CPGs. Often the commentators made
this their primary point and labeled their commentaries with
such titles as "Pessimism, models, and episodic behavior"
(Larimer & Thompson), "On neuronal nihilism" (Lent),
"Snake oil and the modeling process in neurobiology"
(Black), and "Philosophy leads to pessimism, research to
understanding" (Rowell). Others belied what they felt was
my pessimism with such upbeat titles as "A practical
approach to understanding central pattern generators"
(Kaneko), "CPG analysis is alive and well" (Willows), and
"Central pattern generators can be understood" (Getting).
I must admit that to some extent I was playing devil's
advocate, although my general concerns about systems with
too many interneurons and premature modeling are quite
real. It is certainly clear to all of us interested in central
pattern generators that if we compare what we knew about
CPGs just fifteen years ago with what we know about them
today, our overall progress has been spectacular, and much of
it has been the result of work done by these commentators.
Nevertheless, I took this opportunity in order to provide a
forum which would allow us to assess the progress of this field
in a way which is impossible at general meetings. The
commentaries were useful and enlightening and, I thought,
reflected the vigor and interest in this field of research.
One can consider my arguments from two perspectives.
From a philosophical standpoint, as Rowell correctly pointed
out, a complete understanding - i.e., more than would be
necessary to explain our observations - is an abstract concept.
As one commentator observed, it is not necessary to know the
molecular events occurring in single transistors or op amps to
understand the principles of a computer processor. At the
other extreme, a circuit made of a few neuromimes mimick-
ing an experimentally derived network does not give us much
of an answer either. Without getting into an epistemological
argument about how we know that we know, I think most of
us would agree that when we can tell somebody what the
principles of central pattern generation are for a particular
system, we will know as much as we want to.
A second way of looking at the question, however, concerns
just how we go about finding these principles. If we examine
the most tangible problem of reducing a CPG to its compo-
nent parts - i.e., individual neurons and their properties (and
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
565
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Response/Selverston: Central pattern generators
many commentators argued that this was also unnecessary) -
we are faced with an experimental task of monumental
proportions. CPGs are often embedded within a matrix of
hundreds of other neurons. Finding all of them (if we really
want to) by intracellular probing does not seem to me to be
the best approach, and it is really only the inefficiency of this
technique that I'm guarded about. Since many of my
colleagues are more optimistic about this approach than I am,
we will simply have to let time determine whether or not the
usefulness of microelectrode searching has peaked. As I
pointed out in the target article, there are new methodologies
which are becoming available, and I was delighted to learn
from the commentaries that some are already being used
successfully. Reingold & Celperin were quite positive about
the use of 2-deoxyglucose in anatomically identifying all the
neurons underlying a behavioral circuit. They also point out,
correctly, that this does not solve any of the remaining
problems, but it will at least give us an idea of how many cells
we may have to focus our attention on.
Modeling. There were many comments dealing with the
use of models in helping to understand CPGs. The majority of
commentators favored the use of some kind of model, either
conceptual or real, to provide a basis for explanation and
further experimentation. Many felt that such models should
be "testable " experimentally, and that most of the present
models were not adequate in this regard. As Hartline
suggested, a model can demonstrate that neurons arranged in
a particular way and with certain parameters are capable of
producing a certain behavior, but it cannot prove that this is
the way that a network actually operates. There was consider-
able disagreement about the amount of information a good
model requires. Some felt that it was perfectly all right for a
model to be incomplete if it helped to further the understand-
ing of a system, while others felt that newer, more detailed
models were necessary if they were to be able to accommo-
date the larger amounts of data now becoming available.
But I think the most perceptive suggestions came from
those who felt that the purpose of the model was to provide a
basis for developing the principles by which a CPG could be
understood. To their way of thinking, an incomplete model,
or one in which some parameters were guessed at, was not
that much of a problem. If the principles underlying the
patterns could be obtained, then the model would probably
work despite variations in the values of specific parameters.
My object in considering models was to use one based on some
principle, such as reciprocal inhibition or cyclic recurrent
inhibition, to dictate the experimental design.
Willows claims that I failed to understand the use of
models in CPG analysis and that the approach of modeling as
one goes along not only is the most efficient way to analyze
CPGs but one that will lead to ultimate truth. While this
method should suggest "critical tests of the system" in
Willows's experience, in my experience it often leads to
premature explanations of mechanism, faulty conclusions,
and often to forced experimental approaches, out of an effort
to make the system fit into a particular scheme.
I don't know whether Willows would have been content to
leave the Tritonia swimming CPG mechanism as one in
which the basic rhythm was generated by motor neurons.
Since he argued that "it would not be a wise expenditure of
effort' to look for other interneurons because of not knowing
"a priori" which of them to "research exhaustively," I assume
he wouldn't have been. However, it was only through such
patient searching by Getting and his colleagues that a new
version of the CPG (even if still incomplete) has emerged and
has been found to be composed entirely of interneurons. I
would suggest that efforts to improve efficiency should be
derived from the development of better methods and not
from taking experimental shortcuts.
Hartline felt that the Leech neuromime model of Friesen
represented an advance in our knowledge because it consti-
tuted a demonstration that a meaningful pattern could be
produced even though it was not necessary to show that this
was the actual mechanism present in the leech. This is an
advance only if one really believes that this is the only model
that could produce a correct rhythm. My suggestion is that it
is not. With sufficient manipulation of the parameters, the
proposed model could produce an entirely different set of
motor patterns. The leech CPG model has at least pointed out
the dangers of an untestable model.
Harth suggested that it would be pointless to plug every
possible parameter of a network into a model because if we
had all that information we would not need the model. A
model, of course, is not going to explain mechanism any more
than the wiring diagram of a computer processor is going to
explain the principles involved in the processors' operation.
However, a combination of a good model and sufficient data
appears at the moment to be our best route toward getting at
the correct mechanism.
Calabrese feels rather strongly that testable models are a
necessity if we are to understand mechanisms. Like Willows
and others, he feels that without models experimenters will
simply not know what data to collect and analyze. I quite
agree that a conceptual formulation is necessary to provide us
with guidance or we may just collect descriptive data ad
infinitum. Achieving a balance between what is experimen-
tally accessible and the constraints of present models is one of
the things I'm concerned about. It's terribly difficult to fit
part of a CPG into a model; ideally, as additional parts
become known, testable and flexible models can accommo-
date them and point the experimenter in the right direction.
Friesen's comments were quite similar, pointing out the
correct use of modeling in neurobiology. I can only say once
again that models can help us "choose among the nearly
limitless types of experiments"; they should not, however,
mislead us into thinking that we really understand a system
when at some point the data and model coincide. When
enough cells in leech ganglia were found to fit into a model
which seemed attractive, the mechanism was thought to be
understood even though (1) monosynapticity was not estab-
lished for the majority of the connections, (2) cellular and
synaptic parameters were only approximated, and (3) a
neuromime model is notoriously compliant.
Friesen may be perfectly right in that his model is what led
to further experiments showing that there was more to the
story (although this is denied in Weeks's commentary),
specifically that the swim pattern could be produced in a
single ganglion and that the model needed to be extended. He
may also be right in that Weeks's data merely add redundan-
cy; but my gut feeling is that the interganglionic neurons are
probably coordinating elements which provide phasing infor-
mation and are not a key part of the swim CPG. If these cells
were perturbed by pulses of hyperpolarizing or depolarizing
current, they would reset the rhythm whether they were part
of the CPG or coordinating fibers.
Ethological constraints. Many commentaries pointed out
the dangers of trying to understand CPGs without consider-
ing the overall behavior of the animal, particularly the role of
sensory feedback. I have no disagreement with this sugges-
tion; certainly such workers as Wendler have provided clear
evidence that proprioceptive feedback has more than just an
excitatory effect on the insect flight CPG. My only concern is
that for CPGs which, in isolation, can produce a reasonably
normal-looking motor output pattern the inclusion of external
inputs only complicates the analysis. I personally feel that the
time to consider such mechanisms is after a thorough analysis
of the isolated CPG has been performed. With this approach,
the inputs can be treated as controlling devices which modify
566
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980). 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References/Selverston: Central pattern generators
the basic CPG output to meet behavioral demands, but not as
components of the CPG itself. I did not wish to suggest that
such inputs were unimportant - CPGs, except in the case of
some fixed action patterns, would be almost useless without
them. The importance of hormonal influences on the CPGs
must also be considered when a final scheme is put forward.
But, once again, trying to explain their function before much
is known about a network only serves to complicate the
analysis.
The new mentalism. Goldberg, Loeb & Marks, and others
felt that it was pointless to try to identify all the components
of a CPG. I found it interesting, for example, that Willows
thought that even looking for all the interneurons which
might be part of a CPG was counterproductive. In this "new
mentalism," identifying components will not produce under-
standing. My view of mentalism is that it suggests that there
exists behavior which cannot be understood by any form of
neuronal circuit analysis - that behavior is a psychological
process which transcends such analysis and must be consid-
ered in terms of the principles which predict it. But it has
been the use of simple systems and identifiable cells that has
done much to discredit mentalism. One can think of behavior
in terms of systems of individual neurons. Understanding
CPGs is difficult because identifying all of the neurons
underlying a behavior is difficult. This does not signify a
retreat to mentalism. On the contrary, it simply indicates that
there are genuine technical problems involved in providing a
rigorous explanation. Pretending that some interneuronal
components do not exist or must certainly be unimportant
when what is really meant is "they are so damn hard to find,
so let's not bother with them" is much more of a mentalistic
view than mine. By ignoring the interneurons in a CPG
circuit and building models which incorporate only the most
accessible cells, one will certainly be able to publish quickly,
but, in the long run, time and patience are going to be
required if viable models and generalizable principles are to
emerge.
There are no simple mechanisms. I think that perhaps the
most useful take-home message that can be extracted from
the BBS commentary is that even the simplest CPG can
utilize a large number of mechanisms. Even with a "naked
CPG," systems properties, individual cellular properties, and
synaptic interactions may all contribute importantly to mech-
anisms. The operation of most CPGs requires some form of
tonic or phasic excitation, and this too must be included in
any explanation of a mechanism. If the CPG is considered a
part of the whole animal, then the important role of sensory
feedback, coordinating the input from other CPGs and from
hormonal effects, must eventually be explained as well. We
are likely to find duplicate systems controlling the same
behavior or single systems containing many redundant
components. Some interneurons may have only a minor role
in the overall mechanism, but if a large number are present,
their collective effects may be crucial to our understanding.
Limiting our strategy to the discovery of one discrete mecha-
nism may make modeling easier, but it may not always give
us the whole story. Harth felt that there were certain coopera-
tive properties of networks that transcend a simple additive
description of the elemental properties of each component
[cf. Arbib & Caplan: "Neurolinguistics Must Be Computa-
ional." BBS 2(3) 1979]. He suggested that there is so much
intrinsic variability in the structure and function of every
neuron that it is mainly the cooperative properties of the
network that assure similarity of function between animals.
While I agree that cooperative properties play an important
role in generating rhythmic motor patterns, I feel that it is not
necessary to invoke this property because neurons are
different. The primary value of the identified neuron
concept, so useful in invertebrate studies, is that the function
and connectivity of identified cells is constant from animal to
animal. As Harth correctly points out, this does not apply to
the structure of identified cells where large differences have
been reported. Trying to extract cooperative properties from
imagined networks has occupied some theoretical modelers
for years but has not added much to our understanding of real
networks.
Outlook for understanding CPGs. The collective peer
opinion seems to be that our outlook for gaining some degree
of understanding of CPG mechanisms is quite good. Most
researchers were satisfied that even with present techniques
our progress has been excellent and that with continued effort
we can probably explain more and more behaviors at the
cellular level. There was measured optimism for finding new
and better experimental methodology which will help to
identify hard-to-find CPG components, to model existing
circuits, and to study cellular interactions in vivo. The diver-
sity of neural mechanisms available to produce rhythmic
behavior make it clear that there is genuine value in the
comparative approach and that, if more general principles
are to be found, an in-depth analysis of different networks is
the best way to find them.
There is a pressing need for good testable models. There
seems to be a growing awareness on the part of experimenter
and modeler of each other's needs and limitations and I look
forward to increased cooperation between these two fields.
In sum, I found the commentaries extremely useful and
stimulating. I look forward to another reappraisal of CPGs in
the future - by someone else.
References
Alving, B. O. (1968) Spontaneous activity in isolated somata of Aplysia pace-
maker neurons. Journal of General Physiology 51:29-45. [ AIS]
Andersen, P. & Eccles, J. C. (1962) Inhibitory phasing of neuronal discharge.
Nature (London) 196:645-47. 
[GS]
Anninos, P. A., Beek, B., Csermely, T. J., Harth, E. & Pertile, C. (1970) Dy-
namics of neural structures. Journal of Theoretical Biology 26:121 
48. 
[EH]
Arechiga, H. (1977) Orcadian rhythmicity in the nervous system of crusta-
ceans. In: Symposium on oscillator Theory and neurophysiology. 
Federa-
tion Proceedings 36:2036-41. 
|HMP]
Ayers, J. L. & Clarac, F. (1978) Neuromuscular strategies underlying different
behavioral acts in a multifunctional crustacean leg joint. Journal of Com-
parative Physiology 128A:81-94. 
[JA, HMP]
Ayers, J. L. & Davis, W. J. (1977) Neuronal control of locomotion in the lobster
Homarus americanus. I. Motor programs for forward and backward
walking. Journal of Comparative Physiology 115:1-24. 
[JA]
Ayers, J. L. & Selverston, A. I. (1977) Monosynaptic control of inter- and intra-
oscillator coordination of an endogenous pacemaker network. Society for
Neurosdence Abstracts 3:267. 
[JA, RLC]
Ayers, J., Jr. & Selverston, A. I. (1977) Synaptic control of an endogenous pace-
maker network. Journal of Physiology 73:452-61. 
[HMP]
Ayers, J., Jr. & Selverston, A. I. (1979) Monosynaptic entrainment of an endog-
enous pacemaker network: a cellular mechanism for von Hoist's magnet
effect. Journal of Comparative Physiology 129:5-17. 
[HMP]
Baker, R. & Berthoz, A., eds. (1977) Control of gaze by brain stem neurons.
Proceedings of the Symposium held in Royaumont, Paris, France, July
1977. Amsterdam, and N. Y.: Elsevier/North-Holland Biomedical
Press. 
[CRSK]
Barker, J. L., Ifshin, M. S. & Gainer, H. (1975) Studies on bursting pacemaker
potential activity in molluscan neurons. III. Effects of hormones. Brain
Research 84:501-3. [AIS]
Barker, J. L. & Gainer, H. (1974) Peptide regulation of bursting pacemaker ac-
tivity in a molluscan neurosecretory cell. Science 184:1371-73. 
[AIS]
Basinger, S. F., Gordon, W. C. & Lam, D. M. K. (1979) Differential labelling
of retinal neurones by 3H-2-deoxyglucose. Nature 280:682-84. 
[SCR]
Bassler, U. (1977) Sensory control of leg movement in the stick insect, Carau-
sius morosus. Biological Cybernetics 25:61-72. 
[GW]
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
567
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Re/erences/Selverston: Central pattern generators
Bentley, D. & Konishi, M. (1978) Neural control of behavior. In: Annual Re-
view of Neuroscience, vol. 1, ed. W. M. Cowan, 2. W. Hall, and E. R.
Kandel, pp. 35-59. 
[HMP]
Berry, M. S. (1972) A system of electrically coupled small cells in the buccal
ganglia of the pond snail Planorbis comeus. Journal of Experimental Bi-
ology 56:621-37. 
[SM]
Berry, M. S. & Cottrell, G. A. (1974) The value of high extracellular calcium as
a test for monosynaptic connexions in Planorbis comeus. journal of Phys-
iology (London) 242:82-84P. 
[AIS]
Berry, M. S. & Pentreath, V. W. (1976) Criteria for distinguishing between
monosynaptic and polysynaptic transmission. Brain Research 105:1-
20. 
[AIS]
Bohr, N. (1933) Light and life. Nature 131:421-57. 
[CML]
Bowerman, R. F. & Larimer, J. L. (1974) Command fibers in the circum-
esophageal connectives of the crayfish. II. Phasic Fibers, journal of Ex-
perimental Biology 60:118-29. 
[JA]
Bradley, C. W., Euler, C. von, Marttila, I. & Roos, B. (1975) A model of the
central and reflex inhibition of inspiration in the cat. Biological Cybernet-
ics 19:105-16. 
(SC)
Briindle, K. & Szekely, G. (1973) The control of alternating coordination of
limb pairs in the newt (Triturus vulgaris). Brain, Behavior and Evolution
8:366-85. 
[GS]
Brown, T. G. (1911) The intrinsic factors in the act of progression in the mam-
mal. Proceedings of the Royal Society of Britain 84:308-19. 
[AIS]
(1914) On the nature of the fundamental activity of the nervous centres; to-
gether with an analysis of the conditioning of rhythmic activity in pro-
gression, and a theory of the evolution of function in the nervous system.
Journal of Physiology (London) 48:18-46. 
[AIS]
Bulloch, A. G. M. & Dorsett, D. A. (1979) The integration of the patterned out-
put of buccal motoneurons during feeding in Tritonia hombergi. Journal
of Experimental Biology 79:23-40. 
[SM]
Bullock, T. H. (1976) In search of principles in neural integration. In: Simple
Networks and Behavior, ed. J. D. Fentress, pp. 52-60. Sunderland, Mass.:
Sinauer Assoc. [AIS]
(1980) Reassessment of neural connectivity and its specification. In: Infor-
mation processing in the nervous system, ed. H. M. Pinsker & W. D. Wil-
lis, Jr., pp. 199-220. New York: Raven Press. 
[WJD]
Bunge, M. (1980) From neuron to behavior and mentation: an exercise in lev-
elmanship. In: Information Processing in the Nervous System, ed. H. M.
Pinsker and W. D. Willis, Jr., pp. 1-16. New York: Raven Press. 
[HMP]
Burns, B. D. & Salmoraghi, G. C. (1960) Repetitive firing of respiratory neu-
rones during their burst activity. Journal of Neurophysiology 23:24-
47. 
[AIS]
Burrows, M. (1975) Co-ordinating interneurons of the locust which convey two
patterns of motor commands: their connexions with flight motor neurons.
Journal of Experimental Biology 63:713-33. 
[JA]
(1975) Co-ordinating interneurones of the locust which convey two patterns
of motor commands: their connexions with ventilatory motoneurones.
Journal of Experimental Biology 63:735-53. 
[FD]
(1975) Monosynaptic connexions between wing stretch receptors and flight
motoneurones of the locust. Journal of Experimental Biology 62:189-
219. 
[GW]
(1979) Synaptic potentials effect the release of transmitter from locust non-
spiking interneurons. Science 204:81-83. 
[TJW]
(1980) The control of sets of motoneurons by local interneurons in the locust.
Journal of Physiology 298:213-33. 
[FD.AIS]
Byrne, J. H. & Koester, J. (1978) Respiratory pumping: neuronal control of a
centrally commanded behavior in Aplysia. Brain Research 143:87-
105. 
[HMP]
Calabrese, R. L. (1977) The neural control of alternate heartbeat coordination
states in the leech, Hirudo medidnalis. Journal of Comparative Physiol-
ogy 122:111-43. 
[RLC]
(1979) The roles of endogenous membrane properties and synaptic interac-
tion in generating the heartbeat rhythm of the leech, Hirudo 
medidnalis.
Journal of Experimental Biology 82:163-76. 
[RLC]
(1979) Suppression of the activity of secondary impulse initiation sites by the
activity of a primary initiation site in rhythmically active neurons. Society
for Neuroscience Abstract 5:493. 
[HMP]
Camp, C. & Pinsker, H. M. (1979) Computer separation of unitary spikes from
whole-nerve recordings. Brain Research 169:455-79. 
[HMP]
Carpenter, G. A. (1979) Bursting phenomena in excitable membranes. SIAM
Journal of Applied Mathematics 36:334-72. 
[AHC]
Chase, Ronald. (1979) The mentalist hypothesis and invertebrate neurobiology.
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 23:103-17. 
[ AODW]
Cobbs, J. & Pinsker, H. M. (1978) In vivo responses of paired giant mechanore-
ceptor neurons in Aplysia abdominal ganglion. Journal of Neurophysiol-
ogy 9:121-41. 
[HMP)
Cohen, A. H. & Wallen, P. (submitted) The neuronal correlate to locomotion in
fish: "Fictive swimming" induced in an in vitro preparation of the lam-
prey spinal cord. 
[AHC]
Cohen, L. B., Salzberg, B. M. & Grinvald, A. (1978) Optical methods for moni-
toring neuron activity. Annual Review of Neuroscience 1:171-82.
[AIS, GLG, HMP]
Davis, W. J. (1976) Organizational concepts in the central motor networks of
invertebrates. In: Neural Control of Locomotion, ed. R. M. Herman, S.
Grillner, P. S. G. Stein, and D. G. Stuart, pp. 265-92. New York: Plenum
Press. 
[MM, AIS]
Delcomyn, F. (1976) An approach to the study of neural activity during behav-
iour in insects. Journal of Insect Physiology 22:1223-27. 
[FD]
(1977) Corollary discharge to cockroach giant interneurones. Nature (Lon-
don) 269:160-62. 
[FD]
(1980) Neural basis of rhythmic behavior in animals. Science (in press).
[RG]
Delcomyn, F. & Daley, D. (1979) Central excitation of cockroach giant inter-
neurons during walking. Journal of Comparative Physiology 130:39-
48. 
[FD]
Dennett, D. C. (1978) Brainstorms: Philosophical Essays on Mind and Psy-
chology. Montgomery, Vt.: Bradford Books. 
[LJG]
Diamond, J. (1979) The regulation of nerve sprouting by extrinsic influences.
In: The Neurosdences, 4lh Study Program, ed. F. O. Schmitt and F. G.
Worden. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
[EH]
Dorsett, D. A., Willows, A. O. D. & Hoyle, G. (1969) Centrally generated
nerve impulse sequences determining swimming behaviour in Tritonia.
Nature 224:711-12. 
[GH]
(1973) The neuronal basis of behavior in Tritonia. IV. The central origin of
a fixed action pattern demonstrated in the isolated brain. Journal of Neu-
robiology. 4:287-300 
[GH]
Eggar, M. D. & Wyman, R. S. (1969) A reappraisal of reflex stepping in the
cat. Journal of Physiology 202:501-16. 
[AIS]
Fentress, J. C. (1976) Simpler Networks and Behavior. Sunderland, Mass.: Si-
nauer Associates. 
[JCF]
(1977) The tonic hypothesis and the patterning of behavior. New York Acad-
emy of Sciences 290:370-95. 
[JCF]
Fentress, W. B., Jr. (1980) How can behavior be studied from a neuroethologi-
cal perspective? In: Information processing (n the nervous system, ed. H.
M. Pinsker & W. D. Willis, Jr., pp. 236-83. New York: Raven Press.
[HMP]
Friesen, W. O., Poon, M. & Stent, G. S. (1978) Neural control of swimming in
the medicinal leech. IV. Identification of a network of oscillatory inter-
neurones. Journal of Experimental Biology 75:25-43. 
[WOF, JCW)
(1976) An oscillatory neuronal circuit generating a loeomotory rhythm. Pro-
ceedings National Academy of Science, U.S.A. 73:3734-38. 
[DKH, AIS,
TJW]
Friesen, W. O. & Stent, G. S. (1977) Generation of a loeomotory rhythm by a
neural network with recurrent cyclic inhibition. Biological Cybernetics
28:27-40. 
(RLC, WOF, JCW]
(1978) Neural circuits for generating rhythmic movements. Annual Review
of Biophysics and Bioengineering 7:37-61. 
[RG, AIS]
Geppetti, L. & Fiore, L. (1979) Electrotonic and chemical connections among
small cells in the buccal ganglion of Aplysia. Archives Italiennes de Biol-
ogie 117:268-79. 
[SM]
Gerstein, G. L. & Perkel, D. H. (1972) Mutual temporal relations among spike
trains. Biophysical Journal 12:453-73. 
[GLG]
Gerstein, G. L., Perkel, D. H. & Subramanian, K. N. (1978) Identification of
functionally related neural assemblies. Brain Research 140:43-62. 
[GLG]
Getting, P. A. (1975) Tritonia swimming: triggering of a fixed action pattern.
Brain Research 96:128-33. 
[AIS]
(1976) Afferent neurons mediating escape swimming of the marine mollusc
Tritonia. Journal of Comparative Physiology 110:271-85. 
[AIS]
Getting, P. A.; Lennard, P. R.; & Hume, R. I. (in press) Central pattern genera-
tor mediating swimming in Tritonia. I. Identification and synaptic inter-
action. Journal of Neurophysiology. 
[SG, AIS]
Getting, P. A. & Willows, A. O. D. (1974) Modification of neuron properties by
electrotonic synapses. II. Burst formation by electrotonic synapses. Jour-
nal of Neurophysiology 37:858-68. 
[AIS]
Gillete, R. & Davis, W. J. (1977) Role of the metacerebral giant neuron in the
feeding behavior of Pleurobranchaea. Journal of Comparative Physiol-
ogy 116:129-59. 
[SM]
Gillette, R., Gillette, M. U. & Davis, W. J. (1980) Action potential broadening
and endogenously sustained bursting are substrates of command ability in
a feeding neuron of Pleurobranchaea. Journal of Neurophysiology
43:669-85. 
[RG]
Gillette, R., Kovac, M. P. & Davis, W. J. (1978) Command neurons in Pleuro-
568
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References/Selverston: Central pattern generators
branchaea receive synaptic feedback from the motor network they excite.
Science 199:798-801. [SM, A1S)
Glaser, E. M. & Ruchkin, D. S. (1976) Principles of Seurobtological Signal
Analysis, p. 471. New York: Academic Press. 
[HMP]
Gogolak, C , Stumpf, C, Petchsc, H. & Sterc, J. (1968) The firing pattern of
septal neurons and the form of the hippocampa) theta wave. Brain Re-
search 7:201-7. 
[CS]
Cola, M. (1976) Electrical properties of bursting pacemaker neurons. In: Neu-
robiology of Invertebrates, ed. J. Salanki, Jr., pp. 381-421. Budapest:
Akademai Kiado. 
[HMP, AIS)
Goodman, C S. (1978) Isogenic grasshoppers: genetic variability in the mor-
phology of identified neurons. Journal of Comparative 
Neurology
182:681-706. 
|RG]
Gorski, R. A. (1979) Hormonal modulation of neurona! structure and function.
In: The Neurosdences, 4th Study Program, ed. F. O. Schmitt & F. G.
Worden. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
[EH]
Cranzow, B. & Kater, S. B. (1977) Identified higher-order neurons controlling
the feeding motor program of Helisoma. Neurosdence 2:1049-63. 
[SM]
Granzow, B., Kater, S. B. 4 Rowell, C. H. F. (1979) Comparison of serotoner-
gic cerebral cells of Helisoma trivolvis with the metacerebral cells of some
other gastropods. Neuroscience Abstracts 5:247. 
[SM]
Grillner, S. (1976) Some aspects on the descending control of the spinal circuits
generating locomotor movements. In: Neural Control of Locomotion, ed.
R. M. Herman, S. Grillner, P. S. G. Stein, & D. C. Stuart, pp. 351-76. New
York: Plenum Press. 
[AIS]
(1977) On the neural control of movement-A comparison of different basic
rhythmic behaviors. In: Function and Formation of Neural Systems, ed.
G. S. Stent, pp. 197-224. Berlin: Report of the Dahlem Workshop. 
[SCR,
AIS]
Grillner, S. & Zangger, P. (1979) On the central generation of locomotion in
the low spinal cat. Experimental Brain Research 34:241-62. 
[SG]
Grinvald. A., Salzberg, B. M. & Cohen, L. B. (1977) Simultaneous recording
from several neurons in an invertebrate central nervous system. Nature
268:140-42. 
[AIS]
Harmon, L. D. (1964) Neuromimes: Action of a reciprocally inhibitory pair.
Science 146:1323-25. 
[AIS]
Harper, It. M. & McCinty, D. J. (1973) A technique for recording single neu-
rons from unrestrained animals. In: Brain Unit Activity during Behavior,
ed. M. L. Phillips, pp. 80-104. Springfield. III.: Charles C. Thom-
as. 
[GLG|
Harth, E., Csermely, T. J., Beek, B. & Lindsay, R. D. (1970) Brain functions
and neural dynamics. Journal of Theoretical Biology 26:93-120. 
[EH]
Harth. K., Lewis, N. S. & Csermely, T. J. (1975) Escape of Tritonia: Dy-
namics of neuromuscular control mechanisms. Journal of Theoretical Bi-
ology 55:210-28. 
[AIS]
Hartline, D. K. (1979) Pattern generation in the lobster (Panulirus) stomato-
gastric ganglion. II. Pyloric network simulation. Biological Cybernetics
33:223-36. 
[WOF, TJW]
Herman, R. M., Grillner, S., Stein, P. S. G. & Stuart, D. G., eds. (1976) Neural
Control of Locomotion, p.822. New York: Plenum Press. 
[HMP]
Hille, B. (1967) The selective inhibition of delayed potassium currents in nerve
by tetraethyl ammonium ion. Journal of Ceneral Physiology 50:1287-
1302. 
[AIS]
Hollerbach, J. M. (1977) A simple model of handwriting. 5th International
Joint Conference in Artificial Intelligence. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
[SG]
Holmes, P. J. (to appear) Phase locking and chaos in coupled limit cycle oscilla-
tors. Proceedings, Symposium on Recent Advances in Structural Dy-
namics, Southampton, England. 
[AHC]
Hoist, E. von (1935) Erregungsbildung und Erregungsleitung im Fischriicken-
mark. Pflugers Archiv 235:345-59. 
[CW]
(1935) Uber den Prozess der zentralnerviisen (Coordination. Pflugers Archiv
236:149-58. 
[FH]
(1936a) Vom Dualismus der motorischen und der automatisch-rhythmischen
Funktion im Riickenmark und vom Wesen des automatischen Rhythmus.
Pflugers Archio 237:356-78. [FH, GW]
(1936b) Versuche zur Theorie der relativen [Coordination. Pflugers Archiv
237:93-121. 
[FH]
(1937) Vom Wesen der Ordnung im Zentralnervensystem. Naturwissen-
schaften 25:625-31, und 641-47. 
[FH]
(1939) Die relative (Coordination uls Phanomen und als Methode zentralner-
voser Funktionsanalyse. Ergebnisse der Physiologie 42:228-306. 
[GW]
(1973) The behavioral physiology of animals and man: the collected papers
of Erich von Hoist. Vol. 1 Miami, Fla.: University of Miami Press. 
[GW]
Hoyle, G. (1975) Identified neurons and the future of neuroethology. Journal
of Experimental Zoology 194:51-74. 
[GH]
Hubel, D. H., LeVay, S. & Wiesel, T. (1975) Mode of termination of retinotec-
tal fibers in macaque monkey: an autoradiographic study. Brain Research
76:25-40. 
[AIS]
Jalife, J. & Antzelevitch, C. (1979) Phase resetting and annihilation of pace-
maker activity in cardiac tissues. Science 206:695-97. 
[HMP]
Jankowska, E., Jukes, M. G. M., Lund, S. & Lundberg, A. (1967) The effect of
DOPA on the spinal cord. V. Reciprocal organization of pathways trans-
mitting excitatory action to alpha motoneurones of flexors and extensors.
Ada Physiological Scandinavica 70:369-88. 
[SG]
Jankowska, E., Jukes, M. G. M., Lund, S. & Lundberg, A. (1967) The effect of
DOPA on the spinal cord. VI. Half-centre organization of interneurones
transmitting effects from the flexor reflex afferents. Ada Physiologica
Scandinavica 70:389-402. 
[AIS]
Kater, S. B. (1974) Feeding in Helisoma trivolvis: The morphological and
physiological basis of a fixed action pattern. American Zoologist 14:1017-
36. 
[AIS]
Kater, S. B. & Rowell, C. H. F. (1973) Integration of sensory and centrally pro-
grammed components in generation of cyclic feeding activity of Heli-
soma trivolvis. Journal of Neurophysiology 36:142-55. 
[SM, SCR]
Kandel, E. R. (1967) Cellular Studies of Learning. In: The Neurosdences 
First
Study Program, ed. G. Quarton, pp. 666-89. New York: Rockefeller Uni-
versity Press. 
[AIS]
(1976) Cellular Basis of Behavior. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman. 
[SCR,
TJW]
Kaneko, C. R. S., Merickel, M. & Kater, S. B. (1978) Centrally programmed
feeding in Helisoma: identification and characteristics of an electrically
coupled premotor neuron network. Brain Research 146:1-21. 
[CRSK,
MM]
Kanz, J. E., Eberly, L. B., Cobbs, J. & Pinsker, H. M. (1979) Neuronal corre-
lates of siphon withdrawal in freely-behaving Aplysia. Journal of Neuro-
physiology 42:1538-56. 
[HMP]
Katchalsky, A. K., Rowland, V. & Bluementhal, R. (1974) Dynamic patterns of
brain cell assemblies. Neurosdence Research Program Bulletin 12:1-187.
UCF]
Kennedy, C, Des Rosiers, M. H., Jehle, J., Reivich, W., Sharpe, F. & Sokoloff,
L. (1975) Mapping of functional neural pathways by autoradiographic
survey of local metabolic rate with [HC]deoxyglucose. Sdence 187:850-
53. 
[AIS]
Kennedy, D. (1971) Nerve cells and behavior. American Sdentist 59:36-42.
[WJD]
Kling, U. & Szekely, G. (1968) Simulation of rhythmic nervous activities. I.
Function of networks with cyclic inhibitions. Kybemetik 5:89-103. 
[GS]
Koester, J., Mayeri, E., Liebeswar, C. & Kandel, E. R. (1974) Neural control of
circulation in Aplysia. II. lnterneurons. Journal of Neurophysiology
37:476-96. 
[RG, AIS]
Kristan, W. B. (1974) Neural control of swimming in the leech. American Zo-
ologist 14:991-1001. [AIS]
Kupfermann, I. & Weiss, K. R. (1978) The command neuron concept. The Be-
havioral and Brain Sciences 1:3-39 
[WJD]
Luco, J. V. (1963) In: Perspectives in Biology, pp. 355-60. Amsterdam: Else-
vier. 
[JVL]
Lynch, G. & Akers, R. M. (1979) Extrinsic influences on the development of
afferent topographies in mammalian brain. In: The Neurosdences, 4th
Study Program, ed. F. O. Schmitt and F. G. Worden. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press. 
[EH]
Macagno, E. R., Lopresti, V. & Levinthal, C. (1973) Structure and develop-
ment of neuronal connections in isogenic organisms: variations and simi-
larities in the optic system of Daphnia magna. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy ofSdences 70:57-61. 
[EH]
Magni, F. & Pellegrino, M. (1978) Patterns of activity and the effects of activa-
tion of the fast conducting system on the behaviour of unrestrained
leeches. Journal of Experimental Biology 76:123-35. 
[HMP]
McCulloch, W. S. & Pitts, W. (1943) A logical calculus for ideas immanent in
nervous activity. Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 5:115-33. 
[GH]
McDougall, W. (1903) The nature of inhibitory processes within the nervous
system. Brain 26:153-91. 
[WOF]
Maynard, D. M. & Burke, W. (1966) Electrotonic junctions and negative feed-
back in the stomatogastric ganglion of the mud crab, Scylla serrata.
American Zoologist 6:526. 
[RG]
Maynard, D. M. & Selverston, A. I. (1975) Organization of the stomatogastric
ganglion of the spiny lobster. IV. The pyloric system. Journal of Compar-
ative Physiology 100:161-82. 
[AIS]
Maynard, D. M. & Walton, K. D. (1975) Effects of maintained depolarization
of presynaptic neurons on inhibitory transmission in lobster neuropil.
Journal of Comparative Physiology 97:215-43. 
[TJW]
Mendelson, M. (1971) Oscillator neurons in crustacean ganglia. Science
171:1170-73. 
[AIS]
Merickel, M. B., Eyman, D. & Kater, S. B. [1977] Analysis of a network of elec-
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980). 3
569
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References/Selverston: Central pattern generators
trically coupled neurons producing rhythmic activity in the snail Heli-
soma trtvolvis. Biomedical Engineering, 24:277-87. 
[CRSK]
Merickel, M. & Gray, R. (1980) Investigation of burst generation by the electri-
cally coupled cyberchron network in the snail Helisoma using a single-
electrode voltage clamp. Journal of Neurobiology 11:73-102. 
[CRSK,
MM, SM]
Merickel, M. Kater, S. B. & Eyman, E. D. (1978) Burst generation by an elec-
trically coupled network in the snail Helisoma: analysis using computer
simulation. Brain Research 159:331-49. 
[CRSK, MM]
Miller, J. P. & Selverston, A. (1979a) Rapid killing of single neurons by irradia-
tion of intracellularly injected dye. Science 206:702-4. 
[SG, AIS]
(1979b) Rapid killing of single neurons by illumination of intracellularly in-
jected dye. Society for Neurosdence Abstracts 5:496. 
[TJW]
Mitchell, S. J. & Ranck, J. B. Jr. (1980) Generation of theta rhythm in medial
entorhinal cortex of freely moving rats. Brain Research 189:49-66. 
[GS]
Mohl, B. It Nachtigall, W. (1978) Proprioceptive input on the locust flight mo-
tor revealed by muscle stimulation. Journal of Comparative 
Physiology
128:57-65. 
[GW]
Morris, J. & Maynard, D. M. (1970) Recordings from the stomatogastric ner-
vous system in intact lobsters. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology
33:969-74. 
[HMP]
Mulloney, B. It Selverston, A. I. (1974) Organization of the stomatogastric gan-
glion of the spiny lobster. I. Neurons driving the lateral teeth. Journal of
Comparative Physiology 91:1-32. 
[AIS]
Nicolis, G. It Prigogine, I. (1977) Self Organization in Nonequilibrium Sys-
tems. New York: John Wiley and Sons. 
[JFC]
Orlovsky, G. N. & Shik, M. L. (1976) A neurophysiological analysis of the cat
locomotive system. In: International Review of Physiology, ed. R. Porter,
vol. 10, Neurophysiology 11, pp. 281-317. Baltimore: University Park
Press. 
[AIS]
Ornberg, R. L., Neale, E. A., Smith, C. B., Yarowsky, P. & Bowers, L. M. Ra-
dioautographic localization of glucose utilization by neurons in culture.
Journal of Cell Biology 83:142a. 
[SCR]
Patterson, P. H. (1979) Epigenetic influences in neurona) development. In:
The Neurosciences, 4th Study Program, ed. F. O. Schmitt and F. G.
Worden. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
[EH]
Pavlidis, T. (1973) Biological Oscillators: Their Mathematical Analysis, pp.
207. New York: Academic Press. 
[HMP]
Pavlidis, T. & Pinsker, H. M. (1977) Introduction. In: Symposium on Oscillator
Theory and Neurophysiology. Federation Proceedings 36:2033-35.
[HMP]
Pearson, K. & Fourtner, C. R. (1975) Nonspiking interneurons in the walking
system of the cockroach. Journal of Neurophysiology 38:33-52. 
[AIS]
Pearson, K. G. & Goodman, C. S. (1979) Correlation of variability in structure
with variability in synaptic connections of an identified interneuron in lo-
custs. Journal of Comparative Neurology 184:141-66. 
[RG]
Perkel, D. H., Gerstein, G. L. & Moore, G. P. (1967) Neuronal spike trains and
stochastic point processes. II. Simultaneous spike trains. Biophysical Jour-
nal 7:419-40. 
[GLG]
Perkel, D. H., Gerstein, G. L., Smith, M. S. & Tatton, W. G. (1975) Nerve im-
pulse patterns. Brain Research 100:271-96. 
[GLG]
Perkel, D. H. & Moore, G. P. (1965) "A defense of neural modelling" reply to
commentary by L. Fein. In: Biophysics and Cybernetic Systems, ed. A.
Callahan, M. Maxfield, and L. J. Fogel. Washington, D. C: Spartan
Books. 
[DKH]
Perkel, D. H. & Mulloney, B. (1974) Motor pattern production in reciprocally
inhibitory neurons exhibiting postinhibitory rebound. Science 185:181-
83. 
[RG, AIS, TJW]
Peterson, E. L. & Jones, M. D. R. (1979) Do circadian oscillators ever stop in
constant light? Nature 280:677-79. 
[HMP]
Pinsker, H. M. (1977a) Aplysia bursting neurons as endogenous oscillators. 1.
Phase response curves for pulsed inhibitory synaptic input. Journal of
Neurophysiology 40:527-43. 
[HMP]
(1977b) Aplysia bursting neurons as endogenous oscillators. II. Synchroniza-
tion and entrainment by pulsed inhibitory synaptic input. Journal of Neu-
rophysiology 40:544-56. 
[HMP]
(1980) Neuroethological analysis of information processing during behavior.
In: Information Processing in the Nervous System, ed. H. M. Pinsker and
W. D. Willis, Jr., pp. 285-312. New York: Raven Press. 
[HMP]
Pinsker, H. M. and Bell, J. (1980, in press) Phase plane description of endoge-
nous neuronal oscillators in Aplysia. Biological Cybernetics. 
[HMP]
Poon, M., Friesen, W. O. & Stent, G. S. (1978) Neural control of swimming in
the medicinal leech. V. Connexions between the oscillatory interneurons
and the motor neurones. Journal of Experimental Biology 75:45-63.
[WOF]
Pribram, K. H. (1974) How is it that sensing so much we can do so little? In:
The neurosciences: third study program, ed. R. O. Schmitt and F. G.
Worden, pp. 249-61. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
[TJW]
Rand, R. H. & Holmes, P. J. (to appear) Bifurcation of periodic motions in two
weakly coupled van der Pol oscillators. International Journal of Nonlin-
ear Mechanics. 
[AHC]
Raper, J. A. (1979) Nonimpulse-mediated synaptic transmission during the
generation of a cyclic motor program. Science 205:304-6. 
[RG, TJW]
Reingold, S. C. & Gelperin, A. (1980) Feeding motor program in Limax. II.
Modulation by sensory inputs in intact animals and isolated central ner-
vous systems. Journal of Experimental Biology 85:1-20. 
[SM, SCR]
Reingold, S. C. A Sejnowski, T. J. (1980) [3H)-2-Deoxyglucose uptake in the
molluscan central nervous system. Society for Neurosdence 
Abstracts
6:74. 
[SCR]
Reingold, S. C, Sejnowski, T., Gelperin, A. & Kelley, D. (1980, submitted)
[3H]-2-deoxyglucose autoradiography in a molluscal nervous sys-
tem. 
[SCR]
Roeder, K. D. (1948) Organization of the ascending giant fiber system in the
cockroach (Periplaneta americana L.). Journal of Experimental Zoology
108:243-62. 
[FD]
Rovainen, C. M. (1979) Neurobiology of lampreys. Physiological Reviews
59:1007-77. 
[AHC]
Russell, D. F. It Hartline, D. K. (1978) Bursting neural networks: a reexamina-
tion. Science 200:453-56. 
[AHC, RLC, RG, MM, SCR, TJW]
Salzberg, B. M., Grinvald, A., Cohen, L. B., Davila, H. V.& Ross, W. N. (1977)
Optical monitoring of neuronal activity in an invertebrate central nervous
system. Journal of Neurophysiology 40:1281-92. 
[CLG]
Schmitt, F. O., Dev, P. & Smith, B. H. (1976) Electronic processing of informa-
tion by brain cells. Science 193:114-20. 
[SG]
Schwindt, P. It Crill, W. (1980) Role of a persistent inward current in moto-
neuron bursting during spinal seizures. Journal of Neurophysiology
43:1296-1318. 
[CRSK]
Selverston, A. I. (1976) Neuronal mechanisms for rhythmic motor pattern gen-
eration in a simple system. In: Neural Control of Locomotion, ed. R. M.
Herman, S. Grillner, P. S. G. Stein, & D. G. Stuart, pp. 377-400. New
York: Plenum Press. 
[AIS]
Selverston, A. I. & Mulloney, B. (1974) Organization of the stomatogastric gan-
glion of the spiny lobster. II. Neurons driving the medial tooth. Journal of
Comparative Physiology 91:33-51. 
[TJW]
Selverston, A. I. & Remler, M. D. (1972) Neural geometry and activation of
crayfish fast flexor motoneurons. Journal of Neurophysiology 35:797-
814. 
[AIS]
Selverston, A. 1., Russell, D. F., Miller, J. P. & King, D. G. (1976) The stomato-
gastric nervous system; structure and function of a small neural network.
Progress in Neurobiology 6:1-75. 
[RLC, RG, AIS]
Sejnowski, T. J., Reingold, S. C, Kelley, D. B. & Gelperin, A. (submitted for
publication). Localization of [aH]-2-deoxyglucose in single molluscan neu-
rons. 
[SCR]
Senseman, D. It Gelperin, A. (1974) Comparative aspects of the morphology
and physiology of a single identifiable neuron in Helix aspersa, Limax
maximus, and Ariolimax califomica. Malacological Review 7:51-52.
[SM]
Shepherd, G. M. (1974) The Synaptic Organization of the Brain: An Intro-
duction. New York: Oxford University Press. 
[JCF]
Siegler, M. V. S. (1977) Motor neurone coordination and sensory modulation in
the feeding system of the mollusc Pleurobranchaea califomica. Journal of
Experimental Biology 71:27-48. 
[SM, SCR]
Siegler, M. V. S. & Burrows, M. (1980) Non-spiking interneurones and local
circuits. Trends in Neurosciences 3:73-77. 
[SC]
Sokoloff, L., Reivich, M., Patlak, C. S., Petigrew, K. D., Des Rosiers, M. It Ken-
nedy, C. (1974) The ["Ckleoxyglucose method for the quantitative deter-
mination of local cerebral glucose consumption. Proceedings of the Fifth
Meeting of the American Society of Neurochemistry, p. 86. 
[AIS]
Spira, M. E. & Bennett, M. V. L. (1972) Synaptic control of electrotonic coup-
ling between neurons. Brain Research 37:294-300. 
[AIS]
Spira, M. E. Spray, D. C. & Bennett, M. V. L. (1976) Electrotonic coupling: Ef-
fective sign reversal by inhibitory neurons. Science 194:1065-67. 
[AIS]
Stein, P. S. G. (1976) Mechanisms of interlimb phase control. In: Neural Con-
trol of Locomotion, ed. R. M. Herman, S. Grillner, P. S. G. Stein, & D. G.
Stuart, pp. 465-88. New York: Plenum Press. 
[AIS]
Stent, G. S. (1969) The Coming of the Golden Age. New York: Natural His-
tory Press. 
[CML]
Susswein, A. J. & Kupfermann, I. (1976) The stimulus control of biting in Aply-
sia. Journal of Comparative Physiology 108:75-96. 
[SCR]
Szekely, G. (1965) Logical network for controlling limb movements in urodela.
Ada Physiological Academy of Science, Hungary 27:285-89. 
[AIS]
Szekely, G. & Czeh, G. (1976) Organization of locomotion. In: Frog Neurobiol-
ogy, ed. R. Llinas and W. Precht, pp. 765-92. Berlin and Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag. 
[GS]
Tameyasu, T. (1976) Intracellular potentials in the small cells and cellular in-
570
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References /Seiverston: Central pattern generators
teraction in the cardiac ganglion of the lobster Panulirus japonicus. Com-
parative Biochemistry and Physiology 54A: 191-96. 
[AIS]
Thompson, W. J. & Stent, G. S. (1976) Neuronal control of heartbeat in the
medicinal leech, 1. Generation of the vascular constriction rhythm by
heart motor neurons. Journal of Comparative Physiology 111:261-79.
[RLC. AIS)
(1976b) Neuronal control of heartbeat in the medicinal leech. II. Interseg-
mental coordination of heart motor neuron activity by heart interneurons.
Journal of Comparative Physiology 111:281-307. 
[RLC]
(1976c) Neuronal control of heartbeat in the medicinal leech. 111. Synaptic
relations of the heart interneurons. Journal of Comparative 
Physiology
111:309-33. 
[RLC]
Tinbergen, N. (1951) The study of instinct. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[Gil]
Truman, J. W. (1978) Hormonal release of stereotyped motor programmes
from the isolated nervous system of the Cecropia silkmoth. Journal of Ex-
perimental Biology 74:151-73. 
[SCR]
Treistman, S. N. (1979) Duplication of a spontaneously active neuron in Aply-
sia. Journal of Neurobiology 10:325-30. 
[RG]
Treistman, S. N. & Schwartz, J. H. (1976) Functional constancy in Aplysia ner-
vous systems with anomalously duplicated identified neurons. Brain Re-
search 109:607-14.
van Cisbergen, J. A. M. & Robinson, D. A. (1977) Generation of micro-and
macrosaccades by burst neurons in the monkey. In: Control of gaze by
brain stem neurons. Developments in neuroseience, vol. 1, ed. R. Baker &
A. Berthoz, pp. 301-8. Amsterdam 4 New York: Elsevier/North-Holland
Biomedical Press. 
[CRSK]
Viebert, J. F., Bertrand, F., Denavit-Saubie, M., & Hugelin, A. (1976) Three
dimensional representation of bulbo-pontine respiratory networks archi-
tecture from unit density maps. Brain Research 114:227-44. 
[GS]
von der Porlen, K., Redmann, G., Rothmun, B. & Pinsker, H. M. (1980) Neu-
roethological studies of freely swimming Aplysia brasiliana. Journal of
Experimental Biology 84:245-57. 
[HMP]
Warshaw, H. S. & rlartline, D. K. (1976) Simulation of network activity in sto-
matogastric ganglion of the spiny lobster, Panulirus. Brain Research
110:259-72. 
[TJW]
Weeks, J. C (1980; submitted) The neuronal basis of leech swimming: Separa-
tion of swim initiation, pattern generation and intersegmental coordina-
tion by selective lesions. Journal of Neurophysiology. 
[RLC, WOF,
DKII, AIS. JCW]
Weeks, J. C. (1980a) The Roles of Identified Interneurons in Initiating and
Generating the Swimming Motor Pattern of Leeches. Doctoral disserta-
tion. University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, Calif. 
[JCW]
Weeks, J. C. & Kristan, W. B., Jr. (1978) Initiation, maintenance and modula-
tion of swimming in the medicinal leech by the activity of a single neu-
rone. Journal of Experimental Biology 77:71-88. 
[JCW]
Weiss, K. R., Cohen, J. & Kupfermann, I. (1975) Modulatory command func-
tion of the metacerebral cell on feeding behavior in Aplysia. Federation
Proceedings of the Federation of American Societies of Experimental
Biology 34:418. 
[SM]
Weiss, K. R., Cohen, J. L., & Kupfermann, I. (1978) Modulatory control of
buccal musculature by a serotonergie neuron (metacerebral cell) in Aply-
sia. Journal of Neurophysiology 41:181-203. 
[SM]
Weiss, K. R. & Kupfermann, I. (1976) Homology of the giant serotonergic neu-
rons (metacerebral cells) in Aplysia and pulmonate molluscs. Brain Re-
search 117:33-49. 
[SM]
Wendler, G. (1965) The co-ordination of walking movements in arthropods.
Symposia of the Society for Experimental Biology 20:229-49. 
[G W]
(1974) The influence of proprioceptive feedback on locust flight co-ordina-
tion. Journal of Comparative Physiology 88:173-200. 
[HMP, GW]
(1978) Lokomotion: das Ergebnis zentral-peripherer Interaktion. Verh.
Dtsch. Zool. Ces. 1978:80-96. 
[GW]
Westin, J., Langberg, J. J. & Camhi, J. M. (1977) Responses of giant interneu-
rons of the cockroach Periplaneta americana to wind puffs of different
direction and velocities. Journal of Comparative Physiology 121:307-24.
[FD]
Willows, A. O. D. (1976) Trigger neurons in the mollusk Tritonia. In: Neural
Control of Locomotion, ed. R. M. Herman, S. Grillner, P. S. G. Stein, &
D. G. Stuart, pp. 327-50. New York: Plenum Press. 
[AIS]
Willows, A. O. D., Dorsett, D. A. & Hoyle, G. (1973) The neuronal basis of be-
havior in Tritonia. 111. Neuronal mechanism of a fixed action pattern.
Journal of Neurobiology 4:255-85. 
[AIS]
Wilson, D. M. (1961) The central nervous control of flight in a locust. Journal
of Experimental Biology 38:471-79. 
(AIS, GW]
(1964) The origin of the flight-motor command in grasshoppers. In: Neural
Theory and Modeling, ed. R. F. Reiss, pp. 331-45. Stanford, Calif.: Stan-
ford University Press. [AIS]
Wilson, D. M. & Waldron, I. (1968) Models for the generation of the motor
output pattern in the flying locust. Proceedings of Institute of Electrical
O Electronics Engineers 56:1058-64. 
[AIS]
Wilson, H. R. & Cowan, J. D. (1972) Excitatory and inhibitory interactions in
localized populations of model neurons. Kybernetik 12:1-24. 
[EH]
Wine, J. J. & Krasne, F. B. (1972) The organization of escape behavior in cray-
fish. Journal of Experimental Biology 56:1-18. 
[HMP]
Winfree, A. (1977) Phase control of neural pacemakers. Science 197:761-63.
[HMP]
Wong, R. & Harth, E. (1973) Stationary states and transients in neural popula-
tions. Journal of Theoretical Biology 40:77-106. 
[EH]
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1980), 3
571
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

BRADFORD BOOKS
IN THE COGNITIVE SCIENCES
1980-1981
DENNETT:
BRAINSTORMS
Cloth $21.50 Paper $10.00
WALKER/CHOMSKY et alia:
Explorations in THE BIOLOGY OF LANGUAGE
Cloth $22.50
MARKS:
COMMISSUROTOMY, CONSCIOUSNESS & UNITY OF MIND
Monograph $4.00
DRETSKE:
KNOWLEDGE AND THE FLOW OF INFORMATION
Cloth $18.50
FODOR:
REPRESENTATIONS: Philosophical Essays on the Foundations of
Cognitive Science
Cloth $20.00
BLOCK:
IMAGERY
Cloth $15.00 Paper $7.50
HAUGELAND:
MIND DESIGN: Philosophy, Psychology, Artificial Intelligence
Cloth $21.50 Paper $10.00
SHEPARD/COOPER:
MENTAL IMAGES AND THEIR TRANSFORMATIONS
Cloth Price TBA
DREYFUS:
HUSSERL, INTENTIONALITY AND COGNITIVE SCIENCE
Cloth Price TBA
JL
Box 28 Montgomery, Vermont 05470 - (802) 933-4193
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00006580 Published online by Cambridge University Press

