83 
 
 
 
PEKERTI: Jurnal Pendidikan Islam & Budi Pekerti Volume 4 
Nomor 2. Agustus 2022 
E-ISSN: 2963-3389 
 
Epistemology Of Muhammad Iqbal's Existentialism:  Its Levation To Islamic 
Education 
 
Url Jurnal: https://journal.iaingorontalo.ac.id/index.php/pekerti/article/view/3293 
 
Rahmat Haluti 
Munirah 
rahmat.haluti2019@gmail.com 
munirah@iaingorontalo.ac.id 
Pascasarjana UIN Alauddin Makassar 
IAIN Sultan Amai Gorontalo 
 
ABSTRACT 
The impoverishment of the philosophical dimension is taking place in this country, and the result, is then the 
economy becomes the main concern, life is no longer oriented to devoting oneself, guaranteeing the freedom 
of each individual as well as justice. The results showed that the socio-political and intellectual background 
of the environment and society influenced a lot of the construction existentialism of Mohammad Iqbal while 
Soren Kierkegaard was more influenced by the internal conditions of his family and life;  Mohammad Iqbal's 
construction existentialism is destiny, ijtihad, and self-concept, while Soren Aabye Kierkegaard is aesthetic, 
ethical, and religious; the similarity of the construction of existentialism Mohammad Iqbal and Soren  
Kierkegaard lies in his similarity in critiques the thought that denies human individuality, Iqbal does a 
critique of Plato's idealism, while Kierkegaard does a critique of Hegel's idealism, the other similarity is to 
emphasize the importance of human individuality that demonstrates the true existence of human beings, 
basing their existential thinking on Existence God; the relevance of the existence of these two figures to 
Islamic studies is to make aware of the noble identity of man and needs to be maintained so as not to be 
trapped in materialism and moral impoverishment. 
Keywords : Existentialism,  Change, Islamic, Education 
A. INTRODUCTION 
Almost all of the big narratives are preoccupied with the question "who is man?". Religion, 
science, and philosophy are scrambling to formulate a supposedly unique figure in this world. All of 
these grand narratives have always questioned human nature. Humans are tinkered with like 
fiddling with things. The question always starts with "what". This essentialistic tendency drew a 
backlash from existentialism. For existentialism is a philosophy that views all symptoms as based 
on existence. (Adian, 2005: 159).  The word existence is generally defined as existence, but in the 
philosophy of existentialism the expression existence has a special meaning. Existence is the way 
humans are in the world. The way humans are in the world is different from the way things are. 
Objects are unaware of their existence, also one is next to the other, without relationship. Not so 

84 
 
with the way humans are. Man is with that thing. Those things mean because of man, in addition 
man is in company with his fellow human beings. To distinguish these two ways of being in the 
philosophy of existentialism it is said, that things "are" whereas human beings are "existent". 
(Hadiwijono, 2001: 48). 
Meanwhile historically existentialism emerged as a philosophical movement opposed to the 
rezin of rationalism and idealism deeply rooted in the Western philosophical tradition. Western 
philosophy has given birth to a long tradition of teaching that "thinking is equal to being" or 
teaching the ontological doctrine that reason is true reality. This teaching can be traced back to 
Ancient Greek philosophy, but its assertiveness appears from the moment Rene Descartes with his 
slogan cogito ergo sum which later proceeded and culminated in  Hegel's absolute idealism. The 
rational and theoretical features of this philosophy later became the foundation for the establishment 
of a view of Western essentialism whose cultural hegomony is very strong today. 
From the first half of the nineteenth century, the tradition was shaken by the emergence of a 
new school of philosophy, existentialism pioneered by Soren Kierkegaard, although at the same 
time Friedrich Nietzsche in Germany also carried out the same attacks as he did and these two 
figures were later referred to as the first figures of religious or theistic existentialism (Soren 
Kierkegaard ) and the first figures of nonreligious or atheistic existentialism (Friedrich Nietzsche). 
(Roswantoro, 2009: 43-44). 
Meanwhile, philosophical figures from the Islamic world who criticize the buildings of 
Greek classical philosophy and Western Modern philosophy that gave birth to the rezin of 
rationalism and idealism as well as views of essentialism include Muhammad Iqbal. Iqbal is a 
philosophical figure from the Islamic world who once thrilled the philosophical universe of both the 
West and the East. These philosophers managed to beautifully blend the treasures of Western and 
Eastern thought and concocted them in his main work: Reconstuction of Religious Thought.  What 
an admirable philosophical work. A philosophical work that offers a philosophy of motion that 
worships change and sneers at it. Furthermore Iqbal's philosophy is at its core a human philosophy 
that talks about the self or ego. The ego is an absolute fact of human reality. It is the center of 
consciousness and active cognitive life of man that drives human deeds and efforts. According to 
Iqbal the ego is an intuitive unity or brightening point of consciousness that illuminates human 
thoughts, feelings, and will. (Adian, 2003: 9). 
It is within this framework that the author seeks to  map the central topics of Muhammad 
Iqbal's philosophy of religious existentialism and its relevance to Islamic education into something 
solid and unique to be elaborated more so that the values of Islamic Education are fully depicted. 
B. A Brief Biography of Muhammad Iqbal and His Work 
Iqbal was born in Sialkot-India (a historic old town on the border of West Punjab and 
Kashmir) on November 9, 1877 or 2 Dzulqa'dah 1294 , and died on April 21, 1938. Although he 
was born into a poor family, thanks to his intelligence in understanding knowledge, he obtained 
scholarship assistance from high school to college level. Iqbal also got a good education. After his 
primary education was completed in Sialkot, he attended the Government College of Lahore. Iqbal 

85 
 
is recorded as a beloved disciple of Sir Thomas Arnold. Iqbal graduated in 1897 and earned two 
gold medals for his good skills in English and Arabic, as well as obtaining a scholarship. Until in 
1909, he earned a master's degree in philosophy. Iqbal was born to a devout family. Since childhood 
he has received direct guidance from his father, Sheikh Mohammad Noor and Muhammad Rafiq his 
grandfather. He completed his primary to secondary education in Sialkot and then went on to 
Higher Education in Lahore, in Cambridge-England and finally in Munich-Germany by submitting 
a thesis entitled The Development of Metaphysics in Persia. Upon his return from Europe in 1909 
he was appointed Professor in Lahore and briefly became a lawyer.  
Iqbal's recorded works include Bang-i-dara (Genta Bell), Payam-i-Mashriq (Message From 
the East), Asrar-i-Khudi (Secrets of the Self), Rumuz-i-Bekhudi (Secrets of Self-Negation), Jawaid 
Nama (Book of Eternity), Zarb-i-Kalim (The Blow of the Stick of Prophet Moses), Pas Cheh Bayad 
Kard Aye Aqwam-i-Sharq (What Are You Going To Do O People of the East?), Name Travelers, 
Bal-i-Jibril (Jibril's Wings), Armughan-i-Hejaz (Gift from Hijaz), Devlopment of Metaphyiscs in 
Persia,  Lectures on the Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam -'Ilm al-Iqtishâd, A 
Contibution to the History of Muslim Philosopy, Zabur-i-'Ajam (New Secret Garden), Khusal Khan 
Khattak, and Rumuz-i-Bekhudi (The Secret of Self-Negation).  
As a thinker, it certainly cannot be completely said that his ideas were born without being 
influenced by previous thinkers. When viewed from the socio-political conditions of his time, Iqbal 
lived during the British colonial rule. At this time, the thinking of Muslims on the Indian continent 
was strongly influenced by a religious figure, namely Shah Waliyullah Ad-Dahlawi and Sayyid 
Ahmad Khan . With the exception of Ahmad Khan, Shah Waliyullah was the first Muslim thinker 
to realize that muslims were facing modern times in which there were serious challenges from the 
British on the issue of understanding Islam, especially when the last Mughal Dynasty in India 
suffered defeat against the British in 1857, which also greatly affected the 41 years of British 
Empire rule, and even in 1858 the British East India Company was abolished and the King of 
England was responsible for  government of the Indian empire. (http://www.jurnalstidnatsir, 2009). 
C. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
Iqbal's Critique of Philosophy 
Just as existentialists in general oppose philosophical schools that do not touch on concrete-
empirical human realities and experiences, such as idealism and rationalism, Iqbal did the same. 
Iqbal opposed the kind of idealism and rationalism of Modern Greek and Western philosophy, 
including also Hegelianism. Iqbal's rejection of the philosophies of Platonism and Hegelianism is 
the same as the existentialist-existentialist establishment in general. They consider such idealism 
and rationalism to tend to drown out human individuality in closed masses or collectivities. Because 
philosophy like this positions man under the domination of ideas or concepts. Human beings are 
defined or equated with ideas or concepts about humans. Plato, Hegel and his supporters created 
only a view of essentialism, packing reality in its essences. (Roswantoro, 102-103). 
Plato in Iqbal's critique is painted as an old sheep who advised the mancan to eat grass and 
guide him to the poisonous grasslands of idealism, which deprived him of his natural power. For 
Iqbal, Greek philosophy was too abstract, speculative, and did not invite man to fruitful work; It 

86 
 
cannot be practiced and can never lead the human heart to unity with the highest reality, for such 
unity is made possible not through mere speculation but only by burning love. The rational side of 
Plato's philosophy has always been attacked in Iqbal's pusition: One atom in pain is lebik both than 
Plato's philosophy. Then Iqbal also rejected essentialism by saying that nothing is universal in this 
life. The reality of life is seen by him as an evolutionary and purposeful process. The basic 
character of reality is individulity. (Roswantoro, 103). Iqbal's critique above, shows that, he does 
not agree with the partial meaning of man but man according to Iqbal must be understood and 
interpreted in acomprehensive-totality and whole manner. 
Epistemological Constructions of Muhammad Iqbal's Philosophy 
As a philosophical system of thought, Iqbal's philosophy can be mapped according to the 
main issues of philosophies. The main issues of philosophy are basically divided into three parts, 
namely ontology, epistemology and axiology. The three are interrelated so as to form three 
matching pillars as a buffer for a building of thought. (Barnadib, 1990: 20). 
Iqbal's philosophical studies in this paper are more focused on the epistemelogical aspects 
although they do not entirely forget the ontological and axiological aspects but become one thing 
that converges in the discussion. There are three main issues that are the focus of Iqbal's 
philosophical epistemology described here, namely about the nature of knowledge, the source of 
knowledge, the classification of knowledge and how to obtain knowledge. The following are 
outlined one by one onthe subject matter. 
The Nature of Knowledge 
Iqbal's theory of what knowledge actually is is strongly related to the thought of "Kamil 
people" (perfect persons). This linkage shows the certainty of ownership of the essential knowledge 
as the main indicator for realizing a perfect person. Iqbal describes that Insan Kamil is a human 
being who is in the position of "sajada" (worship) and  "iqtirabah" (approaching) to God in his 
consciousness of setting foot on earth as khalifatullah. From this Iqbal asserts his initial idea of 
knowledge as a dynamic ideal, which begins with the knowledge of sensory indignations, is 
responded to by reason and ends in the knowledge given by qalbu. So knowledge essentially 
proceeds from its natural coceptual nature and leads to an increasingly abstract towards the highest 
knowledge that Iqbal calls 'Isyq (love). Iqbal emphasizes that the sensory perception passed on to 
reason that gives a conceptual natural feel to human knowledge is not independent, but rather 
dependent on inspiration. (Bilgrami, 1982: 55-56).  In that process inspiration is received by the 
intuition of the metaphysical one, that is, the Most Supernatural God. Thus, the science in Iqbal's 
view is essentially Divine because it departs from the consciousness of the uluhiyyah, goes to the 
senses, then goes to the intellect and ends at the consciousness of the uluhiyyah again. This circus 
of the process of acquiring knowledge is very likely to deviate from its rails so that it becomes 
(Danusiri, 1996: 65). a "shaitanat" (source of evil). For this reason, the process requires submitting 
to the higher principles of life, namely  "Din" (religion). (Danusiri, 1996: 56). 
In this way, Iqbal did not intend to obscure the various disciplines according to their 
respective distinctive objects, by leading his journey to the abstract as mentioned above. On the 

87 
 
contrary, Iqbal emphasized the field of knowledge by placing the means of knowledge for humans 
(epistemological potential) namely the senses, reason, and intuition according to their respective 
terrains. Knowledge gained through the senses and reason is called science. And the knowledge 
gained by intuition is the essential science, referred to as 'Isyq (love). The field is not intended to 
negate each other so that it becomes separate knowledge, but is merely a post of attention or a 
phase. 
Sources of Knowledge 
With the concept of the essence of knowledge as a substance of the Divine nature, Iqbal 
inspired the source of knowledge from the Qur'an. According to Iqbal, there are three sources of 
knowledge, namely Afaq  (universe), Anfus  (self/ego) and Sirah (history). For more details, the 
following will be explained by each of these sources as follows: 
a. Afaq (Universe) 
As a source of knowledge, the universe according to Iqbal keeps the secret of the ultimate 
truth (the Ultimate Reality:God) for those who seek to investigate it, according to the nature 
of the universe which is spiritual. Inquiry into the universe is not always realized through 
contemplative attempts to understand the ultimate truth, but it can also be-perhaps even 
better-beginning with empirical activity through sensory efforts to investigate natural objects 
supported by a particular scientific discipline. This is based on Iqbal's view that not only 
highlights the spiritual dimension of the universe, but also its material dimension which is 
spurred through empirical investigation. 
b. Anfus (Ego or Self). 
The anfus (ego/self) that Iqbal refers to is nothing but a human being who, besides being a 
subject of study of nature, is also the object of his own study throughout history as a source 
of knowledge. As a subject of study, humans have epistemological potential that includes 
the uptake of the five senses, reason and intuition. These three potentials will be further 
elaborated on the discussion of how to acquire knowledge. The concept of man who is the 
source of knowledge according to Iqbal is a human being who is aware of his humanity as 
an inseparable element between soul and body. Iqbal summed up his awareness of humanity 
as a human being who was able to declare his existence with the word "Áku" (I am). 
(Hussain, 2001: 78). 
c. History 
As a source of knowledge, history in the form of records of past events according to Iqbal 
must be critically studied. This critical study is not limited to the objectivity of the truth of 
the record of the series of events, but also by looking at the character of the whistleblower or 
chronicler himself. This second thing is even the first consideration. In Iqbal's measure 
above, it can be understood how much he raised the aspect of morality in the preparation of 
historical records that can be used as a source of knowledge. (Danusiri, 52). 
The importance of morality in the compilation of historical data is attributed Iqbal to the 
straightness of the future journey of a nation. The truth of writing the history of an earlier 

88 
 
generation will be a reference or direction for the generations behind to go towards a more 
advanced nation. 
Knowledge Classification 
According to Iqbal the initial stage of knowledge is conceptual knowledge. Through sensory 
responses, man forms concepts of object challenge so that he can master them. The relation of man 
to nature through sensory responses is an indirect way of establishing relations with truth. It is this 
that awakens the human consciousness to see nature as symbols that will lead him to understand the 
sensory supra reality. In other words, knowledge must start concrete. The ability of reason to master 
the concrete is the vehicle that will bring reason beyond that concrete one. 
Like Iqbal, the value of sensory experience or mystical experience is equally real and 
concrete. Although it cannot be re-followed in its footsteps by the sensitizing, mystical experience 
cannot be ignored for the purpose of knowledge because it has the same truth value. As a truth-
identifying tool, the responses of the two are never wrong. Therefore there is no reason to reject the 
levels of human experience because every reality is as good as any other reality. (Adian, 68-69). 
Experience, which takes place over time, has three levels: the material level, the life level, and the 
level of mind and consciousness—each of which is discussed by the natural sciences, life sciences 
and psychology. (Iqbal, 2002: 70). 
Knowledge Acquisition Tools 
Every object of scientific study, demands a tool that is in accordance with the object of 
study, so that the tools used must be in accordance with the object. The study method is the path 
and method taken to find the principles of truth contained in the object of study, and then 
formulated in theoretical concepts, by adjusting the object of study, so that there are no approach 
errors, such as paying to uproot teak trees with a razor blade. With regard to the way of acquiring 
knowledge, Iqbal first studied and criticized the existing theories of epistemology. (Asy’arie, 1999: 
66). 
In the matter of acquiring knowledge, according to Iqbal, the position of the senses, reason 
and intuition are mutually supportive of each other's shortcomings. Judging from how it works 
Iqbal, considers that the senses, reason and intuition are functional units that depend and 
complement in tangling the object of science. Only then does the intensity of each of those means in 
capturing the object of science depend on the character of the object. The jiga to which it is objects 
are physical objects, the most dominant senses, while reason recedes. Intuition recedes more after 
inspiring the senses. If the field of mathematics as a recognized object, the senses and intuition do 
not play much role. Intuition is merely inspires the senses. The senses catch that there is an object. 
Reason fully understands the mathematical problem. If metaphysics is metaphysics, God is like the 
object of recognition, then intuition dominates, while the senses and reason are passive altogether. 
(Danusiri, 56).  
Consistent with the distinction of "working area" between senses, reason and intuition, Iqbal 
divided knowledge into two parts, namely the knowledge gained from the perception of the senses 
and reason and the 'isyq (love; the essential science) that intuition acquires. 'Isyq is Divine which is 
the pinnacle of universal truth as a guide to the product of the senses and reason. (Bilgrami, 56). 

89 
 
 
 
Muhammad Iqbal's Theistic Existentialism. 
Questioning whether Iqbal is an existentialist or not is something that will suffer the same 
answer as the case of existentialists. According to Jean Wahl all the thinkers or philosophers who 
were later called existentialists, such as Kierkegaard, Heidegger, Jaspers, Marcel, Nietzsche never 
referred to them as existentialists; except for Sartre who refers to himself as an atheist existentialist. 
The designation existentialism was given to them solely because of the philosophical content they 
offered. This content is indeed different from the content of other philosophical schools. (Malik, 
2009: 99). Iqbal memang secara khusus tidak berbicara masalah eksistensi atau tidak menggap 
dirinya sebagai seorang eksistensialis, tetapi rekonstruksi filsafat Islamnya menunjukan adanya 
elemen-elemen eksistensialistik dalam pemikirannya serta kedekatannya dengan tokoh filosof Barat 
terutama Bergson dan Nietzsche. 
If you look further at Iqbal's position in the discourse of existentialism is very unique, but 
what is clear is that his complexion is very religious, the same as Kierkegaard. His existential 
interpretation is more positive than that of modern existentialists such as Nietzshe and Sartre, since 
his philosophy does not end in the pessimism of both, nor does it lose faith. If Nietzshe and Sartre 
had a confinement of human freedom in God, then Iqbal saved man's freedom even though there 
was a God. Iqbal's existentialism, when compared to existentialists, is overall closer to Kierkegaard. 
Iqbal and Kierkegaard both believed that in his self-actuation, man developed his existence from the 
consciousness of his limitations to the eternal and infinite reality, which describes the existence of 
divinity. The existential relationship between human existence and God becomes "condensed" in 
the thinking of both. Both of them both understand God as a reality of the self that has individuality. 
From this both believe that being a Christian or being Moslem must always come from the 
expression of selfhood, just as God's actions also express His selfhood and individuality. This is 
why existentialism is both religious (theistic) in style. (Roswantoro, 2009: 104-105). 
Basic Character of Iqbal's Theistic Existentialism 
Rejecting the Packaging of Reality to a Concept: The Basic Intuition of the Work of Reason 
Just as existentialists in general oppose philosophical schools that touch on concrete-
empirical human realities and experiences, such as idealism and rationalism, Iqbal did the same. 
Iqbal opposed idealism and rationalism in Modern Greek and Western philosophy. In his work The 
Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam and Asrar-i-Khudi, Iqbal denounced Plato as a view 
that was not in line with the spirit of the Qur'an. Iqbal pronounced: 
Plato looked down upon the sensory derision of the senses, with which such a view he 
produced mere opinions and unreal knowledge. How different it is from the Qur'an, which regards 
hearing and sight as an invaluable Divine gift and is revealed to be responsible to God in all its 
activities. (Iqbal, 2009: 106). 
The disregard for sensory perception that Iqbal highlighted as a weakness of Plato's 
philosophy shows that it is only busy doing abstractions of pure thought which therefore tend to 

90 
 
ignore the concrete realities and actual life of man. Where the real and concrete world is actually 
seen as myth and delusion, while the world of ideas as the result of the construction of pure thought 
is considered the real world, so the world of ideas is identified with the phenomenal world. This is 
illustrated by Iqbal's insinuation as if Plato equated loss with gain and existence with nothing. 
Plato's world of ideas is not based on the concrete world, so his philosophy abandons the concrete 
world of human action and the actuality of dynamic human life. In short, the Platonic mind is 
merely melangit and never grounded, as revealed in his following rhyme: 
He doesn't like the silliness of this world 
He put his heart on the light of the extinguished flame 
And depicting the word submerged in opium 
He flapped his wings towards the sky 
And never descended into his nest again. (Iqbal, 2009: 106-108). 
While his critique of Hegel is the thought of packaging reality into a rational system that 
works on the principle of tiadic logic, that is, the eternal turnaround between theses, antithesis and 
synthesis. Iqbal rejects this abstract system, because it is nothing more than a mere delusion as, he 
illustrates, a hen who wants offspring but without the presence of a rooster. This can be seen from 
his following rhymes: 
Walaupun gagasan-gagasannya 
Disiapkan sebagai baju pengantin 
Yang pikirannya melambung tinggi 
Ia adalah ayam yang karena kelewat bernafsu 
Membayangkan tidak punya pasangan. (Iqbal, 2009: 109-110). 
"No partner" is Iqbal's phrase to show that Hegel is merely immersed in the reality of a mere 
thought or concept and forgets the existentialist concrete reality. Its proponents only know that 
concepts are the only way to capture reality, while the subject who captures reality is always in a 
certain existential situation, and this situation is not something that is stationary, but rather moves 
dynamically without being able to definitively be objectified. 
Iqbal's rejection of the philosophy of Plato and Hegel was the same as that of the 
existentialists in general. They consider such idealism and rationalism to tend to drown out human 
individuality in a world of ideas or ideas that are not necessarily in direct contact with the real 
world. Because such philosophy positions man under an idea or concept. Human beings are 
understood by definition, in such a way that they tend to be equated with ideas and concepts about 
human beings. Plato, Hegel and his supporters created only a view of essentialism, which packaged 
reality in essences or in concepts of absrtak. In this essentialism, reason has a dominant position, 
since it is the only instrument for constructing conceptual notions. This is why Iqbal felt the need to 
discuss this intellect at length in his book The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam. 
(Roswantoro: 110). 
Egohood as the Ontological Basis of Human Existence  
Egohood  is a distillery that describes Iqbal's philosophy of human existence as an 
individual, as an ego. Ego, harpiah means "self." Another word that is like with ego is" (Iqbal: 117). 

91 
 
khudi" which in Persian and Urdu literature means vanity and pomp. But Iqbal used the term to 
denote independence, personality, and individuality. With the concept of khudi  or egology, he 
wants to show that the self or individuality is a real and very fundamental entity that is central and 
fundamental to the entire human organization. Even the ego, for him is not only intended to show 
the individuality of man, but life itself is real and is in the form of an individual. The universe is an 
organized association of individuals who are always in a state of organic growth. Humans play a 
role in the process of such growth. (Iqbal: 118). 
For Iqbal, each object has an individuality. Individuality is the axis of all reality. True life is 
living as oneself, and being self means being able to say "I am". It is the degree of intuition of "I-I-
exist-an" (Iamness) that places each object in the degree of being. (Ahmad, 118). In his work Arsar 
Khudi,  he shows that this system of the universe comes from the Self, and the sustainability of the 
lives of all individuals depends on the will and action of strengthening the self. This stance of his is 
contained in the following rhymes: (Iqbal: 118). 
The form of existence is a result of khudi (self), 
As for what you see is a secret of yourself, 
When the self appears in consciousness 
It declares a universe of thought. 
A hundred words are hidden in their form: 
Self-affirmation brings the non-self into the self. 
.......... 
He rises, flares, falls, incandescent, breathes, 
Burning, illuminating, walking, and flying, 
The breadth of time is the arena, 
The sky was a huge wave of dust on his way. 
.......... 
The essence of the self is the actualization of itself: 
In every atom there is the power of the self. 
.......... 
When life accumulates strength from the self, 
The river of life became an ocean. (Iqbal:118-119). 
In this poem it can be interpreted i that human  existence in Iqbal's view is determined by an 
active and persistent self-developing self, and capable of mastering its environment, not being 
mastered. or in the sense that the human ego is an individual who is always the exclusive center of 
the self, meaning that the whole reality of his presence is centered on and determined by himself. It 
is oneself that is the creator of values and the determinant of fate for himself. (Roswantoro, 2009: 
119). 
The human ego or selfhood will be enforced if there is 'isyq (love, love). Because love gives 
great power to the individual who has the capacity to be able to persevere and express positively 
and meaningfully this is revealed in iqbal's following verse: 
With the love of the ego is made more enduring, 

92 
 
More lively, more smoldering, more radiant. 
From love the process of transmitting its existence. 
And the development of unknown possibilities. 
For Iqbal, 'isyq by maintaining the ego implies that the ego is always moving and expanding 
its affirmation of individuality. It is with  this 'isyq  that the ego finds the Absolute, beloved ego. 
The limited ego loves the Absolute ego because He is a true individuality with relentless creativity. 
This unique nature and life in it is His creation that reflects His individuality and creativity. 
(Roswantoro, 2009: 124-125). 
Thus ontologically it can be understood that human existence according to Iqbal is not 
determined by universality and objectivism because for him all life is individual. He based this view 
on the fundamental principle of the ethical and religious ideals of the Islamic religion, according to 
which the ideal ideal is self-affirmation and not self-negation. If Kierkegaard calls subjectivity the 
ontological basis of human existence, Iqbal calls " egohood" or selfhood, not subjectivity, whose 
explanation of meaning in ethical and religious contexts has common philosophical principles. 
(Roswantoro, 2009: 126). 
The Three Stages of Human Existence: from Obedience to the Law, Self-Control, To God's 
Representative 
Iqbal holds the opinion that the self or ego in motion towards its freedom goes through three 
phases of mental development. The human self develops from obedience to the law to self-control 
as the highest form of self-consciousness to becoming a caliph or representative of God as the 
ultimate ideal of a perfect man. He explains these three stages of human existence in his work, 
Asrar-I Khudi.  He explained the development of human existence in the context of human beings 
living their religion. The three stages are obedience or obedience (obedience, itha'at), the stage of 
self-control (self-control, dhanti nafsi), and the stage of God's representative (vicigerance fo God, 
divine niyabati). 
In the stage of obedience and obedience, the religious man has the devotion and hardness of 
heart to follow absolutely without rebuttal to what he accepts as his belief. Iqbal describes such a 
man as like a camel : 
Devotion and hard work are the qualities of camels, 
Patience and hardness of heart are the ways of camels, 
Calmly he stepped along the sandy road, 
It is a boat of people walking in the desert, 
........ 
Who is more patient than the rider 
You also don't refuse the burden of the task, (Iqbal, 2009: 127). 
The nature of obedience like a camel, is also found in religious people so that it gives rise to 
an attitude that accepts without any criticism at all by considering that no matter how heavy the 
burden placed on it in the name of faith is accepted with pleasure. This kind of attitude of obedience 
in the early stages of religion is quite positive, but the eternal obedience that arises not from the 

93 
 
power from within man himself is a struggle. Obedience shows the honesty and sinking of oneself 
in the other party. This stage of obedience shows the inauthenticity of human individuality in the 
process of its diversity or in other words at this stage man is simply the place or vehicle of others. 
While in the second stage of human existence-the stage of self-control he begins to question 
himself as a decisive subject and begins to leave the self as a determinated object. Self-control does 
not mean avoiding the life activities of others, but means opening up the possibilities of the ego in 
purposeful and purposeful activities, the self begins to live from the awareness of itself as oneself. 
At this stage, it also invites every Muslim to transcend himself in direct contact with God in order to 
find himself a strong self who is not easily controlled by all kinds of deceitfulness of the world and 
is under the control of others. Religious rituals are merely a means of maintaining his direct 
relationship with his God, so that he becomes an increasingly strong self, a soul that controls 
himself and develops himself and does not dissolve easily in others. (Akhtar, 129). 
The third stage is the representative of God, in this stage one has reached a high existential 
stage, since his life and his whole activity describe God's will, as in the following fragment of 
rhyme: 
If you master camels, you will rule the world. 
And wear Solomon's crown over your head. 
You will gain glory in this world as it progresses, 
And ye shall reign in a kingdom that cannot be bribed, 
It's sweet to be God's representative in this world 
And the practice of shaking the elements. 
The representative of God is like the soul of the universe, 
His form is the shadow of the Name of the Supreme Being. 
He knows the mysteries of the part and the whole, 
He lived the commandments of God in this world. (Iqbal:131-132). 
Being a representative of God is a manifestation of the fullness of man into a true self, a 
truly perfect self, a human being,  a human being who experiences the "experience of unity" as an 
invention of individuality as a principle of the motion of life. 
God as the Absolute Ego and Man as God's Co-Worker  
God in Iqbal's view is Something far beyond the rational depictions of man. Iqbal is in line 
with Kierkegaard that the existence of God cannot be proved according to logical means. Against 
the three rational books of God's existence, cosmology, ontological and teleological, he argues that 
the arguments contain a real movement of thought in its quest to seek the Absolute, but they are 
untenable and open to sharp criticism and condemnation and will eventually only present 
themselves as a contrived interpretation of experience. 
Iqbal regards God as an Ego, an Individuality, a personality truly dynamic life. He prefers to 
refer to God by His personal name, God. God in Islam according to him is something Self or Ego 
that is Absolute or Ultim (The Ultimate Ego). As an emphasis on the individuality of the Absolute 
Ego, the Qur'an gives a name to Him, Allah. Iqbal's idea of the individuality of God, as the 
Absolute Ego actually seems to clearly show that the self of God is unique and different from that 

94 
 
of his being, this idea already quite clearly illustrates the uniqueness and freedom of God. He is a 
free, dynamic self and does not depend on anything outside of Himself. Iqbal's affirmation is at first 
glance anthropomorphic, but it is not really so, because in his view God's Creation is in a different 
region from the territory of human creation. Human creativity is  creation in creation.(Roswantoro: 
143). 
Through his religious experience, man finds God to be the Powerful Self in one "place" and 
himself in power in another. From this the existential relationship between God and man seems so 
close. Man as a limited ego absorbs the individuality and creativity of the Absolute Ego within one's 
own territory. In this way, man appears more as a co-worker or co-creator for God, as illustrated in 
his beautiful poem about the dialogue between God (Khuda) and man (human) follows: 
God 
I created this world from one earth and the same water 
You make Iran, Ethiopia, and Tartaria. 
I scatter the iron grains in the dust 
You make swords, arrows, and weapons 
You make an axe to cut down trees 
You cage for chirping birds 
  Human  
You created the night and I created the lights 
You created clay and I made belanga 
Thou hast created deserts, mountains, and glades and  
I produce vineyards, gardens and thickets 
I am the one who turns stones into mirrors, and  
I was the one who turned poison into an antidote. 
The poem affirms that God and man are free and creative individuals, constantly creating 
maintaining and developing individuality. In this understanding, man in projecting himself into his 
future to his immorality does not make God the goal of his perfection, for besides being impossible, 
it also means that man is immersed in his self-righteousness. Man exists by actualizing his ego by 
absorbing as many absolute ego traits as possible. These are endless possibilities. The more he 
actualizes himself and the more he absorbs the nature of God, the more he becomes a perfect ego. 
According to Iqbalian is man making His individuality the goal of the process of becoming 
his own ego. By absorbing God's creatively dynamic Individuality, the Iqbalian man becomes God's 
representative, becoming His co-worker or co-creator. Iqbal discusses this relationship by saying 
that God created things, man created their value. (Iqbal: 147). 
Authentic Individual Form dnature Iqbal Conception 
Being a human being must always depart from the self-awareness that he is free to judge, 
guide, and determine his own destiny, not easily immersed in the determination of other human 
beings. Being an authentic individual means not simply mimicking the thoughts and actions of 
another individual. Individuality denotes an absorption of God's individuality which he understands 
as the Absolute Ego. The true and ultimate meaning of God's existence lies precisely in the sense of 

95 
 
the absoluteness of God's individuality. Tihan is a completely free Individual, not objectified. God 
for Iqbal, never ceases to desire and create. (Roswantoro, 82-83). 
Man demonstrates his existence by absorbing God's Individuality into an individuality as 
well, but not absolutely in nature. His selfishness is limited in his own existential world. Being an 
authentic self places oneself as the initiator and creator for every choice and action taken, and not 
placing oneself as determined and created by others and their outside world. To be an authentic self 
is to be oneself from within oneself. The authentic self is the self that is more in control than the 
other person or the outside world controls. The basic character of being an authentic human being in 
his conception Iqbal is characterized by at least five traits namely: (Roswantoro, 82-83). 
First the community becomes a rallying point between individuals rather than a collective 
coercion of the individual—as an open individuality, the ego allows itself to accept the actualization 
of other egos. This acceptance occurs because there is a meeting point between them, so that in this 
way a collective or community is formed. Even Iqbal holds that the universe is also a self, so that 
the collective self or society as an ego is something that can be built. While individuals in their 
existential stages can form a community, it can be a society or a State with a certain socio-cultural 
order. This constructed community as the reality of the intersection between individuals. 
Communities are built from the actualization of the ego not the other way around, the ego formed 
by the community. Although Iqbal admits that community can be an element of self-development, it 
cannot limit or even eliminate self-movement, because each self is matured by its own efforts. 
(Roswantoro, 150). 
Both of man's affirmations of his ego precede the ego-limiting environment—it is clearly seen 
in Iqbal's thought above that selfhood, (Roswantoro, 56). Precisely the continuous realization of the 
self by constantly affirming the individuality of himself, is the ontological foundation of human 
existence. Individual affirmations of the human ego always occur and take place due to the 
strengthening by love as the origin from which self-realization proceeds and develops. Man's 
edification of his ego existence, evident in Iqbal, stands independent and precedes all the constraints 
of the ego that comes from other egos and the environment of his collective self. The process of 
confirming the existence of the ego in man determines the authenticity of his existence. Being an 
authentic human being, therefore, must start from the act of actualizing the creative energy and 
directive itself into the reality of other egos and the social reality that limits and surrounds it, so that 
from the collective self is born. 
Thirdly freedom as a constant and irremovable factor in ego life—regarding freedom and 
creativity, Iqbal refers to various verses from the Qur'an in his work that affirm his faith in Allah. 
For Iqbal, freedom is a high religious, social, moral and political value. Iqbal argues that the 
freedom and creativity of man, in the space of ethics should be under the direction of the Most 
Good and the One Who Has Absolute Freedom, that is, God. Furthermore, Iqbal said when the 
human ego comes to the highest freedom does not mean that the human self or ego must negate 
itself in order to be absorbed into God. Man is still human and does not lose  his egohood. 
(Roswantoro, 160). Because freedom is the essence of life itself, it means that there is no freedom, 
there is no life. 

96 
 
The Fourth Individualization  of the ego is limited as a mirror of absolute ego absorption, the 
most unique self, in its own existential factivity-existentialism Iqbal does not place the two 
existences, namely God and man, into a conflicting understanding. Iqbal sees God and man as being 
able to exist without causing man to lose his freedom. For him, God and man are coexistential. 
There is no man, if there is no God. (Roswantoro, 167). 
The fifth to be God's representative on earth mirrors the pinnacle of ego-creativity, 
independence, and accountability—the culmination of Iqbal's religious existentialism is the 
projection of the self that is always fixed on and always approaches the Infinite Ego. This limited 
ego relationship with the Infinite Ego makes it possible for human beings to create continuously 
independently, freely, but responsibly towards a good and peaceful humanity. By always being 
creative in renewing the old and welcoming new things indefinitely as God's ongoing activities and 
creations are a form of actualization of His Individuality. This act of following God's Indivuduality 
reflects man as God's representative on this earth. This characteristic of a person is that he has 
always been the driving force of the old world frozen into a new world full of vitality and creativity. 
(Roswantoro, 172).  
 
Iqbal's Ideas and Their Relevance for Islamic Education 
When we understand Iqbal's ideas in his religious epistemology shows a strong relevance to 
Islamic education where (Islamic) education is not only understood as a teaching and learning 
process bounded by the four walls of schools and academies, but is a coaching to shape, develop 
and modify ideas and deeds both personal and group and is a whole cultural force that affects their 
lives and the nuances of hatred that  shown to the mindset and deeds of tailing others and strongly 
encourage them to have an independent and creative mindset.  
Islamic education is tasked with guiding its students to have high thinking creativity, so as to 
enable the emergence of new innovations that can be used to answer current and future challenges, 
especially the negative impacts of globalization and industrialization. (Sutrisno, 1996: 109-110). 
Thus we can understand that, Iqbal's theistic epistemology of existentialism in relation to 
Islamic education desires that Islamic education be an education that is truly dynamic, innovative 
and has independence so that in the end it becomes a productive forum to prepare and produce a 
superior generation who have an attitude of selflessness that is not mental slaves by always being 
dependent on others,  In human society, especially in matter, but to become a human figure.  A 
human being who experiences the "experience of unity" as an invention of individuality as a 
principle of his life motion. 
D. CONCLUSION 
Iqbal's existentialism is religiously similar to Keirkegaard's, where both believe that in his 
self-actualization, man develops his existence from the consciousness of his limitations to the 
eternal and infinite reality, which describes the existence of divinity. While the authentic individual 
in Iqbal's idea is a human being who does not easily accept the treatment of individuals or 
communities in determining and directing all his activities but rather becomes himself free but 

97 
 
responsible or becomes a person who has always been the driving force of the old world into a new 
world full of vitality and creativity. Iqbal's idea can actually encourage the realization of a 
responsive Islamic education model with the demands of the times how undeterred his ideas are so 
that Islamic education must be dynamic, creative, innovative and have strong independence so that 
the out put hasa complete quality. 
REFRERENCES 
Adian, Donny Gahral, (2003). Muhammad Iqbal: Series of Philosophical Figures, Jakarta: Teraju. 
-------., (2005). Splashing Contemporary Thought: A Comprehensive Introduction, Yogyakarta: 
Jalasutra. 
Ahmad, M. Azis. (2009). "Iqbal's Political Theory" in Alim Roswantoro, Authentic Human Ideas in 
Muhammad Iqbal's Religious Existentialism, Yogyakarta : Idea Press. 
Akhtar, Wahid. (2017).  "Existentialist Elements in Iqbal Thought" in Alim Roswantoro, Authentic 
Human Ideas in Muhammad Iqbal's Religious Existentialism, 
Asy'arie, Musa. (1999). Islamic Philosophy: Sunah Nabi in Thinking Yogyakarta: Lefsi. 
Barnadib, Imam, (1990). Philosophy of Education: Systems and Methods, Yogyakarta : Andi 
Offset. 
Bilgrami, H.H. (1982). Iqbal: A Glimpse of His Life and Thoughts. Djohan Effendi,  Jakarta: Bulan 
Bintang. 
Danusiri, (1996). Epistemology in Tasauf Iqbal, Yogyakarta: Pustaka Pelajar. 
Hadiwijono, Harun. (2001). Sari Sejarah Filosofi Barat 2, Yogyakarta : Kanisius, 2001. 
http://www.jurnalstidnatsir.co.cc/2009/ Tuesday, October 20, 2009. 
Hussain, Shahid. (2001). "Iqbal's Concept of Personal Identity" in Muhdi's Thesis. 
Iqbal, Javid, (2009). "Iqbal's Loose Notes", in Alim Roswantoro, Authentic Human Ideas in 
Muhammad Iqbal's Religious Existentialism, Yogyakarta : Idea Press. 
Iqbal, Muhammad. (2002). Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam: Supplemented by the 
Poems of Asrar-I-Khudi, terj. Ali Audah et al. Yogyakarta: Jalasutra. 
Iqbal, Muhammad. (2009).  "Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam and Asrar-i-Khudi" in 
Alim Roswantoro, Authentic Human Ideas in Muhammad Iqbal Yogyakarta Religious 
Existentialism : Idea Press. 
K.G. Saiyidain. (2009).  "Iqbal's Educational..."in Alim Roswantoro, The Idea of Authentic Man in 
Muhammad Iqbal's Religious Existentialism, Yogyakarta: Idea Press. 
Malik, Hafeez. (2009).  "Iqbal's Conception of Soscialism" in Alim Roswantoro, Authentic Human 
Ideas in Muhammad Iqbal Yogyakarta's Religious Existentialism : Idea Press. 
Ralph B, Winn. (2009).  "Self" in Alim Roswantoro, Authentic Human Ideas in Muhammad Iqbal's 
Religious Existentialism, Yogyakarta : Idea Press. 
Roswantoro, Alim. (2009).  Authentic Human Ideas in Muhammad Iqbal's Religious Existentialism, 
Yogyakarta : Idea Press. 
Scimmel, Annemarie. (2003).  Sayab Jibril: The Religious Ideas of Muhammad Iqbal, terj. 
Shohifullah, Jogjakarta: Lazuardi. 
Sutrisno, The Development of Creativity in Contemporary Islamic Education: A Study of the 
Thought of Muhammad Iqbal.  From: http://digilib.uin-suka.ac.id/29183/2/Sutrisno%20-
%20pengembangan%20kreatifitas%20dalam%20pendidikan%20islam%20kontemporer%20
%28telaah%20pemikiran%20muhammad%20iqbal%29.Pdf 

