Article ID: WMC001322
Beauty And Art. Cognitive Function, Evolution, And
Mathematical Models Of The Mind
Author(s):Dr. Leonid Perlovsky
Corresponding Author:
Dr. Leonid Perlovsky,
Dr., Harvard University - United States
Submitting Author:
Dr. Leonid Perlovsky,
Dr., Harvard University - United States
Article ID: WMC001322
Article Type: Research articles
Submitted on:23-Dec-2010, 04:52:21 PM GMT    Published on: 23-Dec-2010, 04:53:17 PM GMT
Article URL: http://www.webmedcentral.com/article_view/1322
Subject Categories:PSYCHOLOGY 
Keywords:beauty, aesthetics, philosophy, art, cognition, instincts, emotions, concepts, learning, knowledge,
knowledge instinct, evolution, language, hierarchy, mathematics, mind.
How to cite the article:Perlovsky L. Beauty And Art. Cognitive Function, Evolution, And Mathematical Models Of
The Mind . WebmedCentral PSYCHOLOGY 2010;1(12):WMC001322
Source(s) of Funding:
none
Competing Interests:
none
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 1 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
Beauty And Art. Cognitive Function, Evolution, And
Mathematical Models Of The Mind
Abstract
The paper discusses relationships between aesthetics
theory and mathematical models of mind.
Mathematical theory describes abilities for concepts,
emotions, instincts, imagination, adaptation, learning,
cognition, language, approximate hierarchy of the
mind and evolution of these abilities. The knowledge
instinct is the foundation of higher mental abilities and
aesthetic emotions. Aesthetic emotions are present in
every act of perception and cognition, and at the top of
the mind hierarchy they become emotions of the
beautiful. The learning ability is essential to everyday
perception and cognition as well as to the historical
development of understanding of the meaning of life. I
discuss a controversy surrounding this issue.
Conclusions based on cognitive and mathematical
models confirm that judgments of taste are at once
subjective and objective, and I discuss what it means.
The paper relates cognitive and mathematical
concepts to those of philosophy and aesthetics, from
Plato to our days, clarifies cognitive mechanisms and
functions of the beautiful, and resolves many
difficulties of contemporary aesthetics.
Keywords: beauty, aesthetics, philosophy, art,
cognition, instincts, emotions, concepts, learning,
knowledge, knowledge instinct, evolution, language,
hierarchy, mathematics, mind.
Introduction
Based on novel ideas in the area of cognitive  and
mathematical theories of mind and new neuro-imaging
data I would demonstrate relationships among
concepts in cognition, mathematics of the mind, and
aesthetics. I describe contemporary mathematical
understanding of thinking processes, its conscious and
unconscious aspects, mechanisms of concepts,
instincts, emotions, cognition, language and their role
in thinking. I discuss a possibility of understanding
aesthetic emotions within mathematical theories of
mind, the understanding corresponding to the intuition
of the beautiful that have been escaping theoretical
analysis in contemporary aesthetics and philosophy.
Relationships between mathematics and aesthetics (if
any) are commonly thought of along the Plato’s
understanding of beauty as related to the world of
Ideas and pure concepts; “remembrance” of this world
enables us to enjoy beauty not in the objects of the
world, but in relationships among objects. These
relationships are manifested in mathematical
constructs like symmetries, geometric shapes
described by mathematical equations, or (more
recently) fractal geometric objects. But these
“mathematical” ideas of beautiful clearly lack the
personal, the subjective element and therefore they do
not address this necessary fundamental concern of
aesthetics. Similarly, computer tools enabling
computer-generated art do not address the aesthetics
fundamentals.
Yet, the new mathematical models of mind are coming
close to providing a new level of theoretical
understanding of emotions, consciousness and
unconscious, cognition and language, the individual
and collective, and turning out to be closer than
expected to the fundamental issues of philosophy and
aesthetics. I will describe a complex play of the two
factors of subjective and objective in the working of
mind and relate it to more than two thousand year old
debates in philosophy as well as to contemporary
debates in aesthetics. In the next section I summarize
results of mathematical theories of intelligence that are
most relevant to aesthetics (while the exposition is
mathematically correct, it is given at a conceptual level
and no knowledge of mathematics is assumed
throughout this paper; readers with knowledge and
interests in mathematical details are invited to follow
the references). Then, I will review the relationship of
mathematical models to aesthetic concepts since Kant
with detailed references to some of the issues
discussed on the pages of leading contemporary
journals in philosophical aesthetics[i] during the last
decade. And, I will summarize fundamental
mathematical arguments related to possibility or
impossibility of the mathematical “formulae” of beauty.
Socrates asked all great Greek artists of his time
about what was the beautiful, but nobody could give
him an answer. Aristotle came close to conclusions of
this paper, defining the beautiful as “unity in manifold.”
The word “aesthetics” was introduced by Baumgarten
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 2 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
(1750); as a special ability to perceive the beautiful,
separate from usual perception and cognition.
Contemporary aesthetics began with Kant (1790), who
based it on his theory of mind, and related to
knowledge. Kant theory dominates contemporary
aesthetics, however, because of certain difficulties
discussed and explained in this paper, his theory has
remained misunderstood. “The Cambridge companion
to Kant” (Guyer 1992), which intends to explain Kant,
could be understood only by experts, does not make
Kant easier to read and does not clarify any of his
thoughts beyond Kant (1790). This paper clarifies
Kant’s thoughts by comparing them to
cognitive-mathematical theory developed in this paper.
In the following Section 2 I describe the mathematical
theory of the mind including concepts, instincts,
emotions. Section 2 analyzes a specific aspect of the
mathematical theory of mind, the ability for learning
and adaptation; a specific emotion involved in this
ability, and presents arguments for this being the
aesthetic emotion. Section 3 establishes detailed
relationships between notions of the mathematical
theory and those of Kantian theory of mind and
aesthetics. Section 4 continues elaboration of the
mathematical theory from “simple harmony” towards
refined beauty. Section 5 relates the mathematical
theory to current discussions of issues in aesthetics.
Intellect: concept, instincts,
emotion
Analysis of mathematical theories of mind I begin with
the processes most accessible to the consciousness.
Those are the usual conscious perception of objects
around us and comprehension of their usage. For
example: “this is a chair, it is for sitting”. It turned out to
be difficult to create computers capable of such a
simple perception-judgment. After fifty years of
development of mathematical theories of intelligence,
after spending billions of dollars, pounds, franks,
marks, rubles, yen on this research, today we begin
understanding the nature of the complexity of the
problem. How to explain a complexity of the obvious?
A word “chair” written on a paper is very different from
the spoken sounds of the same word; a written and
spoken “chair” is very different from a chair one sits on.
In our brain there are inborn structures that were
developed over hundreds of millions of years of
evolution specifically to enable fast learning (in
childhood) of combining into a single concept a
spoken, written, drawn, and real chair. Let us note that
the “real chair” is what is seen by our eyes, but also
what is sensed as a “seat” by the sitting part of our
b o d y .  
T h e r e f o r e  
“ c h a i r ”  
i s  
a
bodily-sensed-spatio-thought concept.
The brain structures providing the foundation for
learning concepts are called mental representations or
models (mental models) of mind. They model the
world around and the results of the modeling are
phenomena perceived and understood by our mind.
What are these models made of? What do they look
like? What is the mathematics that could describe
them? An original approach of the creators of artificial
intelligence (in the 1950s and 60s) was based on an
assumption that mental model-concepts contain
“photo-likeness” of objects. An image of an object at
an electronic eye “retina” was to be compared to
mental models stored in the computer memory,
resulting in decisions: similar-dissimilar. This early
mathematical attempt to describe the working of the
mind was based first, on the formal logic operating
with binary variables (yes, no) and second, on the then
known properties of the brain neurons, which seemed
similar to early two-state transistors (0,1), 0=no, 1=yes.
This approach failed: an object (say, chair) turned out
to be different each time, a different view angle,
lighting, surrounding objects, shape of legs or back –
the computer could not “comprehend” that all of these
are “chair”.
The most difficult for mathematical models of object
recognition turned out the fact that around an object of
interest there always are other objects, most of no
interest. Recognition, of even a single object, therefore
required evaluating combinations of object.
Combinations are mathematically “bad,” because
there are too many of them. When one looks in any
directions there are very many objects, say, a chair, a
table, a pattern on a floor, various scratches and spots
on every object, etc., in various combinations. Even if
one considers only 100 objects, not a large number,
their combinations are 100100, a number larger than all
elementary particle interactions in the entire life of the
Universe. Clearly no mind or computer would ever be
able to evaluate that many combinations, and select
“useful” one for learning.
Today we know much more about complicated
structures of the brain’s neural networks (Grossberg
1982; Kosslyn 1980, 1994; Barsalou 1999). In neural
modeling field theory, MFT, (Perlovsky 1988, 2001,
2006) mental representations, models, are vague and
distributed, do not look like photos of objects, and not
necessarily located in adjacent brain regions. They are
described by fuzzy logic, which decisions are not
similar to simple “yes-no”. In the process of learning
they “take a form” of a concrete object at its angle,
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 3 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
illumination, etc. This process “from vague to crisp” is
described by dynamic logic (DL), it reassembles
objects and experiences from  bits and pieces, and it
was demonstrated in neuro-imaging experiments to
actually take place in the human visual system during
perception (Bar et al 2006, Perlovsky 2009c).
Vague models make up the content of a priori, inborn
structures of mind, providing the foundation for
perception and cognition (Perlovsky & McManus 1991;
Barsalou 1999, Perlovsky 1994a, 1997a, 2002a,
2007c,d,f, 2008a, 2009c, 2010d). These structures are
not accessible to consciousness directly. Jung called
some of these structures archetypes of mind (Jung
1921). At the moment of birth, and possibly to some
extent, even before the birth begins the process of
learning-adaptation of these a mental structures to the
surrounding world. On the basis of inborn mental
structures, the models of concrete objects and
situations are learned. Models related to vision,
hearing, olfaction, touch are created for perception
and correspond to objects in the outer world. In other
words, mental models of perception correspond to
object-structures in the sensory signals generated by
retina and other sensory organs.
Based on knowledge of neural mechanisms, it is
possible to demonstrate to oneself in 3-second
experiment, that models-representations are vague
and unconscious. Look at an object in front of you,
then close eyes and imagine this object with closed
eyes. The imagined object is not as clear and crisp as
it is with opened eyes. The imagination is vague.
During recent decades we learned that imaginations
are produced by top-down signals from
concept-models to the visual cortex. Therefore we
conclude that models are vague. In interaction with
sensory data these vague representations become
crisp and clear. The vague models are also less
conscious.
Cognition and understanding of abstract concepts of
mind are similar to “simple” sensory perception of
objects (Perlovsky 1997, 2002a, 2004, 2005, 2006a,
2007a,d,e, 2008a). In “simple” sensory perception,
phenomena-objects are formed from sensory neural
signals based on mental models of objects. Similarly,
new concepts in abstract understanding processes are
formed on the basis of more complex models from
concepts understood earlier. This process continues
up and up the hierarchy of the concepts of mind
toward the more general and abstract concepts of
complex situations and relationships. In MFT-DL,
mathematical models describe concepts of simple
objects as well as abstract concepts of complicated
situations and relations. Whereas object-models
represent geometric, color, and other sensory
properties of objects, the models of abstract concept
models represent relations among objects. Mental
models of abstract concepts as well as mental
object-models are distributed and vague (Perlovsky
2001, 2006a, 2009c Bar et al 2006, Barsalou 1999).
Models higher up in the mind hierarchy are built on top
of several layers of vague and less conscious models,
correspondingly, they are even more vague and less
conscious. In the process of perception and cognition,
they take a structure of concrete concepts,
approximately obeying usual logic. In such a form of
concrete objects, situations, and relations they
become accessible to consciousness and are
perceived as objects and situations in the world, or as
thought objects. Let me emphasize that the DL
processes of perception and cognition, as well as
vague representations, are not conscious; only the
final states of DL processes, approximately logical
states of mind, are accessible to consciousness.
(Let us illustrate the above with simple examples. We
perceive a concrete chair on the basis of a vague and
distributed representation of chair, containing vague
notions of a seat, back, and legs, which might be
stored in various brain areas. In the moment of
perception, these pieces of past experiences are
assembled into an image of the concrete chair with
concrete seat, back, and four legs. A more
complicated situation is understanding, say, that you
are in a concert hall. Your understanding is based on a
mental model that includes a scene, a big room, and
many chairs arranged in rows.)
What are the relationships between concepts and
basic needs of an organism? (For example, how to
explain that a hungry person “sees food all around?”)
The basic needs of an organism, e.g. eating, are
indicated by instincts. Instincts are like internal
sensors measuring vital organismic parameters, and
generating signals in neural networks indicating
fundamental needs. Mechanisms of concepts have
been selected by evolution to satisfy instinctual needs.
Connection of instincts and concepts is accomplished
by emotions. In a usual conversation, “emotions” refer
to a special type of behavior: agitation, higher voice
pitch, bright eyes, there are several mechanisms of
emotions. In this paper I follow instinctual-emotional
theory  emotions developed by Grossberg and Levine
(1987). Every instinct generates evaluative emotional
signals indicating satisfaction or dissatisfaction of this
instinct. These signals affect the process of comparing
concept-models to objects – the process called
judgment by Kant (1790). Emotions are evaluations
“good-bad”. Evaluations not according to concepts of
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 4 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
good and bad, but direct instinctive evaluations. An
emotion evaluates a degree to which a phenomenon
(object or situation) satisfies our instinctual needs.
Most of emotions originate in ancient parts of the brain,
relating us to primates and even to lower animals.
Now we consider higher emotions originating in cortex
and related to knowledge.
The Knowledge Instinct and
aesthetic emotion
...All was mixed at the beginning;
but mind appeared and created order.
Anaxagoras
Imagine for a moment that you cannot see clearly one
object from another, do not understand their relations
and purpose; sounds merge in noise, where you
cannot discern their sources or directions, there are no
clear thoughts in consciousness and will is incapable
of concentrating in a concrete desire. A human cannot
survive in such a horrible state.
An adequate perception of the surrounding world, an
understanding of relationships in the world, and an
ability to concentrate will are so important for survival,
that it can even outweigh other “bodily” needs. Better
said, an adequate perception, orientation,
understanding, and concentration of will are conditions
of satisfaction of bodily instincts. The need for
“understanding” is so important that there is an
unconditional, inborn mechanism, an instinct, driving
this need; driving it independently from satisfaction or
dissatisfaction of other instincts.
What is the mechanism of this instinct and how do we
perceive it in our consciousness?
Perception and cognition consist in adapting inborn,
culturally-received, and individually learned mental
models to concrete conditions around us. The faculty
of judgment associates an individual object with the
general rule, as discerned by Kant (1790, Intro. IV),
and also adapts, modifies, the models in this process.
Mental models of mind have to be brought in
correspondence with the world. Correspondence
between the models and the world is knowledge. That
is why the instinct driving the mechanism of adaptation
is called the knowledge instinct (KI). This same instinct
makes little kids, cubs, piglets jump around and play
fight, their inborn models of behavior must adapt to
their body weights, objects, and animals around them
long before the instincts of hunger and fear will
demand their usage for direct aims of survival; neural
mechanisms involved in KI were discussed in (Levine
& Perlovsky 2008). Kiddy behavior just makes the
work of KI more observable; to varying degrees, this
instinct continues acting all our life. All the time we are
bringing our internal models into correspondence with
the surrounding world.
Mathematically KI is modeled by maximization of a
similarity measure between models and sensory
perception. More generally, we should consider a
hierarchical mind structure; representations-models at
a higher level aim at unifying subsets at lower levels;
top-down signals coming from higher levels interact
with bottom-up signals coming from lower levels, and
KI drives this interaction toward increased similarity at
every level.
In biology and psychology KI has been discussed as
curiosity, cognitive dissonance, or a need for
knowledge since the 1950s (Harlow 1950; Festinger
1957; Cacioppo & Petty 1982). In computational
intelligence it is ubiquitous, every mathematical
learning procedure, algorithm, or neural network
maximizes some similarity measure. As every instinct,
KI involves knowledge-related emotions evaluating
satisfaction of this drive for knowledge (Grossberg &
Levine 1987; Perlovsky 2001, 2000c, 2006a,b; 2007c;
Perlovsky, Bonniot-Cabanac, & Cabanac 2010).
How can we understand the nature of emotions
corresponding to KI? Let us direct our inner gaze on
our consciousness: are emotions satisfying or
dissatisfying the learning instinct accessible to
consciousness and what do they feel like? Let us
return to the beginning of this section and imagine
once more a situation of utmost disorientation; objects
and their relations are indiscernible, and those that are
behave unpredictably: doors cannot be opened, water
does not pour, the teeth cannot bite the apple, the will
does not concentrate nor direct our actions, and
nothing makes sense – a terror takes hold. On the
opposite, when surrounding objects and people
behave according to the ideal expectations and needs,
and actions reach clear aims we feel pleasant
harmony, we like it. A feeling of harmony is a
correspondence between the inner concept-models
and the outer world. Emotions of pleasure and terror
related to satisfaction or dissatisfaction of the learning
instinct are aesthetic emotions. As discussed later,
aesthetic emotions are the foundation of our higher
spiritual abilities; emotions related to knowledge have
been called aesthetic since Kant. Experimental
investigation of these emotions have been initiated in
(Perlovsky, Bonniot-Cabanac, Cabanac 2010), and
cortical mechanisms involved in aesthetic emotions
were discussed in (Levine & Perlovsky 2008).
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 5 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
Cognitive-mathematical theory
of knowledge and Kantian
aesthetics
Is beautiful... flowing and changing... or always such
as it is?
Socrates
Kant founded aesthetics on his theory of perception
and cognition, based on processes of interaction
between our psyche and the surrounding world. I
briefly recollect here some main ideas of Kant relating
them in detail to mathematical concepts of mind. As
well known, by discovering the a priori inborn nature of
human psyche as the basis of cognition Kant
overturned the historical course of the human thought
and redirected the philosophical analysis of
relationships of the human and the world, objective
and subjective, particular and universal. He discovered
that our perception and cognition is related to the
world of phenomena and not to the outer world of
things-in-themselves. Phenomena are created by our
mind in the process of interaction with the surrounding
world, with things-in-themselves. A specific ability for
creating phenomena (Understanding) is based on a
priori structure of our mind: every phenomenon is
created on the basis of the corresponding structure.
(In DL, phenomena are final states of models). We are
capable of orientation in the world due to (and to the
extent of) our universal concepts, mental models,
being adequate or similar (to some extent) to the
corresponding individual objects-in-themselves.
Yet, the concepts and objects are different in their
nature. So, how is it possible to establish
correspondence between concepts and objects? By
using a special a priori (inborn) ability, established
Kant, the ability for judgment; judgment of which
concept-model corresponds to which (individual)
object or event (1790, Intro. IV). In the NMF-DL it is
modeled by measure of the correspondence or
similarity between models and sensory data
(Perlovsky 2001, 2006a). Kant has further
demonstrated that the ability for judgment is the
foundation for the ability to perceive beauty.
Our reason prescribes causality to the world of
phenomena, as its basis, its fundamental a priori law:
in the world of phenomena, one follows another and
there is no room for freedom. But in the area of morals
governing our will, reason prescribes freedom, as a
fundamental a priori law of behavior (1790, Intro. IX).
Everyone considers oneself free, at least, in thought.
Freedom and causality seem to be irreconcilable in
principle; practically, however, this irreconcilable
contradiction is resolved every day by everyone in
many minute situations. For example, coming home
from an office she eats dinner. First, she behaves
according to the law of causality, according to which
the food is needed to support life. Second, she does it
completely free, according to her free subjective
choice. The contradiction has been reconciled due to
the ability of judgment to make a correct choice among
many alternatives in correspondence with the general
concepts of objects (dinner and body, which are
subjects to the law of causality) and concepts of
behavior (free desire to eat). Of course, life is far from
being that simple all the time, but it is important for
Kant that such ability for judgment exists in principle.
Let us note that in the above example a person
receives a pleasure, and lets direct our attention to its
dualistic nature: first, a hungry person enjoys eating,
and second, a human made a correct choice in a
situation. This “second” is a little example illustrating
the great discovery by Kant: the correspondence
between concepts and world established by judgment
ability brings pleasant satisfaction. Kant comes to the
fundamental a priori law governing judgment ability, it
is purposiveness. It is not the world of phenomena,
which is purposeful according to some a priori law. No.
Judgment ability is purposeful. However, we perceive
this situation as if objects-in-themselves (world and
behavior) were purposive: a human being freely
desires, acts according to reason, and receives
pleasure and benefits at the same time.
Pleasure brought by judgment ability could appear
without satisfaction of “lower” bodily needs related to
hunger or fear. Sometimes we enjoy pleasure without
expecting any specific benefit. This way, according to
Kant, we experience beauty and spiritually sublime
(1790, Intro. IX). Beauty is aimless purposiveness
perceived in an object, particularly, in objects of art.
Spiritually sublime is aimless purposiveness perceived
by consciousness in a will, models of behavior and
actions, either, our own, those of other people, in
objects or cultural symbols. “Aimless” means here
directed not at the satisfaction of “lower” materialistic
instincts and needs.
In the mathematical theory, “pure” purposiveness of
judgment is described by DL as maximization of
likelihood (or information), in other words, the drive to
improve the correspondence between concepts
(models) and the world. It is definitely not aimless; it is
directed at a goal, which is extremely important for
survival. However, this goal is not directly aimed at
bodily “low” materialistic satisfaction, but to the
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 6 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
satisfaction of KI. Kant saved no effort in emphasizing
that his “aimless purposiveness” (sometimes
translated as “purposiveness without purpose”) is
purposive in the highest spiritual sense (1790,
§§1-22). Yet, without a notion of KI the exact meaning
of this purposiveness has remained unclear (Kant has
discussed this limitation of his theory in 1790, §2).
Debates, with much misinterpretations and their
rebuttals, around this central Kantian idea have begun
since Schiller and continue to this very day (Schiller
1895, Spencer 1891, Guyau 1884, Perlovsky 2000,
multiple current references are discussed later).
It is interesting to compare the Kantian theory of mind
to certain ideas of Buddhism. Buddhism penetrates
into the depths of perception and cognition processes
by recognizing that phenomena are not identical to
things-in-themselves. Emphasizing this, Buddhism
refers to the world of phenomena as “Maya”, the
meaningless deception. A fundamental Buddhist
notion of “emptiness” points out that the value of any
object for satisfying the “lower” bodily instincts is much
less than its value for satisfying higher needs, KI.
Consciousness of bodhisattva, writes Dalai Lama
wonders at perception of emptiness in any object
(Dalai Lama XIV 1993). Any object is first of all a
phenomenon accessible to cognition. Bodhisattva’s
consciousness is directed by KI. The concentration on
“emptiness,” therefore does not mean emotional
emptiness, but the opposite, the fullness with highest
emotions related to KI, beauty and spiritually sublime
(Perlovsky 2001). Similarly to Buddhist “emptiness,”
Kantian “aimless purposiveness” is directed at the
satisfaction of KI and is purposiveness in the highest
sense. It is also interesting to note that Aristotle came
close to this definition of beauty as “unity in manifold”,
for our transcendental idea of the world in its totality is
of the purpose (end) without aim.
After formulating the idea of beauty as purposiveness
without purpose, Kant moves on to analytics,
deductions, and dialectic, giving a number of
examples to clarify his thoughts and explaining why
the beauty is both objective and subjective; yet,
according to von Hartmann “no other thought caused
so much difficulty to Kant and turned out so
controversial.” And his own thoughts on fine art (1790,
§51-54) contradict his fundamental theory of the
aesthetic pleasure.
Pointing out to this complex question of the dialectic of
subjective and objective in the beautiful, Kant’s system
did not resolve it. If this insightful reformer of
philosophical thought did not break up the enchanted
circle of objective and subjective, what is the reason?
And where could we look for the basis to break out
from this circle? DL and neuroimaging data penetrated
into the mystery of conscious and unconscious, turned
around understanding of the role of logical thoughts in
philosophy and psychology, and led to conscious
contemplation of the issue of the historic dialectic of
the beautiful, the change of the notion of beautiful in
the historic change of consciousness. Let us look
again at the classical philosophical question of the
relationship between apriority (initially given, inborn
abilities) and adaptivity (learning), and concentrate on
the changes in understanding of these issues brought
about by the development of science (Perlovsky 1998c,
2010h).
Apriority was understood in all classical philosophy,
beginning from ancient Greeks, as absolute and
eternal constancy, immutability: a priori concepts of
mind never change, their origin is in the other world,
beyond our perception, and they are the basis for all
the objective. There was an impenetrable barrier
between the apriority, as an immutable transcendental
givenness, and adaptivity, as variability, changeability
and the basis for individual differences. This
opposition and irreconcilability of apriority and
adaptivity was inherited by Kant, striving to discover
the eternal and immutable, a priori laws of mind
analogous to the eternal and immutable laws of nature
discovered by Newton[i]. Yet, science, invading the
domain of philosophy repeatedly anew discovers the
play of the a priori and adaptive, objective and
subjective, and overcomes the barrier between
apriority and adaptivity. Attempting to discover the
origins of Universe, physicists are coming to a
conclusion that even the fundamental laws of nature
are changing with time. The meaning of the apriority of
mental abilities changes: the a priori for an individual
(like apriority of space and time) changes in history
and is transferred (between people and generations)
through language and cultural concepts.
Adaptivity-learning of new concepts of mind created in
culture (that is in the language and throughout life) is
based on changeability of the neuro-physiological
apparatus of a priori concepts. A new notion of
adaptation of inborn concepts and the idea of KI
connecting apriority and adaptivity leads to a new way
of understanding the contradictions that were brought
into the philosophical consciousness in the
post-Kantian development of psychology and
aesthetics. I would like to emphasize that it is not an
accidental lapse of analytic sharpness that prevented
Kant from understanding beauty as an emerging and
historically changing property. This could have only
been accomplished after the third Critique was
completed, and it requires re-writing of all three
Critiques as parts of a dynamic system involving
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 7 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
individual mind and culture in their historic evolution.
Several times Kant came close to formulating this
problem (1790, §75). It is not a “magic of
mathematics”, but the gradual historic change in the
understanding of the nature of the a priori and the
adaptive that leads to this new insight.
Hierarchy of values and
beauty
Everything must be conscious to be beautiful
Socrates
Let us repeat that aesthetic emotions appearing in the
NMF-DL theory of mind are related to KI
(mathematical measures of correspondence between
concept-models and the world, between higher and
lower representations), and these emotions are
experienced independently of other instincts. They are
not related directly to hunger or satiation, fear or
comfort, sexual procreation. A feel of harmony
(between concept-models and the world) is
independent, to some extent, from concrete “lower”
bodily needs. The aesthetic need is “spiritually high”.
Harmony is just a first step toward the notion of beauty.
Can aesthetics based on harmony of internal
concepts-models and outside objects explain a feel of
beautiful when one looks at a flower? A flower seems
to be an insignificant object from the point of view of
the survival of the human species. Why evolution
could lead to ability for feeling a special harmony
between our concept-models and a flower?
Object-flower is simple, but the quest for beauty is
complex; to find an explanation for a deeper meaning
of harmony I turn now to the hierarchy of the
organization of mind.
Harmony so far was meant as an “object”-harmony:
correspondence between models of perception and
objects in the world. This is a harmony at a lower level
in the hierarchy of concepts of perception and
cognition. At this level concept-models correspond to
individual objects. “Higher up” in this hierarchy are
more abstract and more universal concept-models of
mind, modeling relationships among objects, and on to
the models of situations, relations among situations,
and, at the top of this “pyramid” there are
concept-models of the meaning of our existence.
Without interacting with objects and events in the
world, these concept-models are vague and uncertain;
they are the bases for learning, and inaccessible to
consciousness. In the process of learning-cognition
(the DL process, Perlovsky 2006a, the simulator
process of perceptual symbol system, Barsalou 1999),
they attain their “end-forms”, more concrete and more
accessible to consciousness. Evolution of vague
unconscious forms into crisp conscious forms occurs
in the interaction of concept-models and sensor
signals (or higher level representations and lower level
bottom-up signals).
Let us consider in some details contents of abstract
models near the top of the mind hierarchy. Models at
every higher level appeared in the process of
biological and cultural evolution with a purpose to unify
multiple lower level models. Recognizing a table,
silverware, chairs as individual objects will only bring
our understanding that far. KI drives our mind to
understand the purpose of these objects, which we
understand due to a higher level model of a dining
room. Models at the top of the mind hierarchy attempt
to unify our entire life experience, to understand it as
something purposeful. Even so these models are
vague and mostly unconscious, we “perceive” them as
related to the purpose of our life. This “perception” is
vague and unconscious we feel it as a mixture of
conceptual and emotional contents. Contemplating an
object outside self stimulates the process of
adaptation; in the first moment, model-objects are
adapted, providing for perception; in the next moments
model-relationships and model-situations are adapted,
and this process continues up and up the hierarchy of
models, reaching sometimes the highest models of the
meaning of life (Levine & Perlovsky 2008; Perlovsky
2010h).
A contemplation of an object, therefore, could
stimulate adaptation of abstract complex models,
bringing a deep satisfaction of the instinct for learning.
Aesthetic emotion in such a case is perceived by us as
a presence of beauty. A flower seems beautiful to us
because we see in it a purpose – the process of our
internal adaptation reaches concept-models of the
meaning and purpose of existence. Possibly, it is
related to the fact that a flower is full of biological
meaning. Flowers appear relatively late in evolution;
ferns do not yet have flowers, it appears first at
horsetails belonging to a botanic classification of
vasculiform cryptogamous. A flower attracts bees by
appearance and scent. Its geometry is exactly
“calculated” so that a bee’s head touches stamens
exactly by the same spot that later touches pistils.
Leaves and branches of a plant can grow larger or
smaller depending on rains, sun, temperature, but the
geometry of a flower does not depend on these
accidentals. After pollination the flower dies and a fruit
appears in its place. Even being not a botanist and
knowing nothing about the biological function of a
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 8 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
flower, a human is capable of feeling that this little
object is full of meaning. This fullness of meaning in a
simple object gives us a possibility to feel meaning in
nature in general, and in particular, the
meaningfulness of our existence. A flower hints to our
unconscious about their joint evolution lasting billions
of years. Knowing of the biological function of a flower,
procreation, one may conclude that the meaning of a
flower is related to a finite goal. However, being a part
of the natural evolution, including human, a flower as if
sets ajar a possibility of a meaning aimed beyond a
concrete aim, what Kant called purposiveness without
purpose. The beauty of a flower is a perceived
possibility of improving ourselves, improving the inner
concept-models of our purposiveness toward the aim
that is hidden from us as of yet. A flower example
illustrates both, a possibility of change of aesthetic
criteria and slowness of this process: for a human
being who learned botany a flower beauty may lose a
part of its mystery (aesthetic fascination may be
shifted toward scientific analysis), yet the biological
nature of our emotions changes very slow, and flowers
will continue bringing us aesthetic joy for thousands of
years.
Emotions of the beautiful is an aesthetic emotion
related to satisfaction of KI at the top levels of the
hierarchy of mind. As discussed, every mental
representation has a purpose of unifying multiple
lower-level. Representations at the top have a purpose
of unifying the entire life experience. It is vague and
not conscious, its conceptual and emotional contents
are not differentiated. Therefore, the concept of
purpose of life and the emotion of the beautiful cannot
be made as clear as an object in front of our eyes.
Even if an object or event can make us more certain
that the purpose of life exist, we feel the presence of
the beautiful.
However, sometimes we think we know what is the
purpose of our life and we can discuss in details
attributes of the beautiful. To reconcile the
contradiction between vagueness and certainty, we
need to consider interaction between cognition and
language (Perlovsky 2004, 2006a, 2007b,e,g, 2009a,
2010g; Fontanari et al 2007, 2008a; Tikhanov et al
2006). Language and cognition interact through the
dual model: each mental representation has two parts,
language and cognitive. Language representations are
learned from surrounding language, their learning
does not need life experience, therefore they can be
learned early in life. By five years kids can talk about
the entire content of culture. The entire hierarchy of
their language representations is crisp and conscious.
But they cannot act as adults, their cognitive
representations are vague. Throughout life cognitive
representations are learned and become more crisp
and consciousness guided  by language and grounded
in life experience. The higher in the hierarchy, the
more vague and less conscious are cognitive models,
whereas language models remain crisp and conscious.
We can talk crisply and consciously about contents of
top representations using language, which
accumulates the cultural wisdom. And we may remain
unconscious about vagueness of corresponding
cognitive contents. This is why sometimes people talk
clearly, crisply, and knowledgably about contents of
the top models. This may help us improve contents of
corresponding cognitive models, which forever remain
vague and unconscious. Yet KI drives us to make
these contents crisper and more conscious. When we
achieve even a small step in this direction, we feel
emotion of the beautiful.
Aesthetic sensitivity of a human could be directed not
just outward, at outer objects (flowers), but also inside
self, at the inner concepts and intuitions. This is the
nature of aesthetic emotion in philosophy and science:
harmony is a correspondence of general abstract
concept-models (scientific theories) to particular,
concrete concept-models which meaning is clarified in
this correspondence. E.g., the concept of “mass”
attained an exact meaning in the second law of
Newton concerning the relationship between mass,
force and acceleration. “Mass” attained even deeper
meaning in the general theory of relativity, which
related mass to energy and curvature of space-time.
This internal connectedness of phenomena, a
meaning that a scientific theory ascribes to the nature
is perceived by scientists as beauty of a scientific
theory. Beauty of an internal object in the case of
science is a possibility to improve our internal most
general and abstract concept-models of meaning and
all-encompassing scientific theories, which we feel as
related to a concrete thought, hypothesis, or
experimental data (internal or external object). This is
why founders of contemporary science, Einstein,
Poincare, Bohr spoke about beauty of a scientific
theory as the first criterion of its validity.
In art, creativity has been historically directed
predominantly at an outer object, an art object.
However, the role of inner object increases, especially
beginning from XIX c., the thoughts of an artist or
connoisseur stimulated by the work of art are
becoming more independent from and of more value
than the object of art itself. That is, the aesthetic
emotion is directed not at the piece of art, but
increasingly at the inner object. Despite increased
specialization, the nature of creative process brings
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 9 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
closer the artist, writer, poet, philosopher, and scientist.
Beauty of an internal object as well as of an external
object is a possibility to improve our internal
concept-models of meaning of our life and existence
that we feel when contemplating an object of art.
Aesthetic and anti-aesthetic in
art, cognitive-mathematical
model of mind, and
contemporary aesthetics
Concentration on inner object was an inseparable part
of enjoying, perceiving, and understanding art for
millennia. The art of tragedy cannot be understood in
any other way, and the Aristotelian explanation of the
catharsis as a mechanism of aesthetic perception of
tragedy concentrated on the inner object. Beginning
from XIX c. this process has fast accelerated creating
tensions, misunderstandings, and arguments about
the role of “non-beautiful” in art. The process of
accelerating art toward inner object is neither simple
nor straightforward and in the process of developing
new expressive means, artists often placed beauty at
the backseat, trying first to cope with the basics of the
aesthetic perception. This caused much discussion
and controversy in aesthetics as the very notions of art
and art object came under scrutiny. The complexity of
the evolution of art in the 20th century brought many to
a conclusion that art is impossible to define (Weitz
1956).
In this section I concentrate on relating the
mathematical-cognitive analysis to several issues
currently discussed in theoretical aesthetics. The
mathematical theory of mind touching upon the
foundations of aesthetics potentially offers relevant
comments to good many current discussions in
journals on philosophic aesthetics and art criticism. I
limit my comments to the following four: the notion of
aesthetic attitude and the surrounding discussion of
what constitute the specifics of aesthetic; the
dynamics of conscious and unconscious in creativity;
conditions leading to modernity and post-modernity;
and the “anti-aesthetic” in art. Even this limited
selection of issues encompasses hundreds of
publications making it impossible to comment on all of
the aspects of the discussed problems (just to list a
few, Gaut 2000, Budd 2001, Carroll 2002, Levinson
2002, Matravers 2003, Livingston 2003, Dickie 2004,
Davies 2004, Gaut 2005, Carroll 2006, Matravers
2007, Scruton 2007); my purpose here is not a
comprehensive review, but an attempt to establish a
relationship between the cognitive-mathematical
theory and aesthetics.
In addition to devastating the notion of aesthetics as a
science, an idea of art non-definability ran contrary to
the tradition dated at least to Kant. Countering the idea
of “non-definability” of art, and to define art and art
perception as a specific type of experience Stolnitz
(1960) introduced a notion of aesthetic attitude. He
emphasized that the attention is selective and directed
to achieving specific goals, however, it is never
exclusively “practical” and sometimes directed at the
enjoyment of the “looks or sounds or feels”. And he
defined “the aesthetic attitude as disinterested and
sympathetic attention to and contemplation of any
object of awareness whatever, for its own sake alone”.
Comparing this definition with the aesthetic emotion as
it appears in the MFT-DL theory of mind, one notices
on the one hand, significant affinity (aesthetic
emotions being specific and fundamentally different
from other emotions, being “free” from immediate
bodily practical interests) and on the other, uncertainty
and limitation concerning “disinterested-ness” and
“sympathy”. For, let me repeat again, aesthetic is
“interested”, but in a higher sense, and not limited to
“sympathetic” feelings but open to positive and
negative emotions (as well as to complicated
superpositions and interactions of “positive” and
“negative” at once at different levels of the hierarchy of
mind). These deficiencies of Stolnitz’ definition are
similar to those of Kant. Both Kant and Stolnitz
explained in detail what they meant by
“disinterested-ness”, yet concise and clear positive
definition (what it is rather than what it is not) was
missing because complete scientific understanding did
not exist; this left “the aesthetic attitude” open to
misunderstandings similar to those faced by Kant’s
theory (Danto, 1996).
Criticism of the notion of aesthetic attitude is related to
complexity of artistic experience in XX c. and goes to
the roots of difficulties faced by aesthetic theory.
Considering aesthetic attitude as a form of attention,
Dickie concluded that such a notion is
self-contradictory and cannot be satisfactory defined
(Dickie 1964). Dickie’s criticism of aesthetic attitude
demonstrates complexity of the issues involved.
Scientific analysis of the working of mind can help in
sorting out the subtleties, which turned out to be
important for aesthetic theory. Identification of
aesthetic emotion with a special form of attention is
wrong. (While Stolnitz himself used the word
“attention”, for him this was only “a point of departure”.
However, when Dickie criticized “attention” he
departed in a very different direction from Stolnitz’).
There are several mechanisms of attention in mind; all
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 10 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
of them are different from emotions in principle.
Attention is an amount of the mind resources allocated
to a phenomenon based on emotions associated with
this phenomenon. Emotions are evaluative signals and
the corresponding feelings related to a phenomenon’s
ability to satisfy or dissatisfy a specific instinct. And,
aesthetic emotions, to repeat it once more, are related
to the phenomenon satisfying or dissatisfying our
cognitive ability or more specifically KI.
The difference discussed above might seem subtle,
but I am concentrating on analyzing it because it is
related to a longstanding fundamental error about the
nature of mind shared by philosophers and
mathematicians, and leading to much confusion in
theoretical aesthetics, the error of considering mind as
a logical system. Its origins can be traced to Plato’s
conception of mind (IV BCE a) (even before Aristotle
created logic). Aristotle (IV BCE) on the one hand
founded the science of logic, on the other, he was
specific about logic not being a theory of mind. He
related logic to language, emphasized that language
does not obey the fundamental law of logic (“the
crispiness” given by “the law of excluded middle”), and
warned not to make logical definitions more exact than
language. These subtlety of Aristotelian thoughts were
not understood, and later have been seen as the
contradiction between “crispiness” of logic and
“fuzziness” of language; Aristotle developed a theory
of mind (forms) similar to DL (Perlovsky 2001, 2007c,
2010c). It drew the attention of Boole (1847) and other
founders of formal logic, including Frege and Russell,
and the perceived contradiction was resolved in the 19th
c. by eliminating (from logic) the fuzziness of language.
The consequences were unexpectedly “disastrous” for
logic. The internal contradiction and inconsistency of
“formal” or “crisp” logic was proven by Gödel
(1933/1986). Logic turned out to be neither as
omnipotent nor as “logical” as was expected. It follows
that the mind does not work according to logic
(Perlovsky 2006a,b, 2007c,g, 2008a, 2010c,d,g,
Perlovsky & Ilin 2010a,b). Nevertheless, this
implication of the Gödel theory was not understood by
many philosophers and mathematicians, the
erroneous idea of mind operating as a logical system
found its support, among many others, in Wittgenstein
(1921), Putnam (1988), and Newell (1983).
Today the idea of logical mind is discredited among
mathematicians due to the fact that more than forty
years of attempts to base mathematical intelligence on
logic failed. Yet, “deification of logic,” equating
mathematics and science with logic is still a powerful
myth in collective consciousness of today. The reason
is that, as discussed, vague states and processes in
the mind are not accessible to consciousness;
consciousness can only access logic-like states;
therefore mind appears logic-like to consciousness.
When considering mind as a system operating with
logical rules according to the laws of logic, there is no
fundamental difference between phenomena,
emotions, and attention, all of these are sorts of logical
rules, that is concepts. Thus, the error of Dickie is not
just in missing some barely relevant distinction, but is
related to an incorrect conception of mind that was
dominant among mathematicians from 19th c. till 1970s
(under the names “logical formalism,” “Artificial
Intelligence”), and among many leading philosophers
of the 20th c., being directly related to Plato’s
conception of mind. Understanding mind as a logical
system eliminates a distinction between concepts and
emotions and inevitably leads to defining aesthetic
contents according to a concept (not emotion).
Another aspect of Dickie’s criticism has been directed
at “disinterested-ness” of the aesthetic, which he has
understood as irrelevancy to real life and human
feelings. This misinterpretation is widespread.
Conceptual difficulty in comprehending “disinterested
purposiveness” led many to forget the “purposiveness”
in Kantian theory and to emphasize the
“disinterested-ness.” Dickie’s criticism helped to
identify fallacious misunderstandings of this idea,
especially when it was directed at the popular notion of
“psychical distancing,” which carried the aesthetic from
“disinterested-ness” further into the realm of
“irrelevancy,” and it is this interpretation that drew his
sharpest criticism. The tradition of interpreting Kant’s
theory of aesthetic, beauty, and “free play” as
enjoyment of art for art’s sake, that is irrelevant for
“real life,” has a long history descending from Schiller
(1895). Discussions of “art for art’s sake” pervade
much of the aesthetics literature to this very day, it
continues in Scruton (1974), Guyer (1997), Zangwill
(1995), and Kemp (1999) (to mention just a few).
MFT-DL explains “free play” as the working of the
mechanism of KI, which is “free” in the very specific
Kantian sense: free from “lower” bodily instincts. The
“negative” definition of Kant (of what “disinterested” is
not), as I have discussed, proved insufficient and led
to much misunderstanding throughout history. And, let
me repeat again, the “positive” definition of the specific
nature of aesthetic interest became possible due to
the theory of KI, the mechanisms of learning and
adaptation of mental concept-models, the dynamic
nature of mind, of the “faculty of understanding.”
An opposite direction of misunderstanding of the
“disinterested-ness” is in denying it altogether. Aiken
(1998) attempted to explain art “ethologically”, similar
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 11 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
to other types of instinctive behavior. She asked the
relevant question, along the lines of Kantian
teleological analysis, “ ‘What purpose has this
behavior’ for the survival of this species?” Yet,
according to our analysis as well as according to a
review by O’Hear (2000), her answers relating origins
of aesthetic to sex are “all too clearly... restricted” and
represent a “wasted opportunity” to answer an
important question of the biological basis for aesthetic
emotion. I would also like to add that the idea that
beauty is related to sex is a pervading one. When at
an intermediate stage of my research I was discussing
the biological and neural origins of aesthetic emotions
with a leading authority in the field of cognitive and
neural science, he told me that he was contemplating
this problem for many years, but the relationship
between beauty and sex confuses the issue and
makes this matter impenetrable to scientific analysis (a
private discussion). A separate discussion below is
devoted to this issue because of its importance.
Carroll (2000) offers a philosophical and psychological
analysis of aesthetic experience similar in some ways
to the results of NMF-DL, yet opposite in conclusions.
Comparing the two helps understanding the deep and
subtle issues of the aesthetic theory and clarifies close
but non-trivial relationships between the
cognitive-mathematical theory developed here, and
explanations offered previously. Carroll’s analysis is
multi-“dimensional” (he addresses multiple aspects of
aesthetics) and deliberately careful (he discusses
several approaches to controversial issues, often
opposing each other). Therefore, the following
comparison takes the reader through Carroll’s
arguments one by one and compares them to the
MFT-DL analysis (for shortness, in the following C
designates Carroll’s arguments and M mathematical).
(1) C suggests that “the broadest approach... to
aesthetic (of) art... encompasses any appropriate
response to an artwork.” A deficiency of this definition
is its circularity: the art is defined through what is
appropriate for art. M shows that aesthetic is an
inherent part of any perception and cognition of any
object or thought, and is an emotion evaluating
satisfaction or dissatisfaction of KI.
(2) C “appropriate response” is governed by historical
context of norms. M similarly concludes that the entire
previous experience may affect every act of perception
and cognition, including aesthetic perception of art.
(Many authors concentrated on the historical definition
of art, emphasizing that an artwork cannot be properly
perceived without knowing the history of art and art
criticism (Dickie 1974, Walton 1970, Danto 2001); M
makes even a stronger statement that the entire life
experience may affect every act of perception and
cognition; this point will be elaborated later).
(3) C makes a side remark suggesting that aesthetic
response to nature treats “nature as if it were art”. M
states that the basic nature of aesthetic emotion is
related to KI and is the same with respect to nature
and art; specifics of art ought to be analyzed within the
context of dynamics of collective and individual
conscious and unconscious (an example of such
analysis is given later, but the comprehensive analysis
will have to wait until a separate publication).
(4) C suggests that the “therapeutic dimension” of an
artwork, that is using insights derived from an artwork
for improving ones life, on the one hand is clearly
appropriate, but on the other is “exactly what ...
aesthetic... excludes”. This illustrates fundamental
difficulties with understanding Kant (1790) and
aesthetics. M clearly distinguishes aesthetic emotion
corresponding to the process of cognition of a new
concept from emotions related to the processes of
using this new concept (or even anticipating its use).
The distinction is due to different instinctual and neural
mechanisms involved and is not necessarily
consciously perceived. Aesthetic is related to KI.
(5) C continues the previous line of argument to the
following antinomy: “the aesthetic is... in contrast... to
the cognitive” and yet the cognitive is often an
important aspect of the artwork. M clearly specifies the
relationships between aesthetic-emotional and
cognitive-conceptual in processes of perception and
cognition: aesthetic emotion evaluates cognitive
phenomena (mental models of perception and
cognition – and therefore is closely related to the
cognitive), yet, the emotion is distinct from any
concept, emotion evaluates not according to a rule or
concept, but instinctively according to satisfaction or
dissatisfaction of KI.
(6) In discussing “disinterested and sympathetic
attention” C mentions “contemplation of an artwork for
its own sake... freedom from the pressures of
everyday life... We suspend questions of what is to be
done personally, morally, and politically... we
temporarily hang the pursuit of knowledge and truth on
a hook in... the coat-check room.” M explains that to
experience the pure aesthetic emotion we do not have
to suspend anything: our mind works in parallel along
many pathways, and while thinking about pragmatic
goals we may experience (consciously or only partly
so) pure aesthetic emotions related to improving our
concept-models and satisfying KI. We do not
contemplate “an artwork for its own sake”, but for the
satisfaction of the instinct for knowledge. We definitely
do not “hang the pursuit of knowledge...” because the
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 12 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
increase of knowledge is what causes the pleasant
aesthetic emotion. (This last confusion in C arguments
is especially symptomatic and similar in its origin to the
previously discussed misconception about mind as a
system of logical rules, a misconception widely shared
among 
“lay 
public”, 
philosophers, 
and
mathematicians). Whereas suspension of the
pragmatic may intensify the aesthetic aspect of an
experience, this is not a fundamental requirement for
aesthetic experience.
(7) C discusses disinterested attention as directed to
the artwork itself: “Are its structures unified, is it
complex, what are its noteworthy expressive
properties...?” M suggests that the specific properties
of an artwork that affect us ought to be analyzed in the
entire context of culture, individual mind content and
its current state. And even at this level of expertise
individual judgments of taste differ. The individual
aesthetic judgment is only governed by the individual
experience. This analysis pertains to a different level
of details than the fundamental questions of the nature
of “disinterested” and aesthetic.
(8) C discusses “sympathetic” aspect of aesthetic
experience as “object-directed... surrendering to the
(art)work – allowing ourselves to be guided by its
structures and purposes”. M suggests that conscious
“surrendering” is not a necessary fundamental aspect
of the aesthetic experience. There are mechanisms in
the mind (conscious and unconscious) that to varying
degrees enable or disable learning of new concepts,
that is the aesthetic ability, at high levels of the
hierarchy (obviously disabling aesthetic ability at the
lower perceptual level will lead to basic incapacity and
death). I prefer (in accord with the mathematical
analysis) to speak about adaptivity or openness (to
new experiences and ideas). The mind by evolutionary
necessity is conservative. Too much openness to new
experiences would have been dangerous for our
ancestors. Human mind is more adaptive, more open
to novelty than mind of animals. Anthropologists
concluded that during the course of evolution human
sexual development was modified, it is arrested at a
young age and childhood prolonged so that we can
learn more. Adaptivity of mind in many people is
reduced after adolescence. Yet, many retain openness
and adaptivity throughout life. While it is possible to
develop mathematical measures of “optimal
openness”, it is not clear that human mind follows this
optimality. Clearly, a degree of openness (sympathy)
is necessary for aesthetic experience. However, an
idea that more sympathy implies a better aesthetic
ability is wrong. A complicated interplay of conscious
and unconscious mechanisms regulates adaptivity and
openness. At the higher level KI is related to the
meaning and purpose of life. Openness to
meaningless experiences has nothing to do with
aesthetic ability.
(9) C discusses the potential conflict between
“disinterested-ness and... sympathetic attention”
related to religious, political, moral or cognitive content
and purposes of artworks. M resolves this conflict
essentially the same way as discussed in (4) and (5)
above. “Sympathy” enhanced by non-aesthetic
interests might predispose mind to a greater openness
towards specific aesthetic experiences. Yet, sympathy
could be of an aesthetic or non-aesthetic origin.
Whereas the aesthetic and non-aesthetic emotions
might not be clearly separated in one’s consciousness,
specific and different mechanisms of mind are at work.
I again repeat that aesthetic is related to KI and better
knowledge, and at the top of the mind hierarchy to the
meaning of life.
(10) C resolves the conflict (9) by suggesting that
aesthetic part of experience is the one that does not
involve sympathy, and that aesthetic is just a part of
appropriate art experience (which involves aesthetic
and sympathetic experiences). M agrees with C, that
an appropriate art experience is not limited to an
aesthetic one. Yet M response is different in that first,
it emphasizes that sympathy (or a part of it) might be
of aesthetic origin, and second, that the aesthetic is
not subsumed by the art, aesthetic experience
involves non-art objects.
 (11) Evolution, sex, and the beautiful.
C examines the role of evolutionary mechanisms as
ultimately responsible for the aesthetic ability. This
leads to a conclusion that, ultimately, aesthetic ability
has specific instrumental (pragmatic) purposes. C
identified two types of purposes: expressive and
interpretative, and concludes that both are pragmatic
instrumental ones. One is aimed at improving our
pattern recognition ability, another at improving our
intra-species communication skills, leading to cultural
evolution. Both therefore are instrumental and
pragmatic, and the conflict between aesthetic and
pragmatic is not resolved.
M analysis is threefold: (i) in agreement with C it
concludes that in a hierarchical system, including
individuals (at a lower level) and specie (at a higher
level), aesthetic ability at the lower level may serve a
pragmatic goal at the higher level; (ii) nevertheless,
this does not deny the fundamental difference
between aesthetic and pragmatic at the level of
individuals: aesthetic and pragmatic goals “are
implemented” through entirely different mechanisms of
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 13 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
body-mind (KI and procreation); but this is yet not a full
story: (iii) only part of our aesthetic abilities can be
scientifically attributed to evolutionary-pragmatic
mechanism at specie level; the top levels of the
hierarchy of our mind are not subsumed within
individual-specie hierarchy; first, this is suggested by
what we know about hierarchical organization of our
brain: the hierarchy is only approximate, interactions
encompassing several levels of “hierarchy” are
present in the brain; second, this is evident from our
ability to formulate and pursue goals beyond the limits
of specie’s pragmatic interests; at the top levels of the
mind hierarchy we are not satisfied with considering
our ultimate goal to be the specie or gene propagation;
we are searching for the “aimless” purpose, not limited
by any finite aim. The ideal of beauty involves an open
infinite mystery (mathematically it is related to
combinatorial complexity of the choice of beautiful,
which involves infinite information); Kant, analysing
this issue, came with the same conclusion (1790, §§65,
80, 83). DL explains this mystery through interaction of
cognition and language; but this mystery cannot be
resolved, it is an actual mystery related to the meaning
of life, and human lives in this mystery.
Let me continue this discussion because some might
firmly believe that evolution leads to a pragmatic
explanation of our aesthetic abilities, considering such
a statement an inevitable scientific conclusion of the
evolutionary theory. First, this is just a belief, there is
no scientific evidence that evolution can exhaustively
explain the aesthetic ability. (And any attempt at
predicting the future direction of science would
certainly have been futile during the last 250 years).
Second, consider our mathematical ability. Obviously,
evolution favors some mathematical ability, say, to
catch a rabbit, a hunter needs to be able to anticipate
its trajectory. With what accuracy? Probably, 10% (or
0.1) would suffice, well, let us be generous, say 1%
(0.01). Therefore, it might be reasonable to conclude
that evolution might lead to our ability to predict events
in the world of phenomena with accuracy 0.01. But
how would one go about explaining our ability to
predict measurements in certain physical experiments
with accuracy of 0.0000000001 ? There are no
scientific explanations for the origins of such ability,
nor for the reason why the “real world” is
mathematically predictable with such accuracy.
(12) In Jerome vs. Charles mental experiment C
attempts to resolve the contradiction between the
pragmatic vs. “for its own sake,” by considering the
role of beliefs. While assuming Jerome and Charles
having different beliefs, C maintains “they are
processing the artwork in exactly the same way.” M
comments that this consideration makes no sense, it is
much affected by the “logical” conception of mind
discussed previously. Aesthetic experience is not a
matter of conscious beliefs, but is an instinctive
emotional reaction, which can be affected by
conscious considerations only in an indirect ways.
Separating “beliefs” from “data processing” in mind,
based on what we know about the mind operations, is
wrong for any purpose, and is a dangerous line of
argument that leads C to fallacious conclusions (this
Carroll’s argument is also historically related to that of
Dickie, criticized previously).
(13) Despite of some similarity between C and M
arguments, the differences result in opposite
conclusions on the most fundamental issues. C
concludes that the only possible definition of aesthetic
experience is the one of empiricism: “we can give
content to the notion of aesthetic experience by merely
enumerating the kind of activities and corresponding
experiences.” This contradicts to the basic intuition
about the beautiful – everyone may just feel it. M
concludes that aesthetic experience is a special kind
of experience due to specifically aesthetic
mechanisms active in the mind of everyone.
Carroll’s analysis demonstrated the depth of
conceptual penetration informed by many recent
advances in psychology and cognitive science. Yet,
subtleties of interaction between instincts, emotions,
and concepts in our mind have not been clarified and
lead to fundamental difficulties. I hope the above
discussion helps clarify the controversial issues.
In discussing Carroll’s paper, Stecker (2001)
continued the mental experiment with Jerome and
Charles by considering them taking up an offer from a
psychologist to attend his lab and to receive
subliminally “evolutionary advantages” similar to what
can be derived from observing an artwork but to an
even greater degree. Stecker then concluded that
Charles, because he did not feel a need anymore to
look at the painting did not have any aesthetic
experience in the first place. This whole “mental
experiment” suffers from the same “logical” conception
of mind, which leads it to the wrong conclusion. After
all, this psychologist lab is very much like our real life
experience; while moving through life, our aesthetic
taste does change, and as it evolves, we might enjoy
not any longer an artwork that once was a source of
genuine aesthetic experience. Mathematical theory
suggests that this would happen when unconscious
contents addressed by the artwork became fully
conscious. This essentially dynamic nature of the
interacting conscious and unconscious, which makes
up the aesthetic taste, is missed by both authors.
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 14 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
Interaction between conscious and unconscious was
missing in the above discussion of the nature of artistic
experience. According to the DL analysis of mind,
creativity is directed at improving (and developing new)
concept-models of mind (what Kant called the faculty
of understanding). Similar ideas of artistic creativity
relating sensory data to novel universal conceptions
have been discussed in aesthetic literature (Arnheim,
2001). The new concept-models are developed in two
directions, from within, from a priori unconscious
archetypes by differentiating them, connecting to the
individual life experience and bringing to
consciousness, and from the outside, from
concept-models existing in collective conscious[i],
culture, primarily in language, by connecting them to
the unconscious inner instincts, through archetypes.
Creativity thus involves conscious and unconscious,
and occurs at the border between the two. Artistic
intuitions about the self and world are internal
perceptions and feelings related to vague,
unconscious models in the process of connecting
them to consciousness by means of artistic expression.
This mathematical analysis is essentially in agreement
with the account of the nature of creativity given by
Jung (1934), who explained that the depth of
unconscious is collective, same among all people, and
that the special gift of creativity involves individual
consciousness.
In the context of aesthetic creativity, the role of
conscious and unconscious was explored by Croce
(1922) who “identified intuitive... with... artistic fact”. In
correspondence with the mathematical theory and
contrary to popular beliefs he emphasized first, that
functioning of mind of genius is distinct from “ordinary”
only in degree: “Molière... was right: ‘whenever we
speak, we create prose’.” And, second, that both
conscious and unconscious are a part of artistic
experiences: “...those who claim unconsciousness as
the chief quality of an artistic genius, hurl him from an
eminence far above humanity to a position far below it.
Intuitive or artistic genius... is always conscious.” In
attempting to analyze the complicated mechanism of
interaction between “matter (or content) and form”,
however, he came with a one-sided conclusion that
“The aesthetic fact... is a form, and nothing but form.”
This conclusion is related to the well-known Plato’s
view that Ideas or Forms of mind are given a priori in
their final form; mathematically it is related to the idea
of “logical mind.” Croce arguments therefore are not
consistent with his conclusion, a situation which is
more typical than exceptional in the complex world of
aesthetics.
Aristotle (IV BCE, Metaphysics) pointed out Plato’s
error: if Forms are a priori given in their final form,
learning is not needed and is impossible. He
discussed the difference between a priori
Forms-as-potentialities (that we identify with
unconscious vague models) and Forms-as-actualities
(that we identify with conscious models-concepts
corresponding to completed perception or cognition).
Aristotle emphasized that “potentialities” are not logical,
but “actualities,” which emerge in the process of
experience, are logical. This Aristotelian description is
close to the MFT-DL theory of mind (Perlovsky 2006b,
2007c, 2010c).
I briefly discuss now the relationships between the
MFT-DL theory and previously developed
aesthetic-theoretical accounts of the rise and fall of
Modernism and of Postmodernism. The “foremost
Kantian art critic of our time (Greenberg who’s)
openness... and the ability to sense (Pollock’s work)
artistic goodness – even to proclaim its artistic
greatness – at a time when this was far indeed from
the received view, gave Greenberg in retrospect
credentials of a kind few other critics enjoyed” (Danto
1996). According to Greenberg (1999), the main
feature of Modernism is self-referentness, critical
exploration of the depths of self, and abstract
expressionism was the highest point in the
development of art toward the ideal of disinterested
beauty that explored the meanings of human self.
However, his “...art criticism has become extremely
problematic in an artworld almost defined by
Duchamp...” (Danto, 1996) and his account does not
seem to be theoretically consistent; criticizing
Greenberg, De Duve (1996) and Gaiger (1999) note
that while attempting to give a transcendental account
of aesthetic judgment he ultimately comes to an
empiricist interpretation of Kant. And according to
Kuhns (2001), Greenberg “moves from enlightening
openness to dogmatic closedness” and lacks
“thorough grounding in the philosophical aesthetics.”
In view of such contradictory opinions, is it possible to
provide a consistent explanation for the importance of
Modernism and for its demise?
The answer to this question is “yes,” both art directions
s a t i s f i e d  
o p p o s i t e  
s i d e s  
o f  
K I .  
T h e
cognitive-mathematical theory emphasizes the two
aspects of the historical process of the development of
mind first, that unconscious is inexhaustible in its
depths extending toward the biological foundations of
neural functioning that forms the material substrate of
collective unconscious and unify human with animal
kingdom, and second, that mind develops from fuzzy,
unconscious concept-models toward more crisp and
more conscious ones. The role of rational conscious
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 15 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
mind increases in history. This process was noticed by
Plato (IV BCE b), accepting for himself only the
Socratic rational thinking, while mentioning the role of
unconscious mystery in the creativity of oracles and
poets (Perlovsky 2001). This process is not linear, it
experiences delays and setbacks on large and small
scales and, since the advent of scientific method in the
17th c., it has tremendously accelerated (Perlovsky
2007c, 2010a,b). There is an old idea that for millennia
artists created unconsciously (Anichkov 1904); for
instance, landscape appeared in painting much earlier
than appreciation of the beauty of nature was
conceptually formulated; these ideas of unconscious
creativity, as discussed, are untenable. Formulating
conceptually is not equivalent to being conscious. I
rather think that the first cave wall painters were more
conscious than their contemporaries; quite possible
that “more painterly endowed” was identical with “more
conscious”. Yet, the conscious aspect of creativity is
ever increasing; Michelangelo’s “One paints, not with
his hands, but with the brain” (see Gilbert 1980) could
not belong to an ancient Greek artist. The reason is
that the conceptual content of art tremendously
increased during the 2000 years. And this process
continues, “proportion” of conscious vs. unconscious
in creativity is increasing; a contemporary artist
expects more of his creativity than “creating beauty”. A
“naive” creativity became as if impossible. Especially
beginning from the 19th c., an artist feels a need to
combine the intuition with a rational thought (Croce
1922). Yet painting a “concept,” an idea that have
been already formulated in words, is not art. This
pressure toward rationality, while maintaining
exclusively artistic expression, is so strong that some
artists feel it as oppressing and experiment with drugs
to get rid of this pressure. Yet, an artist today expects
“more” from his or her art than unconscious “creation
of beauty.” According to Danto, “artwork themselves
carrying on philosophy of art” (McAdoo 2000). An artist
strives toward theoretical understanding of her or his
art; artistic intuition strives to unite with philosophic
aesthetic thought and to become one in an artwork.
Abstract expressionism in its best achievements has
penetrated deep into unconscious and revealed
interesting image-less images that some perceive as
aesthetically and as if magically related to archetypes
of psyche (which according to Jung are space-less
and time-less); its “non-representational” shapes and
colors touched upon intuitions and emotions, which
have never before been expressed in words or
artworks. The limits of our consciousness were
expanded. However, in this process ambitions of the
modernist art went beyond bounds where
consciousness of artists, critiques, connoisseurs, and
mass-consumers 
of 
art 
could 
follow.
Unconscious-as-such and unformed-as-such became
the object of art.
 This concentration on unconscious went against the
main direction of the historical development of culture
toward an increasing level of consciousness (and as
well, against the great achievements of abstract art
which expanded the consciousness). The “debauchery”
of unconsciousness precipitated demise of abstract
expressionism (and modernism in general).
Postmodernist art emphasized the historic tendency
toward conceptual content accessible to
consciousness, towards an understandable
“message”, even at a price of simplification of its
content. According to the MFT-DL analysis, and in
correspondence with the analysis by Danto (1964)
postmodernist art concentrated on the ubiquitous
nature of aesthetic emotion and its fundamental basis
in every act of perception and cognition. Today, being
distanced by time from politics, commerce, and
shockings of the moment, we can appreciate that a
significant part of Minimalism, Dadaism, and
Conceptualism has been just a pure aesthetic
enjoyment of the availability to cognition of concepts of
the simplest objects and messages. Let me repeat the
previously given explanation of the Buddhist’s
emptiness in terms of the MFT-DL theory: an artist,
like bodhisattva, “wonders at perception of emptiness
in any object” (Dalai Lama, XIV, 1993) that is,
concentrates on an object as a phenomenon, which
concept is accessible to cognition.
Why does Danto (1999) hand “the olive branch” to
Warhol’s “Brillo Boxes” rather than to Duchamp’s
“Fountain”? An answer to this question, of course,
ought to illustrate the main characteristics of any
judgment of taste, its subjectivity and its objectivity.
The subjective aspect is that Danto likes it better. The
objective aspect according to (Danto 1999) is
approximately as follows. Rejecting the previous art
tradition, Duchamp concentrated on “a reaction of
visual indifference with a total absence of good or bad
taste” (Duchamp 1970). And eventually he conceded
his non-aesthetic interests: “I threw... the urinal into
their faces, and now they come and admire it for its
beauty” (Duchamp 1962). Unlike Duchamp, Warhol
“really was moved by the everydayness of everyday
things” (Danto 1999). This pure aesthetic attitude to
everydayness, Danto sees in “Brillo Boxes” “as more
philosophically challenging than the narrower,
anti-aesthetic iconoclasm of Duchamp” (Danto 1999).
The mathematical analysis explaining aesthetic value
of any object and emphasizing this as an important
aspect of postmodernism is in agreement with Danto,
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 16 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
who values the aesthetic of pure and simple
perception of any object in Warhol’s artwork and
identifies this value with the philosophy and art of the
postmodern.
I disagree, however, with McAdoo (2000) who places
Warhol closer to Breughel than to Duchamp, based on
Warhol’s passion for everydayness. This sounds to me
as judging art according to concept. Breughel’s
interest in an everyday object is of totally different
nature than Warhol’s. In deep despair Breughel
observes an everyday person. When young, he
contrasts the ugliness of human “everydayness” with
beauty of the surrounding landscapes. He tries to
wake up people’s dormant KI; he tries to build within
himself a foundation for his own soul. But his attempt
to reconcile with everydayness failed. When older, the
despair dominates his perception, down to a total
ugliness of “Blind Men”. The ugliness of appearance
matches the ugliness of the wretchedness of their
souls. His vision is tragic, which is the opposite of both,
Duchamp and Warhol. Breughel belongs to a culture,
which consciousness has not yet dissociated from the
tragedy of human life, but this is a different story,
which I will return to later. A testimonial to the
complexity of contradictions between philosophy and
historicism I found in Danto (1996): “As an essentialist
in philosophy... art is always the same. But as an
historicist... a work of art at one time cannot be one at
another...”
The enjoyment of concepts of cognition as such is not
new to art. According to Nietzsche (1872), Homeric
poets’ mind has just discovered the power of
concept-models that brings order to chaos of the
surrounding world. This analysis by Nietzsche closely
corresponds to the MFT-DL theory of the evolution of
consciousness (Perlovsky 2007b,g, 2009b, 2010a)
and is confirmed by an analysis of the historical
changes in the conscious contents (Jaynes 1976).
Homeric poets enjoyed the harmony revealed to them
by their cognitive and perceptual functions. Based on
this combination of Nietzsche’s, Jaynes’, and MFT-DL
analyses, I would say that postmodernist artists
attempted to return to the Apollonian consciousness of
Homer. The difference however was in that for
Homeric poets the just discovered conceptual was a
tower, a stone wall reliably defending them from the
chaotic world. Due to conceptual thinking, an ancient
Greek felt himself a master of the world. Not so for the
conceptualist artist of the 20th c., “by the mid 1980s
there seemed... no form of cultural analysis... and no
ironic mode that could do more than take responsibility
for its own impotence.” (Altieri 2001).
The concentration on the very possibility of conscious
perception of an object, in contemporary mind, is
closely linked to a concentration on the inner object,
which is the concept of a “real-world”-object. Here an
artist, while within a relatively safe realm of
consciousness, expands his or her freedom: “the
attention and irony of an artist is concentrated on an
internal object even when is repulsed by it” (Danto
1964). While modernism rushed toward the depth of
self, the opposite tendency of postmodernism rushed
with equal force towards the simplicity of the basics of
aesthetics. These two opposing tendencies,
sometimes combined in conscious and unconscious of
an individual artist, bumped at each other, in a process
that Jung called enantiodromia[ii], and for a moment
annihilated the art object. While intending toward
conceptual, according to Danto’s analysis, an artist of
the 1990s “surrenders to philosophers the task of
articulating its essence” (Danto 1997). Yet, Danto’s
conception of the end of art history does not seem
convincing nor providing “a convincing account of art’s
essential history” (Davies 2001). It seems to me that
artists of the 21st c. will have to extricate the art from
its postmodernist ambivalence between pre-Sophocles
conceptualism and post-Jungian complexity of the self.
The role of the anti-aesthetic in art was much
discussed and a subject of great controversies. It was
at the core of initial difficulties of aesthetic theories in
the 20th c. related to separating art from non-art and
leading to a pessimistic idea of non-definability of art
(Weitz 1956). Without discussing all the aspects of the
problem, I would just mention that Dickie was among
those concluding with an untenable idea that the only
way to define art is empirically, according to the
practice of the art world. He introduced the Institutional
theory of art, first, as what was accepted as art (Dickie
1974), and second as what was intended as art
(Dickie 1984). According to the first definition, as far as
I can see, van Gogh was not an artist during his
lifetime and became one after his death. According to
the second definition, van Gogh letters are not art, and
any writer’s letters published posthumously without
author’s intent (which is unknown) are not art (or were
not art before publishing, but became art after
publishing? in how many copies 2, 3, 1000?).
Institutional theory was much criticized for empiricism
and circularity and yet, according to Matravers (2000),
“there is a remarkable consensus... that something like
this might be right.” Reflecting on forty years of the
British Journal of Aesthetics, it’s Editor Lamarque
(2000) noted that “from the mid-1960s, the debate
(about what is art) settled broadly into two camps:
...the functions of art, and... procedures under which
art was created” and “away from more traditional
emphases” on properties of artwork, “away from either
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 17 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
aesthetic responses or... aesthetic qualities.” The
difficulty in defining art is due to attempts to reconcile
objective and subjective, and to a significant extent
due to anti-aesthetic content introduced into art during
the 20th c. While anti-aesthetic was always a part of art
(e.g., Goya, Brueghel the Elder, Bosch), the
overwhelming influence of the ugly during the 20th c.
led to “a retreat from the aesthetic”. As long as “beauty”
was an essential part of art, the definition of art was
not felt as needed. But what is the role of “ugly” in art?
Is it possible that ugly for one is beautiful for other?
How is it possible that disgusting and disharmonious
could bring an aesthetic satisfaction? Upon a little
thought, an answer might seem simple: an ugly scene
might contain an important moral or political message.
Criminal chronicle, for example, is a source of moral
sweeteners, satisfying a need for compassion and a
need to be convinced once more in the triumph of the
moral principle. But wrong would be those seeing in
these enjoyments a predominant aesthetic basis. They
mostly serve other instincts, not related to
improvement of the inner concept-models. A
distinction between the aesthetic on the one hand and
the moral, political, or other sympathies on the other,
were well appreciated within the aesthetic theory, yet,
in the anti-aesthetic art of the 20th c. there was a
clearly perceived (by many) an irreducible remainder
of an aesthetic nature, as if an “aesthetic ugliness”.
But is not it an oxymoron?
A possibility of negative judgments of tastes, in
particular, in Kant’s aesthetics, was a subject of
intense discussion in this journal and in BJA. In
Thomson’s opinion, ugliness cannot be reconciled with
morality (Thomson, 1992); opposing arguments were
presented by Guyer (1992). Recently, again Shier
(1998) argued that there is no room in Kant’s aesthetic
for negative judgments of taste, with opposing
arguments by Wenzel (1999). I find the arguments
unconvincing, Wenzel’s “negative purposiveness” and
“disharmonious free play” are confusing, or at least not
articulated clearly. This confusion is related to Kant’s
notion of “free play”, where the word “free” indicates
an absence of clear understanding of the mechanism
involved[iii], which is explained in the DL theory as KI.
A negative judgment of taste, for example, occurs
when one sees on a road a cat’s body overrun by a
car. A feeling of disgust, of intense aesthetic
displeasure is related to this sight because it is
disharmonious with our concept-models of meaning. It
reminds us that spiritual meaning and purpose are
limited in the material world by chance. Not the cat we
pity[iv], but ourselves, the dead cat reminds us of our
finiteness in the material world, reminds us about as it
were “insufficient basis” for concept-models of
meaning and purpose of our life and contributes to
destruction rather than improvement of these models.
But, how is it possible, that a similarly disgusting sight
of destruction can be a source of aesthetic pleasure,
when rendered in oil on canvas?
Danto (1964), Levinson (1989), and other authors
have discussed the fact that art perception, in principle,
is related to the entire art culture and its history. I
would like now to analyze deeper the mechanism by
which “ugly” could contribute to the improvement of
the models of meaning and ultimate purpose.
KI, as discussed previously, is a mechanism of
improvement of mind’s internal concept-models for
better correspondences to objects and situations in the
s u r r o u n d i n g  
w o r l d .  
T h i s  
p r o c e s s  
o f
improvement-adaptation can only go on if there is a
perceived imperfection. On the contrary, if there is a
perfect correspondence between the models and
objects, in other words, in a state of “perfect harmony”,
there is no reason for internal change. A myth of
“perfect harmony” appears historically when
philosophers attempt to understand the ideal of beauty.
A theory of beauty founded on KI reveals that a notion
of “perfect harmony” corresponds to the absence of
stimuli in neural networks involved in the adaptation of
concept-models, in making these models clear and
conscious. “Perfect harmony” is an unconscious state
of the primordial unity of human and world, a state
opposite to conscious creative perception that is
necessary for the emergence of the feeling of beauty.
Mental concept-models emerged historically in the
process of separation of human from animal kingdom,
and our “humanization” is related to a slow
development of better and better concepts. Therefore,
new concept-models created by an artist ought to
contradict in some degree to previous concepts, and
consequently, satisfaction of KI is only possible in a
state of broken harmony. “Theoretical harmony”
should not and cannot dictate artist, which objects to
pick and how to render them in artworks; because
everyone has one’s own experience, one’s own
acquired models, one’s own “previous,” and one’s own
“novel.”
Aesthetic enjoyment of ugly and disharmonious is a
complicated feeling related to the tragedy of human
existence. A tragedy in a movie, novel, or on a theater
stage could deeply move us, producing inside us at
once a sad and beautiful emotion. Can we understand
this emotion, if it is experienced in a purified form, if
we consider it separately from a pity or compassion for
the protagonist, as a pure aesthetic mixture of
sadness or despair and beauty? According to the DL
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 18 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
theory, the explanation for this complex mixture of
feelings is in that we at once perceive some
inadequacy of our highest models of meaning but also
a possibility of improving them, and only in this
combination a satisfaction of KI and therefore
experience of the beautiful is possible.
Tragic art was born in Ancient Greece as a
disharmony of human relationships expressed in
music and text of theatrical drama, but touching not
the art of visual forms. The beauty of Ancient Greek
sculptures was based on an ideal of form[v].
Disharmony of visual form as an expression of human
tragedy, which has sometimes been misunderstood in
artworks of Goya and Breughel, only now is being
accepted and justified by aesthetic thought. The
nature of beauty, as perfection of the concepts of
thought, of the faculty of understanding, is unified in
the world of objects, in the world of thoughts, and in
the world of will. In contemporary art, the disharmony
of form, by reaching extreme degrees, addresses the
sleeping instinct for learning. Extreme degrees of the
disharmony of form (like chopping off fingers, dragging
out intestines... shown on movie screens, canvas, or
inspirationally described in a novel) could satisfy those
with dormant aesthetic abilities. However, extreme
disharmony by itself does not inspire the mass
consumer of art, who loses interest in art, nor political
leaders, many of whom are convinced anyway that art
does not matter, nor those seeking the meaning of
existence. High artworks turn to disharmony of
concept-models and the world, to contradictions
between concept-models, in search for new meaning,
not destroying, but creating the image of beauty. Our
mind, faced with the meaninglessness of the world,
demands justification of being, and receives it in the
beautiful, in the nature of “the aesthetic phenomenon”
(Nietzsche, 1872).
Conclusion
As far as we know from Plato (IV BCEb,c), rational
conscious critique of art’s penetration into unconscious
depths of human psyche was began by Socrates. His
demand for rational understanding being an
inseparable part of art, according to Nietzsche (1872)
destroyed the highest achievement of Greek spirit, the
Attic tragedy. This places today’s stakes higher: we
have to remedy what was destroyed, yet preserving
the spirit of Socrates, which is the foundation of the
scientific method. At the highest height of art, a victory
is expected over both subjective and objective,
conscious and unconscious, rational and instinctive. It
is not any longer a philosopher or aesthetician
demanding consciousness from an artist or poet. No.
Despite Eliot’s statement (Eliot 1979) that “art...
performs its function... much better by indifference to
(the various theories)”, the artist, poet, any creative
person feels that unconscious creativity is not possible
any longer, feels a need to combine the intuition with a
rational thought (Croce 1922; Danto 1996). Whereas
centuries ago the gap between theoretical aesthetics
and instinctive creativity was not even noticed by
artists, today an artist is handcuffed by inadequacy of
theoretical thought. Some try to overcome this
oppressive gap between intuition and thought by
experimenting with narcotics, however, fairy-tale
narco-images do not turn into equally impressive
works of art. Creative process beginning in the
Dionysian chaos of the unconscious matter, in fuzzy
models-archetypes making up the biological
foundation of human soul has to transform the fuzzy
archetypes into consciousness of crisp Apollonian
forms, with necessity going through the tragedy of
separation of individual from collective, subjective from
objective, through the catharsis of the liberation of
spirit. The tragic tension of this process is pulling
stronger and stronger with the historic evolution of
forms of consciousness. And searching for a
possibility to combine subjective and objective an artist
turns to philosophy and aesthetics, but in vain, too
often contemporary thought flees the tragedy and
succumbs to the ‘social contract’ of the ‘politically
correct.’
Will cognitive-mathematical analysis of mind help
analyzing the pressing aesthetic questions? Would it
eventually lead to a “rule” prescribing the norms of
beauty? In this paper, I attempted to demonstrate that
contemporary mathematics of mind is not limited to
logical rules with simple “yes” or “no” and can be
useful in the analysis of fundamental issues of
philosophy and aesthetics. The “refusal” of
mathematics to be bound by crisp logic is essential; it
is a natural (for a mathematician) result of the Gödel
theory that logically proved the inconsistency of crisp
logic (1933). As discussed in this paper, dynamic logic
connects unconscious to consciousness. In the
historic development of mind, the role of crisp
conscious logic is ever increasing. We exist in this
dialectical paradox between vague and crisp,
conscious and unconscious, and growing tensions
between 
these 
opposites 
provide 
the
ever-strengthening impetus for the art. This is not
necessarily shocking news for a philosophically
inclined one, but it is good to know that mathematics
does not contradict philosophy; this knowledge may
spare efforts that have periodically been devoted to
doubts and confusion.
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 19 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
A new understanding gained with the help of
cognitive-mathematical theory of mind is that beauty is
a property of hierarchical adaptive systems, capable of
learning and changing at many hierarchical levels. The
notion of beauty is determined by contents of mental
models near the top of the hierarchy, genetically
inherited, transferred through culture and language,
and acquired in individual experience. This hierarchy
is not final, it is ever expanding, and therefore contents
of representations near the top aim at this continuing
expansion without limit. Therefore a computer, before
coming close to the notion of beauty inherent to
human mind, would have to learn and absorb human
individual and cultural experience, including tactile,
bodily experience, and mental models with a
potentially infinite hierarchy. A “formulae of beauty”,
understood as a finite combination of mathematical
signs which meanings are fixed axiomatically, is
impossible, because beauty is not a finite notion. It
involves a mysterious depth, infinity of perfecting our
mental representations of the meaning of life
(Perlovsky 2010g).
Mathematical analysis of the nature of beauty reveals
the historical dialectic of the a priori and adaptive,
penetrating into the interaction of objective and
subjective. It leads to the understanding of the
increasing role of rational and conscious “apollonian”
in beautiful in interaction with unconscious and
instinctual “Dionysian”, as a part of the general historic
process of the evolution of mind and consciousness.
The development of consciousness combining such
diverse principles, individuation and synthesis,
subjective and objective, involves a striving toward the
infinite, a “sweep of the wings of yearning”, the
process as tragic as history itself. It explains the
nature of disharmony in the beauty not as ugly and
disgusting as such, but as a mechanism of creating
new meanings, mechanism of understanding the
infinite “aimless” purpose of our existence – improving
our internal image of Self.
References
1.Aiken, N. 1998, The Biological Origins of Art,
Praeger. 
2.Altieri, C. 2001, Book Review, JAAC, 59(1),
pp.103-105.
3.Anichkov, E. Aesthetics, in Enciclopedic Dictionary,
F.Brokhause & I.Efron, St.Peterburg, Russia, 1904
(Russian).
4.Aristotle, (IV BC). Metaphysics. In the Complete
Works of Aristotle, Ed.J.Barnes, Bollingen Series,
1995, Princeton, NJ.
5.Arnheim, R. 2001, What it Means to be Creative,
BJA, 41(1), pp.24-25.
6.Bar, M., Kassam, K. S., Ghuman, A. S., Boshyan, J.,
Schmid, A. M., Dale, et al.. (2006). Top-down
facilitation of visual recognition. USA: Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 103, 449-54.
7.Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual Symbol Systems,
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577–660. Carroll,
N. 2000, Art and the Domain of the Aesthetic, BJA,
40(2), pp.191-208
8.Baumgarten 1750. Aesthetics.
9.Boole, G. 1847, The Mathematical Analysis of Logic,
St.Augustine Press, 1998.
10.Budd, M. The Pure Judgment of Taste as an
Aesthetic Reflective Judgment, Brit J Aesthetics 2001
41: 247-260
11.Carroll, N. 2000, Art and the Domain of the
Aesthetic, BJA, 40(2), pp.191-208
12.Carroll, N. 2002, Aesthetic Experience Revisited,
Brit J Aesthetics, 42: 145-168
13.Carroll, N. 2006, Ethics and Aesthetics: Replies to
Dickie, Stecker, and Livingston, Brit J Aesthetics, 46:
82-95
14.Croce, B. 1922, Intuition, Technique and the
Classification of Art, in Ph.Alperson, ed., The
Philosophy of the Visual Art, Oxford. Univ. Press, NY,
1992.
15.Dalai Lama, XIV, 1993, The Buddism of Tibet, ed.
J.Hopkins, Snow Lion Pub., Ithaca, NY.
16.Danto, A. 1964, The Artworld, in Ph.Alperson, ed.,
The Philosophy of the Visual Art, Oxford. Univ. Press,
NY, 1992.
17.Danto, A. 1996, From Aesthetics to Art Criticism
and Back, JAAC, 54(2), pp.105-115.
18.Danto, A. In (1996, pp.105-115) Danto calls
disinterestedness and not the purposiveness “The
First Dogma of Aesthetics”; in his analysis (p.112) he
assumes that in Kantian aesthetics practical
usefulness diminishes beauty, which of course is
incorrect.
19.Danto, A. 1997, After the End of Art: Contemporary
Art and the Pale of History, Princeton Univ. Press,
Princeton, NJ.
20.Danto, A. 1999, Philosophizing Art: Selected
Essays, Univ. California Press, Berkeley, CA.
21.Danto, A. 2001, Symposium: The Historicity of the
Eye, JAAC, 59(1), pp.1-9.
22.Davies, S. 2001, Book Review, JAAC, 59(1).
23.Davies, S. 2004, The Cluster Theory Of Art, Brit J
Aesthetics, 44: 297-300
24.De Duve, T. 1996, Clement Greenberg Between
the Lines, (Paris: Editions Dis Voir, tr. B., Holmes). 
25.Deming, R., Perlovsky, L.I. (2005). A Mathematical
Theory for Learning, and its Application to
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 20 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
Time-varying Computed Tomography. New Math. and
Natural Computation. 1(1), 147-171.   
26.Deming, R.W. and Perlovsky, L.I. (2007).
Concurrent multi-target localization, data association, 
and navigation for a swarm of flying sensors,
Information Fusion, 8, 316-330.   
27.Dickie, G. 1984, The Art Circle, Haven, New York,
NY.Dickie, G. 1964, The Myth of the Aesthetic Attitude,
In Ph. Alperson, ed. The Philosophy of the Visual Art,
Oxford. Univ. Press, NY, 1992
28.Dickie, G. 1974, What Is Art: An Institutional
Analysis, in Ph.Alperson, ed., The Philosophy of the
Visual Art, Oxford. Univ. Press, NY, 1992.
29.Dickie, G. 2004, Reading Sibley, Brit J Aesthetics,
44: 408-412
30.Duchamp, M. In 1970, H.H.Arnason, History of
Modern Art, Prentice Hall, England Cliffs, N.J., p.229.
31.Duchamp, M. In 1962, H.Richter, Dada: Art and
Anti-Art, Thames and Hudson, 1966, London, p.207.
32.Eliot, T.S. 1979, The Function of Criticism, in
Selected Prose of T.S. Eliot, ed. F. Kermode, Faber,
London.
33.Fontanari, J.F. and Perlovsky, L.I. (2004). Solvable
null model for the distribution of word frequencies.
Physical Review E 70, 042901 (2004).   
34.Fontanari, J.F. and Perlovsky, L.I. (2007). Evolving
Compositionality in Evolutionary Language Games.
IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computations,
11(6), 758-769; doi:10.1109/TEVC.2007.892763   
35.Fontanari, J.F. and Perlovsky, L.I. (2008a). How
language can help discrimination in the Neural
Modeling Fields framework. Neural Networks, 21(2-3),
250–256   
36.Fontanari, J.F. and Perlovsky, L.I. (2008b). A game
theoretical approach to the evolution of structured
communication codes, Theory in Biosciences, 127,
2 0 5 - 2 1 4 ,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12064-008-0024-1.   
37.Fontanari, F.J., Tikhanoff, V., Cangelosi, A., Ilin, R.,
and Perlovsky, L.I.. (2009). Cross-situational learning
of object–word mapping using Neural Modeling Fields.
Neural Networks, 22 (5-6), 579-585   
38.Gaiger, J. 1999, Constraints and Conventions: Kant
and Greenberg on Aesthetic Judgment, British Journal
of Aesthetics, 39(4), p.376-391.
39.Gaut, B. 2000, ‘Art’ as a Cluster Concept, in Noël
Carroll (ed.), Theories of Art Today. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press, pp. 25-44
40.Gaut, B. 2005, The Cluster Account of Art
Defended, Brit J Aesthetics, 45: 273-288
41.Gödel, K. 1986, Kurt Gödel collected works, ed.
S.Feferman at al, Oxford University Press.
42.Greenberg, C. 1999, Homemade Esthetics:
Observations on Art and Taste, Oxford: Oxford Univ.
Press.
43.Grossberg, S. (1982). Studies of Mind and Brain.
D.Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht, Holland.
44.Grossberg, S. & Levine, D.S. (1987). Neural
dynamics of attentionally modulated Pavlovian
conditioning: blocking, inter-stimulus interval, and
secondary reinforcement. Psychobiology, 15(3),
pp.195-240.
45.Guyau, J.M. 1884/2010, Les problemes
d’esthetique contemporaine. Nabu Press (French).
46.Guyer, P. 1992, Thomson’s Problem with Kant: A
Comment on “Kant’s Problems with Ugliness”, JAAC,
50(4), pp.317-319.
47.Guyer. P. Ed. 1992.The Cambridge companion to
Kant, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
48.Guyer, P. 1997, Kant and the Claims of Taste,
Cambridge U.P., Cambridge.
49.Hartmann, v. E. 1904, In V. Soloviov, Aesthetics,
Encyclopedic Dictionary, ed. F.Brokhause & I.Efron,
St.Peterburg, Russia, (Russian). (find on Amazon)
50.Ilin, R. & Perlovsky, L.I. (2010). Cognitively Inspired
Neural Network for Recognition of Situations.
International Journal of Natural Computing Research,
1(1), 36-55.   
51.Jaynes, J. 1976, The Origin of Consciousness in
the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind. Houghton
Mifflin Co., Boston, MA.
52.Jung, C.G., 1921, Psychological Types. In the
Collected Works, v.6, Bollingen Series XX, 1971,
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
53.Jung, C.G. 1934, Archetypes of the Collective
Unconscious. In the Collected Works, v.9,II, Bollingen
Series XX, 1969, Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ.
54.Kant, I. 1790, The Critique of Judgment, tr.
J.H.Bernard, Prometheus Books, Amherst, NY.
55.Kemp, G. 1999, The Aesthetic Attitude, BJA, 39(4),
pp.392-399.
56.Kovalerchuk, B. & Perlovsky, L.I. (2008). Dynamic
Logic of Phenomena and Cognition. IJCNN 2008,
Hong Kong, 3530-3537.   
57.Kozma, R., Puljic, M., and Perlovsky, L. (2009).
Modeling goal-oriented decision making through
cognitive phase transitions, New Mathematics and
Natural Computation, 5(1), 143-157.   
58.Kuhns, R. 2001, Book Review, JAAC, 59(1),
pp.97-99.
59.Lamarque, P. 2000, The British Journal of
Aesthetics: Forty Years On, BJA, 40(1), pp.1-20.
60.Levine, D.S., Perlovsky, L.I. (2008). Neuroscientific
Insights on Biblical Myths: Simplifying Heuristics
versus Careful Thinking: Scientific Analysis of
Millennial Spiritual Issues. Zygon, Journal of Science
and Religion, 43(4), 797-821.   
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 21 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
61.Levinson, L. 2002, The Irreducible Historicality of
the Concept of Art, Brit J Aesthetics, 42: 367-379
62.Levinson, J. 1989, Refining Art Historically, JAAC,
47(1), pp.21-33
63.Linnehan, R., Brady, D., Schindler, J., Perlovsky,
L., Rangaswamy, M. (2007). On the Design of SAR
Apertures Using the Cram´er-Rao Bound. IEEE
Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems,
43(1), 344-355.   
64.Livingston, P. 2003, On an Apparent Truism in
Aesthetics, Brit J Aesthetics, 43: 260-278
65.Machlup & U. Mansfield, J.Wiley, New York, NY.
66.Matravers, D. 2003, The Aesthetic Experience, Brit
J Aesthetics, 43: 158-174
67.Matravers, D. 2007, Institutional Definitions And
Reasons, The British Journal Of Aesthetics,
47(3):251-257
68.Matravers, D. 2000, The Institutional Theory: A
Protean Creature, BJA, 40(2), pp.242-250.
69.Mayorga, R., Perlovsky, L.I., Eds. (2008). Sapient
Systems. Springer, London, UK.  
70.McAdoo, N. 2000, Book Review, JAAC, 40(4),
pp.505-508.
71.Michelangelo, in C.E. Gilbert, tr., and R.N. Linscott,
ed., Complete Poems and Selected Letters of
Michelangelo, Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ,
1980.
72.Newell, A. 1983, Intellectual issues in the history of
artificial intelligence, in The Study of Information, ed. F. 
73.Nietzsche, F. 1872, The Birth of Tragedy, tr.
F.Golffing, Doubleday, Garden City, NY, 1956.
74.O’Hear, A. 2000. Review of Aiken 1998, BJA,
40(3), pp.390-391, 2000.
75.Perlovsky, L.I. (1987). Multiple sensor fusion and
neural networks. DARPA Neural Network Study,
1987.   
76.Perlovsky, L.I. (1988a). Cramer-Rao Bounds for the
Estimation of Means in a Clustering Problem. Pattern
Recognition Letters 8, 1-3.   
77.Perlovsky, L.I. (1989b). Cramer-Rao Bounds for the
Estimation of Normal Mixtures. Pattern Recognition
Letters, 10, 141-148.   
78.Perlovsky, L.I. & McManus, M.M. (1991). Maximum
Likelihood Neural Networks for Sensor Fusion and
Adaptive Classification. Neural Networks 4 (1),
89-102.   
79.Perlovsky, L.I. & Marzetta, T.L. (1992). Estimating
a Covariance Matrix from Incomplete Independent
Realizations of a Random Vector. IEEE Trans. on SP,
40 (8), 2097-2100.   
80.Perlovsky, L.I. (1994a). Computational Concepts in
Classification: Neural Networks, Statistical Pattern
Recognition, and Model Based Vision. Journal of
Mathematical Imaging and Vision, 4 (1), 81-110.   
81.Perlovsky, L.I. (1994b). A Model Based Neural
Network for Transient Signal Processing, Neural
Networks, 7(3), 565-572.   
82.Perlovsky, L.I., Coons, R. P., Streit, R.L., Luginbuhl,
T.E., Greineder, S. (1994). Application of MLANS to
Signal Classification. Journal of Underwater Acoustics,
44 (2), 783-809.   
83.Perlovsky, L.I. & Jaskolski, J.V. (1994). Maximum
Likelihood Adaptive Neural Controller. Neural
Networks, 7 (4), 671-680.  84.Perlovsky, L.I., Chernick,
J.A. & Schoendorf, W.H. (1995a). Multi-Sensor ATR
and Identification Friend or Foe Using MLANS. Neural
Networks, 8 (7/8), 1185-1200.   
85.Perlovsky, L.I., Schoendorf, W.H., Tye, D.M.,
Chang, W. (1995b). Concurrent Classification and
Tracking Using Maximum Likelihood Adaptive Neural
System. Journal of Underwater Acoustics, 45(2),
399-414.    
86.Perlovsky, L.I. (1997). Cramer-Rao Bound for
Tracking in Clutter and Tracking Multiple Objects.
Pattern Recognition Letters, 18(3), 283-288.   
87.Perlovsky, L.I. (1997). Physical Concepts of
Intellect. Proceedings of Russian Academy of
Sciences, 354(3), 320-323.   
88.Perlovsky, L.I., Plum, C.P., Franchi, P.R.,
Tichovolsky, E.J., Choi, D.S., & Weijers, B. (1997a).
Einsteinian Neural Network for Spectrum Estimation.
Neural Networks, 10(9), 1541-46.    
89.Perlovsky, L.I., Schoendorf, W.H., Garvin, L.C.,
Chang. (1997b). Development of Concurrent
Classification and Tracking for Active Sonar. Journal
of Underwater Acoustics, 47(2), 375-388.    
90.Perlovsky, L.I., Schoendorf, W.H., Burdick, B.J. &
Tye, D.M. (1997c). Model-Based Neural Network for
Target Detection in SAR Images. IEEE Trans. on
Image Processing, 6(1), 203-216.
91.Perlovsky, L.I. (1998a). Cramer-Rao Bound for
Tracking in Clutter. In Probabilistic Multi-Hypothesis
Tracking, Ed. R.L. Streit, NUWC Press, Newport, RI,
77-84   
92.Perlovsky, L.I., Webb, V.H., Bradley, S.A., Hansen,
C.A (1998a). Improved ROTHR Detection and
Tracking 
using 
MLANS. 
In 
Probabilistic
Multi-Hypothesis Tracking, Ed. R.L. Streit, NUWC
Press, Newport, RI, 245-254.   
93.Perlovsky, L.I. (1998b). Conundrum of
Combinatorial Complexity. IEEE Trans. PAMI, 20(6)
666-670. 
94.Perlovsky, L.I., Webb, V.H., Bradley, S.R. &
Hansen, C.A. (1998b). Improved ROTHR Detection
and Tracking Using MLANS . AGU Radio Science,
33(4), 1034-44.   
95.Perlovsky, L. I. (1998c). Computational Complexity
and the Origin of Universals. Proc. World Congress on
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 22 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
Philosophy, Boston, MA.Perlovsky, L.I. (2000). Beauty
and mathematical Intellect. Zvezda, 2000(9), 190-201
(Russian)  
96.Perlovsky, L.I. (2001). Neural Networks and
Intellect: using model-based concepts. Oxford
University Press, New York, NY (3rd printing).    
97.Perlovsky, L.I. (2002a). Physical Theory of
Information Processing in the Mind: concepts and
emotions. SEED On Line Journal, 2002 2(2), 36-54.   
98.Perlovsky, L.I. (2002b). Statistical Limitations on
Molecular Evolution. Journal of Biomolecular Structure
& Dynamics, 19(6), 1031-43.   
99.Perlovsky, L.I. (2002c). Aesthetics and
mathematical theories of intellect. Iskusstvoznanie,
2/02, 558-594 (Russian).   
100.Perlovsky, L.I. (2004). Integrating Language and
Cognition. IEEE Connections, Feature Article, 2(2),
8-12.   
101.Perlovsky, L.I. (2005). Evolving Agents:
Communication and Cognition. In Autonomous
Intelligent Systems: Agents and Data Mining. Eds: V.
Gorodetsky, J. Liu, V.A. Skormin. Springer-Verlag
GmbH, 37-49   
102.Perlovsky, L.I. (2006a). Toward Physics of the
Mind: Concepts, Emotions, Consciousness, and
Symbols. Phys. Life Rev. 3(1), 22-55.   
103.Perlovsky, L.I. (2006b). Fuzzy Dynamic Logic.
New Math. and Natural Computation, 2(1), 43-55.   
104.Perlovsky, L.I. (2006c). Music – The First Priciple.
Musical Theatre,
http://www.ceo.spb.ru/libretto/kon_lan/ogl.shtml   
105.Perlovsky, L.I. and Deming, R.W. (2007). Neural
Networks for Improved Tracking, IEEE Trans. Neural
Networks, 18(6), 1854-1857.   
106.Perlovsky, L.I. (2007a). Cognitive high level
information fusion, Information Sciences, 177,
2099-2118.   
107.Perlovsky, L.I. (2007b). Evolution of Languages,
Consciousness, and Cultures. IEEE Computational
Intelligence Magazine, 2(3), 25-39   
108.Perlovsky, L.I. (2007c). The Mind vs. Logic:
Aristotle and Zadeh. Society for Mathematics of
Uncertainty, Critical Review, 1(1), 30-33.   
109.Perlovsky, L.I., Kozma, R., Eds. (2007a).
Neurodynamics of Higher-Level Cognition and
Consciousness. 
Springer-Verlag, 
Heidelberg,
Germany.   
110.Perlovsky, L.I. (2007d). Modeling Field Theory of
Higher Cognitive Functions. In Artificial Cognition
Systems, Eds. A. Loula, R. Gudwin, J. Queiroz. Idea
Group, Hershey, PA, 64-105.   
111.Perlovsky, L.I. (2007e). Symbols: Integrated
Cognition and Language. In Semiotics and Intelligent
Systems Development. Eds. R. Gudwin, J. Queiroz.
Idea Group, Hershey, PA, 121-151.   
112.Perlovsky, L.I. (2007f). Neural Networks, Fuzzy
Models and Dynamic Logic. In Aspects of Automatic
Text Analysis (Festschrift in Honor of Burghard
Rieger), Eds. R. Köhler and A. Mehler, Springer,
Germany, 363-386.   
113.Perlovsky, L., Kozma, R. (2007b). Editorial -
Neurodynamics of Cognition and Consciousness, In
Neurodynamics of Cognition and Consciousness,
Perlovsky, L., Kozma, R. (eds), ISBN
978-3-540-73266-2, Springer Verlag, Heidelberg,
Germany.   
114.Perlovsky, L.I. (2007g). Neural Dynamic Logic of
Consciousness: the Knowledge Instinct. In
Neurodynamics of Higher-Level Cognition and
Consciousness, Eds. Perlovsky, L.I., Kozma, R. ISBN
978-3-540-73266-2, Springer Verlag, Heidelberg,
Germany.   
115.Perlovsky, L.I. (2008a). Sapience, Consciousness,
and the Knowledge Instinct. (Prolegomena to a
Physical Theory). In Sapient Systems, Eds. Mayorga,
R., Perlovsky, L.I., Springer, London.   
116.Perlovsky, L.I. and Mayorga, R. (2008). Preface.
In Sapient Systems, Eds. Mayorga, R., Perlovsky, L.I.,
Springer, London. 117.Perlovsky, L.I. (2008b). Music
and Consciousness, Leonardo, Journal of Arts,
Sciences and Technology, 41(4), 420-421.   
118.Deming R., Schindler J., Perlovsky L. (2009).
Multitarget/Multisensor Tracking using only Range and
Doppler Measurements, IEEE Transactions on
Aerospace and Electronic Systems, 45 (2), 593-611.   
119.Perlovsky, L.I. (2009a). Language and Cognition.
N e u r a l  
N e t w o r k s ,  
2 2 ( 3 ) ,  
2 4 7 - 2 5 7 .  
doi:10.1016/j.neunet.2009.03.007.   
120.Perlovsky, L.I. (2009b). Language and Emotions:
Emotional Sapir-Whorf Hypothesis. Neural Networks,
22(5-6); 518-526. doi:10.1016/j.neunet.2009.06.034   
121.Perlovsky, L.I. (2009c). ‘Vague-to-Crisp’ Neural
Mechanism of Perception. IEEE Trans. Neural
Networks, 20(8), 1363-1367.  
122.Perlovsky, L.I. (2010a). Musical emotions:
Functions, origin, evolution. Physics of Life Reviews,
7(1), 2-27. doi:10.1016/j.plrev.2009.11.001    
123. Perlovsky, L.I. (2010b). Intersections of
Mathematical, Cognitive, and Aesthetic Theories of
Mind, Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the
Arts, 4(1), 11-17. doi: 10.1037/a0018147.   
124.Perlovsky, L.I. (2010c). Neural Mechanisms of the
Mind, Aristotle, Zadeh, & fMRI, IEEE Trans. Neural
Networks, 21(5), 718-33.   
125.Perlovsky, L.I. (2010d). The Mind is not a Kludge,
Skeptic, 15(3), 51-55   
126.Perlovsky, L.I. & Ilin, R. (2010a). Neurally and
Mathematically Motivated Architecture for Language
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 23 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
and Thought. Special Issue "Brain and Language
Architectures: Where We are Now?" The Open
N e u r o i m a g i n g  
J o u r n a l ,  
4 ,  
7 0 - 8 0 .
http://www.bentham.org/open/tonij/openaccess2.htm   
127.Perlovsky L.I. & Ilin, R. (2010b). Grounded
symbols in the brain. IEEE World Congress on
Computational Intelligence (WCCI’10), Barcelona,
Spain; arXiv; WebmedCentral.
128.Perlovsky, L.I, Bonniot-Cabanac, M.-C., &
Cabanac, M. (2010). Curiosity and pleasure, arXive
1010.3009.   
129.Perlovsky, L.I. (2010e). Science and Religion:
Scientific Understanding of Emotions of Religiously
Sublime, arXive.   
130.Perlovsky, L.I. (2010f). Jihadism and Grammars.
Comment to “Lost in Translation,” Wall Street Journal,
J u n e  
2 7 ,
http://online.wsj.com/community/leonid-perlovsky/activi
ty   
131.Perlovsky, L.I. (2010g). Joint Acquisition of
Language 
and 
Cognition; 
WebmedCentral
B R A I N ; 1 ( 1 0 ) : W M C 0 0 9 9 4 ;
http://www.webmedcentral.com/article_view/994   
132.Perlovsky, L.I. (2010h). Freedom of will, arXive.
133.Perlovsky, L.I. (2010). Dynamic logic;
http://www.scitopics.com/Dynamic_logic.html   
134.Perlovsky, L.I. (2010). Dynamic logic,
computational complexity, engineering and
m a t h e m a t i c a l  
b r e a k t h r o u g h s ;
http://www.scitopics.com/Dynamic_logic_computation
al_complexity_engineering_and_mathematical_
breakthroughs.html   
135.Perlovsky, L.I. (2010). Dynamic Logic. Cognitive
B r e a k t h r o u g h s ;
http://www.scitopics.com/Dynamic_Logic_Cognitive_B
reakthroughs.html   
136.Perlovsky, L.I. (2010). Mind mechanisms:
concepts, emotions, instincts, imagination, intuition,
b e a u t i f u l ,  
s p i r i t u a l l y  
s u b l i m e ;
http://www.scitopics.com/Mind_mechanisms_concepts
_emotions_instincts_imagination_intuition_beautiful_
spiritually_sublime.html 
137.Perlovsky, L.I. (2010). Language and Cognition.
I n t e r a c t i o n  
M e c h a n i s m s ;
http://www.scitopics.com/Language_and_Cognition_In
teraction_Mechanisms.html   
138.Perlovsky, L.I. (2010). Languages and Cultures:
Emotional Sapir-Whorf Hypothesis (ESWH);
http://www.scitopics.com/Languages_and_Cultures_E
motional_Sapir_Whorf_Hypothesis_ESWH.html   
139.Perlovsky, L.I. (2010). Jihad and Arabic Language.
How Cognitive Science Can Help Us Understand the
W a r  
o n  
T e r r o r ;
http://www.scitopics.com/Jihad_and_Arabic_Language
_How_Cognitive_Science_Can_Help_Us_Understand
_
the_War_on_Terror.html   
140.Perlovsky, L.I. (2010). Music and Emotions.
F u n c t i o n s ,  
O r i g i n s ,  
E v o l u t i o n ;
http://www.scitopics.com/Music_and_Emotions_Functi
ons_Origins_Evolution.html   
141.Perlovsky, L.I. (2010). Beauty and art. Cognitive
f u n c t i o n  
a n d  
e v o l u t i o n ;
http://www.scitopics.com/Beauty_and_art_Cognitive_f
unction_and_evolution.html   
142.Perlovsky, L.I. (2010). New “Arrow of Time”:
E v o l u t i o n  
i n c r e a s e s  
k n o w l e d g e ;
http://www.scitopics.com/New_Arrow_of_Time_Evoluti
on_increases_knowledge.html   
143.Perlovsky, L.I. (2010). Science and Religion: New
cognitive findings bridge the fundamental gap;
http://www.scitopics.com/Science_and_Religion_New
_cognitive_findings_bridge_the_fundamental_gap.html
   
144.Plato. (IV BCa). Cratylus. Tr. C.D.C.Reeve in
Plato, ed. L.Cooper, Oxford University Press, New
York, NY.
145.Plato. (IV BCb). Parmenides. Trans. in Plato, L.
Cooper, Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
146.Plato. (IV BCc). Republic. Trans. in Plato, L.
Cooper, Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
147.Putnam, H. 1988, Representation and Reality,
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
148.Schiller, F. 1895/1993, In Essays, German Library,
v. 17, ed. W.Hinderer and D.Dahlstrom, Continuum
Pub Group.
149.Scruton, R. 1974, Art and Imagination, Routledge,
London.
150.Scruton, R. 2007, In Search of the Aesthetic, The
British Journal of Aesthetics, 47(3):232-250
151.Shier, D. 1998, Why Kant Finds Nothing Ugly,
BJA, 38(4), pp.412-418.
152.Spencer, H. 1891, In Essays, Scientific, Political
and Speculative, Williams & Norgate, London. 
Stecker, R. 2001, Only Jerome: a Reply to Noël
Carroll, BJA, 41(1), pp.76-80.
153.Stolnitz, J. 1960, The Aesthetic Attitude, In Ph.
Alperson, ed. The Philosophy of the Visual Art, Oxford.
Univ. Press, NY, 1992.
154.Thomson, G. 1992, Kant’s problem with ugliness,
JAAC, 50(2), pp.107-115.
155.Tikhanoff. V., Fontanari, J. F., Cangelosi, A. &
Perlovsky, L. I. (2006). Language and cognition
integration through modeling field theory: category
formation for symbol grounding. In Book Series in
Computer Science, v. 4131, Heidelberg: Springer.   
156.Walton, K.L.1970, Categories of Art, in
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 24 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
Ph.Alperson, ed., The Philosophy of the Visual Art,
Oxford. Univ. Press, NY, 1992
157.Weitz, M. 1956, The Role of Theory in Aesthetics,
JAAC, 15, pp.27-33.
158.Wenzel, C. 1999, Kant Finds Nothing Ugly?, BJA,
39(4), pp.416-422.
159.Wittgenstein, L. 1921, Tractatus Logico
Philosophicus, Routlege, 1981.
160.Zangwill, N. 1995, Kant on Pleasure in the
Agreeable, JAAC, 53(2); 1995, Groundrules in the
Philosophy of Art, Philosophy, 70.
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 25 of 26

WMC001322
Downloaded from http://www.webmedcentral.com on 23-Dec-2010, 05:43:32 PM
Disclaimer
This article has been downloaded from WebmedCentral. With our unique author driven post publication peer
review, contents posted on this web portal do not undergo any prepublication peer or editorial review. It is
completely the responsibility of the authors to ensure not only scientific and ethical standards of the manuscript
but also its grammatical accuracy. Authors must ensure that they obtain all the necessary permissions before
submitting any information that requires obtaining a consent or approval from a third party. Authors should also
ensure not to submit any information which they do not have the copyright of or of which they have transferred
the copyrights to a third party.
Contents on WebmedCentral are purely for biomedical researchers and scientists. They are not meant to cater to
the needs of an individual patient. The web portal or any content(s) therein is neither designed to support, nor
replace, the relationship that exists between a patient/site visitor and his/her physician. Your use of the
WebmedCentral site and its contents is entirely at your own risk. We do not take any responsibility for any harm
that you may suffer or inflict on a third person by following the contents of this website.
Webmedcentral > Research articles
Page 26 of 26

