
Audiology Answers for 
Otolaryngologists
 


Audiology Answers for 
Otolaryngologists
Michael Valente, PhD
Director, Division of Audiology
Department of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery 
Washington University School of Medicine
Saint Louis, Missouri
Elizabeth Fernandez, AuD
Clinical Audiologist, BJC Medical Group
Ballas ENT Consultants
Saint Louis, Missouri  
Heather Monroe, AuD
Clinical Audiologist, Dizziness and Balance Center
Department of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery 
Washington University School of Medicine
Saint Louis, Missouri
Thieme
New York ● Stuttgart

Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc.
333 Seventh Avenue
New York, NY 10001
Acquisitions Editor: Beth Campbell and Emily Ekle
Managing Editor: Dominik Pucek
Editorial Director: Michael Wachinger
Production Editor: Marcy Ross, MPS Content Services
International Production Director: Andreas Schabert
Compositor: MPS Content Services, A Macmillan Company
Printer: Sheridan Press
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Valente, Michael.
  Audiology answers for otolaryngologists / Michael Valente, Elizabeth Fernandez, Heather Monroe.
    p. ; cm.
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  Summary: “Audiology Answers is designed to supplement and reinforce the audiology compo-
nent of the otolaryngology/ENT resident training program. In addition, this book will be useful for 
medical students doing otolaryngology clerkships, physicians of all specialties who see patients for 
ear problems, and students enrolled in undergraduate communication sciences and graduate-level 
speech-language pathology programs. Audiology students will also appreciate this quick-reference 
source early in their training. The book will be written in Q/A format and generously illustrated. 
The most commonly performed diagnostic tests will be covered, with emphasis given to those top-
ics that may be encountered in daily practice and that are most likely to appear on the otolaryngol-
ogy board exam”—Provided by publisher.
  ISBN 978-1-60406-357-8 (alk. paper)
  1.  Audiology—Examinations, questions, etc. 2.  Otolaryngology—Examinations, questions, etc. 
I. Fernandez, Elizabeth, 1983-  II. Monroe, Heather.  III. Title.
  [DNLM: 1.  Hearing Disorders—Handbooks.  2.  Audiology—methods—Handbooks.  3.  Hear-
ing Impaired Persons—rehabilitation—Handbooks.  4.  Hearing Tests—Handbooks.  WV 39 V154a 
2011]
  RF291.3.V35 2011
  617.80076—dc22
Copyright © 2011 by Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc. This book, including all parts thereof, is le-
gally protected by copyright. Any use, exploitation, or commercialization outside the narrow limits 
set by copyright legislation without the publisher’s consent is illegal and liable to prosecution. 
This applies in particular to photostat reproduction, copying, mimeographing or duplication of any 
kind, translating, preparation of microfilms, and electronic data processing and storage.
Important note: Medical knowledge is ever-changing. As new research and clinical experience 
broaden our knowledge, changes in treatment and drug therapy may be required. The authors and 
editors of the material herein have consulted sources believed to be reliable in their efforts to pro-
vide information that is complete and in accord with the standards accepted at the time of publica-
tion. However, in view of the possibility of human error by the authors, editors, or publisher of the 
work herein or changes in medical knowledge, neither the authors, editors, nor publisher, nor any 
other party who has been involved in the preparation of this work, warrants that the information 
contained herein is in every respect accurate or complete, and they are not responsible for any er-
rors or omissions or for the results obtained from use of such information. Readers are encouraged 
to confirm the information contained herein with other sources. For example, readers are advised 
to check the product information sheet included in the package of each drug they plan to admin-
ister to be certain that the information contained in this publication is accurate and that changes 
have not been made in the recommended dose or in the contraindications for administration. This 
recommendation is of particular importance in connection with new or infrequently used drugs.
Some of the product names, patents, and registered designs referred to in this book are in fact reg-
istered trademarks or proprietary names even though specific reference to this fact is not always 
made in the text. Therefore, the appearance of a name without designation as proprietary is not to 
be construed as a representation by the publisher that it is in the public domain.
Printed in the United States of America
5 4 3 2 1
ISBN 978-1-60406-357-8

v
Contents
Foreword by Joel Goebel and Timothy E. Hullar . .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . .  vii
Foreword by J. Gail Neely . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  ix
Preface . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  xi
Acknowledgments . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  xiii
	 1	 Psychoacoustics . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
	 2	 Audiometric Testing . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
	 3	 Vestibular Evaluation . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  42
	 4	 Amplification . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  75
Index . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  97


vii
Foreword
Patients seeking care from otolaryngologists for hearing and balance complaints 
commonly present with complex problems, sometimes affecting multiple organ 
systems. A team approach is often the best way to diagnose and treat these condi-
tions. Included on such a team with the otolaryngologist are audiologists, speech 
and language therapists, physical therapists, nurses, social workers, and physicians 
from a wide range of other specialties.
The audiologist plays a critical role in the team approach to managing these 
challenging patients. Growth in our understanding of hearing and balance disor-
ders has accompanied increasing sophistication in audiology training programs, 
including the recent development of the AuD doctoral degree. This expanding body 
of knowledge challenges the otolaryngologist to remain current with the assess-
ment and treatment methods of our audiologic colleagues. In this light, Audiology 
Answers for Otolaryngologists offers a concise reference for otolaryngologists and 
other team members regarding the terminology and methodology of a variety of 
auditory and vestibular assessment and rehabilitative options. The question-and-
answer format provides for easy readability and the references for each section 
give the reader access to more detailed information.
Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists builds on the rich history of audio-
logic research and teaching at Washington University and the affiliated Central 
Institute for the Deaf (CID). Since 1914, CID has been a center for educating chil-
dren with deafness, researching the causes and treatments of deafness, instructing 
teachers of the deaf, and training audiologists. This guidebook is an emblem of the 
tradition of excellence of these two institutions individually, and of the synergy 
between them.
We sincerely appreciate the work that Mike Valente, PhD, Elizabeth Fernan-
dez, AuD, and Heather Monroe, AuD, and others have put into this guidebook, and 
we are confident that it will help us all deliver more effective patient care in the 
future.
Joel Goebel, MD, FACS 
Professor and Vice Chairman 
Residency Program Director 
Dizziness and Balance Center Director 
Department of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery
Washington University School of Medicine 
Saint Louis, Missouri
Timothy E. Hullar, MD, FACS 
Assistant Professor 
Department of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery 
Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology
Program in Audiology and Communication Sciences
Washington University School of Medicine 
Saint Louis, Missouri


ix
Foreword
Fundamental to the practice of otology and neurotology is audiology. An expert 
audiologist is a crucial member of the team. Certainly, audiology and otology/neu-
rotology are uniquely different fields, audiology for the precise identification of 
site of lesion and degree of lesion within the auditory system and otology/neu-
rotology for the determination of the cause of the lesion. Aural rehabilitation re-
quires special expertise from both. The idea that either field alone can deliver the 
best possible care or that conflict between the two is productive is a “fatal flaw” 
in the design of a best practice. A team is much more than a word; it takes mutual 
respect and a working knowledge of the other’s field. Teams don’t occur by chance; 
they are laboriously built. Respect for expertise is dependent upon the achieve-
ment of personal expertise and experience with some of the practices and pitfalls 
inherent within the other’s field. 
In this regard, those of us with the mission to train future otolaryngologists 
must make the necessary resident schedule changes and facilitate exposure and 
proper training in audiology. Mike Valente, PhD, Elizabeth Fernandez, AuD, and 
Heather Monroe, AuD, working with our residents and otology/neurotology fac-
ulty over the last several years, have developed and field-tested Audiology Answers 
for Otolaryngologists. The organization of this work in a question-and-answer for-
mat allows quick searches for germane questions and hopefully will inspire expan-
sion of this “living document.” Drs. Valente, Fernandez, and Monroe have a long 
track record of providing comprehensive audiologic education to all those seeking 
a better understanding of this expansive field. We are very fortunate to be able to 
have them as integral members of our practice/research/education team.
J. Gail Neely, MD, FACS
Director, Otology/Neurotology/Base of Skull Surgery
Washington University School of Medicine
Saint Louis, Missouri
 


xi
Preface
A unique collaboration exists at Washington University School of Medicine, in which 
residents in the Department of Otolaryngology spend time observing audiologists in 
a variety of clinical tasks, including audiologic assessment, patient counseling, and 
hearing aid fitting and verification. This collaboration came to exist after ear, nose, 
and throat (ENT) physicians in the department recognized that residents across the 
country were performing poorly on audiology-related questions on their board ex-
ams. Though shadowing audiologists in the day-to-day practice of the audiology 
clinic is incredibly useful to residents, not all residents will have the opportunity to 
see everything. Therefore, a supplement is necessary to really ensure that each resi-
dent understands all aspects of audiology, which is the inspiration for this pocket 
guidebook. Because residents have incredibly demanding schedules and little extra 
time to wade through comprehensive audiology textbooks to study for their boards, 
a question-and-answer format with concise yet detailed answers, which are com-
plemented by an array of illustrations, is used as the format for this guide. 
Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists is divided into four chapters: Psy-
choacoustics, Audiometric Testing, Vestibular Evaluation, and Amplification. 
Each chapter utilizes a question-and-answer format to provide the reader with 
a high-yield study guide. The answer to each question is concise yet detailed, and 
is complemented by a figure or table to emphasize the most important informa-
tion. Keywords, figure numbers, and table numbers are bolded within the text for 
easy reference. Chapter 1, Psychoacoustics, focuses on the fundamental proper-
ties related to sound and hearing. For example, this chapter provides information 
on sound properties such as frequency and intensity, an understanding of which 
is necessary to understand audiometric interpretation and hearing aid process-
ing. Chapters 2 and 3, Audiometric Testing and Vestibular Evaluation, respectively, 
provide an indispensable guide to diagnostic testing in audiology, ranging from 
pure tone testing, tympanometry, and auditory brainstem response testing to elec­
tronystagmography and rotational chair testing. Finally, Chapter 4, Amplification, 
focuses on patient candidacy, sound processing, and the hearing aid assessment, 
fitting, and verification process.
Though the primary audience of Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists is 
ENT residents, this text would also be of great use to ENT physicians, audiologists 
and audiology students, speech-language pathologists (SLP) and SLP students, and 
teachers of the deaf/hard-of-hearing. Because the disciplines of otolaryngology, 
audiology, speech pathology, and deaf education often work collaboratively in pro-
viding quality patient care, it is necessary to have a working knowledge of each 
profession. This expansion of our knowledge base outside of our own respective 
profession will allow us, as healthcare providers, to more readily understand pa-
tient reports from other disciplines, better coordinate care, and have more intel-
lectual conversations with and about our patients. The Audiology Answers are now 
at our fingertips. Enjoy!
Michael Valente, PhD
Elizabeth Fernandez, AuD
Heather Monroe, AuD


xiii
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to recognize our colleagues who contributed to the de-
velopment of this text, including Diane Duddy, Joel Goebel, Judy Peterein, Belinda 
Sinks, and Maureen Valente. In addition, we would like to thank our families for 
their continual support, encouragement, and inspiration.


1
 1 Psychoacoustics  
 What Is the Difference between dB HL and dB SPL?  
 The  decibel  ( dB ) is a logarithmic unit of measurement used to express the  magnitude 
of a sound relative to some reference level. Decibels in hearing level, or  dB HL , is com-
monly used in audiology because it refers to the decibel level on the audiometer. The 
reference level for dB HL is “0,” which is related to the average threshold in decibels 
sound pressure level (dB SPL) for the average, normal-hearing listener. In   Fig. 1.1 , the 
solid black line represents the average auditory threshold in dB SPL at each audio-
metric frequency. Each threshold in dB SPL, which is noted in the table at the bottom 
of  Fig. 1.1 , is equal to 0 dB HL on the audiometer for the corresponding frequency. 
 Decibels in sound pressure level, or  dB SPL , refers to the magnitude of the dis-
placement of molecules in the air. The reference for dB SPL is 20 micropascals (20 
μPa) or 0.0002 dynes/cm 2 . Because it is easy to measure dB SPL with a condenser 
or free-ﬁ eld microphone coupled to a sound level meter, sound measurements are 
often expressed in dB SPL. 
 What Is the Difference between dB IL and dB SPL?  
 As stated in the previous section, a common method to express the magnitude of 
a sound is in decibels sound pressure level or dB SPL, for which the reference is 
0.0002 dynes/cm 2 . A less common method to express sound intensity is in acous-
tic power by using decibels intensity level, or  dB IL . The reference for dB IL is 10 −16  
W/cm 2 . According to  Gulick, Gescheider, and Frisina (1989) , “a dangerously intense 
sound would represent a power of only about 0.0024 watt” (p. 46). As a result, it is 
cumbersome to measure the incredibly small amounts of power associated with 
◆
◆
Fig. 1.1   Average thresh-
olds across frequency in dB 
SPL, corresponding to 0 dB 
HL. For example, at 125 Hz: 
0 dB HL = 45 dB SPL, and at 
1000 Hz: 0 dB HL = 7 dB SPL.
       (From: Roeser, R. J., & Clark, J. L. (2007). 
Pure-tone tests. In R. J. Roeser, M. Valente, 
& H. Hosford-Dunn (Eds.).  Audiology: Diag-
nosis . 2nd ed. (pp. 238–260). New York: 
Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc.) 

2 Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
 Table 1.1  dB IL versus dB SPL 
 Intensity W/cm 2 
Times Standard 
dB 
Dyne/cm 2 
Pressure Times
10 −16  
1 
0 
0.0002 
1
10 −14  
100 
20 
0.002 
10
10 −12  
10,000 
40 
0.02 
100
10 −10  
1,000,000 
60 
0.2 
1000
  Source:  From: Gulick, W. L., Gescheider, G. A., & Frisina, R. D. (1989).  Hearing: Physiological acoustics, 
neural coding, and psychoacoustics (p. 51).  New York: Oxford University Press, Inc.    By permission of 
Oxford University Press, Inc.
the enormous range of intensities that the human ear can hear. Note in   Table 1.1 
that the dB values are the same regardless of whether they were calculated from 
intensity (power) or pressure; however, a 100-fold increase in intensity is equal to 
a 10-fold increase in pressure. 
 What Is the Difference between Detection and 
Discrimination?  
  Detection  is simply the ability to determine if a sound is present or absent,  whereas 
 discrimination  is the ability to determine the diﬀ erence between two stimuli or 
sounds. For example, during speech audiometry patients are asked to repeat spondee
words (e.g.,  mushroom ,  baseball ) until a  speech recognition threshold ( SRT ) is 
 established. In this case, the words are increased and decreased in 5 dB steps until the 
audiologist ﬁ nds the softest level in dB HL at which the patient can correctly repeat 
the word 50% of the time (hence the term speech recognition  threshold ) .  
 Sometimes, an SRT cannot be measured and the audiologist is simply inter-
ested in measuring the level (dB HL) where the patient is aware that speech is 
present ( speech awareness threshold , or SAT ). Therefore, the SAT is a detection 
measure, whereas the SRT is a threshold measure. Also, it should be clear that the 
dB HL associated with the SAT is lower than the dB HL associated with the SRT be-
cause one is a detection measure, whereas the other is a threshold measure. 
 Another common measure used by audiologists is the  word recognition score 
 ( WRS ). The WRS is a speech  discrimination  measure in which the patient repeats 
a list of 50 common, one syllable (monosyllabic) words. The words are presented 
at a dB level at which the listener can hear clearly, which for most normal-hearing 
listeners is ~40 dB louder than the listener’s SRT (i.e., 40 dB SL or sensation level). 
The WRS is a percentage correct score (from 0 to 100%) and is useful in diﬀ erential 
diagnosis and counseling. 
 What Is the Minimum Audible Angle?  
 The  minimum audible angle  ( MAA ) is the smallest change in the location (azi-
muth) of two sound sources that can be perceived by a listener. The MAA is smallest 
◆
◆

1 Psychoacoustics 3
 Fig. 1.2  The MAA is smallest 
for sounds originating directly 
in front of the listener, or at 0° 
azimuth, and is largest when 
the sound sources are to one 
side of the listener.        (From: Gelfand, 
S. A. (2004).  Hearing: An introduction to psy-
chological and physiological acoustics.  4th ed. 
New York: Marcel Dekker.) 
(the listener can best identify small changes in azimuth) when the sound sources 
are in front of the listener (0° azimuth), and is largest (poorer) when the sound 
sources are to the side of the listener. When sounds are directly in front of the lis-
tener, very small changes (1–2° azimuth) result in an increased ability to make use 
of interaural diﬀ erences ( Gelfand, 2004 ); whereas when two sound sources are to 
the side of the listener, interaural diﬀ erences remain very similar with changes in 
angle.  Figure 1.2 illustrates the diﬀ erences in MAA for sounds originating at 0° and 
45° azimuth. 
 What Psychoacoustic Properties Influence Sound 
Localization?  
 One of the major advantages of binaural listening is sound localization. Diﬀ erences 
in the arrival time and intensity of a sound between the two ears are used to deter-
mine a sound’s location in space.  Interaural level diﬀ erence  ( ILD ), which refers to 
the diﬀ erence in the intensity of a sound at the two ears, is used in the localization 
of  high-frequency sounds  (primarily above 2800 Hz). High-frequency sounds have 
wavelengths shorter than the circumference of the head, and are thus inﬂ uenced 
by the  head shadow eﬀ ect . In other words, a high-frequency sound originating 
to the right of a listener will decrease in intensity at the left ear due to the “road-
block” the high-frequency sound encounters at the head. In addition, spectral dif-
ferences (i.e., interaural spectral diﬀ erences) exist between the two ears, especially 
for high-frequency sounds, as spectral information is lost due to the deﬂ ection and 
attenuation caused by the head shadow eﬀ ect.   Figure 1.3   illustrates the diﬀ erence 
in ILD for pure tones at various frequencies and azimuths. As can be seen from   
Fig. 1.3  , the diﬀ erence in intensity between the two ears at 10,000 Hz is ~20 dB 
when presented at 90°; however, these diﬀ erences lessen as the azimuth of the 
signal is greater than or less than 90°. Also, note that as frequency decreases, the 
ILD decreases from 20 dB at 10,000 Hz to less than 5 dB at 250 Hz. 
◆

4 Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
 Interaural time diﬀ erence  ( ITD ) refers to the diﬀ erence in the time it takes 
for a sound to reach each ear after the onset of a sound. Sound localization using 
ITDs as cues is best for  low-frequency sounds  (200 to 2800 Hz). Low-frequency 
sounds physically have wavelengths longer than the circumference of the head; 
therefore, a sound originating to the right of a listener would have the same inten-
sity and spectrum at both ears, but would arrive at the left ear later than the right 
ear.   Figure 1.4   illustrates the use of ILD and ITD cues for high- and low-frequency 
sounds, respectively, where a sound is originating from a loudspeaker at 90° 
azimuth or directly to the right of the listener (A).   Figure 1.4B   illustrates the use 
of ILDs for localizing to high-frequency sounds, and   Fig. 1.4C   illustrates the use of 
ITDs for localizing to low-frequency sounds. At 90° azimuth, the ITD is ~0.7 msec 
and is fairly independent of frequency. As the azimuth increases from 0° to 90°, the 
ITD increases, as can be seen in  Fig. 1.5 . 
 Fig. 1.3    Interaural level dif-
ference (ILD) at the ears for 
pure tones at 250, 1000, 
5000, and 10000 Hz at varying 
azimuths. Note that the ILD is 
greatest for higher- frequency 
tones and at 90° azimuth.        (From: 
Gulick, W. L.,  Gescheider, G. A., & Frisina, 
R. D. (1989).  Hearing: Physiological acous-
tics, neural coding, and psychoacoustics.  New 
York: Oxford University Press, Inc. By permis-
sion of Oxford University Press, Inc.) 
Fig. 1.4   For a sound originating at 90° azi-
muth  (A) , interaural level differences (ILDs) as-
sist in the localization of high-frequency sounds 
 (B) , and interaural time differences (ITD) assist 
in the localization of low-frequency sounds  (C) . 
       (From: Gelfand, S. A. (2009).  Essentials of audiology.  3rd ed. New York: 
Thieme Medical Pub lishers, Inc.) 
A
B
C

1 Psychoacoustics 5
 What Is Loudness Recruitment?  
 Individuals with sensorineural hearing loss may by hypersensitive to sounds that 
are perceived as comfortably loud to normal-hearing listeners. This “ rapid growth 
of loudness ” in an ear with sensorineural hearing loss is known as  recruitment  
and is typically considered to be an indicator for  cochlear hearing loss ( Roeser, 
Valente, & Hosford-Dunn, 2007 , p. 4).   Figure 1.6   illustrates one test, called Loud-
ness Growth in Octave Bands (LGOB), which had been used to measure loudness 
growth. As can be seen in   Fig. 1.6  , there is a dashed and solid line in each box rep-
resenting loudness growth for narrowband noise centered at 500, 1000, 2000, and 
4000 Hz. The dashed line represents loudness growth in the normal ear at the test 
frequency and the solid line represents the loudness growth at the same frequency 
◆
Fig. 1.5   Interaural time difference (ITD) for near 
and far sources at various azimuths. The ITD in-
creases as the sound source increases from 0° to 
90° azimuth.        (From: Gulick, W. L., Gescheider, G. A., & Frisina, R. D. 
(1989).  Hearing: Physiological acoustics, neural coding, and psychoacoustics . 
New York: Oxford University Press, Inc. By permission of Oxford University 
Press, Inc.) 
 Fig. 1.6  Illustration of 
recruitment using the 
Loudness Growth in Oc-
tave Bands (LGOB) test.      

6 Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
for the listener with hearing loss. In each box, the x-axis represents the input sig-
nal (0–120 dB SPL) and the y-axis represents the patient’s loudness judgment (on 
a scale of 1 to 5). In looking at 500 Hz, it can be seen that the patient with normal 
hearing goes from perceiving the signal from “very soft” (1) to “loud” (4) in a range 
of ~65 dB (20 to 85 dB SPL) and the slope of the curve is 45°. At the same frequency, 
the hearing-impaired listener goes from soft to loud in a range of ~45 dB (40–85 
dB SPL). Four things become clear. First, a loudness judgment of “1” to the hearing-
impaired listener at 500 Hz required ~20 dB more input than the normal listener 
to obtain the same loudness judgment. This represents a 20 dB hearing loss at 500 
Hz. Second, the dynamic range (DR) is ~20 dB narrower for the hearing-impaired 
listener. Third, the slope of the curve for the hearing-impaired listener is steeper. 
Fourth, the loudness judgment for the normal patient and the hearing-impaired 
patient is the same at the higher-input levels. Now look at the loudness growth at 
4000 Hz. In this case, the loudness judgment for “soft” for the hearing-impaired 
patient is ~45 dB greater than that of the normal-hearing patient. This represents 
about a 45 dB hearing loss at 4000 Hz for this patient. The DR for the normal ear 
is still ~65 dB wide, but for the hearing-impaired patient the DR has been reduced 
to ~15 dB (65–80 dB). This is recruitment! Thus, the slope of the loudness growth 
curve for the normal-hearing patient remains at 45°, but the slope for the hearing-
impaired patient is now very steep! Finally, the loudness judgment for “loud” is 
the same for the normal and impaired ear. Individuals with normal hearing typi-
cally have a DR, or the diﬀ erence between the threshold of hearing and the level 
of loudness discomfort, of 100 dB SPL (  Fig. 1.7A  ). Because individuals with sen-
sorineural hearing loss have elevated thresholds and normal loudness discomfort 
levels (  Fig. 1.7B  ), these patients have a reduced DR. As a result, small increases in 
intensity may be perceived as disproportionately loud to such individuals. 
Fig. 1.7   (A)  Dynamic range for a normal-hearing listener and  (B)  for a hearing-impaired 
listener plotted on an SPL-O-Gram. Unlike a traditional audiogram, which is in dB HL and 
goes from lowest to highest intensity (top to bottom), the SPL-O-Gram is in dB SPL and 
goes from highest to lowest intensity. (U = uncomfortable loudness level; X = threshold.)      
A
B

1 Psychoacoustics 7
Fig. 1.8  Pure tone sinewave.        (Adapted from: 
Gelfand, S. A. (2009).  Essentials of audiology.  3rd ed. New 
York: Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc.) 
 What Is Frequency?  
 Frequency  is deﬁ ned as the number of cycles or repetitions per unit of time. In 
the International System of Units (SI), the unit used to express frequency is hertz 
( Hz ), where 1 Hz is deﬁ ned as 1 cycle per second. The human ear has an audible 
frequency range of ~20 to 20,000 Hz and is most sensitive to frequencies near 1000 
Hz, as was seen in   Fig. 1.1  . The perceptual correlate of frequency is pitch, so as 
frequency increases a listener perceives an increase in pitch. Notice in   Fig. 1.8 that 
both the upper and lower waveforms represent a 1000 Hz tone (four complete 
cycles in 0.004 seconds: 4/0.004 = 1000 Hz); however, the upper waveform repre-
sents a less intense tone, as it has less amplitude than the lower waveform. 
 What Is Fundamental Frequency and What 
Are Harmonics?  
 Fundamental frequency, abbreviated f o , is the natural resonating frequency of a peri-
odic signal. Harmonics are multiples of the fundamental frequency. So a fundamental 
frequency, f o , would have harmonics of 2fo, 3fo, 4fo, etc. For example, a fundamental 
frequency of 1000 Hz would have harmonics at 2000 Hz, 3000 Hz, 4000 Hz, and so on. 
In addition, intensity decreases with each harmonic, as can be seen in   Fig. 1.9 . 
◆
◆
Fig. 1.9  A 1000 Hz fundamental frequency 
and its harmonic frequencies, which incremen-
tally decrease in inten sity as the harmonic fre-
quency increases.        (From: Gulick, W. L., Gescheider, G. A., & 
Frisina, R. D. (1989).  Hearing: Physiological acoustics, neural coding, and 
psychoacoustics.  New York: Oxford University Press, Inc. By permission 
of Oxford University Press, Inc.) 

8 Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
 How Does the Frequency Spectrum of Vowels versus 
That of Consonants Influence Speech Recognition?  
 Vowel sounds consist primarily of low frequencies (and have more energy or are 
louder), whereas consonants contain more high frequencies (and have less energy 
or are softer). A listener’s perception of “loudness” comes primarily from low-
 frequency sounds. On the other hand, a listener’s ability to correctly discriminate 
two words or syllables within the same word correctly is more reliant on hearing 
the consonant sounds of speech. For example, it would be diﬃ  cult to discrimi-
nate the diﬀ erence between the words  have, has , and  half if the ﬁ nal consonants 
were not heard accurately. It is very common for individuals with presbycusis or 
noise-induced hearing loss, who have greater hearing loss in the high frequencies, 
to report that they can “hear, but not understand.” These listeners have normal 
or near-normal low-frequency hearing (vowels), which becomes progressively 
 poorer with increasing frequency (consonants), as shown in   Fig. 1.10  . In the audio-
gram in   Fig. 1.10  , sounds below the threshold line (i.e., more intense vowels) are 
audible, whereas sounds above the threshold line (i.e., less intense consonants) are 
inaudible. So it is often true that one may  hear much of a conversation, but might 
 misunderstand many words. This problem is increased in noisy environments. 
◆
 Fig. 1.10    Familiar sounds audiogram.        (From: Thibodeau, L. (2007).  Speech audiometry.  In: R. J. Roeser, 
M. Valente, & H. Hosford-Dunn (Eds.).  Audiology: Diagnosis . 2nd ed. (pp. 288–313). New York: Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc.) 

1 Psychoacoustics 9
 What Is the Upward Spread of Masking and How 
Does It Impact Speech Recognition?  
 Masking is simply “covering up” one sound with another. For example, if a per-
son is talking on a cell phone while walking on a busy street, a listener may mis-
understand what the person on the other line has said when a bus drives by. In 
this scenario, the noise from the bus is masking the telephone conversation. As 
the intensity of a masker increases, the masker has a greater eﬀ ect on frequen-
cies greater than the masker frequency. This phenomenon, known as the  upward 
spread of masking , helps to explain why it is diﬃ  cult to understand speech in the 
presence of background noise. Background noise, which is composed primarily of 
low- frequency energy, masks the higher-frequency consonant sounds of speech. As 
stated in the previous section, consonants contribute greatly to speech recognition 
abilities. So even for normal-hearing listeners, background noise can negatively im-
pact speech recognition. This phenomenon has an even greater impact on a hear-
ing-impaired listener, as it takes less noise to mask the high-frequency sounds and 
negatively impact speech recognition than for a normal-hearing listener. In addi-
tion, it is also possible for high-frequency sounds to mask lower-frequency sounds, 
which is known as backward masking or the  downward spread of masking . 
 What Is the Just Noticeable Difference for Intensity 
and Frequency?  
 The  just noticeable diﬀ erence  ( jnd ) refers to the smallest detectable diﬀ erence 
between two stimuli. For auditory stimuli, the jnd can be measured for intensity 
and frequency. The jnd for intensity varies from 0.25 to 2.5 dB and decreases as the 
stimulus level increases. The jnd for frequencies below 1000 Hz is 2 to 3 Hz and for 
frequencies above 1000 Hz is 0.3% of the reference frequency. For example, a lis-
tener can detect a diﬀ erence between 1000 Hz and 1003 Hz, but at higher frequen-
cies (e.g., 3000 Hz) a greater diﬀ erence (3000 × 0.3 = 9 Hz) is required.  Figure 1.11 
provides a visual illustration of the jnd (referred to as DL, or diﬀ erence limen) for 
intensity and frequency. 
 What Are the Advantages of Binaural versus 
Monaural Hearing?  
 As stated in previous sections, input from two ears allows a listener to  localize , or 
determine the location of a sound in space. Binaural hearing has additional advan-
tages, including binaural summation and binaural squelch.  Binaural summation 
refers to the perceived loudness increase when listening to a sound with both ears 
◆
◆
◆

10 Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
(of approximately equal hearing sensitivity) versus with only one ear. For example, 
if a listener has a threshold of 10 dB HL in both ears at 1000 Hz, then a 1000 Hz 
tone played simultaneously in both ears at 50 dB HL will sound twice as loud as 
the same 50 dB HL tone presented to just one ear (  Fig. 1.12  ). When the intensity of 
a sound is near the listener’s auditory threshold (0 dB SL) the binaural advantage 
is ~3 dB, whereas for sounds greater than or equal to 35 dB above threshold (35 
dB SL), the binaural advantage is ~6 dB ( Gelfand, 2004 ). This phenomenon is espe-
cially important in the ﬁ tting of hearing aids, as will be discussed in Chapter 4. 
Fig. 1.11   Illustration of the just noticeable difference (jnd) for intensity and frequency. 
In this example, the jnd is referred to as the difference limen (DL).        (From: Gelfand, S. A. (2009). 
 Essentials of audiology . 3rd ed. New York: Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc.) 
Fig. 1.12   Illustration of binaural 
summation. As intensity increases, 
perceived loudness (in sones) in-
creases; however, the perceived loud-
ness binaurally was twice that which 
was perceived monaurally.        (From: Gulick, 
W. L., Gescheider, G. A., & Frisina, R. D. (1989).  Hearing: 
Physiological acoustics, neural coding, and psychoacoustics.  
New York: Oxford University Press, Inc. By permission of 
Oxford University Press, Inc.) 

 Binaural squelch  refers to a listener’s ability to listen only to the sound source 
of interest when additional sound sources are present. This phenomenon is com-
monly referred to as the  cocktail party eﬀ ect . For example, most people can recall 
a time at a party when several conversations were going on at once and at which 
time they were able to follow only the conversation of interest while tuning out all 
of the background noise. 
 When a listener has the use of only one ear or when one ear is signiﬁ cantly 
better than the other, the listener’s ability to make use of localization cues is sig-
niﬁ cantly reduced. In addition, monaural listening requires a greater signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR = the level of the signal to the level of the noise) to communi-
cate eﬀ ectively because the advantages of binaural summation and squelch are 
unavailable.   Figure 1.13   illustrates the necessary SNR improvement required for a 
hearing-impaired listener to perform equally as well as a normal-hearing listener 
in background noise. For example, if a patient has a hearing loss of 50 dB HL, he 
or she would have to improve the SNR by 6 dB to achieve a level of performance 
equal to that of a normal-hearing listener. Further, a patient with a hearing loss 
of 80 dB would have to improve the signal-to-noise ratio by 12 dB to hear equally 
as well as a patient with normal hearing. There are several ways in which a hear-
ing- impaired listener can improve his or her SNR, including the use of hearing aids 
with directional microphones and hearing assistance technology, such as an FM 
system. These devices are discussed in detail in Chapter 4. 
 References 
  Gelfand, S. A. (2004).  Hearing: An introduction to psychological and physiological 
acoustics . 4th ed. New York: Marcel Dekker. 
  Gulick, W. L., Gescheider, G. A., & Frisina, R. D. (1989).  Hearing: Physiological acous-
tics, neural coding, and psychoacoustics. New York: Oxford University Press, Inc. 
  Roeser, R. J., Valente, M., & Hosford-Dunn, H (Eds.). (2007).  Audiology: Diagnosis. 
2nd ed. New York Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc. 
  
Fig. 
1.13  The 
required 
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) 
improvement required for a 
hearing-impaired listener to 
perform as well as a normal-
hearing listener. As the de-
gree of hearing loss increases, 
the SNR required to maintain 
performance also increases.       
 (Based on data collected by Killion. From: 
Killion, M. (1997). SNR loss: “I can hear what 
people say, but I can’t understand them.” 
 The Hearing Review 4 (12), 8–14.) 
1 Psychoacoustics 11

12
2 Audiometric Testing  
 Why Is It Important to Calibrate Audiometric 
Equipment?  
 Audiometric equipment should be calibrated quarterly, with an exhaustive cali-
bration required annually, to ensure that the results obtained via audiometric test-
ing are accurate. In addition, many states require that audiometric calibration be 
performed annually to acquire and maintain licensure. Audiometric calibration 
standards are provided by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and 
by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). Calibration of an audiom-
eter involves the use of the following equipment: pistonphone (used to calibrate 
the sound level meter [SLM]), voltmeter, pressure and free-ﬁ eld condenser micro-
phone, sound level meter with either an octave or one-third octave ﬁ lter, appropri-
ate couplers (6 cc, 2 cc, artiﬁ cial mastoid), and a 500 g and 5.4 newton (N) weight. 
The output of the audiometer is conﬁ rmed through the various transducers used 
in testing (i.e., headphones, insert earphones, bone oscillator, and loudspeaker) 
whereas the transducer is coupled to an artiﬁ cial ear, 2 cc coupler, or artiﬁ cial mas-
toid. For loudspeaker calibration (  Fig. 2.1D  ), a calibrated free-ﬁ eld microphone is 
placed in the test room at a distance equal to where the center of a patient’s head 
would be, but with the patient absent. The output from the calibrated microphone 
is coupled to a calibrated SLM and one octave or one-third octave ﬁ lter. Signals 
(narrowband noise [NBN], frequency-modulated pure tones, or speech) are sent 
to the loudspeaker from the audiometer, and the output from the loudspeaker is 
calibrated with the equipment mentioned above to be sure that the measured out-
put adheres to the ANSI S3.6–2004 standard for sound ﬁ eld thresholds. In ANSI 
S3.6–2004, there are separate standards if the loudspeaker is at 0°, 45°, or 90° 
azimuth to the patient and if testing is done monaurally or binaurally. Typically, 
most clinics select the standard for 0° with binaural hearing as their reference for 
sound ﬁ eld calibration. Reﬂ ecting back to Chapter 1 of this guidebook, calibra-
tion conﬁ rms that an audiometer dial reading of 0 decibels in hearing level (dB 
HL) is equivalent to the expected decibels in sound pressure level (dB SPL) at each 
frequency for all transducers. In addition, calibration veriﬁ es that no harmonic 
distortion exists (i.e., 1000 Hz on the audiometer is representative of a pure tone 
with a frequency of 1000 Hz), that noise interference does not exist, and that the 
attenuator dial is linear (i.e., an increase of 5 dB HL (on the audiometer dial) results 
in an increase of 5 dB SPL [in the coupler]).   Figure 2.1   illustrates the conﬁ guration 
for calibration of the audiometer using the THD-49/50 headphone coupled to the 
6 cc coupler (A), the ER-3A insert earphone coupled to the 2 cc coupler (B), the 
bone oscillator coupled to the artiﬁ cial mastoid (C), and the loudspeakers being 
calibrated by a free-ﬁ eld microphone (D). 
 In addition, regular calibration should be performed on immittance audi-
ometers to conﬁ rm that the results obtained in tympanometry, acoustic reﬂ ex 
threshold (ART) testing, and acoustic reﬂ ex decay testing are accurate.  Figure 2.2 
illustrates the calibration of an immittance audiometer with the use of a 0.5 cc 
cavity. 
◆

2 Audiometric Testing 13
Fig. 2.1   Equipment configuration for audiometric calibration: ( A ) TDH 49/50 head-
phone placed on a 6 cc coupler, ( B ) ER-3A insert earphone in 2 cc coupler, ( C ) bone 
oscillator on artificial mastoid, and ( D ) sound field loudspeakers being calibrated with 
a free-field microphone. Note: For calibration of the headphone and bone oscillator, a 
500 g and 5.4 N weight, respectively, would be placed atop the transducer to simulate 
the appropriate tension of the headband.      
A
B
C
D

14 Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
 What Is the Maximum Allowable Noise Level in the 
Test Environment?  
 When measuring hearing thresholds, it is important that the noise level in the test 
environment does not result in erroneously elevated thresholds. According to the 
ANSI (ANSI S3.1–1999 [Revised 2003]), when testing pure tone thresholds using 
conventional (TDH-49/50) headphones the maximum permissible ambient noise 
levels (MPANLs) range from 16 to 33 dB SPL (  Table 2.1  , Column 2) depending on 
test frequency. In addition, the MPANLs for testing with loudspeakers in the sound 
ﬁ eld or via bone conduction are even lower (6–16 dB SPL;   Table 2.1 , Column 4), 
whereas those for testing using insert earphones are higher (42–51 dB SPL; 
( Table 2.1  , Column 3). The ambient noise levels in a “quiet” oﬃ  ce will almost al-
ways exceed the MPANLs; therefore, special care should be taken when interpret-
ing hearing tests obtained in rooms that do not meet ANSI S3.1–1999 (Revised 
2003). Further, if acceptable noise levels cannot be achieved, then the use of a 
single- or double-walled soundbooth is required. 
 How Are Air-Conduction and Bone-Conduction 
Thresholds Determined? 
 Conventional pure tone audiometry consists of air-conduction (AC) and bone-
conduction (BC) testing.  AC testing  involves the use of a headphone (  Fig. 2.3A ) or 
◆
◆
Fig. 2.2   Calibration of an immittance audiometer. ( A ) The immittance probe is placed 
into a 0.5 cc cavity (or a 2.0 cc cavity). A diagnostic tympanogram is performed with 
the probe in the coupler, and ( B ) the expected result for properly calibrated equipment 
is displayed at right. A flat tympanogram is obtained with an ear canal volume of 0.5 cc, 
which is equal to the volume of the calibration cavity. 
A
B

2 Audiometric Testing 15
 Table 2.1    One-Third Octave Band MPANLs (in dB SPL) for Audiometric Testing from 
250 to 8000 Hz  
 Frequency 
TDH 
Insert 
Ears Open (Sound Field/Bone Conduction)
 250  
 20.0  
 48.0  
 16.0 
 500  
 16.0 
  45.0  
 11.0 
 800 
  19.0  
 44.0  
 10.0 
 1000 
  21.0  
 42.0  
  8.0 
 1600 
  25.0  
 43.0  
  9.0 
 2000 
  29.0  
 44.0  
  9.0 
 3150  
 33.0  
 46.0  
  8.0 
 4000  
 32.0 
  45.0  
  6.0 
 6300  
 32.0  
 48.0  
  8.0 
 8000  
 32.0  
 51.0  
  9.0 
  Source:  From: Frank, T., & Rosen, A. D. (2007). Basic instrumentation and calibration. In R. J. 
Roeser, M. Valente, & H. Hosford-Dunn (Eds.)  Audiology: Diagnosis.  2nd ed. (pp. 195–237 ).  New 
York: Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc.  
Fig. 2.3  Various transducers used in pure tone 
testing. ( A ) TDH 49/50 headphones. ( B ) ER-3A 
insert earphones. ( C ) B71 bone oscillator.      
A
B
C

16 Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
insert earphone (  Fig. 2.3B  ) that delivers the stimulus (250, 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, 
4000, 6000, and 8000 Hz) to the external auditory canal. The thresholds obtained 
via air-conduction testing reﬂ ect the status of the outer ear, middle ear, and inner 
ear.  BC testing  involves the use of a bone oscillator (  Fig. 2.3C  ) to deliver the stimu-
lus (250, 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hz) to the mastoid process. The thresh-
olds obtained via BC testing reﬂ ect the status of only the inner ear. Thresholds are 
typically obtained using a bracketing technique in which the audiologist increases 
and decreases the attenuator dial on the audiometer (dB HL) until threshold is 
determined. Threshold is deﬁ ned as the lowest intensity level (dB HL) at which the 
patient hears the stimulus 50% of the time. (Note: Pure tone testing at inter- octaves 
of 750 and 1500 Hz are required if a diﬀ erence of ≥ 20 dB HL exists between 500 
and 1000 Hz or 1000 and 2000 Hz, respectively.) 
 Pure tone thresholds are plotted on an  audiogram , with frequency on the x-
axis and dB HL on the y-axis, using the audiometric symbols illustrated in   Fig. 2.4 . 
The audiogram must maintain an aspect ratio of 20 dB per octave, meaning that 
if the distance between 0 and 20 dB HL is 1 inch, then the distance between each 
octave (e.g., 250 to 500 Hz) must also be 1 inch. Pure tone thresholds for the right 
ear are commonly recorded using red symbols and are represented by a circle 
(unmasked) or triangle (masked) for air-conduction and a bracket (with the open-
ing facing rightward) for bone-conduction testing. Pure tone thresholds for the 
left ear are commonly recorded using black or blue symbols and are represented 
by an “x” (unmasked) or square (masked) for AC and a bracket (with the opening 
facing leftward) for BC testing. In some cases, a patient may have no response to 
pure tones at the limits of the audiometer. Such responses are recorded using the 
appropriate symbol (unmasked or masked AC or BC) with the addition of an ar-
row that points diagonally to the bottom left corner of the audiogram for right ear 
responses and diagonally to the bottom right corner of the audiogram for left ear 
responses. 
 Fig. 
2.4 Audiometric 
symbols.      

2 Audiometric Testing 17
 When Is Masking for Air-Conduction Testing 
Required?  
 Masking  is the use of a noise source placed into the  non-test ear  (NTE) to pre-
vent the participation of the NTE in the determination of a patient’s audiomet-
ric threshold in the test ear (TE). The noise source used in masking for pure tone 
testing is narrow-band noise (NBN) centered at the test frequency (e.g., 1000 Hz 
NBN to NTE when establishing a threshold for 1000 Hz in the TE). Masking for 
speech audiometry is conducted using a speech noise, which is a broadband noise 
(centered around 500 to 2000 Hz) ﬁ ltered to mirror the long-term average speech 
spectrum. 
 Masking for AC testing is required if the AC threshold at a test frequency in 
the TE exceeds the BC threshold of the NTE by 40 dB HL or greater at the same 
test frequency. Thus, this rule requires a contralateral comparison between the AC 
threshold of the TE to the BC threshold at the same frequency in the opposite or 
NTE. The criterion of 40 dB HL was chosen as a conservative estimate of the  mini-
mum  interaural attenuation for AC testing. Interaural attenuation is the amount by 
which a signal introduced to the TE is decreased during transmission through the 
skull to the NTE ( Roeser & Clark, 2007 ).   Figure 2.5A   illustrates the crossover that 
occurs to the NTE when a signal of greater than or equal to 40 dB HL is introduced 
to the TE. The masking stimulus for all pure tone testing consists of NBN centered 
around the test frequency to the NTE ( Fig. 2.5B ). 
◆
 Fig. 2.5  Illustrations of the average interau-
ral attenuation for air-conduction testing ( A ), 
and masking configurations for air-conduc-
tion ( B ) and bone-conduction ( C ) testing.       
 (Adapted from: Roeser, R. J., & Clark, J. L. (2007). Clinical mask-
ing. In R. J. Roeser, M. Valente, & H. Hosford-Dunn (Eds.).  Audiol-
ogy: Diagnosis . 2nd ed. (pp. 261–287). New York: Thieme Medical 
Publishers, Inc.) 
A
B
C

18 Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
 When Is Masking for Bone-Conduction Testing 
Required?  
 Masking for BC testing is required if the AC threshold of   the TE exceeds the BC 
threshold of the TE by 10 dB HL or more, which is referred to as an  air–bone gap . 
The minimum interaural attenuation for BC testing is 0 dB and therefore, the 
criterion for masking is reduced compared with that of masking for AC testing 
( Fig. 2.5C  ). Thus, this rule requires an ipsilateral comparison between the AC and 
BC threshold of the same ear at the test frequency; however, masking for BC test-
ing is performed via an NBN centered around the test frequency to the NTE using 
AC. As can be seen in   Fig. 2.6  , when masking for right BC thresholds, the right 
ear remains unoccluded while the left ear is covered with the headphone for pre-
sentation of the masking noise. In this case, the right earphone is simply placed 
on the right side of the head so as not to occlude the right ear and to support the 
earphone placed over the left ear. 
 How Is the Speech Recognition Threshold 
Determined?  
 During speech audiometry, patients are asked to repeat a standardized list of 
spondee words (e.g.,  mushroom, baseball ) until a  speech recognition threshold 
 ( SRT ) is established. In this case, the words are decreased in 10 dB steps and in-
creased in 5 dB steps until the audiologist ﬁ nds the softest level in dB HL at which 
the patient can correctly repeat the word 50% of the time (hence the term speech 
◆
◆
 Fig. 2.6    ( A,B ) Transducer configuration for masked bone-conduction testing on the 
right ear, with masking noise presented to the left ear via the left earphone. In this case, 
the right earphone is simply resting on the side of the head.       
A
B

2 Audiometric Testing 19
 Table 2.2    Interpretation of Speech Recognition Threshold (SRT)  
 SRT (dB HL) 
Interpretation
 0–15 
  Normal 
 16–25 
  Slight 
 26–40 
  Mild 
 41–55  
 Moderate 
 56–70 
  Moderately severe 
 71–90 
  Severe 
 > 90  
 Profound  
recognition  threshold ) . The spondee words used to establish the SRT are presented 
via a recorded list or the audiologist may use a microphone to present the words 
via monitored live voice (MLV). Although recorded presentation is preferred so 
that results may be more reliably compared between audiologists and clinics, MLV 
is often used. In such cases in which MLV is used, it is important that the audiolo-
gist present each syllable of the spondee word at 0 dB on the volume units (VU) 
meter of the audiometer for greater accuracy. The SRT should be in good agree-
ment (± 10 dB) with the patient’s pure tone average (PTA), or the average of pure 
tone thresholds at 500, 1000, and 2000 Hz, in a reliable test session. 
 Sometimes, an SRT cannot be measured and the audiologist is simply interested 
in measuring the level (dB HL) at which the patient is aware that speech is pres-
ent ( speech awareness threshold , or  SAT ). The SAT should be in good agreement 
with the patient’s best pure tone threshold because the SAT is merely a detection 
measure and does not require identiﬁ cation of the spondee word.  Table 2.2 sum-
marizes the interpretation of the SRT. 
 How Is the Word Recognition Score Determined? 
 Another common measure made by audiologists is the  word recognition score 
 ( WRS ). The WRS is a measure in which the patient repeats a list of 50 one-syllable 
(monosyllabic), phonetically balanced words, and in which a percentage correct 
score is calculated. For adult patients, the most common word lists are the NU-6 
(male or female talker) or the CID-22 (male talker). For children, the most com-
monly used word list is the PBK-50. The best practice is to use a complete 50-word 
list unless the patient misses two or less of the ﬁ rst 25 words. If more than two 
words of the ﬁ rst 25 are missed then best practice is to administer all 50 words. 
Also, many audiologists unfortunately use MLV presentation of the monosyllabic 
words. In this practice, the audiologist uses a microphone to present the words live 
as he/she monitors the vocal eﬀ ort (input level) of his/her presentation by observ-
ing the VU meter on the audiometer. The goal is to peak the words of the carrier 
phase “say the word” at 0 dB on the VU meter, but let the presentation level of the 
actual word fall to a more natural presentation. As one can imagine, this is not the 
preferred best practice as this will create signiﬁ cant inter- and intra-audiologist 
variability. Best practice demands that the 50 words be presented in a standard-
◆

20 Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
ized format using ether a compact disc (CD) or tape presentation of the word lists. 
The words are presented at a dB level at which the listener can hear clearly, which 
for most normal-hearing listeners is ~40 dB louder than the listener’s SRT (i.e., 40 
dB SL, or sensation level).  Table 2.3 provides guidelines for interpreting the WRS. 
 When Is Masking for Speech Recognition Threshold 
Required?  
 Masking for SRT testing is required if the SRT in the TE exceeds the best BC thresh-
old of the NTE at any of the speech frequencies (500, 1000, or 2000 Hz) by 40 dB 
or more. Masking for speech audiometry utilizes a speech noise that is presented 
to the NTE via AC. 
 When Is Masking for Word Recognition Testing 
Required?  
 Masking for WRS testing is required when the presentation level of the words in 
the TE exceeds the best BC threshold of the NTE by 40 dB or more at any of the 
speech frequencies (500–2000 Hz). Because word recognition testing is typically 
conducted at 40 dB SL (in reference to the listener’s SRT in the same ear), it may be 
assumed that masking for WRS should always be used in patients with relatively 
symmetrical hearing sensitivity. Again, masking for speech audiometry utilizes a 
speech noise that is presented to the NTE via AC. 
◆
◆
 Table 2.3  Interpretation of Word Recognition Score (WRS) 
 WRS (%)  
 Interpretation 
 90–100  
 Normal 
 76–88  
 Slight diﬃ  culty 
 60–74 
  Moderate diﬃ  culty 
 50–58  
 Poor 
 < 50 
  Very poor  

2 Audiometric Testing 21
 How Do You Interpret an Audiogram?  
 Audiometric interpretation involves determining the  type ,  magnitude , and  con-
ﬁ guration  of hearing loss. As stated previously, the  type  of hearing loss is deter-
mined by comparing AC and BC thresholds, and may be classiﬁ ed as conductive, 
sensorineural, or mixed. The  magnitude of hearing loss is interpreted on a range 
from normal to profound and is based on the PTA (PTA = average of thresholds at 
500, 1000, and 2000 Hz).  Table 2.4 reports the magnitude of hearing loss. 
 The  conﬁ guration  or shape of the hearing loss can be classiﬁ ed as ﬂ at, sloping, 
rising, precipitous, trough, inverted trough, high frequency, fragmentary (corner), 
or notched. A  ﬂ at conﬁ guration is characterized by little or no change in thresh-
olds across frequencies (±20 dB). A  sloping  conﬁ guration is characterized by hear-
ing thresholds decreasing (poorer) as frequency increases. This sloping conﬁ gura-
tion can be  gradual, sharp , or  precipitous . A  rising conﬁ guration is characterized 
by hearing thresholds increasing (improving) as frequency increases. This rising 
conﬁ guration can be  gradual, sharp , or  precipitous . A  precipitous  conﬁ guration 
is characterized by hearing thresholds decreasing (poorer) very sharply between 
octave frequencies. A  trough conﬁ guration is characterized by hearing thresholds 
being poorer in the mid frequencies and better in the low and high frequencies. This 
conﬁ guration is often associated with genetic hearing loss. An  inverted trough  con-
ﬁ guration is characterized by hearing thresholds being better in the mid frequen-
cies and poorer in the low and high frequencies. A  high-frequency conﬁ guration 
is characterized by hearing thresholds being within normal limits at 250 to 2000 
Hz and followed by hearing loss at 3000 to 8000 Hz. A  fragmentary  ( corner ) con-
ﬁ guration is characterized by hearing thresholds being present only in the very low 
frequencies. A  notched conﬁ guration is characterized by normal hearing through 
3000 Hz with a sharp drop at 4000 and 6000 Hz, and improvement at 8000 Hz. This 
conﬁ guration is typically seen in patients having a history of excessive exposure of 
loud levels of noise. Another example of a notched conﬁ guration is during BC testing 
when there is poorer hearing at 2000 Hz with better hearing at 1000 and 4000 Hz. 
This is sometimes called  Carhart’s Notch  and is sometimes seen in patients with 
otosclerosis.   Figure 2.7  provides illustrations and descriptors for the audiometric 
conﬁ gurations discussed above. 
◆
 Table 2.4  Interpretation of Magnitude of Hearing Loss 
Based upon the Pure Tone Average (PTA), which is the 
Average of Thresholds at 500, 1000, and 2000 Hz 
 PTA (dB HL)  
 Magnitude of Hearing Loss 
 0–15  
 Normal 
 16–25  
 Slight 
 26–40 
  Mild 
 41–55  
 Moderate 
 56–70 
  Moderately severe 
 71–90  
 Severe 
 > 90  
 Profound  

22 Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
Fig. 2.7   Audiometric configuration.        (From: Roeser, R. J., Buckley, K. A., & Stickney, G. S. (2000). Pure tone tests. 
In R. J. Roeser, M. Valente, & H. Hosford-Dunn (Eds.).  Audiology: Diagnosis.  (pp. 227–251). New York: Thieme Medical Publishers, 
Inc.) 

2 Audiometric Testing 23
 What Is the Difference between Conductive, 
Sensorineural, and Mixed Hearing Loss?  
 A  conductive hearing loss (CHL) is the result of an ineﬃ  cient transmission of 
sound from the outer ear and/or middle ear to the inner ear. Foreign bodies in 
the ear canal, cerumen impaction, and conditions such as atresia, otitis media, 
and otosclerosis can result in a CHL. CHL can oftentimes be corrected medically 
or surgically. 
 A  sensorineural  hearing loss (SNHL) is the result of damage to the inner ear 
and/or the auditory nerve. Noise-induced hearing loss, presbycusis, and Meniere’s 
disease are examples of SNHL. An SNHL is typically permanent and typically can-
not be corrected medically or surgically; however, some causes of SNHL such as 
Meniere’s disease and sudden sensorineural hearing loss (SSNHL) may be im-
proved with medical treatment. 
 A  mixed  hearing loss has both conductive and sensorineural components. For 
example, an individual with presbycusis and chronic otitis media with eﬀ usion 
may present with a mixed hearing loss. 
 The type of hearing loss is determined by the relationship between AC and 
BC thresholds. In AC testing, the stimulus is delivered via headphones or insert 
earphones. BC testing delivers the stimulus via vibration produced by a bone os-
cillator placed on the mastoid process; therefore, the signal bypasses the outer 
and middle ear and directly stimulates the inner ear. Individuals with a CHL have 
normal BC thresholds (≤ 15 dB HL) and reduced AC thresholds. On the audiogram, 
this is deﬁ ned by an air–bone gap greater than 10 dB or as is illustrated for the 
right ear ([ and Δ) in   Fig. 2.8A  . Patients with SNHL have AC and BC thresholds that 
are equally depressed, are greater than 15 dB HL, and where no air–bone gaps are 
present. This is illustrated in  Fig. 2.8B , where the BC thresholds from 2000 to 4000 
Hz are beyond the limits of the audiometer. Finally, a patient with a mixed hearing 
loss has decreased AC and BC thresholds with a concurrent air–bone gap (i.e., BC 
threshold is > 15 dB HL and there is a signiﬁ cant air–bone gap) as can be seen for 
the left ear (] and □) in  Fig. 2.8C . 
◆

 Fig. 2.8    Example audiograms: conductive, sensorineural, and mixed ( A–C ). ( A ) Normal 
left; conductive right (mild from 250 to 1000 Hz gradually sloping to moderately severe 
from 2000 to 8000 Hz). ( B ) Bilateral SNHL (mild rising to normal from 250 to 1000 Hz, 
precipitously sloping from mild to severe from 1000 to 2000 Hz, with a severe trough 
configuration from 2000 to 8000 Hz). ( C ) Mild rising to slight SNHL in the right ear from 
250 to1000 Hz that precipitously slopes to severe through 8000 Hz; moderately severe 
mixed hearing loss from 250 to 2000 Hz steeply sloping to profound mixed hearing loss 
from 4000 to 8000 Hz in the left ear.      
A
B
C

2 Audiometric Testing 25
 What Are Audiometric Criteria for an Acoustic 
Neuroma?  
 Several audiometric “red ﬂ ags” may be indicative of a possible acoustic neuroma. 
Factors such as asymmetrical hearing loss in the high frequencies (at ≥ two adja-
cent frequencies), poor WRSs, elevated and/or absent ARTs, and positive acoustic 
reﬂ ex decay may be suggestive of a retrocochlear (i.e., past the cochlea) pathology. 
In addition to audiometric ﬁ ndings, subjective patient complaints of unilateral 
symptoms (i.e., tinnitus, aural fullness, facial numbness) should also be considered 
as possible indicators for a retrocochlear pathology, especially on the side with the 
expressed symptoms. When one or more of the aforementioned red ﬂ ags are pres-
ent, it is always recommended that the patient follow up with an otologist to rule 
out a retrocochlear pathology, which often involves auditory brainstem response 
(ABR) testing and medical imaging. 
 What Is Tympanometry and How Is It Interpreted?  
 Tympanometry  is an objective measure of middle ear function, which determines 
the amount of energy transmitted by the middle ear system. This measurement 
is obtained by placing a probe in the ear canal that consists of three ports: a loud-
speaker, manometer pressure pump, and microphone.   Figure 2.9   shows an immit-
tance audiometer with the probe indicated by the solid arrow. During tympanom-
etry, a 226 Hz tone is introduced by the loudspeaker via the probe assembly while 
the manometer pressure pump automatically and slowly varies the pressure in the 
ear canal from +200 to –200 daPa (dekapascals). In the meantime, the microphone 
in the probe assembly measures the change in intensity (in dB SPL) as the pres-
sure is varied. As immittance decreases (i.e., the eardrum is stiﬀ er and more sound 
is reﬂ ected oﬀ  the tympanic membrane), the measured SPL increases. As immit-
◆
◆
 Fig. 2.9  Example of an immittance audi-
ometer used to perform tympanometry, 
acoustic reflex thresholds, reflex decay, 
and eustachian tube function testing. 
The probe assembly is indicated by the 
solid arrow and the insert for contralat-
eral stimulation by the dashed arrow.  

26 Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
tance increases (i.e., the eardrum is more compliant and less sound is reﬂ ected oﬀ  
the tympanic membrane), the measured SPL decreases. When completing tym-
panometry, the audiologist is measuring  ear canal volume  ( ECV ) (physical space 
between the end of the probe assembly and the  tympanic membrane),  middle 
ear pressure  ( MEP ) (i.e., pressure along the abscissa of the tympanogram where 
the eardrum is the most compliant or where pressure is equal on both sides of the 
tympanic membrane), and  static admittance or maximum compliance (point 
along the tympanogram where the amount of reﬂ ected SPL is the least). 
 In the normal adult middle ear, the ECV would be between 0.6 and 1.5 ml, 
the MEP would be ±100 daPa, and the maximum compliance (i.e., height of the 
tympan  ogram) would be between 0.3 and 1.4 ml.   Table 2.5 provides normative 
values for the interpretation of tympanometry and   Fig. 2.10 illustrates a normal 
tympanogram. If the ECV is ≥ 1.5 ml, then this may suggest the presence of a per-
foration of the tympanic membrane or a functioning pressure equalization tube 
( Fig. 2.11A  , where ECV is 7.2 ml). An ECV of less than 0.60 ml may suggest a ceru-
men plug, blocked probe assembly, or an unusually small ear canal. If the MEP is 
greater than –100 daPa, then this might suggest the presence of a malfunctioning 
eustachian tube (  Fig. 2.11B  , where MEP is –230 daPa). An MEP of greater than 
+100 daPa may suggest the presence of acute otitis media. If the static compliance 
is less than 0.30 mmhos, this would suggest a “stiﬀ ” or hypocompliant middle ear 
system that could be related to, for example, the presence of otitis media or oto-
sclerosis (  Fig. 2.11C  , where static compliance is 0.2 ml). If the static compliance is 
 Table 2.5    Interpretation of Tympanometry  
 Parameter  
 Normal Range 
 Ear canal volume 
  0.6–1.5 ml  
 Middle ear pressure 
 ± 100 daPa 
 Static admittance 
  0.3–1.4 mmhos  
 Fig. 2.10    Example of a normal tym-
panogram.      

2 Audiometric Testing 27
greater than 1.4 mmhos, this would suggest a hypercompliant middle ear system 
that could be related to, for example, a scarred tympanic membrane or ossicular 
discontinuity ( Fig. 2.11D , where static compliance is 1.5 ml). 
 What Are Acoustic Reflex Thresholds and How Are 
They Interpreted?  
 The introduction of a loud sound to the ear canal of either ear results in the  acous-
tic reﬂ ex , or the contraction of the stapedius muscle (and to a lesser degree, the 
tensor tympani) causing the tympanic membrane to stiﬀ en and causing a result-
ing change in middle ear immittance. This change in immittance is measured as 
an increase in dB SPL by the microphone in the probe assembly.  Acoustic reﬂ ex 
thresholds  ( ARTs ), or the lowest level at which the acoustic reﬂ ex can be elicited 
(deﬂ ection ≥ 0.02 ml), are clinically useful in the direct evaluation of middle ear 
◆
Fig. 2.11   Abnormal tympanograms: ( A ) flat tympanogram accompanied by an en-
larged ear canal volume (7.2 ml) consistent with a perforation or a patent tympanos-
tomy tube; ( B ) significant negative pressure (–230 daPa); ( C ) hypocompliant tympano-
gram (0.2 ml); and ( D ) hypercompliant tympanogram (1.5 ml).      
A
B
C
D

28 Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
status and the indirect evaluation of cochlear and retrocochlear status. ARTs can 
be measured ipsilaterally (stimulus is in the probe ear) or contralaterally (stimu-
lus is in the non-probe ear) via a supra-aural or insert earphone (indicated by the 
dashed arrow in Fig. 2.9), and are commonly measured at 500, 1000, 2000, and 
4000 Hz.   Figure 2.12 illustrates the acoustic reﬂ ex pathway for ipsilateral (solid 
line) and contralateral (dashed line) stimulation. As can be seen in   Fig. 2.12 , the 
measurement of ARTs not only provides information regarding the status of the 
middle ear system, but also of the inner ear, auditory nerve, regions of the lower 
auditory brainstem, and the facial nerve. 
 Figure 2.13   illustrates the tracings obtained in ipsilateral ART testing at 500 
Hz (upper) and 1000 Hz (lower). In   Fig. 2.13  , the ART at 500 Hz is 85 dB HL and 
at 1000 Hz it is 80 dB HL, as this is the lowest level at which a deﬂ ection of ≥ 0.02 
ml is noted (notice how below threshold the reﬂ ex amplitude is less than 0.02 
and above threshold the reﬂ ex amplitude increases). ARTs are typically present 
between 70 and 100 dB HL in normal-hearing patients. Contralateral reﬂ exes are 
generally 5 to 10 dB SL re: the ipsilateral ART at the corresponding frequency. ARTs 
may be present at normal sensation levels, elevated SLs, reduced SLs, or may be 
completely absent.  Table 2.6 summarizes the interpretation of ARTs. 
 Fig. 2.12  Acoustic reflex arc illustrating right ipsilateral ( solid line ) and right contra-
lateral ( dashed line ) pathways.        (From: Martin & Clark,  INTRODUCTION TO AUDIOLOGY , Figure 6.6, p. 160, © 2006.  
Reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc.)

2 Audiometric Testing 29
 What Is Acoustic Reflex Decay and How Is It 
Interpreted?  
 Acoustic reﬂ ex decay  is a measure of the sustainability of the acoustic reﬂ ex, or 
how long the stapedius muscle can remain contracted during continuous stimula-
tion. Reﬂ ex decay is measured with contralateral stimulation at 500 and 1000 Hz at 
10 dB SL (re: contralateral ART). The tone is presented continuously for 10 seconds 
and the patient is instructed to remain as still as possible.  Negative reﬂ ex decay 
indicates that the magnitude of the stapedial reﬂ ex contraction did not decrease 
by ≥ 50% in the ﬁ rst 5 seconds of testing (  Fig. 2.14A ), whereas,  positive reﬂ ex de-
cay  indicates that the magnitude of the stapedial reﬂ ex contraction decreased by ≥ 
50% in the ﬁ rst 5 seconds of testing (  Fig. 2.14B  ). Positive acoustic reﬂ ex decay may 
be suggestive of a retrocochlear pathology and further evaluation by an otologist 
is strongly recommended. 
◆
 Fig. 2.13  Ipsilateral acous-
tic reflex thresholds at 500 
(upper curve) and 1000 
(lower curve) Hz from a pa-
tient with normal hearing. 
The ART at 500 Hz was es-
tablished at 85 dB HL and at 
1000 Hz was established at 
80 dB HL.      
Table 2.6  Interpretation of Acoustic Reﬂ ex Thresholds  
 Hearing Status  
 Expected Acoustic Reflex Threshold (dB HL) 
 Normal  
 70–100 dB HL 
 Conductive loss 
  Elevated or absent 
 Cochlear loss 
 Normal sensation level (SL) or reduced SL 
 Neural loss 
 Normal SL, elevated, or absent 

30 Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
 What Is the Stenger Test and How Is It Performed for 
Pure Tone and Speech Testing?  
 The  Stenger test is useful in the diﬀ erential diagnosis of  functional hearing loss 
or malingering when an individual presents with an  asymmetrical or  unilateral 
hearing loss (20 dB or greater diﬀ erence in hearing thresholds between the two 
ears at some audiometric frequencies or SRT). Clinical indicators of possible ma-
lingering may include lack of agreement between the PTA and SRT (±10 dB where 
the SRT is better than the PTA), inconsistent or exaggerated responses, SRT does 
not agree with the patient’s prior ability to easily answer questions on the case 
history or instructions, or when the patient responds positively on virtually every 
question in the case history. Other “signs” that may warn the audiologist that the 
patient may exaggerate a hearing loss is if the reason for the visit is for the purpose 
of compensation or as part of a lawsuit. 
 The Stenger test involves the presentation of pure tone or speech stimuli 
(spondee words) to both ears simultaneously (dichotic or diotic listening). In the-
ory, when tonal or speech stimuli are presented to the ears at the same time, with 
one stimulus louder in one ear, the ear where the SL is greatest will perceive the 
sound. For a pure tone Stenger test, a tone is introduced to the “better” ear at 10 dB 
above threshold and to the “poorer” ear at 10 dB below the admitted threshold. If 
the patient responds to the tones, the audiologist would know that he or she did 
indeed hear the sound in the better ear; however, if the patient fails to respond, 
this may indicate that the person is malingering. For example, at 1000 Hz a patient 
has an admitted threshold of 20 dB HL in the right ear and 60 dB HL in the left ear. 
The audiologist elects to use the pure tone Stenger test to rule out malingering, 
and therefore, simultaneously introduces a 1000 Hz tone to the right ear at 30 dB 
HL (10 dB above threshold) and to the left ear at 50 dB HL (10 dB below thresh-
old). If the patient responds to the presentation of the tones, then the Stenger test 
is negative and suggests that the patient indeed has poorer hearing in the ear in 
question. If the patient fails to respond, then the Stenger test is positive and sug-
gests a functional hearing loss in the poorer ear. 
◆
 Fig. 2.14  Negative ( A ) and positive ( B ) acoustic reflex decay at 1000 Hz.      
A
B

2 Audiometric Testing 31
 How Are Tuning Fork Tests Utilized Clinically? 
 Tuning fork tests are rarely used by audiologists, but are used by otologists and 
otolaryngologists with greater regularity. If an audiologist does perform such tests, 
he/she will typically use the BC vibrator rather than a tuning fork to present the 
stimuli. This is because the stimuli being sent by the bone vibrator is clear of any 
distortion, is of a known and calibrated intensity level, and does not decrease in 
intensity over time. 
 Tuning fork tests used in audiology consist of the  Weber, Rinne, Bing , and 
 Schwabach  tests. All of these examinations serve to identify the type or location of 
hearing loss. The  Weber  test is used to identify a unilateral hearing loss as conduc-
tive or sensorineural. A tuning fork (usually 512 or 1024 Hz) is placed at the mid-
line of the skull on the forehead and the patient is asked to determine where he/
she hears the sound. If the patient lateralizes the sound to the better ear, the test 
is suggestive of sensorineural loss in the poorer ear. If the patient lateralizes to the 
poorer ear, the test is suggestive of a conductive loss in the poorer ear. Individuals 
with normal hearing or with bilateral sensorineural hearing loss will lateralize 
to midline or will hear the tone in both ears equally. The  Weber  test may also be 
performed with the use of a BC oscillator as part of an audiometric evaluation. The 
 Rinne  test is also used to identify a hearing loss as sensorineural or conductive, 
and involves placing the tuning fork near the external auditory canal and on the 
mastoid process and asking the patient in which position the tone sounds loudest. 
If the patient reports that the tone is loudest when the tuning fork is placed on 
the mastoid process, then the test is suggestive of a conductive hearing loss. If the 
patient reports that the tone is loudest when the tuning fork is held near the outer 
ear, then the test is suggestive of normal hearing or sensorineural hearing loss. 
The  Bing test is used to determine if the occlusion eﬀ ect exists when the patient’s 
ear canal is closed oﬀ . The tuning fork is placed on the mastoid process while 
the patient’s ear canal is alternately opened and closed by pressing on the tragus. 
If the tone is louder when the ear canal is closed, then the test is suggestive of 
normal hearing or sensorineural hearing loss. If the tone does  not  sound louder 
when the ear canal is closed, then the test is suggestive of conductive hearing loss. 
The tuning fork test that is least commonly utilized is the  Schwabach  test, which 
is used to estimate AC thresholds of the patient by measuring the amount of time 
it takes for the patient to cease to hear a tone after the tuning fork has been struck. 
 Table 2.7   provides guidelines for interpretation of the most commonly used tun-
ing fork tests: Weber, Rinne, and Bing. 
◆

32 Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
 What Are Otoacoustic Emissions and How Are They 
Interpreted?  
 Otoacoustic emissions  ( OAE ), commonly referred to as cochlear “echoes,” reﬂ ect 
the active processes of the outer hair cells in the cochlea. Though some individu-
als have spontaneous OAE, most individuals do not. Evoked OAE, more speciﬁ cally 
 transient-evoked OAE  ( TEOAE ) and  distortion product OAE  ( DPOAE ) are most 
commonly used in the clinical setting to objectively assess outer hair cell function. 
OAE provide direct information regarding inner ear status (absent in moderate to 
profound SNHL) and indirect information regarding middle ear status (absent in 
CHL), and are especially useful in newborn hearing screenings, determining sen-
sory versus neural pathology, ototoxic monitoring, in cases of suspected malinger-
ing, and in patients who are diﬃ  cult to test behaviorally. Present OAE do not mean 
that hearing is normal, as OAE only begin to decrease at hearing losses of ~30 to 40 
dB HL ( Glattke & Robinette, 2007 ); therefore, OAE cannot be used to estimate au-
diometric thresholds. OAE are measured with a probe assembly placed in the ear 
canal consisting of two or three ports: one or two loudspeakers for introduction of 
the stimulus and a microphone to record the OAE in the ear canal. Measurement 
of OAE occurs through the use time-locked signal averaging; therefore, a quiet test 
environment and quiet patient are important factors. 
 TEOAE  are evoked using a click or toneburst stimulus, and the obtained re-
sponse therefore represents outer hair cell motility in the frequency region sur-
rounding 2000 Hz for click stimuli and at the frequency of the toneburst for 
toneburst stimuli. TEOAE are typically analyzed based on amplitude, response 
reproducibility, and the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), which are compared with nor-
mative data. Approximately 1000 stimuli are presented at a level of 80 dB peak 
◆
Table 2.7  Interpretation of Tuning Fork Tests  
 Tuning Fork Test  
 Outcome 
  Interpretation 
 Weber
 
 Lateralize to better ear 
Sensorineural loss in poorer 
 
 
 ear
 
Lateralize to poorer ear 
Conductive loss in the poorer 
 
 
 ear
 Rinne
 
 Tone loudest via bone 
Conductive loss
 
 conduction
 
Tone loudest via air conduction 
Sensorineural loss or normal 
 
 
 hearing
 
Bing
 
 Tone louder with tragus  
Sensorineural loss or normal
 
 closed versus tragus open 
 hearing
 
Tone same with tragus closed  
Conductive loss
 
 and tragus open 

2 Audiometric Testing 33
equivalent (pe) SPL, and the measured response amplitude is usually 60 to 70 dB 
below the presentation level ( Glattke & Robinette, 2007 ).   Figure 2.15 provides an 
example of a TEOAE (stimulus: 80 dB peSPL click) obtained from the left ear of a 
patient with normal hearing. This patient has present TEOAE as judged by the re-
sponse amplitude of 18.9 dB; response reproducibility of 95, 97, 99, 99, and 96% at 
1000, 2000, 3000, 4000, and 5000 Hz, respectively; and, SNR of 13, 16, 22, 22, and 
15 dB at 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000, and 5000 Hz, respectively (as indicated in the box 
labeled Response 18.9dB in  Fig. 2.15 ). 
 DPOAE  are evoked by the simultaneous presentation of two pure tones (F1 
and F2), which are separated in frequency by a ratio of ~1.2, and where F1 is pre-
sented at 65 dB SPL and F2 is presented at 55 dB SPL. The amplitude of the cubic 
distortion product (2F1-F2) is then measured in the ear canal and is considered to 
be the DPOAE. As a result, outer hair cell function at discrete frequency regions can 
be determined by varying the frequency of F1 and F2. The obtained DPOAE ampli-
tudes are plotted similarly to an audiogram on a distortion-product (DP) gram, as 
can be seen in   Fig. 2.16  , where frequency is plotted on the x-axis and amplitude 
(in dB SPL) is plotted on the y-axis. The solid curve with the “x” symbols on the 
DP-gram corresponds to the amplitude (dB SPL) of the DPOAE plotted at each F2 
frequency and the lower curve with the triangle symbols are the levels of the mea-
sured noise ﬂ oor (NF) in the ear canal. The two solid lines below the “x” symbol 
curve indicate normative values for the DP levels, and the two solid lines above the 
triangle curve represent the normative values for the NF levels. The curves for the 
squares and diamond symbols located at the top of the DP-gram are the measured 
stimulus level of F1 (65 dB SPL) and F2 (55 dB SPL) in the ear canal, respectively, 
and are used to monitor the probe ﬁ t throughout testing. Much like TEOAE, DPOAE 
are evaluated based on amplitude, reproducibility, and SNR, which are compared 
with normative data. 
 Fig. 2.15  Transient evoked otoacoustic emission (TEOAE) response from the left ear of 
a patient with normal audiometric thresholds.        (From: Glattke, T. J., & Robinette M. S. (2007). Otoacoustic 
emissions. In R. J. Roeser, M. Valente, & H. Hosford-Dunn (Eds.).  Audiology: Diagnosis . 2nd ed. (pp. 478–496). New York: Thieme 
Medical Publishers, Inc.) 

34 Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
 What Is Electrocochleography?  
 Auditory evoked potential (AEP) testing measures the amount of electrical activ-
ity from the peripheral and central auditory nervous system in response to an 
acoustic stimulus. AEP measurement results in the generation of a waveform, with 
time (msec) plotted on the x-axis and amplitude (microvolts, μV) on the y-axis. 
Response parameters used in the interpretation of AEPs may include the latency 
of the response, waveform morphology, and amplitude, which are compared with 
normative data. AEP testing requires a relaxed patient state and uses time-locked 
signal averaging and ﬁ ltering to improve the SNR and minimize test artifact from 
external (environment) and internal (patient) noise sources. 
 Electrocochleography  ( ECOG  or  ECochG ) is one such AEP that measures the 
electrical activity generated in the cochlea and vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII). 
The components of this AEP are the cochlear microphonic (CM) potential, the 
summating potential (SP), and the compound action potential (AP) of the audi-
tory nerve. Generator sites for ECOG components are as follows: CM—outer hair 
cells; SP—outer hair cells, inner hair cells, and organ of Corti; AP—aﬀ erent ﬁ bers 
of the distal eigth cranial nerve and spiral ganglion ( Ferraro, 2007 ). In ECOG test-
ing, alternating polarity click stimuli at ≥ 85 dBnHL (db normalized hearing level) 
are presented to the TE, and the response is recorded with the following electrode 
montage: an active electrode at the ipsilateral ear canal (or it may be placed on the 
◆
 Fig. 2.16    DP-gram plotting the distortion product otoacoustic emissions from the 
left ear of a patient with normal audiometric thresholds. DPOAE were measured using 
an ototoxic monitoring protocol; therefore, emissions were measured from ~1500 to 
10000 Hz.      

2 Audiometric Testing 35
tympanic membrane or promontory), a reference electrode at the vertex (or con-
tralateral earlobe/mastoid), and a ground electrode on the forehead. This response 
occurs in the ﬁ rst 5 millisecondsec following the onset of an acoustic stimulus, and 
the component parts are recorded on an electrocochleogram. ECOG test results 
are interpreted by calculating the summating potential:action potential (SP:AP) 
amplitude ratio, where a normal SP:AP ratio is considered to be less than 0.5 μV. 
 Figure 2.17  illustrates a normal electrocochleogram. 
 ECOG is most commonly used in the diﬀ erential diagnosis of Meniere’s dis-
ease. In addition, ECOG may be used for enhancement of Wave I of the ABR (AP 
of the electrocochleogram), intraoperative monitoring in an attempt to preserve 
hearing, and in the diagnosis of auditory neuropathy. In patients with Meniere’s 
disease, the SP is enlarged and the SP:AP ratio is greater than or equal to 0.5 μV, as 
is illustrated in   Fig. 2.18  . It is important to keep in mind that other pathologies that 
may inﬂ uence basilar membrane mechanics, such as perilymph ﬁ stula and supe-
rior semicircular canal dehiscense, will also result in an enlarged SP and, therefore, 
an abnormal SP:AP ratio. 
 Fig. 2.17  Normal electrocochleography (ECOG) tracing: SP/AP=0.08μV/0.39 μV=0.20      

36 Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
 What Is Auditory Brainstem Response Testing?  
 The  ABR  is a measurement of the synchronous neural activity of the auditory 
nerve and auditory brainstem in response to an acoustic stimulus. ABR testing 
utilizes click and/or toneburst stimuli that are introduced to the ear via an insert 
earphone, headphone, or BC oscillator. Electrodes placed at the vertex and on each 
earlobe (or mastoid) are used to record the ABR. The ABR waveform consists of 
ﬁ ve to seven vertex-positive peaks, which are generated in the ﬁ rst 10 millisec-
ondsec following stimulus onset and are labeled using Roman numerals. The ABR 
waveform involves multiple generator sites along the auditory nervous system: 
Wave I—compound AP of distal portions of the auditory nerve, Wave II—synchro-
nous activity of the proximal auditory nerve, and Waves III through V—multiple 
generator sites in the auditory brainstem ( Hood, 1998 ). Waves I, III, and V are the 
most prominent ABR components and the amplitude and latency of these waves 
are used in the interpretation of the ABR. The following ABR parameters are com-
monly used in interpretation: amplitude and amplitude ratio, absolute latencies 
of Waves I, III, and V, interpeak latencies of Waves I to III, III to V, and I to V, la-
tency-intensity function, latency shift of Wave V with stimulus rate increase, and 
the interaural latency diﬀ erence of Wave V. In addition, waveform morphology 
and replicability are important factors in ABR interpretation.  Table 2.8 provides 
◆
 Fig. 2.18  Abnormal electrocochleography (ECOG) tracing: SP/AP=0.25μV/0.30 μV=0.84      

2 Audiometric Testing 37
normative information for a variety of ABR parameters used in interpretation and 
 Fig. 2.19 illustrates both a normal and abnormal ABR tracing. 
 The ABR is clinically useful as a tool to estimate hearing sensitivity in patients 
who are diﬃ  cult to test behaviorally, as a neurodiagnostic tool in an attempt to 
evaluate retrocochlear status (i.e., diﬀ erential diagnosis of an acoustic neuroma), 
for intraoperative monitoring, and in newborn hearing screenings. When ABR 
testing is utilized for the purpose of estimating hearing sensitivity, the stimulus 
intensity is gradually decreased until the lowest level at which Wave V is pres-
ent can be determined. This level is deﬁ ned as the ABR threshold and can predict 
hearing sensitivity within 5 to 20 dB ( Arnold, 2007 ). Threshold ABR testing should 
use both click and toneburst stimuli to obtain as much diagnostic information as 
possible, because the click stimulus only estimates hearing sensitivity for a broad 
frequency range around 2000 Hz. 
 When a neurodiagnostic ABR is performed, click stimuli at suprathreshold 
levels (≥ 75 dBnHL) are introduced to the TE and the interaural latency diﬀ erence 
of Wave V (often referred to as IT5) and the Wave I to V interpeak latencies are ana-
lyzed and compared with normative data. In addition, stimuli may be presented 
Table 2.8  Normative Values for Various Parameters of Auditory Brainstem Response 
Interpretation  
 ABR Parameter 
  Normal Value 
 Amplitude 
 0.1–0.5 μV
 Absolute latency at 75 dBnHL 
 Wave I 
1.6 millisecondsec ±0.2 millisecondsec 
 Wave III 
3.7 millisecondsec ±0.2 millisecondsec
 Wave V 
 5.6 millisecondsec ±0.2 millisecondsec
 Interpeak latencies 
 Wave I – III  
2.0 millisecondsec  ±0.4 millisecondsec
 Wave III – V 
1.8 millisecondsec  ±0.4 millisecondsec
 Wave I – V  
3.8 millisecondsec ±0.4 millisecondsec
 Latency-Intensity function 
 (50 – 70 dBnHL)  
0.3 millisecondsec per 10 dB
 Wave V 
 Stimulus rate increase 
 (21.1/s – 67.1/s)  
< 0.5 millisecondsec
 Wave V latency shift 
 Amplitude ratio 
 Wave V/I 
> 1.0 μV 
 Interaural latency diﬀ erence 
 Wave V 
 < 0.4 millisecondsec
  Source:  Data from: Hood, L. J. (1998).  Clinical applications of the auditory brainstem response.  San 
Diego: Singular Publishing Group, Inc. 

38 Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
at a slow (i.e., 21.1 stimuli per second) and fast (i.e., 67.1 stimuli per second) rate 
of presentation, and the amount by which Wave V latency shifts is analyzed and 
compared with normative data. Criteria for referrals for otoneurolgic ABR testing 
include unilateral and/or asymmetric sensorineural hearing loss, unilateral tinni-
tus, dizziness that is central in origin, poorer than expected WRSs, and signiﬁ cant 
acoustic reﬂ ex decay and/or elevated or absent ARTs. In making referrals for ABR 
testing, it is important to keep in mind that the degree and slope of hearing loss 
may aﬀ ect the ability to obtain equivocal results. In general, ABR results in patients 
with PTAs greater than 80 dB HL at 2000 Hz and above may result in inconclusive 
results. Standard ABR testing is most sensitive at detecting medium and large tu-
mors (greater than 1.5 cm). Another otoneurologic application of the ABR includes 
its use as a preoperative predictive indicator of hearing preservation following 
surgery for an acoustic neuroma. For example, the likelihood that hearing will be 
preserved in an acoustic neuroma patient with poor morphology and/or absent 
waveforms on an ABR preoperatively is small. 
 Common ABR patterns exist dependent upon pathology. Conductive hearing 
loss results in a prolongation of all waves, so absolute wave latencies are delayed, 
whereas interpeak latencies are within normal limits. Cochlear hearing losses may 
result in the absence or delay of Wave I; therefore, the I to V interpeak latency may 
be reduced, and a steepened latency-intensity function may exist. Retrocochlear 
 Fig. 2.19  ABR results from a patient with complaints of constant tinnitus in the left 
ear. ABR results were suggestive of retrocochlear dysfunction for the left ear and were 
normal for the right ear.      

2 Audiometric Testing 39
pathology may result in prolonged absolute latencies, prolonged interpeak laten-
cies, interaural diﬀ erence in the absolute latency of Wave V, and poor morphology. 
 What Is Stacked Auditory Brainstem Response Testing?  
 A new method of measuring the ABR in an attempt to detect smaller tumors (less 
than 1 cm) is the  stacked ABR . The stacked ABR is much more time-consuming 
than the standard ABR and requires a more controlled subject state, as the stacked 
ABR requires a greater amount of data collection and is much more degraded by 
muscle artifact than standard ABR. In addition, the stacked ABR uses the same 
electrode montage as the standard ABR, though greater precision in the distance 
between electrodes is required. The stacked ABR uses (a) a wide-band click (60–65 
dBnHL) to stimulate a broad frequency region of the cochlea and auditory nerve, 
identically to the standard ABR, and (b) clicks in the presence of high-pass pink 
noise with varying cut-oﬀ  frequencies (8000, 4000, 2000, 1000, and 500 Hz) to 
separate the responses from more discrete frequency regions of the cochlea and 
auditory nerve ( Don, Kwong, Tanaka, Brackmann, & Nelson, 2005 ). The response 
to clicks in the presence of masking noise are summed (or stacked) to estimate 
total neural activity, and the amplitude of the resulting stacked ABR is compared 
with normative data and/or with the stacked ABR amplitude of the opposite ear. In 
patients with retrocochlear pathology, the amplitude of the stacked ABR will be re-
duced as will the interaural diﬀ erence in Wave V amplitude.   Figure 2.20 illustrates 
◆
 Fig. 2.20  Stacked ABR results from a patient with a 1 cm right acoustic neuroma. This 
patient had a normal interaural latency difference of Wave V (IT5) and normal I to V inter-
peak latency for the left ear on the standard ABR. The amplitude of the stacked ABR on 
the tumor side was reduced 50% compared with the non-tumor side.        (From: Don, M., & Kwong, B.
(2007). Auditory brainstem response: Differential diagnosis. In J. Katz (Ed.).  Handbook of clinical audiology . 5th ed. (pp. 274–297). 
Baltimore, MD: Lippincott, Williams, & Wilkins.) 

40 Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
stacked ABR results for a patient with a 1 cm right acoustic neuroma. It should be 
noted that because this is an amplitude-dependent measurement, any degree of 
cochlear hearing loss may reduce the amplitude of the response and will therefore 
result in inconclusive results. 
 What Is Cochlear Hydrops Analysis Masking 
Procedure? 
 CHAMP  testing, which stands for  Cochlear Hydrops Analysis Masking Procedure , 
is utilized for diﬀ erential diagnosis of Meniere’s disease. Because Meniere’s disease 
alters the mechanics of the basilar membrane and the way in which the cochlea 
processes auditory information, it is believed that low-frequency masking noise is 
less eﬀ ective at masking higher frequency regions of the cochlea ( Don, Kwong, & 
Tanaka, 2005 ). CHAMP testing uses the same electrode montage of standard ABR 
testing while click stimuli are delivered to the ear in the presence of high-pass pink 
noise with varying cut-oﬀ  frequencies, identically to the stacked ABR protocol. In 
patients with Meniere’s disease, Wave V fails to increase in latency with the con-
tinual introduction of greater amounts of low-frequency energy in the masking 
noise, whereas in non-Meniere’s patients, Wave V increases in latency as greater 
low-frequency content is included in the masking noise.   Figure 2.21 illustrates a 
CHAMP response in a patient with right Meniere’s disease. The left ear response 
was within normal limits, as Wave V latency increased signiﬁ cantly as the spec-
trum of the masking noise was broadened; however, the right ear response was 
abnormal, as Wave V latency failed to shift signiﬁ cantly. 
◆
 Fig. 2.21    CHAMP tracing. A normal result was found for the left ear, as is noted by the 
shift in Wave V latency; however, right ear results were abnormal, as Wave V latency 
shift was not significant.      

2 Audiometric Testing 41
 References 
 American National Standards Institute. (Revised 2003).  American National Stan-
dard maximum permissible ambient noise levels for audiometric test rooms (S3.1–
1999). New York: Acoustical Society of America. 
 American National Standards Institute. (Revised 2004).  American National Stan-
dard specification for audiometers (S3.6–2004). New York: Acoustical Society of 
America.
 Arnold, S. A. (2007). The auditory brainstem response. In R. J. Roeser, M. Valente, & 
H. Hosford-Dunn (Eds.).  Audiology: Diagnosis.  2nd ed. (pp. 426–442). New York: 
Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc.  
 Don,  M. ,  Kwong,  B. , &  Tanaka,  C. ( 2005 , July).  A diagnostic test for Ménière’s disease 
and cochlear hydrops: Impaired high-pass noise masking of auditory brainstem 
responses.  Otology & Neurotology , 26  ( 4 ),  711 – 722 . 
 
 Don,  M. ,  Kwong,  B. ,  Tanaka,  C. ,  Brackmann  D. E. , &  Nelson   R. A. ( 2005 , September/
October).  The stacked ABR: A sensitive and specific screening tool for detecting 
small acoustic tumors.  Audiology & Neuro-Otology , 10  ( 5 ),  274 – 290 . 
 
 Ferraro, J. A. (2007). Electrocochleography. In R. J. Roeser, M. Valente, & H. Hos-
ford-Dunn (Eds.)  Audiology: Diagnosis. 2nd ed. (pp. 400–425). New York: Thieme 
Medical Publishers, Inc. 
 Glattke, T. J., & Robinette, M. S. (2007). Otoacoustic emissions. In R. J. Roeser, M. 
Valente, & H. Hosford-Dunn (Eds.)  Audiology: Diagnosis . 2nd ed. (pp. 478–496). 
New York: Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc. 
 Hood, L. J. (1998).  Clinical applications of the auditory brainstem response. San Di-
ego, CA: Singular Publishing Group, Inc. 
 Roeser, R. J., & Clark, J. L.(2007). Clinical masking. In R. J. Roeser, M. Valente, & 
H. Hosford-Dunn (Eds.)  Audiology: Diagnosis . 2nd ed. (pp. 261–287). New York: 
Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc.  
 
 
 

42
3  Vestibular Evaluation
What Is the Computerized Dynamic Posturography 
Test?
Balance and mobility are complex tasks that involve the coordination of numerous 
systems working together in harmony. Computerized dynamic posturography 
(CDP) evaluates the patient’s ability to use these systems both together and inde-
pendently. During the test, upright balance function is assessed and the patient’s 
functional limitations are determined. This is accomplished through a variety of 
tasks that attempt to simulate conditions encountered in daily life. Unlike video-
oculography (VOG) and rotational chair tests, which look primarily at the hori-
zontal vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR), CDP is unique in that it attempts to evaluate 
the function of the vestibulospinal reflex (VSR) in addition to visual and somato-
sensory cues. Furthermore, performance on CDP is influenced by input from the 
vertical semicircular canals and otolith organs (Furman, 1995).
To perform the test, the patient stands on a force platform that is surrounded 
on three sides by an enclosure that blocks the patient’s field of view. The force plat-
form consists of two footplates supported by five force sensors that detect exertion 
from the patient’s feet along the horizontal and vertical axes (EquiTest, NeuroCom 
International Inc., Clackamas, Oregon; see NeuroCom International, 2000). Results 
of the test can be used to quantify and differentiate impairment in the sensory, mo-
tor, and central systems as well as aid in the rehabilitation of the patient (Nashner, 
2008). It can provide insight regarding the current state of central compensation in 
patients with a unilateral peripheral vestibular injury or bilateral loss. Furthermore, 
the test can help identify patients suspected to have exaggerated symptoms.
What Is the Sensory Organization Test?
During the sensory organization test (SOT) the patient attempts to maintain bal-
ance under six different conditions that incorporate various combinations of sup-
port surface and visual surround motion. Effective use of visual, vestibular, and 
somatosensory inputs as well as appropriate sensory integration and an intact mus-
culoskeletal system are required to perform optimally on the test (Nashner, 2008).
There are six SOT conditions with a maximum of three trials each (Fig. 3.1): 
Condition 1—the platform and visual environment are stable. The patient has ac-
cess to all three inputs to maintain balance. Condition 2—the platform is stable and 
the patient’s eyes are closed. The patient must rely on vestibular and somatosen-
sory inputs. Condition 3—the platform is stable, but the visual surround moves in 
concert with the patient (sway referenced) providing a distorted visual input. This 
assesses how well the patient can disregard the false input from the visual system 
and utilize the two other systems. Condition 4—the surround is now stable but 
the platform is sway referenced. Under this condition, the patient relies primar-
◆
◆

3  Vestibular Evaluation  43
ily on visual and vestibular inputs. Condition 5—the platform is sway referenced 
and the patient’s eyes are closed. The patient must rely primarily on vestibular in-
put because somatosensory and visual input has been distorted. Condition 6—the 
platform and surround are both sway referenced. The patient must rely on vestibu-
lar input and ignore false visual and somatosensory inputs.
Following each SOT trial, an equilibrium score (EQ) is calculated (Fig. 3.2). The 
EQ represents the maximum amount of anteroposterior (AP) sway that occurred 
during each trial (NeuroCom International, 2000). The highest possible score is 
Fig. 3.1  Sensory organization test—six conditions. The patient stands on a force plat-
form with a visual surround on three sides to block the field of view. Each trial becomes 
progressively more difficult. The platform is fixed in the first three trials and sway refer-
enced in the last three. The surround is sway referenced in trials 3 and 6. In trials 2 and 
5 vision is denied. (Reprinted with permission from: NeuroCom International, Inc. (2001). Equitest system operators manual. 
(version 7.04). Clackamas, OR: NeuroCom International, Inc.)

44  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
100 (which would be indicative of no sway) and the lowest possible score is a 0 
(fall or step). The greater the amount of AP sway during the trial, the closer the 
score is to 0. If the operator marks the trial as a fall, the word FALL appears on the 
graph and that trial is scored as a 0 (NeuroCom International, 2000).
The formula used to calculate the EQ is as follows:
where 12.5 degrees is the normal limit of sway stability and θ represents the AP 
Center of Gravity (COG) Sway Angle (NeuroCom International, 2000). The score for 
Fig. 3.2  Sensory organization test (SOT) comprehensive report in a normal subject. 
The equilibrium score illustrated by the top graph depicts the patient’s performance 
on each trial of the SOT and is divided into the six SOT conditions. The composite score 
reflects the stability of the patient during the SOT test as a whole. The sensory analysis 
graph reflects patient performance when utilizing the different inputs to balance: so-
matosensory (SOM), visual (VIS), and vestibular (VEST) as well as the patient’s ability 
to ignore conflicting visual input (PREF). Strategy analysis indicates the use of hip and 
ankle strategies to maintain balance. Scores approaching 100 indicate primary use of 
ankle strategy, whereas scores approaching 0 indicate primary use of hip strategy. COG 
alignment reflects the patient’s center of gravity at the start of each SOT trial.

3  Vestibular Evaluation  45
each trial is displayed on a graph and compared with age-matched normative data 
within the system. Scores that exceed the shaded area on the graph are considered 
to be within normal limits and appear as a green bar on the graph. Those scores 
falling within the shaded area are considered outside normal limits and appear as 
a red bar. A composite equilibrium score is also calculated. “The composite equilib-
rium score is calculated by (a) independently averaging the scores for conditions 
1 and 2; (b) adding these two scores to the equilibrium scores from each trial of 
sensory conditions 3, 4, 5, and 6; and (c) dividing that sum by the total number of 
trials” (NeuroCom International, 2000, p. SOT-7).
Specific sensory impairments to balance have been associated with various 
patterns of SOT performance (Fig. 3.3). Decreased SOT 5 and 6 is referred to as a 
Fig. 3.3  Abnormal SOT patterns. (A) Vestibular dysfunction; (B) vestibular loss; (C) sup-
port surface dependence; (D) vision preference; (E) visual preference; (F) aphysiologic.    
A
C
E
B
D
F

46  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
vestibular dysfunction pattern (Nashner, 2008). These patients may have uncom-
pensated unilateral or bilateral vestibular dysfunction. Patients with bilateral loss 
may demonstrate early falls on SOT 5 and 6 (Goebel, White, & Heidenreich, 2009), 
which is indicative of a vestibular loss pattern (Fig. 3.4). Decreased SOT 4, 5, and 
6 is referred to as a support surface dependence (somatosensory dependence) 
pattern and indicates impairment in the use of both vestibular and visual inputs to 
balance. Decreased SOT 2, 3, 5, and 6 is referred to as a visual dependence pattern. 
These patients may have impairment in the utilization of both somatosensory and 
vestibular inputs. Decreased SOT 3 and 6 is referred to as a vision preference pat-
tern (Nashner, 2008). These patients may have impairment in the central adap-
tive mechanisms for suppression of conflicting visual input (Nashner, 2008). An 
aphysiologic pattern is characterized as one in which the patient performs better 
on the more difficult conditions or has great inter-test variability (Nashner, 2008). 
This may also present as a global dysfunction in a patient in which observation 
prior to the test suggests a higher level of functional ability.
Fig. 3.4  Early falls during SOT trials 5 and 6 in a patient with bilateral vestibular loss.

3  Vestibular Evaluation  47
Fig. 3.5  Inter-trial vari-
ability on the sensory or-
ganization test.
Fig. 3.6  Circular sway as seen on 
the raw data tracing of the sensory 
organization test in a patient with 
aphysiologic balance dysfunction.
Results of the SOT may provide indications of aphysiologic performance. This 
may occur in several ways: (1) an improvement in postural ability on the more 
difficult conditions; (2) considerable inter-trial variability as seen in Fig. 3.5; (3) 
reduced scores on condition 1 when the patient did not appear to have postural or 
gait instability immediately prior to the examination; and/or (4) excessive lateral 
and/or circular sway patterns as seen in Fig. 3.6 (Nashner, 2008).
What Can Be Gained from Center of Gravity Scores 
and Strategy Analysis?
COG alignment appears as a scatter plot on the comprehensive report for the SOT 
and reflects the patient’s COG at the start of each SOT trial (NeuroCom International, 
2000) (Fig. 3.2). COG scores are useful in determining the patient’s risk of falls. To 
remain upright, the body must be able to maintain its COG on a relatively small 
base of support. A person’s limits of stability is defined as the maximum distance 
the body can lean in any given direction without losing balance. When the body 
is placed beyond its limits of stability, one must take a step or stumble to recover 
◆

48  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
balance and avoid falling (Nashner, 2008). Therefore, a COG that is significantly ec-
centric reduces the distance the body can lean in that direction before exceeding 
the limits of stability, thus placing the patient at a higher risk for falls.
Strategy analysis helps to determine if the patient uses ankle and hip strat-
egies appropriately when performing balance tasks (Fig. 3.2). Strategy analysis 
scores range from 100 to 0. A score of 100 indicates exclusive use of ankle strategy 
and a score of 0 indicates exclusive use of hip strategy (NeuroCom International, 
2000). Strategy analysis scores that lie between the two extremes indicate a com-
bination of the two strategies was used (NeuroCom International, 2000). The strat-
egy analysis is calculated by the following formula:
In this formula, 25 lb is the “difference measured between the greatest shear 
force (ShMAX) and the lowest shear force (ShMIN) generated by a test group of normal 
subjects who used only hip sway to balance on a narrow beam (Nashner, unpub-
lished data)” (NeuroCom International, 2000). Ankle strategy is most appropriate 
for small adjustments to the center of gravity such as those that occur when the 
support surface is firm and movement is slow. Hip strategies are more effective 
with rapid movements or when COG approaches the limits of stability (Nashner, 
2008).
What Is the Sensory Analysis Graph?
The sensory analysis graph is based on the average equilibrium scores of specific 
paired SOT conditions. It is designed to aid in the interpretation of how well the 
patient uses somatosensory (SOM), visual (VIS), and vestibular (VEST) inputs as 
well as his or her ability to ignore conflicting visual input (PREF) (Fig. 3.2).
What Is the Motor Control Test?
The motor control test evaluates automatic motor reflex responses to sudden, 
unexpected forward and backward translations of the support surface (Neuro-
Com International, 2000). The amplitude of the translations is determined by the 
individual patient’s height. Three consecutive trials of small, medium, and large 
translations are recorded for both backward and forward perturbations. A score is 
determined for latency, weight symmetry, and amplitude scaling (Fig. 3.7).
Latency refers to the time it takes for the automatic postural response to occur 
following the onset of platform translation. Latencies are calculated for each leg 
and each translation and are valuable for identifying motor system abnormalities 
(Nashner, 1997). Prolonged latencies imply dysfunction in any one or a combina-
◆
◆

3  Vestibular Evaluation  49
tion of the components which comprise the long-loop automatic motor system 
and are most often associated with central and/or peripheral nervous system le-
sions (Nashner, 1997; Nashner, 2008).
Weight symmetry refers to the percentage of body weight that is placed on 
each individual leg during the motor control test (Nashner, 2008). Amplitude scal-
ing provides indication of the strength of the postural response (Nashner, 2008).
Examination of motor control test raw data may provide further insight when 
an aphysiologic cause is suspected. A voluntary component is suspected when re-
sponse tracings vary dramatically from one trial to the next, or when responses to 
small translations are large and highly variable (Nashner, 2008) (Fig. 3.8). Aphysi-
ologic patterns may occur in patients who are either highly anxious or deliberately 
exaggerating sway (Nashner, 2008).
Fig. 3.7  Motor control test results in a normal subject. Weight symmetry indicates 
the percentage of body weight placed on each leg during small, medium, and large 
translations of the platform. Latency indicates the time lapse between onset of plat-
form translation and the automatic postural response. Amplitude scaling indicates the 
strength of the response.

50  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
What Is the Adaptation Test?
As described by Nashner (2008), “The adaptation test assesses the ability to bal-
ance on irregular surfaces by suppressing automatic reactions to surface perturba-
tions when they are disruptive to our stability” (p. 172). During the adaptation test, 
the patient attempts to maintain his or her  balance during identical sequences of 
five toes-up and five toes-down rotations of the platform (Nashner, 2008). The 
amplitude of the patient’s sway is measured immediately following each surface 
rotation (Fig. 3.9). Measurements indicate how well the patient is able to utilize 
adaptive mechanisms to enhance stability (Nashner, 1997).
◆
Fig. 3.8  Motor control test raw data. (A) Response tracings are inconsistent and reflect 
a voluntary component. (B) Response tracings obtained on a patient with normal func-
tion or true pathology.    
A
B

3  Vestibular Evaluation  51
What Are the Clinical Applications of the 
Computerized Dynamic Posturography Test?
CDP may provide useful information in patients with case histories that indicate 
a history of falls, disequilibrium, postural instability, gait abnormalities, chronic 
symptoms indicating inadequate compensation, vertigo or dizziness of unknown 
etiology, or when a non-organic cause is suspected. Results from CDP may also be 
applied to the development and monitoring of vestibular rehabilitation (Neuro-
Com International, 2000).
◆
Fig. 3.9  Adaptation test results in a normal subject.

52  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
What Are the Limitations of the Computerized 
Dynamic Posturography Test?
CDP does not indicate specific pathology, but rather provides a quantitative as-
sessment of the patient’s functional limitations. The test cannot be performed on 
everyone. Physical requirements for the test include a minimum weight of 40 lb, 
minimum height of 30 inches and the ability to stand unassisted for more than 2 
to 3 minutes (NeuroCom International, 2000). It should be noted that some of the 
SOT trials cannot be completed if the patient is blind.
What Is Video-Oculography?
VOG, also known as videonystagmography (VNG), is the most frequently ordered 
test in the dizziness and balance laboratory. Sometimes still referred to as electro-
nystagmography or ENG, video-oculography utilizes video rather than electrode 
recording (Fig. 3.10). VOG is a combination of tests that assess ocular motor func-
tion and the horizontal VOR. The test helps to differentiate between peripheral 
and central causes of dizziness and imbalance as well as provides important later-
alization cues. The VOG test battery may include, but is not limited to, the follow-
ing subtests: random saccades, horizontal and/or vertical smooth pursuit, spon-
taneous nystagmus with and without fixation, gaze nystagmus with and without 
fixation, post-headshake, positional/positioning, bithermal calorics, and fixation 
suppression.
◆
◆
Fig. 3.10  Video-oculography goggles. 
In this photo, the infrared camera has 
been placed in the portal in front of the 
patient’s right eye. Pivoting the cover 
over the remaining portal ­allows testing 
in total darkness (without fixation) on 
certain subtests of the VOG.

3  Vestibular Evaluation  53
How Are Abnormalities on Saccades Interpreted?
The random saccade test assesses velocity, accuracy, and latency of the eyes as 
they fixate upon alternating targets. Abnormalities on saccades are a central find-
ing but may also be caused by factors such as inattention, age, visual acuity, or 
medication effect (Leigh & Zee, 1991) (Fig. 3.11).
◆
Fig. 3.11  Disconjugate saccades in a patient diagnosed with multiple sclerosis. Note 
the difference in left and right velocities.

54  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
How Are Pursuit Abnormalities Significant?
For the smooth pursuit test, the patient is asked to follow a target with his or her 
eyes as it moves in the horizontal or vertical plane. Abnormal findings on pursuit 
include saccadic or absent smooth pursuit and are considered a central finding 
(Fig. 3.12). Other factors that may cause abnormal findings on pursuit include the 
patient’s age, visual acuity, vigilance, and medication effect (Cass, 2008).
When Is Spontaneous Nystagmus Significant and 
What Does It Mean?
Spontaneous nystagmus is measured first with the patient staring at a target di-
rectly in front of him or her and then with fixation denied. Spontaneous nystag-
mus is considered abnormal when the slow component velocity exceeds 6 de-
grees/second (Shepard & Telian, 1996). Characteristics of the nystagmus can help 
determine its origin.
Spontaneous nystagmus of peripheral origin is horizontal and becomes more 
pronounced when visual fixation is denied. The nystagmus is usually direction-
fixed. Alexander’s law states that spontaneous nystagmus due to a vestibular lesion 
will intensify with gaze in the direction of the fast phase and will diminish with 
gaze in the direction of the slow phase. Alexander classified the nystagmus by its 
intensity and direction. Nystagmus that is only visible when gazing in the direction 
of the fast phase is considered first-degree nystagmus. The nystagmus is more in-
tense with second-degree nystagmus and is visible when the eyes are in the neutral 
position as well as when gazing in the direction of the nystagmus. The nystagmus 
is most intense in third-degree nystagmus and is present when gazing in all direc-
tions (Isaacson, Ort, & Rubin, 2008). Patients with acute unilateral vestibular dys-
function may go through all three classifications as central compensation occurs.
Spontaneous nystagmus of central origin usually has a prominent vertical 
component, does not improve with fixation, and is accompanied with less vertigo 
than peripheral nystagmus (Brandt, 1997). Furthermore, central nystagmus often 
changes directions when gaze is directed away from the fast phase (Brandt, 1997).
◆
◆
Fig. 3.12  Saccadic pursuit in a patient with central pathology.

3  Vestibular Evaluation  55
What Is the Significance of Gaze Nystagmus?
For the gaze nystagmus test, the patient is asked to hold the eyes in several eccentric 
positions first while staring at a target, and then with fixation denied. Nystagmus 
that occurs only when the eyes are held in certain eccentric positions is referred 
to as gaze-evoked nystagmus. Gaze-evoked nystagmus is a central finding but may 
also be caused by alcohol or medication effect (Hain, 1997; Bhansali, 2008).
What Does Post-Headshake Nystagmus Indicate?
The post-headshake test is useful for detecting asymmetry in vestibular tone and/
or velocity storage (Leigh & Zee, 1991). For this test, the examiner rapidly shakes 
the patient’s head in the plane of the horizontal canal for 10 to 20 seconds. Fol-
lowing headshake, the eyes are observed for any resultant nystagmus. Horizon-
tal post-headshake nystagmus indicates a unilateral vestibular lesion and usually 
beats toward the stronger side (Takahashi, Fetter, Koenig, & Dichgans, 1990). In 
some instances, headshake nystagmus may beat toward the side of the lesion as is 
sometimes seen in patients with Meniere’s disease (Takahashi et al, 1990). A verti-
cal nystagmus which results from horizontal headshake is indicative of a central 
vestibular lesion (Leigh & Zee, 1991).
What Do Positional/Positioning Tests Indicate?
Positional nystagmus is induced by holding the head in a specific position. To test 
for positional nystagmus, movement of the patient’s eyes is observed while the 
patient holds the head and body in each position. Typical positions evaluated are 
the upright, supine, right ear-down and left ear-down positions. Each position is 
maintained for a minimum of 30 seconds (Gianoli & Smullen, 2008). Positional 
nystagmus is considered abnormal if it exceeds 6 degrees/second in a single posi-
tion and may be of peripheral or central origin (Brandt, 1997).
Positioning nystagmus is tested using the Dix-Hallpike maneuver (Dix & 
Hallpike, 1952). The maneuver is performed by first turning the patient’s head 
45 degrees to the left or right while the patient is seated on the examining table. 
The examiner then assists the patient as he or she quickly moves into a reclined 
position with the head tilted back at a 30 degree angle, while at the same time 
carefully supporting the patient’s neck. The patient remains in this position for at 
least 60 seconds or until the response diminishes before rising back to the upright 
position. The maneuver is repeated with the head turned 45 degrees in the op-
posite direction.
The Dix-Hallpike maneuver is most sensitive when the patient is denied visual 
fixation although the torsional component is not suppressed by vision. The use 
◆
◆
◆

56  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
of VOG or Frenzel lenses allows the examiner to directly observe the nystagmus 
elicited by the maneuver while fixation is denied. Diagnosis of benign paroxsymal 
positional vertigo (BPPV) can be made through the observation of the patient’s 
nystagmus during the maneuver (Fig. 3.13). Diagnostic indicators include the 
latency, duration, and direction of the nystagmus as well as fatigability with re-
peated provocation, the sensation of vertigo, and in some patients a reversal upon 
rising to a seated position (Gianoli & Smullen, 2008). It is characterized by its brief 
(2–15 second) onset latency and subjective complaints of vertigo that typically last 
less than 30 seconds (Gianoli & Smullen, 2008).
BPPV is likely the most common cause of vertigo in the general population. In 
a study conducted in Germany, the one-year incidence of BPPV was estimated to 
be as high as 0.6% (von Brevern  et al, 2007). Although it is confirmed by a positive 
finding on the Dix-Hallpike maneuver, diagnosis is based primarily upon patient 
history. The patient will typically describe brief episodes of vertigo that occur with 
changes in head position such as rolling over in bed or looking up to a shelf.
There are multiple forms of BPPV. Observation of the nystagmus during the 
Dix-Hallpike maneuver provides insight regarding which canal is affected and 
whether it is due to cupulolithiasis or canalithiasis. Posterior canal canalithiasis 
is the most common form of BPPV, occurring in ~90% of cases (Gianoli & Smullen, 
2008). It is characterized by an upbeating torsional geotropic nystagmus with the 
affected ear down. BPPV in the horizontal canal is usually geotropic toward the 
undermost ear and is observed as a purely horizontal nystagmus. Anterior canal 
BPPV is quite rare. It appears as an ageotropic downbeat nystagmus with the head 
hanging (affected ear up) (Gianoli & Smullen, 2008) (Table 3.1).
Fig. 3.13  The nystagmus response recorded during a right Dix-Hallpike maneuver in a 
patient with right posterior canal BPPV.

3  Vestibular Evaluation  57
There are two theories regarding the cause of BPPV. Cupulolithiasis was the 
first of the two theories to emerge. Described by Schucknecht in 1969, it is based 
upon his postmortem studies on patients diagnosed with BPPV. Schucknecht 
suggested that a deposit of dense particles (likely otoconia) lying on the cupula 
resulted in the structure becoming abnormally sensitive to gravitational force 
(Schuknecht, 1969). In cupulolithiasis, the otoconia remain attached to the cupula. 
The increased mass of the cupula results in vertigo and nystagmus, which occurs 
immediately upon moving into the provoking position and persists until the pa-
tient changes position (Herdman & Tusa, 2000).
The mechanics of cupulolithiasis do not agree with the latency and duration 
of symptoms seen in the majority of patients. It is for this reason that researchers 
were quick to question the theory. The theory of canalithiasis more readily explains 
the classic symptoms of BPPV. The theory of canalithiasis suggests that the otoco-
nia/debris are free floating in the semicircular canal. As the head moves into the 
provoking position, the otoconia travels through the semicircular canal causing a 
hydrodynamic effect (House & Honrubia, 2003). The movement of the endolymph 
stimulates the cupula causing symptoms of vertigo and nystagmus, which have a 
brief onset latency and which usually diminish within 60 seconds. Furthermore, 
the response typically fatigues with repeated provocation.
What Do Abnormal Caloric Test Results Indicate?
Caloric testing is often considered the most valued subtest of the VOG due to its 
ability to evaluate the responsiveness of the ears both individually and compara-
tively. The analysis of caloric symmetry is determined by each individual clinic’s 
normative data and the mode of caloric irrigation. Options for caloric irrigation 
include open loop (water is irrigated directly into the ear canal), closed loop (wa-
ter circulates within a balloon placed in the ear canal), and air (air flow is directed 
toward the tympanic membrane). Asymmetric caloric responses usually denote a 
peripheral lesion. Absent responses may occur with bilateral vestibular loss, sup-
◆
Table 3.1  Distinguishing Characteristics of Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo 
(BPPV) by Affected Canal
	
Posterior Canal	
Horizontal Canal	
Anterior Canal
Incidence
	
Common, ~90% of 	
Rare, ~6–8% of cases	
Rare, <1% of cases 
	
  cases (Gianoli & 	
  (Gianoli & Smullen, 	
  (Gianoli & Smullen,  
	
  Smullen, 2008)	
  2008)	
  2008)
Nystagmus
	 Geotropic rotary with 	
Horizontal geotropic in 	 Ageotropic rotary with 
	
  a strong upward 	
  the majority of cases, 	  a strong downward 
	
  beating component	
  ageotropic in ~10% 	   beating component 
	
	
  of cases (Gianoli &  
Smullen, 2008)

58  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
pression, medication effect, or may also occur when there is a problem with tem-
perature transfer.
Bithermal caloric irrigation is the most common method of testing. During 
caloric irrigation the cupula of the horizontal canal should be oriented in a near 
vertical position to allow for optimal flow of the convection current created by 
the temperature change (Jacobson & Newman, 1997). Typically, this is achieved by 
having the patient lie supine with the head elevated to a 30 degree angle. The ears 
are irrigated one at a time for ~45 seconds. The clinician may choose to irrigate 
with either the warm or the cool temperature first. Temperature settings should 
be verified at 44°C (warm) and 30°C (cool). During caloric irrigation fixation is 
denied and nystagmus is recorded using infrared video cameras (VOG) or through 
electrodes (ENG). The examiner should explain the procedure to the patient prior 
to irrigation and make him or her aware that he or she may experience some dizzi-
ness. The examiner must also give the patient an alerting task as soon as irrigation 
begins to see the resultant nystagmus build. These tasks may be individualized 
for the best outcome. Tasking and recording of the nystagmus should begin at the 
start of irrigation and continue until the nystagmus begins to diminish. Once the 
nystagmus begins to diminish, the examiner should have the patient stare at a 
target to evaluate the patient’s ability to fixate. It should be noted that otoscopic 
examination should precede irrigation to ensure that there is nothing in the ear 
canal that may interfere with temperature transfer and to note any structural ab-
normalities. Open loop irrigation cannot be performed on patients with perforated 
eardrums.
The acronym COWS (Cool Opposite Warm Same) can be used to remember 
the expected direction of the nystagmus following caloric stimulation. Responses 
to cool irrigation should elicit a nystagmus that beats in the opposite direction 
of the ear stimulated. Responses to warm irrigation should elicit nystagmus that 
beats in the same direction as the ear stimulated. In some instances, the patient 
may be tested in the prone position in which case the opposite will be true (cool 
same, warm opposite).
The use of two temperatures during caloric testing is important for accurate 
assessment. This is most obvious in cases where a spontaneous or positional nys-
tagmus is present. In such a case, it is possible to have caloric responses that are 
deceptively symmetric or absent. It is also important to remember that the use of 
two temperatures allows us to measure two different types of responses. Warm 
temperatures result in an excitatory response, whereas cool temperatures are in-
hibitory.
Following the caloric test, calculations are made to determine the symmetry 
of the caloric response and directional preponderance. In most VOG software used 
today, this calculation is based on a 10 second window determined by the exam-
iner as the peak of the response for each caloric irrigation. Unilateral weakness is 
determined using Jongkee’s formula:
where RW represents the peak response for right warm irrigation, RC represents 
the peak response for right cool irrigation, LC represents the peak response for left 
cool irrigation, LW represents the peak response for left warm irrigation, and UW 
stands for unilateral weakness (Stockwell, 1983).

3  Vestibular Evaluation  59
Caloric testing can provide important lateralizing clues. However, information 
gained from the caloric test is limited. It assesses only the horizontal canal at only 
one frequency (~0.003 Hz). Furthermore, the caloric test cannot differentiate be-
tween labyrinthine and retrolabyrinthine disease.
What Does It Mean If the Patient Fails to Fixate 
Suppress?
Immediately following the caloric test, the patient is instructed to fixate upon a 
visual target. Estimation of the patient’s ability to suppress the response is deter-
mined by comparing the velocity of the eye movement once the patient is allowed 
fixation with the velocity of the eye movement prior to fixation (Stockwell, 1983). 
The nystagmus response from caloric irrigation should suppress markedly when 
the patient is given a visual target. In the case of good eyesight, failure to fixate 
suppress is indicative of cerebellar dysfunction (Shepard & Telian, 1996).
What Is Directional Preponderance?
A directional preponderance exists when the nystagmus response from caloric 
stimulation is significantly greater in one direction versus the other. Directional 
preponderance is calculated using the values determined for the peak velocity of 
each irrigation of the caloric test in the following formula (Stockwell, 1983):
A directional preponderance may occur with both peripheral and central ves-
tibular lesions (Leigh & Zee, 1991). It is most often present in patients who have a 
strong spontaneous nystagmus.
What Are the Clinical Applications of  
Video-Oculography?
VOG provides an objective recording of ocular motor function and quantitative 
assessment of nystagmus. Findings on the various subtests may indicate central 
pathology or peripheral vestibular pathology. Observation of nystagmus during 
the Dix-Hallpike maneuver can aid in the diagnosis of BPPV. Caloric testing may 
provide valuable lateralization information.
◆
◆
◆

60  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
What Are the Limitations of Video-Oculography?
Physical abilities need to be considered before sending a patient for VOG testing. 
VOG requires that at least one eye has a trackable pupil. Blindness may further 
limit the testing that can be performed. Positional/positioning tests require that 
the patient is able to move from a seated to a reclined position. Furthermore, the 
patient must be capable of following directions.
What Is the Rotational Chair Test?
Motorized rotational chair testing is a valuable tool in the dizziness and balance 
laboratory. Often used in conjunction with VOG to confirm a diagnosis and in-
crease accuracy, it allows assessment of multiple frequencies of the horizontal 
vestibular ocular reflex (0.01–1.0 Hz) (Handelsman & Shepard, 2008) and provides 
information on the function of the velocity storage mechanism. When compared 
with the caloric test, the range of frequencies tested by rotational chair are closer 
to those found in natural head movement (up to 4 Hz) (Baloh & Honrubia, 2001). 
Furthermore, rotational testing is not affected by the physical features of the ear 
(Honrubia, 2000) and is generally well tolerated by patients.
During the test, the patient is seated upright and secured to the chair with the 
head tilted downward 30 degrees to allow maximum stimulation of the horizon-
tal semicircular canals. Eye movements are recorded using electrodes or infrared 
cameras. Use of restraints is necessary to prevent head slippage and avoid risk of 
injury. The chair is situated inside an enclosure to eliminate the influence of am-
bient light. Rotational chair testing can aid in differentiating between peripheral 
and central causes of dizziness and imbalance. In addition, it is a useful tool in 
determining the extent of peripheral lesions and provides information about the 
current state of compensation.
What Is a Significant Finding on the  
Video-Oculography Test?
Assessment of the VOR is performed using sinusoidal oscillation performed at 
multiple frequencies. The typical range of frequencies tested is between 0.01 and 
1.0 Hz (Handelsman & Shepard, 2008). Ideally, the test is performed with the pa-
tient enclosed in a light-proof booth so that visual fixation is not possible. In ad-
dition, the patient is asked to perform mental tasking to avoid suppression of the 
response. Calculations are made for the gain, phase, and symmetry of the nystag-
mus response (Fig. 3.14).
◆
◆
◆

3  Vestibular Evaluation  61
Fig. 3.14  (A,B) Rotational chair test summary in a patient with unilateral vestibular 
dysfunction. Note the reduced low-frequency VOR gain with accompanying phase lead 
and the reduced time constants (indicated by the rapid decay) on the rotational veloc-
ity-step (RVS) test summary. Abbreviations: VFX, visual fixation; CW, clockwise; CCW, 
counterclockwise.
A
B

62  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
Gain measures indicate the strength of the response and are calculated by 
dividing the slow component velocity of the patient’s eye movement by the slow 
component velocity of the stimulus (Handelsman & Shepard, 2008). A decrease in 
VOR gain occurs in both unilateral and bilateral vestibular loss (Fig. 3.14). Other 
causes of reduction in VOR gain include reduced alertness, suppression of the re-
sponse, or conditions that restrict eye movement (Shepard & Telian, 1996). As cen-
tral compensation occurs, gain values may begin to normalize (Desmond, 2004). 
VOR gain may be normal when the loss is restricted to the very low frequencies.
Phase measures indicate the amount of time delay from the peak velocity of 
the stimulus to the peak velocity of the patient’s eye movement (Micromedical 
Technologies, 1995). Of the three calculations derived from VOR testing, phase is 
the most sensitive measure of peripheral vestibular function. An increase in phase 
lead is a strong indication of peripheral dysfunction. (Fig. 3.14) Phase lag is con-
sidered a central finding (Shepard & Telian, 1996). Accurate measurement of phase 
requires a VOR gain which exceeds 0.2. Phase may remain abnormal as central 
compensation occurs (Desmond, 2004).
The symmetry of the response is the difference between responses during 
rightward versus leftward rotation (Micromedical Technologies, 1995). Asymme-
try in the VOR response implies imbalance within the system. This may occur with 
a static imbalance, as in acute lesions when a significant spontaneous nystagmus is 
present. Lesions that are dynamically uncompensated may also result in an asym-
metric response (Shepard & Telian, 1996). Measures of symmetry have limited use 
in localizing site of lesion as abnormalities may be caused by either a unilateral 
weakness or an irritative lesion. Symmetry values normalize as central compensa-
tion occurs (Desmond, 2004).
What Does It Mean If the Time Constant Is  
Decreased/Prolonged on the Step Velocity Test?
For the step velocity test, the chair is rapidly accelerated in a clockwise or counter-
clockwise direction until it reaches a predetermined velocity (between 60 and 180 
degrees/second). Once the predetermined velocity is reached, the chair sustains 
that velocity for a period of 45 to 60 seconds (Shepard & Telian, 1996). Nystag-
mus is recorded while the chair rotates and is referred to as per-rotary nystagmus. 
Next, the chair is abruptly stopped and the post-rotary nystagmus is recorded for 
a period of ~30 seconds. The patient should be mentally tasked throughout the 
recording to avoid suppression of the response. The time constant is determined 
by calculating the amount of time it takes for the peak of per-rotary and post-
­rotary nystagmus responses to decay to 37% of peak value (Handelsman & Shepard, 
2008). If the normal central velocity storage mechanism is intact, a time constant 
of greater than 6 seconds is expected. Reduced time constants are consistent with 
disabling of central velocity storage, which occurs with acute peripheral vestibular 
dysfunction (Fig. 3.14).
◆

3  Vestibular Evaluation  63
What Is Velocity Storage?
Velocity storage is a central mechanism that allows for continuation of the raw ves-
tibular response during sustained rotation. When the head is rotated, the cupula de-
flects in the opposite direction resulting in nystagmus. Due to the elastic properties 
of the cupula, it takes an estimated 6 seconds for the cupula to return to its resting 
position during sustained rotation (Leigh & Zee, 1991). The velocity storage mecha-
nism is responsible for continuation of the nystagmus response for several addi-
tional seconds, which makes the VOR signal more useful during sustained rotation.
What Does the Visual Vestibular Ocular Reflex 
(VVOR) Test Measure?
In this test of visual-vestibular interaction, the patient rotates in a clockwise or 
counterclockwise direction while viewing a stationary optokinetic stimulus 
(Shepard & Telian, 1996). Visual input contributes to the response most signifi-
cantly in the lower frequencies and velocities (Baloh & Honrubia, 2001). For this 
reason, low-frequency VVOR gain may remain normal in cases of vestibular loss 
(Baloh & Honrubia, 2001).
What Does a Failure to Fixate Suppress Indicate?
This test evaluates the patient’s ability to suppress the VOR when fixating upon a 
visual target. During this test, the patient stares at a laser light projected from the 
chair onto the wall in front of him or her. The chair and the light rotate together 
so that the light remains stationary in the patient’s visual field. In the presence of 
good visual acuity, failure to fixate suppress the VOR suggests cerebellar or brain-
stem abnormalities (Shepard & Telian, 1996).
What Is the Optokinetic Nystagmus (OPK/OKN) Test?
For optimal visual acuity, images must remain relatively stable on the retina. Dur-
ing head rotation, the VOR quickly reacts to stabilize the image. However, the VOR 
response is short lived, diminishing completely within 30 seconds. As the VOR re-
sponse decays, the optokinetic and smooth pursuit systems supplement and eventu-
ally take over for the VOR to maintain the image on the retina (Leigh & Zee, 1991).
◆
◆
◆
◆

64  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
Fig. 3.15  Optokinetic stimulus as seen within 
the rotational chair enclosure.
Whereas the smooth pursuit system employs only the fovea, the optokinetic 
system utilizes the entire retina (Baloh & Honrubia, 2001). Therefore, to elicit a 
true optokinetic response, the stimulus must fill the entire visual field (Leigh & 
Zee, 1991). In the laboratory, this is achieved by projecting stripes onto the wall of 
the rotational chair enclosure (Fig. 3.15). As the stripes rotate around patients, the 
eyes reflexively follow and patients begin to sense that they themselves are rotat-
ing. Abnormalities in OPK nystagmus may indicate a central lesion.
What Is the Dynamic Subjective Visual Vertical 
(DSVV) Test?
The otolith organs detect and respond to linear acceleration such as that caused by 
gravitational force. The response is an ocular counter-roll, with the eyes rotating in 
a compensatory direction (Halmagyi & Curthoys, 2000). An ocular counter-roll is 
also present following acute unilateral loss of otolith function. Static measurement 
of the subjective visual vertical (SVV) during an acute loss may illustrate a tilt of 
10 to 20 degrees or more (patient’s perception) toward the weaker ear (Böhmer & 
Mast, 1999; Karlberg, Aw, Halmagyi, & Black, 2002). In a period as short as a few 
weeks, central compensation occurs and the static SVV begins to normalize (Böh-
mer & Mast, 1999; Karlberg, Aw, Halmagyi, & Black, 2002). It is quite common for 
a patient’s initial evaluation to take place after compensation has occurred when 
there may no longer be any outward visible signs of otolithic dysfunction.
◆

3  Vestibular Evaluation  65
Dynamic measurement of the SVV can reveal utricular dysfunction after 
compensation has occurred. A relatively new test to the balance laboratory, there is 
some variability to how the test is performed. In our center, the patient sits upright 
in the rotational chair with his or her head and body secured in place (Fig. 3.16). The 
patient is instructed to manipulate a light bar to what appears to be earth-­vertical 
under three conditions. Measurements are taken while the chair is static, during 
on-axis rotation, and during eccentric rotation. For dynamic measurements, the 
chair is accelerated to a constant angular velocity of 300 degrees/second. The utri-
cles are stimulated by the resultant centripetal and tangential acceleration (Furman 
& Baloh, 1992). Measurements are taken after the chair has sustained this velocity 
for 1 minute to allow sufficient time for the response from the semicircular canals 
to extinguish. For each of the three conditions, the patient is asked to manipulate a 
light bar from both the right and left limits of the controller, to what appears to be 
earth-vertical (Fig. 3.16). This task is completed within a light-proof enclosure to 
ensure that the patient is not influenced by any outside reference. Degree of tilt is 
recorded by the examiner and a comparison is made between static and dynamic 
measurements as well as the two eccentric conditions (left and right).
Fig. 3.16  The dynamic subjective visual vertical test. (A) Patient secured in the rota-
tional chair with the light bar installed. (B) Patient’s view of the light bar and the dial 
control used to adjust tilt. (C) Examiner’s view of the light bar. Numbers indicate the 
degree of tilt.
A
B
C

66  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
When rotated on axis, two normal functioning utricles will cancel each  
other out, resulting in minimal tilt. Minimal tilt may also occur in cases of bilateral 
dysfunction. A significant tilt following on-axis rotation may suggest unilateral  
dysfunction. Shifting the chair off axis allows stimulation of one utricle at a time. 
A study conducted by Nowé et al investigating interutricular distance suggested 
that lateral displacement of 3.19 to 4.03 cm will align one labyrinth with the axis 
of rotation in the average Caucasian adult subject (Nowé et al, 2003). The ear that 
is placed on axis receives minimal to no stimulation, whereas the eccentric ear is 
solely exposed to the acceleration of the chair (Clarke and Engelhorn, 1998). If the 
eccentric ear is functioning properly, an ocular counter-roll should occur resulting 
in a tilt in the patient’s perception of earth-vertical. Patients with impaired otolith 
function will demonstrate a reduction in tilt during rotation.
The dynamic subjective visual vertical test is a promising new method to eval-
uate utricular function. At the time of this writing, normative data are still being 
established on this novel test.
What Are the Clinical Applications of the Rotational 
Chair?
Rotational chair testing provides dynamic assessment of the VOR and provides in-
formation regarding the patient’s current state of compensation. Well tolerated by 
most and not requiring the patient to follow complicated instructions, rotational 
chair testing is often the test of choice in the pediatric population. In some cases, 
testing can even be completed while the patient is seated on a parent’s lap. In pa-
tients whose caloric test results indicate a bilateral weakness, rotational chair test-
ing can be used to verify caloric results and investigate the extent of dysfunction.
Rotational chair testing can detect peripheral lesions that are higher in fre-
quency than those tested during the VOG. Standard caloric testing assesses the VOR 
at a frequency between 0.002 and 0.004 Hz (Handelsman & Shepard, 2008),where-
as natural head movement occurs in a frequency range of ~0.1 to 4 Hz (Baloh & 
Honrubia, 2001). Typical rotational chair protocols test a portion of the frequen-
cies occurring in natural head movement, specifically those between 0.01 and 1.00 
Hz (Handelsman & Shepard, 2008). Due to the higher frequency range tested by 
rotational chair, it is sometimes used as a tool for monitoring ototoxicity.
What Are the Limitations of the Rotational Chair?
With the exception of eccentric testing of utricular function during dynamic test-
ing of the SVV, the rotational chair cannot test the ears separately and therefore is  
limited in its ability to provide important lateralizing information. In addition, 
claustrophobic patients may not be able to tolerate sitting within the enclosure and 
the test requires that at least one eye have a trackable pupil. DSVV may not be per-
◆
◆

3  Vestibular Evaluation  67
formed on persons who exceed the weight limitation of the rotational chair or those 
with medical contraindications (neck or back pain/injuries, history of stroke, etc.).
What Is the Vestibular Evoked Myogenic Potential 
Test?
The vestibular evoked myogenic potential (VEMP) test is a recent addition to the 
vestibular test battery. Unlike traditional vestibular tests that focus primarily upon 
the function of the VOR and the integrity of the horizontal semicircular canal in 
particular, the VEMP allows one to assess the function of the vestibulocollic re-
flex. The VEMP is not a disease-specific test and thus is best used as a complemen-
tary tool.
Currently, there are several techniques available to elicit a VEMP response and 
each of these techniques activates vestibular afferents uniquely (Welgampola & 
Colebatch, 2001). Among the types of stimuli used are air- and bone-conducted 
sound, head taps, and galvanic stimulation. Responses may be recorded from 
the sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM; cVEMP) or from the extraocular muscles 
(oVEMP).
Air-conducted (click or tone burst) cVEMP is the most common technique 
used clinically today and is easily accessible through existing electrophysiologi-
cal equipment. The test is performed by presenting high-intensity clicks or tone 
bursts to the ear while the patient contracts the ipsilateral SCM. The response is 
measured via surface electrodes with the active electrode placed on the belly of 
the ipsilateral SCM, the reference electrode on the clavicle, and ground electrode 
on the forehead (Fig. 3.17).
The air-conducted VEMP response consists of two components, the first aris-
ing from vestibular afferents and the second arising from cochlear afferents (Cole-
◆
Fig. 3.17  Electrode array used to 
record cVEMP. The active electrode is 
placed on the belly of the ipsilateral 
sternocleidomastoid muscle, the refer-
ence electrode on the clavicle, and the 
ground electrode on the forehead.

68  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
Fig. 3.18  cVEMP response in a 
normal subject. Responses were 
recorded down to a threshold of 
85 dBnHL (decibels in normal hear-
ing level). A behavioral reference, 0 
dBnHL is determined in the clinical 
facility by  the average threshold 
response to the stimulus (click) in 
a small group of normal hearing 
young adults (Hall, 2007).
batch, Halmagyi, & Skuse, 1994). The vestibular response is of primary interest and 
can be described as a short-latency alteration in EMG activity appearing as a bipha-
sic positive-negative wave (p13-n23) (Colebatch et al, 1994) (Fig. 3.18). VEMP re-
sponses to air-conducted sound arise from the saccule along the inferior vestibular 
nerve (Colebatch et al, 1994; Halmagyi & Colebatch, 1995; Sheykholeslami & Kaga, 
2002; Murofushi, Matsuzaki, & Mizuno,1998; Iwasaki et al, 2009). Air-­conducted 
VEMPs can provide useful lateralizing information as well as information about 
the integrity of the saccule and inferior vestibular nerve.
What Is a Significant Finding on the Vestibular 
Evoked Myogenic Potential Test?
Threshold, latency, and amplitude measurements of the VEMP response have been 
studied for their clinical significance. Threshold measurements have proven use-
ful in the detection of superior semicircular canal dehiscence (SSCD). Due to 
increased compliance in the system, patients with SSCD may have abnormally re-
duced VEMP thresholds (Watson, Halmagyi & Colebatch, 2000; Streubel, Cremer, 
Carey, Weg, & Minor, 2001; Brantberg, Löfqvist, & Fransson, 2004) (Fig. 3.19). The 
amplitude of the response in SSCD is also large but has limited diagnostic value due 
to the large amount of variance in normals (Watson et al, 2000). Reduced VEMP 
thresholds may be seen in patients with other disorders including perilymph fistula 
and enlarged vestibular aqueduct (Sheykholeslami, Schmerber, Kermany, & Kaga, 
2004; Watson et al, 2000). Estimation of VEMP threshold is perhaps best used as a 
complementary tool. It has been suggested that a combination of VEMP threshold, 
computed tomography (CT) scan, and eye recordings may eliminate the need for 
surgical exploration to confirm the diagnosis of SSCD (Watson et al, 2000).
◆

3  Vestibular Evaluation  69
Latency of the VEMP response has also been studied and is considered a rela-
tively stable aspect of the response (Zhou & Cox, 2004). Prolonged latencies have 
been reported in several central pathologies (Murofushi, Shimizu, Takegoshi, & 
Cheng, 2001). Latency may also be prolonged with increased age (Zapala & Brey, 
2004).
The amplitude of the response has shown to be highly variable among normal 
subjects (Lim, Clouston, Sheean, & Yiannikas, 1995). VEMP amplitude is greatly 
influenced by the degree of muscle activation, stimulus intensity (Lim et al, 1995; 
Colebatch et al, 1994) and has shown to decrease with age (Zapala & Brey, 2004). 
Studies have shown abnormalities in amplitude can occur from several vestibular 
end-organ pathologies with asymmetry being the most common abnormality (Za-
pala & Brey, 2004).
What Effect Does Hearing Loss Have on the 
Vestibular Evoked Myogenic Potential Test?
Conductive hearing loss can quickly abolish or attenuate the air-conducted VEMP 
response due to the decrease in stimulus intensity as it travels through the sys-
tem. The presence of an air-conducted VEMP response in patients with conductive 
hearing loss is suggestive of superior semicircular canal dehiscence (Streubel et al, 
2001). Bone-conducted VEMPs are not affected by conductive hearing loss (Wel-
gampola & Colebatch, 2005). The VEMP response is not impacted by sensorineural 
hearing loss (Colebatch et al, 1994).
◆
Fig. 3.19  cVEMP response in a 
patient with superior semicircular 
canal dehiscence. Responses were 
recorded down to a threshold of 
60 dBnHL.

70  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
What Are the Clinical Applications of the Vestibular 
Evoked Myogenic Potential Test?
Clinical applications of the VEMP test continue to be investigated. Currently, the 
VEMP has proven useful in the detection of superior semicircular canal dehiscence, 
in determining the integrity of the inferior vestibular nerve, and can be used to as-
sess otolith function.
What Are the Limitations of the Vestibular Evoked 
Myogenic Potential Test?
VEMPs are significantly impacted by age. Beginning in the sixth decade of life re-
sponses in normals may be absent, amplitudes may be decreased, latency may be pro-
longed, and asymmetry becomes more prevalent (Welgampola & Colebatch, 2005). 
VEMPs require the cooperation of the patient and cannot be used with patients who 
are unconscious and is contraindicated in patients suffering from tinnitus due to the 
intensity of the stimulus (Colebatch, 2001; Welgampola & Colebatch, 2005). VEMPs 
recorded from the SCM require that the patient be able to maintain adequate muscle 
contraction (Alpini et al, 2004). This may be particularly difficult for patients with 
weak neck muscles or muscle stiffness. oVEMP shows promise as a possible alterna-
tive to cVEMP in patients who cannot perform the required muscle contraction.
Air-conducted VEMPs are abolished by external or middle ear disease (Alpini 
et al, 2004). Bone-conducted VEMPs can be used in patients with conductive hear-
ing loss; however, the response is bilateral and does not provide any lateralizing 
information. In addition, current clinical equipment requires modification to pro-
vide the appropriate bone-conducted stimulus (Welgampola & Colebatch, 2005). 
Furthermore, bone-conducted sound is thought to activate both saccular and 
utricular afferents and travels along the superior nerve, and thus may provide dif-
ferent information from the air-conducted stimulus (Curthoys, Kim, McPhedran, & 
Camp, 2006; Iwasaki et al, 2009).
References
Alpini, D., Pugnetti, L., Caputo, D., Cornelio, F., Capobianco, S., & Cesarani, A. (2004, 
June). Vestibular evoked myogenic potentials in multiple sclerosis: Clinical and 
imaging correlations. Multiple Sclerosis, 10(3), 316–321.
Baloh, R. W., & Honrubia, V. (2001). Clinical neurophysiology of the vestibular sys-
tem. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, Inc.
Bhansali, S. A. (2008). Medication side effects. In J. A. Goebel (Ed.). Practical man-
agement of the dizzy patient. 2nd ed. (pp. 43–60). Philadelphia: Lippincott Wil-
liams & Wilkins.
Böhmer, A., & Mast, F. (1999). Chronic unilateral loss of otolith function revealed by 
the subjective visual vertical during off center yaw rotation. Journal of Vestibular 
Research, 9(6), 413–422.
◆
◆

3  Vestibular Evaluation  71
Brandt, T. (1997). Background, technique, interpretation, and usefulness of position-
al and positioning testing. In G. P. Jacobson, C. W. Newman, & J. M. Kartush (Eds.). 
Handbook of balance function testing. (pp. 123–155). San Diego, CA: Delmar.
Brantberg, K., Löfqvist, L., & Fransson, P. A. (2004, May/June). Large vestibular 
evoked myogenic potentials in response to bone-conducted sounds in patients 
with superior canal dehiscence syndrome. Audiology & Neuro-Otology, 9(3), 
173–182.
Cass, S. P. (2008). Performing the physical examination: Ocular motor examina-
tion. In J. A. Goebel (Ed.). Practical management of the dizzy patient. 2nd ed. (pp. 
75–78). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Clarke, A. H., & Engelhorn, A. (1998, August). Unilateral testing of utricular func-
tion. Experimental Brain Research, 121(4), 457–464.
Colebatch, J. G. (2001, February). Vestibular evoked potentials. Current Opinion in 
Neurology, 14(1), 21–26.
Colebatch, J. G., Halmagyi, G. M., & Skuse, N. F. (1994, February). Myogenic po-
tentials generated by a click-evoked vestibulocollic reflex. Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 57(2), 190–197.
Curthoys, I. S., Kim, J., McPhedran, S. K., & Camp, A. J. (2006, November). Bone con-
ducted vibration selectively activates irregular primary otolithic vestibular neu-
rons in the guinea pig. Experimental Brain Research, 175(2), 256–267.
Desmond, A. (2004). Vestibular function: Evaluation and treatment. New York: 
Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc.
Dix, M. R., & Hallpike, C. S. (1952, June). The pathology symptomatology and diag-
nosis of certain common disorders of the vestibular system. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of Medicine, 45(6), 341–354
Furman, J. M. (1995, January). Role of posturography in the management of ves-
tibular patients. Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, 112(1), 8–15.
Furman, J. M. R., & Baloh, R. W. (1992, May). Otolith-ocular testing in human sub-
jects. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 656, 431–451.
Gianoli, G. J., & Smullen, J. L. (2008). Performing the physical examination: Posi-
tioning tests. In J. A. Goebel (Ed.). Practical management of the dizzy patient. 2nd 
ed. (pp. 85–97). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Goebel, J. A., White, J. A., & Heidenreich, K. D. (2009). Evaluation of the vestibular 
system. In J. B. Snow, P. A. Wackym, & J. J. Ballenger (Eds.). Ballenger’s otorhino-
laryngology head and neck surgery. 17th ed. (pp. 131–144). Shelton, CT: People’s 
Medical Publishing House.
Hain, T. C. (1997). Interpretation and usefulness of ocular motility testing. In G. P. 
Jacobson, C. W. Newman, & J. M. Kartush (Eds.). Handbook of balance function 
testing. (pp. 101–122). San Diego, CA: Delmar.
Hall, J. W., III. (2007). New handbook of auditory evoked responses. Boston:  
Pearson.
Halmagyi, G. M., & Colebatch, J. G. (1995). Vestibular evoked myogenic potentials in 
the sternomastoid muscle are not of lateral canal origin. Acta Oto-Laryngologica. 
Supplementum, 520(Pt 1), 1–3.
Halmagyi, G. M., & Curthoys, I. S. (2000). Otolith function tests. In S. J. Herdman 
(Ed.). Vestibular rehabilitation. 2nd ed. (pp.195–214). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis 
Company.
Handelsman, J. A., & Shepard, N. T. (2008). Rotational chair testing. In J. A. Goebel 
(Ed.). Practical management of the dizzy patient. 2nd ed. (pp. 137–152). Philadel-
phia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

72  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
Herdman, S. J., & Tusa, R. J. (2000). Assessment and treatment of patients with be-
nign paroxysmal positional vertigo. In S. J. Herdman (Ed.). Vestibular rehabilita-
tion. 2nd ed. (pp. 451–475). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis Company.
Honrubia, V. (2000). Quantitative vestibular function tests and the clinical exami-
nation. In S. J. Herdman (Ed.). Vestibular rehabilitation. 2nd ed. (pp. 105–171). 
Philadelphia: F. A. Davis Company.
House, M. G., & Honrubia, V. (2003, March/April). Theoretical models for the mech-
anisms of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. Audiology & Neuro-Otology, 
8(2), 91–99.
Isaacson, J., Ort, S. A., & Rubin, A. M. (2008). Performing the physical examination: 
Detecting spontaneous and gaze-evoked nystagmus. In J. A. Goebel (Ed.). Practi-
cal management of the dizzy patient. 2nd ed. (pp. 61–73). Philadelphia: Lippin-
cott-Williams & Wilkins.
Iwasaki S., Chihara Y., Smulders Y. E., Burgess, A. M., Halmagyi, G. M., Curthoys,  
I. S., et al. (2009, March). The role of the superior vestibular nerve in generating 
ocular vestibular-evoked myogenic potentials to bone conducted vibration at Fz. 
Clinical Neurophysiology, 120(3), 588–593.
Jacobson, G. P., & Newman, C. W. (1997). Background and technique of caloric test-
ing. In G. P. Jacobson, C. W. Newman, & J. M. Kartush (Eds.). Handbook of balance 
function testing. (pp. 156–192). San Diego, CA: Delmar.
Karlberg, M., Aw, S. T., Halmagyi ,G. M., & Black, R. A. (2002, January). Vibration- 
induced shift of the subjective visual horizontal: a sign of unilateral vestibular def-
icit. Archives of Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery, 128(1), 21–27.
Leigh, R. J., & Zee, D. S. (1991). The neurology of eye movements. 2nd ed. Philadel-
phia: F. A. Davis Company.
Lim, C. L., Clouston, P., Sheean, G., & Yiannikas, C. (1995, October). The influence of 
voluntary EMG activity and click intensity on the vestibular click evoked myo-
genic potential. Muscle & Nerve, 18(10), 1210–1213.
Micromedical Technologies. (1995). ENG, vorteq, and rotational chair user’s manu-
al. (version 4.5). Chatham, IL: Micromedical Technologies, Inc.
Murofushi, T., Matsuzaki, M., & Mizuno, M. (1998, May). Vestibular evoked myo-
genic potentials in patients with acoustic neuromas. Archives of Otolaryngol-
ogy–Head & Neck Surgery, 124(5), 509–512.
Murofushi T., Shimizu K., Takegoshi H., & Cheng P. W. (2001, September). Diag-
nostic value of prolonged latencies in the vestibular evoked myogenic potential. 
Archives of Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery, 127(9), 1069–1072.
NeuroCom International. (2000). EquiTest system operators manual. (version 7.04). 
Clackamas, OR: NeuroCom International, Inc.
Nashner, L. M. (1997). Computerized dynamic posturography. In G. P. Jacobson,  
C. W. Newman, & J. M. Kartush (Eds.). Handbook of balance function testing. (pp. 
280–307). San Diego, CA: Delmar.
Nashner, L. M. (2008). Computerized dynamic posturography. In J. A. Goebel (Ed.). 
Practical management of the dizzy patient. 2nd ed. (pp. 153–182). Philadelphia: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Nowé, V., Wuyts, F. L., Hoppenbrouwers, M., Van de Heyning, P. H., De Schepper,  
A. M., & Parizel, P. M. (2003). The interutricular distance determined from exter-
nal landmarks. Journal of Vestibular Research, 13(1), 17–23.
Schuknecht, H. F. (1969, December). Cupulolithiasis. Arch Otolaryngol, 90(6), 765–
778.

3  Vestibular Evaluation  73
Shepard, N. T., & Telian, S. A.(1996). Practical management of the balance disorder 
patient. San Diego, CA: Singular Publishing Group.
Sheykholeslami, K., & Kaga, K. (2002, March). The otolithic organ as a receptor of 
vestibular hearing revealed by vestibular-evoked myogenic potentials in patients 
with inner ear anomalies. Hearing Research, 165(1-2), 62–67.
Sheykholeslami K., Schmerber S., Habiby Kermany M., & Kaga K. (2004, April). Ves-
tibular-evoked myogenic potentials in three patients with large vestibular aque-
duct. Hearing Research, 190(1-2), 161–168.
Stockwell, C. W. (1983). ENG workbook. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Streubel, S. O., Cremer, P. D., Carey, J. P., Weg, N., & Minor, L. B. (2001). Vestibular-
evoked myogenic potentials in the diagnosis of superior canal dehiscence syn-
drome. Acta Oto-Laryngologica. Supplementum, 545, 41–49.
Takahashi, S., Fetter, M., Koenig, E., & Dichgans, J. (1990, January/February). The 
clinical significance of head-shaking nystagmus in the dizzy patient. Acta Oto-
Laryngologica, 109(1-2), 8–14.
von Brevern, M., Radtke, A., Lezius, F., Feldmann, M., Ziese, T., Lempert, T.,  (2007, 
July). Epidemiology of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo: A population based 
study. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 78(7), 710–715.
Watson, S. R. D., Halmagyi, G. M., & Colebatch, J. G. (2000, February). Vestibular 
hypersensitivity to sound (Tullio phenomenon): Structural and functional as-
sessment. Neurology, 54(3), 722–728.
Welgampola, M. S., & Colebatch, J. G. (2001, November). Vestibulocollic reflexes: Nor-
mal values and the effect of age. Clinical Neurophysiology, 112(11), 1971–1979.
Welgampola, M. S., & Colebatch, J. G. (2005, May). Characteristics and clinical ap-
plications of vestibular-evoked myogenic potentials. Neurology, 64(10), 1682–
1688.
Zapala, D. A., & Brey, R. H. (2004, March). Clinical experience with the vestibular 
evoked myogenic potential. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 15(3), 
198–215.
Zhou, G., & Cox, L. C. (2004, December). Vestibular evoked myogenic potentials: 
History and overview. American Journal of Audiology, 13(2), 135–143.
Further Reading
Bath, A. P., Harris, N., McEwan, J., & Yardley, M. P. (1999, June). Effect of conductive 
hearing loss on the vestibulo-collic reflex. Clinical Otolaryngology and Allied Sci-
ences, 24(3), 181–183.
Cazals, Y., Aran, J. M., Erre, J. P., Guilhaume, A., & Aurousseau, C. (1983, March/
April). Vestibular acoustic reception in the guinea pig: a saccular function? Acta 
Oto-Laryngologica, 95(3-4), 211–217.
Chen, C. H., & Young, Y. H. (2003, June). Vestibular evoked myogenic potentials in 
brainstem stroke. The Laryngoscope, 113(6), 990–993.
Cohen, B., Henn, V., Raphan, T., & Dennett, D. (1981). Velocity storage, nystagmus, 
and visual-vestibular interactions in humans. Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences, 374, 421–433.
Colebatch, J. G., & Halmagyi, G. M. (1992, August). Vestibular evoked potentials in 
human neck muscles before and after unilateral vestibular deafferentation. Neu-
rology, 42(8), 1635–1636.
Furman, J. M., & Cass, S. P. (1999, November). Benign paroxysmal positional ver-
tigo. The New England Journal of Medicine, 341(21), 1590–1596.

74  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
Itoh, A., Kim, Y. S., Yoshioka, K., Kanaya, M., Enomoto, H., Hiraiwa F., (2001). Clini-
cal study of vestibular-evoked myogenic potentials and auditory brainstem re-
sponses in patients with brainstem lesions. Acta Oto-Laryngologica. Supplemen-
tum, 545, 116–119.
Iwasaki, S., Smulders, Y. E., Burgess, A. M., McGarvie, L. A., Macdougall, H. G., Hal-
magyi, G. M., et al. (2008, September). Ocular vestibular evoked myogenic po-
tentials to bone conducted vibration of the midline forehead at Fz in healthy 
subjects. Clinical Neurophysiology, 119(9), 2135–2147.
Li, M. W., Houlden, D., & Tomlinson, R. D. (1999). Click evoked EMG responses in 
sternocleidomastoid muscles: Characteristics in normal subjects. Journal of Ves-
tibular Research, 9(5), 327–334.
Seidman, S. H., Telford, L., & Paige, G. D. (1998, April). Tilt perception during dynam-
ic linear acceleration. Experimental Brain Research, 119(3), 307–314.
Schuknecht, H. F. (1962, May/June). Positional vertigo: Clinical and experimental 
observations. Transactions–American Academy of Ophthalmology and Otolaryn-
gology, 66, 319–332.
Shimizu, K., Murofushi, T., Sakurai, M., & Halmagyi, M. (2000, August). Vestibular 
evoked myogenic potentials in multiple sclerosis. Journal of Neurology, Neuro-
surgery, and Psychiatry, 69(2), 276–277.
Stockwell, C. W., & Bojrab, D. I. (1997). Background and technique of rotational 
testing. In G. P. Jacobson, C. W. Newman, & J. M. Kartush (Eds.). Handbook of bal-
ance function testing. (pp. 237–248). San Diego, CA: Delmar.
Stockwell, C. W., & Bojrab, D. I. (1997). Interpretation and usefulness of rotational 
testing. In G. P. Jacobson, C. W. Newman, & J. M. Kartush (Eds.). Handbook of bal-
ance function testing. (pp. 249–258). San Diego, CA: Delmar.
Todd, N. P. M., Rosengren, S. M., & Colebatch, J. G. (2009, February). A utricular 
origin of frequency tuning to low-frequency vibration in the human vestibular 
system? Neuroscience Letters, 451(3), 175–180.
Wuyts, F. L., Hoppenbrouwers, M., Pauwels, G., & Van de Heyning, P. H. (2003). 
Utricular sensitivity and preponderance assessed by the unilateral centrifuga-
tion test. Journal of Vestibular Research, 13(4-6), 227–234.
Young, Y. H., Huang, T. W., & Cheng, P. W. (2003, August). Assessing the stage of 
Meniere’s disease using vestibular evoked myogenic potentials. Archives of Oto-
laryngology–Head & Neck Surgery, 129(8), 815–818.

75
4  Amplification
What Type of Evaluation Is Required for Determining 
Hearing Aid Candidacy?
A comprehensive audiometric evaluation is required prior to determining hearing 
aid candidacy. It is vital that, at a minimum, air- and bone-conduction audiom-
etry, speech recognition thresholds (SRTs), and word recognition scores (WRSs) 
be obtained. In addition, tympanometry, acoustic reflex threshold testing, and/or 
acoustic reflex decay testing should be performed in patients with asymmetries 
in audiometric configuration and/or WRSs, conductive hearing loss components, 
or in patients with subjective reports of unilateral tinnitus, pain and/or pressure, 
and dizziness.
What Is the Role of the Otologist or Physician in 
Determining Hearing Aid Candidacy?
It is important that the referring physician, or preferably an otologist, provide 
medical clearance for amplification prior to a trial period with hearing aids. 
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA; U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 
2007) requires that medical clearance for amplification be obtained for all individ-
uals under the age of 18. In addition, individuals over the age of 18 should either 
obtain medical clearance or sign a waiver acknowledging that they were informed 
of the recommendation for medical clearance, but elected to proceed with amplifi-
cation without consulting a physician. It is especially important that patients with 
asymmetries in audiometric configuration and/or WRSs, conductive hearing loss 
components, complaints of unilateral symptoms of tinnitus, complaints of pain 
and/or pressure, and dizziness be evaluated by an otologist to determine whether 
further testing or some form of medical treatment is recommended. Once medical 
clearance has been obtained by the physician, it is safe to proceed with a hearing 
aid fitting (HAF). In addition, it is required that an audiometric evaluation be com-
pleted no more than 6 months before hearing aids can be dispensed.
What Is the Hearing Aid Evaluation?
The hearing aid evaluation (HAE) is an appointment that occurs following the 
comprehensive evaluation and preferably after medical clearance for amplification 
has been received. The HAE is typically a 60-minute appointment that consists of 
◆
◆
◆

76  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
reviewing the patient’s hearing test, determining patient motivation, and making 
recommendations for amplification based on a combination of the patient’s hear-
ing loss characteristics, lifestyle, and financial resources. The HAE begins with a 
thorough description of the patient’s audiogram to determine hearing aid candi-
dacy and to establish realistic expectations with hearing aids depending upon the 
patient’s hearing loss and ability to recognize speech. For example, a patient with 
mild to moderate sensorineural hearing loss from 2000 to 8000 Hz with excel-
lent word recognition abilities is likely to have a better outcome with hearing aids 
than a patient with severe sensorineural hearing loss and a very poor ability to 
recognize speech. The use of a subjective questionnaire regarding a patient’s com-
munication abilities without hearing aids is also recommended during the HAE. 
Such subjective questionnaires provide the audiologist and patient with a realistic 
picture of the patient’s functional communication abilities in everyday life with an 
unaided hearing loss and are also used after an HAF to confirm hearing aid benefit 
and/or satisfaction. Examples of commonly used patient questionnaires include 
the Abbreviated Profile of Hearing Aid Benefit (APHAB; Cox & Alexander, 1995), 
the Client Oriented Scale of Improvement (COSI; Dillon, James, & Ginis, 1997), and 
the Characteristics of Amplification Tool (COAT; Sandridge & Newman, 2006).
Once hearing aid candidacy has been determined and the patient feels ready 
to proceed with hearing aids, hearing aid style (or size) and hearing aid technology 
are discussed at length. Depending on the style of hearing aid that the patient se-
lects, an earmold impression is made of each ear canal to order a custom earmold 
(impression sent to earmold laboratory) for a behind-the-ear fitting or a custom 
in-the-ear hearing aid (impression sent to hearing aid manufacturer). Finally, the 
patient’s subjective loudness discomfort levels (LDLs) are often measured in the 
sound booth at the HAE, which is information that will be important at the HAF. 
LDLs, hearing aid style, technology options, and earmolds are discussed in detail 
in the following sections.
What Are Loudness Discomfort Levels and Why Are 
They Measured?
A major complaint of hearing aid users is that their hearing aids are too loud. The 
measurement of a patient’s loudness discomfort levels (LDLS) provides audiolo-
gists with an output target in decibels in sound pressure level (dB SPL) for pro-
gramming hearing aids to ensure the amplification to loud input levels is never 
judged to be uncomfortably loud. An LDL is defined as the level (decibels in hear-
ing level [dB HL] and/or dB SPL) at which a patient reports that a signal (pure tone 
and/or speech) is “loud, but OK.” The measurement of LDLs is typically performed 
at the HAE appointment, but may also be performed immediately prior to the HAF. 
Figure 4.1 illustrates the configuration for measuring LDLs using an insert ear-
phone. LDLs are measured from 500 to 4000 Hz in dB HL and SPL using a real ear 
approach, or one that involves the use of a probe microphone placed ~4 to 6 mm 
from the tympanic membrane. During LDL testing, the audiologist presents pure 
tones, beginning at ~20 dB SL (in reference to pure tone threshold at the test fre-
quency), and uses an ascending procedure until the patient judges the pure tone 
◆

4  Amplification  77
signal to be “uncomfortably loud.” The audiologist then decreases the signal 10 
dB, followed by incremental increases of 5 dB, and this bracketing technique is re-
peated until the level at which the patient judges the pure tone signal as “loud, but 
OK” is reliably determined. These levels are recorded as the measured LDLs both in 
dB HL, the level on the audiometer dial, and dB SPL, the level recorded at the probe 
microphone. Table 4.1 provides the categorical loudness scaling anchors that are 
provided to the patient during LDL testing.
The patient’s LDLs are used at the HAF to verify that the output of the hearing 
aid does not exceed the measured LDLs. This is confirmed by comparing the output 
of the hearing aid with a 90 dB SPL pure tone sweep, referred to as the real ear 
saturation response (RESR90), to the patient’s measured LDLs. This measurement 
will be discussed in further detail in the real ear measurements (REMs) section. 
Unfortunately, most audiologists too often use average transformations to predict 
LDL data to program hearing aids. The concern with using predicted LDLs is that 
intersubject variability of LDLs is as wide as 35 to 40 dB (Elberling, 1999), and as a 
result, the maximum output of the hearing aids may exceed a patient’s LDLs and 
the hearing aids are more likely to be rejected by the patient. Conversely, the maxi-
mum output (or ceiling) of a hearing aid may also be too far below the patient’s 
LDLs, which may result in increased distortion. For these reasons, it is important to 
Fig. 4.1  Real ear configuration for measurement of loud-
ness discomfort levels (LDLs) in dB HL and dB SPL using an 
insert earphone.
Table 4.1  Categorical Loudness Scale Used during Measurement of Loudness 
Discomfort Levels
7. Uncomfortably loud
6. Loud, but OK
5. Comfortable, but slightly loud
4. Comfortable
3. Comfortable, but slightly soft
2. Soft
1. Very soft
0. Cannot hear at all

78  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
not only measure individual LDLs, but to verify that the real ear maximum output 
of the hearing aids approximates the patient’s LDLs.
What Are the Available Styles of Hearing Aids?
Hearing aid style refers to the size or the physical appearance of a hearing aid, 
and can be divided into two basic categories: in-the-ear and behind-the-ear  
(Fig. 4.2). In-the-ear (ITE) hearing aids are custom made to each patient’s ear(s) 
and vary in size (largest to smallest) from traditional ITE, to in-the-canal (ITC) 
and completely-in-the-canal (CIC) instruments. With custom hearing aids, all of 
the electronic parts are housed in the custom hearing aid shell that sits in the ear 
canal and/or part of the concha bowl. Custom aids are typically easier to insert 
and remove and may have manual controls, such as a program button and volume 
control. However, because the electronic components of custom aids are located 
in a shell that is deeply inserted in the ear canal, these aids are subject to repair 
due to issues related to cerumen and moisture infiltration into the hearing aid. 
In addition, the amount of gain available in custom hearing aids is limited due to 
problems with feedback.
Behind-the-ear (BTE) hearing aids are non-custom and vary in the way that 
they are coupled to the ear and in the location of the receiver or loudspeaker. Con-
◆
Fig. 4.2  Various styles of hearing 
aids: (A) completely in-the-canal 
(CIC), (B) in-the-canal (ITC)/half 
shell, (C) in-the-ear (ITE)/full shell, 
(D) behind-the-ear (BTE), and (E) 
open-fit BTE.
A
B
C
D
E

4  Amplification  79
ventional BTE aids are coupled to the ear via a custom earmold or a thin tube 
with a stock, one-size-fits-most dome. In addition, the loudspeaker (i.e., receiver) 
may be located in the hearing aid itself or it may be attached to a thin wire that is 
seated deeply in the ear canal. Generally, BTE aids are less likely than ITEs to need 
repairs that are the result of moisture and/or cerumen issues. In addition, BTE aids 
are usually able to accommodate a wider range of hearing losses (from slight loss 
to profound loss), are less prone to feedback-related problems, and have a longer 
battery life than ITE aids.
Open-fit hearing aids are BTE hearing aids that are coupled to the ear with a 
thin tube or wire and a non-occluding, or open, standard dome or custom earmold. 
This fitting option is most appropriate for patients with relatively normal hear-
ing in the low frequencies (250–1000 Hz) and primarily high-frequency (> 1000 
Hz) hearing loss; thus, low-frequency sounds enter and exit the open ear canal 
naturally, and amplification is provided only in the middle and/or high frequencies 
where it is required. When the open ear canal is completely blocked by an earmold 
or custom hearing aid, bone-conducted sound is amplified in the space occupying 
the ear canal from the tip of the earmold/hearing aid to the tympanic membrane 
by as much as 30 dB in the low frequencies (Revit, 1992). This phenomenon is 
known as the occlusion effect (OE), and results in the patient perceiving that they 
are talking into a barrel. Open-fit hearing aids help to minimize and oftentimes 
eliminate the OE. In general, two types of open-fit BTEs exist, receiver-in-the-aid 
(RITA) and receiver-in-the-ear (RITE). A RITA open-fit BTE (Fig. 4.3A) has all of 
the electrical components housed in the case behind the ear, and is coupled to 
the ear via an open tube and dome. A RITE open-fit BTE (Fig. 4.3B) has the micro-
phones and processor located in the case behind the ear, but the receiver is located 
in the ear canal and is coupled to the ear via a thin receiver wire that is housed in 
a thin plastic tube. Much like custom hearing instruments, the RITE open-fit BTE 
is much more likely to require repair due to cerumen and/or moisture infiltration 
into the receiver than the RITA open-fit BTE.
Fig. 4.3  (A) Receiver-in-the-aid (RITA) versus (B) receiver-in-the-ear (RITE) open-fit BTE 
aids. (Photos courtesy of Phonak. From: Phonak Hearing Systems (2009). Image resources. Retrieved April 20, 2009 from http://
www.phonakpro.com/_marketingservices/mktserv_imageresources_digitalbionics.html)
A
B

80  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
What Is the Basic Sound Processing of a Hearing Aid?
Modern hearing aids consist of some of the most advanced digital signal process-
ing available; however, the basic sound processing of a hearing aid remains the 
same today as it did in the past. All hearing aids, analog or digital, consist of a few 
basic parts that allow for sound processing to occur: a microphone (or micro-
phones), an amplifier, and a receiver (or loudspeaker). The microphone converts 
acoustic energy to electric energy, the amplifier amplifies the electronic signal, 
and the receiver converts the electric signal back to an acoustic signal. In a digital 
hearing aid, sound is picked up by one or more microphones and the sound sig-
nal is filtered through an analog-to-digital (A/D) converter. From there, the binary 
code is sent through an amplifier, where multiple stages of sound processing oc-
cur, and through a digital-to-analog (D/A) converter. Finally, the amplified sound is 
delivered to the patient’s ear canal via the receiver or speaker. Figure 4.4 depicts 
the basic sound processing discussed above. The advanced sound processing that 
occurs in the amplification stage, including noise reduction and feedback manage-
ment, is discussed in the sections below.
What Are Directional Microphones and How Do They 
Work?
The greatest complaint of patients with hearing loss is an increased difficulty un-
derstanding speech in the presence of background noise. Oftentimes, patients re-
port they do well in quiet listening situations, but cannot understand speech when 
noise is present. Also, in the past, and to some degree at present, patients with 
hearing aids report they do well with their hearing aids in quiet, but not nearly as 
well in noise. Hearing aids with two or more microphones help to address patient 
complaints of difficulty in background noise by reducing the level of noise behind 
◆
◆
Fig. 4.4  Block diagram depicting the basic sound processing in a hearing aid. (From: 
Agnew, J. (2002). Amplifiers and circuit algorithms for contemporary hearing aids. In M. Valente (Ed.). Hearing aids: Standards, op-
tions, and limitations. 2nd ed. (pp. 101–142). New York: Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc.) 

4  Amplification  81
and/or to the sides of the listener, thereby providing the greatest amplification for 
sounds in front of the speaker. In this way, the hearing aid attempts to make speech 
more audible in the presence of background noise. Such a system, referred to as a 
directional microphone, enhances the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). When a hear-
ing aid is only equipped with one microphone or when only the front microphone 
of a directional microphone system is activated (referred to as omnidirectional) 
then the microphone is equally sensitive to sounds all around the listener.
Directional microphones have different polar patterns that determine the de-
gree of azimuth at which the hearing aid provides the greatest (node) and least 
(null) amount of amplification. Figure 4.5 illustrates a variety of polar patterns, 
including cardioid, bidirectional, hypercardioid, and supercardioid. For example, 
a directional microphone system with a bidirectional polar pattern (Fig. 4.5B) 
would provide greatest amplification to the front and back of the listener, with 
very little amplification provided for sounds directly to the sides of the listener (at 
90° and 270° azimuth).
The earliest directional microphone systems required the patient to manually 
select whether the hearing aid would function in omnidirectional or directional 
mode. The patient was counseled to leave the hearing aid in omnidirectional mode 
for quiet listening and switch to directional mode in noisy situations. In addition, 
Fig. 4.5  Polar plots for directional microphones: cardioid (A), bidirectional (B), hypercardi-
oid (C), and supercardioid (D). (Vector graphics created by user Galak76 for Wikipedia Commons. Permission to repro-
duce the images is provided under the Creative Commons license. These images appear in their original context under the heading 
Microphone Polar Patterns on Wikipedia: Microphone. Retrieved April 15, 2010 from: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microphone.)
A
C
B
D

82  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
the first directional microphone systems were programmed with a single, fixed 
polar pattern. With advancements in technology, directional microphone systems 
can now be automatic and adaptive. This means that the hearing aid automatically 
detects the presence of noise and activates the directional microphone, and that 
the polar pattern of the directional microphone adapts or changes based on the 
location and characteristics of the noise detected by the hearing aid. In addition, 
hearing aids vary in the number of frequency channels they have. Each frequency 
channel in a hearing aid is assigned a specified bandwidth and controls hearing 
aid compression characteristics (compression allows all sounds to fit into a user’s 
dynamic range so it squeezes or compresses the speech signal so all sounds can be 
heard). It is helpful to think of hearing aid channels as keys on a piano or sliders on 
an audio equalizer board. Importantly, many digital hearing aids today with mul-
tiple channels of signal processing perform better in background noise because 
the polar pattern may vary in each channel and will continually change within 
each channel based on the incoming signal. Such a directional microphone system 
is referred to as having multichannel automatic adaptive directionality, and is the 
most advanced directional microphone system to date.
What Is Noise Reduction?
Hearing aids are constantly analyzing the listening environment in an attempt to 
provide the greatest amplification for speech or conversation. Speech is a modu-
lated signal that is constantly varying in intensity and frequency content, whereas 
noise is typically a steady-state, broadband signal (e.g., restaurant noise) or a very 
sudden and brief increase in intensity (e.g., a door slamming). If hearing aids detect 
a steady-state signal, or what it believes to be an impact noise, the hearing aid will 
decrease the gain at the frequency region(s) contained in the noise. Most digital 
hearing aids today provide some type of noise reduction; however, the ability of 
the hearing aid to reduce noise while maintaining the available gain in the hearing 
aid varies greatly depending on the technology employed in each hearing aid. Un-
like directional microphones, the noise reduction feature in hearing aids does not 
improve the SNR. Noise reduction simply improves comfort in noise by reducing 
the gain of the hearing aid for noisy situations.
What Is Feedback Management?
Feedback, or the annoying whistle produced by hearing aids, occurs when ampli-
fied sound exiting the receiver or loudspeaker of the hearing aid is re-amplified 
by the hearing aid when it enters the microphone. Common causes of feedback in 
hearing aids include a poor fitting hearing aid or earmold, cerumen in the hear-
ing aid/earmold or in the ear canal, or a mechanical problem. A few methods for 
reducing feedback, including plugging the vent, making a tighter fitting earmold/
◆
◆

4  Amplification  83
hearing aid, reducing the gain via the programming software, or reducing the gain 
manually via the volume control, are often effective; however, if the gain of the 
hearing aid has to be reduced, the listener is sacrificing audibility. Most modern 
digital hearing aids today incorporate feedback cancellation software that virtu-
ally eliminates feedback before it is audible to the hearing aid user or communica-
tion partner. The majority of feedback cancellation systems work by detecting 
feedback and generating a signal of equal frequency and intensity to the feedback, 
but of inverse phase to cancel the feedback. The major benefit of this feedback 
reduction technology is that the amount of usable gain available to the hearing 
aid user is not sacrificed to the degree that it was in the past. This especially holds 
true for hearing aids with multiple channels of signal processing, as was discussed 
in the directional microphone section above, as audibility of sounds in frequency 
channels where the feedback does not exist is completely maintained.
Which Is Best: Monaural or Bilateral Amplification?
For patients with bilateral symmetrical hearing loss and similar WRSs, bilateral 
amplification is highly recommended. Input to two ears allows for improved local-
ization, binaural summation, and binaural squelch, as was discussed in Chapter 1 
of this text. When a listener has the use of only one ear or when one ear is signifi-
cantly better than the other, the listener’s ability to make use of localization cues 
is significantly reduced. In addition, monaural listening requires a greater SNR (the 
level of the signal to the level of the noise) to communicate effectively because the 
advantages of binaural summation and squelch are unavailable. Binaural summa-
tion refers to the perceived loudness increase when listening to a sound with both 
ears (of approximately equal hearing sensitivity) versus with only one ear. When 
the intensity of a sound is near the listener’s auditory threshold (0 dB SL) the bin-
aural advantage is ~3 dB, whereas for sounds greater than or equal to 35 dB above 
threshold (35 dB SL), the binaural advantage is ~6 dB (Gelfand, 2004). As a result, 
patients with bilateral amplification have improved audibility with less gain, which 
results in less acoustic feedback and greater reserve gain in the hearing aids.
Binaural squelch refers to a listener’s ability to listen only to the sound source 
of interest when additional sound sources are present. Hearing in background 
noise is difficult for both normal-hearing and hearing-impaired listeners, and dif-
ficulty hearing in background noise is one of the most common complaints among 
hearing aid users. As a result, it is recommended that individuals with bilateral 
hearing loss pursue bilateral amplification to take advantage of binaural squelch. 
Occasionally, a patient with bilateral hearing loss and asymmetrical word recog-
nition abilities will receive greatest benefit from a monaural hearing aid fitting 
in the ear with the better word WRS; however, because it is difficult to predict 
which individuals will benefit most from a monaural fitting, it is best practice to 
recommend a trial period with bilateral amplification. During the trial period, the 
patient can experiment with using one or both hearing aids at a time to determine 
if bilateral amplification or monaural amplification is preferred. In the author’s ex-
perience, when using this strategy ~85% of patients prefer bilateral amplification, 
whereas 15% prefer monaural amplification.
◆

84  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
What Are the Available Hearing Aid Options for 
Unilateral Hearing Loss?
Several hearing aid options are available for patients with unilateral hearing loss 
(UHL), which is sometimes referred to as single-sided deafness (SSD). These op-
tions include: bone-anchored hearing aid (Baha); transcranial, contralateral rout-
ing of the signal (CROS); TransEar; and traditional CROS. The Baha (Fig. 4.6A) is 
a device that is coupled to a surgically implanted titanium screw and abutment 
in the mastoid bone of the “dead” ear, and uses bone conduction (BC) to transmit 
sounds from the ear with hearing loss to the ear with normal BC thresholds (BC 
thresholds ≤ 20 dB HL from 500 to 3000 Hz). The transcranial CROS uses a power 
air-conduction hearing aid to transmit the amplified signal from the poor ear to 
the cochlea of the good ear. This fitting requires a power hearing aid with excel-
lent feedback reduction and a tight, deep-fitting earmold or hearing aid shell to 
overcome the interaural attenuation of the skull. The TransEar (Ear Technology 
Corp., Johnson City, TN; Fig. 4.6B) is a behind-the-ear, digital hearing aid that at-
taches to a custom in-the-canal shell that houses a BC vibrator, allowing sounds 
reaching the poor ear to be transmitted to the inner ear of the good ear via BC. A 
traditional wireless CROS fitting (Fig. 4.6C) involves the use of an FM transmitting 
microphone on the poor ear that sends sound from the poor ear to an FM receiver 
in the good ear, either wirelessly or via a wire that inserts in each earpiece. Though 
this option is commonly the first recommendation by many audiologists, it is not 
the most beneficial option for UHL, as the CROS fitting may result in environmen-
tal interference and increased distortion.
◆
Fig. 4.6  Three device options for 
unilateral hearing loss: (A) Baha,  
(B) TransEar bone-conduction hear-
ing aid, and (C) wireless CROS sys-
tem consisting of an FM transmit-
ter and receiver.
A
C
B

4  Amplification  85
FDA guidelines recommend that the BC pure tone average (from 500 to 3000 
Hz) in the normal ear be 20 dB HL or better for greatest success with Baha fittings 
for SSD. No such FDA guideline exists for TransEar or the CROS options discussed 
above; however, logic would suggest that the guideline of BC thresholds of 20 dB 
or better be used for these fittings as well because the mode of transmission (bone 
conduction) is similar for each.
What Are the Options for Earmold Style, Tubing, and 
Venting?
Earmolds are custom molds of a patient’s ears that couple BTE hearing aids to the 
ears. The style or size of the earmold varies from a full-shell earmold that fills the 
entire concha bowl to a very open, skeleton-type earmold that is used to secure an 
open-fit BTE to the ear. Generally, the more severe the hearing loss, the larger the 
earmold required to provide a better seal that allows for adequate gain without 
feedback. Figure 4.7 provides examples of various earmold styles, including a full-
shell, skeleton, half-shell, and canal earmold.
Plastic tubing is necessary to couple the custom earmold to the BTE hearing 
aid. The internal diameter, length, and thickness of earmold tubing varies and may 
change the frequency response that is generated by the hearing aid, which allows 
for improved customization of the hearing aid to the patient’s hearing loss. For ex-
ample, a 3 mm Libby Horn tube increases in internal diameter along the length of 
the tubing from 1.9 3mm to 3 mm. This variation in diameter provides an enhance-
ment in the high frequencies relative to a tube that maintains the same internal 
diameter throughout the length of the tubing (i.e., standard size no. 13 tubing = 
1.93 mm). Additionally, a continuous flow adapter (CFA) is a special filtered elbow 
between the earmold tubing and the earmold itself that may be used to filter the 
amplified sound to best meet the prescribed target for a patient’s hearing loss.
Venting refers to an open air channel that runs throughout the length of an 
earmold or hearing aid. A vent allows for aeration of the ear canal and provides 
varying degrees of relief from OE. Vent types include parallel, intersecting, and 
◆
Fig. 4.7  Various earmold styles: (A) full-shell, (B) skeleton, (C) half-shell, and (D) canal.
(From Microsonic, Inc., with permission.)
A
B
C
D

86  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
Fig. 4.8  Venting options: (A) parallel, (B) diagonal (intersecting), and (C) trench vent.
(From: Microsonic, Inc. (2006). Custom earmold manual. 8th ed. Ambridge, PA: Microsonic, Inc.)
A
B
C
trench. A parallel vent extends throughout the length of the earmold/custom hear-
ing aid and is parallel to the sound bore, an intersecting vent intersects the sound 
bore, and a trench vent extends along the entire length of the earmold/custom 
hearing aid but is on the outside of the earmold/aid. Figure 4.8 illustrates the vent 
types discussed above. The length and diameter of the vent are important in the 
amount of low- and mid-frequency gain provided by the hearing aid. In general, 
the more low-frequency gain required the smaller the vent should be; however, 
even a patient with a very severe hearing loss should have venting (i.e., pressure 
vent) in his or her earmold(s) for comfort and reduction of OE.
What Are Coupler Measurements and Why Are They 
Important?
It is impossible to confirm that a hearing aid is working properly simply by listening 
to it. As a result, it is imperative that electroacoustic measurements be performed 
to ensure that the hearing aid (new and repaired) meets technical specifications 
and ANSI S3.42–1992 (American National Standards Institute, 1992), and S3.22–
2003 (American National Standards Institute, 2003) standards. Such measurements 
are performed in a standardized test chamber both upon receipt of a new and/or 
repaired hearing aid from a manufacturer and at each hearing aid check appoint-
ment, which should be conducted at least annually. Hearing aid test systems con-
sist of a sound chamber that includes one or more loudspeakers for the generation 
of standardized test signals (pure tones, speech-weighted signals, actual speech), 
various hearing aid couplers that approximate the volume of the average adult ear 
canal (2 cc), and a microphone for recording the response of the hearing aid to the 
various input signals. Figure 4.9 demonstrates a BTE (A) and ITE (B) hearing aid at-
tached to a 2 cc coupler in the test box for electroacoustic assessment.
Two commonly performed coupler measurements are those that conform to 
the following ANSI standards: S3.42–1992 and S3.22–2003. Electroacoustic analy-
sis using ANSI S3.42–1992 is useful to determine if a hearing aid has linear or non-
linear signal processing and if excessive intermodulation distortion (IMD) is pres-
ent. Figure 4.10 illustrates the family of frequency response curves to input levels 
of a speech-shaped signal presented at 50, 60, 70, 80, and 90 dB SPL that is gener-
◆

4  Amplification  87
ated by an ANSI S3.42–1992 coupler measurement. As is illustrated in Fig. 4.10, the 
frequency response curves are not superimposed. That is, the measured gain below 
2000 Hz decreases as the input signal is increased from 50 to 90 dB SPL. Note that 
gain remains the same (linear) in the frequency range above 2000 Hz. If this hearing 
aid had linear signal processing, the five frequency response curves would have ap-
peared as being superimposed upon each other. Therefore, one may conclude that 
gain varies with differing input levels and therefore this hearing aid is nonlinear.
Another potential use of ANSI S3.42–1992 is to determine if the hearing aid 
has excessive intermodulation distortion (IMD). It can be seen in Fig. 4.10 that the 
Fig. 4.9  A behind-the-ear hearing aid (A) attached to an HA-2, 2cc coupler; and an in-
the-ear hearing aid (B) attached to an HA-1, 2cc coupler for electroacoustic assessment.
A
B
Fig. 4.10  Example of a 2 cc coupler measurement of a digital behind-the-ear hear-
ing aid to ANSI S3.42–1992. In this example, the gain of the hearing aid is measured 
for broadband, speech-shaped noise of varying input levels (50, 60, 70, 80, and 90 dB 
SPL).

88  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
morphology, or shape, of the frequency response curve for the 90 dB SPL input, 
although showing less gain, has the same shape as the frequency response curve 
for the 50 dB SPL input signal. If this hearing aid had excessive IMD, the frequency 
gain response for the higher input levels would appear as “jagged” or “broken-up.” 
In that case, it would be best practice to attach the printout to the manufacturer 
repair form and explain that the attached measure suggests the presence of IMD 
and the hearing aid needs to be repaired.
ANSI S3.22–2003 is a standardized test that uses a pure tone signal to mea-
sure the performance of the hearing aid at various hearing aid settings. The mea-
sured values obtained during an ANSI S3.22–2003 coupler measurement include 
the maximum output, frequency response, gain, equivalent input noise level, total 
harmonic distortion, telecoil response, battery drain, and the compression charac-
teristics of a hearing aid. Figure 4.11 illustrates the frequency response tracing ob-
tained during an ANSI S3.22–2003 coupler measurement. After completing elec-
troacoustic assessment, the response of a hearing aid should be compared with 
manufacturer specifications to ensure that a patient is receiving/using a quality 
product that is functioning properly. This measurement is required for new and 
repaired hearing aids and should become a part of the patient’s medical record. 
This test can also be completed at scheduled semi-annual or annual patient visits, 
unscheduled patient visits where the patient has a specific complaint about the 
performance of the hearing aid(s), and at the HAF following programming.
Fig. 4.11  Example of a 2 cc coupler measurement of a digital behind-the-ear hearing 
aid to ANSI S3.22–2003. In this example, the maximum output is 124.9 dB SPL and the 
measured gain is 41.6 dB. The top tracing (labeled “O”) is the output of the hearing aid 
in response to a 90 dB pure tone sweep and the bottom tracing (labeled “R”) is the fre-
quency response of the hearing aid in response to a 60 dB pure tone sweep.

4  Amplification  89
What Are Prescriptive Targets and How Are They Used?
The amount of gain (or output) prescribed for a hearing aid at each frequency 
cannot be arbitrarily derived. Much like an eye exam results in a prescription for 
glasses or contact lenses, each patient’s audiometric thresholds (the dotted line 
labeled “T” in Fig. 4.12) result in a “prescription,” or a specified amount of target 
gain or output required for improving hearing so soft input levels (50 dB SPL) are 
audible, average input levels (65 dB SPL) are comfortably loud, and loud input lev-
els (80–90 dB SPL) are not judged to be uncomfortably loud. Though several pre-
scriptive methods exist, two are most commonly used by audiologists: NAL-NL1 
(Dillon, 1999) and DSL v5.0 (Scollie et al, 2005). NAL-NL1, the National Acoustic 
Laboratories (NAL) fitting strategy for linear and nonlinear signal processing, at-
tempts to maximize speech intelligibility while equalizing loudness. The DSL v5.0 
method, which stands for desired sensation level, was originally developed for de-
termining the prescribed hearing aid gain in children, and attempts to normalize 
loudness. Real ear verification measures, which are discussed in detail in the next 
section, are performed to confirm that the measured gain (or output) of a hear-
ing aid is meeting the prescriptive target for the patient’s hearing loss. The dotted 
◆
Fig. 4.12  Real ear SPL measurement illustrated on an SPL-O-Gram, where Curve 2 = 
output of HA (hearing aid) to a soft input (50 dB SPL modulated, speech-weighted noise), 
Curve 3 = output of HA to an average input (65 dB SPL), Curve 4 = output of HA to a 
loud input (80 dB SPL), and Curve 5 = maximum output of the HA in response to a 90 
dB SPL pure tone sweep. This is a well-fit hearing aid, as the output for each input level 
very closely approximates the prescribed targets for soft (L), average (M), and loud (H), 
and the maximum output of the hearing aid (Curve 5) does not exceed the patient’s 
measured LDLs (U), which are barely visible at the top of the SPL-O-Gram, (T) indicates 
the patient’s threshold.

90  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
Fig. 4.13  Real ear insertion gain (REIG) measurement where Curve 6 = gain of HA 
(hearing aid) to a soft input (50 dB SPL modulated, speech-weighted noise), Curve 7 = 
gain of HA to an average input (65 dB SPL), Curve 8 = gain of HA to a loud input (80 dB 
SPL), and the dotted line labeled “A” is the NAL-NL1 target for 80 dB. On this graph it is 
obvious that this is a well-fit hearing aid for loud inputs, as the gain closely approximates 
the prescribed target for loud sounds. The targets for soft and medium inputs are not 
saved on the graph for REIG measurements in this system’s software; however, it was 
confirmed that they met the target.
lines in Fig. 4.12 labeled “L,” “M,” and “H” are the NAL-NL1 output targets for input 
signals of 50, 65, and 80 dB SPL, respectively, and the dotted line, labeled “A,” in  
Fig. 4.13 is the NAL-NL1 gain target for an 80 dB SPL input.
What Are Real Ear Measurements and Why Are They 
Important?
Much like coupler measurements verify that hearing aids meet ANSI specifications, 
REMs verify that a hearing aid is appropriately amplifying sound in a patient’s ear 
canal. Each hearing aid manufacturer has software that determines the appropri-
ate gain required to meet the prescribed target based on a patient’s hearing loss. 
However, hearing aid manufacturers use average data to determine the maximum 
output and gain characteristics of hearing aids, and as a result, the “first fit” pre-
scribed by a manufacturer will often result in hearing aids being fit inappropriately 
◆

4  Amplification  91
(i.e., too loud, inadequate high-frequency gain). In addition, the size and shape of 
an individual ear canal has unique resonant properties, which greatly influence 
the way that the sound exiting the hearing aid receiver is actually amplified. As 
a result, it is imperative that REMs be performed at the initial HAF to ensure that 
soft sounds (i.e., 50 dB SPL) are soft, but audible, that input levels approximating 
average speech (i.e., 65 dB SPL) are comfortably loud, and that loud sounds (i.e., 80 
dB SPL) are loud, but never exceeding the patient’s measured LDLs.
REMs use a probe microphone, located ~4 to 6 mm from the tympanic mem-
brane, to measure the level of amplified sound (dB SPL) generated by a hearing aid. 
REMs verify that soft (50 dB SPL), average (65 dB SPL), and loud (80 dB SPL) levels 
of speech are amplified appropriately by comparing the gain and/or output of the 
hearing aid to the prescriptive target for the patient’s hearing loss. Though the 
software supplied by hearing aid manufacturers theoretically programs each aid 
based on the patient’s hearing loss to meet such a prescriptive target, individual 
ear canal resonances result in a variation of the true response of the hearing aid. 
Patient configuration for REMs consists of the following: a loudspeaker located ~12 
inches from the test ear, a reference microphone located at ear level that confirms 
the level of sound reaching the ear from the loudspeaker is accurate, and a probe 
microphone placed in the ear canal so the tip of the probe tube is ~4 to 6 mm from 
the tympanic membrane. Figure 4.14 illustrates REM configuration.
The most commonly performed real ear tests are real ear insertion gain 
(REIG) and real ear SPL (also known as real ear aided response [REAR]) measure-
ments. REIG measurements subtract the ear canal resonance, referred to as real 
ear unaided gain (REUG), from the real ear aided gain (REAG) of the hearing aid. 
Fig. 4.14  Patient configuration for real ear measurements. A probe tube attached to a 
microphone is placed ~5 mm from the tympanic membrane so the gain and/or output 
of the hearing aid for various input levels can be verified. Soft (50 dB SPL), average (65 
dB SPL), and loud (80 dB SPL) levels of a speech-weighted signal are delivered via a loud-
speaker placed ~12 inches from the ear. A reference microphone located on top of the 
ear ensures that the input level from the loudspeaker remains constant.

92  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
Therefore, REIG = REAG-REUG. Figure 4.13 illustrates REIG measurements. Real ear 
SPL measurements obtain the output of the hearing aid in dB SPL; therefore, an 
unaided measurement of the ear canal resonance is not required. Figure 4.12 il-
lustrates real ear SPL measurements on what is commonly referred to as an SPL-
O-Gram. As the audiologist performs REM at each input level, fine-tuning adjust-
ments are made to the hearing aid(s) to more closely approximate the prescriptive 
target. In addition, REM confirms that the maximum output of the hearing aid 
never exceeds a patient’s measured LDLs, which should have been measured at 
the hearing aid evaluation. This is confirmed by comparing the response of the 
hearing aid to a 90 dB SPL pure tone sweep, referred to as the real ear saturation 
response (RESR90), to the patient’s measured LDLs. For example, in Fig. 4.12 the 
RESR90 curve labeled “5” is well below the patient’s measured LDLs (labeled “U”) at 
the top of the graph. In addition, subjective aided loudness judgments should be 
recorded, where the patient reports how loud a speech signal is on a scale from 1 
to 7 (Table 4.1) where 1 is a rating of “very soft” and 7 is a rating of “uncomfort-
ably loud.” In a patient with well-fit hearing aid(s), a speech signal at 50 dB SPL 
should be rated from 1 to 3, at 65 dB SPL it should be rated from 3 to 5, and at 80 
dB SPL it should be rated at less than 7. Finally, it is important to verify that hearing 
aids with directional microphones are indeed directional, or that the gain and/or 
output of the hearing aid is less for sounds arriving from the back of the listener 
than those arriving from the front of the listener. This measurement is referred to 
as the front-to-back ratio and is illustrated in Fig. 4.15. Unfortunately, ~75 to 80% 
of audiologists fail to perform REMs regularly (Kirkwood, 2006). As a result, many 
hearing aid users achieve inadequate gain, which decreases overall speech intel-
ligibility and hearing aid satisfaction.
Fig. 4.15  Real ear front-to-back ratio measurement.

4  Amplification  93
What Is the Difference between Verification and 
Validation?
The verification of hearing aids (coupler, real ear, aided soundfield thresholds, 
aided WRSs in quiet and noise) is an objective measurement of hearing aid per-
formance, whereas validation refers to a subjective assessment of hearing aid 
benefit/performance. Verification occurs via the use of specialized equipment to 
confirm that hearing aids are providing adequate gain for soft, average, and loud 
inputs, and that loud sounds are never uncomfortably loud. Validation employs 
the use of subjective questionnaires, such as the Client-Oriented Scale of Improve-
ment (COSI; Dillon, James, & Ginis, 1997) and the Abbreviated Profile of Hearing 
Aid Benefit (APHAB; Cox & Alexander, 1995) to determine if the hearing aids are 
meeting the needs of the patient, according to the patient. Both measures are im-
portant in determining the success of an HAF and should be employed for all HAFs 
to provide the highest level of quality patient care and to determine the need for 
further hearing aid programming, counseling, and/or aural rehabilitation to pro-
vide patients with the greatest possible benefits from their hearing aids.
What Is Hearing Assistance Technology?
Hearing assistance technology (HAT) is any device, other than a hearing aid, 
that is used to enhance communication in everyday life. Devices such as amplified 
telephones, TV listening devices, amplified stethoscopes, alerting systems, and 
personal FM or infrared listening systems are a few examples of HAT (Fig. 4.16). 
Such devices may be used in conjunction with or independent of hearing aids. For 
patients with difficulty in word recognition abilities, HAT is often a requirement 
for successful communication in adverse listening situations, as the addition of 
HAT increases the SNR and overcomes adverse factors such as background noise 
and reverberation.
When HAT devices are used in conjunction with hearing aids, the hearing aids 
require either a telecoil or an FM receiver to pick up the signal of interest. For ex-
ample, a personal FM system consists of an external microphone (transmitter) and 
an FM receiver. The transmitter is worn within 6 to 12 inches of the communication 
partner’s mouth and the signal that is picked up by the transmitter microphone is 
delivered via an FM signal (also referred to as a radio frequency, RF, signal) to the 
patient’s hearing aid. The patient’s hearing aid must have either an FM receiver at-
tached to it or the patient must have an active telecoil in the hearing aid, which is 
a small copper coil that receives an audio signal via magnetic leakage from a loop 
worn around the patient’s neck. While an FM transmission is very clear and allows 
the listener to be ≥ 75 feet from the transmitter, other HAT devices deliver the 
signal of interest to the patient’s ears via an infrared transmission, which requires 
direct line-of-sight to function properly and may be interrupted if the line-of-sight 
is compromised by sunlight or some physical barrier. Many television listening 
devices use an infrared transmission, much like a television remote.
◆
◆

94  Audiology Answers for Otolaryngologists
Fig. 4.16  Various hearing assistance technology devices: (A) amplified telephone,  
(B) amplified/vibrating alarm clock, and (C) infrared TV listening device to be used with 
a neckloop.    
A
C
B
In addition, telephone use is often difficult for individuals with hearing loss. 
Amplified telephones, captioned telephones, and TTY/TDD (teletypewriter/tele-
communications device for the deaf) devices are options for patients with varying 
degrees of hearing loss and aural/oral communication abilities. Other HAT devices 
exist to improve the quality of life of individuals with hearing impairment. Such 
devices include alarm clocks, door bell systems, smoke detectors, and wrist watches 
with amplification, flashing lights, and/or vibration that are used to alert the hear-
ing impaired listener.
References
American National Standards Institute. (1992). American national standard for test-
ing hearing aids with a broad-band noise signal. (ANSI S3.42–1992). New York: 
ANSI.
American National Standards Institute. (2003). American national standard for 
specification of hearing aid characteristics. (ANSI S3.22–2003). New York: ANSI.

4  Amplification  95
Cox, R. M., & Alexander, G. C. (1995, April). The abbreviated profile of hearing aid 
benefit. Ear and Hearing, 16(2), 176–186.
Dillon H. (1999). NAL-NL1: A new procedure for fitting non-linear hearing aids. 
Hearing Journal, 52(4), 10–16.
Dillon, H., James, A., & Ginis, J. (1997). Client oriented scale of improvement (COSI) 
and its relationship to several other measures of benefit and satisfaction pro-
vided by hearing aids. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 8, 27–43.
Elberling, C. (1999, May). Loudness scaling revisited. Journal of the American Acad-
emy of Audiology, 10(5), 248–260.
Gelfand, S. A. (2004). Hearing: An introduction to psychological and physiological 
acoustics. 4th ed. New York: Marcel Dekker.
Kirkwood, D. H. (2006). Survey: Dispensers fitted more hearing aids in 2005 at 
higher prices. Hearing Journal, 59(4), 40–50.
Revit, L. J. (1992). Two techniques for dealing with the occlusion effect. Hearing 
Instruments, 43(12), 16–18.
Sandridge, S. A., & Newman, C. W. (2006). Improving the efficiency and account-
ability of the hearing aid selection process—use of the COAT. Retrieved April 20, 
2009 from: http://www.audiologyonline.com/articles/article_detail.asp?article_
id=1541
Scollie, S., Seewald, R., Cornelisse, L., Moodie, S., Bagatto, M., Laurnagaray, D., et al. 
(2005). The desired sensation level multistage input/output algorithm. Trends in 
Amplification, 9(4), 159–197.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 21: Food and 
Drugs. (Revised April 1, 2007). 21CFR801.421. Washington, DC: Government 
Printing Office.


97
Index
Note: Page numbers followed by f and t indicate figures and tables, respectively.
A
Abbreviated Profile of Hearing Aid 
Benefit (APHAB), 76, 93
ABR. See auditory brainstem 
response (ABR)
acoustic neuroma
audiometric criteria for, 25
stacked ABR findings with, 
39–40, 39f
acoustic reflex, 27
acoustic reflex decay
definition, 29
negative, 29, 30f
positive, 29, 30f
testing, 29
equipment, calibration, 12,  
14f
acoustic reflex threshold (ART)
clinical significance, 27–28, 28f
definition, 27
interpretation, 28, 29t
measurement, 28, 28f, 29f
testing, equipment, calibration, 
12, 14f
adaptation test, 50, 51f
AEP. See auditory evoked 
potential(s) (AEP)
air-bone gap, 18, 23
air-conduction (AC) testing, 14–16, 
15f, 23
interaural attenuation for, 17, 17f
masking for, 17, 17f
thresholds obtained via, 16
alarm clock(s), amplified/vibrating, 
94, 94f
alerting systems, 93, 94
Alexander’s law, 54
American National Standards 
Institute (ANSI), standards
for audiometric calibration, 12
for hearing aids, 86–88
for maximum permissible 
ambient noise levels 
(MPANLs), 14, 15t
amplitude scaling, on motor 
control test, 48–49, 49f
ANSI. See American National 
Standards Institute (ANSI)
APHAB. See Abbreviated Profile 
of Hearing Aid Benefit 
(APHAB)
aphysiologic pattern
on motor control test, 49, 50f
on sensory organization test, 45f, 
46–47, 47f
ART. See acoustic reflex threshold 
(ART)
audiogram(s), 16
interpretation, 21
symbols used in, 16, 16f
audiometer(s), calibration, 12, 13f
audiometric equipment, 
calibration, 12, 13f, 14f
audiometric symbols, 16, 16f

98  Index
audiometric testing, maximum 
allowable noise level for, 
14, 15t
auditory brainstem response (ABR), 
35
clinical applications, 37
interpretation, normal values in, 
37t
neurodiagnostic, 37–38
otoneurologic, 37–38
pathology-related patterns, 
38–39
stacked, 39–40, 39f
testing, 36–39
abnormal results, 38f
normal results, 38f
threshold, 37
waveform, 36
auditory evoked potential(s) (AEP)
interpretation, 34
testing, 34
azimuth, 2–3, 3f
B
background noise, and speech 
recognition, 9
Baha. See hearing aid(s), bone-
anchored (Baha)
benign paroxysmal positional 
vertigo (BPPV), 56–57, 56f
characteristics, by affected canal, 
56–57, 57t
binaural hearing, advantages, 9–11
binaural squelch, 11, 83
binaural summation, 9–10, 10f, 83
Bing test, 31, 32t
bone-conduction (BC) testing, 
14–16, 15f, 23
interaural attenuation for, 18
masking for, 17f, 18, 18f
thresholds obtained via, 16
bone vibrator, 31
BPPV. See benign paroxysmal 
positional vertigo (BPPV)
BTE hearing aids. See hearing aid(s), 
behind-the-ear (BTE)
C
calibration, audiometric, 12, 13f, 14f
requirements for, 12
standards for, 12
caloric testing
abnormal results on, 57–59
methods, 57–59
canalithiasis, 57
Carhart’s notched, 21
CDP. See computerized dynamic 
posturography (CDP)
center of gravity (COG) alignment, 
44f, 47
center of gravity (COG) scores, 
47–48
CHAMP, 40, 40f
Characteristics of Amplification 
Tool (COAT), 76
CHL. See conductive hearing loss 
(CHL)
CIC hearing aids. See hearing aid(s), 
completely-in-the-canal 
(CIC)
Client-Oriented Scale of 
Improvement (COSI), 76, 
93
COAT.  See Characteristics of 
Amplification Tool (COAT)
cochlear hearing loss, recruitment 
and, 5
cochlear hydrops analysis masking 
procedure. See CHAMP
cochlear pathology, ABR pattern 
with, 38
cocktail party effect, 11
COG. See center of gravity (COG)
computerized dynamic 
posturography (CDP), 42
clinical applications, 51
limitations, 52
conductive hearing loss (CHL), 21
ABR pattern with, 38
audiogram for, 23, 24f
consonant(s), frequency spectrum 
of, 8
and speech recognition, 8, 8f

Index  99
COSI. See Client-Oriented Scale of 
Improvement (COSI)
COWS acronym, 58
CROS. See hearing aid(s), CROS 
system
cupulolithiasis, 57
cVEMP. See vestibular evoked 
myogenic potential 
(VEMP) test, from 
sternocleidomastoid 
muscle
D
dB. See decibel(s) (dB)
dB HL. See decibels in hearing level 
(dB HL)
dB IL. See decibels intensity level 
(dB IL)
dB SPL. See decibels in sound 
pressure level (dB SPL)
decibel(s) (dB), definition, 1
decibels in hearing level (dB HL)
definition, 1
equivalent dB SPL, 1, 1f, 12
reference level for, 1, 1f
with speech awareness 
threshold, 2
with speech recognition 
threshold, 2
decibels in sound pressure level 
(dB SPL)
auditory threshold for, at 
audiometric frequencies, 
1, 1f
definition, 1
equivalent to 0 dB HL, 1, 1f, 12
reference level for, 1
vs. dB IL, 1–2, 2t
decibels intensity level (dB IL)
definition, 1
reference level for, 1
vs. dB SPL, 1–2, 2t
detection.  See also speech 
awareness threshold  
(SAT)
definition, 2
difference limen (DL), 9, 10f
directional microphone(s), 80–82, 
81f
polar patterns, 81, 81f
directional preponderance, of 
nystagmus response from 
caloric stimulation, 59
discrimination. See also word 
recognition score (WRS)
definition, 2
distortion product (DP) gram, 33, 
34f
distortion product otoacoustic 
emissions (DPOAE), 32
interpretation, 33
measurement, 33
Dix-Hallpike maneuver, 55–56,  
56f
DPOAE. See distortion product 
otoacoustic emissions 
(DPOAE)
DR. See dynamic range (DR)
DSL v5.0 prescriptive method for 
hearing aid(s), 89
DSVV. See dynamic subjective 
visual vertical (DSVV) test
dynamic range (DR), 6, 6f
dynamic subjective visual vertical 
(DSVV) test, 64–67, 65f
E
ear canal volume (ECV)
abnormal, 26, 27f
definition, 26
normal values, 26, 26t
earmold(s), 85, 85f
ECochG. See electrocochleography 
(ECOG, ECochG)
ECOG. See electrocochleography 
(ECOG, ECochG)
ECV. See ear canal volume (ECV)
electrocochleography (ECOG, 
ECochG), 34–35, 35f, 36f
EQ. See equilibrium score (EQ)
equilibrium score (EQ), 43–45, 44f
composite, 45

100  Index
eye movement(s). See nystagmus; 
pursuit abnormalities; 
saccades
F
feedback
definition, 82
in hearing aids, management, 
82–83
feedback cancellation systems, 83
fixate suppress
and nystagmus response from 
caloric stimulation, 59
and vestibulo-ocular reflex 
(VOR), 63
FM system, personal, 93
fo. See fundamental frequency (fo)
frequency. See also fundamental 
frequency (fo)
definition, 7
just noticeable difference for, 9, 
10f
fundamental frequency (fo), 7, 7f
G
gaze nystagmus test, 55
H
HAE. See hearing aid evaluation 
(HAE)
HAF. See hearing aid fitting (HAF)
harmonics, 7, 7f
HAT. See hearing assistance 
technology (HAT)
head shadow effect, 3
headshake nystagmus, 55
hearing aid(s)
amplifier for, 80, 80f
ANSI standards for, 86–88
S3.22–2003, 86, 88, 88f
S3.42–1992, 86–88, 87f
basic sound processing in, 80, 
80f
behind-the-ear (BTE), 78–79, 78f
earmold styles for, 85, 85f
 open-fit, 78f, 79, 79f
tubing for, 85
and bilateral amplification, 83
bone-anchored (Baha), 84–85, 
84f
candidacy for
determination, otologist/
physician and, 75
evaluation for, 75
completely-in-the-canal (CIC), 
78, 78f
coupler measurements, 86–88
CROS system, 84–85, 84f
traditional wireless, 84, 84f
transcranial, 84
directional mode, 81–82
DSL v5.0 prescriptive method 
for, 89
electroacoustic assessment, 86, 
87f
feedback, management, 82–83
frequency channels, 82
in-the-canal (ITC), 78, 78f
in-the-ear (ITE), 78, 78f
and medical clearance for 
amplification, 75
microphone for, 80, 80f. See also 
directional microphone(s)
and monaural amplification, 83
NAL-NL1 prescriptive method 
for, 89–90, 89f, 90f
and noise reduction, 82
omnidirectional mode, 81–82
prescriptive targets for, 89–90
real ear measurements (REMs) 
for, 89, 89f–92f, 90–92
receiver for, 80, 80f
styles, 78–79, 78f
TransEar, 84–85, 84f
for unilateral hearing loss, 
84–85, 84f
validation, 93
venting, 85–86, 86f
verification, 93
hearing aid evaluation (HAE), 
75–76
hearing aid fitting (HAF), 75, 76

Index  101
verification, 76, 93
hearing assistance technology 
(HAT), 93–94, 94f
hearing loss
asymmetrical, 30
conductive. See conductive 
hearing loss (CHL)
configuration, 21, 22f
flat, 21, 22f
fragmentary (corner), 21, 22f
high-frequency, 21, 22f
inverted trough, 21, 22f
notched, 21, 22f
precipitous, 21, 22f
rising, 21, 22f
sloping, 21, 22f
gradual, 21
precipitous, 21
sharp, 21
trough, 21, 22f
functional, differential diagnosis,  
30
magnitude, 21, 21t
mixed, 21, 23
audiogram for, 23, 24f
noise-induced, 21, 23
sensorineural. See sensorineural 
hearing loss (SNHL)
type, 21
unilateral, 30
hearing aid options for, 84–85, 
84f
and vestibular evoked myogenic 
potential (VEMP) test, 69
hertz (Hz), 7
Hz. See hertz (Hz)
I
ILD. See interaural level difference 
(ILD)
immitance audiometer(s), 25, 25f
calibration, 12, 14f
infrared listening system, 93
intensity, just noticeable difference 
for, 9, 10f
interaural attenuation, 17, 17f
for air-conduction (AC) testing, 
17, 17f
for bone-conduction (BC) testing, 
18
interaural level difference (ILD), 3, 
4f
interaural spectral differences, 3
interaural time difference (ITD), 4, 
4f, 5f
ITC hearing aids. See hearing aid(s), 
in-the-canal (ITC)
ITD. See interaural time difference 
(ITD)
ITE hearing aids.  See hearing 
aid(s), in-the-ear (ITE)
J
jnd. See just noticeable difference 
(jnd)
Jongkee’s formula, 58
just noticeable difference (jnd)
definition, 9
for frequencies, 9, 10f
for intensity, 9, 10f
L
latency, on motor control test, 
48–49, 49f
LDLs. See loudness discomfort 
levels (LDLs)
LGOB. See Loudness Growth in 
Octave Bands (LGOB)
loudness
rapid growth of, 5
recruitment, 5–6, 5f
loudness discomfort levels (LDLs), 
92
definition, 76
measurement, 76–78, 77f
Loudness Growth in Octave Bands 
(LGOB), 5–6, 5f
loudness scale, 77, 77t
M
MAA. See minimum audible angle 
(MAA)

102  Index
malingering, differential diagnosis, 
30
masking. See also CHAMP
for air-conduction (AC) testing, 
17, 17f
backward, 9
for bone-conduction (BC) testing, 
17f, 18, 18f
definition, 9
downward spread of, 9
for non-test ear, 17, 17f
for speech audiometry, 17
for speech recognition threshold, 
20
upward spread of, 9
for word recognition testing, 20
maximum compliance
abnormal, 26–27, 27f
definition, 26
normal values, 26, 26t
maximum permissible ambient 
noise levels (MPANLs), for 
audiometric testing, 14, 
15t
medical clearance for 
amplification, 75
Meniere’s disease, 23
differential diagnosis, 35, 40
headshake nystagmus in, 55
MEP. See middle ear pressure 
(MEP)
microphone(s). See also directional 
microphone(s)
hearing-aid, 80, 80f
middle ear pressure (MEP)
abnormal, 26, 27f
definition, 26
normal values, 26, 26t
minimum audible angle (MAA), 
2–3, 3f
MLV. See monitored live voice 
(MLV)
monitored live voice (MLV), 19
motor control test, 48–49, 49f, 50f
amplitude scaling on, 48–49, 49f
aphysiologic pattern on, 49, 50f
latency on, 48–49, 49f
weight symmetry on, 48–49, 49f
MPANLs. See maximum 
permissible ambient noise 
levels (MPANLs)
N
NAL-NL1 prescriptive method for 
hearing aid(s), 89–90, 89f, 
90f
narrow-band noise (NBN), in 
masking for pure tone 
testing, 17
National Acoustic Laboratories 
(NAL), NAL-NL1 
prescriptive method for 
hearing aids, 89–90, 89f, 
90f
NBN. See narrow-band noise (NBN)
noise-induced hearing loss, 8
noise reduction, hearing aids and, 
82
non-test ear (NTE), masking for, 
17, 17f
NTE. See non-test ear (NTE)
nystagmus. See also optokinetic 
nystagmus (OPK/OKN) test
gaze-evoked, 55
positional, 55
positioning, 55–57
post-headshake, 55
response from caloric 
stimulation, 58
directional preponderance, 59
fixate suppress and, 59
spontaneous
of central origin, 54
characteristics, and origin, 54
classification, 54
measurement, 54
of peripheral origin, 54
O
OAE. See otoacoustic emissions 
(OAE)
occlusion effect (OE), 79

Index  103
ocular counter-roll, 64, 66
OE. See occlusion effect (OE)
open-fit behind-the-ear (BTE) 
hearing aid(s), 78f, 79, 79f
receiver-in-the-aid (RITA), 79, 79f
receiver-in-the-ear (RITE), 79, 
79f
optokinetic nystagmus (OPK/OKN) 
test, 63–64, 64f
otoacoustic emissions (OAE). See 
also distortion product 
otoacoustic emissions 
(DPOAE); transient-
evoked otoacoustic 
emissions (TEOAE)
clinical significance, 32
definition, 32
measurement, 32
otoconia, 57
oVEMP. See vestibular evoked 
myogenic potential 
(VEMP) test, from 
extraocular muscles
P
pitch, 7
presbycusis, 8, 23
pure tone audiometry, 14–16. See 
also air-conduction (AC) 
testing; bone-conduction 
(BC) testing
thresholds obtained via, 16
pure tone sinewave, 7, 7f
pursuit abnormalities, 54, 54f
R
real ear aided response (REAR) 
measurement(s), 91–92
real ear front-to-back ratio 
measurement, 92, 92f
real ear insertion gain (REIG) 
measurement(s), 90f, 
91–92
real ear measurements (REMs), for 
hearing aid(s), 89, 89f–92f, 
90–92
real ear saturation response 
(RESR90), 77, 89f, 90
real ear SPL measurement(s), 89f, 
91–92
real ear unaided gain (REUG) 
measurement(s), 91–92
REAR. See real ear aided response 
(REAR) measurement(s)
receiver-in-the-aid (RITA) open-fit 
BTE hearing aid(s), 79,  
79f
receiver-in-the-ear (RITE) open-fit 
BTE hearing aid(s), 79, 79f
recruitment
definition, 5
sensorineural hearing loss and, 
5–6, 5f
REIG. See real ear insertion gain 
(REIG) measurement(s)
REMs. See real ear measurements 
(REMs)
RESR90. See real ear saturation 
response (RESR90)
retrocochlear pathology
ABR findings with, 38–39, 38f
and acoustic reflex decay, 29
audiometric findings with, 25
REUG. See real ear unaided gain 
(REUG) measurement(s)
Rinne test, 31, 32t
RITA. See receiver-in-the-aid (RITA) 
open-fit BTE hearing 
aid(s)
RITE. See receiver-in-the-ear (RITE) 
open-fit BTE hearing 
aid(s)
rotational chair test, 60, 61f. See 
also step velocity test
clinical applications, 66
limitations, 66–67
and vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR) 
assessment, 60–62, 61f
S
saccades, abnormalities, 53, 53f
saccadic pursuit, 54, 54f

104  Index
SAT. See speech awareness 
threshold (SAT)
Schwabach test, 31
sensorineural hearing loss
dynamic range for, 6, 6f
and loudness recruitment, 5–6, 
5f
sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL), 
21
audiogram for, 23, 24f
sudden, 23
sensory organization test (SOT), 
42–47
aphysiologic pattern, 45f, 46–47,  
47f
and center of gravity (COG) 
scores, 47–48
equilibrium score (EQ) 
calculated from, 43–45, 
44f
inter-trial variability on, 47, 47f
pathology-related patterns on, 
45–47, 46f
sensory analysis graph, 44f, 48
six conditions for, 42–43, 43f
strategy analysis, 44f, 48
support surface dependence 
pattern, 45f, 46
sway patterns on, 47, 47f
vestibular dysfunction pattern, 
45–46, 45f
vestibular loss pattern, 45f, 46, 
46f
vision preference pattern, 45f, 46
visual dependence pattern, 45f, 
46
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
definition, 11
directional microphones and, 81
improvement, needed by 
hearing-impaired listener 
to equal normal hearing, 
11, 11f
monaural listening and, 11
single-sided deafness (SSD). See 
hearing loss, unilateral
SLM. See sound level meter (SLM)
smooth pursuit test, 54, 54f
SNHL. See sensorineural hearing 
loss (SNHL)
SOT. See sensory organization test 
(SOT)
sound(s)
high-frequency, localization, 3, 
4f
low-frequency, localization, 4, 4f
sound level meter (SLM), 12
sound localization, 83
psychoacoustic properties 
affecting, 3–4, 4f, 5f
speech audiometry, masking for, 17
speech awareness threshold (SAT), 
2, 19
speech recognition
background noise and, 9
frequency spectrum of vowels 
vs. consonants and, 8, 8f
upward spread of masking and,  
9
speech recognition threshold 
(SRT), 2
determination, 18–19
interpretation, 19, 19t
masking for, 20
SPL-O-Gram, 89f, 92
spondee words, used to establish 
speech recognition 
threshold (SRT), 18–19
SRT. See speech recognition 
threshold (SRT)
SSCD. See superior semicircular 
canal dehiscence (SSCD)
SSD (single-sided deafness). See 
hearing loss, unilateral
SSNHL. See sensorineural hearing 
loss (SNHL), sudden
stacked auditory brainstem 
response, 39–40, 39f
static admittance, definition, 26
static compliance, 26–27, 27f
Stenger test
definition, 30

Index  105
interpretation, 30
technique for, 30
step velocity test, decreased/
prolonged time constant 
on, 61f, 62
subjective visual vertical (SVV), 
64. See also dynamic 
subjective visual vertical 
(DSVV) test
superior semicircular canal 
dehiscence (SSCD), 
detection, 68–69, 69f
support surface dependence, on 
sensory organization test, 
45f, 46
SVV. See subjective visual vertical 
(SVV)
T
telephone, amplified, 93, 94, 94f
TEOAE. See transient-evoked 
otoacoustic emissions 
(TEOAE)
TransEar, 84–85, 84f
transient-evoked otoacoustic 
emissions (TEOAE), 32
interpretation, 33, 33f
measurement, 32–33
TTY/TDD, 94
tuning fork test(s)
clinical applications, 31
interpretation, 32t
TV listening devices, 93, 94f
tympanogram
abnormal, 26, 27f
normal, 26, 26f
tympanometry
definition, 25
equipment, 25, 25f
calibration, 12, 14f
normal values, 26, 26t
technique for, 25–26
U
unilateral hearing loss (UHL). See 
hearing loss, unilateral
utricular dysfunction, dynamic 
subjective visual vertical 
(DSVV) test for, 64–66, 65f
V
validation, of hearing aids, 93
velocity storage, 63
VEMP. See vestibular evoked 
myogenic potential 
(VEMP) test
vent(s)/venting, for hearing aids, 
85–86, 86f
verification, of hearing aids, 76, 93
vertigo. See benign paroxysmal 
positional vertigo (BPPV)
vestibular dysfunction, on sensory 
organization test, 45–46, 
45f
vestibular evoked myogenic 
potential (VEMP) test, 
67–68, 67f
air-conducted, 67–68, 70
clinical applications, 70
from extraocular muscles, 67, 70
hearing loss and, 69
limitations, 70
response
amplitude, 69
latency, 69
threshold, 68
significant findings on, 68–69, 69f
from sternocleidomastoid 
muscle, 67–68, 67f, 68f, 70
vestibular loss, on sensory 
organization test, 45f, 46, 
46f
vestibulocollic reflex, assessment, 
67–68, 67f
vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR), 42. 
See also visual vestibular 
ocular reflex (VVOR) test
assessment, 60, 61f
asymmetry, 61f, 62
failure to fixate suppress, 63
gain, 61f, 62
phase measures, 61f, 62

106  Index
vestibulospinal reflex (VSR), 
evaluation, 42
videonystagmography. See video-
oculography (VOG)
video-oculography (VOG), 42, 52, 
52f
clinical applications, 59
limitations, 60
significant findings on, 60–62
vision preference, on sensory 
organization test, 45f, 46
visual dependence, on sensory 
organization test, 45f, 46
visual vestibular ocular reflex 
(VVOR) test, 63
VNG (videonystagmography). See 
video-oculography (VOG)
VOR. See vestibulo-ocular reflex 
(VOR)
vowel(s), frequency spectrum of,  
8
and speech recognition, 8, 8f
VVOR. See visual vestibular ocular 
reflex (VVOR) test
W
Weber test, 31, 32t
weight symmetry, on motor 
control test, 48–49,  
49f
word list(s), for word recognition 
score, 19
word recognition score (WRS), 2
determination, 19–20
interpretation, 20, 20t
testing, masking for, 20
WRS. See word recognition score 
(WRS)

