DARWIN’S
DOUBT
THE EXPLOSIVE ORIGIN OF ANIMAL LIFE AND
C-
THE CASE FOR INTELLIGENT DESIGN
STEPHEN
C. MEYER
Author of SIGNATURE IN THE CELT

USA $28.99
“In the Origin of Species, Darwin openly acknowl-
edged important weaknesses in his theory and
professed his own doubts about key aspects of
it.
Yet today’s public defenders of a Darwin-only
science curriculum apparently do not want thes 3
or any other scientific doubts about contem-
porary Darwinian theory, reported to students.
This book addresses Darwin’s most significant
doubt
... and how a seemingly isolated anomaly
that Darwin acknowledged almost in passing has
grown to become illustrative of a fundamental
problem for all of evolutionary biology.”
—FROM THE PROLOGUE
Charles Darwin knew
that
there was
a
significant
event
in
the
history
of
life
that his theory did not explain. In what
is known today as the “Cambrian explo-
sion,” 530 million years ago many animals
suddenly appeared
in
the
fossil record
without apparent ancestors in earlier lay-
ers of rock. In Darwin’s Doubt Stephen
C. Meyer
tells the story of the mystery
surrounding
this
explosion
of
animal
life— a mystery that has intensified, not
only because the expected ancestors of
these animals have not been found, but
also because scientists have learned more
about what it takes to construct an animal.
Expanding on the compelling case
he presented in his last book. Signature
in the Cell, Meyer argues that the theory
of intelligent design—which holds
thal
certain features of the universe and of
living things are best explained by an in
telligent cause, not an undirected process
such
as
natural selection— is
ultimately
the best explanation for the origin of the
Cambrian animals.

-


DARWIN’S
DOUBT
THE EXPLOSIVE ORIGIN OF ANIMAL LIFE AND
THE CASE FOR INTELLIGENT DESIGN
STEPHEN
C. MEYER
HarperOne
An Imprint ofHarperCoWinsPublishers

HarperOne
darwin’s doubt:
The Explosive Origin ofAnimal Life and the Casefor Intelligent
Design. Copyright © 2013 by Stephen C. Meyer. All rights reserved. Printed in
the United States of America. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in
any manner whatsoever without written permission except in the case of brief
quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. For information address
HarperCollins Publishers, 10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022.
HarperCollins books may be purchased for educational, business,
or sales promotional use. For information, please e-mail the Special
Markets Department at SPsales@harpercollins.com.
HarperCollins website: http://www.harpercollins.com
HarperCollins*, mt \ and HarperOne" are trademarks
of HarperCollins Publishers
Illustrations © 2013 Ray Braun, Seattle, WA.
FIRST EDITION
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
is available upon request.
isbn 978-0-06-207147-7
COVER photograph:
Courtesy Chen,
J. Y., G. Q. Zhou, M. Y. Zhu, and K. Y. Yeh. The Chengjiang
Biota—A Unique Window of the Cambrian Explosion. Taichung, Taiwan: National
Museum of Natural Science (1996), 149, Figure 186. Used by permission.
13
14
15
16
17
rrd(h)
10 9876543

CONTENTS
Prologue
v
PART ONE
THE MYSTERY OF THE MISSING FOSSILS
1
Darwin’s Nemesis
3
2
The Burgess Bestiary
26
3
Soft Bodies and Hard Facts
50
4
The Not Missing Fossils?
77
5
The Genes Tell the Story?
98
6
The Animal Tree of Life
114
7
PunkEek!
136
PART TWO
HOW TO BUILD AN ANIMAL
8
The Cambrian Information Explosion
155
9
Combinatorial Inflation
169
10
The Origin of Genes and Proteins
185
11
Assume a Gene
209
12
Complex Adaptations and the Neo-Darwinian Math
230
13
The Origin of Body Plans
255
14
The Epigenetic Revolution
271
PART THREE
AFTER DARWIN, WHAT?
15
The Post-Darwinian World and Self-Organization
291
16
Other Post-Neo-Darwinian Models
311

iv
Contents
17
The Possibility of Intelligent Design
336
18
Signs of Design in the Cambrian Explosion
353
19
The Rules of Science
382
20
What’s at Stake
404
Acknowledgments
414
Notes
415
Bibliography
454
Credits and Permissions
481
Index
488

PROLOGUE
When people today hear the term “information revolution,” they typically
think of silicon chips and software code, cellular phones and supercom-
puters. They rarely think of tiny one-celled organisms or the rise of animal
life. But, while writing these words in the summer of 2012,
1 am sitting at
the end of a narrow medieval street in Cambridge, England, where more
than half a century ago a far-reaching information revolution began in
biology. This revolution was launched by an unlikely but now immortal-
ized pair of scientists, Francis Crick and James Watson. Since my time as
a Ph.D. student at Cambridge during the late 1980s, I have been fascinated
by the way their discovery transformed our understanding of the nature of
life. Indeed, since the 1950s, when Watson and Crick first illuminated the
chemical structure and information-bearing properties ofDNA, biologists
have come to understand that living things, as much as high-tech devices,
depend upon digital information—information that, in the case of life, is
stored in a four-character chemical code embedded within the twisting
figure of a double helix.
Because of the importance of information to living things,
it has now
become apparent that many distinct “information revolutions” have oc-
curred in the history of life—not revolutions of human discovery or in-
vention, but revolutions involving dramatic increases in the information
present within the living world itself. Scientists now know that building a
living organism requires information, and building a fundamentally new
form of life from a simpler form of life requires an immense amount of
new information. Thus, wherever the fossil record testifies to the origin
of a completely new form of animal life—a pulse of biological innova-
tion— it also testifies to a significant increase in the information content
of the biosphere.
In 2009, 1 wrote a book called Signature in the Cell about the first “infor-
mation revolution” in the history of life—the one that occurred with the
origin of the first life on earth. My book described how discoveries in mo-
lecular biology during the 1950s and 1960s established that DNA contains

VI
Prologue
information in digital form, with its four chemical subunits (called nucle-
otide bases) functioning like letters in a written language or symbols in a
computer code. And molecular biology also revealed that cells employ a
complex information-processing system to access and express the infor-
mation stored in DNA as they use that information to build the proteins
and protein machines that they need to stay alive. Scientists attempting
to explain the origin of life must explain how both information-rich mol-
ecules and the cell’s information-processing system arose.
The type of information present in living cells—that is, “specified” in-
formation in which the sequence of characters matters to the function of
the sequence as a whole—has generated an acute mystery. No undirected
physical or chemical process has demonstrated the capacity to produce
specified information starting “from purely physical or chemical” precur-
sors. For this reason, chemical evolutionary theories have failed to solve
the mystery of the origin of first life—a claim that few mainstream evolu-
tionary theorists now dispute.
In Signature in the Cell,
I not only reported the well-known impasse
in origin-of-life studies;
I also made an affirmative case for the theory of
intelligent design. Although we don’t know of a material cause that gener-
ates functioning digital code from physical or chemical precursors, we do
know—based upon our uniform and repeated experience—of one type of
cause that has demonstrated the power to produce this type of informa-
tion. That cause
is intelligence or mind. As information theorist Henry
Quastler observed, “The creation of information is habitually associated
with conscious activity.” 1 Whenever we find functional information—
whether embedded in a radio signal, carved in a stone monument, etched
on a magnetic disc, or produced by an origin-of-life scientist attempting to
engineer a self-replicating molecule—and we trace that information back
to its ultimate source, invariably we come to a mind, not merely a material
process. For this reason, the discovery of digital information in even the
simplest living cells indicates the prior activity of a designing intelligence
at work in the origin of the first life.
My book proved controversial, but in an unexpected way. Though
I
clearly stated that I was writing about the origin of the first life and about
theories of chemical evolution that attempt to explain it from simpler pre-
existing chemicals, many critics responded as if I had written another book
altogether. Indeed, few attempted to refute my book’s actual thesis that

Prologue
vii
intelligent design provides the best explanation for the origin of the infor-
mation necessary to produce the first life. Instead, most criticized the book
as if it had presented a critique of the standard neo-Darwinian theories
of biological evolution—theories that attempt to account for the origin of
new forms of life from simpler preexisting forms of life. Thus, to refute
my claim that no chemical evolutionary processes had demonstrated the
power to explain the ultimate origin of information in the DNA (or RNA)
necessary to produce life from simpler preexisting chemicals in the first
place, many critics cited processes at work in already living organisms—in
particular, the process of natural selection acting on random mutations in
already existing sections of information-rich DNA. In other words, these
critics cited an undirected process that acts on preexistent information-
rich DNA to refute my argument about the failure of undirected material
processes to produce information in DNA in the first place .
2
For example, the eminent evolutionary biologist Francisco Ayala
at-
tempted to refute Signature by arguing that evidence from the DNA of
humans and lower primates showed that the genomes of these organisms
had arisen as the result of an unguided, rather than intelligently designed,
process—even though my book did not address the question of human
evolution or attempt to explain the origin of the human genome, and even
though the process to which Ayala alluded clearly presupposed the ex-
istence of another information-rich genome in some hypothetical lower
primate .
3
Other discussions of the book cited the mammalian immune system as
an example of the power of natural selection and mutation to generate new
biological information, even though the mammalian immune system can
only perform the marvels it does because its mammalian hosts are already
alive, and even though the mammalian immune system depends upon
an elaborately preprogrammed form of adaptive capacity rich in genetic
information—one that arose long after the origin of the first life. Another
critic steadfastly maintained that “Meyer’s main argument” concerns “the
inability of random mutation and selection
to add information to
[pre-
existing] DNA
”4 and attempted to refute the book’s presumed critique of
the neo-Darwinian mechanism of biological evolution accordingly.
I found this all a bit surreal, as if I had wandered into a lost chapter
from a Kafka novel. Signature in the Cell simply did not critique the theory
of biological evolution, nor did it ask whether mutation and selection can

Prologue
viii
add new information
to preexisting information-rich DNA. To imply
otherwise, as many of my critics did, was simply to erect a straw man.
To those unfamiliar with the particular problems faced by scientists
trying to explain the origin of life,
it might not seem obvious why invok-
ing natural selection does not help to explain the origin of the first life.
After all, if natural selection and random mutations can generate new in-
formation in living organisms, why can
it also not do so in a prebiotic
environment? But the distinction between a biological and prebiotic con-
text was crucially important to my argument. Natural selection assumes
the existence of living organisms with a capacity to reproduce. Yet self-
replication in all extant cells depends upon information-rich proteins and
nucleic acids (DNA and RNA), and the origin of such information-rich
molecules is precisely what origin- of-life research needs to explain. That’s
why Theodosius Dobzhansky, one of the founders of the modern neo-
Darwinian synthesis, can state flatly, “Pre-biological natural selection is a
contradiction in terms .”5 Or, as Nobel Prize-winning molecular biologist
and origin-of-life researcher Christian de Duve explains, theories of pre-
biotic natural selection fail because they “need information which implies
they have to presuppose what is to be explained in the first place .”6 Clearly,
it is not sufficient to invoke a process that commences only once life has
begun, or once biological information has arisen, to explain the origin of
life or the origin of the information necessary to produce it.
All this notwithstanding,
I have long been aware of strong reasons
for doubting that mutation and selection can add enough new informa-
tion of the right kind to account for large-scale, or “macroevolutionary,”
innovations—the various information
revolutions
that have occurred
after the origin of life. For this reason,
I have found
it increasingly te-
dious to have to concede, if only for the sake of argument, the substance of
claims I think likely to be false.
And so the repeated prodding of my critics has paid off. Even though I
did not write the book or make the argument that many of my critics cri-
tiqued in responding to Signature in the Cell,
I have decided to write that
book. And this is that book.
Of course,
it might have seemed a safer course to leave well enough
alone. Many evolutionary biologists now grudgingly acknowledge that no
chemical evolutionary theory has offered an adequate explanation of the

Prologue
IX
origin of life or the ultimate origin of the information necessary to pro-
duce it. Why press a point you never made in the first place?
Because despite the widespread impression to the contrary—conveyed
by textbooks, the popular media, and spokespersons for official science
the orthodox neo-Darwinian theory of biological evolution has reached
an impasse nearly as acute as the one faced by chemical evolutionary
theory. Leading figures
in several subdisciplines of biology— cell biol-
ogy, developmental biology, molecular biology, paleontology, and even
evolutionary biology—now openly criticize key tenets of the modern ver-
sion of Darwinian theory in the peer-reviewed technical literature. Since
1980, when Harvard paleontologist Stephen Jay Gould declared that neo-
Darwinism “is effectively dead, despite its persistence as textbook ortho-
doxy,”
7 the weight of critical opinion in biology has grown steadily with
each passing year.
A steady stream of technical articles and books have cast new doubt on
the creative power of the mutation and selection mechanism.
8 So well es-
tablished are these doubts that prominent evolutionary theorists must now
periodically assure the public, as biologist Douglas Futuyma has done, that
“just because we don’t know how evolution occurred, does not justify doubt
about whether it occurred.”9 Some leading evolutionary biologists, particu-
larly those associated with a group of scientists known as the “Altenberg
16,” are openly calling for a new theory of evolution because they doubt the
creative power of the mutation and natural selection mechanism.
10
The fundamental problem confronting neo-Darwinism, as with chem-
ical evolutionary theory,
is the problem of the origin of new biological
information. Though neo-Darwinists often dismiss the problem of the
origin of life as an isolated anomaly, leading theoreticians acknowledge
that neo-Darwinism has also failed to explain the source of novel varia-
tion without which natural selection can do nothing—a problem equiva-
lent to the problem of the origin of biological information. Indeed, the
problem of the origin of information lies at the root of a host of other
acknowledged problems in contemporary Darwinian theory—from the
origin of new body plans to the origin of complex structures and systems
such as wings, feathers, eyes, echolocation, blood clotting, molecular ma-
chines, the amniotic egg, skin, nervous systems, and multicellularity, to
name just a few.

X
Prologue
At the same time, classical examples illustrating the prowess of natural
selection and random mutations do not involve the creation of novel ge-
netic information. Many biology texts tell, for example, about the famous
finches in the Galapagos Islands, whose beaks have varied in shape and
length over time. They also recall how moth populations in England dark-
ened and then lightened in response to varying levels of industrial pol-
lution. Such episodes are often presented as conclusive evidence for the
power of evolution. And indeed they are, depending on how one defines
“evolution.” That term has many meanings, and few biology textbooks
distinguish between them. “Evolution” can refer to anything from trivial
cyclical change within the limits of a preexisting gene pool to the creation
of entirely novel genetic information and structure as the result of natural
selection acting on random mutations. As a host of distinguished biolo-
gists have explained in recent technical papers, small-scale, or “micro-
evolutionary,” change cannot be extrapolated to explain large-scale, or
“macroevolutionary,” innovation .
11 For the most part, microevolutionary
changes (such as variation in color or shape) merely utilize or express ex-
isting genetic information, while the macroevolutionary change necessary
to assemble new organs or whole body plans requires the creation of en-
tirely new information. As an increasing number of evolutionary biolo-
gists have noted, natural selection explains “only the survival of the fittest,
not the arrival of the fittest .” 12 The technical literature in biology is now
replete with world-class biologists
13 routinely expressing doubts about
various aspects of neo-Darwinian theory, and especially about its central
tenet, namely, the alleged creative power of the natural selection and mu-
tation mechanism.
Nevertheless, popular defenses of the theory continue apace, rarely if
ever acknowledging the growing body of critical scientific opinion about
the standing of the theory. Rarely has there been such a great disparity be-
tween the popular perception of a theory and its actual standing in the rel-
evant peer-reviewed scientific literature. Today modern neo-Darwinism
seems to enjoy almost universal acclaim among science journalists and
bloggers,
biology textbook
writers, and
other popular spokespersons
for science as the great unifying theory of all biology. High-school and
college textbooks present its tenets without qualification and do not ac-
knowledge the existence of any significant scientific criticism of it. At the
same time, official scientific organizations—such as the National Acad-

Prologue
xi
emy of Sciences (NAS), the American Association for the Advancement
of Sciences (AAAS), and the National Association of Biology Teachers
(NABT)—routinely assure the public that the contemporary version of
Darwinian theory enjoys unequivocal support among qualified scientists
and that the evidence of biology overwhelmingly supports the theory. For
example, in 2006 the AAAS declared, “There is no significant controversy
within the scientific community about the validity of the theory of evo-
lution.”
14 The media dutifully echo these pronouncements. As New York
Times science writer Cornelia Dean asserted in 2007, “There is no credible
scientific challenge to the theory of evolution as an explanation for the
complexity and diversity of life on earth.”
15
The extent of the disparity between popular representations of the
status of the theory and its actual status, as indicated in the peer-reviewed
technical journals, came home to me with particular poignancy as I was
preparing to testify before the Texas State Board of Education in 2009.
At the time the board was considering the adoption of a provision in its
science education standards that would encourage teachers to inform
students of both the strengths and weaknesses of scientific theories. This
provision had become a political hot potato after several groups asserted
that “teaching strengths and weaknesses” were code words for biblical
creationism or for removing the teaching of the theory of evolution from
the curriculum. Nevertheless,
after defenders of the provision insisted
that it neither sanctioned teaching creationism nor censored evolutionary
theory, opponents of the provision shifted their ground. They attacked the
provision by insisting that there was no need to consider weaknesses in
modern evolutionary theory because, as Eugenie Scott, spokeswoman for
the National Center for Science Education, insisted in The Dallas Morning
News, “There are no weaknesses in the theory of evolution.” 16
At the same time,
I was preparing a binder of one hundred peer-
reviewed scientific articles in which biologists described significant prob-
lems with the theory—a binder later presented to the board during my
testimony. So I knew—unequivocally—that Dr. Scott was misrepresenting
the status of scientific opinion about the theory in the relevant scientific
literature.
I also knew that her attempts to prevent students from hear-
ing about significant problems with evolutionary theory would have likely
made Charles Darwin himself uncomfortable. In On the Origin ofSpecies,
Darwin openly acknowledged important weaknesses in his theory and

Prologue
xii
professed his own doubts about key aspects of it. Yet today’s public defend-
ers of a Darwin-only science curriculum apparently do not want these,
or any other scientific doubts about contemporary Darwinian theory, re-
ported to students.
This book addresses Darwin’s most significant doubt and what has
become of it.
It examines an event during a remote period of geological
history in which numerous animal forms appear to have arisen suddenly
and without evolutionary precursors in the fossil record, a mysterious
event commonly referred to as the “Cambrian explosion.” As he acknowl-
edged in the Origin, Darwin viewed this event as a troubling anomaly-
one that he hoped future fossil discoveries would eventually eliminate.
The book is divided into three main parts. Part One, “The Mystery of
the Missing Fossils,” describes the problem that first generated Darwin’s
doubt—the missing ancestors of the Cambrian animals in the earlier
Precambrian fossil record—and then tells the story of the successive, but
unsuccessful, attempts that biologists and paleontologists have made to
resolve that mystery.
Part Two, “How to Build an Animal,” explains why the discovery of the
importance of information to living systems has made the mystery of the
Cambrian explosion more acute. Biologists now know that the Cambrian
explosion not only represents an explosion of new animal form and struc-
ture but also an explosion of information—that it was, indeed, one of the
most significant “information revolutions” in the history of life. Part Two
examines the problem of explaining how the unguided mechanism of nat-
ural selection and random mutations could have produced the biological
information necessary to build the Cambrian animal forms. This group of
chapters explains why so many leading biologists now doubt the creative
power of the neo-Darwinian mechanism and it presents four rigorous cri-
tiques of the mechanism based on recent biological research.
Part Three, “After Darwin, What?” evaluates more current evolutionary
theories to see if any of them explain the origin of form and information
more satisfactorily than standard neo-Darwinism does. Part Three also
presents and assesses the theory of intelligent design as a possible solution
to the Cambrian mystery. A concluding chapter discusses the implications
of the debate about design in biology for the larger philosophical questions
that animate human existence. As the story of the book unfolds,
it will
become apparent that a seemingly isolated anomaly that Darwin acknowl-

Prologue
xiii
edged almost in passing has grown to become illustrative of a fundamen-
tal problem for all of evolutionary biology: the problem of the origin of
biological form and information.
To see where that problem came from and why it has generated a crisis
in evolutionary biology, we need to begin at the beginning: with Darwin’s
own doubt, with the fossil evidence that elicited
it, and with a clash be-
tween a pair of celebrated Victorian naturalists—the famed Harvard pa-
leontologist Louis Agassiz and Charles Darwin himself.


PART ONE
THE MYSTERY
OF THE MISSING
FOSSILS


DARWIN’S NEMESIS
When Charles Darwin finished his famous book, he thought that he had
explained every clue but one.
By anyone’s measure, On the Origin of Species was a singular achieve-
ment. Like a great Gothic cathedral, the ambitious work integrated many
disparate elements into a grand synthesis, explaining phenomena in fields
as diverse as comparative anatomy, paleontology, embryology, and bio-
geography. At the same time, it was impressive for its simplicity. Darwin’s
Origin explained many classes of biological evidence with just two central
organizing ideas. The twin pillars of his theory were the ideas of universal
common ancestry and natural selection.
The
first of these
pillars,
universal common
ancestry,
represented
Darwin’s theory of the history of life. It asserted that all forms of life have
ultimately descended from a single common ancestor somewhere in the
distant past. In a famous passage at the end of the Origin, Darwin argued
that “all the organic beings which have ever lived on this earth have de-
scended from some one primordial form.”
1 Darwin thought that this pri-
mordial form gradually developed into new forms of life, which in turn
gradually developed into other forms of life, eventually producing, after
many millions of generations, all the complex life we see in the present.
Biology textbooks today usually depict this idea just as Darwin did,
with a great branching tree. The trunk of Darwin’s tree of life represents
the first primordial organism. The limbs and branches of the tree repre-
sent the many new forms of life that developed from it (see Fig.
1.1). The

4
DARWIN’S DOUBT
I
, Feld
:
p m n q
( 19 Stdmrru)
tt, Feld: pxyq
(JSldmme)
"I, Fell
p s
t q
(/
iStamm )
sttlhrv J mqglicht' FdlU der
univtrsaierv Gouatogtty dar
Radix
communis
Orgauismorimi
FIGURE 1.1
Darwin’s evolutionary tree of life, as depicted by the nineteenth-century German evolu-
tionary biologist Ernst Haeckel.
vertical axis on which the tree is plotted represents the arrow of time. The
horizontal axis represents changes in biological form, or what biologists
call “morphological distance.”
Biologists often call Darwin s theory of the history of life “universal
common descent” to indicate that every organism on earth arose from
a single common ancestor by a process of “descent with modification.”
Darwin argued that this idea best explained a variety of biological evi-
dences: the succession of fossil forms, the geographical distribution of

Darwin’s Nemesis
5
various species (such as Galapagos finches), and the anatomical and em-
bryological similarities among otherwise highly distinct organisms.
The second pillar of Darwin’s theory affirmed the creative power of a
process he called natural selection, a process that acted on random varia-
tions in the traits or features of organisms and their offspring .
2 Whereas
the theory of universal common descent postulated a pattern (the branch-
ing tree) to represent the history of life, Darwin’s idea of natural selection
referred to a process that he said could generate the change implied by his
branching tree of life.
Darwin formulated the idea of natural selection by analogy to a well-
known
process,
that
of
“artificial
selection”
or
“selective
breeding.”
Anyone in the nineteenth century familiar with the breeding of domestic
animals— dogs, horses, sheep, or pigeons, for example—knew that human
breeders could alter the features of domestic stock by allowing only ani-
mals with certain traits to breed. A sheepherder from the north of Scot-
land might breed for a woollier sheep to enhance its chances of survival
in a cold northern climate (or to harvest more wool). To do so, he would
choose only the woolliest males and woolliest ewes to breed. If generation
after generation he continued to select and breed only the woolliest sheep
among the resulting offspring, he would eventually produce a woollier
breed of sheep. In such cases, “the key is man’s power of accumulative
selection,” wrote Darwin. “Nature gives successive variations; man adds
them up in certain directions useful to him .”3
Darwin noted that pigeons have been coaxed into a dizzying variety of
breeds: the carrier, with its elongated eyelids and a “wide gape of mouth”;
the “short-faced tumbler,” with its “beak in outline almost like that of a
finch”; the common tumbler, with its penchant for flying in close forma-
tion and “tumbling in the air head over heels”; and, perhaps strangest of
all, the pouter, with its elongated legs, wings, and body overshadowed by
its “enormously developed crop, which it glories in inflating” for its aston-
ished patrons .
4
Of course, pigeon breeders achieved these startling metamorphoses by
carefully sifting and selecting. But, as Darwin pointed out, nature also has
a means of sifting: defective creatures are less likely to survive and repro-
duce, while those offspring with beneficial variations are more likely to sur-
vive, reproduce, and pass on their advantages to future generations. In the
Origin, Darwin argued that this process, natural selection acting on random

6
DARWIN’S DOUBT
variations, could alter the features of organisms just as intelligent selection
by human breeders can. Nature itself could play the role of the breeder.
Consider once more our flock of sheep. Imagine that instead of a human
selecting the woolliest males and ewes to breed, a series of very cold win-
ters ensures that all but the very woolliest sheep in a population die. Now
again only very woolly sheep will remain to breed. If the cold winters con-
tinue over several generations, will the result not be the same as before?
Won’t the population of sheep eventually become discernibly woollier?
This was Darwin’s great insight. Nature—in the form of environmental
changes or other factors—could have the same effect on a population of or-
ganisms as the intentional decisions of an intelligent agent. Nature would
favor the preservation of certain features over others—specifically, those
that conferred a functional or survival advantage upon the organisms
possessing them—causing the features of the population to change. And
the resulting change will have been produced not by an intelligent breeder
choosing a desirable trait or variation—not by “artificial selection”—but
by a wholly natural process. What’s more, Darwin concluded that this
process of natural selection acting on randomly arising variations had
been “the chief agent of change” in generating the great branching tree of
life in all its variety.
On the Origin ofSpecies seized the attention of the scientific community
like a thunderclap. Darwin’s analogy to artificial selection was powerful,
his proposed mechanism of natural selection and random variation easily
grasped, and his skill in dispensing with potential objections unrivalled.
Moreover, the explanatory scope of his argument for universal common
descent constituted something of a tour deforce. By the close of the Origin,
it seemed to many that Darwin had dispensed with every conceivable ob-
jection to his theory but one.
THE ANOMALY: DARWIN’S DOUBT
Despite the scope of his synthesis, there was one set of facts that troubled
Darwin—something he conceded his theory couldn’t adequately explain,
at least at present. Darwin was puzzled by a pattern in the fossil record
that seemed to document the geologically sudden appearance of animal
life in a remote period of geologic history, a period that at first was com-
monly called the Silurian, but later came to be known as the Cambrian.

Darwins Nemesis
7
During this geological period, many new and anatomically sophis-
ticated creatures appeared suddenly in the sedimentary layers of the
geologic column without any evidence of simpler ancestral forms in the
earlier layers below, in an event that paleontologists today call the Cam-
brian explosion. Darwin frankly described his concerns about this conun-
drum in the Origin: “The difficulty of understanding the absence of vast
piles of fossiliferous strata, which on my theory were no doubt somewhere
accumulated before the Silurian
[i.e., Cambrian] epoch, is very great,” he
wrote. “I allude to the manner in which numbers of species of the same
group suddenly appear in the lowest known
fossiliferous rocks.”
5 The
sudden appearance of animals so early in the fossil record did not easily
accord with Darwin’s new theory of gradual evolutionary change, and
there was one scientist who would not let him forget it.
THE ANTAGONIST
Swiss-born paleontologist Louis Agassiz, of Harvard University, was one
of the best-trained scientists of his age, and he knew the fossil record
better than any man alive. Hoping to enlist Agassiz as an
ally, Darwin
sent him a copy of On the Origin of Species and asked him to consider the
argument with an open mind (see Fig.
1.2). One can almost see the great,
aging naturalist receiving the unremarkable package from the postman,
FIGURE 1.2
Figure 1.2a (left): Louis Agassiz. Figure 1.2b (right): Charles Darwin.

8
DARWIN’S DOUBT
unwrapping the small green volume that had stirred such a tempest on
both sides of the Atlantic. Perhaps he retired to his study the better to
concentrate, scrutinizing the books prepossessing title, recalling what he
had already heard about the work. He read the book with deep interest,
making notes in the margin as he moved through it, but in the end his ver-
dict would disappoint its author. Agassiz concluded that the fossil record,
particularly the record of the explosion of Cambrian animal life, posed an
insuperable difficulty for Darwins theory.
THE TWO-PRONGED CHALLENGE
To see why, consider brachiopods and trilobites, two ofthe best-documented
creatures in the Cambrian fossil record by 1859. The brachiopod (see Fig.
1.3), with its two shells, looks like a clam or an oyster, but is very different
djr©wAt>
£
vEWTPAL kawtle
pedicle
Po^tepioP
AkjTEPIoP
<TOMAd+4
LoP*4oP+4oP£
t>oP<AL
,,
MAn/tLE
KAdtLE CAVITY
FIGURE 1.3
Figure 1.3a
(top): Brachiopod internal anatomy. Figure 1.3b (bottom,
left): Brachiopod
fossil showing remains of internal structure. Courtesy Paul Chien. Figure 1.3c (bottom,
right): Fossil showing exterior structure of brachiopod shell. Courtesy Corbis.

Darwin’s Nemesis
9
CUTAWAY
viBlO
TOP
VIEl/O
MlW>L£ OP AXIAL LoTJE
TrtoPAX
'
pyftitoUM
CrAlL)
PLSUPA
PLSUPAL
FUPPOU)
PLEUPAL
<PI(J£
PLEUPAL
dEMTPAL PLEUPAL
LoTJE
LEPWALow
(UBAt»
wl>
E/E _
AXIAL
FUPPow)
FIGURE 1.4
Figure 1.4a
(top): Trilobite anatomy. Figure 1.4b (bottom): Trilobite fossil of the species
Kuanyangia pustulosa. Courtesy Illustra Media.

10
DARWIN’S DOUBT
inside. As shown in the accompanying figure, it possesses a gonad, mantle,
mantle cavity, anterior body wall, body cavity, gut, and lophophore, the last
of which is a feeding organ like a ring of tentacles, usually in the shape of
a coil or horseshoe, with a mouth inside the ring of tentacles, and an anus
outside. The brachiopod exhibits a highly complex overall body plan, with
many individually complex and functionally integrated anatomical systems
and parts. Its tentacles, for instance, are covered by cilia precisely arranged
to generate and direct a current of water toward the mouth.6
Even more sophisticated was the trilobite (see Fig.
1.4), with
its three
longitudinal lobes across its head (a raised middle lobe and a flatter pleural
lobe to either side) and a body divided into three parts—head, chest, and
tail, the former two consisting of as many as thirty segments. It had a pair
of legs for every pleural groove and another three pairs for the head. Most
dramatic of all were the compound eyes found on even some of the very
early trilobites—eyes that afforded these not so primitive animals a 360-
degree field of vision.
7
The abrupt appearance of such complex anatomical designs presented
a challenge to each of the two main parts of Darwin’s theory of evolution.
THE CAMBRIAN EXPLOSION AND THE
ACTION OF NATURAL SELECTION
The Cambrian fossil evidence represented a significant challenge to Dar-
win’s claim that natural selection had the capacity to produce novel forms
of life. As Darwin described it, the ability of natural selection to produce
significant biological change depends upon the presence of three distinct
elements: (1) randomly arising variations, (2) the heritability of those vari-
ations, and (3) a competition for survival, resulting in differences in repro-
ductive success among competing organisms.
According to Darwin, variations in traits arise randomly. Some varia-
tions (such as thicker fleece) might confer advantages in the competition
for survival in particular environmental conditions. Those variations that
are heritable and that impart functional or survival advantage will be pre-
served in the next generation. As nature “selects” these successful varia-
tions, the features of a population change.
Darwin conceded that the beneficial variations responsible for per-
manent change in species are both rare and necessarily modest. Major

Darwin’s Nemesis
11
variations in forms, what later evolutionary biologists would term “mac-
romutations,” inevitably produce deformity and death. Only minor varia-
tions meet the test of viability and heritability.
It followed that, over human timescales, the benefits of this evolution-
ary mechanism would be difficult or impossible to spot. But given enough
time, favorable variations would gradually accumulate and give rise to
new species and, given more time, even fundamentally new groups of or-
ganisms and body designs. If artificial selection could conjure so many
strange breeds from a wild strain in a few centuries, Darwin argued,
imagine what natural selection could achieve over many millions of years.
Even the origin of complex structures such as the mammalian eye—which
seemed at first to present a significant challenge to his theory—could be
explained if one postulated the existence of an initially simpler structure
(such as a light sensitive spot) that could be gradually modified over long
periods of time.
And that was the rub. Darwin’s mechanism of natural selection and
random variation necessarily required a lot of time to generate wholly
novel organisms, creating a dilemma that Agassiz was keen to expose.
In an 1874 Atlantic Monthly essay titled “Evolution and the Permanence
of Type,” Agassiz explained his reasons for doubting the creative power of
natural selection. Small-scale variations, he argued, had never produced
a “specific difference” (i.e., a difference in species). Meanwhile, large-scale
variations, whether achieved gradually or suddenly, inevitably resulted in
sterility or death. As he put it, “It is a matter of fact that extreme variations
finally degenerate or become sterile; like monstrosities they die out.”
8
Darwin himself insisted that the process of evolutionary change he en-
visioned must occur very gradually for the same reason. Thus, Darwin
realized that building, for instance, a trilobite from single-celled organ-
isms by natural
selection
operating on
small,
step-by-step variations
would require countless transitional forms and failed biological experi-
ments over vast stretches of geologic time. As University of Washington
paleontologist Peter Ward would later explain, Darwin had very specific
expectations for what paleontologists would find below the lowest known
strata of animal fossils—in particular, “intervening strata showing fos-
sils of increasing complexity until finally trilobites appeared.”
9 As Darwin
noted, “If my theory be true, it is indisputable that before the lowest Silu-
rian [Cambrian] stratum was deposited, long periods elapsed, as long as,

12
DARWIN’S DOUBT
or probably far longer than, the whole interval from the Silurian age to
the present day; and that during these vast, yet quite unknown, periods of
time, the world swarmed with living creatures .” 10
The mechanism of natural selection necessarily had to work gradually
on small incremental variations. And, indeed, the kinds of variations that
Darwin actually observed and described in developing his analogy be-
tween natural and artificial selection were in every case minor. Only by
selecting and accumulating minor variations over many generations were
breeders able to produce the striking changes in the features of a breed,
changes
that were,
nevertheless,
extraordinarily modest compared
to
the radical differences in form between, say, Precambrian and Cambrian
forms of life. At the end of the day, as Agassiz hastened to note, the pigeons
Darwin cited in support of the creative power of artificial and, by analogy,
natural selection were still pigeons. More significant changes to the form
and anatomical structure of organisms would, by the logic of Darwin’s
mechanism, require untold millions of years, precisely what seemed un-
available in the case of the Cambrian explosion.
THE CAMBRIAN EXPLOSION AND THE TREE OF LIFE
The abrupt appearance of the Cambrian fauna also posed a separate but
related difficulty for Darwin’s picture of a continuously branching tree
of life. To produce truly novel animal forms, the Darwinian mechanism
would—by its own internal logic—require not only millions of years, but
untold generations of ancestors. Thus, even the discovery of a handful
of plausible intermediates allegedly linking a Precambrian ancestor to a
Cambrian descendant wouldn’t come close to fully documenting Darwin’s
picture of the history of life. If Darwin is right, Agassiz argued, then we
should find not just one or a few missing links, but innumerable links
shading almost imperceptibly from alleged ancestors to presumed de-
scendants. Geologists, however, had found no such myriad of transitional
forms leading to the Cambrian fauna. Instead, the stratigraphic column
seemed to document the abrupt appearance of the earliest animals.
Agassiz thought the evidence of abrupt appearance, and the absence of
ancestral forms in the Precambrian, refuted Darwin’s theory.
11 Of these
earlier forms, Agassiz asked, “Where are their fossilized remains?” He in-
sisted that Darwin’s picture of the history of life “contradicted] what the

Darwin’s Nemesis
13
animal forms buried in the rocky strata of our earth tell us of their own
introduction and succession upon the surface of the globe. Let us therefore
hear them;—for, after all, their testimony is that of the eye-witness and the
actor in the scene.”
12
MURCHISON, SEDGWICK, AND THE
CAMBRIAN FOSSILS OF WALES
Darwin, for his part, responded with more than civility. Far from dismiss-
ing Agassiz, he conceded that his objection carried considerable force. Nor
was Agassiz alone in pressing these concerns. Other leading naturalists
thought the fossil evidence presented a significant obstacle to Darwin’s
theory. At the time, perhaps the best place to investigate the lowest known
strata of fossils was Wales, and one of its leading experts was Roderick
Impey Murchison, who named the earliest geologic period the Silurian
after an ancient Welsh tribe. Five years before On the Origin of Species,
he called attention to the sudden appearance of complex designs like the
compound eyes of the first trilobites, creatures already thriving at the ap-
parent dawn of animal life. For him, this discovery ruled out the idea that
these creatures had evolved gradually from some primitive and relatively
simple form: “The earliest signs of living things, announcing as they do
a high complexity of organization, entirely exclude the hypothesis of a
transmutation from lower to higher grades of being.”
13
The other pioneering explorer of Wales’s
rich
fossil
record, Adam
Sedgwick, also thought that Darwin had leaped beyond the evidence, as
he told him in a letter in the fall of 1859: “You have deserted—after a start
in that tram-road of all solid physical truth—the true method of induc-
tion.”
14 Sedgwick might have had in mind the same evidence the two men
had studied together some twenty-eight years before when the Cambridge
professor had brought Darwin along as his field assistant to explore, in the
Upper Swansea Valley in northwestern Wales, the very strata that seemed
to testify so powerfully to the sudden appearance of animal life.
It was
these strata that Sedgwick named after a Latinized English term for the
country of Wales—“Cambria,” a designation that eventually replaced “Si-
lurian” as the name for the earliest strata of animal fossils.
Sedgwick emphasized that these Cambrian animal fossils appeared to
pop out of nowhere into the geological column. But he also stressed what

14
DARWIN’S DOUBT
£UfcyPTEfeAW<
...
TETfcAColiAL
FIGURE 1.5
Three organisms that first appear in the Ordivician period: eurypterans (sea scorpions),
starfish, and tetracoral.
he viewed as a broader reason to doubt Darwins evolutionary model: the
sudden appearance of the Cambrian animals was merely the most out-
standing instance of a pattern of discontinuity that extends throughout
the geologic column. Where in the Ordovician strata, for instance, are
many of the families of the trilobites and brachiopods present in the Cam-
brian just below
it?
15 These creatures along with numerous other types
suddenly disappear. But just as suddenly one finds newcomers in the
Ordovician strata like the eurypterans (sea scorpions), starfish, and tetra-
corals (see Fig.
1.5).
16 In a later Paleozoic period called the Devonian, the
first amphibians (e.g., Ichthyostega) arise. Much later, many staples of the
Paleozoic era (which encompasses the Cambrian, Ordovician, and four
subsequent periods) suddenly go extinct in a period called the Permian.
17
Then, in the Triassic period that follows, completely novel animals such as
turtles and dinosaurs emerge.
18 Such discontinuity, Sedgwick argued,
is
not the exception, but the rule.

15
Darwins Nemesis
DATING BY DISCONTINUITY
Already by Sedgwick’s time, the various strata of fossils had proved so
distinct one from another that geologists had come to use the sharp dis-
continuities between them as a key means for dating rocks. Originally,
the best tool for determining the relative age of various strata was based
on the notion of superposition. Put simply, unless there is a reason to be-
lieve otherwise, a geologist provisionally assumes that lower rocks were
put down before the rocks above them. Now, contrary to a widespread
caricature, no respected geologist, then or now, adopts this method un-
critically. The most basic training in geology teaches that rock formations
can be twisted, upended, even mixed pell-mell by a variety of phenomena.
This is why geologists have always looked for other means to estimate the
relative age of different strata.
In 1815, Englishman William Smith had hit upon just such an alterna-
tive means.
19 While studying the distinct fossil strata exposed during canal
construction, Smith noted that so dissimilar are the fossil types among
different major periods and so sharp and sudden the break between them,
that geologists could use this as one method for determining the relative
age of strata. Even when layers of geological strata are twisted and turned,
the clear discontinuities between the various strata often allow geolo-
gists to discern the order in which they were deposited, particularly when
there is a broad enough sampling of rich geological sites from the period
under investigation to study and cross-reference. Although not without
its pitfalls, this approach has become a standard dating technique, used in
conjunction with superposition and other more recent radiometric dating
methods. 20
Indeed, its difficult to overemphasize how central the approach
is to
modern historical geology. As Harvard paleontologist Stephen Jay Gould
explains, it is the phenomenon of fossil succession that dictates the names
of the major periods in the geological column (see Fig.
1.6). “We might
take the history of modern multi- cellular
life, about 600 million years,
and divide this time into even and arbitrary units easily remembered as
1-12 or A-L, at 50 million years per unit,” Gould writes. “But the earth
scorns our simplifications, and becomes much more interesting in its de-
rision. The history of life is not a continuum of development, but a record

16
DARWIN’S DOUBT
dENozoid.
ERA
NEOdfENE
PERIOD
PALEOGENE
PERIOD
ME^OZOId.
ERA
PALEOZOIC
ERA
.
SUAfcTEfcwAfcy
PERIOD
'ERTIAR/
PLEIyT&dEWE B?oCU
PdlodEwE EPodW
MIOdENE EPOdR
odlfir&dEwE EPodH
EodEME EPodR
ERETAdEoUS PERIOD
jURA&Id. PERIOD
TRIA&Id PERIOD
PERMIAN PERIOD
dARTJOWlFERoiX PERIOD
Devonian period
Silurian period
oRDovK-IAn PERIOD
nEoPRo-
TEROZOld
ERA
OfcECAMlJfclAN
ttkc;
CAM^PiAn p£fciot>
^30 MILLION /EA^ A<f|0
6t>lAdAfcAKJ P£l>lot>
OTTlEfc PfcEdAM^fclANJ
P£l>lot><
43
MY
&>3-4
MY
79 MY
?6>.3 MY
^z.9 MY
44-7 MY
60 MY
& 0.3 MY
24 . U> MY
41 . U> MY
MY
94 MY
APPfcoX-
4,&og MY
FIGURE 1.6
The geological timescale.

Darwin’s Nemesis
17
punctuated by brief, sometimes geologically instantaneous, episodes of
mass extinction and subsequent diversification .” 21 The question that Dar-
win’s early critics posed was this: How could he reconcile his theory of
gradual evolution with a fossil record so discontinuous that
it had given
rise to the names of the major distinct periods of geological time, particu-
larly when the first animal forms seemed to spring into existence during
the Cambrian as if from nowhere?
A SOLUTION UNSEEN
Of course, Darwin was well aware of these problems. As he noted in the
Origin, “The abrupt manner in which whole groups of species suddenly
appear in certain formations has been urged by several paleontologists—for
instance, by Agassiz, Pictet, and Sedgwick—as a fatal objection to the belief
in the transmutation of species. If numerous species, belonging to the same
genera or families, have really started into life all at once, the fact would be
fatal to the theory of descent with slow modification through natural selec-
tion .” 22 Darwin, however, proposed a possible solution. He suggested that
the fossil record may be significantly incomplete: either the ancestral forms
of the Cambrian animals were not fossilized or they hadn’t been found yet.
“I look at the natural geological record, as a history of the world imperfectly
kept, and written in a changing dialect,” Darwin wrote. “Of this history we
possess the last volume alone, relating only to two or three countries. Of this
volume, only here and there a short chapter has been preserved; and of each
page, only here and there a few lines
On this view, the difficulties above
discussed are greatly diminished, or even disappear.”23
Darwin himself was less than satisfied with this explanation . 24 Agassiz,
for his part, would have none of it. “Both with Darwin and his follow-
ers, a great part of the argument is purely negative,” he wrote. They “thus
throw off the responsibility of proof.
.
.
. However broken the geological
record may be, there
is a complete sequence in many parts of it, from
which the character of the succession may be ascertained.” On what basis
did he make this claim? “Since the most exquisitely delicate structures, as
well as embryonic phases of growth of the most perishable nature, have
been preserved from very early deposits, we have no right to infer the dis-
appearance of types because their absence disproves some favorite
[i.e.,
Darwinian] theory.”25

18
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Though Darwin himself was
less than
enthusiastic about
his
re-
sponse to Agassiz’s objection,
it seemed adequate to satisfy the needs of
the moment. The overwhelming preponderance of evidence that Darwin
had marshaled seemed to support his theory. In any case, many leading
naturalists—Joseph Hooker, Thomas Huxley, Ernst Haeckel, and Asa
Gray— all younger than Agassiz, quickly aligned themselves with
his
evolutionary line of thinking. True, some scientists, notably the Scottish
engineering professor Fleeming Jenkin and (later) the English geneticist
William Bateson, expressed persistent doubts about the efficacy of natural
selection. But despite the views of some weighty scientific critics, Darwin’s
revolutionary theory won increasingly wide support and soon defined the
terms of the debate about the history of life. Those who rejected it whole-
sale, as Agassiz did, consigned themselves to increasing irrelevance.
AGASSIZ UNDER THE MICROSCOPE
So did Agassiz identify a genuine problem for Darwin’s theory, a mystery,
at least, waiting to be solved? If so, whatever became of this problem? And
if not, how could such a brilliant and knowledgeable scientist, someone
so steeped in the evidence, fall so far outside the mainstream of scientific
opinion?
Historians of science
in the post-Darwinian
era have
typically
at-
tempted to answer this later question by portraying Agassiz as a brilliant
and respected scientist who nevertheless was too ossified to catch the new
wave, a figure past his prime and mired in philosophical prejudice . 26 Bi-
ographer Edward Lurie describes the Harvard naturalist as a “giant of the
nineteenth century ... a person deeply involved in his surroundings, a
man who understood the possibilities of life with an uncommon aware-
ness .”27 Similarly, historian Mabel Robinson says that she long awaited
a biography of Agassiz that “would re-create this man of genius and his
headlong splendid race through life.” He was, she said, “a man to remem-
ber because genius
is rare,” “an immortal Pied Piper.”28 These scholars
are merely echoing what Agassiz’s contemporaries, even Darwin himself,
said. “What a set ofmen you have at Harvard!” Darwin told the American
poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. “Both our universities put together
cannot furnish the like. Why, there is Agassiz—he counts for three .”29

Darwin’s Nemesis
19
Even so, many historians argue that Agassiz was too infected by German
idealism to properly assess the factual basis of Darwin’s case. According
to idealist philosophers of biology, living forms exemplified transcendent
ideas and in their organization provided evidence of purposive design in
nature. Comments historian A. Hunter Dupree, “Agassiz’s idealism was
of course the basis of his concepts of species and their distribution,” of his
insistence that a divine or intellectual cause must stand behind the origin
of each type. 30 The ship of science was transitioning from idealism to
modern empiricism. Agassiz had fallen overboard, since he had imbibed
too deeply an outmoded idealism from his teacher, the French anatomist
Georges Cuvier, and from philosophers
like Friedrich
Schelling, who
“ran wild in trying to put all nature into a unified and absolute system of
ideas.”
31 Agassiz wasn’t merely wrong, Dupree explains, but an annoying
obscurantist, actively fighting “against the extension of empiricism into
natural history.”32
Edward Lurie offers a similar if somewhat more nuanced assessment:
although “quite capable of making the most admirable scientific discov-
eries reflecting complete devotion to scientific method,” Agassiz “would
then interpret the data through the medium ofwhat seemed to be the most
absurd metaphysics.” 33 The very man who made “the most careful, exact,
and precise descriptions” of the natural world would, in his generaliza-
tions from those observations, “indulge in flights of idealistic fancy.”34 In
short, Lurie thought that “Agassiz’s cosmic philosophy shaped his entire
reaction to the evolution idea.”35
As science advanced in the
late nineteenth century,
it increasingly
excluded appeals to divine action or divine ideas as a way of explaining
phenomena in the natural world. This practice came to be codified in a
principle known as methodological naturalism. According to this prin-
ciple, scientists should accept as a working assumption that all features of
the natural world can be explained by material causes without recourse to
purposive intelligence, mind, or conscious agency.
Proponents of methodological naturalism argue that science has been
so successful precisely because it has assiduously avoided invoking creative
intelligence and, instead, searched out strictly material causes for previ-
ously mysterious features of the natural world. In the 1840s, the French
philosopher August Comte argued that science progresses through three

20
DARWIN’S DOUBT
distinct phases. In its theological phase,
it invokes the mysterious action
of the gods to explain natural phenomena, whether thunderbolts or the
spread of disease. In a second, more advanced metaphysical stage, scien-
tific explanations refer to abstract concepts like Plato’s forms or Aristotle’s
final causes. Comte taught that science only reaches maturity when it casts
aside such abstractions and explains natural phenomena by reference to
natural laws or strictly material causes or processes. Only in this third and
final stage, he argued, can science achieve “positive” knowledge.
During the late nineteenth century, scientists increasingly embraced
this “positivistic” vision. 36 Agassiz, by insisting that the Cambrian fossils
pointed to “acts of mind”37 and an “intervention of an intellectual power,”
stood firmly against this new vision. For many, his reference to the work of
a transcendent mind merely demonstrated that he was unable to abandon
an outmoded idealistic approach. The train of scientific progress had left
Agassiz behind.
AN OLD FOSSIL RECOVERED
Though clearly Agassiz did reject the principle of methodological natural-
ism, as it is now named, there are problems with portraying him as a fossil
of another age. First, Agassiz was unsurpassed in his commitment to the
empirical method. It is Agassiz about whom the story is told of the profes-
sor instructing one of his students to observe a fish for three arduous days,
a story iconic enough that
it is reprinted in freshman composition text-
books. In the story, the student, Samuel Scudder, pulls out his hair trying
to see anything new about the slimy creature, wondering why Professor
Agassiz is torturing him with this “hideous fish.” But in the end Scudder
breaks through to new levels of observational depth and precision. Mabel
Robinson notes that if such teaching methods seem less revolutionary to
contemporary readers than they did to Scudder, that’s because Agassiz
trained an army of able young naturalists who took his method to other
universities, and they in turn passed them on to their students, themselves
future professors. 38
William James, the founder ofAmerican pragmatism, extolled Agassiz’s
commitment to empirical rigor in a letter he wrote to his father while on
an expedition with Agassiz in 1865 to South America. In the letter the
young man commented that he felt a “greater feeling of weight and solidity

Darwin’s Nemesis
21
about the presence of this great background of special facts than about the
mind of any other man I know,”
39 a storehouse of precise data made pos-
sible by “a rapidity of observation, and a capacity to recognize them again
and remember everything about them."40 James would eventually enter
the field of psychology, but he took with him the empirical approach to
problem solving that Agassiz had modeled so impressively. 41
As Lurie concedes, Agassiz’s stature among American scientists grew
out of his unrivaled knowledge of geology, paleontology, ichthyology,
comparative anatomy, and taxonomy. So passionate was Agassiz for the
particulars of the natural world that he began organizing a system of
information-sharing among naturalists, sailors, and missionaries around
the world. He collected more than 435 barrels of specimens, among them
an extremely rare group of fossil plants.42 In a single year, Agassiz amassed
more than 91,000 specimens and identified close to 11,000 new species,43
making Harvard’s natural history museum preeminent among such mu-
seums in the world.
He also appears to have gone to great lengths, literally and figuratively,
to assess On the Origin of Species empirically, going so far as to make a
research voyage retracing Darwin’s trip to the Galapagos Islands. As he
explained to German zoologist Carl Gegenbauer, he “wanted to study the
Darwin theory free from all external influences and former prejudices.”44
The
idea
that
religious
or
philosophical
prejudice compromised
Agassiz’s scientific judgment raises other questions. As historian Neal
Gillespie explains, Agassiz was “second to no man in his opposition
to sectarian
religious interference with
science.”45 Moreover, Agassiz
showed himself perfectly willing to accept natural mechanisms where
before supernatural intervention had been the preferred explanation.
Since he regarded material forces, and the laws of nature that described
them, as the products of an underlying design plan, he saw any creative
work they did as deriving ultimately from a creator. For instance, he as-
sumed this was the case with the development of embryos: he attributed
their natural evolution from zygote to adult as a natural phenomenon
and considered this no threat to his belief in a creator.46 He also readily
accepted the notion of a naturally evolving solar system.47 He thought a
skillful cosmic architect could work through secondary natural causes
every bit as effectively as through direct acts of agency. The marginalia
in his copy of On the Origin of Species suggest that he had this same

22
DARWIN’S DOUBT
attitude concerning biological evolution. “What is the great difference,”
he wrote, “between supposing that God makes variable species or that he
makes laws by which species vary?”
A
third problem with
the
official
portrait of Darwin’s
chief rival
concerns Lurie’s suggestion that Agassiz was a master of particulars, but
not of generalizing from those particulars. The historical record suggests
otherwise. For example, Agassiz was the man who ably generalized from a
wide array of particular clues in his work on the ice age, winning over the
geological establishment by demonstrating how a range of facts were best
explained by the action of retreating glaciers.
Here a direct comparison between Darwin and Agassiz is possible. Each
searched for an explanation of a curious geological phenomenon in the
Scottish Highlands, the parallel roads of Glen Roy. Glen Roy is the valley
of the River Roy and, although
it’s a place of breathtaking beauty, what
visitors found most intriguing about it over the years were its three paral-
lel roads that wind along the canyon wall on either side of the river (see
Fig.
1.7).
48 Scottish legend held that they were hunting paths built for use
by early Scottish kings or perhaps even for the mythical warrior Fingal.
Scientists later argued that the roads were natural rather than artificial.
Darwin and Agassiz were both convinced that natural processes were the
cause, but they nevertheless arrived at different explanations. What was
the end of the matter? In his autobiography, Darwin explained, “Having
been deeply impressed with what I had seen of the elevation of the land in
S. America, I attributed the parallel lines to the action of the sea; but I had
to give up this view when Agassiz propounded his glacier-lake theory.”49
Subsequent investigations in the late nineteenth and early twentieth cen-
turies confirmed that Agassiz’s interpretation was the correct one. 50
Agassiz, then, was far more than just a walking encyclopedia or an in-
satiable gatherer of fossils who couldn’t see the proverbial forest for the
trees. Those who insist otherwise can point to but one example to support
their position, namely, his rejection of Darwin’s theory; but they cannot
use that example to establish his general inability to interpret evidence
and then turn around and use that supposed inability to explain his fail-
ure to accept Darwin’s theory. That is to argue in a circle.
There is a far more obvious solution to the historical puzzle posed by the
great Agassiz’s objection to Darwin’s theory: the fossils of the Cambrian

Darwins Nemesis
23
FIGURE 1.7
Parallel roads of Glen Roy.
strata do, in fact, arise abruptly in the geological record, in clear defiance
of what Darwin’s theory would lead us to expect. In short, a genuine mys-
tery is at hand.
Two final considerations lend support to this view.
First, as already
noted, Darwin himself accepted the validity of Agassizs objection .
51 As
he acknowledged elsewhere in the Origin , “To the question why we do not
find rich fossiliferous deposits belonging to these assumed earliest periods
prior to the Cambrian system,
I can give no satisfactory answer.
.
.
. The
case at present must remain inexplicable; and may be truly urged as a valid
argument against the views here entertained .” 52
Second, Darwin’s attempt to account for the absence of the expected
fossil ancestors of the Cambrian forms failed to address the full strength
and subtlety of Agassiz’s objection. As Agassiz explained, the problem
with Darwin’s theory was not just the general incompleteness of the fossil
record or even a pervasive absence of ancestral forms of life in the fossil

24
DARWIN’S DOUBT
record. Rather, the problem, according to Agassiz, was the selective incom-
pleteness of the fossil record.
Why, he asked, does the fossil record always happen to be incom-
plete at the nodes connecting major branches of Darwin’s tree of life,
but rarely—in the parlance of modern paleontology— at the “termi-
nal branches” representing the major already known groups of organ-
isms? These terminal branches were well represented (see Fig. 1.8), often
stretching over many generations and millions of years, while the “in-
ternal branches” at the connecting nodes on Darwins tree of life were
nearly always—and selectively—absent. As Agassiz explained, Darwins
theory “rests partly upon the assumption that, in the succession of ages,
just those transition types have dropped out from the geological record
which would have proved the Darwinian conclusions had these types
been preserved.” 53 To Agassiz,
it sounded like a just-so story, one that
explains away the absence of evidence rather than genuinely explaining
the evidence we have.
Was there any easy answer to Agassizs argument? If so, beyond his
stated willingness to wait for future
fossil discoveries, Darwin didn’t
offer one.
FIGURE 1.8
The vertical lines in these diagrams represent known animal phyla. The dots within the
vertical lines represent animals from those phyla that have been found fossilized in dif-
ferent strata. The diagram on the left shows the animal tree of life as expected based
upon Darwinian theory. The diagram on the right shows a simplified representation of
the actual pattern of the Precambrian-Cambrian fossil record. Notice that fossils rep-
resenting the internal branches and nodes, but not the terminal branches, are missing.

Darwin’s Nemesis
25
AN ENDURING MYSTERY
In the years immediately following the publication of On the Origin of
Species, many of Agassiz’s concerns were temporarily swept aside as public
and scientific fascination with Darwin’s ideas grew. Even so, a persistent
mystery lay at the feet of biologists, one that subsequent generations of
scientists would revisit and repeatedly seek to resolve. As Darwin noted,
in his time, the fossils of the Cambrian were relatively few, and the period
of the explosion only vaguely understood. But perhaps future scientists
would come to his rescue with fresh discoveries.
The story of the successive attempts to solve the Cambrian mystery
stretches from Darwin’s time to the present, and from the Swansea Valley
in southern Wales to remote fossil sites in southern China. In the next
chapter, the work of detection moves from the late nineteenth century to
the early twentieth, from the British Isles to British Columbia, and to a
fossil site above the Kicking Horse River so astonishing that, even today,
paleontologists and some of the most skeptical and hardened of scientific
rationalists speak its name with childlike reverence.

2
THE BURGESS BESTIARY
Only in fiction can we expect such fine orchestration of setting and dra-
matic action. Gothic tales haunted by demons of the past have their thun-
derstorms and crumbling mansions, the existentialist novel its disorienting
cityscapes, the romance its unattainable balconies laced with jasmine. In
ordinary life, the staging is usually less precise. Intricate family tragedies
unravel in tidy suburban ranch-style homes, while enchanted romances
blossom over cubicle walls. But the twentieth century’s most revolutionary
fossil discovery was more like fiction: the setting was commensurate with
the moment.
Photographs taken during the summer’s expedition show a lean and
balding man with pleasant crinkles at the corners of his eyes and a deep
thought line slashing down between his brows; he stands precariously on
rocky ascents, pick and hoe at hand, gazing far into the distance from a
stony peak, at ease among the forbidding slopes and treacherous ridges.
Working his way over one ridge and then above the tree line of the next,
Charles Doolittle Walcott reached a place where he could see for miles.
To the northwest, the crude arrowhead of Mount Wapta jutted skyward.
Below lay Emerald Lake,
its waters green from the mineral-rich glacial
till. To the east and west, snowy peaks stretched to the horizon (see Figs.
2.1 and 2.2). Only the view to the northeast lacked a vista. Here was the
homely shale of a barren ridge. Of course, as in any fairy tale, there lay the
real prize, a hidden vista measured not in miles, but in ages.
Walcott, already the director of the Smithsonian Institution, was about
to enter the most significant phase of his professional life. More than this,

The Burgess Bestiary
27
FIGURE 2.1
The scenery of the Burgess Shale and surrounding area. Courtesy Corbis.
FIGURE 2.2
Charles Doolittle
Walcott in the field
(c. 1911). Courtesy
Smithsonian Institu-
tion Archives.

28
DARWIN’S DOUBT
he was about to make perhaps the most dramatic discovery in the history
of paleontology, a rich trove of middle Cambrian-era fossils, including
many previously unknown animal forms, preserved in exquisite detail,
suggesting an event of greater suddenness than had been known even in
Darwin’s time and detailing a greater diversity of biological form and ar-
chitecture than had hitherto been imagined.
Where did this wealth of biological form come from, and why, again,
did it seem to arise so suddenly during the Cambrian period? Walcott was
the first to explore the Burgess Shale, and he would be the first to suggest
an answer to the questions it raised.
THE BESTIARY
Among paleontologists, the fateful clue that led to the Burgess Shale’s dis-
covery is the stuff of legend. Paleontologist Stephen Jay Gould considered
it to have been rendered best in an obituary of Charles Walcott written by
Walcott’s former research assistant, Charles Schuchert:
One of the most striking of Walcott’sfaunal discoveries came at the end
of the field season of 1909, when Mrs. Walcott’s horse slid on going down
the trail and turned up a slab that at once attracted her husband’s at-
tention. Here was a great treasure— wholly strange Crustacea ofMiddle
Cambrian time— but where in the mountain was the mother rockfrom
which the slab had come? Snow was even then falling, and the solving
of the riddle had to be left to another season, but next year the Walcotts
were back again on Mount Wapta, and eventually the slab was traced
to a layer ofshale—later called the Burgess Shale—3000feet above the
town ofField.
1
Gould quotes the legend to celebrate its archetypal appeal even as he
debunks
it: “Consider the primal character of this tale—the lucky break
provided by the slipping horse,
.
.
. the greatest discovery at the very last
minute of a field season (with falling snow and darkness heightening the
drama of finality), the anxious wait through a winter of discontent, the tri-
umphant return and careful, methodical tracing of errant block to mother
lode .” 2 A compelling story, Gould concludes, but pure fiction. Walcott’s
own diaries reveal that his team had plenty of time to begin excavating the
site that very summer amid cooperative weather and even warm nights.

The Burgess Bestiary
29
As for their return the following summer, locating the mother lode was
apparently the work of a single day rather than a full week, a conclusion
Gould drew from both Walcott’s diaries and his knowledge of Walcott’s
expertise as a geologist.
3
The motifs of the lucky break, the frustrating delay, and the final and
fortuitous triumph will resurface later
(see Chapter 7) as a
tall tale of
Gould’s own, but for now consider only the scientific community’s weak-
ness for staging the Burgess discovery with various fictional props, as if
the stunning scenery around
it were not setting enough. This weakness
for theater is understandable, considering what Walcott and later inves-
tigators found there. Over the next several years, Walcott’s team alone
collected more than 65,000 specimens, many of them astonishingly well
preserved, some so bizarre that paleontologists would cast about for more
than half a century for the proper categories in which to contain them.
Consider just one odd couple from Walcott’s quarry, Marrella and
Hallucigenia. Marrella, also called a lace crab, is an unusual form. Walcott
described it as a type of trilobite, but later studies by Cambridge paleon-
tologist Harry Whittington classified it not as a trilobite, nor a chelicerate
(the subgroup of arthropods that includes spiders), and not even as a crus-
tacean, but rather as a fundamentally distinct form of arthropod.
4 The
creature is divided into twenty-six segments, each with a jointed leg for
walking and a feathery gill branch for swimming. Its head shield has two
long pairs of spikes directed backwards, and the underside of the head
features two pairs of antennae. One is short and stout, the other long and
sweeping (see Fig. 2.3).
Hallucigenia belongs to a genus and family of one.
It has a rounded
mass at one end (possibly the head) connected to a cylinder-shaped trunk
sporting seven pairs of spines projecting upward and to either side, each
of them almost as long as the trunk itself (see Fig. 2.4). On the underside
of the creature are seven pairs of limbs, each corresponding in position to
one of the pairs of spines on the back, though with the tentacle farthest
back offset. The underbelly also features three pairs of shorter tentacles
before the trunk tapers and curves upward in what was probably a flex-
ible extension from the body. Each of the larger tentacles appears to have
a hollow tube connected to the gut and a pincer at the tip. This ancient
creature was so peculiar that paleontologists feigned disbelief at what they
saw, giving it its memorable name.

30
DARWIN’S DOUBT
4 Jj**'
*$&.«**»
FIGURE 2.3
Figure 2.3a (left): Artist rendering of Marrella splendens. Figure 2.3b (right): Photograph of
Marrella splendens fossil. Courtesy Wikimedia Commons, user Smith609.
FIGURE 2.4
Figure 2.4a (top): Artist rendering of Hallucigenia sparsa. Figure 2.4b (bottom): Photograph
of Hallucigenia sparsa fossil. Courtesy Smithsonian Institution.

The Burgess Bestiary
31
The term “Cambrian explosion” was to become common coin, because
Walcott’s site suggested the geologically abrupt appearance of a menagerie
of animals as various as any found in the gaudiest science fiction. During
this explosion of fauna, representatives of about twenty of the roughly
twenty-six total phyla present in the known fossil record made their first
appearance on earth (see Fig. 2.5).
5
The term “phyla” (singular: “phylum”) refers to divisions in the bio-
logical classification system. The phyla constitute the highest (or widest)
categories of biological classification in the animal kingdom, with each
exhibiting a unique architecture, organizational blueprint, or structural
body plan. Familiar examples of phyla are cnidarians (corals and jelly-
fish), mollusks (squid and clams), echinoderms (sea stars and sea urchins),
arthropods (trilobites and insects), and the chordates, to which all verte-
brates including humans belong.
The animals within each phylum exhibit distinguishing features that
enable taxonomists to divide and group them further into other, progres-
sively smaller divisions, beginning with classes and orders, and eventu-
ally coming to
families, genera, and individual
species. The broadest
and highest categories within the animal kingdom—such as phyla and
classes— designate the major categories of animal
life, typically desig-
nating unique body plans. Lower taxonomic categories—like genus and
species—designate smaller degrees of difference among organisms that
typically exemplify similar overall ways of organizing their body parts
and structures.
Throughout the book
I will use these conventional categories of clas-
sification, as do most Cambrian paleontologists. Nevertheless, I am aware
that some paleontologists and systematists (experts in classification) today
prefer “phylogenetic classification,” a method that often uses a “rank-free”
classification scheme.6 Advocates of modern phylogenetic classification
argue that the traditional classification system lacks objective criteria by
which to decide whether a certain group of organisms should be assigned
a particular rank of, for example, phylum or class or order.
7 Proponents of
rank-free classification attempt to eliminate subjectivity in classification
(and ranking) by grouping together animals that are thought, based upon
studies of similar molecules in different groups, to share a common ances-
tor. This method of classification treats groups that emerge at roughly the
same time on the tree of life as equivalent. Nevertheless, even proponents

32
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Tl
12. — -T3
T4
Tj?
T&>
<
A-
40
3?
30
2.0
lO
TIKE ~
PC
C O
{
l> K ??MT^
J
<
T Q~ |
-
beoLoftic PEPiob
§
2
FIGURE 2.5
Figure 2.5a (top): Chart showing when representatives of the different animal phyla first
appeared in the fossil record. According to Darwinian theory, differences in biological
form should increase gradually, steadily increasing the number of distinct body plans
and phyla, over time. References for first appearances are found in note 5 of this chapter.
Figure 2.5b (bottom , left) expresses that expectation graphically, showing the number of
new phyla increasing steadily as members of one phylum diversify and give rise to new
phyla. Figure 2.5c (bottom, right) shows the actual pattern of first appearance showing a
spike in the number of phyla that first appear in the Cambrian, followed by either few or
no new phyla arising in subsequent periods of geological history.

The Burgess Bestiary
33
of phylogenetic classification often use the conventional taxonomic cate-
gories in their technical discussions of specific organisms because of their
common scientific usage. So despite my own sympathy with some of the
concerns of rank-free advocates (see below), I have chosen to do the same.
In any case, its worth noting that using a rank-free classification system
does not minimize the mystery of the Cambrian explosion. The Cambrian
explosion presents a puzzle for evolutionary biologists, not just because
of the number of phyla that arise, but rather because of the number of
unique animal forms and structures that arise (as measured, perhaps, by
the number of phyla)—however biologists decide to classify them. Thus,
whether scientists decide to use newer rank-free classification schemes
or
older, more
conventional,
Linnaean
categories,
the
“evolutionary
novelties”—that is, the new anatomical structures and modes of organiza-
tion—that arise suddenly with the Cambrian animals remain as facts of
the fossil record, requiring explanation. (For an expanded technical dis-
cussion of these issues, go to this endnote .)
8
One especially dramatic fact of the Cambrian explosion
is the
first
appearance of many novel marine invertebrate animals (representatives
of separate invertebrate
9 phyla, subphyla, and classes in the traditional
FIGURE 2.6
Representatives of some of the major animal groups that first appeared in the sedimen-
tary rock record during the Cambrian period.

34
DARWIN’S DOUBT
classification scheme). Some of these animals have mineralized exoskel-
etons, including those representing phyla, such as echinoderms, brachio-
pods, and arthropods, and each represent clearly distinct and novel body
plans. Further, these are just three of dozens of novel body plans exempli-
fied by the Burgess animals—animals in which both soft and hard parts
are well preserved (see Fig. 2.6).
The variety in the Burgess Shale was so extreme it took several decades
for paleontologists to grasp it fully. Walcott, for instance, attempted to fit
all of the new forms into existing phyla. However, even in the midst of this
attempt, he realized that this revolutionary quarry posed a problem more
fundamental than a need to tidy up the existing taxonomy. He had met
Louis Agassiz at a young age, having sold him some of his first fossils, and
later described him as “a guide in whom
I could trust and follow,” one in
whose work “I find this tribute to the Great Mind that created the objects
of his study.”
10 But in the great debate between Agassiz and Darwin, Wal-
cott sided with the Englishman. Thus, the Burgess Shale struck Walcott as
not only fascinating, but puzzling.
A PUZZLING PATTERN
Over the years, as paleontologists have reflected on the overall pattern of
the Precambrian-Cambrian fossil record in light of Walcott’s discoveries,
they too have noted several features of the Cambrian explosion that are
unexpected from a Darwinian point ofview
11 in particular: (1) the sudden
appearance of Cambrian animal forms; (2) an absence of transitional in-
termediate fossils connecting the Cambrian animals to simpler Precam-
brian forms; (3) a startling array of completely novel animal forms with
novel body plans; and (4) a pattern in which radical differences in form
in the fossil record arise before more minor, small-scale diversification
and variations. This pattern turns on its head the Darwinian expectation
of small incremental change only gradually resulting in larger and larger
differences in form.
THE MISSING TREE
Figures 2.7 and 2.8 illustrate the difficulty posed by the first two of these
features: sudden appearance and missing intermediates. These diagrams

The Burgess Bestiary
35
graph morphological change over time. The first shows the Darwinian ex-
pectation that changes in morphology should arise only as tiny changes
accumulate. This Darwinian commitment to gradual change through
microevolutionary variations produces the classic representation of evo-
lutionary history as a branching tree.
Now compare this branching tree pattern with the pattern in the fossil
record. The bottom part of Figure 2.7 and Figure 2.8 show that the Pre-
cambrian strata do not document the expected transitional intermediates
between Cambrian and Precambrian fauna. Instead, the Precambrian-
Cambrian
fossil
record,
especially in
light of the Burgess Shale
after
Walcott, points to the geologically sudden appearance of complex and
novel body plans.
t>Afck)lNlAKJ
hoPPUoLoCrY
“
CEVOZOlC
T‘
T
hE^OZOlC
PALEOZOIC
1
—
1
FfcECAMBfclANi FO«IL EvlbEUCE
FIGURE 2.7
The origin of animals. Darwinian theory (top) predicts gradual evolutionary change in
contrast to the fossil evidence (bottom), which shows the abrupt appearance of the major
animal groups.

36
DARWIN’S DOUBT
FIGURE 2.8
According to Darwinian theory, the strata beneath the Cambrian rocks should evidence
many ancestral and intermediate forms. Such forms have not been found for the vast
majority of animal phyla. These anticipated but missing forms are represented by the
gray circles. Lines and dark circles depict fossilized representatives of phyla that have
been found.
Of course, the fossil record does show an overall increase in the com-
plexity of organisms from Precambrian to Cambrian times, as Darwin
expected. But the problem posed by the Burgess Shale is not the increase
in complexity, but the sudden quantum leap in complexity. The jump
from the simpler Precambrian organisms (further explored in the next
chapters) to the radically different Cambrian forms appears to occur far
too suddenly to be readily explained by the gradual activity of natural
selection and random variations. Neither the Burgess Shale nor any other
series of sedimentary strata known in Walcott’s day recorded a pattern
of novel body plans arising gradually from a sequence of intermediates.
Instead, completely unique organisms such as the bizarre arthropod Opa-
binia (see Fig. 2.9)—with
its fifteen articulated body segments, twenty-
eight gills, thirty flipper-like swimming lobes, long trunk-like proboscis,
intricate nervous system, and five separate eyes
12—appear fully formed in
the Cambrian strata along with representatives of other fundamentally
different body plans and designs of equal complexity.
Darwin, as we know, regarded the sudden appearance of the Cambrian

The Burgess Bestiary
37
FIGURE 2.9
Figure 2.9a (top): Artist rendering of Opabinia. Figure 2.9b (bottom): Photograph of Opa-
binia fossil.
animals as a significant challenge to his theory.
13 Where natural selection
had to bridge yawning chasms from relatively simple life-forms to exqui-
sitely complex creatures, it would require great expanses of time .
14
Darwins recognition
15 of this constraint was prescient. Geologists in
his day employed relative dating methods. They did not have modern
radiometric methods for determining the “absolute” ages of rocks. For
this reason, they did not yet fully understand how long it would have taken
to accumulate the great columns of sedimentary rock and, thus, the great
expanses of time that were available to the evolutionary process. Neither
had scientists yet discovered the sophisticated inner workings of the cell,
and the information-rich structures (DNA, RNA, and proteins) that had
to be significantly altered to achieve even modest evolutionary changes.
Nevertheless, Darwin was able—based upon what he knew of the com-
plexity of organisms and his own understanding ofhow the mechanism of
natural selection must operate—to deduce that descent with modification
required time, and lots of it.
Recalling the context of Darwins original argument reveals why.
In the Origin , he sought to counter the famous watch-to-watchmaker

38
DARWIN’S DOUBT
design argument offered by theologian William Paley. Paley had argued
that just as complex structures such as watches necessarily issue from
intelligent watchmakers, the complex structures
in living organisms
must likewise owe their origin to a designing intelligence. With natural
selection, Darwin proposed a purely natural mechanism for construct-
ing the complex organs and structures (such as eyes) present in many
forms of life. His mechanism of natural selection worked by construct-
ing such systems one tiny step at a time, discarding the harmful varia-
tions and seizing upon the rare improvement. If evolution progressed
by “whole watches”—that
is, by entire anatomical systems like the tri-
lobite’s eye—then biology would have fallen back to the old absurdity of
imagining that a watch could fall together purely at random and all at
once. Thus, unless Darwin’s evolutionary mechanism worked gradually
by preserving the tiniest of random changes over many millions of years,
it didn’t work at all.
MORE MISSING LINKS
Two other features of the Cambrian explosion revealed in the Burgess Shale,
features (3) and (4) described earlier, not only confirmed the reality of the
Cambrian mystery, but broadened and deepened
it—and at just the time
when paleontologists were looking to resolve the mystery with new fossil
discoveries.
First,
the great profusion of completely novel forms of
life
in
the
Burgess assemblage (feature 3) demanded even more transitional forms
than had previously been thought missing. Each new and exotic Cam-
brian creature—the anomalocarids
(see
Fig.
2.10), Marrella, Opabinia,
and the bizarre and appropriately named Hallucigenia—for which there
were again no obvious ancestral forms in the lower strata, required its own
series of transitional ancestors. But where were they?
Darwin had hoped that later fossil discoveries would eventually elimi-
nate what he regarded as the one outstanding anomaly associated with
his theory. Walcott’s discovery was not that discovery. Not only did the
Burgess Shale fail to reveal the expected ancestral precursors of the known
Cambrian animal forms, but it revealed a motley crew of previously un-
known animal forms and body plans that now demanded
their own

The Burgess Bestiary
39
FIGURE 2.10
Figure 2.10a (top): Artist rendering ofAnomalocaris. Figure 2.10b (bottom): Photograph of
Anomalocaris fossil. Courtesy J.
Y. Chen.
lengthy chain of evolutionary precursors, only complicating the task of
explaining the Cambrian explosion in Darwinian terms.
ORDERS FROM THE TOP
The Burgess Shale raised an additional difficulty (feature
4, discussed
earlier), though not one that Walcott recognized during his
lifetime.
Instead,
its exposition would await a later generation of Cambrian ex-
perts, particularly Stephen Jay Gould. Darwin s theory implied that as
new animal forms first began to emerge from a common ancestor, they
would at first be quite similar to each other, and that large differences in
the forms of life—what paleontologists call disparity—would only emerge
much later as the result of the accumulation ofmany incremental changes.
In its technical sense, disparity refers to the major differences in form that
separate the higher-level taxonomic categories such as phyla, classes, and
orders. In contrast, the term diversity refers to minor differences among
organisms classified as different genera or species. Put another way, dis-
parity refers to life’s basic themes; diversity refers to the variations on those

40
DARWIN’S DOUBT
themes. The more body plans in a fossil assembly, the greater the disparity.
And the animal forms preserved in the Burgess Shale display considerable
disparity. Further, the large differences in form between the first animals
appeared suddenly in the Burgess Shale, and the appearance of such dis-
parity arose before, not after, the diversification of many representatives of
lower taxonomic categories (such as species or genera) within each higher
category, designating a new body plan.
The site of the Burgess Shale and its setting nicely illustrates the dif-
ference between
diversity and
disparity.
Walcott’s
celebrated
quarry
is tucked away in the Canadian Rockies near the Continental Divide.
Reaching
it involves a six-mile hike through the picturesque scenery of
Yoho National Park—Takakkaw Falls, Emerald Lake, and glaciers and
glacier-cut mountain peaks thrusting into view at almost every turn. In
this ecologically diverse setting, hikers have a chance of spotting squirrels,
marmots, deer, moose, elk, wolves, and mountain goats. Rare sightings
might include a grizzly bear or Canadian lynx, while alert birdwatchers
might glimpse a horned lark, a white-tailed ptarmigan, the rare water
pipit, or a gray-crowned rosy finch; an eagle, hawk, or grassland falcon;
dippers, jays, migrating warblers, or harlequin ducks .
16
As richly various as this array of animals is, all of them come from a
single phylum, Chordata—and even from a single subphylum, Vertebrata.
Imagine hiking to the quarry to excavate it and, on the hike, being lucky
enough to spot every one of these animals along the way. After having
feasted your eyes on such animal variety, when you arrive at Walcott’s
quarry, it yields not merely dozens of fossilized species from a single sub-
phylum, but wildly disparate creatures from dozens ofphyla.
According to Darwin’s theory, the differences in form, or “morpho-
logical distance,” between evolving organisms should increase gradually
over time as small-scale variations accumulate by natural selection to
produce increasingly complex forms and structures (including, eventu-
ally, new body plans). In other words, one would expect small-scale dif-
ferences or diversity among species to precede large-scale morphological
disparity among phyla. As the former Oxford University neo-Darwinian
biologist Richard Dawkins puts it, “What had been distinct species within
one genus become, in the fullness of time, distinct genera within one
family. Later, families will be found to have diverged to the point where

The Burgess Bestiary
41
taxonomists (specialists in classification) prefer to call them orders, then
classes, then phyla.”
17
Darwin himself made this point in On the Origin ofSpecies. Explaining
his famous tree diagram (see Fig. 2.11a), he noted that it illustrated more
than just the theory of universal common descent. The tree diagram also
illustrated how higher taxa should emerge from lower taxa by the accu-
mulation of numerous slight variations. He said, “The diagram illustrates
the steps by which small differences distinguishing varieties are increased
into larger differences distinguishing species.”
18 He went on to assert that
the process of modification by natural selection would eventually move
beyond the formation of species and genera to form “two distinct families,
or orders, according to the amount of divergent modification supposed to
be represented in the diagram.” 19 In his view, this process would continue
until
it produced differences in form that were great enough that tax-
onomists would classify them as new classes or phyla. In short, diversity
would precede disparity, and phyla-level differences in body plan would
emerge only after species-, genus-, family-, order-, and class-level differ-
ences appeared.
The actual pattern in the fossil record, however, contradicts this ex-
pectation (compare Fig. 2.12 to Fig. 2.11b). Instead of more and more spe-
cies eventually leading to more genera, leading to more families, orders,
classes, and phyla, the
fossil record shows representatives of separate
phyla appearing first followed by lower-level diversification on those basic
themes.
This
is nowhere more dramatically apparent than in the Cambrian
period explains Roger Lewin
in the journal
Science: “Several possible
patterns exist for the establishment of higher taxa, the two most obvi-
ous of which are the bottom-up and the top-down approaches. In the
first, evolutionary novelties emerge, bit by bit. The Cambrian explosion
appears to conform to the second pattern, the top-down effect.”20 Or as
paleontologists Douglas Erwin, James Valentine, and Jack Sepkoski note
in their study of skeletonized marine invertebrates: “The fossil record sug-
gests that the major pulse of diversification of phyla occurs before that
of classes, classes before that of orders, orders before that of families.
.
.
.
The higher taxa do not seem to have diverged through an accumulation
of lower taxa.”
21 In other words, instead of a proliferation of species and

42
DARWIN’S DOUBT
o'*
r,“
ou
t"
F*
c!t
UtH
vl
liH
XIV
V
•
•
*.
:
.•
.
•
.
«
*
*
*
/
<
:
i
i
i
/
»
«
i
t
•
*
*
i
f
§
•
I
:
j
i
;
1
i— XUI
«
•
.
*
*
•
•
,*
•
*
*
•
*
*
’•
\
j
•
\
:
;
\
:
/
i
1
i—i_/
xn
*
*
>
•
•.
!
.
•
i
/
;
;
;
?
•
;
;
».
1
1
,
•
%
»
t
,
1
.
%
*
$
\il
i11
xi
aK
f*
m*°
E
;®
w"
x "
Y
\
/
\
!
a*WS
V/'
\i4»
I
7
..
:
!
\
i /
•> V
nc
\
.
. y
;
.
\ /
aH$/
rd
k*
L»
•
--Vm‘
M /,'
. J /
al
viii
\
\
•
:
\
:
;
a*'W
'< /»
\&*
\L*» f
:
\ /
\
• /
\ !,./
alii
A
"
vn
t{.
'
\l
\
/
«'t
vV«
W
/
:
..
:/
1
^
‘^V
VI
«.*
•
rf*
I 1
:
' i.
m. 1
1
j
*M
'
w
v
\
t
:
/
<t*
.
V***
i*
‘‘••ij/in.*
:
-.\\
If /'
'
'''"W *’
IV
**’V
H:-- "*- 4
!
I
e
hi
V?>"'
\: ;
\u/
:
a*
s‘
'
'
:
/
I
\\ j
i
.•
«*V
»*'
ir
y
^ m
'
J
’
\
•.
.*
;
:
1
0*1
I
I
W
!
-
*
'
...
-
-
!
i
!
'^L
!
L_
A
B
C
D
I
\
;
\
*
•
J
»
•
M
!
«
^
•
t
•
’
t
.
,
•*!
.
»
«
•
»
«
•
*
»
•
•
t
•
:
•
i
:
•
/
OtJ£
freciEi
FAKIty #1
FAKIty #Z
6r£uU{
ftEvUt
frEVUt
ftEvVt
# 1
1
#Z
#3
6f£uUt 6[£vU{
*z
#3„_
£t£mU£
" tMT
TTK6
FIGURE 2.11
Figure 2.11a (top): Darwin’s theory of common descent illustrated here with his famous
branching tree of life diagram reproduced from the Origin of Species, 1859. Figure 2.11b
(bottom): Growth of the tree of life over time in the manner envisioned by Darwin with
new species giving rise to new genera and families, eventually giving rise to new orders,
classes, and phyla (these higher taxonomic categories not depicted).

The Burgess Bestiary
43
other representatives of lower-level taxa occurring first and then build-
ing to the disparity of higher taxa, the highest taxonomic differences such
as those between phyla and classes appear first (instantiated by relatively
few species-level representatives). Only later, in more recent strata, does
the fossil record document a proliferation of representatives of lower taxa:
different orders, families, genera, and so on. Yet we would not expect the
neo-Darwinian mechanism of natural selection acting on random genetic
mutations to produce the top-down pattern that we observe in the history
of life following the Cambrian explosion.
Of course, advocates of modern phylogenetic classification, with their
“rank-free” approach, don’t describe this phenomenon as a “top-down”
pattern, because their system of classification dispenses with taxonomic
ranks and hierarchies. In their system, there is no “top” and no “down.”
Nevertheless, advocates of phylogenetic classification do acknowledge that
different combinations of “character” states (characteristics or features of
organisms) can mark either bigger or smaller morphological differences
between clades (closely related groups of organisms that presumably share
a common ancestor). And some leading advocates of phylogenetic classi-
fication have noted that the fossil record exhibits a pattern in which a few
character traits marking large morphological differences between clades
TTM£
FIGURE 2.12
The top-down pattern of appearance in the fossil record: disparity precedes diversity.

44
DARWIN’S DOUBT
arise first, followed later in each clade by the addition of other combi-
nations of characters that mark smaller differences within those clades.
Larger differences between clades arise
first, smaller differences within
them arose later—the themes precede the variations.
The founder of the modern phylogenetic classification, Willi Hennig,
for example, noted that once particular groups arise, the range of allow-
able variability within those groups narrows. In his classic work Phyloge-
netic Systematics, Hennig quoted another paleontologist approvingly who
observed: “The breadth of evolution of successive groups shows a distinct
narrowing, since the basic divergences of organization became progres-
sively smaller. The type of mammals
is more uniform and closed than
that of the reptiles, which in turn is unquestionably uniform compared to
that of the Amphibia-Stegocephalia.” Hennig goes on to explain that “the
same phenomenon is repeated in every systematic unit of higher or lower
order.”22
Yet, on a Darwinian view, small-scale variations and differences should
arise
first, gradually giving rise to larger-scale differences in form—just
the opposite of the pattern evident in the fossil record. Thus, the discovery,
and later analysis, of the Burgess revealed another puzzling feature of the
fossil record from a Darwinian point of view, regardless of which system
of classification paleontologists prefer to use. Indeed, Walcott’s discov-
ery turned Darwin’s anticipated bottom-up— or small changes
first, big
changes later—pattern on its head.
FIRST IMPRESSIONS
The extraordinary conditions at work in the preservation of the Burgess
fauna helped to reveal the extent of the rich diversity (and disparity) of
form present in the Cambrian period. On shale of a very fine grain, the
Burgess
fossils look like lithographic pictures, dark on light (see color
insert plates 15 and 16). Even the soft parts like the gills and guts are some-
times preserved. This is not the norm in the world of paleontology. Usu-
ally soft tissues decay before they can be fossilized, leaving behind only
harder parts, such as bone, teeth, and shells, to be preserved. The Burgess
event that captured the Cambrian fauna for future discovery was different.
Although it took the lives of untold Cambrian animals,
it did so with an
exquisite delicacy that preserved soft tissue.

The Burgess Bestiary
45
Visualizing how this occurred will drive home why the conditions
were so unusual. All of the fossilized animals of the Burgess Shale were
sea creatures
living near an enormous carbonate
reef that
later was
thrust upward by plate tectonic activity to form what is now called the
Cathedral Escarpment. Long after the sea creatures of the Burgess Shale
were entombed, these tectonic forces drove the fossils upward from the
seafloor carrying them many miles eastward along faults, at the same time
building the mountains that Walcott would climb millions of years later.
Thanks to this tectonic movement of earth’s major plates, the continents
are now located in very different places than they were millions of years
ago. At the time these Cambrian creatures were alive, the land masses that
would later form North America lay on the equator.
Plate tectonic activity explains why a trove of sea creatures were found
fossilized in the mountains of Yoho National Park rather than along a
seafloor somewhere. But there’s still the question of why so many differ-
ent types of marine invertebrates, including soft-bodied ones, were so un-
usually well preserved. Paleontologists think they know the answer. They
think the marine animals that were later fossilized in the Burgess Shale
lived near the bottom of an ancient sea in front of an underwater cliff or
escarpment. Due to tectonic activity, blocks at the edge of this underwater
cliff began to break off. These blocks slumped, creating underwater mud-
flows in their wake. These slumps and flows transported the Burgess ani-
mals several kilometers into deeper waters where they were buried in such
a way as to leave them not only undamaged, but also protected from scav-
engers and bacteria. Very probably, the mudflows were highly turbulent,
for paleontologists found the creatures dumped and preserved in a variety
of angles in relation to the bedding. The speed and pressure of these mud-
flows quickly produced a preservation-friendly, oxygen-free environment.
Then the turbulent and muddy currents pressed fine silt and clay into the
crevices of the bodies at just the right consistency and pressure to fossilize
them without tearing their delicate appendages, an ideal set of circum-
stances for ensuring later observation by future paleontologists . 23
Due in part to the unusual circumstances under which these fossils
were preserved, there’s now
little doubt about the unparalleled dispar-
ity of the Cambrian fauna. Based on available evidence from the Burgess
Shale and other sites around the world, the Cambrian period witnessed
the appearance of, arguably, more disparate body plans than ever before

46
DARWIN’S DOUBT
or since. And this disparity arose at a most unexpected time, assuming
Darwinian theory, namely, right at the dawn of animal life.
THE ARTIFACT HYPOTHESIS
Walcott grasped these difficulties, and had a deep enough professional
commitment to Darwinism, to search for a solution. He realized that the
Precambrian fossil record could, in principle, assist in explaining the pat-
tern of the Cambrian fossil record. The discovery of a rich Precambrian
fossil history detailing variations accumulating little by little would serve
to cast the pattern of the Burgess in a different light. Yet the Precambrian
strata of his day showed no signs of providing any obvious transitional
forms, much less a well-articulated bottom-up pattern of animals rep-
resenting lower taxa proliferating into forms exemplifying higher and
higher taxonomic categories. Nevertheless, an idea occurred to Walcott
that gave him fresh hope.
Perhaps his awareness of the dramatic ways that the surface of the earth
had changed over geologic time, making preservation of the Burgess fauna
itself possible, inspired him. Finding marine animals so high above sea
level no doubt made Walcott acutely aware of the way in which continents
and seas had changed locations over the course of geological time. And
so, Walcott, ever the geologist, proposed an ingenious geological solu-
tion to the biological problem of the origin of animal life. He noted that
the Precambrian period was a period of dramatic continental uplift. He
then suggested that the ancestors of the trilobites first evolved at a time
when the Precambrian seas had receded from the landmasses. Then, at the
beginning of the Cambrian, the seas again rose, covering the continents
and depositing recently evolved trilobites. Thus, according to Walcott, an-
cestral precursors to the trilobites and other distinctive Cambrian forms
had existed, but they were not fossilized in sediments that would later be
elevated above sea level until early in the Cambrian; instead, before the
Cambrian, during a period when sea levels were lower, trilobites and their
ancestral forms were being deposited offshore in what are now only deep-
sea sediments . 24 Walcott named this cryptic period of time in which tri-
lobites and other animals were rapidly evolving offshore as the “Lipalian
interval.” (The term “Lipalian” is derived from the Greek word for lost.)

The Burgess Bestiary
47
In this view, the abrupt appearance of the Cambrian body plans in the
geological column was merely an “artifact” of incomplete sampling of the
fossil record and, indeed, the inability to access the undersea sedimentary
layers where the ancestors of the Cambrian fauna presumably lay encased.
In short, the transgression and regression of ancient seas made the ances-
tral precursors of the Cambrian fauna inaccessible to discovery.
His artifact hypothesis (also known as the “Lipalian interval” hypoth-
esis) was a distinct advance over Darwin’s unadorned claim that the fossil
ancestors of the Cambrian animals had not yet been discovered. Walcott’s
hypothesis had the advantage of accounting for the sudden appearance
of the trilobites and the absence of ancestral and transitional forms by
reference to known geological processes.
It also could be tested, at least
once offshore drilling technology advanced to allow for the sampling of
the buried offshore sedimentary rocks.
Although Walcott conceded that his hypothesis was essentially a nega-
tive argument that attempted to explain away the absence of evidence,
he insisted that
it was a sensible inference from his broad sampling of
the paleontological data.
“I fully realize that the conclusions above out-
lined are based primarily on the absence of a marine fauna in Algonkian
[Precambrian] rocks,” he wrote, “but until such
is discovered I know of
no more probable explanation of the abrupt appearance of the Cambrian
fauna than that I have presented .”25
LUMPING AND SPLITTING
Walcott used another
strategy
for
squaring
the
Burgess
Shale with
Darwin’s theory of evolution. Taxonomists, tasked with identifying and
naming distinct groups of life-forms, have been divided into two types:
“lumpers” and “splitters.” “Lumpers” tend to group disparate organisms
together in the same large classificatory categories and then make distinc-
tions between them at lower taxonomic levels. “Splitters” tend to separate
similar organisms into numerous higher taxonomic divisions. Walcott
favored lumping, and his doing so with the Burgess fossils seemingly min-
imized the difficulties associated with the sudden proliferation of so many
new Cambrian forms.
On his return to the Smithsonian, he placed all of the exotic forms

48
DARWIN’S DOUBT
of the Burgess into modern phyla. One of his efforts at lumping placed
Marrella splendens not only in the same phylum, but also in the same
class (Trilobita)
as the trilobites, despite obvious morphological differ-
ences. He justified this classification by arguing that the organism fore-
shadowed the trilobite (compare Figs.
1.4 and 2.3). Gould later criticized
Walcott’s method of classification as “shoehorning.” He noted that even
one of Walcott’s fellow lumpers, Yale paleontologist Charles Schuchert,
called the classification of Marrella into question. 26 Gould also noted that
Walcott used this strategy to minimize the challenge posed by the mor-
phological disparity of the Burgess forms. 27
Some paleontologists today reject Gould’s criticism of Walcott’s inclu-
sion of so many Burgess animal forms into existing taxonomic categories.
Nevertheless, few paleontologists think Walcott’s use of lumping
ex-
plained away the Cambrian explosion. Most, for example, classify Mar-
rella splendens within an existing modern phylum, namely, Arthropoda,
even if they also classify it within a new and separate class, Marrellomor-
pha. Yet, whether Marrella, for example, falls within a novel phylum or
class, matters less than explaining why so many clearly novel forms, and
the novel structures these forms exhibit,
first arose with such apparent
suddenness.
RESOLUTION—FOR A TIME
Walcott thought that he had solved the mystery of the Cambrian explo-
sion, as did many other Darwinists who gratefully adopted both his tax-
onomy and his version of the artifact hypothesis. And since Walcott’s
approach held out hope of one day uncovering evidence of a Precambrian
trunk for the animal phyla along with its primary limbs, adherents could
not be accused of moving the paleontological case for Darwinism into the
realm of untestable dogma. They had only to wait for the technologies of
seafloor drilling to emerge and hope that nature had seen fit, unmolested
under the ocean deeps, to leave concrete evidence of the gradual emer-
gence of the major Cambrian body plans.
Walcott’s theoretical accomplishment was no mean feat. His discovery
of the Burgess Shale was like a defense attorney with absolute faith in his
client stumbling upon a room stuffed with clues that would seem to dis-
credit him. Through his grouping of disparate body types into existing

The Burgess Bestiary
49
phyla and his ingenious version of the artifact hypothesis, Walcott had
found an elegant way to explain all this seemingly uncooperative evidence
in a Darwinian way.
In defending Walcott for overlooking significant features of the Bur-
gess fossils, Gould points out that Walcott’s multiple and growing admin-
istrative demands hardly left time to revisit the foundational categories
of animal taxonomy. How much less, then, was Walcott likely to revisit
the most fundamental assumption of all—the assumption that animals
originated gradually in a Darwinian way as the result of natural selection
acting on small incremental variations? Consideration of that possibil-
ity would come decades later, only after Walcott’s version of the artifact
hypothesis had itself exploded.

3
SOFT BODIES AND
HARD FACTS
In the spring of 2000, Discovery Institute, where
I do my research, spon-
sored a lecture at the University of Washington geology department by
renowned Chinese paleontologist J. Y. Chen (see Fig. 3.1). As the result of
his role in excavating a new discovery of Cambrian-era fossils in southern
China, Professor Chen’s standing in the scientific world was on the rise.
The discovery, near the town of Chengjiang in the Kunming Province,
revealed a trove of early Cambrian animal forms. After TIME magazine
mentioned the Chengjiang discovery in a 1995 cover story about the Cam-
brian explosion,
1 interest in the fossils surged. When he came to Seattle,
Professor Chen had already published numerous scientific papers about
this profusion of novel life-forms and had established himself as one of the
foremost experts on the fossils in this unique geological setting.
Not surprisingly, Chen’s visit generated considerable interest among
the University of Washington faculty. He came bearing intriguing pho-
tographs and samples of the oldest and most exquisitely preserved Cam-
brian fossils in the world from an exotic site halfway around the globe,
a site, moreover, that was now widely acknowledged to surpass even the
legendary Burgess Shale as the most extensive and significant Cambrian-
era locality.
The fossils from the Maotianshan Shale near Chengjiang (see Fig. 3.2)
had established an even greater variety of Cambrian body plans from an
even older layer of Cambrian rock than those of the Burgess, and they did

Soft Bodies and Hard Facts
51
so with an almost photographic fidelity. The Chinese fossils also helped to
establish that the Cambrian animals appeared even more explosively than
previously realized.
So there was
little doubt about the
significance of the
discoveries
that Chen came to report that day. What was soon in doubt, however,
was Chens scientific orthodoxy. In his presentation, he highlighted the
FIGURE 3.1
J. Y. Chen.
FIGURE 3.2
Figure 3.2a
(left) shows the Moatianshan Shale outcrop. Courtesy Illustra Media. Figures
3.2b and c (center and right) show a Precambrian-Cambrian boundary marker at the Moa-
tianshan site. Courtesy Paul Chien.

52
DARWIN’S DOUBT
apparent contradiction between the Chinese fossil evidence and Darwin-
ian orthodoxy. As a result, one professor in the audience asked Chen,
almost as if in warning, if he wasn’t nervous about expressing his doubts
about Darwinism so freely—especially given China’s reputation for sup-
pressing dissenting opinion. I remember Chen’s wry smile as he answered.
“In China,” he said, “we can criticize Darwin, but not the government. In
America, you can criticize the government, but not Darwin.”
Nevertheless, those in the audience that day soon learned that Profes-
sor Chen had good reasons for questioning Darwin’s picture of the his-
tory of life. As Chen explained, the Chinese fossils turn Darwin’s tree of
life “upside down.” They also cast doubt on a surviving version of Charles
Walcott’s artifact hypothesis, a crucial prop in the case for Darwinian
gradualism.
BURGESS REVISITED
By the time Charles Walcott finished his last excavation of the Burgess
Shale in 1917, he and his team had collected over 65,000 fossil specimens,
all ofwhich were shipped to the Natural History Museum at the Smithson-
ian Institution for cataloguing. In 1930, another American paleontologist,
Harvard professor Percy Raymond, initiated another investigation of the
Burgess. His specimens were also eventually stored in the United States.
As a result of these two prominent American-led excavations, there
were initially no collections of Burgess fossils on public display in Canada.
Many Canadian
scientists regarded this as a national embarrassment,
so in the 1960s the Canadian Geological Survey commissioned a British
team to resume digging at the Walcott quarry, in order to “repatriate the
Burgess Shale” by keeping most of the newly discovered fossils on per-
manent display in Canada.
2 The team was led by paleontologist Harry
Whittington (see Fig. 3.3), of the University of Cambridge, who was as-
sisted by two of his graduate students, Simon Conway Morris and Derek
Briggs, both ofwhom would eventually distinguish themselves as interna-
tionally renowned experts on the Burgess Shale.
As Whittington analyzed the Cambrian fauna at the Burgess, he real-
ized that Walcott had grossly underestimated the morphological disparity
of this group of animals. Many of the creatures in the assemblage featured
unique body designs, unique anatomical structures, or both.
3 Opabinia,

Soft Bodies and Hard Facts
53
FIGURE 3.3
Harry Whittington. Courtesy Archives
of the Museum of Comparative Zoology,
Ernst Mayr Library, Harvard University.
with its five eyes, fifteen distinct body segments, and a claw at the end of
a long proboscis, exemplified the unique forms on display in the Burgess.
But so did Hallucigenia , Wiwaxia, Nectocaris, and many other Burgess
animals. To this day, paleontologists describing Nectocaris, for example,
can t decide whether it more closely resembles an arthropod, a chordate,
or a cephalopod (a class of mollusk; see Fig. 3.4).
Whittington found that grouping such forms within well-established
taxonomic categories, even higher taxonomic categories such as the class
or phylum, strained the limits of these classifications. Even many of those
animals that fell easily into existing phyla represented clearly unique sub-
phyla or classes of organisms. Anomalocaris (literally, “abnormal shrimp”)
and Marrella , for example, both had hard exoskeletons and clearly repre-
sent either arthropods or creatures closely related to them. Yet each of
these animals possessed many distinct anatomical parts and exemplified
different ways of organizing these parts, thus clearly distinguishing them-
selves from better-known arthropods such as the previous staple of Cam-
brian paleontological studies, the trilobite.
Whittington, a trilobite expert, understood this as well as anyone. In
1971, he published the first comprehensive taxonomic review of the Burgess
biota. In his review, he broke decisively with Walcott’s previous attempt to
lump all Cambrian forms into a few preexisting taxonomic categories.
In so doing, he reemphasized the morphological disparity present in the
Burgess animal biota and, in the process, deprived evolutionary biologists
of one part of Walcott’s two-part strategy for minimizing the Cambrian

54
DARWIN’S DOUBT
eve
6fILL
FIGURE 3.4
Figure 3.4a (left): Artist rendering of Nectocaris. Figure 3.4b (middle, right): Photograph
of Nectocaris fossil. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd.: Nature,
Martin R. Smith and Jean-Bernard Caron, “Primitive Soft-Bodied Cephalopods from the
Cambrian,” Nature, 465 (May 27, 2010): 469-72. Copyright 2010.
problem. By lumping all Burgess animals into existing phyla and classes,
Walcott had seemingly diminished the problem of disparity by reduc-
ing the number of novel phyla for which connecting intermediates were
required. By recognizing the disparity clearly on display in the Burgess,
Whittington partially undercut Walcotts solution to the Cambrian mys-
tery and highlighted what would become its central unsolved problem: the
origin of novel biological form.
SOUNDING THE SEAFLOOR
Although Whittington, and
later Gould,
rejected Walcotts
early
at-
tempt to “shoehorn” all the animals of the Burgess Shale into preexisting
taxonomic categories, many paleontologists now also reject Stephen Jay
Goulds characterization of many Burgess Shale creatures as being so
exotic as to defy affinity in classification with any modern groups .
4 Many
of these paleontologists would also recognize fewer total phyla first ap-
pearing in the Cambrian than Gould did, and perhaps even as few as Wal-

Soft Bodies and Hard Facts
55
cott did. As discussed in the previous chapter, still other paleontologists
now favor “rank-free” approaches to classification.
Regardless, most paleontologists recognize that the Burgess Shale at-
tests to an extraordinary profusion ofnew animal forms—including many
manifesting unique anatomical
structures and arrangements of body
parts. Thus, whatever differences of opinion exist about how to classify
these animals—and any five-year-old child can distinguish them from
each other and from all previously known forms of life—their origin still
requires explanation. Thus, as noted, Walcott’s use of “lumping” did not
solve the Cambrian mystery.
5
But what of the second part of Walcott’s proposal, the artifact hypothe-
sis? To evaluate this hypothesis, Walcott devised a more clear-cut and less
subjective test. Recall that Walcott argued that the ancestral precursors of
the Cambrian animals were missing from the Precambrian fossil record
because of the transgression and regression of seas. He posited an interval
of geologic time in which the ancestors of the Cambrian fauna were evolv-
ing offshore in a Precambrian ocean and being deposited only in layers of
marine sedimentary rock. In this hypothesis, only after the ancient ocean
rose and covered the continent were the remains of Cambrian sea animals
preserved in sediment that today is above sea level.
When Walcott proposed his ingenious geological scenario,
it could
not yet be tested. But with the development of offshore drilling technol-
ogy in the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s, oil companies began to drill through
thousands of feet of marine sedimentary rock.
6 As geologists evaluated
the contents of these drill cores, they did not find Walcott’s predicted Pre-
cambrian fossils.
Instead, an even more fundamental problem for the hypothesis arose.
At the time that Walcott proposed his version of the artifact hypothesis,
geologists considered the oceanic and continental plates to be essentially
stable and fixed with respect to one another. Mountain building, fault-
ing, and other geologic processes were attributed to worldwide changes
in sea level, accumulating troughs of sediment called geosynclines, rising
mounds of igneous rocks from beneath the earth’s crust, and even a
shrinking earth.7
The idea that enormous, solid plates actually move, recycling themselves
through the plate-tectonic processes ofsubduction and seafloor spreading,
had not yet been proposed. Yet modern plate tectonic theory now affirms

56
DARWIN’S DOUBT
that oceanic crustal material eventually plunges back into the earth and
melts in a process known as subduction. After surface rocks melt during
subduction, they form a new supply of molten magma. Eventually, magma
from other locations deep in the earth wells up at mid-oceanic ridges to
form new igneous rocks, in a process known as seafloor spreading. It fol-
lows that any oceanic sediments deposited atop the oceanic igneous crust
will have a limited “life span” on the surface of the earth. Eventually, these
sedimentary rocks collide with the continental margin, plunge deep into
the upper mantle, and melt to form magma.
As a consequence of this cycle, the maximum age of any marine sedi-
ment
is strictly limited. And according to modern estimates, the oldest
section of oceanic crust has existed only since the Jurassic
(or about
180 million years ago
8)—far too young to contain fossil ancestors of the
trilobites. As the evidence
for plate tectonics mounted,
scientists
dis-
carded Walcott’s artifact hypothesis and Lipalian interval as nonstarters.
Paleontologists today do not expect to find any Precambrian ancestors
of the trilobites in oceanic sediments, since they realize that there are no
Precambrian sediments in the ocean basins. If Precambrian strata are to
be found anywhere, continents are the place.
OTHER VERSIONS OF THE ARTIFACT HYPOTHESIS
Although Walcott’s proposals to explain away the absence of fossilized an-
cestors of the Cambrian animals came to naught, other versions of the arti-
fact hypothesis continued to circulate. These proposals take two basic forms.
Some scientists claimed, though for different reasons, that the expected Pre-
cambrian fossil ancestors had simply not yet been found—that missing fos-
sils were an artifact of the incomplete sampling of the fossil record. Others
suggested that Precambrian sedimentary rocks had not preserved the miss-
ing fossils—that the incomplete preservation of the Precambrian animals
meant the missing fossils were no longer there to be found.
Walcott rejected the idea that paleontologists simply had not looked in,
or sampled, enough places. He noted that geologists already had exten-
sively investigated “the great series of Cambrian and Precambrian strata
in eastern North America.” Though they had looked “from Alabama to
Labrador; in western North America [and] from Nevada and California

Soft Bodies and Hard Facts
57
far into Alberta and British Columbia, and also in China” their investiga-
tions had turned up nothing of significant interest .
9 In Walcott’s view the
continents simply had not preserved the fossilized remains of the Cam-
brian ancestors.
Before Walcott, some geologists had gone a step farther and suggested
that all Precambrian sedimentary rocks had been destroyed via extreme
heat and pressure, a process called “universal metamorphism.” Walcott
rejected this hypothesis, since he himself had encountered a “great series
of pre-Cambrian sedimentary rocks on the North American continent”
among other places. Other geologists suggested that major bursts of evo-
lutionary innovation occurred only during periods when sedimentary de-
position had ceased, thus again resulting in a lack of fossil preservation.
But, as Gould remarked of Walcott’s artifact hypothesis, this explanation
also appeared to many scientists “forced and ad hoc
.
.
. born of frustra-
tion, rather than the pleasure of discovery.” 10
CONTEMPORARY VERSIONS OF THE ARTIFACT
HYPOTHESIS: TOO SOFT OR TOO SMALL
After the demise of the “universal metamorphism” idea, some paleontolo-
gists proposed simpler, more intuitively plausible versions of the artifact
hypothesis. They claimed that the proposed intermediate forms leading to
the Cambrian animals may have been either too small or too soft, or both,
to have been preserved.
Developmental biologist Eric Davidson, of California Institute of Tech-
nology, has suggested that the transitional forms leading to the Cambrian
animals were “microscopic forms similar to modern marine larvae” and
were thus too small to have been reliably fossilized .
11 Other evolution-
ary scientists, such as Gregory Wray, Jeffrey Levinton, and Leo Shapiro,
have suggested that the ancestors of the Cambrian animals were not pre-
served, because they lacked hard parts such as shells and exoskeletons .
12
They argue that since soft-bodied animals are difficult to
fossilize, we
shouldn’t expect to find the remains of the supposedly soft-bodied ances-
tors of the Cambrian fauna in the Precambrian fossil record. University
of California, Berkeley, paleontologist Charles R. Marshall summarizes
these explanations:

58
DARWIN’S DOUBT
[I]t is important to remember that we see the Cambrian
“explosion
”
through the windows permitted by the fossil and geological records. So
when talking about the Cambrian “explosion
we are typically refer-
ring to the appearance oflarge-body (can be seen by the naked eye) and
preservable (and therefore largely skeletonized) forms.
.
.
. If the stem
lineages were both small and unskeletonized, then we would not expect
to see them in the fossil record.
13
Though
intuitively
plausible,
several
discoveries
call
into
question
both of these versions of the artifact hypothesis. As for the idea that the
ancestors of the Cambrian animals were too small to be preserved, pa-
leontologists have known for some time that the cells of filament-shaped
microorganisms (probably cyanobacteria) have been preserved in ancient
Precambrian rocks. Paleobiologist J. William Schopf, of the University of
California, Los Angeles, has reported an extremely ancient example of
these fossils in the Warrawoona Group strata of western Australia. These
fossilized cyanobacteria are preserved in 3.465 -billion-year-old bedded
cherts (microcrystalline sedimentary rocks).
14 The same strata have also
preserved stromatolite mats, an organic accretionary growth structure
usually indicating the presence of bacteria, within slightly younger dolo-
stone sediments of roughly 3.45 billion years in age (see Fig. 3. 5).
15
FIGURE 3.5
Figure 3.5a
(left): Photographs of Cambrian-age fossil stromatolites. Courtesy Wikime-
dia Commons , user Rygel, M. C. Figure 3.5b (right): Alternating fine- and coarse-layered
structure of Precambrian stromatolite fossils shown in cross section. Courtesy American
Association for the Advancement of Science, Figure 2B, Hoffman, P., “Algal Stromatolites:
Use in Stratigraphic Correlation and Paleocurrent Determination,” Science, 157 (Septem-
ber 1 , 1967): 1043-45. Reprinted with permission from AAAS.

Soft Bodies and Hard Facts
59
These discoveries pose a problem for the idea that the Cambrian ances-
tors were too small to survive in the fossil record. The sedimentary rocks
that preserve the fossilized cyanobacteria and single-celled algae are far
older and, therefore, far more likely to have been destroyed by tectonic ac-
tivity than those later sedimentary rocks that should have preserved the
near-ancestors of the Cambrian animals. Yet these rocks, and the fossils
they contain, have survived just fine. If paleontologists can find tiny fossil-
ized cells in these far older and rarer formations, shouldn’t they also be able
to find some ancestral forms of the Cambrian animals in younger and more
abundant sedimentary rocks? Yet few such precursors have been found.
There are also several reasons to question the second version of this
hypothesis—the idea that the presumed Cambrian ancestors were too
soft to be preserved. First, some paleontologists have questioned whether
soft-bodied ancestral forms of the hard-bodied Cambrian animals would
have even been anatomically viable .
16 They argue that many animals
representing phyla such as brachiopods and arthropods could not have
evolved their soft parts first and then added shells later, since their sur-
vival depends upon their ability to protect their soft parts from hostile
environmental forces. Instead, they argue that soft and hard parts had to
arise together.
17 As paleontologist James Valentine, of the University of
California, Berkeley, has noted in the case of brachiopods, “The brachio-
pod Bauplan [body plan] cannot function without a durable skeleton .” 18
Or as J. Y. Chen and his colleague Gui-Qing Zhou observe: “Animals such
as brachiopods
.
.
. cannot exist without a mineralized skeleton. Arthro-
pods bear jointed appendages and likewise require a hard, organic or min-
eralized outer covering .” 19
Because these animals typically require hard parts, Chen and Zhou
assume that the ancestral forms of these animals should have been pre-
served somewhere in the Precambrian fossil record if in fact they were
ever present. Thus, the absence of hard-bodied ancestors of these Cam-
brian animals in the Precambrian strata shows that these animals
first
arose in the Cambrian period. As they rather emphatically insist: “The
observation that such fossils are absent in Precambrian strata proves that
these phyla arose in the Cambrian .”20
It should be pointed out that this argument cannot be made for all Cam-
brian animal groups and, in my view, does not achieve the standing of a
“proof” in any case. Many Cambrian phyla, including phyla characterized

60
DARWIN’S DOUBT
by mostly hard-shelled animals such as mollusks and echinoderms, do
have soft-bodied representatives. The earliest known mollusk, Kimberella,
for example, lacked a hard external shell (though
it did have other hard
parts).
21 So,
clearly, some mainly hard-shelled Cambrian groups could
have had soft-bodied ancestors.
It
is also possible to postulate the existence of an arthropod or bra-
chiopod ancestor—especially some extremely distant ancestor—lacking a
hard shell. Soft-bodied onychophorans (velvet worms) were once proposed
as ancestors of the arthropods, though more recent studies challenge this
idea. Onychophorans themselves arise well after arthropods in the fossil
record and cladistics analysis suggests that onychophorans may be a sister,
rather than an ancestral, group to arthropods . 22 Even so,
it’s difficult to
disprove a negative: in particular, to foreclose the possibility that arthro-
pods or brachiopods might have had a soft-bodied ancestor deep in the
Precambrian.
Nevertheless,
it seems unlikely on a Darwinian view of the history of
life that all Cambrian arthropod or brachiopod ancestors, especially the
relatively recent ancestors of these animals, would have lacked hard parts
entirely. There are many types of arthropods that arise suddenly in the
Cambrian—trilobites,
Marrella, Fuxianhuia protensa,
Waptia, Anom-
alocaris—and all of these animals had hard exoskeletons or body parts.
Moreover, the only known extant group of arthropods without a hard exo-
skeleton (the pentastomids) have a parasitic relationship with arthropods
that do .
23 Thus, surely, it seems likely that some of the near ancestors of the
many arthropod animals that arose in the Cambrian would have left at
least some rudimentary remains of exoskeletons in the Precambrian fossil
record— if, in fact, such ancestral arthropods existed in the Precambrian
and if arthropods arose in a gradual Darwinian way.
Moreover, the arthropod exoskeleton is part of a tightly integrated ana-
tomical system. Specific muscles, tissues, tendons, sensory organs—and
a special mediating structure between the soft tissue of the animal and
the exoskeleton called the endophragmal system—are
all integrated to
support the process of molting and exoskeletal growth and maintenance
that is integral to the arthropod mode of existence. A best-case Darwin-
ian scenario for the origin of such a system would, therefore, envision the
“co-evolution” of these separate anatomical subsystems in a coordinated
fashion, since some of these anatomical subsystems confer a functional

Soft Bodies and Hard Facts
61
advantage to the animal largely by supporting, and promoting, the growth
and maintenance of the exoskeleton (and vice versa). Others would be
vulnerable to damage without
it.
Thus,
it seems unlikely that these in-
terdependent subsystems would evolve independently
first without an
exoskeleton, only to have the exoskeleton arise suddenly as a kind of ac-
cretion atop an already integrated system of soft parts at the end of a long
evolutionary process.
This, again, makes it reasonable to expect that at least some rudimen-
tary arthropod hard parts would have been preserved in the Precambrian
if arthropods were present then. That such parts are unknown for
all
Cambrian arthropods (and brachiopods) in a fossil record that presum-
ably favors hard-part preservation, seems at least curious. And it appears,
on
its face, to support the assertions of those Cambrian paleontologists
such as Chen and Zhou who take the absence of any hard parts in the Pre-
cambrian record as evidence of the absence of those groups that typically
depend on hard parts for their existence.
In any case, advocates of the artifact hypothesis must at least explain a
Cambrian explosion of hard body parts, if not whole Cambrian animals.
As paleontologist George Gaylord Simpson noted in 1983, even if it’s true
that Precambrian ancestors were not preserved simply because they lacked
hard parts, “there is still a mystery to speculate about: Why and how did
many animals begin to have hard parts—skeletons of sorts—with appar-
ent suddenness around the beginning of the Cambrian?” 24
There is an additional, more formidable, difficulty for this version of the
artifact hypothesis. Although the fossil record generally does not preserve
soft body parts as frequently as hard parts,
it has preserved many soft-
bodied animals, organs, and anatomical structures from both the Cam-
brian and the Precambrian periods.
As we saw earlier, Precambrian sedimentary rocks in several places
around the world have preserved
fossilized colonial blue-green
algae,
single-celled algae, and cells with a nucleus (eukaryotes). 25 These micro-
organisms were not only small, but they also entirely lacked hard parts.
Another class of late Precambrian organisms called the Vendian or Edia-
caran biota included the fossilized remains of many soft-bodied organ-
isms, including many that may well have been lichens, algae, or protists
(microorganisms with cells containing nuclei). Cambrian-era strata them-
selves preserve many soft-bodied creatures and structures. The Burgess

62
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Shale in particular preserved the soft parts of several types of hard-bodied
Cambrian animals, such as Marrella splendens, 26 Wiwaxia, 27 and Anoma-
locaris. The Burgess Shale also documents entirely soft-bodied representa-
tives28 of several phyla, including:
•
Cnidaria (represented by an animal called Thaumaptilon, a feather-
shaped colonial organism formed from smaller soft sea anemone-
like animals) 29
•
Annelida (represented by the polychaete worms Burgessochaeta and
Canadia)30
•
Priapulida (represented by Ottoia, Louisella, Selkirkia— all worms
with a distinctive proboscis) 31
•
Ctenophora (represented by Ctenorhabdotus, a gelatinous animal
with a translucent body similar to a modern comb jelly) 32
•
Lobopodia (represented by Aysheaia and Hallucigenia, segmented
soft-bodied animals with many legs)33
The Burgess also preserves soft-bodied animals of unknown
affini-
ties, such as Amiskwia, a gelatinous air mattress-like animal;34 Eldonia, a
jellyfish-like animal with a much more complex anatomy than a modern
jellyfish;35 and the aforementioned, difficult to classify, Nectocaris 36 As
Simon Conway Morris notes, “The existing [Burgess] collections repre-
sent approximately 70,000 specimens. Of these, about 95 percent are either
soft-bodied or have thin skeletons.”37
THE CHENGJIANG EXPLOSION
Any doubts about the ability of sedimentary rocks to preserve soft and
small body parts were permanently laid to rest by a series of dramatic
fossil finds in southern China beginning in the 1980s.
In June 1984, paleontologist Xian-Guang Hou journeyed to Kunming,
in southern China, to prospect for fossilized samples of a bivalved arthro-
pod called a bradoriid. 38 The area around Kunming in the Yunnan Province
was well known for its lower Cambrian strata and typical Cambrian-era
fossils, such as bradoriids and trilobites, both ofwhich were relatively easy
to preserve because of their characteristically hard exoskeletons. In 1980,

Soft Bodies and Hard Facts
63
Hou had found many bradoriid samples in a geological formation called
the Qiongzhusi Section near Kunming.
In the summer of 1984 Hou traveled to the town of Chengjiang to
look for bradoriids in another geological formation called the Heilinpu
Formation. His efforts there yielded little success. As a result, he turned
his attention to another outcrop, a sedimentary sequence now called the
Maotianshan Shale. Hou’s team set farmworkers to digging out and scour-
ing the mudstone blocks. His book, The Cambrian Fossils of Chengjiang,
China, describes what happened next:
At about three o’clock in the afternoon ofSunday July 1, a semicircular
whitefilm was discovered in a split slab, and was mistakenly thought
to represent the valve ofan unknown crustacean. With the realization
that this
.
.
.
represented a previously unreported species, breaking of
the rock in a search for additional fossils continued apace. With the
find ofanother specimen, a 4-5 cm long animal with limbs preserved,
it
became apparent that here was nothing less than a soft-bodied biota. 39
Hou remembers the Cambrian specimen vividly, for it appeared “as if it
was alive on the wet surface of the mudstone.”40 Redoubling their efforts,
the researchers quickly uncovered the fossilized remains of one extraordi-
nary soft-bodied animal after another. Most of the fossils were preserved
as flattened two-dimensional imprints of three-dimensional organisms,
although, as Hou observes, “some retain a low three-dimensional relief.”
41
Most important, he notes, “The remains of hard tissues, such as the shells
of brachiopods or the carapaces of trilobites, are well represented in the
Chengjiang fauna, but less robust tissues, which are usually lost through
decomposition, are also beautifully preserved.”42
As the result of the very fine, small-grained sediments in which they
were deposited, the Chengjiang fossils preserved anatomical details with
a fidelity surpassing even that of the Burgess fauna.43 The Maotianshan
Shale also preserved an even greater variety of soft-bodied animals and
anatomical parts than the Burgess Shale had done. In the ensuing years,
Hou and his closest colleagues,
J. Y. Chen and Gui-Qing Zhou, found
many excellent examples of well-preserved animals lacking even a ke-
ratinized exoskeleton, including soft-bodied members of phyla such as
Cnidaria
(corals and jellyfish), Ctenophora (comb
jellies), Annelida
(a
type of “ringed” segmented worm), Onychophora (segmented worms with

64
DARWIN’S DOUBT
legs), Phoronida (a tubular, filter-feeding marine invertebrate), and Pri-
apulida (another distinctive type of worm).44 (See Fig. 3.6.)
They found fossils preserving the anatomical details of numerous soft
tissues and organs such as eyes, intestines, stomachs, digestive glands,
sensory organs, epidermes, bristles, mouths, and nerves.45 They also dis-
covered jellyfish-like organisms called Eldonia, which exhibit delicate, soft
body parts such as radiating water canals and nerve rings. Other fossils
even revealed the contents of the guts of several animals.46
The discoveries near Chengjiang demonstrated beyond any reason-
able doubt that sedimentary rocks can preserve soft-bodied fossils of
great antiquity and in exquisite detail, thereby challenging the idea that
the absence of Precambrian ancestors is a consequence of the fossil re-
cord’s inability to preserve soft-bodied animals from that period. At the
same time, the sedimentary rocks near Chengjiang had other surprises
in store.
PRECAMBRIAN SECRETS
Paul Chien is a Chinese-American marine biologist who, as a boy, left
mainland China with his family to escape the 1949 Communist take-
over under Mao Tse-tung. Eventually, after completing Ph.D. studies
in the United States, he became a biology professor at the University
of San Francisco. He
first learned about the discoveries in southern
China after reading the TIME magazine cover story in 1995. Then he
learned, ironically, from a story in People’s Daily, the official newspa-
per of the Chinese Communist party, that some Chinese paleontolo-
gists thought that these discoveries challenged a Darwinian view of the
history of life.
The great variety of the marine invertebrates present in Chengjiang
fascinated Chien and convinced him to return to the country of his birth.
After making his first trip in the summer of 1996, he met
J. Y. Chen. As
Paul Chien returned over several successive summers to do research of his
own, he and J. Y. Chen continued to share their findings and compare notes.
Upon arriving in China in 1998 for his third summer of research, Paul
Chien learned that Chen had discovered a fossil of an adult sponge in the
late Precambrian rocks of a sedimentary formation called the Doushantuo
Phosphorite—a formation that lies beneath the Maotianshan Shale. As the

Soft Bodies and Hard Facts
65
FIGURE 3.6
Cambrian explosion fossils from Chengjiang fauna, artist depictions and fossil photos.
Photos in 3.6a, b, e, andf courtesy J.
Y. Chen. Photos in 3.6c and d courtesy Paul Chien.
Figure 3.6a: A
ciliated comb jelly,
from the phylum
Ctenophora.
Figure 3.6b: A filter-
feeding worm-like
member of the
phylum Phoronida.
Figure 3.6c:
The shrimp-
like arthropod,
Waptia.
Figure 3.6d:
A priapulid
worm with
its distinctive
proboscis.
Figure 3.6e:
The enigmatic
jellyfish-like
Eldonia.
Figure 3.6f:
A conical
shelled animal
from the
phylum
Hyolitha.

66
DARWIN’S DOUBT
two scientists examined the sediments that encased Chen’s fossil sponge,
they made a discovery that would doom the most popular remaining ver-
sion of the artifact hypothesis.
As
J. Y. Chen began to examine the sedimentary rocks that enclosed
his fossilized sponge, he decided to look at them in a so-called thin sec-
tion under a light microscope. Chen wondered whether smaller embry-
onic forms of these Precambrian animals might also have been preserved
in these phosphorite rocks. Sure enough, under magnification he found
little round balls that he and Paul Chien identified as sponge embryos. In
1999, at a major international conference about the Cambrian explosion
held near Chengjiang,
J. Y. Chen, Paul Chien, and three other colleagues
presented their findings.47
A number of Chinese paleontologists questioned them at
first, sug-
gesting that the little round balls were not sponge embryos at all, but in-
stead the remains of brown and green algae.48 Here Paul Chien’s expertise
came to the fore. Early in his career, Chien had perfected a technique for
examining the embryos of living sponges under a scanning electron mi-
croscope. He now adapted his technique to examine these microscopic
fossilized structures using a more powerful microscope. What he found
startled him and amazed other scientists.
Sponges are nature’s glassworks. They are made of a soft and flexible
lattice of cells from which protrude silica-encrusted “spicules.” Though
sponges come in a variety of shapes and sizes, they are one of the sim-
plest known forms of animal life, with between six and ten distinctive cell
types. 49 In comparison, the typical arthropod has between thirty-five and
ninety cell types.
As Chien examined the
little balls of the Doushantuo Phosphorite
under the scanning microscope, he noticed what looked like cells under-
going cell division. At first, he had no way to determine what type of cells
they might be. But as he examined cross sections of these cells more care-
fully, he identified a distinctive structure that he knew from his prior re-
search.
Only sponges have spicules, and the fossilized cells he was examining
preserved microscopic spicules in the early stages of their development. 50
Clearly, these were not algal balls; they were sponge embryos. Even more sur-
prising, Chien was able to observe the internal structure of these embryonic

Soft Bodies and Hard Facts
67
cells, allowing him to identify the nuclei of some of these cells within the
fossilized remains of the larger outer cell membrane (see Fig. 3.7).
The discovery of these sponge embryos has proven decisive in the
case against the remaining versions of the artifact hypothesis, for several
reasons.
First, though spicules in sponges are encased in a thin layer of glassy
silica, sponges
are generally considered to be
a soft-bodied organism
because of the predominantly soft tissues out of which the rest of their
bodies are made. Moreover, the cells of all embryos during their earliest
embryonic stages are soft. Even in animals that have internal or external
skeletons, the nascent forms of these hard parts do not emerge until gas-
trulation, partway through the process of embryological development.
Thus, discovery of an embryo in the earliest stages of cell division shows
beyond a doubt that Precambrian sedimentary rocks can, under the right
circumstances, preserve soft-bodied organisms.
It also established something else.
J. Y. Chen found these sponge em-
bryos beneath the Cambrian-Precambrian boundary in late Precam-
brian rock. Yet these Precambrian layers did not preserve remains of
VUCLEI
’'OPEweP”
FIGURE 3.7
Figure 3.7a (above): Photographs of fossilized
sponge embryos in the early stages of cell division,
showing the sponge at the 8-cell stage of division,
with four of its cells marked in the foreground.
Figure 3.7b (right): A close-up image of a fossil of
a sponge embryo cell revealing numerous yolk
granules inside. Courtesy Paul Chien.

68
DARWIN’S DOUBT
any clearly ancestral or intermediate forms leading to the other main
groups of Cambrian animals. This raised an obvious question.
If the
Precambrian sedimentary strata beneath the Maotianshan Shale pre-
served the soft tissues of tiny, microscopic sponge embryos, why didn’t
they also preserve the near ancestors of the whole animals that arose in
the Cambrian, especially since some of those animals must have had
at least some hard parts as a condition of their viability? If these strata
could preserve embryos, then they should have preserved fully devel-
oped animals— at least, if such animals were present at the time. That
well-developed, clearly ancestral animal forms were not preserved, when
tiny sponge embryos
51 were, strongly indicates that such forms were
simply not present in the Precambrian layers.
Of course, there are conditions under which fossils are unlikely to be
preserved. We know, for example, that near-shore sands do not favor
preservation of detail, let alone the fine detail of very small organisms
a millimeter or less in length . 52 Even so, such considerations do
little
to bolster the artifact hypothesis. The sedimentary environments that
produced the carbonates, phosphorites, and shales of the Precambrian
strata beneath the Maotianshan Shale, for example, would have provided
a congenial environment for fossilizing all sorts of creatures during Pre-
cambrian times.
Advocates of the artifact hypothesis need to show not just that certain
factors discourage preservation in general. No one disputes that. What
they need to show is that these factors were ubiquitous in Precambrian
depositional environments worldwide. If near-shore sands characterized
all Precambrian sedimentary deposits, then paleontologists would not
expect to find any fossils there, at least not any tiny ones. Yet clearly this is
not the case. Precambrian strata include many types of sediments that can
preserve—and in the case of the Doushantuo formation in China, have
preserved—animal remains in fine detail, including small and vulnerable
sponge embryos.
Moreover, geologists Mark and Dianna McMenamin have noted that
in many other Cambrian locales around the world, including one in New-
foundland that they have studied extensively, the pattern of sedimenta-
tion changes very little across the Cambrian-late Precambrian boundary,
suggesting that many Precambrian environments would have provided
equally good environments for the preservation of fossils .
53

Soft Bodies and Hard Facts
69
In their 2013 book, The Cambrian Explosion, paleontologists James Val-
entine and Douglas Erwin go further. They note that many late Precam-
brian depositional environments actually provide more favorable settings
for the preservation of fossils than those present in the Cambrian period.
As they note, “a revolutionary change in the sedimentary environment
from microbially stabilized sediments during the Ediacaran [late Precam-
brian] to biologically churned sediments as larger, more active animals
appeared—occurred during the early Cambrian. Thus, the quality of fossil
preservation in some settings may have actually declined from the Edia-
caran to the Cambrian, the opposite of what has sometimes been claimed,
yet we find a rich and widespread explosion of [Cambrian] fauna.”54
STATISTICAL PALEONTOLOGY
Recent work in a
field known as
statistical paleontology casts further
doubt on the artifact hypothesis. Since the discovery of the Burgess Shale,
Precambrian- and Cambrian-era discoveries have repeatedly uncovered
fossil forms that either establish radically disparate new forms of life or,
increasingly, forms that fall into existing higher taxonomic groups (such
as class, subphylum, or phylum).
As a result, the fossil record amply documents organisms correspond-
ing to the terminal branches on the Darwinian tree of life (animal forms
representing new phyla or classes, for example), but
it fails to preserve
those organisms representing the internal branches or nodes leading to
these representatives of novel phyla and classes of Cambrian-era animals.
Yet these intermediates are the very forms required to connect the termi-
nal branches to form a coherent evolutionary tree and establish that the
representatives of the Cambrian animals did arise by means of a gradual
evolutionary process from simpler Precambrian ancestors.
Recall that Louis Agassiz thought that this pattern could not be ex-
plained by appealing to an incomplete fossil record, because the
fossil
record was strangely selective in its incompleteness, preserving abundant
evidence of the terminal branches but consistently neglecting to preserve
the representatives of the internal branches or nodes.
Contemporary paleontologists, such as Michael Foote at the University
of Chicago, have come to a similar conclusion. Foote has shown, using
statistical sampling analysis, that as more and more
fossil discoveries

70
DARWIN’S DOUBT
fall within existing higher taxonomic groups
(e.g., phyla, subphyla, and
classes), and as they fail to document the rainbow of intermediate forms
expected in the Darwinian view of the history of life, it grows ever more
improbable that the absence of intermediate forms reflects a sampling
bias—that is, an “artifact” of either incomplete sampling or preservation.
This kind of analysis merely quantifies what, in other circumstances, we
would sense intuitively. Imagine that you reach into an enormous barrel
full of marbles and randomly pull out a yellow, a red, and a blue marble. At
this point your brief sampling should leave you undecided as to whether
you have a representative sample of the barrel’s contents. You might at first
imagine that the barrel also contains marbles representing a rainbow of
intermediate colors. But as you continue to sample from every place in the
barrel and find that the barrel disgorges only those same three colors you
begin to suspect that it may offer a much more limited selection of colors
than, say, the rack of color samples at your local paint store.
Over the past 150 years or so, paleontologists have found many rep-
resentatives of the phyla that were well known in Darwin’s time (by
analogy, the equivalent of the three primary colors) and a few completely
new forms altogether (by analogy, some other distinct colors such as
green and orange, perhaps). And, of course, within these phyla there is
a great deal of variety. Nevertheless, the analogy holds at least insofar
as the differences in form between any member of one phylum and any
member of another phylum are vast, and paleontologists have utterly
failed to find forms that would fill these yawning chasms in what biolo-
gists call “morphological space.” In other words, they have failed to find
the paleontological equivalent of the numerous finely graded intermedi-
ate colors (Pendleton blue, dusty rose, gun barrel gray, magenta,
etc.)
that interior designers covet. Instead, extensive sampling of the fossil
record has confirmed a strikingly discontinuous pattern in which rep-
resentatives of the major phyla stand in stark isolation from members of
other phyla, without intermediate forms filling the intervening morpho-
logical space.
Foote’s statistical analysis of this pattern, documented by an ever in-
creasing number of paleontological investigations, demonstrates just how
improbable it is that there ever existed a myriad of as yet undiscovered in-
termediate forms of animal life—forms that could close the morphological
distance between the Cambrian phyla one tiny evolutionary step at a time.

Soft Bodies and Hard Facts
71
In effect, Foote’s analysis suggests that since paleontologists have reached
repeatedly into the proverbial barrel, sampled it from one end to the other,
and found only representatives of various radically distinct phyla but no
rainbow of intermediates, we shouldn’t hold our breath expecting such
intermediates to eventually emerge. He asks “whether we have a represen-
tative sample of morphological diversity and therefore can rely on patterns
documented in the fossil record.” The answer, he says, is yes. 55
By this affirmation, he doesn’t mean that there are no biological forms
left to discover. He means, rather, that we have good reason to conclude
that such discoveries will not alter the largely discontinuous pattern that
has emerged. “Although we have much to learn about the evolution of
form,” he writes, the statistical pattern created by our existing fossil data
demonstrates that “in many respects our view of the history of biological
diversity is mature.”56
CHENGJIANG AND THE CAMBRIAN CONUNDRUM 57
The Cambrian and Precambrian fossils from southern China have ren-
dered the mystery associated with the Cambrian explosion more acute in
other ways as well. First, the fossil finds in southern China coupled with
advances in radiometric dating techniques applied to other Cambrian-era
strata have allowed scientists to reassess the duration of the Cambrian
explosion. As the name implies, the fossils documenting the Cambrian
explosion appear within a relatively narrow slice of geologic time. Until
the early 1990s, most paleontologists thought the Cambrian period began
570 million and ended 510 million years ago, with the Cambrian explosion
of novel animal forms occurring within a 20- to 40-million-year window
during the lower Cambrian period.
Two developments have led paleontologists and geochronologists to
revise those estimates downward.
First, in
1993, radiometric dating of
zircon crystals from formations just above and below Cambrian strata
in Siberia allowed for a precise redating of Cambrian strata. Radiomet-
ric analyses of these crystals fixed the start of the Cambrian period at
544 million years ago, 58 and the beginning of the Cambrian explosion
itself to about 530 million years ago (see Fig. 3.8). These studies also sug-
gested that the explosion of the novel Cambrian animal forms occurred
within a window of geologic time much shorter than previously believed,

72
DARWIN’S DOUBT
in or BAlcrWy+boo KVA
5^2.? MVA
^30 KyA
FIGURE 3.8
The Cambrian explosion occurred within a narrow window of geological time.
lasting no more than 10 million years, and the main
4 period of exponen-
tial increase of diversification” lasting only 5 to 6 million years. 59
Geologically speaking, 5 million years represents a mere 1/10 of 1 per-
cent (0.11 percent, to be precise) of earth’s history. J. Y. Chen explains that
“compared with the 3 -plus-billion-year history of life on earth, the period
[of the explosion] can be likened to one minute in 24 hours of one day.”60
Some geologists or evolutionary biologists dispute these numbers,
but they do so by redefining the Cambrian explosion as a series of sepa-
rate events rather than using the term to refer to the main radiation
of new body plans in the lower Cambrian. In 2009,
I participated in a
debate in which one of my opponents, paleontologist Donald Prothero,
from Occidental College, used this common rhetorical strategy to min-
imize the severity of the Cambrian mystery. In his opening statement,
he claimed that the Cambrian explosion actually took place over an
80-million-year period of time and that consequently those who cited
the Cambrian as a challenge to the adequacy of the neo-Darwinian
theory were mistaken. As
I was listening to his opening statement,
I
consulted his textbook to see how he had derived his 80-million-year

Soft Bodies and Hard Facts
73
figure. Sure enough, he had included in the Cambrian explosion three
separate
pulses of new innovation
or
diversification, including the
origin of a group of late PreCambrian organisms called the Ediacaran or
Vendian fauna. He also included not only the origin of the animal body
plans in the lower Cambrian, but also the subsequent minor diversifica-
tion (variations on those basic architectural themes) that occurred in
the upper Cambrian. He included, for example, not just the appearance
of the first trilobites, which occurred suddenly in the lower Cambrian,
but also the origin of a variety of different trilobite species later from
the upper Cambrian.
In my response to Prothero,
I noted that he was, of course, free to re-
define the term “Cambrian explosion” any way he liked, but that by using
the term to describe several separate explosions (of different kinds), he
had done nothing to diminish the difficulty of explaining the origin of
the first explosive appearance of the Cambrian animals with their unique
body plans and complex anatomical features. Beyond this, as we’ll see in
the next chapter, the Vendian organisms may not have been animals at
all, and they bear little resemblance to any of the animals that arise in the
Cambrian. We’ll also see that most, if not all,
61 of these organisms actu-
ally went extinct well before the origin of the animals that first appear in
the lower Cambrian and so they do little to minimize the problem of the
explosive origin of animals.
In any case, expanding the definition of the Cambrian explosion only
obscures the real challenge posed by the event, a challenge underscored
by the discoveries
at Chengjiang. An analysis by MIT geochronologist
Samuel Bowring has shown that the main pulse of Cambrian morpho-
logical innovation occurred in a sedimentary sequence spanning no more
than 6 million years. 62 Yet during this time representatives of at least
sixteen completely novel phyla and about thirty classes first appeared in
the rock record. In a more recent paper using a slightly different dating
scheme, Douglas Erwin and colleagues similarly show that thirteen new
phyla appear in a roughly 6 -million-year window.63 As we’ve seen, among
these animal forms were the first trilobites, with their lens-focusing com-
pound eyes among other complex anatomical features. The problem of
explaining how so many new forms and structures arose so rapidly in
the first explosive period of the Cambrian remains, whether or not one

74
DARWIN’S DOUBT
decides to include within the designation “Cambrian explosion” other dis-
tinct events (see Part Two).
THE TOP DOWN PATTERN IN STARK RELIEF
The Chengjiang fauna makes the Cambrian explosion more difficult to
reconcile with the Darwinian view for yet another reason. The Cheng-
jiang discoveries intensify the top-down pattern of appearance in which
individual
representatives of the higher taxonomic
categories
(phyla,
subphyla, and classes) appear and only later diversify into the lower taxo-
nomic categories (families, genera, and species).
Discoveries
at
Chengjiang
contradict
the bottom-up
pattern
that
neo-Darwinism expects. The site does not show the gradual emergence
of unique species followed slowly but surely by the emergence of repre-
sentatives of ever higher and more disparate taxa, leading to novel phyla.
Instead, like the Burgess Shale, it shows body plan-level disparity arising
first and suddenly, with no evidence of a gradual unfolding and ranging
through the lower taxonomic groups.
Consider the case of the early chordates, a phylum consisting of crea-
tures
possessing
a
flexible,
rod-shaped
structure
called
a notochord.
Mammals, fish, and birds are familiar members of this phylum. Prior to
the discovery of the Chengjiang biota, chordates were unknown in the
Cambrian period and were thought to have
first appeared only much
later, during the Ordovician period .64 Now, following the discoveries at
Chengjiang, the first appearance of chordates in the Cambrian period has
been amply documented.
For example,
J. Y. Chen and several other Chinese paleontologists have
found
a spindle-shaped
eel-like animal
called Yunnanozoon
lividum,
which many paleontologists have interpreted as an early chordate because
it possesses, among other features, a digestive tract, branchial arches, and
a large notochord much like a spinal cord . 65 In addition,
J. Y. Chen and
colleagues have reported the discovery of a sophisticated craniate-like
chordate called Haikouella lanceolata from the lower Cambrian Maotian-
shan Shale. According to Chen and others, Haikouella has many of the
same features of Yunnanozoon lividum as well as several additional ana-
tomical features including a “heart, ventral and dorsal aorta, an anterior
branchial arterial, gill filaments, a caudal (posterior) projection, a neural

Soft Bodies and Hard Facts
75
cord with a relatively large brain, a head with possible lateral eyes, and a
ventrally situated buccal cavity with short tentacles.”66
Simon Conway Morris, with D. G. Shu and several Chinese colleagues,
has reported an even more dramatic find. They have discovered the fos-
silized remains of two small Cambrian
fish, Myllokunmingia fengjiaoa
and Haikouichthys ercaicunensis (see Fig. 3.9), suggesting a much earlier
appearance for both fishes and vertebrates (a class of chordates), both of
which were first thought to have originated in the Ordovician period, about
475 million years ago. Both of these taxa are jawless fish (agnathans) and
are considered by Shu and others to be closely allied to modern lampreys. 67
Finally, a paper by Shu and others reports the first convincing specimen of
another type of chordate from the Cambrian, a urochordate (tunicate). 68
This specimen, Cheungkongella ancestralis ,
is likewise found in the early
Cambrian shales (Qiongzhusi Formation) near Chengjiang. These recent
finds demonstrate that not only did the phylum Chordata first appear in
FIGURE 3.9
Figure 3.9a
(top): Drawing of the Cambrian fish, Myllokunmingia fengjiaoa. Figure 3.9b
(bottom): Photograph of Myllokunmingia fengjiaoa fossil. Reprinted by permission from
Macmillan Publishers Ltd.: Nature, Shu et al., “Lower Cambrian Vertebrates from South
China,” Nature, 402 (November 4, 1999): 42-46. Copyright 1999.

76
DARWIN’S DOUBT
the Cambrian, but also each one of the chordate subphyla (Cephalochor-
data, Craniata, and Urochordata) first emerged then as well. In any case,
the discovery in China of chordates, and other previously undiscovered
phyla in the Cambrian, only accentuates the puzzling top-down pattern of
appearance that other Cambrian discoveries had previously established.69
MORE QUESTIONS THAN ANSWERS
Thus, despite the efforts to explain the Cambrian explosion using various
versions of the artifact hypotheses, the mystery of the Cambrian explo-
sion has only grown more acute as a result of the dramatic discoveries in
southern China that have turned Darwin’s tree of life upside down.
When I first heard
J. Y. Chen describe these discoveries in 2000, 1 had
been investigating another unsolved question about the history of life:
What caused the first living cell, and the information it contains, to arise?
As I heard Dr. Chen speak that day in Seattle, my interest in another puz-
zling question about the history of life began to germinate. Could
it be
that the origin of animal life was in its own way just as difficult a problem
as that of the origin of life itself? Though I eventually concluded that the
Cambrian explosion does, indeed, present a profound challenge to con-
temporary Darwinian theory, it didn’t take me long to discover that some
scientists believed that the mystery of the Cambrian explosion had already
been resolved by the discovery of some rather enigmatic PreCambrian fos-
sils. We turn to those next.

THE NOT MISSING
FOSSILS?
The atmosphere in the auditorium of the Sam Noble Science Museum
at the University of Oklahoma was uncomfortably tense, with a security
detail of local Norman, Oklahoma, police officers on hand to keep the
peace—a conspicuous change from the campus security guard who might
be present at a typical university event. The occasion? A new documen-
tary, Darwin’s Dilemma, that Jonathan Wells, a colleague ofmine from the
Discovery Institute, and I were scheduled to show. The film would explore
the challenge to Darwin’s theory posed by the Cambrian fossil record.
For weeks before our event in September of 2009, outspoken evolu-
tionary biology students and an atheist student group, both egged on by
militant off-campus bloggers, had threatened to disrupt the screening.
Members of the biology faculty pledged to come, so that well before the
official start time a large crowd had gathered.
The museum and the geology department, not wanting to complicate
matters in their own minds by watching the film first, decided to launch
a preemptive first strike by issuing a disclaimer and scheduling an official
lecture designed to rebut the film. In the disclaimer the museum stated
that, given its public funding, it had no choice but to rent the auditorium
to groups irrespective of their “religious beliefs” or “scientific literacy.”
The disclaimer further noted that the Sam Noble Science Museum did
“not support unscientific views masquerading as science, such as those
of the Discovery
Institute.” The museum
flyer
also announced
the

78
DARWIN’S DOUBT
lecture of one of their curators, a paleontologist from the university, and
mocked the topic of the film—the Cambrian “explosion”—with carefully
placed scare quotes. The lecture’s start time of 5:00 p.m. also ensured a
confluence afterward of the audience made upset by the lecture and the
more friendly audience coming to see the film.
Jonathan Wells, a biologist well known for his skepticism about con-
temporary Darwinian theory, attended the pre-film lecture. Ignoring a
few hostile glares, he listened as the paleontologist from the university
argued that the Cambrian explosion presented no actual dilemma for
Darwinian evolution, and as this same paleontologist speculated that if
Darwin had only known what paleontologists today know of the Cam-
brian fossil record, he (Darwin) would have celebrated it as confirmation
of his theory. This particular paleontologist also denied that novel animal
forms emerged suddenly in the Cambrian. Instead, he argued that they
arose in rudimentary form much earlier in the late Precambrian. He noted
that paleontologists had discovered in late Precambrian sediments fossil-
ized sponges, a type of primitive mollusk, and the burrows of worms.
He also laid particular stress on the significance of a group of enig-
matic organisms first discovered in the Ediacaran Hills in southern Aus-
tralia dating from about 565 million years ago, in a Precambrian period
known as the Vendian or Ediacaran. Jonathan and I were well aware that
most paleontologists do not regard these fossilized organisms as plausible
ancestors to the Cambrian fauna. But on that evening the expert from
the university claimed the opposite. He also claimed that some obscure
Ediacaran organisms (with exotic names such as Vernanimalcula, Par-
vancorina, and Arkarua) represented early bilaterians (bilaterally sym-
metrical animals), arthropods, and echinoderms. He insisted that these
organisms pushed back the explosion of animal life by some 40 million
years, establishing a “fuse” for the Cambrian explosion in the form of
primitive and presumably ancestral animal forms for several of the most
significant Cambrian phyla and body designs.
An hour before I was to walk over to lead a discussion and answer ques-
tions about the Cambrian film from what proved to be an intensely hostile
audience, Jonathan Wells called me with a report on the museum’s at-
tempt to refute the film preemptively. The presentation claimed to have re-
solved the Cambrian mystery—Darwin’s dilemma—by showing that the

The Not Missing Fossils?
79
ancestral precursors to the major groups of Cambrian animals had been
found after all. But is this true?
THE EDIACARAN FAUNA AND VENDIAN RADIATION
In the previous chapter, we saw that many prominent paleontologists have
sought to explain the Cambrian explosion as an artifact of our incomplete
sampling of an incomplete fossil record. The lecture that my colleague
heard that night in Oklahoma took a very different approach, giving the
strong impression that the Precambrian fossil record actually does pre-
serve the ancestral forms of the Cambrian animals and that the Ediacaran
fauna, in particular, provide several striking examples of such forms.
In public presentations about the Cambrian explosion,
I’ve often
encountered this claim, though usually in the form of an unfocused
question: “What about the Ediacaran?” Nevertheless, in writing about
the Cambrian,
I take care not to attribute the idea that the Ediacaran
fauna represent Cambrian ancestors to leading Ediacaran or Cambrian
experts,
lest
I critique a straw man. Most paleontologists doubt that
well-known Ediacaran forms represent ancestors of the Cambrian ani-
mals and few think the late Precambrian fossil record as a whole makes
the Cambrian explosion appreciably less explosive. The claim is impor-
tant to address, however, since
it persists as a kind of paleontological
urban legend, one that even occasionally finds its way into the mouths
of paleontologists.
The Ediacaran fauna derive their name from their most notable dis-
covery site, the Ediacaran Hills in the outback of southeastern Australia.
These fauna date from late Precambrian time, a period that the Interna-
tional Union of Geological Sciences has recently renamed the “Ediacaran
period.”
1 Since geologists used to call the last period of Precambrian time
the “Vendian period,” paleontologists also refer to the Ediacaran fauna as
the Vendian fauna or biota (see Fig.
1.6). Paleontologists have made ad-
ditional discoveries of Edicaran- or Vendian-era creatures in England,
Newfoundland, the White Sea in northwestern Russia, and the Namibian
desert in southern Africa, suggesting a near worldwide distribution. Al-
though these fossils were originally dated to between 700 and 640 million
years old, volcanic ash beds both below and above the Namibian site have

80
DARWIN’S DOUBT
recently provided more accurate radiometric dates. These studies fix the
date for the first appearance of the Ediacaran fauna at about 570-565 mil-
lion years ago, and the last appearance at the Cambrian boundary about
543 million years ago, or about 13 million years before the onset of the
Cambrian explosion itself.
2
The
late Precambrian-era sediments around the world have yielded
four main types of fossils, all of which are dated between about 570 and
FIGURE 4.1
Examples of enigmatic Ediacaran
fossils: Dickinsonia, Spriggina, and Charnia. Fossil
photos in Figures 4.1a and 4.1b courtesy Peterson, K.
J., Cotton,
J. A., Gehling,
J. G., and
Pisani, D., “The Ediacaran Emergence of Bilaterians: Congruence Between the Genetic
and the Geological Fossil Records,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B ,
2008, 363 (1496): 1435-43, Figure 2, by permission of the Royal Society.
Figure 4.1a: Artist depiction of Dickinsonia {left) and photograph of Dickinsonia
fossil (right).
Figure 4.1b: Artist depiction of
Spriggina (left) and photograph of
Spriggina fossil (right).
Figure 4.1c: Artist depiction of Charnia
(left), and photograph of Charnia fossil
(right). Courtesy Wikimedia Commons,
user Smith609.

The Not Missing Fossils?
81
543 million years ago. The first group consists of the Precambrian sponges
mentioned in the previous chapter. These animals first arose about 570 to
565 million years ago.
The second is the distinctive group of fossils from the Ediacaran Hills.
The creatures fossilized there include such well-known forms as the flat,
air mattress-like body of Dickinsonia ; the enigmatic Spriggina, with
its
elongated and segmented body and possible head shield; and the frond-
like Charnia
(see Fig.
4.1). These organisms were at least mostly soft-
bodied and are large enough to identify with the naked eye.
The third group includes what are called trace fossils, the possible re-
mains of animal activity such as tracks, burrows, and fecal pellets. Some
paleontologists have attributed these trace fossils to ancient worms.
The fourth group is the fossils of what may be primitive mollusks, a
possibility that received support from a recent discovery in the
cliffs
along the White Sea in northwestern Russia. There, Russian
scientists
have discovered thirty-five distinctive specimens of a possible mollusk
called Kimberella, probably a simple animal form. These new White Sea
specimens, dated to 550 million years ago, suggest that Kimberella “had a
strong [though not hard], limpet-like shell, crept along the sea floor, and
resembled a mollusk.”
3 Paleontologist Douglas Erwin, of the Smithsonian
Institution, has commented:
“It’s the first animal that you can convinc-
ingly demonstrate is more complicated than a flatworm.”4 Additionally,
seafloor tracks from Precambrian sediments in both Canada and Aus-
tralia have been attributed to mollusks, since the tracks resemble what
might have been left by a row of small teeth on the tongue-like ribbon
of some mollusks as they scraped food particles off the seafloor. In this
case, Kimberella may well have been the track maker.
5 The authors of the
original descriptive paper in Nature, Mikhail Fedonkin, from the Russian
Academy of Sciences, and Benjamin Waggoner, then at the University of
California at Berkeley, conclude as much and suggest that such creatures
“began to diversify before the beginning of the Cambrian.”6 Paleontolo-
gists, however, are still weighing the evidence.
7
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE EDIACARAN
So do either the remains of the specific organisms from the Ediacaran
Hills or the Ediacaran or Vendian biota as a whole solve the problem of

82
DARWIN’S DOUBT
the Cambrian explosion? Do these exotic forms represent a kind of fuse
to the Cambrian explosion that eliminates the need to explain the rapid
emergence of novel body plans and forms of animal life? There are many
good reasons to doubt this idea.
First, with the exception of sponges and the possible exception of Kim-
berella, the body plans of visibly fossilized organisms (as opposed to trace
fossils) bear no clear relationship to any of the organisms that appear in
the Cambrian explosion (or thereafter).
8 The most noted Ediacaran organ-
isms such as Dickinsonia, Spriggina, and Charnia do not have an obvi-
ous head, a mouth, bilateral symmetry (see below), a gut, or sense organs
such as eyes. Some paleontologists question whether these organisms even
belong in the animal kingdom.
Dickinsonia, for example, has been interpreted by University of Oregon
paleontologist Gregory Retallack as having “fungal-lichen” affinities, since
its mode of fossil preservation “is comparable not with that of soft-bodied
jellyfish, worms, and cnidarians, but with the fossil record of fungi and
lichens.” Dickinsonia’s taxonomic position, Retallack notes, has long been
an unsolved puzzle.
“Biological
affinities of Dickinsonia remain prob-
lematic,” he writes, since it has been “variously considered a polychaete,
turbellarian or annelid worm, jellyfish, polyp, xenophyophoran protist,
lichen or mushroom.” 9
Similar disputes have characterized attempts to classify Spriggina. In
1976, Martin Glaessner, the first paleontologist to study the Ediacaran in
detail, described Spriggina as a possible annelid polychaete worm based
largely upon
its segmented body. Nevertheless, Simon Conway Morris
later rejected that hypothesis because Spriggina shows no evidence of the
distinguishing “chaetes,” leg-like bristled protrusions that polychaete
worms possess. Glaessner himself later repudiated his original hypoth-
esis that Spriggina was ancestral to polychaetes, noting that Spriggina
“cannot be considered as a primitive polychaete, having none of the pos-
sible ancestral characters indicated ... by specialists on the systematics
and evolution of this group.”
10
In 1981, paleontologist Sven Jorgen Birket-Smith produced a recon-
struction of a Spriggina
fossil showing that
it possessed a head and
legs similar to those of trilobites, though examinations of subsequent
Spriggina specimens have shown no evidence of it possessing limbs of
any kind.
11 In 1984, Glaessner weighed in on this discussion as well.

The Not Missing Fossils
?
83
He argued that
“Spriggina shows no specific characters of the arthro-
pods, particularly of the trilobites.”
12 He also noted that the body seg-
mentation of Spriggina, and “its known appendages are at the level of
polychaete annelids”
13 (although, as noted, by this time he had rejected
Spriggina as a possible polychaete ancestor). Instead, he proposed that
Spriggina represented a side branch on the animal tree of life—one that
resulted, “metaphorically” perhaps, in “an unsuccessful attempt to make
an arthropod.”
In a presentation to the Geological Society of America in 2003, geolo-
gist Mark McMenamin revived the idea that Spriggina might represent
a trilobite ancestor. He argued that several features present in Spriggina
fossils are comparable to those in trilobites such as “the presence of
genal spines” and an
effaced head or “cephalic
region.”
14 Neverthe-
less, many Ediacaran experts, including McMenamin, have also noted
that Spriggina specimens show no evidence of eyes, limbs, mouths, or
anuses, most of which are known from fossil trilobites. 15 Other paleon-
tologists remain skeptical about whether Spriggina does in fact exhibit
genal spines, noting that good specimens seem to show relatively smooth
edges with no protruding spines.
16 In addition, analysis of the best speci-
mens of Spriggina shows that it does not exhibit bilateral symmetry, un-
dermining earlier attempts to classify
it as a bilaterian animal, and by
implication an arthropod.
17 Instead, Spriggina exhibits something called
“glide symmetry” in which the body segments on either side of its mid-
line are offset rather than aligned.
18 As geologist Loren Babcock of Ohio
State University notes, “The zipper-like body plans of some Ediacaran
(Proterozoic) animals such as Dickinsonia and Spriggina involve right
and left halves that are not perfect mirror images of each other.”
19 The
lack of such symmetry, a distinctive feature of all bilaterian animals,
and the absence in Spriggina specimens of many other distinguishing
features of trilobites, has left the classification of this enigmatic organ-
ism uncertain.
Paleontologists James Valentine, Douglas Erwin, and David Jablonski
distill the confusing welter of conflicting views about the Ediacaran fos-
sils: “Although the soft-bodied fossils that appear about 565 million years
ago are animal-like, their classifications are hotly debated. In just the
past few years these fossils have been viewed as protozoans; as lichens;
as close relatives of the cnidarians; as a sister group to cnidarians plus

84
DARWIN'S DOUBT
all other animals; as representatives of more advanced, extinct phyla;
and as representatives of a new kingdom entirely separate from the ani-
mals .”20 What’s more, Valentine, Erwin, and Jablonski note that those
paleontologists who do regard the Ediacaran fauna as animals rarely
classify them the same way, underscoring their lack of clear affinities
to any known animal groups. As they note, “Still other specialists have
parceled the fauna out among living phyla, with some assigned to the
Cnidaria and others to the flatworms, annelids, arthropods and echino-
derms .”21 The uncertain standing of these fossilized forms is partly due
to their early extinction, but
it also stems from an absence of defining
characteristics shared with known groups. They conclude: “This confus-
ing state of affairs arose because these body fossils do not tend to share
definitive anatomical details with modern groups, and thus the assign-
ments must be based on vague similarities of overall shape and form, a
method that has frequently proved misleading in other cases .” 22
Other leading paleontologists also doubt that the Cambrian animals
descended from these Ediacaran forms. In a phylogenetic diagram show-
ing the evolutionary relationship of Precambrian and Cambrian fossils,
Oxford biologists Alan Cooper and Richard Fortey depict the Ediacaran
fauna as lying on a line of descent separate from the Cambrian animals
rather than being ancestral to them .
23 In another paper, Fortey asserts that
the beginning of the Cambrian “saw the sudden appearance in the fossil
record of almost all the main types of animals (phyla) that
still domi-
nate the biota today.” He concedes that there are a variety of fossils in
older strata, but insist that “they are either very small (such as bacteria and
algae) or their relationships to the living fauna are highly contentious, as
is the case with the famous soft-bodied fossils from the late Precambrian
Pound Quartzite, Ediacara, South Australia .”24
Similarly, paleontologist Andrew Knoll and biologist Sean B. Carroll
have argued: “It is genuinely difficult to map the characters of Ediacaran
fossils onto the body plans of living invertebrates .” 25 Although many pa-
leontologists initially showed interest in the possibility that the Cambrian
animal forms might have evolved from the Ediacaran organisms, pa-
leontologist Peter Ward explains that “later study cast doubt on the affin-
ity between these ancient remains preserved in sandstones [the Australian
Ediacaran] and living creatures of today” (that
is, animals representing
phyla that first arose in the Cambrian).
26 As Nature recently noted, if the

The Not Missing Fossils?
85
Ediacaran fauna “were animals, they bore little or no resemblance to any
other creatures, either fossil or extant.”27
This absence of clear affinities has led an increasing number of pa-
leontologists to reject ancestor-descendant relationships between all but
(at most) a few of the Ediacaran and Cambrian fauna. Nevertheless, some
have suggested that trace fossils may establish a link. In an authoritative
2011 paper in the journal Science, Douglas Erwin and colleagues described
the discovery of Ediacaran trace fossils consisting of surface tracks, bur-
rows, fecal pellets, and feeding trails, which, they argue, though small,
could only have been made by animals such as worms with a relatively
high degree of complexity. 28 On the basis of these findings, Erwin and
other paleontologists have argued that these trace fossils suggest the exis-
tence of organisms with a head and tail, nervous systems, a muscular body
wall allowing creeping or burrowing, and a gut with mouth and anus. 29
Other paleontologists suggest that these characteristics may indicate the
presence of a Precambrian mollusk or a worm phylum. 30
Graham Budd, a British paleontologist who works at Uppsala Univer-
sity in Sweden, and others, have disputed these associations. Budd and
geologist colleague Soren Jensen argue that many alleged trace fossils ac-
tually show evidence of inorganic origin: “There are numerous reports of
older trace fossils, but most can be immediately shown to represent either
inorganic sedimentary structures or metaphytes [land plants], or alterna-
tively they have been misdated.”
31 Still others have suggested that surface
tracks and trails could have been left by mobile single-celled organisms,
including a known form of a giant deep-sea protist that leaves bilaterian-
like impressions. As one paper explains, “Some such traces date back to
1.5 billion to 1.8 billion years ago, which outdates even the boldest claims
of the time of origin of animal multi-cellularity and forces researchers to
contemplate the possibility of an inorganic or bacterial origin.” 32
Even the most favorable interpretations of these trace fossils suggest
that they indicate the presence of no more than two animal body plans
(of largely unknown characteristics). Thus, the Ediacaran record falls far
short of establishing the existence of the wide variety of transitional inter-
mediates that a Darwinian view of life’s history requires. The Cambrian
explosion attests to the first appearance of organisms representing at least
twenty phyla and many more subphyla and classes, each manifesting dis-
tinctive body plans. In a best case, the Ediacaran forms represent possible

86
DARWIN’S DOUBT
ancestors for, at most, four distinct Cambrian body plans, even counting
those documented only by trace fossils. This leaves the vast majority of
the Cambrian phyla with no apparent ancestors in the Precambrian rocks
(i.e., at least nineteen of the twenty-three phyla present in the Cambrian
have no representative in Precambrian strata). 33
Third, even if representatives of four animal phyla were present in the
Ediacaran period,
it does not follow that these forms were necessarily
transitional or intermediate to the Cambrian animals. The Precambrian
sponges (phylum Porifera), for example, were quite similar to their Cam-
brian brethren, thus demonstrating, not a gradual transformation from a
simpler precursor or the presence of an ancestor common to many forms,
but quite possibly only an earlier first appearance of a known Cambrian
form. The same may be true of whatever kind of worm may be attested by
Precambrian tracks and burrows.
Moreover, even assuming, as some evolutionary biologists do, 34 that
later Cambrian animals had a sponge-like Precambrian ancestor, the gap
in complexity as measured by the number of cell types alone, to say noth-
ing of the specific anatomical structures and distinct modes of body plan
organization that are present in later animals but not in sponges, leaves a
massive discontinuity in the fossil record that requires explanation (much
like the morphological gap between Spriggina and actual arthropods).
AN EDIACARAN MINI-EXPLOSION
The Ediacaran
fossils themselves provide evidence of a puzzling leap
in biological complexity, though not one nearly great enough (or of the
right kind) to account for the Cambrian explosion. Before organisms like
Kimberella, Dickinsonia, and sponges appeared, the only living forms
documented in the fossil record for over 3 billion years were single-celled
organisms and colonial algae. Producing sponges, worms, and mollusks
from single-celled organisms is a little like transforming a spinning top
into a bicycle. The bicycle isn’t remotely as complex as the automobile sit-
ting beside it, but it represents an enormous leap in technological sophis-
tication over the spinning top. Likewise, although the humble Ediacaran
biota look simple beside most of the Cambrian animals, they represent an
enormous leap in functional complexity over the single-celled organisms
and colonial algae that preceded them.

The Not Missing Fossils?
87
Thus, the Ediacaran biota attest to a separate sudden increase in biologi-
cal complexity within a short window of geological time (about 15 million
years), following roughly 3 billion years in which only single-celled organ-
isms inhabited the earth. 35 This leap in complexity, in a relatively short
span of geological time, may well exceed the explanatory resources of
natural selection working on random mutations. We will return to that
question in Part Two.
The Ediacaran fossils therefore do not solve the problem of the sudden
increase in biological form and complexity during the Cambrian. Instead,
they represent an earlier, if less dramatic, manifestation of the same kind
of problem. To biology’s “big bang,”36 the Ediacaran biota add a significant
“pow.” As paleobiologist Kevin Peterson, of Dartmouth College, and his col-
leagues note, these fauna represent “an apparent quantum leap in ecological
complexity as compared with the ‘boring billions’ [of years] that character-
ize Earth before the Ediacaran,” even if these organisms are “still relatively
simple when compared with the Cambrian,” which they characterize as an-
other “quantum leap in organismal and ecological complexity.”37
Many paleontologists now refer to the Ediacaran radiation as an ex-
plosion in
its own right. 38
This Precambrian “pow” makes the problem
of fossil discontinuity only more acute, since credible intermediates lead-
ing to the Ediacaran layers are completely nonexistent in the even more
sparsely populated strata beneath them.
Finally, even if one regards the appearance of the Ediacaran fossils as
evidence of a “fuse” leading to the Cambrian explosion as some have pro-
posed, 39 the total time encompassed by the Ediacaran and Cambrian ra-
diations
still remains exceedingly brief relative to the expectations and
requirements of a modern neo-Darwinian view of the history of life. As
I will explain in more detail in Chapter 8, neo-Darwinism is the modern
version of Darwin’s theory that invokes random genetic changes called
mutations as the source of much of the new variation upon which natu-
ral selection acts. Like classical Darwinism, the neo-Darwinian mecha-
nism requires great stretches of time to produce novel biological form and
structure. Yet, current studies in geochronology suggest that only 40 to 50
million years elapsed between the beginning of the Ediacaran radiation
(570-565 million years ago) and the end of the Cambrian explosion (525-
520 million years ago).40 To anyone unfamiliar with the equations ofpopu-
lation genetics by which neo-Darwinian evolutionary biologists estimate

88
DARWIN’S DOUBT
how much morphological change is likely to occur in a given period of
time, 40 to 50 million years may seem like an eternity. But empirically
derived estimates of the rate at which mutations accumulate imply that 40
to 50 million years does not constitute anything like enough time to build
the necessary anatomical novelties that arise in the Cambrian and Edia-
caran periods. I will describe this problem in more detail in Chapter 12.
Until recently, radiometric studies had estimated the duration of the
Cambrian radiation itself at 40 million years, a period of time so brief,
geologically speaking, that paleontologists had already dubbed it an “ex-
plosion.” The relative suddenness of the Cambrian explosion, even on the
earlier measure of its duration, had already raised serious questions about
the adequacy of the neo-Darwinian mechanism; consequently, it had also
raised questions about whether a Darwinian understanding of the his-
tory of life could be reconciled with the Cambrian and Precambrian fossil
record. Thus, treating the Ediacaran and the Cambrian radiations as one
continuous evolutionary event (itself an unrealistically generous assump-
tion) only returns the problem to its earlier (pre-zircon redating) status.
For all these reasons, the late Precambrian fossils have not solved, but
instead have deepened, the mystery of the origin of animal form. And few
leading Cambrian paleontologists, of whom I was aware on that Septem-
ber evening in 2009 while preparing to answer questions at the University
of Oklahoma, thought otherwise.
EDIACARAN EXOTICA
So what about the claim that certain exotic Ediacaran fossils are plausible
ancestors to the Cambrian animal forms, even if better-known Ediacaran
forms such as Dickinsonia, Charnia, and Spriggina are probably not? Did
these exotic forms solve the mystery of the Cambrian explosion?
Only a few years before my visit to the University of Oklahoma, I had
written a scientific review article with research help from several col-
leagues, including a paleontologist and a marine biologist.
41 (The latter
was Paul Chien, who helped discover the Precambrian sponge embryos
discussed in the previous chapter.) In our review
article,
I explained
many of the problems with treating the Ediacaran as transitional inter-
mediates discussed above. In the process of doing the research for that
article, my colleagues and I encountered few paleontologists who thought

The Not Missing Fossils?
89
that Parvancorina , Arkarua (see Fig. 4.2), or Vernanimalcula represented
definitive ancestors of the Cambrian bilaterians, arthropods, or echino-
derms. Could we have missed something?
In fact, leading Cambrian authorities have dismissed associations be-
tween these odd fossil forms and the Cambrian animals. Nevertheless, in
his talk before the showing of our film, the local professor from the Uni-
versity ofOklahoma asserted that the rather indistinct fossil form found in
the Ediacaran Hills called Parvancorina represented a plausible ancestor
of the arthropods. Some have described Parvancorina as a shield-shaped
fossil form with a raised anchor-shaped ridge impressed atop it, bearing a
superficial resemblance in its shape to that of a trilobite—thus, the claim
that it might have represented an early arthropod. Yet leading Cambrian
paleontologists dispute this association. Cambrian expert James Valentine
has argued that Parvancorina is not convincing as an arthropod ancestor,
and for good reason. Parvancorina fossils lack a head, jointed limbs, and
compound eyes,
all distinctive features of arthropods. Thus, Valentine
noted that Parvancorina fossils “have not been shown to share derived
features” with arthropods.42
FIGURE 4.2
Figure 4.2a
(left): Photograph of Arkarua fossil, courtesy Taylor & Francis, Ltd. Figure
4.2b
(right): Photograph of Parvancorina fossil, courtesy Peterson, K.
J., Cotton,
J. A.,
Gehling, J. G., and Pisani, D., “The Ediacaran Emergence of Bilaterians: Congruence be-
tween the Genetic and the Geological Fossil Records,” Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B, 2008, 363 (1496): 1435-43, Figure 2, by permission of the Royal Society.

90
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Valentine makes much the same point about the small disc-like imprint
called Arkarua, one of the other Ediacaran forms cited by the University
of Oklahoma professor that night at the Sam Noble Museum. Valentine
points out that it too lacks many distinctive features of the animal phylum
to which it is typically assigned. Indeed, those who propose Arkarua as an
ancestor of the Cambrian animals usually claim that it represents an early
echinoderm
(as the professor in Oklahoma did). Echinoderms include
starfish, sand dollars, and other animals with five-fold symmetry extend-
ing from a central body cavity.43 Some have perceived five tiny segmented
divisions within the circular impressions left by Arkarua, making them
seem roughly similar to some modern echinoderms. But that similarity
has proven superficial at best. Other paleontologists observe that Arkarua
lacks a stereom, or water vascular system, a definitive diagnostic feature of
echinoderms; thus, its “echinoderm-specific features are not readily vis-
ible.”44 Valentine has argued that, absent such telltale features, the rela-
tionship ofArkarua to echinoderms “remains uncertain.’*
45
In the case of Vernanimalcula, the story is more complicated but equally
problematic. Vernanimalcula
is the name that Chinese paleontologists
gave to an imprint in phosphorite sediment found in the Doushantuo For-
mation in 2004. They found the structure in 580- to 600-million-year-old
rocks, making the impression even older than the Ediacaran strata. The
paleontologist David Bottjer of the University of Southern California, and
some Chinese paleontologists (at least, initially), speculated that the Vern-
animalcula imprint might be the remains of an early bilaterian.46
Recall that bilaterians are animals whose parts found on one side of
the body midline are also found in mirror image on the other (as opposed
to, say, a radially symmetric animal47
). Figure 4.3 shows a picture of the
structure of Vernanimalcula first found in the Doushantuo Phosphorite
formation. Some paleontologists think that Vernanimalcula exhibits such
bilateral symmetry and thus might be ancestral to the bilaterian animals
that later first appeared in the Cambrian period.
But problems have emerged with this argument. First, the form of the
Vernanimalcula does not resemble any specific bilaterian animal. In addi-
tion, recent scientific analyses of these remains have questioned whether
this imprint preserves the remains of animals and, therefore, bilaterians
at all. For example, in 2004, Stefan Bengtson and Graham Budd, two pa-
leontologists and Cambrian experts, published a detailed chemical and

The Not Missing Fossils?
91
FIGURE 4.3
Photograph of Vern-
animalcula fossil. Courtesy
American Association for
the Advancement ofScience,
from Chen, J.-Y., Bottjer,
D.
J., Oliveri, P., Dornbos,
S. Q., Gao, F., Ruffins, S.,
“Small Bilaterian Fossils
from 40 to 55 Million Years
Before the Cambrian,”
Science, 305 (July 9, 2004):
218-22, Figure lb. Reprinted
with permission from AAAS.
microscopic analysis of these fossils in the journal Science.48 They con-
cluded that the structures preserved in phosphorite rocks had undergone
significant alteration by so-called diagenesis and taphonomic processes.
Diagenesis refers mainly to processes of chemical alteration that occur
after sediments are deposited and before sedimentary rocks are fully hard-
ened, or “lithified .” Taphonomic processes are those that alter once living
organisms after burial and preservation in sediments.
Based on their microscopic analysis, Bengtson and Budd rejected the
hypothesis that these structures preserved the remains of an animal form.
Instead, they argued that the phosphorite imprint exhibited distinctive
features of the chemically altered remains of one-celled microfossils
microfossils that had been encrusted with layers of chemical residue from
various diagenetic processes.49
More recently, in 2012, Bengtson and three other colleagues published
another paper sharply critical of the view that Vernanimalcula represents
an ancestor of the bilaterian animals—or even an animal. They show that
the “structures key to animal identity are effects of mineralization that do
not represent biological tissues.” For this reason they conclude: “There is
no evidential basis for interpreting Vernanimalcula as an animal, let alone
a bilaterian.”50
Though the paper was titled “A Merciful Death for the ‘Earliest Bilat-
erian,
5 Vernanimalcula,” the authors were anything but merciful in wield-
ing their arguments. Their article upbraided David
J. Bottjer, the main
paleontologist who has promoted the interpretation of Vernanimalcula

92
DARWIN’S DOUBT
as a bilaterian ancestor, for seeing what he wanted to see and disregard-
ing the clear evidence of nonbiological mineralization. In a 2005 Scientific
American article, Bottjer interpreted Vernanimalcula as the “oldest fossil
animal with a bilaterian body plan yet discovered.” In that article, Bottjer
claimed that Vernanimalcula confirmed the “suspicion that complex ani-
mals have a much deeper root in time” and “that the Cambrian was less of
an explosion and more of a flowering of animal life.”
51 After unequivocally
rejecting Bottjer’s interpretation on the basis of their geochemical analy-
sis, Bengtson and his coauthors rebuked Bottjer in rather personal terms:
It is likely that the fossils referred to [as] Vernanimalcula were inter-
preted as bilaterians because this was
.
.
.
the explicit quarry of its au-
thors. Ifyou knowfrom the beginning not only what you are lookingfor,
but what you are going to find, you willfind it, whether or not it exists.
As Richard Feynman (1974)famously remarked: “The first principle
is that you must notfool yourself—and you are the easiest person to
fool.”
.
.
. Once you havefooled yourselfyou will fool other scientists.
52
Bengtson and his colleagues insist that however much a few paleontolo-
gists such as Bottjer might have wanted to “heap” “evolutionary signifi-
cance” on Vernanimalcula in order to relieve their cognitive dissonance
about the Cambrian explosion, the evidence does not bear the weight of
interpretation that had been placed upon it. Thus, they conclude Vernani-
malcula should be “laid to a merciful rest,” since the interpretation of it
had “taken on a life of its own, a life it never had.”
53
A DEEPER PROBLEM
Though back in 2009, Jonathan Wells and
I didn’t know about the most
recent critical analysis of Vernanimalcula s pretentions, we did know that
many leading paleontologists had
rejected attempts
to
identify
Vern-
animalcula as an animal form. Thus, during the question-and-answer
period following the film, Jonathan Wells explained why these and other
obscure and enigmatic Precambrian fossils (or imprints) failed to qualify
as convincing precursors to any of the Cambrian animals, citing the work
of leading authorities in paleontology. In each case, he noted that similari-
ties between the Ediacaran forms and later Cambrian animals had proven

The Not Missing Fossils?
93
superficial, because the Ediacaran forms lacked many key diagnostic fea-
tures of specific Cambrian phyla.
At the same time, as
I later reflected on the lecture,
I recognized a
deeper problem with attempts to resolve the mystery of the Cambrian ex-
plosion by pointing to a few Precambrian fossils. Many defenders of the
Darwinian picture of the history of life seemed to assume that the dis-
covery of any alleged Precambrian animal forms, however implausible as
ancestors of specific Cambrian animals or however sparsely distributed in
the vast sequences of Precambrian strata, would solve the mystery of the
Cambrian explosion, especially if these forms exemplified some abstractly
perceived commonality such as bilateral symmetry.
To see what’s wrong with this way of thinking, imagine an ambitious
distance swimmer claiming that
it would be possible to swim between
California and Hawaii over a period of many months or years because of
the small islands that provide way stations where he could eat, rest, and
overnight at each stage along his marathon journey. But instead of show-
ing that an archipelago dotting the route between California and Hawaii
at reasonably accessible intervals actually exists, he points to a couple of
barren atolls in the South Pacific far from the most likely course to Hawaii.
Clearly, in that case, the claims of our intrepid hypothetical swimmer
would not be credible. In a similar way, the claims of those who assert that
a few isolated and anatomically enigmatic forms of life in the Precambrian
solve the problem of the Cambrian explosion also lack credibility.
To appreciate another aspect of this problem,
let’s revisit the claims
about Vernanimalcula as a possible ancestor of all the bilaterian phyla. On
the one hand, for such a form to qualify as the ancestor common to a large
number of specific phyla (such as the many bilaterian phyla that arise in
the Cambrian), it must exhibit the basic bilaterian characteristics such as
bilateral symmetry and what is called “triploblasty,” the presence of three
distinct tissue layers (endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm). At the same
time, a viable candidate for the role of common ancestor cannot by defi-
nition manifest any of the differentiating characteristics that distinguish
the individual Cambrian phyla and their respective body plans from each
other. For example, any bilaterian that manifests the characteristic exo-
skeleton of, say, an arthropod cannot also qualify as a plausible ancestor
of a chordate, because chordates have internal skeletons or notochords.

94
DARWIN’S DOUBT
The logic of these distinct body designs precludes sharing both anatomi-
cal characteristics. For this reason, any hypothetical bilaterian common
ancestor could only have existed as a kind of lowest anatomical common
denominator, or what evolutionary biologists call a “ground plan,” having
only those few features that are common to all of the animal forms that
allegedly evolved from it.
But this creates a dilemma. If a fossilized form is simple enough to qual-
ify as the common ancestor of later highly differentiated bilaterian phyla,
then it will necessarily lack most of the important distinguishing anatomi-
cal features of those specific phyla. That means that all the interesting an-
atomical novelties that differentiate one phylum from another must arise
along the separate lineages branching out from the alleged common ances-
tor well after its origin in the fossil record. Heads, jointed limbs, compound
eyes, guts, anuses, antennae, notochords, stereoms, lophophores (a tentacled
feeding organ), and numerous other distinguishing characteristics of many
different animals must come later on many distinct lines of descent. Yet the
gradual evolutionary origin of these characteristics is not documented in
the Precambrian fossil record. These characteristics do not appear until they
arise suddenly in the Cambrian explosion.
For
this reason,
indistinct
fossils such
as
Vernanimalcula—even
if
we take them as representing a common ancestor of many bilaterians
document little of the Darwinian story of the history ofanimal life. Hugely
significant gaps in the fossil record would still remain, because the Pre-
cambrian fossil record simply does not document the gradual emergence
of the crucial distinguishing characteristics of the Cambrian animals. The
important anatomical novelties that define the individual Cambrian phyla
as well as their first clear representatives arise as suddenly as ever.
To say that a form such as Vernanimalcula, or any of the other relatively
indistinct Ediacaran forms, solves the problem of the missing Precam-
brian fossil record would be a bit like saying that a metal cylinder demon-
strates all the steps involved in the construction of a toaster, automobile,
submarine, or jet airplane simply because all these technological objects
utilize “metal enclosures.” It’s true that each of these complex systems uses
metal enclosures, but the presence of an enclosed metal surface is only a
necessary, and not nearly a sufficient, condition of the origin of these vari-
ous technological systems. Similarly, finding a simple but otherwise un-
adorned bilaterally symmetric form of life would hardly solve the problem

The Not Missing Fossils?
95
of fossil discontinuity, because it would not by itself document the emer-
gence of the unique characteristics of the individual bilaterian animals.
This paradox is well known to paleontologists who work on the Cam-
brian
radiation. Charles Marshall and James Valentine,
for
instance,
describe the difficulty of attempting to characterize an “undiagnostic”
group, by which they mean a possible ancestral “stem” group that lacks
the specialized characteristics of its presumptive evolutionary progeny.
They write:
When trying to unravel the origins of the animal phyla ... the
hardest to examine is the phase between the actual cladogenic origin
of a phylum and the time that it acquired its first phylum-specific
characteristic(s). Even ifwe have fossilsfrom this phase in a phylum’s
history, we will not be able to prove their kinships at the level ofphyla .
5,1
Thus, even
if Vernanimalcula,
or some other
fossil form, were simple
enough and animal-like enough to qualify as a so-called ur (or original)
form of animal life,
it would paradoxically, for just that reason, be inca-
pable of establishing itself as an unequivocal common ancestor of some
specific Cambrian phylum.
And there’s no
relief in the other direction.
If an alleged ancestral
form manifests the distinguishing features of one of the specific Cam-
brian phyla— if, for example, Vernanimalcula or some other isolated form
presented a convincing set of distinctively arthropod or chordate or echi-
noderm characteristics, then the very presence of those features would
necessarily preclude the possibility of that specific animal form repre-
senting the common ancestor of all other Cambrian forms. The more an
animal form manifests the characteristics of one phylum or group within
the phylum, the less plausible
it becomes as the ancestor of all the other
animal phyla.
And that is the dilemma in a nutshell. Highly differentiated and com-
plex Precambrian forms by themselves could not have been ancestors
common
to
all
the Cambrian
phyla; whereas
undifferentiated forms
simple enough to have been ancestral to all the Cambrian phyla leave no
evidence, by themselves, of the gradual emergence of the complex ana-
tomical novelties that define the Cambrian animals. Either way—whether
the few alleged Precambrian ancestors are viewed as simple and relatively
undifferentiated or complex and highly differentiated—the fossil record,

96
DARWIN’S DOUBT
given
its otherwise pervasive pattern of discontinuity, does not establish
the gradual evolution of numerous anatomical and morphological novel-
ties. Instead, only a true series of transitional intermediates in which the
fossil record documents both the existence of an original animal form and
the gradual appearance of the key distinguishing anatomical features and
novelties (and the Cambrian animals themselves) would remedy this de-
ficiency. And yet that is precisely what the Precambrian fossil record has
failed to document.
As Graham Budd and Soren Jensen state, “The known [Precambrian/
Cambrian]
fossil record has not been misunderstood, and there are no
convincing bilaterian candidates known from the fossil record until just
before the beginning of the Cambrian (c. 543 Ma), even though there are
plentiful sediments older than this that should reveal them.” 55 Thus they
conclude, “The expected Darwinian pattern of a deep fossil history of the
bilaterians,
potentially showing their gradual development,
stretching
hundreds of millions of years into the Precambrian, has singularly failed
to materialize.”
56
DILEMMA ON DISPLAY
During the question-and-answer session that followed the screening of
Darwin’s Dilemma, none of the University of Oklahoma Ph.D. students or
science faculty who attended the museum-sponsored lecture challenged
my colleague Jonathan Wells when he explained why leading paleontolo-
gists do not think the exotic Precambrian forms cited in the lecture were
ancestors of Cambrian forms. This nonreaction seemed a little odd given
the stress the museum’s own expert had laid on these claims, and given
that he had made these claims rather emphatically in the same building to
many of the same people just three hours earlier.
On our flight out of town the next day, Jonathan Wells told me some-
thing that cast our experience there in an even odder light. He’d had a
chance to walk around the Sam Noble Science Museum after the lecture
and before our event. He discovered that the museum has a display that
vividly illustrates the severity of what we called Darwin’s dilemma. Wells
recorded some of his observations on his return to Seattle. One part of the
account ofwhat he saw while touring the museum’s own display about the
Cambrian explosion is worth quoting at length:

The Not Missing Fossils
?
97
[The display] seemedfactually accuratefor the most part, emphasizing
(among other things) that many of the Cambrian explosion fossils were
soft-bodied—which puts the lie to the common explanation that their
precursors are absentfrom the fossil record because they lacked hard
parts. The exhibit also made it clear that the Ediacaran fossils went
extinct at the end of the pre-Cambrian, so (with afew possible excep-
tions) they could not have been ancestral to the Cambrian phyla. One
particular panel in the exhibit caught my attention. It showed over a
dozen of the Cambrian phyla at the top of a branching tree with a single
trunk, but none of the branch points corresponded to a real living thing.
Instead, the branch points were artificial technical categories such as
“Ecdysozoa,” “Lophotrochozoa,” “Deuterostomia,” and “Bilateria.” The
artificiality of the branch points emphasized that the branching-tree
pattern imposed on the fossil evidence was itselfan artificial construct.
So, after all the controversy,
it turned out that the museum that had
sponsored the lecture denying Darwin’s Cambrian dilemma itself has an
excellent display indicating that the expected ancestral forms of the Cam-
brian animals—the very ones that Darwin hoped to find a hundred and
fifty years ago—are still missing from the Precambrian fossil record. But
then why would the museum sponsor the presentation that it did? It’s hard
to say, I suppose, but I’ve seen this dynamic before in discussions about
Darwinian
evolution.
Evolutionary biologists
will acknowledge prob-
lems to each other in scientific settings that they will deny or minimize in
public, lest they aid and abet the dread “creationists” and others they see
as advancing the cause of unreason. Perhaps just our presence on campus
raising questions about contemporary Darwinism made them feel defen-
sive on behalf of “science.” It’s an understandable, if ironic, human reac-
tion, of course, but one that in the end deprives the public of access to what
scientists actually know. It also perpetuates the impression of evolutionary
biology as a science that has settled all the important questions at just the
time when many new and exciting questions—about the origin of animal
form, for example—are coming to the fore.

5
THE GENES TELL
THE STORY?
Reconstructing the history of life has a lot in common with detective
work. Neither detectives nor evolutionary biologists can directly observe
the events in the past that interest them most. Detectives typically did not
see the crime occur. Evolutionary biologists did not witness the origin of
animals or other groups of organisms. Yet this limitation doesn’t mean
either group of investigators lacks the evidence to determine with some
confidence what happened. Detectives and evolutionary biologists as well
as many other historical scientists—paleontologists, geologists, archeolo-
gists, cosmologists, and forensic scientists—do this regularly, based on
careful inference from the clues or evidence left behind.
Many evolutionary biologists have commented on the forensic nature
of their work. Here’s how Richard Dawkins puts it: “I have used the meta-
phor of a detective, coming on the scene of the crime after it is all over and
reconstructing from the surviving clues what must have happened .” 1
Perhaps the most obvious surviving traces of ancient life are fossils. But
as evolutionary biologists and paleontologists have come to realize that the
Precambrian fossil record has not furnished the confirmation that Darwin
hoped
it would, many have looked to other kinds of clues to establish the
gradual emergence of Cambrian animal life from a common ancestor.
In
this
effort, contemporary evolutionary
biologists have
followed
the example of Darwin himself. Though Darwin argued that a general
progression of simpler to more complex forms of life in the fossil record

The Genes Tell the Story?
99
meshed nicely with his theory, he was acutely aware that the discontinuity
of the fossil record, particularly as evidenced in Precambrian and Cam-
brian strata, did not. This is why he emphasized other types of evidence to
establish his theory of universal common descent.
In a famous chapter in On the Origin ofSpecies titled “The Mutual Af-
finities of Organic Beings,” Darwin made his case not on the basis of the
fossil evidence, but on the basis of similar anatomical structures in many
distinct organisms. He noted, for example, that the forelimbs of frogs,
horses, bats, humans, and many other vertebrates exhibited a common
five-digit (“pentadactyl”) structure or organization (see Fig. 5.1). To ex-
plain such “homologies,” as he called them, Darwin posited a vertebrate
ancestor that possessed pentadactyl limbs in rudimentary form. As a
menagerie of modern vertebrates evolved from this common ancestor,
each retained in its own way the basic pentadactyl mode of organization.
For Darwin, his theory of descent with modification from a common
A. 15AT
TJ. PofcPoi
C.
44Cfete
t>. 44UMAM
FIGURE 5.1
The common five-digit pattern of the pentadactyl limb as manifested in four modern
animals. Copyright Jody F. Sjogren. Used with permission.

100
DARWIN’S DOUBT
ancestor
explained
these
similarities
better than
the
received view
of many older nineteenth-century biologists such as Louis Agassiz or
Richard Owen, both ofwhom thought homologies reflected the common
design plan of a creative intelligence.
In reconstructing the evolutionary history of life, most evolutionary
biologists today emphasize the importance of homology. They assume
that similarities in anatomy and in the sequences of information-bearing
biomacromolecules such as DNA, RNA, and protein point strongly to a
common ancestor.
2 They also assume that the degree of difference in such
cases is on average proportional to the time elapsed since the divergence
from a common ancestor. The greater the difference in the common fea-
ture or molecular sequence, the farther back the ancestor from which the
feature or sequence arose.
Evolutionary biologists have used this approach to try to discern the evo-
lutionary history of the Cambrian animals. If the Precambrian fossil record
refuses to disclose the secrets of Precambrian evolution, so goes the think-
ing, perhaps the study of comparative anatomy and molecular homologies
will. Given the well-established problem with the fossil evidence, many
evolutionary biologists now particularly emphasize the importance of clues
from molecular genetics. As evolutionary biologist Jerry Coyne, of the Uni-
versity of Chicago, notes, “Now we have a powerful, new, and independent
way to establish ancestry: we can look directly at the genes themselves. By
sequencing the DNA of various species and measuring how similar these
sequences are, we can reconstruct their evolutionary relationships .”3
There are two aspects of this endeavor. First, by analyzing the genes
of existing animals representing phyla that first arose in the Cambrian,
scientists have attempted to establish when the common ancestor of the
Cambrian animal forms lived. This effort has generated what is known as
the “deep-divergence hypothesis,” which holds that the common ancestor
of all animal life arose long before the Cambrian explosion. Second, by an-
alyzing anatomical and molecular similarities, biologists have attempted
to reconstruct the Precambrian-Cambrian tree of life, mapping the course
of evolution during a cryptic period before the Cambrian.
Defenders of neo-Darwinism assert that these techniques have pro-
duced a coherent evolutionary picture of the early history of animal life.
They assert that clues from the realm of genetics point unequivocally to

The Genes Tell the Story
?
101
Precambrian ancestral forms and to an evolutionary history that fossils
have failed to document.
This chapter will examine what genes tell us about the alleged universal
common ancestor of all animals; the next chapter will consider whether
the analysis of genes (and other features of organisms) yield a coherent
treelike picture of the Precambrian prehistory of animal
life. Genetic
analyses have indeed revealed a trove of clues. The question
is: Do those
genetic clues establish the Precambrian ancestor and history that fossils
have failed to document, or, as sometimes occurs in criminal investiga-
tions, has there been a rush to judgment?
DEEP DIVERGENCE
Many paleontologists and evolutionary biologists now concede that the
long-sought-after Precambrian
fossils, those necessary to document
a
Darwinian account of the origin of animal life, are missing.4 Scientists are
especially candid about this when addressing each other in the technical
peer-reviewed literature. Often, however, defenders of evolutionary ortho-
doxy raise another possibility—that the common ancestor of the Cam-
brian animals has been documented after all, not by fossil evidence, but
by molecular or genetic evidence of what they call a “deep divergence” of
animal life. In making such claims, these biologists clearly privilege mo-
lecular evidence over evidence from the fossil record.
Proponents of deep divergence don’t deny that the fossil evidence has
come up short. Instead, they adopt one of the versions of the artifact hy-
pothesis to account for that missing evidence. They then argue that there
was no “explosion” of animal forms in the Cambrian, but rather a “long
fuse” of animal evolution and diversification lasting many millions of
years leading up to what only looks like an “explosion” of animal life in
the Cambrian, but this evolutionary history was hidden from the fossil
record. Indeed, they argue that molecular evidence establishes a long
period of undetected or cryptic evolution in Precambrian times, begin-
ning from a common ancestor some 600 million to 1.2 billion years ago,
depending upon which study of the molecular genetic data they cite. If
correct, the Cambrian phyla may have had many hundreds of millions of
years to evolve from a common ancestor.
5

102
DARWIN’S DOUBT
THE MOLECULAR CLOCK
Advocates of deep divergence use a method of analysis known as the
“molecular clock.” Molecular clock studies also assume that the extent to
which sequences differ in similar genes in two or more animals reflects
the amount of time that has passed since those animals began to evolve
from a common ancestor. A small difference means a short time; a big dif-
ference, a long time. To determine exactly how short or long, these stud-
ies estimate the mutation rate by analyzing genes in two species or taxa
TUB TJLOB
. UWALE, A
PLALEUTAL
.. MAMMAL
-TUB
PLATYPUi A
MOWOTPEME
MAMMAL.
C C A CTA A A C frQ
. At04t^]^ CCA CTA A AC
ft
t
!>IFFEJ>£n£E{ IN C>nA BAte teQUEVCEi
TIME
FIGURE 5.2
The idea behind the molecular clock. The two animals and their homologous gene se-
quences at the right of the figure show the molecular distance between two present-day
animals, that is, how many mutational differences have accumulated over time since they
diverged on the tree of life. The animal at the left of the figure (a mammal-like reptile) rep-
resents the common ancestor from which these animals presumably evolved. Knowing
how long ago the common ancestor (the mammal-like reptile) lived, and how many mu-
tational differences have accumulated in its descendants during that time, allows scien-
tists to calculate a mutation rate. In theory, once the mutation rate has been determined,
it can be used to calculate the divergence time of other present-day species, after their
homologous genes have been compared for differences.

The Genes Tell the Story?
103
that are thought to have evolved from an ancestor whose presence in the
fossil record can be discerned and dated accurately. For example, many
molecular-clock studies of birds and mammals are calibrated based on
the age of an early reptile thought to be the most recent common ancestor
of both.
Genetic comparisons enable evolutionary biologists
to estimate the
number of mutational changes since divergence, and dating of the strata
containing presumed fossil ancestors tells how long ago the divergence oc-
curred. Assuming that different lineages evolve at the same rate,
6 together
the two pieces of information enable evolutionary biologists to calculate a
baseline mutation rate. They can then use that rate to determine how long
ago some other pair of animals diverged from each other on the evolution-
ary tree (see Fig. 5.2).
7
Advocates of the deep-divergence hypothesis have applied this method
to analyzing similar genes, RNA molecules, or proteins in pairs of animals
belonging to phyla that first arose in the Cambrian period. In this way
they estimate how long
it took for the different animal phyla to diverge
from a common Precambrian ancestor.
DEEP AND DEEPER:
EVIDENCE FOR DEEP DIVERGENCE
In the 1990s, evolutionary biologists Gregory A. Wray, Jeffrey S. Levinton,
and Leo H. Shapiro performed a major study of Cambrian-relevant molec-
ular sequence data. In 1996, they published their results in a paper entitled
“Molecular Evidence for Deep Precambrian Divergences Among Meta-
zoan Phyla.”
8 Wray’s team compared the degree of difference between the
amino-acid sequences of seven proteins
9 derived from several different
modern animals representing five Cambrian phyla (annelids, arthropods,
mollusks, chordates, and echinoderms). They also compared the nucleo-
tide base sequences of a ribosomal RNA molecule
10 from the same animal
representatives of the same five phyla.
The Wray study concluded that the common ancestor of the animal
forms lived 1.2 billion years ago, implying that the Cambrian animals took
some 700 million years to evolve from this “deep-divergence” point before
first appearing in the fossil record. Wray and his colleagues attempted to

104
DARWIN’S DOUBT
explain the absence of fossil ancestral forms during this period of time by
postulating that Precambrian ancestors existed in exclusively soft-bodied
forms, rendering their preservation unlikely.
More recently, Douglas Erwin and several colleagues performed a study
comparing the degree of sequence difference between other genes—seven
nuclear housekeeping genes
11 and three ribosomal RNA genes
12 across 113
different species of living Metazoa. (The term “Metazoa” refers to animals
with differentiated tissue. The term “metazoan” refers to one such animal
or can be used as an adjective, as in “the metazoan phyla”) They estimated
that “the last common ancestor of all living animals arose nearly 800 mil-
lion years ago.”
13
Many similar studies affirm a very ancient or “stratigraphically deep”
divergence of the animal forms, in opposition to those who claim that the
Cambrian animals appeared suddenly within just a few million years.
14
Each of these studies affirms the gradual emergence of animal life that
most researchers expected to find on the basis of a Darwinian picture of
the history of animal life. Indeed, a major aim of the Wray study was to
challenge the view “that the animal phyla diverged in an explosion’ near
the beginning of the Cambrian period.”
15 Wray and his colleagues argue
instead that “all mean divergence time estimates between these four phyla
and chordates, based on all seven genes, substantially predate the begin-
ning of the Cambrian period.”
16 They conclude: “Our results cast doubt on
the prevailing notion that the animal phyla diverged explosively during
the Cambrian or late Vendian, and instead suggest that there was an ex-
tended period of divergence during the mid-Proterozoic, commencing
about a billion years ago.”
17
From an orthodox Darwinian point of view, the conclusions of these
studies seem almost unavoidable since (1) the neo-Darwinian mechanism
requires vast amounts of time to produce anatomical novelty and (2) such
phylogenetic analyses assume that all the animal forms descended from
a common ancestor. Many evolutionary biologists claim that clues long
hidden in DNA now confirm these Darwinian axioms and, consequently,
the existence of an extremely ancient, Precambrian ancestor of the Cam-
brian animals. As Andrew Knoll, a Harvard paleontologist, states, “The
idea that animals should have originated much earlier than we see them
in the fossil record is almost inescapable.”
18

The Genes Tell the Story?
105
REASONABLE DOUBT
Nevertheless, there is now good reason to doubt this allegedly overwhelm-
ing genetic evidence. In the idiom of our forensic metaphor, other material
witnesses (fossils) have already come forward to testify, the testimony of
the genes (and other key indicators of biological history) is grossly incon-
sistent, and that genetic testimony has come to us through a translator,
who is shaping the way the jury perceives the evidence. Let’s look at each
of these problems in turn.
Fossil Testimony
Recall that the deep-divergence hypothesis has two components. One of
them—a version of the artifact hypothesis—provides an explanation for
why the Precambrian ancestral fossils are missing. And here the deep-
divergence hypothesis first runs into trouble. As we saw in Chapter 3, there
is no currently plausible version of the artifact hypothesis. The preserva-
tion of numerous soft-bodied Cambrian animals as well as Precambrian
embryos and microorganisms undermines the idea of an extensive period
of undetected soft-bodied evolution. In addition, the claim that exclusively
soft-bodied ancestors preceded the hard-bodied Cambrian forms remains
anatomically implausible. A brachiopod cannot survive without its shell.
An arthropod cannot exist without its exoskeleton. Any plausible ancestor
to such organisms would have likely left some hard body parts, yet none
have been found in the Precambrian. Yet the deep -divergence hypothesis,
whatever its other merits, requires a viable artifact hypothesis to explain
the absence of fossilized Precambrian ancestors.
The Testimony ofGenes: Conflicting Stories
There is a second, more telling reason to doubt the deep-divergence hy-
pothesis: the results of different molecular studies have generated widely
divergent results. Yet presumably there was only one common ancestor of
all the Metazoa and only one ultimate divergence point.
For example, comparing the Wray-led study and the Erwin-led study
generates a difference of 400 million years. In the case of other studies,

106
DARWIN’S DOUBT
even greater differences emerge. Many other studies have thrown their
own widely varying numbers into the ring, placing the common ances-
tor of animals anywhere between 100 million and 1.5 billion years before
the Cambrian explosion (some molecular clock studies, oddly, even place
the common ancestor of the animals
after the Cambrian explosion). 19
As Douglas Erwin, writing with fellow paleontologists James Valentine
and David Jablonski, acknowledged
in
1999: “Attempts
to
date those
branchingjs]” from a common Precambrian ancestor “by using molecular
clocks have disagreed widely.”20 How can this be?
In the first place, different studies of different molecules generate widely
divergent dates. In addition to the studies I have already cited, a 1997 paper
by Japanese biologist Naruo Nikoh and colleagues examined two genes
(aldolase and
triose phosphate isomerase), and dated the
split between
eumetazoa and parazoa—animals with tissues (like cnidarians) from those
without (like sponges)— at 940 million years ago.
21 Compare that to a 1999
paper by Daniel Wang, Sudhir Kumar, and S. Blair Hedges based on the
study of 50 different genes, showing that “the basal animal phyla (Porifera,
Cnidaria, Ctenophora) diverged between about 1200-1500 Ma.” 22
Sometimes contradictory divergence times are reported in the same ar-
ticle. For instance, a refreshingly forthright paper by evolutionary biolo-
gist Lindell Bromham of Australian National University and colleagues
in Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences USA analyzed two dif-
ferent molecules, mitochondrial DNA and 18S rRNA, to yield individual
gene-based divergence dates that differed by as much as
1 billion years. 23
Another study investigating the divergence between arthropods and ver-
tebrates found that depending on which gene was used, the divergence
date might be anywhere between 274 million and
1.6 billion years ago,
the former date falling almost 250 million years after the Cambrian ex-
plosion. 24 That paper in
its conclusion chose to split the difference, con-
fidently reporting an arithmetic average of about 830 million years ago.
Likewise, bioinformaticians Stephane Aris-Brosou, now at the University
of Ottawa, and Ziheng Yang, at University College London, found that
depending on which genes and which estimation methods were employed,
the last common ancestor of protostomes or deuterostomes (two broadly
different types of Cambrian animals) might have lived anywhere between
452 million and 2 billion years ago. 25

The Genes Tell the Story
?
107
A survey of recent deep-divergence studies, by molecular evolutionists
Dan Graur and William Martin, notes one study in which the authors
claim to be 95 percent certain that their divergence date for certain animal
groups falls within a 14.2-billion-year range—more than three times the
age of the earth and clearly a meaningless result. 26 Graur and Martin con-
clude that many molecular-clock estimates “look deceptively precise,” but,
given the nature of this field, their “advice to the reader is: whenever you
see a time estimate in the evolutionary literature, demand uncertainty!” 27
The title of their paper, published in Trends in Genetics, made the point
still more vividly: “Reading the Entrails of Chickens: Molecular Times-
cales of Evolution and the Illusion of Precision.”
Sometimes even different studies of the same or similar groups of
molecules have generated dramatically different divergence times. For
example, Francisco Ayala and several colleagues have recalculated the
divergence times of Metazoan phyla, using mostly the same protein-
coding genes as Wray’s team. 28 Correcting for “a host of statistical prob-
lems” 29 in the Wray study, Ayala and colleagues found that their own
estimates “are consistent with paleontological estimates”—not with the
deep-divergence hypothesis. “Extrapolating to distant times from mo-
lecular evolutionary rates estimated within confined
data-sets,” they
conclude,
is “fraught with danger.”30 Or as Valentine, Jablonski, and
Erwin conclude, “The accuracy of the molecular clock is still problem-
atical, at least for phylum divergences, for the estimates vary by some
800 million years depending upon the techniques or molecules used.”
31
Reported Precambrian divergence times would vary even more dramati-
cally were it not that evolutionary biologists and molecular taxonomists
ignore certain molecules in their studies to avoid grossly contradictory
results. Consider, for example, histones—proteins found in all eukary-
otes involved in packing DNA into chromosomes. Histones exhibit little
variation from one species to the next. 32 They are never used as molec-
ular clocks. Why? Because the sequence differences between histones,
assuming a mutation rate comparable to that of other proteins, would
generate a divergence time at significant variance with those in studies
of many other proteins. 33 Specifically, the small differences between his-
tones yield an extremely recent divergence, contrary to other studies.
Evolutionary biologists typically exclude histones from consideration,

108
DARWIN’S DOUBT
because those times do not confirm preconceived ideas about what the
Precambrian tree of life ought to look like.
But that raises obvious questions. If we don’t have fossils documenting
a common animal ancestor, and if genetic studies produce such different
and contradictory divergence times, how do we know what the tree of
life should look like and when the first animals began to diverge from a
common ancestor? If histones change too slowly to provide an accurate
calibration of the molecular clock, then which molecules do change at the
correct rate—and how do we know that they do? The answer to these ques-
tions for most evolutionary biologists usually runs something like this.
We already know that the animal phyla evolved from a common ancestor
and we also know roughly when they did; therefore, we must reject studies
based on histone sequences because the conclusions of these studies would
contradict that date.
But do we really know these things, and if so how? Assumptions about
the window of time in which the first metazoan, the ancestor of all ani-
mals, must have lived are clearly not derived from the testimony of mo-
lecular genetics alone, since the results of sequence comparisons vary so
greatly and include dates, depending upon the molecule studied, that fall
outside that window. Instead, as one widely used textbook euphemisti-
cally puts it, evolutionary biologists must choose “phylogenetically infor-
mative” data . 34 By this, they mean sequences that exhibit neither too little
nor too much variation—where too much and too little are determined by
preconceived considerations of evolutionary plausibility, rather than by
reference to independent criteria for determining the accuracy of molecu-
lar methods.
The subjective quality of these conclusions, where scientists “cherry-
pick” evidence that conforms to favored notions and discard the
rest,
casts further doubt on the extent to which molecular comparisons yield
any clear historical signal. Only one divergence point could represent the
actual universal common ancestor of all animals.
If, however, compara-
tive sequence analyses generate divergence times that are consistent with
nearly all possible evolutionary histories, with the divergence event rang-
ing from a few million to a few billion years ago, then clearly most of these
possible histories must be wrong. They tell us little about the actual time of
the Precambrian divergence, if such an event really happened.

The Genes Tell the Story
?
109
Questionable Assumptions
Other problems run even deeper, having to do with the assumptions that
make comparative sequence analyses possible in the
first place. These
comparisons assume the accuracy of molecular clocks—that mutation
rates of organisms have remained relatively constant throughout geologi-
cal time. These studies also assume, rather than demonstrate, the theory
of universal common descent. Both assumptions are problematic.
Even ifwe assume that mutation and natural selection (and other sim-
ilarly undirected evolutionary processes) can account for the emergence
of novel proteins and body plans, we cannot also assume that the pro-
tein molecular clock ticks at a constant rate. Unlike radiometric dating
methods, molecular clocks depend on a host of contingent factors. As
Valentine, Jablonski, and Erwin note, “Different genes in different clades
evolve at different rates, different parts of genes evolve at different rates
and, most importantly, rates within clades have changed over time .”35
So great is this variation that one paper in the journal Molecular Biol-
ogy and Evolution cautions, “The rate of molecular evolution can vary
considerably among different organisms, challenging the concept of the
‘molecular clock.’
”36
Keep in mind too that molecular clocks are calibrated based on the
estimated age of presumably ancestral fossils.
If, however, such estimates
are incorrect by even a few million years, or if the fossil used to calibrate
the mutation rate does not lie at the actual divergence point on the tree
of life, the estimated mutation rate may be badly skewed. Calibration of
molecular clocks depends on an accurate understanding of the ancestor-
descendant relationships between fossils and their presumed descendant
taxa. If the fossil used to calibrate the divergence time of two later groups
was not actually a true ancestor, then the mutation-rate calculation based
on that fossil’s age may be grossly inaccurate. As Andrew Smith and Kevin
Peterson note: “Molecular clocks are not error-free and come with their
own suite of problems.
.
.
. The accuracy of the technique depends upon
having an accurate calibration point or points, and a reliable phylogeny
with correct branching order and branch-length estimates .”37 Because
these conditions are rarely met, “the idea that there is a universal molecu-
lar clock ticking away has long since been discredited .” 38

110
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Applying the molecular clock to dating the alleged Precambrian ances-
tor of the animals further complicates matters. Because there are so few
fossils in the Precambrian and no clear ancestor-descendant lineages, the
calibration of the molecular clock must be done on the basis of very dif-
ferent fossil lineages arising hundreds of millions of years later. Indeed,
without evidence from the fossil record (older than 550 million years ago)
with which to calibrate the molecular clock, any attempt to date the origin
of the Cambrian animal phyla becomes highly questionable. 39 Perhaps for
this reason, Valentine, Jablonski, and Erwin have wondered whether “mo-
lecular clock dates can ever be applied reliably to such geologically remote
events as Neoproterozoic branchings within the Metazoa.”40 (The Neopro-
terozic is the last Precambrian era.) These methodological problems may
help account for the cacophony of conflicting results.
SMUGGLING IN DARWIN
A second crucial assumption behind the deep-divergence hypothesis
is
the idea of the common descent of all the animal forms— i.e., that all the
Cambrian animals evolved from a common Precambrian ancestor. As
the textbook Understanding Bioinformatics admits, “The key assumption
made when constructing a phylogenetic tree from a set of sequences
is
that they are all derived from a single ancestral sequence, i.e., they are ho-
mologous.”
41 Or as the Harvard University Press textbook The Tree ofLife
states, “We are obliged to assume at first that, for each character, similar
states are homologous,” whereby “homologous” the text means characters
are similar because they share a common ancestor.42
This assumption (of universal common descent) raises the possibility
that the ancestral entities represented by divergence points in these stud-
ies are artifacts of the assumptions by which molecular data are analyzed.
Indeed, the computer programs that are used to compare molecular se-
quences have been written to produce trees showing common ancestors
and branching relationships regardless of the extent to which the genes
analyzed may or may not differ. Phylogenetic studies compare two or more
gene sequences and then use degrees of difference to determine divergence
points and nodes on a phylogenetic tree. Inherent in that procedure is the
assumption that the nodes and divergence points existed in the past.

The Genes Tell the Story?
Ill
Thus, the deep-divergence studies do not, in any rigorous sense, es-
tablish any Precambrian ancestral forms. Did a single, original meta-
zoan or bilaterian ancestor of the Cambrian animals actually exist? The
Precambrian-Cambrian fossil record taken on its face certainly doesn’t
document such an entity. But neither do deep-divergence studies. In-
stead, these studies assume the existence of such ancestors, and then
merely attempt, given that assumption, to determine how long ago such
ancestors might have lived. One could argue that the conflicting diver-
gence points do at least show that some common ancestor existed in
the Precambrian, since, despite their conflicting results, all divergence
studies indicate at least that. But, again, to invoke molecular studies
that assume the existence of a common ancestor as evidence for such an
entity only begs the question. Certainly it provides no reason for using
molecular evidence to trump fossil evidence. Perhaps the Precambrian
rocks do not record ancestors for the Cambrian animals because none
existed. To foreclose that possibility, and to resolve the mystery of the
missing Precambrian ancestral fossils, evolutionary biologists cannot
use studies that assume the existence of the very entity their studies are
thought to establish.
THE “SHMOO”: A CATCH-22 REVISITED
The concept of deep divergence raises another issue related to my discus-
sion at the end of the previous chapter about what would be required to
document the missing ancestral forms of the Cambrian animals. Recall
that I argued there that any plausible postulated common ancestor to all
the animal phyla must have necessarily lacked most (or all) of the specific
anatomical features that distinguish one phylum from another. The more
arthropod-like a hypothetical animal form, the less plausible
it would
have been as an ancestor to the chordates, mollusks, echinoderms, an-
nelid worms, and vice versa. In each case, the design logic and arrange-
ment of parts necessary to provide the foundation for one mode of animal
life preclude it from providing the foundation for other modes of animal
life—just as a system of parts providing one mode of transportation (with
a bicycle, for example) will typically preclude functioning as another (as
with a submarine, for example). 43
"-u

112
DARWIN’S DOUBT
For this reason, biologists thinking about the characteristics of the ear-
liest ancestor of all the metazoan phyla—the actual animal at the deep-
divergence point—have typically postulated an extremely simple form oi
life—what one evolutionary biologist described to me as a “shmoo,” after
the blob-like cartoon character made famous by A1 Capp in the 1940s and
1950s. Some have proposed that the ur-animal might have been some-
thing like a placozoan, a modern amorphous animal with only four cell
types and no bilateral symmetry.44 Other paleontologists have mainly
characterized the hypothetical ur-metazoan negatively, by reference to the
characteristics that it must not have had to be a plausible common ances-
tral form to all other metazoa. (This need to characterize the ur-metazoan
negatively has led some leading paleontologists to question whether the
ur-animal can be described affirmatively with any specificity. 45
)
In any case, the need to characterize the ur-animal as an extremely
simple “shmoo-like”
form,
lacking the numerous
characteristics and
anatomical novelties present in the Cambrian animals, highlights a deep
dilemma for evolutionary theorists. On the one hand, to be plausible as
a common ancestor of all the animal phyla, a hypothetical ur-metazoar
must have few characteristics of later metazoan forms. Indeed, the more
plausible the hypothetical ancestor, the simpler
it must be, meaning
ii
will lack more of the specific distinguishing features of the individual
animal phyla. But that means any evolutionary scenario for the origir
of the animals that postulates such a “stripped down” animal form as
its
starting point will need to envision those distinguishing characteristics
arising later. And the fewer the number of characteristics in the hypo-
thetical common ancestor, the more such characteristics will need
tc
arise later. This logical requirement implies, in turn, the need for an ever
deeper divergence point in Precambrian history and the need for more
time to produce these specific anatomical novelties—in turn, exacerbat-
ing the problem of fossil discontinuity. The more plausible the hypotheti-
cal common ancestor, the deeper the necessary divergence point and the
greater the morphological discontinuity in the fossil record.
On the other hand, proposing a more complex (and more anatomically
differentiated) common ancestor closer in its affinities to some Cambriar
animal forms, would eliminate the need for so deep a divergence point
Nevertheless,
it would also diminish the plausibility of such a hypo-
thetical ancestor as an ur-metazoan common to all the other Cambriar

The Genes Tell the Story
?
113
animals. Again, the more a hypothetical form resembles one of the spe-
cific animal forms or phyla, the less plausible
it will be as an ancestor of
all the others. And that is the dilemma. Could there have been an animal
form simple enough to serve as a viable ancestor common to all the animal
phyla? Perhaps. But positing such a form only deepens the required depth
of the divergence point and intensifies the already significant problem of
Precambrian- Cambrian fossil discontinuity.
DEEP TROUBLE
Comparative genetic analyses do not establish a single deep-divergence
point, and thus do not compensate for a lack of fossil evidence for key
Cambrian ancestors—such as the ur-bilaterian or ur-metazoan ancestor.
The results of different studies diverge too dramatically to be conclusive, or
even meaningful; the methods of inferring divergence points are fraught
with
subjectivity; and the whole enterprise depends upon a question-
begging logic. Many leading Cambrian paleontologists, and even some
leading evolutionary biologists, now express skepticism about both the re-
sults and the significance of deep-divergence studies. For example, Simon
Conway Morris has rejected the idea that such studies should trump fossil
evidence of a more explosive, shallow and rapid Cambrian radiation. After
assessing the inconsistent track record of deep-divergence studies, he con-
cludes, “A deep history extending to an origination in excess of 1,000 Myr
[million years] is very unlikely.”46 Conway Morris is one of several leading
evolutionary biologists and Cambrian paleontologists who have expressed
skepticism about these studies. 47 In any case, there is now little reason to
regard the deep-divergence hypothesis as a genuine solution to the Cam-
brian conundrum.

6
THE ANIMAL TREE OF LIFE
In 2009, in honor of the bicentennial anniversary of Darwin’s birth, a piece
of artwork was created to adorn the ceiling of an exhibit room at the Natu-
ral History Museum in London. A paper in the journal Archives ofNatural
History noted that the inspiration for the artwork, titled “TREE,” came
from a diagram that Darwin had sketched in one of his notebooks—
diagram that later came to be known as the “tree of life” (see Fig. 2.11a).
One BBC radio program called the TREE exhibit the “Darwinian Sistine
Chapel.”
1 Another article in Archives of Natural History, a journal pub-
lished by the University of Edinburgh, remarked that, “TREE celebrates
Darwinian evolutionism” and “secular science and reason.” 2
For many biologists, the iconic image of Darwin’s tree of life represents
perhaps the single best distillation ofwhat the science of evolutionary biol-
ogy has to teach, namely the “fact of evolution,”
3 apart from which “noth-
ing in biology makes sense.”
4 Though the fossil record does not directly
attest to many of the expected intermediate forms represented on Dar-
win’s tree, leading authorities assert that other lines of evidence, particu-
larly from genetics, firmly establish Darwin’s tree as the correct picture of
the history of life.
In the previous chapter, we saw that there are many good reasons to
doubt the deep-divergence hypothesis and its claim to have determined,
based upon genetic evidence, the time at which the Cambrian animals
began to evolve from specific Precambrian ancestors. Indeed, the idea
that these studies can pinpoint when an ur-metazoan, or an ur-bilaterian,

The Animal Tree ofLife
115
arose has engendered increasing skepticism among a growing number of
evolutionary biologists and paleontologists.
The tree of life as a whole, however, is another matter. Many evolution-
ary biologists think the case for universal common descent is something
close to unassailable because, they argue, analysis of both anatomical and
genetic similarities converges on the same basic pattern of descent from a
universal common ancestor. As Richard Dawkins asserts, “when we look
comparatively at
.
.
.
genetic sequences in all these different creatures—we
find the same kind of hierarchical tree of resemblance. We find the same
family tree—albeit much more thoroughly and convincingly laid out—as
we did with
.
.
. the whole pattern of anatomical resemblances throughout
all the living kingdoms .” 5 Likewise, Jerry Coyne argues that gene sequences
independently confirm the same set of evolutionary relationships—the
same basic tree—established from the analysis of anatomy.
6 Oxford Uni-
versity chemist Peter Atkins is even more emphatic: “There is not a single
instance of the molecular traces of change being inconsistent with our
observations of whole organisms .” 7
As a result of this confidence, evolutionary biologists often dismiss
the missing Precambrian fossil precursors and intermediates as a minor
anomaly—one awaiting explanation by an otherwise completely adequate
theory of the history of life. Because most evolutionary biologists are con-
fident that a single continuous tree, with a single root, best represents the
history of life—and explains so many other diverse facts of biology—they
continue to think the same tree-like pattern also accurately describes the
Cambrian explosion and the Precambrian history of animal life. More-
over, when evolutionary biologists reconstruct the phylogenetic history of
a group (including animals), they typically do so in a time-independent
manner. Their concern is usually to establish a relative order ofbranching
along the tree of life, not to establish or “pinpoint” a series of absolute dates
at which divergences occurred. Thus, although deep-divergence studies
do not establish the existence of Precambrian animal ancestors for all the
reasons argued in the previous chapter, the uncertainty surrounding the
dates in these studies has not, for most evolutionary biologists, under-
mined their confidence in the overall tree-like pattern of animal life. In-
stead, many evolutionary biologists believe the strength of the case for the
tree of life as a whole, based on other phylogenetic studies of similar genes

116
DARWIN’S DOUBT
and anatomical traits, indirectly establishes the existence of the missing
evolutionary precursors of the Cambrian animals. As Coyne explains,
It
stands to reason that if the history of life forms a tree, with all species
originating from a single trunk, then one can find a common origin for
every pair of twigs (existing species) by tracing each twig back through
its branches until they intersect at the branch they have in common. This
node, as we’ve seen, is their common ancestor.” 8
On the basis of similar logic, evolutionary biologists have typically as-
sumed that what they think is true of all other forms of life is true of the
Cambrian forms—that there must be a universal animal tree, the absence
of fossil evidence, and the conflicting results of deep-divergence studies,
notwithstanding.
To assess the other evidence from genetics that supports this conclusion,
it’s useful to review how the case for the universal animal tree is similar to
the deep-divergence hypothesis and also how
it is different. To establish
both the fact and shape of the Darwinian animal tree of life, evolutionary
biologists have long used methods that assume that both molecular se-
quences and anatomical similarities provide an accurate historical signal
about the past. Like deep-divergence studies, these methods of “phyloge-
netic” reconstruction assume that the species or larger groupings (taxa)
are related by descent from a common ancestor. (The term phylogeny,
again, refers to the evolutionary history of a group of organisms. Thus,
a “phylogenetic reconstruction”
is an attempt to determine that history.)
Such studies assume that the degree of difference between molecular or
anatomical features in pairs of organisms indicates how long ago they di-
verged from a common ancestor. They also use independent calibrations
of the molecular clock to calculate the exact divergence times .
9
Unlike deep -divergence studies, however, which attempt to establish
just a single divergence time—such as that of the common ancestor of all
the animal phyla—these more detailed phylogenetic studies seek to estab-
lish the contours of the Precambrian tree of animal life. This involves as-
sessing degrees of relatedness among representatives of all the Cambrian
phyla to establish multiple divergence points and times (nodes on the tree
of life) as well as the relationships of the major Cambrian groups.
Investigators employ these methods even in the absence of corroborating
fossil evidence. In his textbook on fossils and evolution, following a full-

The Animal Tree ofLife
117
page depiction of the discontinuous appearance of the Cambrian animals
in the fossil record, Occidental College geologist Donald Prothero explains,
“If the fossil record is poor in one particular group, we look to other sources
of data.” He concludes that two such sources of data, anatomical and mo-
lecular data, now “converge on a common answer”—one “that is almost cer-
tainly ‘the truth’ (as much as we can use that term in science).” 10
But is all of this true? Does analysis of the genetic and anatomical simi-
larity of the Cambrian animals really establish that the history of animal
life is best depicted as a continuously branching tree? Does the pattern of
a branching tree accurately depict the history of Precambrian and Cam-
brian animal life, and in so doing establish the existence of Precambrian
forms that the fossil record fails to document?
THE PRECAMBRIAN AND CAMBRIAN
TREE OF ANIMAL LIFE
History happened once. And if Richard Dawkins is correct that “there is,
after all, one true tree of life, the unique pattern of evolutionary branch-
ings that actually happened ,” 11 then evolutionary history also happened
once. Consequently, if we think of evolutionary trees describing the re-
lationships of animal groups as hypotheses about an unobserved history
(which is what they are), then having two or more conflicting hypotheses
about only one history—the history that actually happened—means that
we haven’t figured out what did happen. A widely used textbook on phylo-
genetic methods explains this: “The fact that there is only one true tree
.
.
.
provides the basis for testing alternative hypotheses. If two hypotheses are
generated for the same group of species, then we can conclude that at least
one of these hypotheses is false. Of course, it is possible that both are false
and some other tree is true .” 12
When a body of evidence supports multiple conflicting historical hy-
potheses, the evidence cannot be sending a definitive historical signal
about what happened in the past. That raises the possibility that it may not
be sending a signal at all. Conversely, when the evidence leads investiga-
tors to converge around a single historical hypothesis, when one hypoth-
esis best explains a whole group of clues,
it is much more likely that the
evidence is telling us what actually happened.

118
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Consider, by way of illustration, a case in which we know a true history
of ancestor-descendant relationships to see how evidence can converge
around a single (unequivocal) history. Between 1839 and 1856, Charles
Darwin and his wife, Emma, produced ten children, listed below in alpha-
betical order:
Anne
Charles
Elizabeth
Francis
George
Henrietta
Horace
Leonard
Mary
William
This alphabetical listing, of course, is not their actual birth order. In-
stead, it is one of a large number of possible birth orders for Darwin’s chil-
dren, only one of which is the correct sequence. Indeed, only one of these
arrangements can represent the actual Darwin family history.
Now, suppose I gave you and some friends a pile of historical evidence
about Darwin’s children, and asked you to “solve for their birth order.” No
one would consider the problem solved if you came back with more than
one order. On the other hand, if you came back and presented a single
coherent hypothesis of the birth order supported by evidence from birth
records, family letters, and photographs from the Darwin family archives,
that would provide persuasive evidence that you had obtained the correct
solution. Since only one true history exists, once you find it the evidence
will tend to fall naturally into place.
But does the evidence for a Precambrian animal tree of life fall simi-
larly into place or does
it generate multiple conflicting histories? We’ve
already seen that fossil evidence does not point to a specific Precambrian

The Animal Tree ofLife
119
tree of animal life, or perhaps to any tree at all. We’ve also seen that genetic
evidence by itself does not establish a single divergence point for animal
evolution. But what about the genetic and anatomical evidence taken to-
gether? Does that evidence converge on a single history of animal life? If
so, then
it could well make up for a lack of fossil evidence. Otherwise,
it
would seem to raise an obvious question: Are the observed genetic and
anatomical “affinities” among the Cambrian phyla sending reliable his-
torical signals at all?
CONFLICTING HISTORIES
There are several reasons to doubt that evidence of genetic and anatomi-
cal similarity is sending a reliable signal of the early history of animal life.
First, comparisons of different molecules frequently generate divergent
trees. Second, comparisons of anatomical characteristics and molecules
frequently produce divergent trees. Third, trees based solely on different
anatomical characteristics often contradict each other. Let’s examine each
problem.
Molecules os. Molecules
Just as the molecular data do not point unequivocally to a single date
for the last common ancestor of all the Cambrian animals (the point of
deep divergence), they do not point unequivocally to a single coherent
tree depicting the evolution of animals in the Precambrian. Numerous
papers have noted the prevalence of contradictory trees based on evi-
dence from molecular genetics. A 2009 paper in Trends in Ecology and
Evolution notes that “evolutionary trees from different genes often have
conflicting branching patterns.”
13 Likewise, a 2012 paper in Biological
Reviews acknowledges that “phylogenetic conflict is common, and fre-
quently the norm rather than the exception.”
14 Echoing these views, a
January 2009 cover story and review article in New Scientist observed
that today the tree-of-life project “lies in tatters, torn to pieces by an on-
slaught of negative evidence.” As the article explains, “Many biologists
now argue that the tree concept is obsolete and needs to be discarded,”
because the evidence suggests that “the evolution of animals and plants
isn’t exactly tree-like.”

120
DARWIN’S DOUBT
The New Scientist article cited a study by Michael Syvanen, a biologist at
the University of California at Davis, who studied the relationships among
several phyla that first arose in the Cambrian.
15 Syvanen’s study compared
two thousand genes in six animals spanning phyla as diverse as chordates,
echinoderms, arthropods, and nematodes. His analysis yielded no consis-
tent tree-like pattern. As the New Scientist reported, “In theory, he should
have been able to use the gene sequences to construct an evolutionary tree
showing the relationships between the six animals. He failed. The problem
was that different genes told contradictory evolutionary stories.” Syvanen
himself summarized the results in the bluntest of terms: “We’ve just an-
nihilated the tree of life.
It’s not a tree anymore,
it’s a different topology
[pattern of history] entirely. What would Darwin have made of that?”
16
Other studies trying to
clarify the evolutionary history and phylo-
genetic relationships of the animal phyla have encountered similar dif-
ficulties. Vanderbilt University molecular systematist Antonis Rokas is a
leader among biologists using molecular data to study animal phylogenetic
relationships. Nevertheless, he concedes that a century and a half after The
Origin of Species, “a complete and accurate tree of life remains an elusive
goal.”
17 In 2005, during the course of an authoritative study he eventu-
ally copublished in Science, Rokas was confronted with this stark reality.
The study had sought to determine the evolutionary history of the animal
phyla by analyzing fifty genes across seventeen taxa. He hoped that a single
dominant phylogenetic tree would emerge. Rokas and his team reported
that “a 50 -gene data matrix does not resolve relationships among most
metazoan phyla” because
it generated numerous conflicting phylogenies
and historical signals. Their conclusion was candid: “Despite the amount
of data and breadth of taxa analyzed, relationships among most metazoan
phyla remained unresolved.” 18
In a paper published the following year, Rokas and University of Wis-
consin at Madison biologist Sean B. Carroll went so far as to assert that
“certain critical parts of the TOL [tree of life] may be difficult to resolve,
regardless of the quantity of conventional data available.”
19 This problem
applies specifically to the relationships of the animal phyla, where “[m]any
recent studies have reported support for many alternative conflicting phy-
logenies.”20 Investigators studying the animal tree found that “a large frac-
tion of single genes produce phylogenies of poor quality” such that in one
case, a study “omitted 35% of single genes from their data matrix, because

The Animal Tree ofLife
121
those genes produced phylogenies at odds with conventional wisdom.”
21
Rokas and Carroll tried to explain the many contradictory trees by pro-
posing that the animal phyla might have evolved too quickly for the genes
to record some signal of phylogenetic relationships into the respective ge-
nomes. In their view, if the evolutionary process responsible for anatomi-
cal novelty works quickly enough, there would not be sufficient time for
differences to accumulate in key molecular markers, in particular those
used to infer evolutionary relationships in different animal phyla. Then,
given enough time, whatever signal did exist might become lost. Thus,
when groups of organisms branch rapidly and then evolve separately for
long periods of time, this “can overwhelm the true historical signal”22—
leading to the inability to determine evolutionary relationships.
Their article brings the discussion of the Cambrian explosion full circle
from an attempt to use genes to compensate for the absence of fossil evi-
dence to the acknowledgment that genes do not convey any clear signal
about the evolutionary relationships of the phyla first preserved by fossils
in the Cambrian. The logic of their analysis also leads them to a strangely
familiar conclusion. Since the analysis of key genetic markers—like the
genes tracked in molecular- clock studies that presumably accumulate mu-
tations at a constant rate—shows a low number of mutational differences
between the Cambrian animal phyla, Rokas and Carroll conclude from
specifically genetic evidence that the phyla must have diverged rapidly. As
they put it in another paper, “Inferences from these two independent lines
of evidence (molecules and fossils) support a view of the origin ofMetazoa
as a radiation compressed in time.” 23 Thus, the inability to reconstruct the
evolutionary history of the animal phyla from the molecular data not only
fails to establish a Precambrian pattern of descent;
it ironically also re-
affirms the extreme rapidity of the origin of the Cambrian animal forms.
Molecules vs. Anatomy
In 1965, chemist Linus Pauling and biologist Emile Zuckerkandl, often
hailed as the fathers of the molecular-clock concept, proposed a rigorous
way to confirm evolutionary phylogenies. They suggested that if studies of
comparative anatomy and DNA sequences generated similar phylogenetic
trees, then “the best available single proof of the reality of macroevolu-
tion would be furnished.” 24 As they went on to explain, “only the theory

122
DARWIN’S DOUBT
of evolution
.
.
. could reasonably account for such a congruence between
lines of evidence obtained independently.”
25 By focusing attention on these
two independent lines of evidence and the possibility of their convergence
(or conflict), Pauling and Zuckerkandl provided a clear and measurable
way to test the neo-Darwinian thesis of universal common ancestry.
And according to some
scientists, studies of molecular homologies
have confirmed expectations about the history of the animal phyla de-
rived from studies of comparative anatomy. After
citing Pauling and
Zuckerkandl’s test, Douglas Theobald claims in his “29+ Evidences for
Macroevolution” that “well-determined phylogenetic trees inferred from
the independent evidence of morphology and molecular sequences match
with an extremely high degree of statistical significance.” 26
In
reality, however, the technical literature
tells
a
different
story.
Studies of molecular homologies often fail to confirm evolutionary trees
depicting the history of the animal phyla derived from studies of com-
parative anatomy. Instead, during the 1990s, early into the revolution in
molecular genetics, many studies began to show that phylogenetic trees
derived from anatomy and those derived from molecules often contra-
dicted each other.
Probably the most protracted conflict of this type concerns a widely ac-
cepted phylogeny for the bilaterian animals. This classification scheme was
originally the work of the influential American zoologist Libbie Hyman. 27
Hyman’s view, generally known as the “Coelomata” hypothesis, was based
on her analysis of anatomical characteristics, mainly germ (or primary
tissue) layers, planes of body symmetry, and especially the presence or ab-
sence of a central body cavity called the “coelom,” which gives the hypoth-
esis
its name. In the Coelomata hypothesis, the bilaterian animals were
classified in three groups, the Acoelomata, the Pseudocoelomata, and the
Coelomata, each encompassing several different bilaterian animal phyla. 28
(See Fig. 6.1a.)
Then, in the mid-1990s, a very different arrangement of these animal
groups was proposed based on the analysis of a molecule present in each (the
18S ribosomal RNA; see Fig. 6.1b). The team of researchers who proposed
this arrangement published a groundbreaking paper in Nature with a title
that surprised many morphologists: “Evidence for a Clade of Nematodes,
Arthropods and Other Moulting Animals.” 29 The paper noted the conven-
tional wisdom, based on Hyman’s hypothesis, that arthropods and annelids

The Animal Tree of Life
123
FIGURE 6.1
How scientists reconstruct evolutionary history depends on which similarities they regard
as revealing the true history of descent (homology) and which similarities they regard as
misleading (homoplasy). Advocates of the Coelomata hypothesis (Figure 6.1a) regard the
coelom (body cavity) as a homologous feature. Thus, they think the presence of a coelom
in both arthropods and vertebrates indicates a common ancestor that possessed a coelom
(indicated by the solid horizontal line in 6.1a). But advocates of the Ecdysozoa hypothesis
(6.1b) think the coelom evolved at least twice independently (indicated by the two dashed
horizontal lines in Figure 6.1b). They regard the presence of the coelom as a historically
misleading similarity— one that does not indicate the presence of that feature in the most
recent common ancestor of the groups possessing it. These two hypotheses and their im-
plied histories are not congruent, and cannot both be true.
were closely related because both phyla had segmented body plans. 30 But
their study of the 18S ribosomal RNA suggested a different grouping, one
that placed arthropods close to nematodes within a group of animals that
molt, which they called “Ecdysozoa.” This relationship surprised anatomists,
since arthropods and nematodes don’t exactly look like kissing cousins. Ar-
thropods (such as trilobites and insects) have coeloms, whereas nematodes
(such as the tiny worm Caenorhabditis elegans) do not, leading many evolu-
tionary biologists to believe nematodes were early branching animals only
distantly related to arthropods.
31 The Nature paper explained how unex-
pected this grouping of arthropods and nematodes was: “Considering the
greatly differing morphologies, embryological features, and life histories of
the molting animals, it was initially surprising that the ribosomal RNA tree
should group them together.” 32

124
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Since the Ecdysozoa hypothesis was first proposed, other scientists have
vigorously opposed it, reaffirming the Coelomata hypothesis, based on the
analysis of other molecular evidence. 33 Advocates of the Ecdysozoa group-
ing pushed back hard, however, 34 contending that, properly interpreted,
available genetic evidence supports the Ecdysozoa, not the Coelomata
hypothesis. 35
My point in summarizing these disputes is simply to note that the mo-
lecular and anatomical data commonly disagree, that one can find par-
tisans on every side, that the debate is persistent and ongoing, and that,
therefore, the statements of Dawkins, Coyne, and many others about all
the evidence (molecular and anatomical) supporting a single, unambigu-
ous animal tree are manifestly false. As can readily be seen by comparing
Figures 6.1a and 6.1b, 36 these hypotheses—Coelomata and Ecdysozoa—
contradict each other. Although both might be false, both cannot be true.
Various papers analyzing other groups have found similar discrep-
ancies between molecular and morphological versions of the animal
tree. A paper by Laura Maley and Charles Marshall in the journal Sci-
ence noted, “Animal relationships derived from these new molecular
data sometimes are very different from those implied by older, classical
evaluations of morphology.” 37 For example, when tarantulas were used
as the representative of arthropods, the arthropods were grouped more
closely to mollusks than to deuterostomes (animals that develop anuses
first and mouths later). This makes sense because both mollusks and ar-
thropods are protostomes (animals that develop mouths first and anuses
later). But when brine shrimp were used as the representative of the ar-
thropods, the arthropods became the odd man out. Now mollusks were
grouped most closely to deuterostomes, far away from arthropods—
a
result clearly at odds with the conventional phylogeny based upon ana-
tomical characteristics. 38
Examples of similar conflicts abound. The traditional phylogeny placed
sponges at the bottom of the animal tree, with progressively more com-
plex phyla
(e.g., cnidarians, flatworms, nematodes) branching
off. But
Valentine, Jablonski, and Erwin note that molecules “indicate a very dif-
ferent configuration” of the tree, where some higher deuterostome phyla
branch off very early and some comparatively less complex phyla branch
very late. 39

The Animal Tree ofLife
125
Likewise, morphological studies suggest phoronids (see Fig. 3.6) and
brachiopods (see Fig. 1.3), both marine filter-feeding animals, are deutero-
stomes, but molecular studies classify them within protostomes.40 Mor-
phological studies typically imply that sponges are monophyletic (all part
of an exclusive branch on the tree of life) because of their distinctive body
architecture, but molecular studies suggest that sponges don’t belong to
a single unified group, with some sponges more closely related to jelly-
fish than they are to other sponges.41 Cnidarians and ctenophores have
similar body plans, leading many to expect they were closely related on
the basis of morphology. But molecular data have distanced these phyla
significantly.42 As a major review article in Nature in 2000 observes, “Evo-
lutionary trees constructed by studying biological molecules often don’t
resemble those drawn up from morphology.”43 And the problem isn’t get-
ting better over time. A 2012 paper admits that larger datasets are not
solving this problem: “Incongruence between phylogenies derived from
morphological versus molecular analyses and between trees based on
different subsets of molecular sequences has become pervasive as datasets
have expanded rapidly in both characters and species.”44
Indeed, the widespread discrepancies between molecular data and
morphological data and between various molecule-based trees have led
some to conclude that Pauling and Zuckerkandl were wrong to assume
that the degree of similarity indicates the degree of evolutionary related-
ness.45 As Jeffrey H. Schwartz and Bruno Maresca put
it in the journal
Biological Theory: “This assumption derives from interpreting molecular
similarity (or dissimilarity) between taxa in the context of a Darwinian
model of continual and gradual change. Review of the history of molecu-
lar systematics and its claims in the context of molecular biology reveals
that there is no basis for the ‘molecular assumption.’
”46
Anatomy vs. Anatomy
Attempts to infer a consistent picture of the history of animal life based
on analyzing the anatomical characteristics of different animals have also
proven problematic. In the first place, there is a general and long-standing
problem with attempts to infer the evolutionary history of the animal
phyla from similar anatomical traits. At the level of the phyla—that
is,

126
DARWIN’S DOUBT
when one compares the phyla to each other and tries to determine their
branching order—the number of shared anatomical characteristics avail-
able for inferring evolutionary relationships drops off quite dramatically.
There is an obvious reason for this. For example, an anatomical charac-
ter such as the “leg,” that is useful for diagnosing and comparing arthro-
pods, which possess legs, proves useless for making comparisons between
(for example) brachiopods or bryozoans, which do not. In the same way,
basic structural features of human-designed systems, such as the distinc-
tive submarine “trait” of an encapsulating watertight hull, might help to
distinguish
it from a cruise ship, which
is only watertight on its under-
side. But this “trait” would be irrelevant for comparing and classifying,
say, suspension bridges, motorcycles, or flat-screen televisions. In a similar
manner, biologists find that there are only a handful of highly abstract
characters, such as radial versus bilateral body symmetry, the number of
fundamental tissue layers (triploblasty, three layers, versus diploblasty, two
layers), or the type of body cavity present (true coelom, pseudocoelom, or
no coelom), available for morphological comparisons of the many diverse
animal forms. Yet evolutionary biologists have often disputed the validity
of these rather abstract traits as guides to evolutionary history.47 In addi-
tion, just as trees based upon the analysis of different sets of similar genes
or proteins often conflict, trees constructed on the basis of different devel-
opmental and anatomical characteristics often conflict.
When biologists construct phylogenetic
trees based upon anatomi-
cal characteristics, they typically group the animal phyla according to
the presence or absence of several key characteristics. For example, the
standard version of the animal tree, based upon anatomy, groups ani-
mals according to their style of body plan symmetry and by their mode
of body plan development. As noted earlier, animals with mirror sym-
metry along their vertical head-to-tail axes all fall within the Bilaterian
group. Animals with radial symmetry (or no symmetry) fall outside this
group. Within the Bilateria, taxonomists distinguish other main groups
protostomes and deuterostomes—based upon their differing modes of
body plan development— i.e., either “mouth first” or “anus first.”
Yet a significant difficulty arises when evolutionary biologists consider
how a particularly fundamental characteristic—the mode of germ-cell
formation—is distributed among various groups on the canonical animal

The Animal Tree ofLife
127
tree of life (see Fig. 6.2).
48 Germ cells produce eggs and sperm (in any sexu-
ally reproducing species) or gametes (in any asexually reproducing spe-
cies), giving rise to the next generation.49 Animals have two main ways
of generating germ cells. In one mode of germ-cell formation, known as
preformation, cells inherit internal signals from a region within their own
cell structure to become germ cells (illustrated by solid black squares on
Fig. 6.3a). In the other main way of generating germ cells, known as epi-
genesis, germ cells receive external signals from surrounding tissues to
become primordial germ cells (PGCs, illustrated by solid white squares
in Fig. 6.3b).
Germ-cell formation has
indisputable evolutionary importance. To
evolve, a population or a species must leave offspring; to leave offspring,
species of animals must generate primordial germ cells. No PGCs, no re-
production; no reproduction, no evolution.
One might expect, therefore, that
if a group of animals
is
all de-
rived from
a common ancestor (with
a particular mode of gamete
production), then the mode of germ-cell formation should also be es-
sentially the same from one animal species to the next in that group.
Further, assuming the common ancestry of all animals, our expecta-
tion of homologous modes of germ-cell formation among the animals
ought to be higher than for any other tissue type, cell line, or mode
of development. Why? Because mutations affecting the developmental
mechanisms that govern PGC formation inevitably disrupt successful
reproduction. 50 Again, if a species cannot reproduce, it cannot evolve. 51
Thus, similar groups of animals—indeed, all animals, if they have de-
scended from a common ancestor—ought to exhibit the same basic mode
of germ-cell formation. Further, that the evolutionary tree derived from
an analysis of the “mode of germ-cell formation” ought to be congruent
with the trees derived from other such fundamental characteristics (such
as body-plan symmetry, mode of development, number of primary tis-
sues, and so forth).
But the mode of germ-cell formation
is nearly randomly distributed
among the different animal groups, making it impossible to generate a co-
herent tree based on this characteristic, let alone making any comparison
between such a tree and the canonical tree. Note also the distribution of
the two basic modes of germ-cell development within the animal phyla

128
DARWIN’S DOUBT
M. METAZOA
1J: UlLATEfcrA
Ac.-. ACoEEoMoPPt+A
M: nEP+JPozoA
t>: t>EUT£Po?roMlA
Ai~v AMTJULAdPAPlA
Cl CUoPDAtA
oli oLFACroP£<
P. PPoto^toMIA
Ei. £dt>y<OZOA
N«.: KJEMAtozoA
<c-. fcALlt>oP«oPA
$PXPALIA
To: PobyZoA
.
T:
PI. PLATyZoA
^nAtWifepa
LUoAwozoA
LTEmoPWoPA ._
dALdAPEA
<lLld£A
!4oMo<dLEP0M0PP++A
PLAdOZOA
dWlDAPlA
XENOTUPTJELLlDA
wemeptoDepmattda
ACOBLA
dEPWALodUoPDATA
...
UPodUoPDATA
dPAtJlATA (iNdL. vEPte^PAtA;
£dt4lWOD£PHATA
WEMIdl+OPDATA
dWAETO^wATWA
.
nEMAToDA
NEMAtoMoPPWA
TAPDidrPADA
owydUopfioPA
APtUPoPoDA
PPIAPULIDA
LoPIdIFEPA
PlwoPUyNdUA
Bpy&zoA _
EWToPPodTA
dydLloPttoPA
AWWELIDA
MoLLl^dA
WEKEPTEA
BPAdUloPoDA
PttopowiDA
^A^TPOTpIdttA
PLATyUELMlMTUE<
^•wATHofroKULIDA
MldPo^rWATHozoA
POTIFEPA
FIGURE 6.2
The canonical tree of the Metazoa as determined by the analysis of selected anatomical
characters and genes.

The Animal Tree of Life
129
A, pfcEFofcHArroKJ
.
*5- entrzveM
FIGURE 6.3
Two modes of germ-cell formation. Figure 6.3a
(left): In fruit flies as the egg
is being
formed, the mother’s nurse cells (the four cells on the left of the oval-shaped egg chamber,
indicated by large black circles) deposit proteins and RNAs, which are transported to the
posterior pole of the egg (indicated by the dark patch to the right of the large cell on the
right). These maternally synthesized molecules then trigger the development of the germ
cells and sex organs of the fly during embryogenesis. Figure 6.3b (right):
In the eggs of
mice there are no maternally deposited products that determine germ-cell formation.
Rather, as the embryo develops a subpopulation of cells (represented by the triangles on
the left) express “germline competence genes.” These cells then “read” signals that arrive
from other tissues (see arrows), causing the cells to differentiate into primordial germ
cells (as indicated by the stars on the right).
as depicted on the canonical tree. Figure 6.4, derived from the work of
Harvard developmental biologist Cassandra Extavour,
52 shows this distri-
bution and provides another way of understanding the incongruence that
arises when analyzing different anatomical characteristics.
Notice the two modes of germ-cell formation do not cluster together in
separate parts of the canonical tree. Instead, they are distributed haphaz-
ardly among various phyla on different branches of the tree. In the proto-
stomes, for instance, modes of germ-cell formation wink on and offbetween
preformation and epigenesis. The same is the case within the deuterostomes:
germ-cell formation varies almost randomly, and several groups exhibit
both modes, rendering
it difficult or impossible to determine which char-
acteristic was present at different ancestral branching points. Noting this
pattern of distribution, Cassandra Extavour concludes that “the data pres-
ently available cannot suggest homologies of the somatic components of
metazoan gonads.”
53

130
DARWIN’S DOUBT
PoPIFEPA
dT£uoP44oPA
dwlfrAPlA.
Ado£LoMoPP44A
KlNoPRytodRA
N£KATot>A
\
ouyd44oP44oPA
TAPl>l4PAl>A'
APT+4PoPot>A\
dRAETodrMATUA
PonrFEPAy
\\\
PLATY44E LKII0T++
drA^TpOTpIdRA^
PRoPowlbA^
T^PAdRloPob
£CtdPPo CTi
fJEKEPTEA
Anj^eLiDA,
Podr^oPRpPA
EdRlUPA^
£rPUfodULlt>A
KoLLU^dA
xemotupbsllida^
Ed+4l^ol>EPKAF
44£KIdRoPt>AT
d£P44ALo d44oPt>AX
UPodRoPDAL
A^mAtRA/
dROKit>PId+4tRyE<
AdTiioopTEPydrr
MPwol/
AnUPA
dAUt>ATA
T£<TUt>lME
L£PIt>0<AUPlA'
APd44o<AUPI
KDWotpekAtA
KETATREPIA7
EUtREPIA7
PoPIFEPA
dT£*JOP44oPA
dult>APlA
Ado£LoMoPP44A
fclNJOp44yiod44A
oMyd+4DPRoPA
TAPl>ldr^AD>A
drA^TpOTpldRA
P44oPoult>A
!3PAd44loPoI>A
EdTOPPOdTA
MEKEPTEA
Po dj-o w oP44 ofcA
EdRiUPA
<IPUMdULlt>A
XEWOTUPB5LLIDA
EdRlMOl>EPKATA
44£KId44oPt>ATA
dEP44ALo d+4oPDAtA
A4MAT44A
MPkjoI
dAUt>ATA
tE^tUMmF^
LEPIDo^AUPIA
MonotPEKAtA
KETAT44EPIA
EUT44EPIA
APT+4PoPot>A
PLATy+4 ELKIWT44£^
AfJMELlDA
MoLLU^dA
UPod44oPt>ATA
d44DKJt>PId44T44yE<
AdTTMOpTEPydrll
N£KATot>A
dRAETO^NAT+lA
POTTFEPA
AnUPA
APd44o<AUPlA
x/'
vH
w2
vu
H
A-W
X/'
b ^
0 C
U-
U}
£
2o
s
FIGURE 6.4
The distribution of modes of primordial germ-cell formation (epigenesis, preformation,
or both) among various animal groups. The solid thin lines between the boxes on the
right and the phyla names on the left show where the different modes of germ-cell forma-
tion are present in different phyla. The nearly random distribution of types of germ-cell
formation among the various animal groups makes it impossible to generate an animal
phylogeny (evolutionary history) based upon this character that will match the evolution-
ary history implied by the canonical animal tree of life.

The Animal Tree ofLife
131
Deutepo^tomiA
e~
PPPTojTQMlA
mmSU
I
TPOdttOPHoPE
DlPdSUPUdA
/
AdDEdoMATEf
CUA£To6(UATuf\
{PIPAdlAw
COB doMATE^
APTCdUdAT£$
ModdU^dA
AdoEdoMATE {
uotouBOPALIA
(CUoPbATA)
LoPMoPUoPATA I
{PIPAdlAw \ DEUTEPofroMlA
do£doMATE( \ /
AdOEd
— P$£Ut>OdO£doMAT£{
FdATiOoPM<
PLAvULA
PA&IATA
dHoPt>AT£<
. H£MIdHoPl>ATE{
<H
£O
At
VU
§
EdHlVO
t>£PM<
APtHPoPoM
Ayw£dlt>{
doPUoPHoPATE^
'KloPWc
_
;/
-T/
§
?X
\ /
APdHEdoEdoMATA
I
SENTHo-^AfrPAEA
I
TjlAfrAEA
APTCdUdATEf
V
ModLUte
WOTONEUPAdlA
dOEdOMATE
drAyTPOMEUPAdlA
t>EUT£Po{TOM£{
|
dOPHoPHoPAT£$
AdOSdOMATE
^AfrpOWEUPAdlA
tfpIPAdlA)\^
APdHEdOEdOMATA
APdHElJIdATEPlA
C>IpdoT5dA?ndA
FdATH)oPM<
dWll>APlAw{
P^EUDodoEdoMATE^
PodyMEPA
K,
. _
,
,
.
TEwTAdULATA
ModdU^dA
^ <PowdrE<
APdHEMETAZoAN
i__
PPOTO-dOEdOMATA
AdoELoMATA
&£UT£PofroM£<
doPHoPHoPAT£{
/
{lPUwdUdAw{
j APth^opoM
.
1K
AwwEUt>s
P<£Ut>o-
«
do£doMAT£(
J
holUKtf
AdoEdoMATE^
dWlt>APlAw{
PdAwUdA
|^ ^PowdrE^
PPotozoA
NOTOWEUPAdlA
(dWoljbATffl
HETEPowEUPAdlA
(TpIMEPId 4PoUP<)
I
dOEdOMATE
drAfrpowEUPAUA
AdoEdoMATE
^AfrPowEUPAdlA
TpIPdoTjdA^TIdA
fclPdolJdAfrldA
t>£UTEPo{TOME{
doPHoPHoPATEf
PPOTo{ToME$
I
Ado£doMAT£<
I
AdoEdA
|
N
dWll>APlA
PPotozoA
t>IpLo$lAfrtdA
t£ mtAdU LAtA
otHEP t>SUT£Po<TOMlA
It fJTACU lata
CCoSLohoPoPA")
OTHEP (PIPAUA
dHoPDATA
t>EUTEPo<ToME^
doPHoPHoPAT£{
PPOTO^TOME dOEdOMATEy
W£MEPT£Au<
P{£Ut>OdO£doMAT£<
PdATyHEdMlWTtt#
dOEdEwTEPATE^
<Pow6£<
DEUTEPofroMy
PodyMEPA
AdoEdoMATA
DlpdO^dA^TIdA
"• PADlAd CLBAvACfB,
TPIMEPI^M
METAMEPI^M
dOEdOM
$dooC> Mtem
'* AwU$
$PiPAd CLBAvACfB,
ME<ot>£PM, ^IdATEPAdrry
*' MOUTH, WEPv£{,
/
DrpdoijdAfry
MUdTTdEddUdAprry
0M
1
VU
g
s'
<
Atp
1
i
iMX
—
VU
iU
1MX
<
Vj
V'
zH
<
o
A-c
At
VUAo
1
1
Ato
VU
-i
VUo
1
VU
=t
VJ
Vx*.
•=>
-1
-Jo
-a
VU22
At
E
2M
VJ
Ato
A-
Vj
A-
<
X
<
<
VU
VJ
x'
C
1
'
V
)
FIGURE 6.5
A selection of incompatible (mutually incongruent) phylogenetic trees representing the
history of the major groups of animals, drawn from the zoological and evolutionary lit-
erature (1940-present). Note: The definitions of some taxonomic groups in some of these
phylogenetic trees may have changed significantly since the time those phylogenies were
originally constructed. Branch lengths may not always be drawn to scale.

132
DARWIN’S DOUBT
After completing a survey of many such difficulties, University of St.
Andrews zoologist Pat Willmer and Oxford University zoologist Peter
Holland, experts on invertebrate anatomy, draw this conclusion: “Taken
together, modern re-evaluations of traditional evidence support differ-
ent and mutually exclusive subsets of [phylogenetic] relations.”54 They go
on to observe that “patterns of symmetry, the number of germ layers in
the body, the nature of the body cavity, and the presence or type of serial
repetition [segmentation] have all been used to infer common ancestry.”
But, they explain, the phylogenetic story these characteristics tell is “now
either unacceptable or at least controversial” because the data are, at best,
inconsistent. 55
The historical record of ongoing uncertainty about the animal tree of
life since 1859 confirms, as one respected textbook on invertebrate ani-
mals explains, that “phylogenetic analysis at the level of the phyla is highly
problematical.”56 As a result, “the study of higher level animal phylog-
eny has yielded an expansive literature but relatively little detailed con-
sensus. ... In point of fact, there exists no such thing as ‘the traditional
textbook phylogeny.’ A diversity of different schemes can be found.” 57 To
appreciate this problem visually, look at Figures 6.1a and 6.1b as well as
Figure 6.5. These show some of the many metazoan phylogenies, based
on anatomy, published in the twentieth century. These branching patterns
plainly do not agree with one other.
THE ASSUMPTIONS OF PHYLOGENETIC INFERENCE
All these problems underscore several fundamental difficulties with the
methods of phylogenetic reconstruction. When biologists analyze multi-
ple anatomical traits or genes, the animal phyla consistently defy attempts
to arrange them into the pattern of a single tree. Yet if there was a period
of hidden Precambrian evolution, and if comparative sequence analyses
reveal the actual history of animal life and, by implication, the existence
of Precambrian animal forms, phylogenetic studies should converge more
and more around a single tree of animal life. Just as only one possible di-
vergence point could represent the event at which animal forms began to
evolve from a common animal ancestor, only one of the many trees pro-
duced by phylogenetic analysis can represent the actual Precambrian his-
tory of animal life. If, instead, phylogenetic analyses consistently generate

The Animal Tree ofLife
133
different possible evolutionary histories, it’s difficult to see how any one of
them could be known to be sending a reliable historical signal. Again, the
history of animal life only happened once.
One could argue that these conflicting trees do, at least, show that some
tree-like evolutionary pattern of common ancestry preceded the Cam-
brian, since all conflicting trees do affirm that. But, again, they all “show”
this because they all presuppose it, not because they demonstrate it.
CONVERGENT EVOLUTION
There is yet another reason to wonder whether studies of anatomical or
molecular homology convey anything definitive about the history of life.
Many animals have single traits or features in common with otherwise
decidedly different animals. In such cases, it makes no evolutionary sense
to classify these forms as closely related ancestors. For example, moles and
mole crickets have remarkably similar forelimbs, though moles are mam-
mals and mole crickets are insects. No evolutionary biologist regards these
two animals as closely related, for understandable reasons.
The theory of universal common descent assumes that, generally, the
more similar two organisms are, the more closely related they must be. As-
suming common descent, animals with wildly differing body plans should
not be closely related. The presence of nearly identical individual traits or
structures within organisms exemplifying otherwise different body plans
cannot, therefore, be attributed to evolution from a common ancestor. In-
stead, evolutionary biologists attribute similar traits or structures in such
a context to so-called convergent evolution, the separate or independent
origin of similar characters emerging on separate lines of descent after
the point at which those lines diverged from their last common ancestor.
Convergent evolution demonstrates that similarity does not always imply
homology, or inheritance from a common ancestor.
For this reason, the repeated need to posit convergent evolution (and
other related mechanisms)
58 casts further doubt on the method of phy-
logenetic reconstruction. Invoking convergent evolution negates the very
logic of the argument from homology, which affirms that similarity im-
plies common ancestry, except—we now learn—in those many, many
cases when
it does not. Repeatedly invoking convergence negates the as-
sumption that justified the method of phylogenetic reconstruction in the

134
DARWIN’S DOUBT
first place, namely, that similarity is a reliable historical signal of common
ancestry.
A FAMILY REUNION?
So what lesson should we draw from these many conflicting trees? Clearly,
these contradictory results call into question the existence of a canonical
tree of animal life. To see why, imagine being invited to an event billed
as an extended-family reunion where you’ve been told you will encoun-
ter hundreds of your relatives, most of whom you have never met. Let’s
call the description in the invitation the “reunion hypothesis.” The invita-
tion says that a group photograph is planned, for which relatives will be
grouped together according to their degree of relationship (first cousins
with first cousins, and so on).
You show up and grab a coleslaw, eager to meet these many previously
unknown relatives. You see the hundreds gathered and have every reason
to believe that the “reunion hypothesis” is true. After all, the invitation in
your mailbox described the event as a family reunion.
As the day goes on, however, something seems amiss. Here and there,
you see familiar facial features—“Yes,” you think, that person could be my
cousin”—but the majority of attendees and all the strangers you engage in
conversation exhibit no discernible family resemblances. Nor does anyone
seem to share any personal relationships with anyone else at the reunion,
no matter how long they chat and try to establish points of commonality.
What’s more, each person tells a different story of his or her family history.
You try to group the strangers by physical characteristics (height, hair
color, body type, and so on), but the characteristics that you find fail to
yield evidence of family ties or genealogical connections. Whatever points
of commonality you find refuse to assemble into a coherent, consistent
story. The pedigrees are unclear. The reunion hypothesis is under major
strain.
When the photographer arrives, she gamely tries to draw everyone to-
gether for the planned photograph. Chaos ensues. No one knows where to
stand, because the family relationships are so unclear, if they exist at all.
After milling around hopelessly for half an hour or so, people depart for
their cars, wondering why they bothered to attend the picnic, and indeed
why they were invited in the first place.

The Animal Tree ofLife
135
Do you now have good reasons to doubt the “reunion hypothesis”? You
do. If the family reunion hypothesis were true, it would have been increas-
ingly confirmed, because the evidence would have converged on a single
consistent pattern. Had there been a true pattern of family relationships, the
longer everyone talked, the more a single coherent pattern of relationship
would have become apparent. But the people at the picnic were not your
relatives, at least not in any way you could determine to be true. Instead of
converging on a single pattern, the “evidence” was all over the map.
A FOREST OF TREES
Of course, my family reunion illustration breaks down as an analogy to the
history of animal life, because ifwe could trace the history of all the people
at the reunion back far enough we would find that they are all related by
common ancestry. Though we can choose to assume that the same is true
of the Cambrian animals, neither the fossil evidence nor the evidence of
genetics and comparative anatomy actually establishes that. These three
classes of evidence either provide no compelling evidence for Precambrian
animal ancestors (in the case of fossils), or they provide question-begging
and conflicting evidence (in the case of genes and anatomy).
And that is the point of my story. Since there can be only one true his-
tory of the Cambrian animals, the evidence should converge on a common
family tree— if indeed we are looking at evidence of true history. The pic-
ture given by the evidence should be stable, not constantly changing. But
the evidence from a variety of quarters has instead continually generated
new, conflicting, and incoherent pictures of the history of animal life. As
with the “cousins” in my illustration, there seems to be no consistent and
coherent way to organize the animal groups into a family tree.
But if the genes don’t tell the story of Precambrian ancestral forms, if
they don’t compensate for a dearth of fossil evidence and establish a un-
equivocal long cryptic history of animal life from an original animal, an
ur-metazoan, then logically we are back to taking the fossil record at face
value. In that case, the mystery of the missing ancestral fossils remains. If
so, is there any way to explain the abrupt appearance of new forms of life
in the fossil record within an evolutionary framework? During the 1970s,
two young paleontologists thought that there just might be a way to do
exactly that.

7
PUNK EEK!
Scientific discoveries are rarely made in Laundromats, but at least one great
scientific breakthrough—an “aha” moment—occurred in one. The year
was 1968, more than a decade before the discovery of the first Chengji-
ang fossils. The scientist overtaken by the muses was paleontologist Niles
Eldredge. One day while standing in a Michigan Laundromat, following
months of collecting trilobite fossils for his Ph.D. research, Eldredge hap-
pened to reach into his pocket. He removed one of the fossils he had been
collecting, a specimen of a trilobite species called Phacops rana. Initially,
as he examined the specimen, he
felt “depressed.” The fossil closely re-
sembled many others that he had found across layers of strata during his
fieldwork in the Midwest. His trilobites showed no evidence of gradual
change, as classical neo-Darwinism had taught him to expect.
1
As Eldredge explained in a lecture at the University of Pittsburgh in
1983, he then experienced a kind of scientific epiphany. He realized that
the “absence of change itself” was “a very interesting pattern.” Or as he
later put it, “Stasis is data.”
2 “Stasis” is the term that Eldredge and his sci-
entific collaborator, Stephen Jay Gould (see Fig. 7.1), later gave to the pat-
tern in which most species, “during their geological history, either do not
change in any appreciable way or else they fluctuate mildly in morphology,
with no apparent direction.”
3 As Eldredge examined that solitary trilo-
bite, he realized that he had been observing evidence of stasis for some
time—however much he might have wanted it otherwise. As he explained,
“Stasis
.
.
. was by far the most important pattern to emerge from all my
staring at Phacops specimens.” He continued, “Traditionally seen as an

Punk Eek!
137
artifact of a poor record, as the inability of paleontologists to find what
evolutionary biologists going back to Darwin had told them must be there,
stasis was, as Stephen Jay Gould put
it,
paleontology’s trade secret
5—an
embarrassing one at that.”4
This
embarrassing
realization
proved
pivotal,
eventually
leading
Eldredge and Gould to reject both the gradualistic picture of evolution-
ary change articulated by Darwin and the neo-Darwinian understanding
of the mechanism by which such change allegedly takes place. It also led
them to formulate, in a series of scientific papers from 1972 to 1980, a new
theory of evolution known as “punctuated equilibrium.”
5
As a consequence of this theory, neither Gould nor Eldredge expected
to find a wealth of transitional intermediate forms in the fossil record. In
their view, the main periods of biological innovation simply occurred too
rapidly to leave many fossil intermediates behind. 6
Gould and Eldredge sought to explain the occurrence of the rapid
periods
7 of change
(i.e., the punctuations) as the by-product of different
kinds of evolutionary mechanisms or processes of change. They proposed,
first, a mechanism called “allopatric speciation” to explain the rapid gen-
eration of new species. Gould, Eldredge, and another early advocate of
punctuated equilibrium named Steven Stanley, a paleontologist at Johns
Hopkins University,
also proposed that natural
selection operated on
FIGURE 7.1
Figure 7.1a (left): Stephen Jay Gould. Courtesy Getty Images. Figure 7.1b (right): Niles
Eldredge. Copyright © Julian Dufort 2011. Used with permission.

138
DARWIN’S DOUBT
higher levels. Rather than natural selection favoring the fittest individual
organisms within a species—as
it does in classical Darwinism and neo-
Darwinism—these
paleontologists proposed that
it often
selected the
most fit species among a group of competing species. Because they thought
that speciation occurred more rapidly, and because they thought that nat-
ural selection acted on whole species and not just individual organisms,
the advocates of punctuated equilibrium theorized that morphological
change typically occurs in larger, more discrete jumps than Darwin first
envisioned.
Thus, in one sense, the theory of punctuated equilibrium, like the
artifact hypothesis, sought to explain the absence of the transitional
intermediate forms that were expected based on Darwin’s theory. By re-
pudiating Darwinian gradualism, the advocates of punctuated equilib-
rium sought to account for the absence of transitional forms in the fossil
record apart from the artifact hypothesis or,
at best, using what they
imagined as a more modest version of it. But in repudiating Darwinian
gradualism, punctuated equilibrium also represented a radically differ-
ent view of the pace and mode of evolution—a new theory of evolution
that purported to identify a new mechanism of evolutionary change.
As historian of science David Sepkoski explains, “Gould and Eldredge
proposed a radical revision of this standard [neo-Darwinian] narrative.
They argued that the pattern of evolutionary history really was com-
posed of fits and starts, consisting of long periods of evolutionary stasis
(or ‘equilibrium’) ‘punctuated’ by shorter periods of rapid speciation.” 8
During the 1970s and 1980s, the theory of punctuated equilibrium, or
“punk eek” as it is affectionately known, generated both intense scientific
debate and extensive media coverage.
9 Critics called the model “evolution
by jerks,” leading Gould to reply that proponents of gradualism were of-
fering “evolution by creeps.”
10 Though initially Eldredge played more of
a role in formulating the theory, Stephen Jay Gould emerged as the lead-
ing spokesman for
it. As a result of his advocacy of the theory as well as
his popular science writing, Gould achieved immense celebrity— celebrity
that has in turn secured an enduring place for punctuated equilibrium in
scientific awareness.
So what has become of this bold scientific proposal? Does punctuated
equilibrium solve the problems that traditional neo-Darwinism does not?

Punk Eek!
139
Does it help explain the Cambrian explosion and the missing fossil inter-
mediates that render it so mysterious?
WANTED: FAST ENGINE
Once they decided to take the fossil record at face value, the question
for Gould and Eldredge was obvious: What could generate evolutionary
change so rapidly? To explain the short bursts or punctuations, Gould
and Eldredge proposed a mechanism of rapid speciation to which Stanley
added (with their agreement) a new understanding of the mechanism of
natural selection.
11
Whereas the neo-Darwinian mechanism of natural selection acting
on random mutations necessarily acts slowly and gradually, Gould and
Eldredge invoked a process called “allopatric speciation” to explain how
new species might arise quickly. The prefix alio means “other” or “differ-
ent,” and the suffix patric means “father.” Thus, allopatric speciation refers
to processes that generate new species from separate parent (or “father”)
populations. Allopatric speciation typically occurs when part of a popula-
tion of organisms becomes geographically isolated—perhaps by the emer-
gence of a mountain range or the shifting of a river’s course—from a larger
parent population and then a daughter population changes in response to
differing environmental pressures.
Gould and Eldredge drew on insights from population genetics
to
explain why new genetic traits were more likely to spread and establish
themselves within these smaller subpopulations. Population genetics, a
subject to which I’ll return in Chapter 12, describes the processes by which
genetic traits change and become fixed in a population of organisms.
It
teaches that in typically large populations of organisms, it is difficult for a
newly arising genetic trait to spread throughout an entire population. Yet
for any evolutionary change to occur in a population, new genetic traits
must become widespread, or “fixed,” by a process called “fixation.”
In smaller populations, however, the probability of a newly arising
trait becoming fixed is much higher, since the new trait needs to spread
to fewer organisms. By way of illustration, consider a bag containing fifty
red and fifty blue marbles. Suppose that, by removing individual marbles
at random, you seek to change the “population” of mixed-color marbles to

140
DARWIN’S DOUBT
one in which all the marbles are red. To produce a completely red “species,”
we must generate a population in which all the blue marbles have been
eliminated. If someone randomly picks half of the one hundred marbles
out of the bag, it is extremely improbable that all of the marbles thus elimi-
nated will be of just one color. Indeed, there is less than
1 chance in 1030
that all of the marbles selected for removal will be blue.
12 Conversely, there
is an extremely high probability that the remaining batch will still include
both blue and red marbles.
In a much smaller group of, say, eight marbles, evenly divided between
four red and four blue, the probability of selecting four blue marbles at
random and leaving only red marbles, though unlikely, is not prohibitively
small. There’s now a much higher chance— 1 in 70—that the remaining
population of marbles will be all red.
13 By starting with a smaller number
of marbles, the probability that random selection will result in a popula-
tion of uniform color is much higher. In a similar way, the probability of
fixing a genetic trait in a population of organisms decreases exponentially
with the size of the population.
In formulating punctuated equilibrium, Gould realized that new spe-
cies would inevitably have to arise in smaller populations, where random
processes could have a greater chance of fixing traits. Prominent among
those random processes is one called genetic drift. This occurs when ge-
netic changes spread or disappear randomly through a population, with-
out regard for their effect on survival and reproduction.
In Gould and Eldredge’s view, allopatric speciation helped to explain
how evolution could occur in larger, more discrete jumps than Darwin-
ian gradualism predicts (see Fig.
7.2). As allopatric speciation occurs,
it
can generate what Gould and Eldredge conceived as sibling or offspring
species. They thought that the processes that drive these speciation events
occur relatively quickly in smaller populations, thus helping to explain
the sudden jumps in the fossil record. As they put it: “Small numbers and
rapid evolution virtually preclude the preservation of speciation events in
the fossil record.”
14 As they envisioned the evolutionary process working,
the branches on the tree of life would split off so abruptly that they would
appear as virtually “horizontal” lines, producing sudden discontinuities
in the fossil record and therefore fewer fossilized intermediates. Eldredge
and Gould explained it this way: “The theory of allopatric (or geographic)
speciation
suggests
a
different
interpretation
of paleontological
data.

Punk Eek!
141
y>UYLA *
1
-FUYLA #Z
FIGURE 7.2
Two views of the history of life. Figure 7.2a (left): The traditional Darwinian picture show-
ing slow, gradual change. Figure 7.2b (right): The history of life as depicted by the theory of
punctuated equilibrium showing rapid speciation.
If new species arise very rapidly in small, peripherally isolated popula-
tions, then the expectation of insensibly graded fossils is a chimera. A new
species does not evolve in the area of its ancestors;
it does not arise from
the slow transformation of all its forbears.” Thus, they concluded, “Many
breaks in the fossil record are real .” 15
Gould, Eldredge, and Stanley thought that members of these sibling
or offspring species would, subsequent to their origin by allopatric spe-
ciation, compete against each other for resources and survival, just as, in
neo-Darwinism, individual organisms or siblings may compete to survive
and reproduce within a population. In their view, if members of one spe-
cies succeed over another because of some selective advantages they pos-
sess, then that species will survive and predominate, passing on its traits.
This process of interspecies or interpopulation competition (as opposed to
intraspecies competition) Gould called “species selection .” 16
As Gould himself explained: “I propose, as the central proposition of
macroevolution, that species play the same role of fundamental individ-

142
DARWIN’S DOUBT
ual that organisms assume in microevolution. Species represent the basic
units in theories and mechanisms of macroevolutionary change.”
17 Since
natural selection then would act upon large differences in overall biologi-
cal form— differences between whole species as opposed to individuals
within species—evolutionary change would take place in bigger, more
discrete jumps.
18
Gould and Eldredge thus did not expect the fossil record to document
many intermediates. Instead, they thought the “gaps” in the fossil record
were “the logical and expected result of the allopatric model of speciation”
as well as the closely related mechanism of species selection.
19 Species se-
lection made “the species” the unit of selection; the allopatric model of
speciation asserted that new species quickly arise from smaller popula-
tions of organisms. Both mechanisms implied that fewer fossil interme-
diates would be preserved. According to punctuated equilibrium, the
long “missing” transitional intermediates are not missing after all. In the
process of species selection, the species, rather than the individual organ-
ism, competes for survival and thus becomes—in the jargon of evolution-
ary biology—the main “unit of selection” in macroevolution.
“PUNK EEK” AND THE FOSSIL RECORD
Eldredge and Gould devised the theory of punctuated equilibrium to
eliminate the conflict between the fossil record and evolutionary theory.
Nevertheless, punctuated equilibrium has
its own problems accounting
for the fossil record. In particular, the pattern of fossil appearance in the
Cambrian period is inconsistent with both the way in which punctuated
equilibrium depicts the history of life and with the idea that allopatric
speciation and species selection are responsible for that pattern. There are
several reasons for this.
First, the top-down pattern of appearance of Cambrian animal forms
that we saw in Chapter 2 contradicts punctuated equilibrium’s depiction
of the history of life almost as much as
it does the Darwinian picture
(see Fig. 2.11). Recall that Darwin thought that the
first representatives
of the higher taxonomic categories emerged after the
first appearance
of representatives of each of the lower level taxa—that small differences
distinguishing, for example, one species from another should gradually

Punk Eek!
143
accumulate until they produced organisms different enough to be clas-
sified, first, as different genera, then, as different families, and eventually
as different orders, classes, and so on. Instead, the first Cambrian animal
forms are different enough from each other to justify classifying them
as separate classes, subphyla, and phyla from their first appearance in the
fossil record (see Fig. 7.3).
This pattern creates an acute difficulty for the theory of punctuated
equilibrium., First, due to the action of allopatric speciation and species
selection, advocates of punctuated equilibrium envision morphologi-
cal change (represented as horizontal distance in Figure 7.2) arising in
larger, more discontinuous increments of change. Nevertheless, like neo-
Darwinists, they too see phyla-level differences arising from the “bottom
up,” starting with lower level taxonomic differences—albeit occurring
in increments involving whole new species rather than individuals or
varieties within species. Indeed, according to the theory of punctuated
equilibrium, allopatric speciation first produces new species in smaller
geographically isolated populations. For representatives of higher taxo-
nomic categories to arise, these new species must accumulate new traits
and evolve further. For this reason, punctuated equilibrium also expects
small-scale diversity and differentiation of new species to precede the
emergence of larger-scale morphological disparity and taxonomic dif-
ferences. It also expects a “bottom-up” rather than a “top-down” pattern
of appearance (see Fig. 7.3).
Second, for species selection to produce many new species, such as those
that arise in the Cambrian explosion, a large pool of different species must
first exist. The Precambrian fossil record does not document, however, the
existence of such a large and diverse pool of competing Precambrian spe-
cies upon which species selection (via allopatric speciation) might operate.
Paleontologists Douglas Erwin and James Valentine exposed this prob-
lem in 1987 in a seminal paper titled “Interpreting Great Developmental
Experiments: The Fossil Record.”20 They questioned the ability of both
of the main evolutionary theories of the time—punctuated equilibrium
and neo-Darwinism—to explain the pattern of fossil appearance in the
Precambrian-Cambrian fossil record.
21 Clearly, neo-Darwinism does not
explain this pattern. But, as Valentine and Erwin argue, neither does punc-
tuated equilibrium. As they conclude, the mechanism of species selection

144
DARWIN’S DOUBT
P4/LA*I._
CLA&
CLA«
#1
#z
PRyLA *2.
CLA«
CLA«
#3
*4
OivEP^rry
OF ^PECIE^
w£
/
A
{PECIE^
^PE<:iE<
t>i<pAprry
OF FoPM
a
J
A
II
o.a«
CLA«
ruyiuh
XUAudrBt iv FofcK
FIGURE 7.3
This figure shows that the theory ofpunctuated equilibrium (on left), like neo-Darwinism,
anticipates small-scale diversity preceding large-scale disparity in form in contrast to the
pattern in the fossil record (shown on right). Punctuated equilibrium also anticipates a
“bottom-up,” rather than a “top-down,” pattern.
requires a large pool of species upon which to act. Thus, Valentine and
Erwin conclude: “The probability that species selection is a general solu-
tion to the origin of higher taxa is not great.” 22
The late-Precambrian and Cambrian
fossil records present another
difficulty for punctuated equilibrium. Though Gould and Eldredge en-
visioned new traits becoming fixed in small isolated populations where
speciation eventually occurs, they envisioned these
traits
first arising
during periods of stasis in the large populations from which the smaller
populations later separated. Gould realized that only stable large popu-
lations would afford enough opportunities for mutations to generate the
new traits that macroevolution requires. 23 At the same time, he recognized
that these new traits would have a far greater chance of being fixed into
small, isolated populations where the random loss of some traits makes
the fixation of others more likely (recall the marble example). By relying
on large populations to generate new traits and small populations to fix

Punk Eek!
145
them throughout a population, Gould wanted to provide both a plausible
(if finely tuned) mechanism to explain both macroevolutionary change
and the absence of fossil intermediates. 24 The late University of Chicago
paleontologist Thomas J. M. Schopf described the balance this way, under
punctuated equilibrium, evolution proceeds “in populations large enough
to be reasonably variable, but small enough to permit large changes in
gene frequencies due to random drift.”25
But by relying on the accumulation of new traits within large parent
populations, Gould undercut his own rationale for concluding that the
fossil record should not preserve many intermediate forms. The reason
for this is obvious: if novel genetic traits arise and spread within a large
population of organisms, they are more likely to leave behind fossil evi-
dence of their existence. Organisms with new and unique combinations
or mosaics of traits represent nothing less than new forms of life. Thus,
the process by which Gould envisions new genetic traits arising in large
populations implies that new forms of life—some presumably transitional
to other forms—should be preserved in the fossil record. Yet the Precam-
brian fossil record
fails to preserve such a wealth of biological experi-
ments during the long periods of relative stability in large populations that
Gould’s theory envisions.
THE TESTIMONY OF STATISTICAL PALEONTOLOGY
Studies in statistical paleontology have raised additional questions about
whether the fossil record documents enough transitional intermediates
to render punctuated equilibrium credible. In Chapter 3,
I discussed the
work of the statistical paleontologist Michael Foote. Foote used sampling
theory to argue that the fossil record provides a reasonably complete pic-
ture of the forms of life that have existed on earth and to suggest that
paleontologists are unlikely to find the many intermediate forms that neo-
Darwinian theory requires.
Foote has also analyzed the question of whether the fossil record docu-
ments the number of intermediate forms that punctuated equilibrium re-
quires. His answer: it depends.
Foote notes that whether a particular version of evolutionary theory can
account for patterns in the fossil record depends upon the kind of mecha-
nism of change it invokes. Neo-Darwinism relies upon a slow, gradually

146
DARWIN’S DOUBT
acting mechanism of change and, thus, has difficulty accounting for evi-
dence of sudden appearance. Foote analyzes whether the number of pro-
posed transitional species in the fossil record is consistent with punctuated
equilibrium and concludes that it depends upon how fast the mechanisms
upon which it relies can generate new forms of life. Though its proponents
envision the evolution of new forms of life arising more abruptly than do
the neo-Darwinists, they would still expect that the fossil record should
have preserved some transitional fossils. Does the fossil record preserve
even the relatively few intermediate forms that the theory of punctuated
equilibrium implies that it should?
To answer that question, Foote developed a statistical method of test-
ing the adequacy of different evolutionary models against several vari-
ables . 26 He observed that for punctuated equilibrium to succeed as an
explanation for the data of the fossil record, it needs a mechanism capa-
ble of producing major evolutionary change quickly, because only such
fast-acting change could account for the relative paucity of transitional
forms in the fossil record. As Foote explained (writing with Gould in
fact), the adequacy of punctuated equilibrium as an account of the fossil
record depends upon the existence of a mechanism “of unusual speed
and flexibility.”27
But does the theory identify such a mechanism?
FROM WHENCE NEW TRAITS AND FORM?
Neither allopatric speciation nor species selection can generate the new
genetic and anatomical traits necessary to produce animal forms, let alone
in the relatively brief time of the Cambrian explosion. As conceived by
Gould and the other advocates of punctuated equilibrium, allopatric spe-
ciation just allows for the possibility of the rapid fixation of preexisting
traits, not the generation of new traits. When a parent population splits
into two or more daughter populations, each of the daughter populations
retains a part, but usually not the whole, of the gene pool of the original
population. No new genetic traits are generated by the geographical isola-
tion of one part of a population from another.
It could be argued, of course, that mutations might occur during the
process of speciation, thus generating new genetic traits. But as Gould and
Eldredge conceived of it, allopatric speciation occurs much too rapidly to

Punk Eek!
147
have a reasonable chance ofmutations generating anything fundamentally
new. Darwin recognized in On the Origin of Species that evolution
is a
numbers game: larger population sizes and more generations offer more
opportunities
for favorable new variations
to
arise. As he
explained:
“Forms existing in larger numbers will always have a better chance
.
.
.
of presenting further favourable variations for natural selection to seize
on, than will the rarer forms which exist in lesser numbers .” 28 Yet for the
mechanism of allopatric speciation to generate new traits, it would need
to generate significant changes in form in small “peripherally isolated”
populations over relatively few generations . 29 Because of these constraints,
many biologists have concluded that allopatric speciation requires too
much change too quickly to provide the theory of punctuated equilibrium
with a biologically plausible mechanism for producing new traits or forms
of animal life.
And that is why Gould and Eldredge, especially in their later formu-
lations of the theory, envisioned new traits arising during long periods
of stasis in larger populations rather than during short bursts of specia-
tion. But a process in which traits arise “during long periods of stasis”
does not constitute a “mechanism of unusual speed and
flexibility,”
though that is precisely what, according to Gould and Foote, punctu-
ated equilibrium requires in order to explain the abrupt appearance of
new animal forms.
If allopatric speciation does not produce a fast-acting trait-generating
mechanism, does species selection? Again, the answer is no. Species se-
lection does not account for the origin of the different anatomical traits
that distinguish one species from another. Species selection, as conceived
by the proponents of punctuated equilibrium, acts on species and traits
that already exist. Indeed, when Stanley, Gould, and Eldredge envisioned
natural selection acting to favor the most fit species over another in a com-
petition for survival, they presupposed the existence of a pool of different
species and, therefore, also the existence of some mechanism for produc-
ing the traits that characterize those different species. That mechanism,
however, would necessarily need to generate those differentiating traits
before species could enter into competition with each other. Species se-
lection eliminates less fit species in a competition for survival; it does not
generate the traits that distinguish species and establish the basis for in-
terspecies competition.

148
DARWIN’S DOUBT
So where do these traits come from? When pressed, Gould eventually
acknowledged that the origin of anatomical traits themselves result from
good, old-fashioned natural selection acting on random mutations and
variations—that is, from the neo-Darwinian mechanism acting over long
periods of time on large relatively stable populations. But that meant that
punctuated equilibrium, to the extent
it relies on mutation and natural
selection,
is subject to the same evidential and theoretical problems as
neo-Darwinism. And one of those problems is that the neo-Darwinian
mechanism does not act quickly enough to account for the explosive ap-
pearance of new fossil forms in the Cambrian period. Like allopatric spe-
ciation, species selection does not qualify as the kind of rapid and flexible
mechanism that Gould elsewhere insisted his theory must have in order to
explain the abrupt appearance of animal forms in the fossil record.
NOVEL FORM AND MECHANISM
An even more profound difficulty with punctuated equilibrium as an ex-
planation for the Cambrian explosion remains. Neither species selection
nor allopatric speciation explains the origin of the representatives of the
higher taxonomic categories—that is, the new animals representing new
phyla and classes. Nor does
it explain the structural and morphological
features that distinguish animals from one another and earlier forms of
life. Allopatric speciation explains how populations get separated from
each other to form different species. Species selection describes how more
fit species predominate over other species in a competition for survival.
Neither mechanism gives any account of how the animals representing
the specifically higher taxa or their distinctive anatomical novelties arose.
Neither mechanism accounts, for example, for the origin of the compound
eye of a trilobite, nor the gills of a Cambrian fish, 30 nor the echinoderm
body plan.
Many critics of punctuated equilibrium have noted this problem. As
Richard Dawkins wrote in 1986: “What I mainly want a theory of evolution
to do is explain complex, well-designed mechanisms like hearts, hands,
eyes and echolocation. Nobody, not even the most ardent species selec-
tionist, thinks that species selection can do this.”
31 Or as paleontologist
Jeffrey Levinton argued in 1988, “It is inconceivable how selection among

Punk Eek!
149
species can produce the evolution of detailed morphological structures.
.
.
. Species selection did not form an eye.”
32
So where do these intricate structures come from? Again, when pressed,
Gould resorted to the alleged power of the neo-Darwinian mechanism.
As he wrote in his magisterial tome The Structure ofEvolutionary Theory,
published in 2002, the year of his death: “I do not deny either the wonder,
or the powerful importance, of organized adaptive complexity.” He went
on to concede, “I recognize that we know no mechanism for the origin of
such organismal features other than conventional natural selection at the
organismic level.”33
For this reason, few if any evolutionary biologists now regard punc-
tuated equilibrium as a solution to the problem of the origin of biologi-
cal form and novelty. As the evolutionary biologists Brian Charlesworth,
Russell Lande, and Montgomery Slatkin have concluded, “genetic mecha-
nisms that have been proposed [by proponents ofpunctuated equilibrium]
to explain the abrupt appearance and prolonged stasis ofmany species are
conspicuously lacking in empirical support.”34
BURST OF INTEREST AND GRADUAL DECLINE
Still, it may not be entirely fair to criticize punctuated equilibrium for failing
to account for the Cambrian explosion. Gould, in particular, equivocated
about whether he meant punctuated equilibrium to serve as a compre-
hensive theory of macroevolutionary change or just an account ofhow new
species emerged from a pool of preexisting species. Strictly speaking, the
mechanisms of allopatric speciation and species selection sought to ex-
plain the pattern of stasis and discontinuity among different species and
not among the higher taxa. Thus, near the end of his career, Gould com-
plained about his critics “misunderstanding” his theory by asserting that he
“proclaimed the total overthrow of Darwinism” and “intended punctuated
equilibrium as both the agent of destruction and the replacement.”35
Yet Gould and
Eldredge,
at
least
initially, advanced punctuated
equilibrium as a bold new theory of evolutionary biology, giving the
impression that
it provided an ambitious solution to the problem of
macroevolution and, by implication, events such as the Cambrian ex-
plosion. From 1972 to 1980, Eldredge and Gould presented a series of

150
DARWIN’S DOUBT
provocative scientific papers that portrayed punctuated equilibrium as
a bold, and even revolutionary, alternative theory of macroevolution.
Indeed, Gould himself referred to it explicitly as “a speciational theory
of macroevolution.”36
In their second main paper, published in
1977, Gould and Eldredge
made explicit their intention to position their theory as a “radical”37 chal-
lenge to neo-Darwinian gradualism and to replace
it with a completely
different understanding of the mode and mechanism of evolutionary
change. Sepkoski notes that in this 1977 article “the authors were more
explicit about the exact nature of the conceptual reconfiguration their
theory brought to macroevolution.” 38 In particular, he argues that Gould
and Eldredge “extended their model to propose a new and ‘general phi-
losophy of change’ in the natural world.” 39 Gould was no less radical in
a widely cited 1980 paper in the journal Paleobiology in which he offered
punctuated equilibrium as “a new and general theory” of evolution. There
he also famously declared the synthetic theory of neo-Darwinism “effec-
tively dead, despite its persistence as textbook orthodoxy.”40
Only after critics exposed punctuated equilibrium for lacking an ad-
equate mechanism did Gould retreat to a more conservative formulation
of the theory, making
its reliance upon the neo-Darwinian mechanism
explicit. From the early 1980s until his death in 2002, Gould made a series
of concessions in particular about the inadequacy of speciation and spe-
cies selection as mechanisms for generating complex adaptations. Thus,
as Sepkoski notes, “Despite the brashness of many of his claims on behalf
of punctuated equilibrium over the years, one is brought time and again
back to the reconciliatory, even conservative justifications Gould made for
his theory,” particularly, he notes, in The Structure ofEvolutionary Theory,
written in the years just before Gould’s death.
41
In the end, Gould’s concessions to neo-Darwinism brought his think-
ing back into conflict with the pattern of sudden appearance in the fossil
record that the theory of punctuated equilibrium was designed to explain.
If Gould and Eldredge were right about the abrupt appearance of new
forms of life in the fossil record, and if the neo-Darwinian mechanism
needs as much time as evolutionary biologists and population geneticists
(see Chapters 8 and 12) calculate, then the mutation and selection mecha-
nism does not have enough time to produce the new traits needed to build

Punk Eek!
151
the forms of life that first appear in the Cambrian period. But punctuated
equilibrium, as initially formulated to rely mainly on allopatric speciation
and species selection, fared no better, since neither mechanism gives any
explanation for the origin of new traits. And so, in the end, punctuated
equilibrium highlighted rather than resolved a profound dilemma for evo-
lutionary theory: neo-Darwinism allegedly has a mechanism capable of
producing new genetic traits, but it appears to produce them too slowly to
account for the abrupt appearance of new form in the fossil record; punc-
tuated equilibrium attempts to address the pattern in the fossil record,
but fails to provide a mechanism that can produce new traits whether
abruptly or otherwise. No wonder, then, that leading Cambrian paleon-
tologists such as James Valentine and Douglas Erwin concluded in 1987,
that “neither of the contending theories of evolutionary change at the spe-
cies level, phyletic gradualism or punctuated equilibrium, seem applicable
to [explaining] the origin of new body plans.’*
42
SPINNING IN CIRCLES
In a sudden flash of insight in the humdrum of a Laundromat, Niles
Eldredge realized that
stasis in the
fossil record represented evidence
rather than mere investigative failure. But like laundry spinning around
in a washing machine, the theory of punctuated equilibrium itselfbecame
caught in a dreary cycle of contradiction. On the one hand, “punk eek”
made a bold attempt to describe more accurately, and even explain, the
decidedly discontinuous pattern of the fossil record. On the other, its ad-
vocates were forced to concede both the inadequacy of their proposed
mechanisms and their need to rely upon the neo-Darwinian process of
mutation and selection in order to account for the origin of new genetic
traits and anatomical innovations. After Gould appeared to jettison both
gradualism and a reliance on the neo-Darwinian mechanism in order to
bring evolutionary theory into conformity with the fossil record, he even-
tually acknowledged that he could not explain the origin ofthe forms oflife
documented in the fossil record apart from that same slow and gradually
acting mechanism. Thus, though the theory of punctuated equilibrium
was initially presented as a solution to the mysterious and sudden origin
of animal forms, upon closer inspection, it failed to offer such a solution.

152
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Nevertheless, the failure of punctuated equilibrium to provide a suf-
ficient mechanism has raised questions about the adequacy of the mecha-
nism that Gould ultimately did reaffirm as the explanation for the origin
of novel biological form. Can the neo-Darwinian mechanism of natural
selection acting on random mutations build new forms of animal life with
all their complex adaptations? If so,
is
it possible that
it could do so in
the brief time allowed by the fossil record? If not, is it reasonable to think
that it could build new forms of animal life if only more time were avail-
able? If so, how much time would the Darwinian mechanism need to build
complex adaptations and new forms of animal life? In the next several
chapters,
I will address these fundamental questions at the heart of the
Cambrian mystery—questions, in brief, about how to build an animal.

PART TWO
HOW TO BUILD
AN ANIMAL


8
THE CAMBRIAN
INFORMATION EXPLOSION
When I was a college professor, I used to ask my students a question: “If
you want your computer to acquire a new function or capability, what do
you have to give it?” Typically,
I would hear a smattering of similar an-
swers from the class: “code,” “instructions,” “software,” “information.” Of
course, all these are correct. And thanks to discoveries in modern biology,
we now know that something similar is true of life: to build a new form of
life from a simpler preexisting form requires new information.
To this point I’ve examined one main aspect of the mystery surrounding
the Cambrian explosion: the mystery of the missing Precambrian ancestral
forms expected on the basis of Darwin’s theory. The next group of chap-
ters will examine a second, and perhaps more profound, aspect of the Cam-
brian mystery: that of the cause of the Cambrian explosion. By what means
or process or mechanism could something as complex as a trilobite have
arisen? Could natural selection have accomplished such a feat? To answer
this question we will have to look more closely at what
it takes to build a
new form of animal life. And we’ll see that an important part of the answer
to that question will have something to do with the concept of information.
THE DARWINIAN ACCOUNT OF THE
ORIGIN OF ANIMAL FORM
As Darwin envisioned the process,
natural
selection can accomplish
nothing without a steady supply of variation as a source of new biological

156
DARWIN’S DOUBT
traits, forms, and structures. Only after useful new variations arise can
natural selection sift them from the chaff of unhelpful variations. If, how-
ever, the amount of variation available to natural selection is limited, then
natural selection will encounter limits on how much new biological form
and structure it can build.
Even in the late nineteenth century, many leading scientists recognized
this. For this reason, there has been a long history of scientific controversy
about just how much novelty natural selection can produce and about
whether natural selection is a truly creative process. In fact, between 1870
and 1920 classical Darwinism entered a period of eclipse, because many
scientists thought that it could not explain the origin and transmission of
new heritable variation.
1
Darwin favored a theory of blended inheritance that seemed to imply
limitations on the amount of genetic variability.
2 He thought that when
parents with different traits combined germ cells during sexual reproduc-
tion, the resulting offspring would receive not one or the other set of their
differing traits, but instead a compromise version. For example, if a male
bird with red feathers on its wings mated with a female bird of the same
species with white wing feathers, the theory implied that the two would
likely produce offspring with pink wing feathers. As many of Darwin’s
contemporaries pointed out, such instances of blending inheritance in-
volved strict limitations on the range of traits that could possibly arise,
depriving natural selection of the wide-ranging supply of variation
it
would need to produce truly fundamental changes in the form of animals.
The pink-feathered offspring might later reproduce with a white- or red-
feathered bird of the same species, producing a slightly lighter or darker
shade of pink feathers. Nevertheless, descendants of the original white-
and red-feathered pair would never produce green, blue, or yellow feathers
in subsequent generations. If correct, blending inheritance would eventu-
ally lead to a bland, homogenous, variationless state in a population.
In the 1860s, the Austrian monk Gregor Mendel, widely regarded as
the founder of modern genetics, showed in his work on garden peas that
Darwin’s assumptions about blending inheritance were incorrect. The re-
sults of his studies created, at least initially, more problems for Darwin-
ism. Mendel showed that the genetic traits of organisms typically have an
integrity that resists blending. He showed this by cross-pollinating plants
with yellow peas and plants with green peas. The plants in the subsequent

The Cambrian Information Explosion
157
generations produced either yellow or green peas, but nothing in between
and nothing with an altogether different color.
3
He also showed that the plants carried some kind of signal or instruc-
tions for building different traits even when the trait was not on display
in a particular plant. He noticed, for example, that when he crossed pea
plants with green and yellow seeds, the next generation had only yellow
seeds, almost as if the capacity for generating green peas had been lost.
But when he cross-pollinated the second-generation plants, the ones with
only yellow peas, he found that both yellow and green peas emerged in the
third generation, in a ratio of 3 to
1. From this Mendel hypothesized that
the second-generation plants continued to carry signals, which he called
“factors,” and later scientists called genes, for generating green peas even
when those plants themselves did not display that trait.
The classical Mendelian genetics that replaced Darwin’s blending theory
of inheritance also suggested limitations on the amount of genetic vari-
ability available to natural selection. If plant reproduction produced either
green or yellow peas but never some intermediate form, and if the signals
for producing the green traits and yellow traits persisted unchanged from
generation to generation,
it was difficult to see how sexual reproduction
and genetic recombination could produce anything more than unique
combinations of already existing traits.
In the decades immediately after Mendel’s work, geneticists came to
understand genes as discrete units or packets of hereditary information
that could be independently sorted and shuffled within the chromosome.
This too suggested that a significant, but still strictly limited, amount of
genetic variation could arise by genetic recombination during sexual re-
production. Thus, Mendelian genetics raised significant questions about
whether the process of natural selection has access to enough variation
(which, after Mendel, was conceived as genetic variation) to allow it to pro-
duce any significant morphological novelty. For a time, Darwin’s theory
was in retreat.
DARWINISM MUTATES
During the 1920s, 1930s, and 1940s, however, developments in genet-
ics revived natural selection as the main engine of evolutionary change.
Experiments performed by Hermann Muller in 1927 showed that X-rays

158
DARWIN’S DOUBT
could alter the genetic composition of fruit flies, resulting in unusual
variations.
4 Muller
called
these X-ray-induced changes
“mutations.”
Other scientists soon reported that they had produced mutations in the
genes of other organisms, including humans. Whatever genes were made
of—and biologists then
still did not know—these developments sug-
gested they could vary more than either Darwin or classical Mendelian
genetics had assumed. Geneticists at the time also discovered that these
small-scale changes
in genes were potentially heritable.
5 But
if vari-
ant versions of genes were heritable, then presumably natural selection
could favor advantageous gene variants and eliminate the others. These
mutations could then influence the future direction of evolution and,
in theory at least, provide an unlimited supply of variation for natural
selection’s workshop.
The discovery of genetic mutations also suggested a way to reconcile
Darwinian theory with insights from Mendelian genetics. During the
1930s and
1940s, a group of evolutionary biologists, including Sewall
Wright,
Ernst Mayr, Theodosius Dobzhansky,
J.
B.
S.
Haldane, and
George Gaylord Simpson, attempted to demonstrate this possibility using
mathematical models to show that small-scale variations and mutations
could accumulate over time in whole populations, eventually producing
large-scale morphological change.
6 These mathematical models formed
the basis of a subdiscipline of genetics known as population genetics. The
overall synthesis of Mendelian genetics with Darwinian theory came to be
called “neo-Darwinism” or simply the “New Synthesis.”
According to this new synthetic theory, the mechanism of natural se-
lection acting upon genetic mutations suffices to account for the origin
of novel biological forms. Small-scale “microevolutionary” changes can
accumulate to produce large-scale “macroevolutionary” innovations. The
neo-Darwinists argued that they had revived natural selection by discover-
ing a specific mechanism of variation that could generate new forms of life
from simpler preexisting ones. By the centennial celebration of Darwin s
Origin of Species in 1959, it was widely assumed that natural selection and
random mutations could indeed build new forms of life over the course of
time with their distinctive body plans and novel anatomical structures. At
the celebration, Julian Huxley, the grandson of T. H. Huxley, summarized
this optimism in a grand proclamation:

The Cambrian Information Explosion
159
Future historians will perhaps take this Centennial Week as epitomiz-
ing an important critical period in the history of this earth ofours— the
period when the process ofevolution, in the person of inquiring man,
began to truly be conscious of itself
.
.
. This is one of the first public oc-
casions on which it has been franklyfaced that all aspects of reality are
subject to evolution, from atoms and stars to fish andflowers, from fish
andflowers to human societies and values—indeed, that all reality is a
single process of evolution
.
. 7
In a television broadcast leading up to the Centennial celebration, Huxley
captured the optimistic mood more succinctly: “Darwinism has come of
age, so to speak. We are no longer having to bother about establishing the
fact of evolution.”8
VARIATION AS INFORMATION
Initially, the elucidation of the structure of DNA by James Watson and
Francis Crick in 1953 contributed to this euphoria.
9 Indeed,
it seemed to
lift the mechanism of genetic variation and mutation out of the mist and
into the clear light of the emerging science of molecular biology. Watson
and Crick’s elucidation of the double helix structure of DNA suggested
that DNA stored genetic information in the form of a four- character digital
and chemical code (see Fig. 8.1). Later, following the formulation of Francis
Crick’s famed “sequence hypothesis,” molecular biologists confirmed that
the chemical subunits along the spine of the DNA molecule called nucleo-
tide bases function just like alphabetic characters in a written language or
digital characters in a machine code. Biologists established that the precise
arrangement of these nucleotide bases conveyed instructions for building
proteins. 10 (See Fig.
8.2.) Molecular biologists also determined that this
store of genetic information in DNA is transmitted from one generation
of cells and organisms to another. In short,
it was established that DNA
stores hereditary information for building proteins and thus, presumably,
for building higher-order anatomical traits and structures as well.
The elucidation of the double helix seemed to
resolve some long-
standing issues in evolutionary biology. Darwinists had long maintained
that natural selection produced new forms by separating the proverbial

160
DARWIN’S DOUBT
FIGURE. 8.1
James Watson (left) and Fran-
cis Crick (right) presenting
their model of the structure
of the DNA molecule in
1953. Courtesy A. Barrington
Brown/Science Source.
wheat from the chaff of genetic variation, but they didn’t know where the
raw material for all of the competing variations resided. Neither did they
know how genes stored information for producing the traits associated
with them. Further, even after geneticists discovered that stable genetic
traits could be altered by mutations, they remained uncertain about what
exactly it was that was being “mutated.” Consequently, biologists were un-
certain about exactly where variations and mutations occurred.
Watson and Crick’s model suggested an answer to that question: genes
correspond to long sequences of bases on a strand of DNA. Building on
that insight, evolutionary biologists proposed that new variations arose,
first, from the genetic recombination of different sections of DNA (differ-
ent genes) during sexual reproduction and, second, from a special kind
of variation called mutations that occur from random changes in the ar-
rangement of nucleotide bases in DNA. Just as a few typographical errors
in an English sentence might alter the meaning of a few words or even the
whole sentence, so too might a change in the sequential arrangement of
the bases in the genetic “text” in DNA produce new proteins or morpho-
logical traits.
Watson and Crick’s discovery also raised new questions—in particu-
lar, questions about the information necessary to build completely new
forms of life during the course of biological evolution. True, mutations

The Cambrian Information Explosion
161
******
FIGURE 8.2
The model (or structural formula) of the DNA molecule showing the digital or alpha-
betic character of the nucleotide bases stored along the sugar-phosphate backbone of the
molecule.
play a role in this process, but could they generate enough information
to produce novel forms of animal
life such as those that arose in the
Cambrian period, an explosion— a vast proliferation— of new biological
information?
THE CAMBRIAN INFORMATION EXPLOSION
Consider choanoflagellates,
a group of single-celled eukaryotic organ-
isms with a flagellum. What separates such organisms from a trilobite or

162
DARWIN’S DOUBT
a mollusk or even a lowly sponge? Clearly, all three of these higher forms
of life are more complex than any one-celled organism. But exactly how
much more complex?
James Valentine has noted that one useful way of comparing degrees
of complexity is to assess the number of cell types in different organisms
(see
Fig.
8. 3).
11 Though a single-celled eukaryote has many specialized
internal structures such as a nucleus and various organelles,
it
still, ob-
viously, represents just a single type of cell. Functionally more complex
animals require more cell types to perform their more diverse functions.
Arthropods and mollusks, for example, have dozens of specific tissues and
organs, each of which requires “functionally dedicated,” or specialized,
cell types.
These new cell types, in turn, require many new and specialized pro-
teins. An epithelial cell lining a gut or intestine, for example, secretes a
specific digestive enzyme. This enzyme requires structural proteins to
modify its shape and regulatory enzymes to control the secretion of the
digestive enzyme itself. Thus, building novel cell types typically requires
building novel proteins, which requires assembly instructions for building
proteins—that is, genetic information. Thus, an increase in the number of
cell types implies an increase in the amount of genetic information.
or
CELL TYPE^
CUottATEt
ai
ECUiSJObEKht
FLAT\A)&m{
CbJlt>AZlAbJ<>
FIGURE 8.3
Biological complexity scale as measured in number of cell types of different organisms.

The Cambrian Information Explosion
163
Applying this insight to ancient life-forms underscores just how dra-
matic the Cambrian explosion was. For over 3 billion years, the living
world included
little more than one- celled organisms such as bacteria
and algae.
12 Then, beginning in the late Ediacaran period (about 555-
570 million years ago), the first complex multicellular organisms appeared
in the rock strata, including sponges and the peculiar Ediacaran biota
discussed in Chapter 4.
13 This represented a large increase in complexity.
Studies of modern animals suggest that the sponges that appeared in the
late Precambrian, for example, probably required about ten cell types.
14
Then 40 million years later, the Cambrian explosion occurred.
15 Sud-
denly the oceans swarmed with animals such as trilobites and anomalo-
caridids that probably required fifty or more cell types—an even greater
jump in complexity. Moreover, as Valentine notes, measuring complex-
ity differences by measuring
differences
in
the number of cell types
probably “greatly underestimate [s] the complexity differentials between
bodyplans.”
16
One way to estimate the amount of new genetic information that ap-
peared with the Cambrian animals is to measure the size of the genomes of
modern representatives of the Cambrian groups and compare that to the
amount of information in simpler forms of life. Molecular biologists have
estimated that a minimally complex single-celled organism would require
between 318,000 and 562,000 base pairs of DNA to produce the proteins
necessary to maintain life.
17 More complex single cells might require up-
wards of a million base pairs of DNA. Yet to assemble the proteins neces-
sary to sustain a complex arthropod such as a trilobite would need orders
of magnitude more protein-coding instructions. By way of comparison,
the genome size of a modern arthropod, the fruit fly Drosophila melano-
gaster,
is approximately 140 million base pairs.
18 Thus, transitions from a
single cell to colonies of cells to complex animals represent significant
and in principle measurable—increases in genetic information.
During the Cambrian period a veritable carnival of novel biological
forms arose. But because new biological form requires new cell types, pro-
teins, and genetic information, the Cambrian explosion of animal life also
generated an explosion of genetic information unparalleled in the previ-
ous history of life.
19 (In Chapter 14, we’ll see that building a new animal
body plan also requires another type of information, not stored in genes,
called epigenetic information.)

164
DARWIN’S DOUBT
So can the neo-Darwinian mechanism explain the dramatic increase
in genetic information that appears in the Cambrian explosion? Before
addressing that question, it will help to define the concept of information
and identify the kind of information that DNA contains.
BIOLOGICAL INFORMATION:
SHANNON OR OTHERWISEe
Scientists typically recognize
at least two basic types of information,
functional (or meaningful) information and so-called Shannon infor-
mation, which is not necessarily meaningful or functional. The distinc-
tion has arisen in part because of developments in a branch of applied
mathematics known as information theory. During the late 1940s, math-
ematician Claude Shannon, working at the Bell Laboratories, developed
a mathematical theory of information. Shannon equated the amount of
information transmitted by a sequence of symbols or characters with
the amount of uncertainty reduced or eliminated by the transmission of
that sequence. 20
Shannon thought that an event or communication that didn’t eliminate
much uncertainty was also not very informative. Consider an illustration.
In the 1970s, when I was a teenager, if someone made a completely obvious
statement, we would say, “Tell me something else
I didn’t know.” Imag-
ine that one of my classmates on the baseball team has just rushed up to
breathlessly “inform” me that our team’s star pitcher is planning to throw
the ball to the catcher in the next game. Such a statement would earn the
scornful reply, “Tell me something else I didn’t know.”
The obvious statement about the pitcher’s intentions also illustrates why
Shannon equated the elimination of uncertainty with the transmission of
information. Since star pitchers who want to go on being star pitchers have
no choice but to throw the ball across the plate to the catcher, the state-
ment ofmy overwrought friend eliminated no previous uncertainty. It was
not informative in the least. If, on the other hand, after days of speculation
on campus about which one of our team’s four pitchers the baseball coach
would choose to pitch in the championship game, my friend had rushed
up to me and revealed the identity of the starting pitcher, that would be
different. In that case, he would have eliminated some significant uncer-
tainty on my part with a decidedly informative statement.

The Cambrian Information Explosion
165
Shannon’s theory quantified the intuitive connection between reduced
uncertainty and information by asserting that the more uncertainty an
event or communication eliminated, the more information
it conveyed.
Imagine that after revealing to me the identity of the starting pitcher
before the championship baseball game in the spring, he then also re-
vealed to me the identity of the starting quarterback before the upcoming
football season. Imagine as well that our baseball team had four equally
competent pitchers and the football team had just two equally competent
quarterbacks. Given these facts, my friend’s decision to inform me of the
identity of the starting pitcher eliminated more uncertainty than his deci-
sion to reveal to me the identity of the starting quarterback.
To
assign
precise
quantitative measures
of information, Shannon
further linked the reduction of uncertainty and information to quantita-
tive measures of probability (or improbability). Notice that in my illus-
tration, the more informative communication reduced more uncertainty
and also described a more improbable event. The probability of any one of
the four pitchers being selected was
1 in 4. The probability of one of the
quarterbacks being selected, given the same assumption, was only 1 in 2.
The more improbable event eliminated more possibilities and more uncer-
tainty. Thus, it conveyed more information.
Shannon applied these intuitions to quantify the amount of informa-
tion present in sequences of symbols or characters stored in texts or codes
or transmitted across communications channels. Thus, in his theory the
presence of an English letter in a sequence of other such letters transmits
more information than a single binary digit (a zero or one) in a section of
computer code. Why? Again, the letter in the English alphabet reduces
uncertainty among twenty-six possibilities, whereas a single binary digit
reduces uncertainty among only two. The probability of any one character
from the English alphabet occurring in a sequence of other such letters
(disregarding the need for spaces and punctuation)
is
1 in 26. The prob-
ability of either a zero or one arising in a sequence of binary characters is
1 in 2. In Shannon’s theory the presence of the more improbable character
conveys more information.
Yet even a binary alphabet can convey an unlimited amount of infor-
mation because, in Shannon’s theory, additional information is conveyed
as improbabilities multiply. Imagine a grab bag of tiles with either zero or
one etched onto each. Imagine someone producing a series of zeros and

166
DARWIN’S DOUBT
ones by reaching into the bag and placing them one by one on a game
board. The probability of choosing a zero on the first pick is just
1 in 2.
But the probability of choosing two consecutive zeros after placing the
first back in the grab bag (and shaking the tiles)
is
1 chance in 2 x 2, or
1 chance in 4. This is because there are four possible combinations of digits
that could have been chosen— 00, 01, 10, or 11. Similarly, the probability of
producing any three-letter sequence as a result of choosing consecutively
in this manner is
1 in 2 x 2 x 2, or
1 in 2
3 (or
1 in 8). The improbability
of any specific sequence of characters increases exponentially with the
number of characters in the sequence. Thus, longer and longer sequences
can generate larger and larger amounts of information even using a simple
binary alphabet.
Information scientists measure such informational increases through a
unit they call a bit. A bit represents the minimum amount of information
that can be conveyed (or uncertainty reduced) by a single digit in a two-
character alphabet.
21
Biologists can readily apply Shannon’s information theory to measure
the amount of Shannon information in a sequence of DNA bases (or the
sequence of amino acids in a protein) by assessing the probability of the se-
quence occurring and then converting that probability to an information
measure in bits.22 DNA conveys information, in Shannon’s sense, in virtue
of its containing long improbable arrangements of four chemicals—the
four bases that fascinated Watson and Crick—adenine, thymine, guanine,
and cytosine (A, T, G, and C). As Crick realized in formulating his se-
quence hypothesis, these nucleotide bases function as alphabetic or digital
characters in a linear array. Since each of the four bases has an equal 1 in 4
chance of occurring at each site along the spine of the DNA molecule, biol-
ogists can calculate the probability, and thus the Shannon information, or
what is technically known as the “information-carrying capacity,” of any
particular sequence n bases long. For instance, any particular sequence
three bases long has a probability of 1 chance in 4 x 4 x 4, or 1 chance in
64, of occurring—which corresponds to 6 bits of Shannon information.
(Indeed, each base in a DNA sequence conveys 2 bits of information, since
1 in 4 is equal to 1 chance in 2 x 2.)
Yet the
applicability of Shannon information theory to molecular
biology has, to some degree, obscured a key distinction concerning the
type of information
that DNA possesses. Although Shannon’s theory

The Cambrian Information Explosion
167
measures the amount of information in a sequence of symbols or charac-
ters (or chemicals functioning as such),
it doesn’t distinguish a meaning-
ful or functional sequence from useless gibberish. For example:
“we hold these truths to be self-evident”
“ntnyhiznslhtgeqkahgdsjnfplknejmsed”
These two sequences are equally long and equally improbable if we imag-
ine them being drawn at random. Thus, they contain the same amount of
Shannon information. Yet clearly there
is an important qualitative dis-
tinction between them that the Shannon measurement does not capture.
The first meaningful sequence performs a communication function, while
the second does not.
Shannon emphasized that the kind of information his theory described
needs to be carefully distinguished from our common notions of informa-
tion. As Warren Weaver, one of Shannon’s close collaborators, made clear
in 1949, “The word ‘information’ in this theory is used in a special math-
ematical sense that must not be confused with
its ordinary usage.” 23 By
ordinary usage, Weaver, of course, was referring to the idea of meaningful
or functional communication.
Webster’s dictionary defines information as “the communication or re-
ception of knowledge or intelligence.” It also defines information as “the
attribute inherent in, and communicated by, alternative sequences or ar-
rangements of something that produce a specific effect.” A sequence of
characters possessing a large amount of Shannon information may convey
meaning (as in an English text) or perform a function that “produces a
specific effect”
(as do both English sentences and computer codes, for
example) or
it may not (as would be the case with a meaningless pile of
letters or a screen of scrambled computer code). In any case, Shannon’s
purely mathematical theory of information does not distinguish the pres-
ence of meaningful or functional sequences from merely improbable,
though meaningless ones. It only provides a mathematical measure of the
improbability— or information-carrying capacity—of a sequence of char-
acters. In a sense,
it provides a measure of a sequence’s capacity to carry
functional or meaningful information. It does not, and cannot, determine
whether the sequence in question does convey meaning or generate a
functionally significant effect.
Strands of DNA contain information-carrying capacity—something

168
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Shannon’s theory can measure.
24 But DNA, like natural languages and
computer codes, also contains functional information.25
In languages such as English, specifically arranged characters convey
functional information to conscious agents. In computer or machine code,
specifically arranged characters (zeros and ones) produce functionally sig-
nificant outcomes within a computational environment without a con-
scious agent receiving the meaning of the code inside the machine. In the
same way, DNA stores and conveys functional information for building
proteins or RNA molecules, even if it is not received by a conscious agent.
As in computer code, the precise arrangement of characters (or chemi-
cals functioning as characters) allows the sequence to “produce a specific
effect.” For this reason, I also like to use the term specified information as
a synonym for functional information, because the function of a sequence
of characters depends upon the specific arrangement of those characters.
And DNA contains specified information, not just Shannon information
or information-carrying capacity. As Crick himself put it in 1958, “By in-
formation I mean the specification of the amino acid sequence in protein.
.
.
. Information means here the precise determination of sequence, either of
bases in the nucleic acid or on amino acid residues of the protein.”26
THE MESSAGE AS THE MYSTERY
So if the origin of the Cambrian animals required vast amounts of new
functional or specified information, what produced this information ex-
plosion? Since the molecular biological revolution first highlighted the pri-
macy of information to the maintenance and function of living systems,
questions about the origin of information have moved decidedly to the
forefront of discussions about evolutionary theory. What’s more, the re-
alization that specificity of arrangement, rather than mere improbability,
characterizes the genetic text has raised some challenging questions about
the adequacy of the neo-Darwinian mechanism.
Is
it plausible to think
that natural selection working on random mutations in DNA could pro-
duce the highly specific arrangements of bases necessary to generate the
protein building blocks of new cell types and novel forms of life? Perhaps
nowhere do such questions pose more of a challenge to neo-Darwinian
theory than in discussions of the Cambrian explosion.

9
COMBINATORIAL
INFLATION
Murray Eden (see Fig. 9.1), a professor of engineering and computer sci-
ence at MIT, was accustomed to thinking about how to build things. But
when he began to consider the importance of information to building
living organisms, he realized something didn’t add up. His critics said that
he knew just enough biology to be dangerous. In retrospect, they were
probably right.
In the early 1960s, just as molecular biologists had confirmed Francis
Crick’s famed sequence hypothesis, Eden began to think about the chal-
lenge of building a living organism. Of course, Eden wasn’t contemplating
building a living organism himself. Rather, he was thinking about what it
would take for the neo-Darwinian mechanism of natural selection acting
on random mutations to do the job. He wondered whether mutation and
selection could generate the needed functional information.
To his way of thinking, specificity was a big part of the problem. Obvi-
ously, if DNA contained an improbable sequence of nucleotide bases in
which the arrangement of bases does not matter to the function of the
molecule, then random mutational changes
in the sequence of bases
would not have a detrimental effect on the function of the molecule. But,
of course, sequence does affect function. Eden knew that in all computer
codes or written text in which the
specificity of sequence determines
function, random changes in sequence consistently degrade function or

170
DARWIN’S DOUBT
meaning. As he explained, “No currently existing formal language can
tolerate random changes in the symbol sequences which express its sen-
tences. Meaning is almost invariably destroyed.”
1 Thus, he suspected that
the need for specificity in the arrangement ofDNA bases made it extremely
improbable that random mutations would generate new functional genes
or proteins as opposed to degrading existing ones.
But how improbable? How difficult would it be for random mutations
to generate, or stumble upon, the genetically meaningful or functional
sequences needed to supply natural selection with the raw material—the
genetic information and variation— it needed to produce new proteins,
organs, and forms of life? Eden wasn’t the only mathematician or scientist
asking these questions. But the mathematically based challenge to evolu-
tionary theory that he helped to initiate would indeed prove dangerous to
neo-Darwinian orthodoxy.
THE WISTAR INSTITUTE CONFERENCE
During the early 1960s, Eden began discussing the plausibility of the
neo-Darwinian theory of evolution with several MIT colleagues in math,
physics, and computer science. As the discussion grew to include math-
ematicians and scientists from other institutions, the idea of a conference
was born. In 1966, a distinguished group of mathematicians, engineers,
and scientists convened a conference at the Wistar Institute in Philadelphia
called “Mathematical Challenges to the Neo-Darwinian Interpretation of

Combinatorial Inflation
171
Evolution.” Prominent among the attendees were Marcel-Paul Schiitzen-
berger, a mathematician and physician at the University of Paris; Stanislaw
Ulam, the codesigner of the hydrogen bomb; and Eden himself. The con-
ference also included a number of prominent biologists, including Ernst
Mayr, an architect of modern neo-Darwinism, and Richard Lewontin, at
the time a professor of genetics and evolutionary biology at the University
of Chicago.
Sir Peter Medawar, a Nobel laureate and the director of the North
London Medical Research Council’s laboratories, chaired the meeting. In
his opening remarks, he said, “The immediate cause of this conference
is a pretty widespread sense of dissatisfaction about what has come to be
thought of as the accepted evolutionary theory in the English-speaking
world, the so-called neo-Darwinian theory.” 2
For many, doubts about the creative power of the mutation and selec-
tion mechanism stemmed from the elucidation of the nature of genetic
information by molecular biologists in the late 1950s and early 1960s.
The discovery that the genetic information in DNA is stored as a linear
array of precisely sequenced nucleotide bases at first helped to clarify the
nature of many mutational processes. Just as a sequence of letters in an
English text might be altered either by changing individual letters one
by one or by combining and recombining whole sections of text, so too
might the genetic text be altered either one base at a time or by combining
and recombining different sections of genes in various ways at random.
Indeed, modern genetics has established various mechanisms of mu-
tational change—not only “point mutations,” or changes in individual
bases, but also duplications, insertions, inversions, recombinations, and
deletions of whole sections of the genetic text.
Although fully aware of this range of mutational options at nature’s
disposal, Eden argued at Wistar that such random changes to written
texts or sections of digital code would inevitably degrade the function of
information-bearing sequences, particularly when allowed to accumu-
late.
3 For example, the simple phrase “One if by land and two if by sea”
will be significantly degraded by just a handful of random changes such
as those in bold: “Ine if bg lend and two ik bT Nea.” At the conference
the French mathematician Marcel Schiitzenberger agreed with Eden’s
concerns about the effect of random alterations. He noted that if some-
one makes even a few random changes in the arrangement of the digital

172
DARWIN’S DOUBT
characters in a computer program, “we find that we have no chance (i.e.,
less than l/lO1000
) even to see what the modified program would compute:
it just jams.”
4 Eden argued that much the same problem applied to DNA—
that insofar as specific arrangements of bases in DNA function like digi-
tal code, random changes to these arrangements would likely efface their
function, while attempts to generate completely new sections of genetic
text by random means were likely doomed to failure.
5
The explanation for this inevitable diminution in function is found in
a branch of mathematics called combinatorics. Combinatorics studies the
number of ways a group of things can be combined or arranged. At one
level, the subject
is fairly intuitive. If a thief slips round the corner of a
dormitory after hours looking for a bike to steal, he will scan the bike rack
for an easy target. If he spots a basic bicycle-style lock with only three dials
of ten numbers each, and on the rack beside
it one with five dials of ten
numbers each, the thief wouldn’t need a degree in mathematics to realize
which one he should attempt to open. He knows that he would need to
search fewer total possibilities with the three-dial lock.
A straightforward calculation supports his intuition. The simpler lock
has only 10 x 10 x
10, or 1000, possible combinations of digits— or what
mathematicians refer to as “combinatorial” possibilities. The five-dial lock
has 10 x 10 x 10 x 10 x 10, or 100,000, combinatorial possibilities. With a
lot of patience, the thief might elect to systematically work his way through
the different combinations of digits on the simpler lock, knowing that at
some point he will stumble across the correct combination. He shouldn’t
even bother with the five-dial lock, since making his way through all of
the possible combinations on it would take 100 times as long. The five-dial
lock simply has too many possibilities for the thief to have a reasonable
chance of opening it by trial and error in the time available to him.
Several of the Wistar
scientists noted that the mutation and
selec-
tion mechanism faces a similar problem. Neo-Darwinism envisions new
genetic information arising from random mutations in the DNA. If at any
time from birth to reproduction the right mutation or combination of mu-
tations accumulate in the DNA of cells involved in reproduction (whether
sexual
or
asexual), then
information
for
building
a new
protein
or
proteins will pass on to the next generation. When that new protein hap-
pens to confer a survival advantage on an organism, the genetic change

Combinatorial Inflation
173
responsible for the new protein will tend to be passed on to subsequent
generations. As favorable mutations accumulate, the features of a popula-
tion will gradually change over time.
Clearly, natural selection plays a crucial role in this process. Favorable
mutations are passed on; unfavorable mutations are weeded out. Never-
theless, the process can only select variations in the genetic text that muta-
tions have first produced. For this reason, evolutionary biologists typically
recognize that mutation, not natural selection, provides the source ofvari-
ation and innovation in the evolutionary process. As evolutionary biolo-
gists Jack King and Thomas Jukes put it in 1969, “Natural selection is the
editor, rather than the composer, of the genetic message.”6
And that was the problem, as the Wistar skeptics saw it: random mu-
tations must do the work of composing new genetic information, yet the
sheer number of possible nucleotide base or amino-acid combinations
(i.e., the size of the combinatorial “space”) associated with a single gene or
protein of even modest length rendered the probability of random assem-
bly prohibitively small. For every sequence of amino acids that generates a
functional protein, there are a myriad of other combinations that don’t. As
the length of the required protein grows, the number of possible amino
acid combinations mushrooms exponentially. As this happens, the prob-
ability of ever stumbling by random mutation onto a functional sequence
rapidly diminishes.
Consider another illustration. The two letters X and Y can be combined
in four different two-letter combinations (XX, XY, YX and YY). They can
be combined in eight different ways for three-letter combinations (XXX,
XXY, XYY, XYX, YXX, YYX, YXY, YYY), sixteen ways for four-letter com-
binations, and so on. The number of possible combinations grows exponen-
tially—
2
2
, 2
3
, 2
4
, and so on—as the number of letters in the sequence grows.
Mathematician David Berlinski calls this the problem of “combinatorial
inflation,” because the number of possible combinations “inflates” dramati-
cally as the number of characters in a sequence grows (see Fig. 9.2).
The combinations of bases in DNA are subject to combinatorial infla-
tion of just this sort. The information-bearing sequences in DNA consist
of specific arrangements of the four nucleotide bases. Consequently, there
are four possible bases that could occur at each site along the DNA back-
bone and 4 x 4, or 4
2
, or 16 possible two-base sequences (AA AT AG AC

174
DARWIN’S DOUBT
TA TG TC TT CG CT CC CA GA GG GC GT). Similarly, there are 4 x 4 x
4, or 4\ or 64 possible three-base sequences. (I’ll refrain from listing them
all.) That is, increasing the number of bases in a sequence from
1 to 2 to 3
increases the number of possibilities from 4 to 16 to 64. As the sequence
length continues to grow, the number of combinatorial possibilities cor-
3
DIAL< X 10
- *5Sr
DidriT^ =
po^r^LE
doKtJlNATTON^
t>lAL< x
il Ol Di6riT< =
1
-
00,000
e
J—l
I
•
CoKSIDATTON^
•
1 o
t>lAL{
DldflT^
1
0
,000 ,000,000
PO^I^LE dOK’SlMATTOW^
lOO
x io
= io loo _ 000 , 000 ,000 ,000 , 000
,000 ,
t>TAL<
bldflT^
= 000 , 000
,000 ,000 , 000,000
poftnjLE doKBiMArroM^
FIGURE 9.2
The problem of combinatorial inflation as illustrated by bike locks of varying sizes. As the
number of dials on the bike locks increases, the number of possible combinations rises
exponentially.

Combinatorial Inflation
175
responding to sequences of increasing length inflates exponentially. For
example, there are 4
100
, or 1060
, possible ways of arranging one hundred
bases in a row.
The amino-acid chains are also subject to such inflation. A chain of
two amino acids could display 202
, or 20 x 20, or 400 possible combina-
tions, since each of the twenty protein-forming amino acids could com-
bine with any one of that same group of twenty in the second position of
a short peptide chain. With a three-amino-acid sequence, we’re looking
at 20
3
, or 8,000, possible sequences. With four amino acids, the number
of combinations rises exponentially to 20
4
, or 160,000, total combina-
tions, and so on.
Now, the number of combinatorial
possibilities corresponding to a
chain with four amino acids only marginally outstrips the combinato-
rial possibilities associated with the five-dial lock in my first illustration
(160,000 vs. 100,000).
It turns out, however, that many necessary, func-
tional proteins in cells require far, far more than just four amino acids
linked in sequence, and necessary genes require far, far more than just a
few bases. Most genes—sections of DNA that code for a specific protein
consist of at least one thousand nucleotide bases. That corresponds to
41000—an unimaginably large number—possible base sequences of that
length.
Moreover,
it takes three bases in a group called a codon to designate
one of the twenty protein-forming amino acids in a growing chain during
protein synthesis. If an average gene has about 1000 bases, then an average
protein would have over 300 amino acids, each of which are called “res-
idues” by protein chemists. And indeed proteins typically require hun-
dreds of amino acids in order to perform their functions. This means that
an average-length protein represents just one possible sequence among an
astronomically large number
20300
, or over 10390—of possible amino-acid
sequences of that length. Putting these numbers in perspective, there are
only 10
65 atoms in our Milky Way galaxy and 1080 elementary particles in
the known universe.
That
is what bothered Eden and other mathematically inclined
sci-
entists at Wistar. They understood the immensity of the combinatorial
spaces associated with even single genes or proteins of average length.
They realized that if the mutations themselves were truly random—that
is, if they were neither directed by an intelligence nor influenced by the

176
DARWIN’S DOUBT
functional needs of the organism
(as neo-Darwinism stipulates)—then
the probability of the mutation and selection mechanism ever producing
a new gene or protein could well be vanishingly small. Why? The muta-
tions would have to generate, or “search” by trial and error, an enormous
number of possibilities—far more than were realistic in the time available
to the evolutionary process.
Eden pointed out in his Wistar presentation that the combinatorial
space corresponding to an average-length protein (which he assumed to
be about 250 amino acids long) is 20250— or about 10325—possible amino-
acid arrangements. Did the mutation and
selection mechanism have
enough time—since the beginning of the universe itself—to generate even
a small fraction of the total number of possible amino-acid sequences cor-
responding to a single functional protein of that length? For Eden, the
answer was clearly no.
For this reason, Eden thought mutations had virtually no chance of
producing new genetic information. He likened the probability of pro-
ducing the human genome by relying on random mutations to that of
generating a library of a thousand volumes by making random changes
or additions to a single phrase in accord with the following instructions:
“Begin with a meaningful phrase, retype
it with a few mistakes, make
it
longer by adding letters
[at random], and rearrange subsequences in the
string of letters; then examine the result to see if the new phrase is mean-
ingful. Repeat this process until the library is complete.”
7 Would such an
exercise have a realistic chance of succeeding, even granting it billions of
years? Eden thought not.
In addition, Schutzenberger emphasized that randomly cutting and
pasting larger blocks of text, as evolutionary biologists often envision,
would not make any appreciable difference to the efficacy of a random
search of sequence space. Imagine a computer “mutating” at random the
text of the play Hamlet either by individual-letter substitutions or by du-
plicating, swapping, inverting, or recombining whole sections of Shake-
speare’s text. Would such a computer simulation have a realistic chance
of generating a completely different and equally informative text such as,
say, The Blind Watchmaker by Richard Dawkins, even granting multiple
millions of undirected mutational iterations?
Schutzenberger didn’t think so. He noted that making random changes

Combinatorial Inflation
177
“at the typographic level” in a computer program inevitably degrades
its function whether those changes are made “by letters or by blocks,
the size of the unit really does not matter.” 8 Thus, he thought that a pro-
cess of randomly shuffling blocks of text in any “typographic typology”
would inevitably degrade meaning in much the same way that a series of
individual-letter substitutions will.
Schiitzenberger insisted that the evolutionary process faced similar
limitations. To him, it seemed extremely unlikely that random mutations
of whatever sort would produce significant amounts of novel and func-
tionally specified information within the time available to the evolutionary
process.
Subsequent to the confirmation of Crick’s sequence hypothesis,
all
present at Wistar understood that the entities that confer functional ad-
vantages on organisms—new genes and
their corresponding
protein
products—constitute long linear arrays of precisely sequenced subunits,
nucleotide bases in the case of genes and amino acids in the case of pro-
teins. Yet, according to neo-Darwinian theory, these complex and highly
specified entities must first arise and provide some advantage before natu-
ral selection can act to preserve them. Given the number of bases present
in genes, and amino acids present in functional proteins, a large number
of changes in the arrangement of these molecular subunits would typically
have to occur before a new functional and selectable protein could arise.
For even the smallest unit of functional innovation—a novel protein—to
arise, many improbable rearrangements of nucleotide bases would need
to occur before natural selection had anything new and advantageous to
select.
Eden and others questioned whether mutations provided an adequate
explanation for the origin of the genetic information necessary to build
new proteins,
let alone whole new forms of life. As physicist Stanislaw
Ulam explained at the conference, the evolutionary process “seems to re-
quire many thousands, perhaps millions, of successive mutations to pro-
duce even the easiest complexities we see in life now.
It appears, naively
at least, that no matter how large the probability of a single mutation
is,
should it be even as great as one-half, you would get this probability raised
to a millionth power, which is so very close to zero that the chances of such
a chain seem to be practically non-existent .”9

178
DARWIN’S DOUBT
LOOKING FOR A LOOPHOLE
In his presentation at the conference, Eden himself acknowledged a pos-
sible way of resolving this dilemma. He suggested that
it was at least
possible that “functionally useful proteins are very common
in
this
[combinatorial] space so that almost any polypeptide one is likely to find
[as the result of mutation and selection] has a useful function.”
10 Many
neo-Darwinian biologists subsequently came to favor this possible solu-
tion. The solution was this: even though the size of the combinatorial
space that mutations needed to search was enormous, the ratio of func-
tional to nonfunctional base or amino-acid sequences in their relevant
combinatorial spaces might turn out to be much higher than Eden and
others had assumed. If that ratio turned out to be high enough, then the
mutation and selection mechanism would frequently stumble onto novel
genes and proteins and could easily leapfrog from one functional pro-
tein island to the next, with natural selection discarding the nonfunc-
tional outcomes and seizing upon the rare (but not too rare) functional
sequences.
As an electrical engineer who was used to working with computer code,
Eden was intuitively disinclined to embrace this possibility. He noted that
all codes and language systems can convey information precisely because
they have rules of grammar and syntax. These rules ensure that not just
any arrangement of characters will convey functional information. For
this reason, functional sequences in working communications systems are
typically surrounded in the larger combinatorial space by a multitude of
nonfunctional sequences—sequences that don’t obey the rules.
In known codes and language systems, functional sequences do indeed
typically represent tiny islands of meaning amid a great sea of gibberish.
Geneticist Michael Denton has shown that in English meaningful words
and sentences are extremely rare among the set of possible combinations
of letters of a given length, and they become proportionally rarer as se-
quence length grows.
11 The ratio of meaningful 12-letter words to 12-letter
sequences is 1/10
14
; the ratio of meaningful 100-letter sentences to possible
100-letter strings has been estimated as 1/10
100
. Denton used these figures
in 1985 to explain why random
letter substitutions inevitably degrade
meaning in English text after only a few changes and why the same thing
might be true of the genetic text.

PLATE
1 (above).
Mt. Maotian, near
Chengjiang, China. The
famous Chengjiang fossil
site was discovered near the
top of this mountain. Cour-
tesy Illustra Media (all).
PLATE 2
(left). The
original discovery site
of the first Chengjiang
fossils. Today this area
is a preserve.
PLATE 3 (below). Looking down from Mt. Maotian, with the large
Fuxian Lake in the distant foreground.

PLATE 4. The opabinid Jianfengia multisegmentalis. Courtesy Paul Chien. Unless
otherwise noted, all fossils shown on this and subsequent color pages are from the
Maotianshan Shale near Chengjiang, China.
PLATE 5.
A fossilized comb jelly
PLATES 6 & 7.
Priapulid worms of the
(a ctenophore). Species: Maotianoascus
species Maotianshania cylindrica. Cour-
octonarius. Courtesy J.
Y. Chen.
tesy Paul Chien and Illustra Media.

PLATE 8 (above). A lobopodian “worm with legs” of the genus Microdictyon.
PLATE 9 (above, left). Another lobopod worm. Species: Microdictyon sinicum.
PLATE 10 (above, right).
Luolishania longicruris, a rare lobopod of the
Maotianshan Shale.
PLATE 11 (below). The extinct and enigmatic Vetulicolia, thought to represent
either an arthropod, a tunicate-like urochordate, or a distinct phylum.
Courtesy Illustra Media (all).
a

PLATES 12 & 13 (right).
Two specimens of the arthropod
Leanchoilia. The top specimen
shows its distinctive long frontal
whiplike appendages.
PLATE 14 (below).
Chengjiangocaris longiformis
{below), a rare arthropod known
only from the Chengjiang biota.
Courtesy Illustra Media (all).

Two fossils from the dark-colored Burgess Shale, near the town of Field in British
Columbia, Canada. Note the contrast in color to the fossils from the honey-colored
Maotianshan Shale depicted on the previous and subsequent pages.
PLATE 15 (above). A fossil of the arthropod Marrella from the Burgess Shale. Courtesy
Illustra Media.
PLATE 16 (below). The shrimp-like arthropod Waptia. Courtesy Illustra Media.

PLATE 18. A fossil of the arthro-
pod Waptia, from the honey-colored
Maotianshan Shale. Courtesy Paul Chien.
PLATE 17. The arthropod Fuxianhuia
protensa. Note its exquisitely preserved
eyes, antennae, segmented body, and
forked tail. Courtesy Illustra Media.
PLATE 19. A fossil of an Anomalocaris, whose large eyes and jaws made it the fiercest
predator in the Cambrian seas. Some reached a length of one meter. Courtesy J.
Y. Chen.

.-j-’
.
/<
m&mww
«::;»•.
,;s*
JV V V,
wBtWs^.
kWSMkT
,
.
.
. || e
,*
:
"-
*
"
t»£&fc
...
’’•.«fc'
*-‘
f».
-£f-
slwi
'la
glUv ?'•
pffg? p®
»
;?^tSKsP*s?8gi*i
..
.
: :i
;
-
1
" '/
.:
; w^r.-v
.
. v.,v
•j.m.r,
;s
'
v,'v.- ? ’’M-.r
"
! 'r
.
»-
,\;
'WmSSlF***
1
\nff-
1
ir-
*mp&z
•;
- ii 7«r
iP»
. .c 'j^Sr
'
i
,f
*-jT
r
''
r
.
•
,
i r
. J
j.J
( Vi^
;
li B» h| £*
.,,
|$
^
|M
t'#4
pPsyfe
Tw.. w*
,
to
'
'*W*
,UL ?% *
•'*'•••.
‘v -
li,
^BJ
,
BiS
T
,*-
K
i c
•
1®
'
jr
*
§:A
fliff
vf
'
W§^.'
PLATES 20-22. A montage of
beautifully preserved trilo-
^B
bites from the Maotianshan
Shale, including a specimen of
Eoredlichia intermedia (left).
Courtesy Illustra Media (all).
r>
••
:f
'jz<
.-;
:i*
*
5? §fp
,
5
\

PLATE 23. A specimen of the trilobite Kuanyangia pustulosa from the Maotianshan
Shale near Chengjiang, China. Courtesy Illustra Media.

Combinatorial Inflation
179
Given the alphabetic or “typographic” character of genetic informa-
tion stored in DNA, Murray Eden and others at Wistar suspected that the
same kind of problems would affect random mutational changes in DNA.
It seemed logical that functional genes and proteins were also surrounded
in their relevant combinatorial spaces by vast numbers of nonfunctional
sequences—and, further, that the ratio of functional to nonfunctional se-
quences would also be exceedingly small.
Yet in 1966 none of the scientists on either side of the debates at Wistar
knew how rare or common functional gene and amino-acid sequences are
among the corresponding space of total possibilities. Do they occur with a
frequency of 1 in 10, 1 in a million, or 1 in a million billion trillion? At the
time, these questions could not be answered.
Most evolutionary biologists remained optimistic that the answer to
this question would vindicate the neo-Darwinian model.
12 And some de-
velopments supported their confidence. During the late 1960s, molecular
biologists learned that most of the functional roles performed by proteins
are performed not just by one precise kind of protein, but by a wide va-
riety, each with its own amino-acid sequence. This is unlike a bike lock,
which has only one functional combination. Indeed, molecular biologists
learned that though some amino acids at certain sites are absolutely es-
sential for any particular protein to work, most sites tolerate amino-acid
substitutions without loss of protein function. For many biologists, this
suggested that mutation and selection had a reasonable chance of generat-
ing functional sequences of nucleotide bases or amino acids after all—that
the ratio of functional to nonfunctional sequences was much higher than
skeptics had anticipated.
How much higher? How much variability is allowed in the amino-acid
sequences in proteins? Are there enough functional proteins within a rel-
evant combinatorial space of possibilities to render a random mutational
search for new proteins plausible?
When Denton compared linguistic and genetic text to explain the po-
tential severity of the combinatorial inflation facing the neo-Darwinian
mechanism, he noted that biologists still didn’t know enough “to calculate
with any degree of certainty the actual rarity of functional proteins.” He
concluded, however, that since future experiments surely would continue
to deepen molecular biology’s fund of knowledge, “it may be that before
long quite rigorous estimates may be possible.”
13

180
DARWIN’S DOUBT
IN SEARCH OF THE RATIO
Denton’s prediction of imminent progress proved correct. During the late
1980s and early 1990s, Robert Sauer, a molecular biologist at MIT, per-
formed a series of experiments that first attempted to measure the rarity
of proteins within amino-acid sequence space.
Sauer’s work exploited, for the first time, new technology that allowed
for the systematic manipulation of gene sequences. Before the late 1970s,
scientists typically used radiation and chemicals to produce mutant forms
of DNA. Though these techniques sometimes paid off with dramatic re-
sults, such as mutant fruit flies with legs growing out of their heads (the
famed Antennapedia mutation), they did not allow scientists to dictate
or target any specific change to a sequence of bases in DNA. The treat-
ments used simply replicated the conditions under which mutations occur
naturally.
During the late 1970s and early 1980s, however, molecular biologists
developed technologies for making customized synthetic DNA molecules.
Robert Sauer used these techniques to make site-directed changes to DNA
sequences of specific genes of known function and then to insert those
variants into bacterial cells. He could then evaluate the effect of various
targeted alterations to a DNA sequence on the function of their protein
products within a bacterial cell culture.
Sauer’s technique allowed him to begin to evaluate how many of the
variant sequences, as a percentage of the total, still produced a functional
form of the relevant protein (see Fig.
9.3). His initial results confirmed
that proteins could indeed tolerate a variety of amino-acid substitutions at
many of the sites in the protein chain. Yet his experiments also suggested
that functional proteins might be incredibly rare among the space of all
possible amino-acid sequences. Based on one set of mutagenesis experi-
ments, Sauer and his colleagues estimated the ratio of functional to non-
functional amino-acid sequences at about 1 to 1063 for a short protein of 92
amino acids in length.
14
This result was in rough agreement with an earlier estimate by infor-
mation theorist Hubert Yockey.
15 Yockey did not perform experiments
to derive his estimate of the rarity of proteins in combinatorial sequence
space. Instead, he used already published data to compare variants of
the similar cytochrome c proteins (proteins involved in the biochemical

Combinatorial Inflation
181
pathways that generate energy in cells) in different species. He did this
to see how much variability existed at each amino-acid site in molecules
performing the same function with the same basic structure. Using
this data about the allowable variability at each
site, he estimated the
probability of finding one of the allowable sequences among the total
number of sequences corresponding to a cytochrome c protein 100 resi-
dues in length. He determined the ratio of functional to nonfunctional
sequences to be about
1 to 10 90 for amino-acid chains of this length.
16
So, although Sauers experimentally derived results were numerically
uUMTJEfc c>F?o^il5 LB Ahiuo-ACit> Coh'5iuATlc>y£
<IT£$ vorm
AKINO Adlt>< ~
i X
po^rULE do M'S rwAtio w <! !
3UT WovO PAPE
APE FUwdTXowAt
temJMycei i
....
—
1
r
-I^. OTrtEP jAjO_Pk£-ii..
I
FUNCTIONAL PfcOTEIN
FOP EvEPy Ob)£ oFTiiE^E
1
ttoio MAwy oftWe^e ?
??????
?o«IBLE AMlMO-ACIt> tE4U6NC£i
FIGURE 9.3
Figure 9.3a (top) depicts the problem of combinatorial inflation as it applies to proteins.
As the number of amino acids necessary to produce a protein or protein fold grows, the
corresponding number of possible amino-acid combinations grows exponentially. Figure
9.3b (bottom) poses graphically the question of the rarity of proteins in that vast amino-
acid sequence space.

182
DARWIN’S DOUBT
different from Yockey’s, both approaches gave extremely low ratios sug-
gesting that functional proteins are indeed rare in sequence space, even
if proteins do admit significant variability in the specific amino acids
present at various positions.
Taken at face value, Sauer’s experiments appeared to yield contradictory
conclusions. On the one hand, his results showed that many arrangements
of amino acids could produce the same protein structure and function
that numerous amino-acid sequences populated amino-acid sequence
space. On the other hand, the ratio of functional sequences to the total
number of possible sequences corresponding to a sequence of roughly 100
amino acids appeared to be incredibly low, just
1 to 1063
.
Nevertheless, it’s not hard to see how both of Sauer’s seemingly contra-
dictory conclusions could be true. Recall the locks confronting my hypo-
thetical bike thief. Commercially manufactured bike locks typically have
only one combination of digits that will allow them to be opened. The
combination that will open a typical bike lock specifies one digit on each
dial. No variability at any dial is allowed.
Now imagine a new kind of lock with three crucial differences from an
ordinary lock. First, with this new alternative lock, there are four positions
on every dial that may—in combination with other positions on other
dials—open the lock. My bike thief would like this feature of this kind of
lock, since it seems to allow more wiggle room at each dial. But he doesn’t
like the two other features of this lock. For one, each dial displays one of
20 letters rather than one of 10 numeric digits. Second, instead of 5 dials,
there are 100 dials. On the upside, because 4 of the 20 letters on each of
the 100 dials might work, there are 4 100
, or a whopping 1060
, correct combi-
nations that will open the lock. That’s an astronomically large number of
correct combinations. But, on the downside, there are 20 possible settings
at each of 100 dials, which computes to 20
100
, or 10130
, possible combina-
tions, a number that totally dwarfs the number of correct combinations of
dial settings.
The bike thief would be happy to learn that every dial has “only” four
possible correct positions on each dial, but in a trial-and-error process,
he still has only 1 chance in 5 (4 out of 20) of landing on a possibly func-
tional dial position for any dial; and this l-in-5 chance must be negotiated
100 times. In other words, the l-in-5 chance must be multiplied by the

Combinatorial Inflation
183
100 dials on the monster lock in order to arrive at the probability of the
thiefstumbling upon a functional combination on a given try. The odds are
1 chance in 5 100 or— ifwe want to convert that to base 10—roughly 1 chance
in 1070
. The odds are that slender because the functional combinations
numerous as they are—are dwarfed by the number of total combinations.
In the same way, Sauer established that though many different combina-
tions of amino acids will produce roughly the same protein structure and
function, the sequences capable ofproducing these functional outcomes are
still extremely rare. He showed that for every functional 92-amino-acid se-
quence there are roughly another 10 63 nonfunctional sequences of the same
length. To put that ratio in perspective, the probability of attaining a correct
sequence by random search would roughly equal the probability of a blind
spaceman finding a single marked atom by chance among all the atoms in
the Milky Way galaxy—on its face clearly not a likely outcome.
17
UNCERTAIN SITUATION
Nevertheless, during the 1990s in the immediate wake of the publication
of Sauer’s results, the implications of his work for evolutionary theory were
not entirely clear. Even in the scientific paper in which Sauer reported his
work, the abstract summarizing his results emphasized the tolerance to
amino-acid substitution that proteins allow. Consequently, scientists on
both sides of the discussion about Darwinian evolution seized on different
aspects of Sauer’s findings either to support or challenge the plausibility of
the neo-Darwinian account of the origin of genes and proteins.
Scientists sympathetic to neo-Darwinism emphasized the tolerance of
proteins to amino-acid substitution; critics of the theory emphasized the
rarity of proteins in sequence space. One scientist, Ken Dill, a biophysicist
at University of California, San Francisco, cited Sauer’s work to suggest
that nearly any amino acid would work at any site in a protein chain, pro-
vided the amino acids in question exhibited the correct hydrophobicity
(water-repelling) or hydrophilicity (water-attracting) properties.
18
Yet, at least one scientist, Lehigh University biochemist Michael Behe,
cited Sauer’s quantitative estimate of the rarity of proteins as a decisive ref-
utation of the creative power of the mutation and selection mechanism al-
together.
19 So by the mid-1990s, though Sauer and his group had initiated

184
DARWIN’S DOUBT
a program of experimental research that addressed the key question that
Murray Eden raised at Wistar, that question had still not been completely
settled. Did the mutation and natural selection mechanism have a realistic
chance of finding the new genes and proteins necessary to build, for exam-
ple, a new Cambrian animal? Answering that would await an even more
systematic and comprehensive experimental regime.

THE ORIGIN OF GENES
AND PROTEINS
As a Ph.D. student in chemical engineering at the California Institute of
Technology in the late 1980s, Douglas Axe (see Fig.
10.1) became inter-
ested in evolutionary theory after several fellow graduate students read the
then-bestselling book by Richard Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker. Axe’s
compatriots were quickly converted to zealous advocates of Dawkins’s ar-
guments and urged him to read the book for himself. Axe was impressed
by the clarity of Dawkins’s writing and illustrations, but he found his case
for the creative power of natural selection and random mutations unper-
suasive. Whether in the analogies he drew to animal breeding or the com-
puter simulations he used to demonstrate the supposed ability of mutation
and selection to generate new genetic information, Dawkins repeatedly
smuggled in the very thing he insisted the concept of natural selection
expressly precluded: the guiding hand of an intelligent agent.
He found Dawkins’s computer simulation particularly interesting. In
The Blind Watchmaker, Dawkins described how he had programmed a
computer to generate the Shakespearean phrase: “Me thinks
it is like a
weasel.”
1 Dawkins did this in order to simulate how random mutations
and natural selection could generate new functional information.
Dawkins programmed the computer
first to generate many separate
strings (sequences) of English letters. He then programmed it to compare
each string to the Shakespearean target phrase and select only the string
that most closely resembled that target.
2 The program then generated

186
DARWIN’S DOUBT
variant versions of that newly selected string and compared those
se-
quences to the target, selecting, again, only the one that most closely
resembled the desired target. This eventually generated—after many itera-
tions—a string that matched the target perfectly.
Axe recognized immediately the role that Dawkins’s own intelligence
had played. Not only did Dawkins provide the program with the infor-
mation that he wanted it to generate (“Me thinks
it is like a weasel”), he
imbued the computer with a kind of foresight by directing it to compare
the variant sequences of letters with the desired target. Axe realized that
Dawkins’s program did not simulate natural selection, which by definition
is neither guided toward nor given information about a desired outcome
generations in the future.
Axe began to wonder if there was some other way to assess the creative
power of the mutation and natural selection mechanism, not with clever
analogies or simplistic computer simulations, but with experimental and
mathematical rigor.
Axe realized that Dawkins was right about one thing: the importance of
genetic information. Like his fellow engineer Murray Eden, Axe’s tendency
to view biology as an engineer led him to ask whether selection and muta-
tion could actually build new organisms. Axe’s own research explored the
connection between process control (a field of study in engineering) and
genetic regulation , a sophisticated version of automated process control
at work on a molecular scale inside living cells. Since cells use proteins to
perform various feats of regulation, Axe was acutely aware that building
FIGURE 10.
1
Douglas Axe. Courtesy Brittnay Landoe.

The Origin of Genes and Proteins
187
new organisms necessarily involved building new proteins, which would
in turn require new genetic information.
But could mutation and selection generate the precise arrays of nu-
cleotide bases necessary to build fundamentally new protein structures?
Axe’s interest in this question eventually led him to the scientific papers of
Robert Sauer and the proceedings of a seemingly obscure 1966 Philadel-
phia conference called “Mathematical Challenges to the Neo-Darwinian
Interpretation of Evolution.”
UNRESOLVED ISSUES
As Axe read the papers that Sauer’s research group had produced, he
realized their importance as a first step toward answering the questions
Murray Eden had raised at Wistar.
If Sauer’s quantitative measures of
rarity held up, then Axe thought
it obvious that mutation and selection
could not adequately search a space that large.
If, on the other hand, sub-
sequent mutagenesis experiments overturned Sauer’s work and showed
that protein function was largely indifferent to changes in amino-acid se-
quence, then the number of functional sequences might be large enough
that mutation and selection would have a good chance of finding new
functional genes and proteins in a reasonable amount of time.
After completing his Ph.D., Axe made
inquiries about doing post-
doctoral research in a top research lab where he could address these un-
answered questions. He was soon invited by Alan Fersht, a professor at the
University of Cambridge and director of the Centre for Protein Engineer-
ing, part of the world-famous Medical Research Council (MRC) Centre at
Cambridge, to join his research group.
The decision to accept Fersht ’s offer was an easy one. The star-studded
history of the adjoining Laboratory for Molecular Biology (LMB), argu-
ably the birthplace of molecular biology, included such luminaries
as
James Watson, Francis Crick, Max Perutz, John Kendrew, Sidney Brenner,
and Fred Sanger. Starting in the chemistry department and then moving
to the MRC Centre, Axe hoped to apply his research training to resolve the
uncertainty that surrounded the interpretation of Sauer’s results. Specifi-
cally, he wanted to eliminate what he saw as two sources of error in Sauer’s
method in order to get a more definitive estimation of the frequency of
functional sequences in sequence space.

188
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Axe thought,
first, that Sauer’s team might have underestimated the
rarity of functional proteins. In their experiments, Sauer’s group tested
the tolerance of proteins to amino-acid substitution by changing amino
acids at one or a few consecutive sites without making any other changes
to other sites at the same time, much like a typist introducing an isolated
typographic error in an otherwise accurately transcribed text. Not sur-
prisingly, Sauer and his colleagues found that many sites along a protein
chain could tolerate these isolated amino-acid substitutions, just as the
reader of a text with only a few typos can often make out
its meaning.
Sauer’s team seemed to be assuming that a similar tolerance would have
emerged if they had changed many sites simultaneously.
Axe thought that this assumption ignored the importance of the larger
context provided by the mostly unaltered protein. A single typographic
error typically will not totally destroy the meaning of a section of English
text, because of the surrounding context provided by the other words, as
well as the correct letters in the altered word. That does not mean, how-
ever, that specificity of sequence doesn’t matter. Instead, the meaning of a
sentence with a typographic error can be discerned only because the rest of
the letters are specifically arranged into meaningful words and phrases that
provide a context for determining the meaning of the incorrectly spelled
word. For just this reason, however, the meaning of a sentence is rapidly
degraded if errors are allowed to accumulate at multiple sites.
Axe wondered ifmuch the same could be true of genes and proteins. He
wondered whether multiple, as opposed to single, position changes would
quickly degrade function and whether a tolerance for substitutions at in-
dividual sites was itself context dependent—whether the tolerance for sub-
stitution at one site might depend upon having highly specific sequences
at other
sites. Thus, without questioning Sauer’s experimental findings,
Axe thought Sauer’s result lent itself to misinterpretation. To many mo-
lecular biologists,
it suggested that proteins could readily accommodate
many simultaneous changes to their amino-acid sequences at many posi-
tions and remain functional.
As
it turns out, Sauer recognized the potential for misinterpretation of
his results. As he explained in the very paper in which he developed his
quantitative estimate of rarity, “this calculation overestimates the number
of functional sequences, since changes at individual positions are less likely
to be independent of one another as more positions are allowed to vary.”3

The Origin of Genes and Proteins
189
Another assumption in Sauer’s approach had potentially the opposite
effect
exaggerating the rarity of functional proteins. Axe thought the test
that Sauer and his colleagues used to decide whether their mutant proteins
were functional required a higher level of function than natural selection
might require. Sauer and his team judged proteins with less than about
5-10 percent of the function seen in the natural protein to be nonfunc-
tional. Yet Axe knew that even damaged enzymes with less than 5 percent
of normal activity could add significantly more benefit than no enzymatic
activity at all. Thus, from a neo-Darwinian point of view, the emergence
of even such handicapped proteins might confer a selectable advantage on
an organism. Axe thought that by rejecting as nonfunctional such mu-
tated sequences, Sauer’s team probably had introduced another estimation
error. These competing errors made it hard to know if the estimate made
by Sauer’s team was too high or too low or whether perhaps they might
neatly cancel each other out. To eliminate both sources of possible error,
Axe carefully designed a new series of experiments.
THE IMPORTANCE OF FOLDS
Axe had a key insight that animated the development of his experimental
program. He wanted to focus on the problem of the origin of new protein
folds and the genetic information necessary to produce them as a critical
test of the neo-Darwinian mechanism. Proteins comprise at least three
distinct levels of structure:4 primary, secondary, and tertiary, the latter
corresponding to a protein fold. The specific sequence of amino acids in a
protein or polypeptide chain make up its primary structure. The recurring
structural motifs such as alpha helices and beta strands that arise from
specific sequences of amino acids constitute its secondary structure. The
larger folds or “domains” that form from these secondary structures are
called tertiary structures (see Fig. 10.2).
Axe knew that as new life-forms arose during the history of life—in
events such as the Cambrian explosion—many new proteins must also
have arisen. New animals typically have new organs and cell types, and
new cell types often call for new proteins to service them. In some cases
new proteins, while functionally new, would perform their different func-
tions with essentially the same fold or tertiary structure as earlier proteins.
But more often, proteins capable of performing new functions require new

190
DARWIN’S DOUBT
AKIN© ALlt><
ALPHA HELIX
tevttAL BETA ftfe
Mfr$
FOfcMIlodr A BETA <44EET
A PROTEIN FoLt>
FIGURE 10.2
Different levels of protein structure. The first panel at the top shows the primary structure
of a protein: a sequence of amino acids forming a polypeptide chain. The second panel
depicts, in two different ways, two secondary structures: an alpha helix
( left), and beta
strands forming a beta sheet (right). The third panel at the bottom shows, in two different
ways, a tertiary structure—that is, a protein fold.

The Origin ofGenes and Proteins
191
folds to perform these functions. That means that explosions of new life-
forms must have involved bursts of new protein folds as well.
The late geneticist and evolutionary biologist Susumu Ohno noted that
Cambrian animals required complex new proteins such as, for example,
lysyl oxidase in order to support their stout body structures. When these
molecules originated in Cambrian animals, they also likely represented a
completely novel folded structure unlike anything present in Precambrian
forms of life such as sponges or one-celled organisms. Thus, Axe was con-
vinced that explaining the kind of innovation that occurred during the
Cambrian explosion and many other events in the history of life required
a mechanism that could produce, at least, distinctly new protein folds.
He had another reason for thinking that the ability to produce novel
protein folds provided a critical test for the creative power of the mutation
and selection mechanism. As an engineer, Axe understood that building a
new animal required innovation in form and structure. As a protein scien-
tist, he understood that new protein folds could be viewed as the smallest
unit ofstructural innovation in the history of life.
It follows that new protein folds represent the smallest unit of struc-
tural innovation that natural selection can select. Of course, natural se-
lection can operate on smaller units of change—individual amino-acid
changes that result in slight functional advantages or fitness gains, but
not new folds, for example. But what if the functional or fitness gains
that natural
selection preserves and passes on never generate struc-
tural innovations? What
if, instead,
it only preserves slight differences
in the sequence or function of proteins that confer an advantage with-
out altering structure? Then, clearly, fundamental changes in the form
of an organism will not occur. Building fundamentally new forms of
life requires structural innovation. And new protein folds represent the
smallest selectable unit of such innovation. Therefore, mutations must
generate new protein folds for natural selection to have an opportunity
to preserve and accumulate structural innovations. Thus, Axe realized
that the ability to produce new protein folds represents a sine qua non of
macroevolutionary innovation.
Could random mutations generate such novel protein folds? Axe realized
that answering this question depended upon measuring the rarity of func-
tional genes and proteins in sequence space and determining whether

192
DARWIN’S DOUBT
random genetic mutations would have enough opportunities to search the
relevant sequence spaces within evolutionary time.
AXE’S INITIAL RESULTS
Axe read the paper by Sauer and his colleague John Reidhaar-Olson that
estimated the proportion of functional protein sequences to be extremely
low (1 in 1063
). He noticed that the authors chose not to emphasize this
measure of rarity, however, but instead the variety of amino-acid substitu-
tions that the protein under study could tolerate.
In their paper, Reidhaar-Olson and Sauer also repeated a then popular
idea that the amino acids buried in the interior of a folded protein (form-
ing what is known as the hydrophobic core) are most important for speci-
fying the structure, while the arrangement of the exterior amino acids
did not matter nearly as much. 5 They thought that the amino acids buried
within folded proteins typically need only to be hydrophobic (water repel-
ling), whereas the amino acids on the exterior, for the most part, need to
be hydrophylic (water attracting). In fact, some protein scientists thought
that these simple restrictions might be the whole story—that a functional
protein fold might require nothing more than an appropriate arrangement
of hydrophobic and hydrophylic amino acids in a given sequence.
At Fersht’s lab in Cambridge, Axe conducted an experimental test of
this idea, and surprised himself with the first result. In a paper he coau-
thored in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences in 1996, he
reported his findings. When he replaced the entire thirteen-residue hy-
drophobic core of a small enzyme with random combinations of other
hydrophobic amino acids, a high fraction of the randomized proteins
(about one-fifth)
still performed their original function. This suggested
that proteins were, perhaps, less susceptible to functional loss as a result of
sequence changes than Axe had thought.
Next he focused on the exterior of proteins, randomizing portions of two
different proteins’ exteriors in much the same way that he had randomly
changed the interior of one of them. This time his approach failed to pro-
duce any functional variants at all. Realizing that this seemed to contradict
what Sauer and others had supposed, Axe decided to make only much more
restrictive changes in the next trial. He replaced each exterior amino-acid
residue only with its most similar amino-acid alternative. Nevertheless, both

The Origin ofGenes and Proteins
193
of the proteins that he studied still lost all function by the time he had re-
placed one-fifth of their exterior residues. Thus he concluded that the exte-
rior parts of the proteins were much more susceptible to functional loss as a
result of amino-acid changes than had been widely assumed.
In
all this work, Axe designed his experiments to remedy the two
sources of estimation error inherent in Sauer’s method. First, by study-
ing amino-acid changes in combination rather than in isolation, he de-
termined that the surrounding context typically did influence whether a
particular amino-acid change at a particular site caused functional loss.
In other words, he discovered that the neglect of the influence of the sur-
rounding context had the effect of exaggerating the tolerance to amino-
acid changes at particular sites, as he (and Sauer) had suspected.
Second, the proteins that Axe chose for his study made it possible for
function to be detected at much lower levels than was possible in Sauer’s
studies. For one protein Axe studied, the more sensitive test of function
did indeed allow a greater proportion of single mutants to retain some
function, with about 95 percent of the mutant proteins achieving the des-
ignation “active.” This suggested that Sauer’s less sensitive screen did con-
tribute to another source of estimation error, this time in the opposite
direction. Nevertheless, Axe’s more sensitive screen also enabled him to
establish that even though single mutations allow many proteins to retain
some function, they still diminish or damage the function of the protein
often enough to ensure that they will be eliminated by the purifying effect
of natural selection. Further, because of the extreme sensitivity of his test
for function, Axe learned that any single mutation that failed his test was
single-handedly destroying function. He determined that fully 5 percent of
such changes did destroy protein function.
Overall, therefore, he showed that despite some allowable variability,
proteins (and the genes that produce them) are indeed highly specified
relative to their biological functions, especially in their crucial exterior
portions. Axe showed that whereas proteins will admit some variation
at most sites if the rest of the protein is left unchanged, multiple as op-
posed to single amino-acid substitutions consistently result in rapid loss
of protein function. This was the case even when these changes occur
at sites that allow variation when altered in isolation. 6 His new experi-
ment also roughly confirmed Sauer’s earlier quantitative assessment of
the rarity of functional proteins, despite the estimation errors inherent

194
DARWIN’S DOUBT
in Sauer’s method. Why? Because it appeared that Sauer’s two estimation
errors—ignoring context and using an insufficiently sensitive screen for
function— did, in fact, roughly cancel each other out.
Despite these advances in understanding, Axe had not yet determined
whether the greatly restricted picture of tolerance that his work had ex-
posed would cause problems for the evolution of new protein folds. In
order to answer that question he would need to obtain a more precise
quantitative estimate of the rarity of proteins in sequence space.
Having developed a method that eliminated the main sources of esti-
mation error in earlier mutagenesis experiments, Axe was now in a posi-
tion to answer that question with unprecedented rigor. Once he did, he
could determine whether random genetic changes would have enough
opportunities—even on the scale of evolutionary time—to search the rel-
evant sequence spaces for functional genes and proteins.
DON’T LEAVE THE FOLD
Of course, Axe understood that neo-Darwinists do not envision a com-
pletely random journey through nucleotide or amino-acid sequence space.
They see natural selection acting to preserve useful mutational variations
and to eliminate deleterious ones. Richard Dawkins, for example, likens
an organism to a high mountain peak .
7 He compares climbing the sheer
precipice up the front side of the mountain to building a new organism
purely by chance—random mutations alone. He acknowledges that this
approach up “Mount Improbable” will not succeed. Nevertheless, he as-
serts that there is a gradual slope up the back side of the mountain that
can be climbed in small incremental steps. In his analogy, the back side
up “Mount Improbable” corresponds to the process of natural selection
acting on many small random changes in the genetic text. What chance
alone cannot do, natural selection acting on random mutations can ac-
complish through the cumulative effect of many slight successive steps.
Yet Axe’s experimental results presented a problem not only for sce-
narios involving random mutations acting alone, but also for scenarios
envisioning selection and random mutation acting in concert. Further,
his mutagenesis experiments cast doubt on each of the two scenarios by
which evolutionary biologists might envision new protein folds (and the

The Origin ofGenes and Proteins
195
information necessary to produce them) arising as the result of the muta-
tion and selection mechanism.
In theory, new genes capable of producing a new protein fold might
arise either from (a) preexisting genes or from (b) nonfunctional sections
of the genome. That
is—to adapt Dawkins’s visual analogy—mutation
and natural selection could conceivably generate a new functional gene
starting from either
(a) another mountain peak (a different preexisting
functional gene) or (b) from the valley floor (a nonfunctional section of
the genome). Yet Axe’s experimental results would show that the action
of natural selection would not help solve the search problem confronting
the mutation mechanism in either of these two cases. To see why, we need
to understand a bit more about each of these two possible neo-Darwinian
scenarios as well as Axe’s subsequent experimental findings.
FROM PEAK TO PEAK
In the first case, evolutionary biologists might envision mutation and se-
lection gradually altering a preexisting gene (and its protein product) to
produce another functional gene (and a different protein product). This
scenario involves moving metaphorically from one functional peak to an-
other without dipping into a valley (a zone of diminished fitness or non-
function).
Most evolutionary biologists reject this first scenario.
8 They do so be-
cause they recognize that mutations in preexisting genes will typically de-
grade functional genetic information. They know, too, that when genes
lose function, natural selection will eventually eliminate the organisms
that possess these genes. Genes that contribute to the healthy function of
an organism, that have been mutated in such a way as to diminish that
function, will be subject to what evolutionary biologists call “purifying se-
lection.” That is, natural selection will typically eliminate organisms pos-
sessing mutation-induced gene variants that diminish function or fitness.
(When natural selection preserves genetic changes that enhance function
or fitness, evolutionary biologists call that “positive selection.”)
Axe’s mutagenesis experiments confirmed these reasons for doubting
the first of the possible neo-Darwinian scenarios, at least as an explanation
for the origin of new protein folds. In work that he published in 2000, he

196
DARWIN’S DOUBT
showed that it is, indeed, exceedingly difficult to make extensive changes
to functional amino-acid sequences without destabilizing a protein fold.
Even best-case changes involving the most chemically similar amino acids
in the exterior of proteins tended to destabilize protein folds.
In these experiments, Axe mutated a gene that produced a protein ex-
hibiting a single fold and function. He found that as he altered this pro-
tein, multiple position changes in the exterior of the protein molecule
quickly effaced or destroyed its function.
9 Yet to turn one protein with a
distinctive folded structure into another with a completely novel structure
and function requires specified changes at many, many sites—far more
than Axe altered in his experiments.
10 The number of changes necessary
to produce a new protein fold typically exceeds the number of changes
that will result in functional loss. Given this, the probability of the evo-
lutionary process successfully traversing a functional landscape from one
functional peak to another— all the while escaping functional loss each
step along the way—is extremely small, with the probability diminishing
exponentially with each additional requisite change.
11 Indeed, by showing
that functional proteins with distinct folds are far more sensitive to func-
tional loss than protein scientists had previously assumed, Axe’s experi-
ments confirmed what most evolutionary biologists suspected—namely,
that protein-to-protein (or functional gene-to-functional gene) evolution
is a no-go where the mutation and selection mechanism must produce a
new protein fold (see Fig. 10.3).
Axe had a more fundamental reason for considering the first evolution-
ary scenario implausible. Based on the physical principles of protein func-
tion, the vast majority of protein functions simply cannot be performed
by unfolded proteins. In other words, stability of protein structure
is a
precondition of protein function. Destabilized protein folds not only lose
the three-dimensional structures they need to perform functional tasks,
they are also vulnerable to attack by other proteins called proteases that
devour unfolded proteins or polypeptides in the cell.
12
As one structure is degraded as the result of multiple sequence changes,
it will necessarily lose structural stability, resulting in a catastrophic loss
of function. Yet any diminution in the function of a protein will also di-
minishfitness in a way that will subject the protein (and its corresponding
gene) to the purifying action of natural selection.
13 Indeed, according to the
equations of population genetics, the standard mathematical expression of

The Origin of Genes and Proteins
197
zo kj
b
or ruvcnom
:
zone or function;
time amI>tH>e u)ait fo£ wo man
FIGURE 10.3
This figure illustrates why many evolutionary biologists reject the idea that genes and pro-
teins under selection pressure will evolve into new functional genes and proteins. Since
genes, like English sentences, contain sequence-specific functional information, multiple
changes in the genetic text will inevitably degrade function (or fitness) long before a new
functional sequence will arise—just as random changes in a meaningful English sentence
will typically destroy meaning long before such changes produce a significantly different
meaningful sentence.
neo-Darwinian theory, even slight losses in fitness will subject the dis-
advantageous traits that produce such losses to purifying selection, thus
eliminating them. That means that even many protein sequences that
retain a significant, though diminished, portion of their original function
nevertheless will not survive the winnowing effects of the neo-Darwinian
mechanism. Thus, the gradual transformation of one functional fold into
another was a complete nonstarter.
Research performed
at the European Molecular Biology Laboratory
by molecular biologist Francisco Blanco has since confirmed this conclu-
sion. Using site-directed mutagenesis, Blancos team found that the se-
quence space between two naturally occurring protein domains
is not
continuously populated by folded or functional proteins. By sampling
intermediate sequences between two sequences that do adopt different
folds, Blanco found that the intermediate sequences “lack a well-defined
three-dimensional structure.” Thus, he concluded that “the appearance of
a completely new fold from an existing one is unlikely to occur by evolu-
tion through a route of folded intermediate sequences .” 14
Thus, both experimental results and the physics of protein folding im-
plied that random searches for novel proteins starting from preexisting
protein-coding genes would result in functional loss long before a protein

198
DARWIN’S DOUBT
with a novel fold would emerge, as most evolutionary biologists already
suspected. Although the first of the two possible evolutionary scenarios
has the advantage of starting on a mountain peak—with a functional gene
and protein— it also has a lethal disadvantage: randomly mutating the
gene will soon destabilize a protein fold and/or generate nonfunctional
intermediate sequences and structures long before a new gene (capable of
generating a new fold) would arise. For this reason, this scenario involves
not so much a climb up Mount Improbable, but a step out over Valley
Impassable.
SCALING MOUNT IMPROBABLE
For
all these reasons, like most evolutionary biologists, Axe thought the
second neo-Darwinian scenario—in which new genes and proteins emerge
from nonfunctional or neutral regions of the genome—provides a much
more plausible means of producing the information necessary to construct
novel protein folds. It was to this scenario that Axe turned his experimental
energies.
In
this scenario, neo-Darwinists envision new genetic information
arising from sections of the genetic text that can vary freely without con-
sequence to the organism. According to this scenario, noncoding sections
of the genome or duplicated sections of coding regions undergo a pro-
tracted period of “neutral evolution
” 15 in which alterations in nucleotide
sequences have no discernible effect on the fitness of the organism. Func-
tional genes and proteins gradually rise from a nonfunctional valley floor
to a functional mountain peak—generating a new gene. Natural selection
plays a role, but not until a new functional gene has arisen.
Evolutionary biologists typically picture this process beginning with a
gene duplication event. Although several different mechanisms can gen-
erate gene duplicates in DNA ,
16 the most common mechanism occurs
during the crossing-over step of meiosis (a kind of cell division that pro-
duces sex cells, or gametes, in sexually reproducing organisms). During
meiosis, homologous chromosomes swap segments of DNA. In a normal
crossing-over event, corresponding chromosomal segments of equal size
are swapped between the two homologous chromosomes, ensuring that
both chromosomes experience no net gain or loss of genes. Sometimes,

The Origin ofGenes and Proteins
199
however, chromosomes swap genetic material of unequal length. When
this happens, one chromosome (the one that gets the smaller piece) ends
up losing some DNA, while the chromosome that receives the larger seg-
ment of genetic material ends up with a new stretch of chromosomal
DNA—one that may include a gene or genes it already had. This results in
duplicate copies of a gene on one chromosome.
When this occurs, one of the two genes may begin to vary—to experience
mutations—without adversely affecting the function of the organism, while
the other performs the original function. In the jargon of evolutionary biol-
ogy, mutational changes in gene duplicates are “selectively neutral”—they
initially provide no advantage or disadvantage to an organism or popula-
tion. These gene-duplication events allow nature room to experiment safely.
Unhelpful but harmless genetic novelties can be passed on to future genera-
tions, where additional mutations one day may render the evolving genetic
material useful. Eventually, as mutational changes accumulate, a new gene
sequence may arise in a new organism that can code for a novel protein fold
and function. At that point, natural selection can favor the new gene and its
protein product, preserving and passing it along to future generations—or
so the story goes.
This scenario—which many evolutionary biologists now refer to as the
“classical model” of gene evolution—has the advantage of allowing portions
of the genome to vary freely through many generations, giving mutations
many opportunities to “search” the space of possible base sequences without
being punished for drifting into valleys of lost or diminished function.
But this scenario faces an overriding problem: the extreme rarity of se-
quences capable of forming stable folds and performing biological func-
tions. Since natural selection does nothing to help generate new folded,
functional sequences, but rather can only preserve such sequences once
they have arisen, random mutations alone must search for the exceedingly
rare folded and functional sequences within the vast sea of combinatorial
possibilities.
And that is the big story associated with Axe’s experiments. His re-
search showed that
folded, functional sequences of amino acids are
indeed exceedingly rare within sequence space. After his initial round
of experiments, Axe performed another series of site-directed mutagen-
esis experiments on a 150-amino-acid protein-folding domain within

200
DARWIN’S DOUBT
a ^-lactamase enzyme and published the results in the Journal of Mo-
lecular Biology
Recall that a folding domain
is a portion of a larger
protein that exhibits a distinctive fold. Since amino-acid chains must
first fold into stable three-dimensional structures, Axe performed ex-
periments that enabled him to estimate the frequency of sequences that
will produce stable folds—any stable fold—before he estimated the fre-
quency of sequences performing a specific ((3-lactamase) function. His
improved experimental method produced a precise quantitative result.
He estimated (a) the number of 150-amino-acid-long sequences capable
of folding into stable “function-ready” folded structures compared to
(b) the whole set of possible amino-acid sequences of that length (recall
Fig. 9.3). Based on his site-directed mutagenesis experiments, he deter-
mined that ratio to be a vanishingly small
1 in 10 74
. In other words, for
sequences 150 amino acids long, only 1 in 10
74 sequences will be capable
of folding into a stable protein.
For a sequence to achieve a protein fold is only a first step, however. A
protein must be folded to be functional, but a folded protein is not neces-
sarily a functional protein. And although sequences capable of forming
stable protein folds are necessary to any significant evolutionary innova-
tion, natural selection cannot select for the presence of a fold unless it also
performs a function that confers a specific functional advantage on an
organism. Thus, Axe also estimated (a) the number of proteins of modest
length (150 residues)
that perform a specified function via any folded
structure compared to (b) the whole set of possible amino-acid sequences
of that size. Based on his experiments and data about the number of stable
folded proteins that exist, Axe estimated that ratio to be about
1 to 1077
.
A telling conclusion follows from this experimental data: The probabil-
ity of any given mutational trial generating (or “finding”) a specific func-
tional protein among all the possible 150 residue amino-acid sequences is
1 chance in 1077—that is, one chance in one hundred thousand, trillion,
trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion.
That is obviously an incredibly small probability, but is it small enough
to justify rejecting the classical model of gene evolution? Or is it plausible
to think that random mutations in the nonfunctional part of the genome
could overcome these long odds to generate the genetic information nec-
essary to produce a novel protein fold with a specific selectable function?

The Origin of Genes and Proteins
201
HOW MANY TRIALS?
When statisticians or scientists assess whether a chance hypothesis pro-
vides a plausible explanation for the occurrence of an event, they do not
just evaluate the probability of that particular event occurring once; they
evaluate the probability of the event occurring given the number of oppor-
tunities it has to occur.
For example, if our hypothetical bike thief from the previous chapter
had enough time to try more than half (more than 500 of the 1000) total
combinations of a three-dial bike lock, then the probability that he will
stumble upon the right combination will exceed the probability that he
will fail. In that case,
it will be more likely than not that he will succeed
in opening the lock by chance. In that case, the chance hypothesis—the
hypothesis that he will succeed in opening the lock by chance—is more
likely to be true than false. On the other hand, ifjust after he started trying
to crack the lock he heard a security guard coming around the corner and
only had time to explore a small fraction of the total number of possible
combinations—far fewer than half—then it will be much more likely than
not that he willfail to open the lock by chance. Consequently, anyone who
knew his situation could conclude that the chance hypothesis
is, in that
case, much more likely to turn out false than true.
When statisticians or scientists assess the probability of an event occur-
ring by chance, they often assess what is called a conditional probability.
In deciding the plausibility of a chance hypothesis, they assess the prob-
ability of the event given or “conditioned on" what else we know, especially
what else
is known about the number of opportunities the event has to
occur. And they refer to the number of opportunities an event has to occur
as “the probabilistic resources.” 18
If the conditional
probability of the chance
hypothesis,
given
the
number of opportunities
it has to occur,
is less than
Vi, then
it is more
likely than not that the event will not happen by chance. It will be viewed
as implausible—more likely to be false than true. Conversely, if the condi-
tional probability of the chance hypothesis, given the number of opportu-
nities it has to occur, is more than Vi, then it is more likely than not that the
event in question will occur by chance. It will be deemed plausible—more
likely to be true than false. And, of course, the smaller the conditional

202
DARWIN’S DOUBT
probability associated with a hypothesis, the more implausible the hypoth-
esis—the more likely the chance hypothesis is to be false than true.
How then should we assess the chance hypothesis for the origin of bio-
logical information—in particular, the hypothesis that random mutations
generated the information necessary to produce a novel protein fold with a
selectable function? What is the conditional probability that such a folded
protein could arise as the result of random mutations in duplicated non-
functional sections of a genome? Axe realized that in order to answer that
question he needed a way to estimate the number of opportunities that
random mutations had for producing a new protein fold with a selectable
function during the whole history of life on earth.
THE BIOLOGICAL UNIVERSAL PROBABILITY BOUND
Here, evolutionary theory itself provides the answer. Axe was interested in
the number of times that mutations might have produced new sequences
of bases in DNA that were capable of producing a new sequence of amino
acids—one of the 1077 possible sequences in the relevant sequence space.
Yet not every such sequence of bases that mutations might generate con-
stituted a relevant trial. In theory, mutations may alter a gene many times
during the life cycle of an organism. Nevertheless, natural selection can
only act on the new sequence of bases that is actually passed on to off-
spring. It might seem that it would be difficult to quantify the number of
mutational trials in each generation. But even
if we think of mutations
repeatedly shuffling and reshuffling the arrangement of bases during the
life cycle of an organism, only those mutations in the genes (or DNA) in
the reproductive cells of parent organisms can have any effect on the next
generation. Since Axe wanted to know how many novel sequences capable
of generating a selectable function might have arisen in the history of life,
he only needed to concern himself with those sequences that could be
transmitted during reproduction.
This meant that if he could estimate the total number of organisms that
had lived during the history of life on earth and the number of new genes
that mutations might produce and pass on to the next generation, he could
establish an upper bound on the number of trials relevant to the evolu-
tionary process.
Axe knew that the huge population sizes of prokaryotes like bacteria

The Origin of Genes and Proteins
203
dwarf the population sizes of all other organisms combined. Thus, esti-
mates for the size of the bacterial population—plus a smidge for every-
thing else—would approximate the size of the number of organisms living
at any given time. Based on the average length of time of a bacterial gen-
eration and the time since the first appearance of bacterial life on earth
(3.8 billion years ago), scientists have estimated that a total of about 1040
organisms have lived on earth since life first appeared.
19 Axe made the
assumption that each new organism received one new sequence of bases
(one potential gene) capable of generating one of the possible amino-acid
sequences in sequence space per generation.
This was an extremely generous assumption. Since mutations have to be
quite rare for life to survive, most bacterial cells inherit an exact copy of
their parent’s DNA. Furthermore, the ones that differ from their parents
are likely to carry a mutation that has already occurred many times in other
cells. For these reasons, the actual number of new sequences sampled in the
history of life is much lower than the total number of bacterial cells that
have existed. Nevertheless, Axe assumed that one new gene per organism
has been transmitted to the next generation. Thus, he used 1040 gene se-
quences as a liberal estimate of the total number of gene sequences (evo-
lutionary trials) that have been generated to search sequence space in the
history of life.
Even so, 1040 represents only a tiny fraction— 1 ten trillion, trillion, tril-
lionffi—of 1077
. Thus, the conditional probability of generating a gene se-
quence capable of producing a novel protein fold and function is still only
1 in 10
37
. This means that if every organism from the dawn of time had
generated, by random mutation, one new base sequence in the sequence
space of interest, that would amount to only one 10 trillion, trillion, tril-
lionth of the sequences in that space—the space that needs to be searched.
And, since conditional probability of a new gene arising in the manner
envisioned by the classical model turns out to be almost unimaginably less
than
Vz, the classical model turns out to be vastly more likely to be false
than true. Thus, Axe concluded that a reasonable person should reject
it.
The probabilistic resources available to the classical model of gene evolu-
tion are simply far too small to tame
1 chance in 1077 (see Fig. 10.4).
To appreciate why this model fails, consider the following illustration.
After the 1975 Steven Spielberg film Jaws became a big hit, one small-
town
motel
advertised
“Shark-Free
Pool.”
Proponents
of the second

204
DARWIN’S DOUBT
1
dumber or<eaUBtJC€< ofA 6fiveu LSH&TH
lO77
DUMBER OFTRIALS, or OR6f
ID TflE
I<ToR/ OF UFE
.
1Q+*
lb77
wiiMBEfc orteQUevcet to be {eAzcueb
FIGURE 10.4
The top panel in this diagram represents the results of Axes mutagenesis experiments
showing the extreme rarity of functional proteins in sequence space. Based on his ex-
periments Axe estimated that there are 10
77 possible sequences corresponding to a spe-
cific functional sequence 150 amino acids long. The second panel shows that functional
amino-acid sequences are extremely rare even in relation to the total number of oppor-
tunities the evolutionary process would have had to generate novel sequences (on the
assumption that each organism that has ever lived during the history of life produced one
such sequence per generation).
evolutionary scenario (gene duplication, followed by neutral evolution),
envision an evolutionary pool where there are no consequences for mu-
tational missteps—by analogy, a pool with no predators. But to extend
the illustration, picture a predator-free pool the size of our galaxy. Now
picture a blindfolded man dropped into the middle of it. He must swim to
the far side, to the one spot on the edge of the pool where a ladder would
give him a way out. Hes safe from predators, but it will do him no good.
He needs direction, some way of gauging his progress, and an immense
amount of time. But he has none of these and so he will arrive at the ladder
in neither a hundred years, nor a hundred billion. Similarly, in the clas-
sical model of gene evolution, random mutations must thrash about aim-
lessly in immense combinatorial space, a space that could not be explored
by this means in the entire history of life on earth, let alone in the few
million years of the Cambrian explosion.

The Origin of Genes and Proteins
205
TO BUILD AN ANIMAL
Yet Axe’s calculations only hint at the full problem for neo-Darwinian
theory. By bending over backwards not to overstate the improbability
of generating a new protein fold and by focusing narrowly on that one
aspect of the challenge confronting evolutionary theory, his figures vastly
understate the improbability of building a Cambrian animal. There are
several reasons for this.
First, the Cambrian explosion as dated by fossil evidence took far less
time than has elapsed since the origin of life on earth until the present
(about 3.8 billion years). 20 Less time available for a given evolutionary
transition means fewer generations of new organisms and fewer opportu-
nities to generate new genes by which to search relevant sequence space.
This makes it even harder to generate a new protein fold by chance in the
relevant time period.
Second, bacteria are by far the most common type of organisms in-
cluded in Axe’s estimate of the total number of organisms that have lived
on earth. Yet no one thinks that Cambrian animals evolved directly from
bacteria. Nor does anyone think that the putative multicellular ances-
tors of the Cambrian forms would have been anywhere near as abundant
as the bacterial populations that Axe used as the main basis of his esti-
mate. A more realistic estimate for the number of possible animal ances-
tors would necessarily result in a much lower estimate for the number of
gene sequences available for searching sequence space (corresponding to
a single protein of modest length in a single Cambrian animal). Recall
that, based on Axe’s estimates, the probability of generating just one gene
(for a new functional protein fold) from all the bacteria (and other organ-
isms) that have ever lived on earth is just
1 in 10 trillion, trillion, trillion.
Consequently, the mechanism for searching sequence space that Axe de-
termined to be extremely implausible must be judged far more implausible
as a mechanism for producing the Cambrian information explosion, since
there were far fewer multicellular organisms present in the Precambrian
period than there have been total organisms present in the entire history
of life.
Third, building new animal forms requires generating far more than
just one protein of modest length. New Cambrian animalswould have re-
quired proteins much longer than 150 amino acids to perform necessary,

206
DARWIN’S DOUBT
specialized functions.
21 For example, as previously noted, many of these
Cambrian animals needed the complex protein lysyl oxidase to support
their stout body structures. In addition to a novel protein
fold, these
molecules (in living organisms) comprise over 400 precisely sequenced
(nonrepeating) amino acids. Reasonable extrapolation from mutagenesis
experiments done on shorter protein molecules suggests that the improb-
ability of randomly producing functionally sequenced proteins of this
length would be extremely unlikely to occur given the probabilistic re-
sources (and duration) of the entire universe. 22
The mutation and selection mechanism faces a related obstacle. The
Cambrian animals exhibit structures that would have required many
new types of cells, each requiring many novel proteins to perform their
specialized functions. But new cell types require not just one or two new
proteins, but coordinated systems of proteins to perform their distinc-
tive cellular functions. The unit of selection in such cases ascends to
the system as a whole. Natural selection selects for functional advan-
tage, but no advantage accrues from a new cell type until a system of
servicing proteins is in place. But that means random mutations must,
again, do the work of information generation without the help of natural
selection—and, now, not simply for one protein, but for many proteins
arising together. Yet the odds of this occurring by chance alone are, of
course, far smaller than the odds of the chance origin of a single new
gene or protein—so small as to render the chance origin of the infor-
mation needed to build a new cell type fantastically improbable (and
implausible) given even the most optimistic estimates for the length of
the Cambrian explosion.
Richard Dawkins has noted that scientific theories can rely on only so
much “luck” before they cease to be credible. 23 But the second scenario, in-
volving gene duplication and neutral evolution, by its own logic, precludes
natural selection from playing a role in generating genetic information
until after the fact. Thus, it relies entirely on “too much luck.” The sensitiv-
ity of proteins to functional loss, the rarity of proteins within combina-
torial sequence space, the need for long proteins to build new cell types
and animals, the need for whole new systems of proteins to service new
cell types, and the brevity of the Cambrian explosion relative to rates of
mutation— all conspire to underscore the immense implausibility of any

The Origin of Genes and Proteins
207
scenario for the origin of Cambrian genetic information that relies upon
random variation alone, unassisted by natural selection.
Yet
the
classical model
of gene
evolution—which
relies on
neu-
tral evolution—requires novel genes and proteins to arise, precisely, by
random mutation alone. Adaptive advantage accrues after the generation
of new functional genes and proteins. Natural selection cannot play a role
until new functional information-bearing molecules have independently
arisen. Thus, to return to Dawkins’s imagery, evolutionary theorists en-
visioned the need to scale the steep face of a precipice of which there is
effectively no gradually sloping back side, since the smallest increment
of structural innovation in the history of life—a new protein fold—itself
presents a formidable Mount Improbable.
By the way, Axe’s later experiments establishing the extreme rarity of
protein folds in sequence space also show why random changes to exist-
ing genes inevitably efface or destroy function before they generate funda-
mentally new folds or functions (scenario one). If only one out of every 1077
of the alternate sequences are functional, an evolving gene will inevitably
wander down an evolutionary dead-end long before it can ever become a
gene capable of producing a new protein fold. The extreme rarity of pro-
tein folds also entails their isolation from each other in sequence space.
A CATCH-22
Douglas Axe’s results highlight an acute dilemma for neo-Darwinism, a
“catch-22.” On the one hand, if natural selection plays no role in generat-
ing new genes, as the idea of neutral evolution implies, then mutations
alone must climb a Mount Improbable in a single leap—a situation that,
given Axe’s results and Dawkins’s own logic,
is probabilistically unten-
able. On the other hand, any model for the origin of genetic information
that envisions a significant role for natural selection, by assuming a preex-
isting gene or protein under selective pressure, encounters other equally
intractable difficulties. The evolving genes and proteins will range over
a series of disadvantageous or nonfunctional intermediates that natural
selection will not favor or preserve, but will, instead, eliminate. At that
point, selection-driven evolution will cease, locking existing genes and
proteins into place.

208
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Thus, whether one envisions the evolutionary process beginning with
a preexisting functional gene or a duplicated non-coding region of the
genome, the results of mutagenesis experiments present a precise quanti-
tative challenge to the efficacy of the neo-Darwinian mechanism. Indeed,
our growing knowledge about the rarity and isolation of proteins and
functional genes in sequence space implies that neither neo-Darwinian
scenario for producing new genes is at all plausible. Thus, neo-Darwinism
does not explain the Cambrian information explosion.

ASSUME A GENE
When
I
first heard that Douglas Axe had succeeded in making a rigor-
ous estimate of the rarity of proteins in sequence space, I wondered what
neo-Darwinists would say in response. Given the experimental rigor and
mathematical precision of the work he reported in the Journal ofMolecu-
lar Biology in 2004, and the long odds against mutation and selection ever
finding a novel gene or functional protein, what could they say? That the
probability of a successful search for new genes and proteins was higher
than Axe’s experiments suggested? That his methods or calculations were
flawed? That no one else had gotten similar results? Since Axe’s work con-
firmed other analyses and experiments, and since his paper had passed
through the careful scrutiny of peer review, none of those responses
seemed plausible. Yet defenders of the adequacy of the neo-Darwinian
mechanism were far from admitting defeat, as I would soon find out.
The same year,
I published a peer-reviewed scientific article about the
Cambrian explosion and the problem of the origin of the biological in-
formation needed to explain
it.
1 In the paper, I cited Axe’s results and ex-
plained why the rarity of functional proteins in sequence space posed such
a severe challenge to the adequacy of the neo-Darwinian mechanism. The
article appeared in a biology journal, Proceedings of the Biological Soci-
ety of Washington, published out of the Smithsonian Institution by scien-
tists working for the Smithsonian’s National Museum of Natural History
(NMNH). Because the article also argued that the theory of intelligent
design could help explain the origin of biological information (see Chap-
ter 18), its publication created a firestorm of controversy.

210
DARWIN'S DOUBT
Museum scientists and evolutionary biologists from around the coun-
try were furious with the journal and its editor, Richard Sternberg, for al-
lowing the article to be peer-reviewed and then published. Recriminations
followed. Museum officials took away Sternberg’s keys, his office, and his
access to scientific samples. He was transferred from a friendly to a hos-
tile supervisor. A congressional subcommittee staff later investigated and
found that museum officials initiated an intentional disinformation cam-
paign against Sternberg in an attempt to get him to resign. His detractors
circulated false rumors: “Sternberg has no degrees in biology” (actually he
has two Ph.D.’s, one in evolutionary biology and one in systems biology);
“He
is a priest, not a scientist” (Sternberg is not a priest, but a research
scientist); “He is a Republican operative working for the Bush campaign”
(he was far too busy doing scientific research to be involved in political
campaigns, Republican or otherwise); “He’s taken money to publish the
article” (not true); and so on. Eventually, despite the demonstrable false-
hood of the charges, he was demoted .
2
Major news stories about the controversy appeared in Science, Nature,
The Scientist, and the Chronicle of Higher Education .
3 Then articles ap-
peared in the mainstream press, including the Washington Post and the
Wall Street Journal . 4 A major story aired on National Public Radio .
5 Stern-
berg himself even appeared on The O’Reilly Factor.
Despite the intense furor, there was no formal scientific response to my
article: neither the Proceedings nor any other scientific journal published a
scientific refutation. The members of the Council of the Biological Society
of Washington who oversaw the publication of the journal insisted that
they didn’t want to dignify it by responding.
Eventually two scientists and a science education policy advocate
each associated with the National Center for Science Education, a group
that lobbies for teaching evolution in the public schools—stepped forward.
The three authors—geologist Alan Gishlick, education policy advocate
Nicholas Matzke, and wildlife biologist Wesley R. Elsberry—published a
response to my article on TalkReason.org, a prominent atheistic website . 6
Although the website’s guidelines prohibit “ad hominem arguments,” the
rule was somewhat loosely enforced in the case of Gishlick, Matzke, and
Elsberry’s response, which they titled “Meyer’s Hopeless Monster.”
Gishlick, Matzke, and Elsberry attempted to refute my central argu-
ment by citing a scientific paper that they said solved the problem of the

Assume a Gene
211
origin of genetic information. The paper, a scientific review essay titled
“The Origin of New Genes: Glimpses from the Young and Old,” had ap-
peared in Nature Reviews Genetics in 2003. Gishlick, Matzke, and Elsberry
asserted that this paper—coauthored by Manyuan Long, an evolutionary
biologist at the University of Chicago, and several colleagues—was repre-
sentative of an extensive “scientific literature documenting the origin of
new genes.” 7
Other biologists echoed Gishlick, Matzke, and Elsberry’s claim in the
context of another public controversy. During the 2005 Kitzmiller v. Dover
trial about an ill-advised attempt to require teachers in a Pennsylvania
school district to read a statement about intelligent design, Brown Uni-
versity biologist Kenneth Miller cited Long’s paper in his testimony. He
said that it shows how new genetic information evolves. The judge in the
case, John E. Jones, then cited Miller’s testimony about Long’s article in
his own decision. Judge Jones asserted there are “more than three dozen
peer-reviewed scientific publications showing the origin of new genetic
information by evolutionary processes.”
8 Elsewhere Matzke, along with
biologist Paul Gross, stated that the paper by Long “reviews all the muta-
tional processes involved in the origin of new genes and then lists dozens
of examples in which research groups have reconstructed the genes’ ori-
gins.”
9 In their view, “Competent scientists know how new genetic infor-
mation arises.”
10
But do evolutionary biologists really know this?
Let’s take a closer look at the article that allegedly shows “how new ge-
netic information arises.”
11
ONCE UPON A GENE
The oft-cited Long paper points to a variety of studies that purport to
explain the evolution of various genes. These studies typically begin by
taking a gene and then seeking to find other genes that are similar (or
homologous) to
it. They then seek to trace the history of slightly differ-
ent homologous genes back to a hypothetical common ancestor gene (or
genes). To do this, the studies survey databases of gene sequences looking
for similar sequences in representatives of different taxonomic groups
often in closely related species. Some studies also attempt to establish
the existence of a common ancestor gene on the basis of similar genes

212
DARWIN’S DOUBT
within the very same organism. They then typically propose evolutionary
scenarios in which an ancestral gene duplicates itself,
12 and then the dupli-
cate and the original evolve differently as the result of subsequent muta-
tions in each gene.
Next, these scenarios invoke various kinds of mutations— duplica-
tion events, exon shuffling, retropositioning, lateral gene transfer, and
subsequent point mutations— as well as the activity of natural selection
(see Fig.
11.1). The evolutionary biologists conducting these studies pos-
tulate that modern genes arose as the result of these various mutational
processes—processes that they envision as having shaped genes during
a long evolutionary history. Since the information in modern genes
is
presumably different from the information in the hypothetical ances-
tor genes, they regard the mutational mechanisms that are allegedly re-
sponsible for these differences as the explanation for the origin of genetic
information.
Upon closer examination, however, none of these papers demonstrate
how mutations and natural selection could find truly novel genes or pro-
teins in sequence space in the first place; nor do they show that it is rea-
sonably probable (or plausible) that these mechanisms would do so in the
time available. These papers assume the existence of significant amounts
ofpreexisting genetic information (indeed, many whole and unique genes)
and then suggest various mechanisms that might have slightly altered or
fused these genes together into larger composites. At best, these scenarios
“trace” the history of preexisting genes, rather than explain the origin of
the original genes themselves (see Fig. 11.2).
This kind of scenario building can suggest potentially fruitful avenues
of research. But an obvious error comes
in mistaking a hypothetical
scenario for either a demonstration of fact or an adequate explanation.
None of the scenarios that the Long paper cites demonstrate the math-
ematical or experimental plausibility of the mutational mechanisms they
assert as explanations for the origin of genes. Nor do they directly observe
the presumed mutational processes in action. At best, they provide hypo-
thetical, after-the-fact reconstructions of a few events out of a sequence of
many supposed events, starting with the existence of a presumed common
ancestor gene. But that gene itself does not represent a hard data point. It is
inferred to have existed on the basis of the similarity of two or more other

Assume a Gene
213
FIGURE 11.1
Various types of
mutations that are
alleged to result in the
modification of genes:
exon shuffling, retro-
positioning, lateral
gene transfer, and
gene fusion.
A. 6X0 fo iHUEELIkit
i.
u)rm tiuo
Stout AmI> Am iMTfeoM
IM UETlOEEM:
z. mfeMA T^AM^irr oF TUB
dfBSJB (lH-r&Ofj{ KEhO\/et>?:
u
.— ..
.—l
3 KOtAttom lM<£irr<
EXom FfcoM AMOTHEfc
(frCME IM{lt>£ OFTHl<
6EM£:
+ mFuA tFAm^IFt
OF TUB MEU) fiEHE vOITH
THfcEE £XOM<:
_ U
. ^ETli0?0^m0NlW^ OE-
KA£#E»J<5r£fc £nA TKAw^dKIPT
l. TlOo 4£m£<, ^EME A, AmI> 6rEvE
13, Afce mextto
OME AfJOTHEte OM A £HfeoMO<oK£:
/ /A j 4SME A}
-
) frEMEg —
V
-
z. THE mfcMA TfcAM<£fcIFr OF AMCXHEfc ^EME,
C
1$ fe£TfcoTfcAM{PC>{£t> 13ETIOEEM ^EmE^ A AmI> 13:
. j
H
j£*rTTy^y>rit mfewA r^AM<c^rpT
l
^
Fofc &£v£ C
3- 6r£ME £ i< mou) iM<£fcT£D> "5ET10EEM £EME{ A AmI> "5
OM THE OteoMo{oME.
C. LATERAL 4£n£TKAu<F£1>
6tEm€^ FfcoM
PAfcEMT O^dpAMl^K
4eme^ fpom
M£i<fr+4Boi>iM<fr
oP^-Ami^m
LATERAL
4€ME TfcAw^FEfc
OFF<FfcIM6
E>. 4EWE FU<IC>W few£ KEd+4AMl<K;
£HfeoMo{oM£ iOItH
Foi>P 6rEvE{: A,
13, C 0
I
CWZohotohE u)rrH
tHPEE ^EME<: A, 13C 0
6tBkjB
FUftOH

214
DARWIN’S DOUBT
FfcOM
^ FUfeiF/lK^
teLECttou
bUPLicA-nov
/-T?
,
..
"^= J
'
•
'
C„<y“V
s'
4EWE A
M&jlfell
FUfclFyifudr
^ELECTIOKL
t
s '
-
rsrs^Jprf
" * S'
'
4€W£ A
lifUiltll'lji—
FIGURE 11.2
Depiction of how gene duplication and subsequent gene evolution might take place.
While the gene on the bottom remains under selective pressure and cannot experience
many mutations without loss of fitness or function (see Figure 10.3), the duplicated gene
at the top can in theory vary without deleterious consequences to the organism.
existing genes, which are the only actual pieces of observational evidence
upon which these often elaborate scenarios are based.
That these scenarios depend on various inferences and postulations
doesn’t, by
itself,
disqualify them from
consideration.
Nevertheless,
whether they adequately explain the origin of genetic information de-
pends upon the evidence for the existence of the entities they infer (the
ancestral genes) and the plausibility of the mutational mechanisms they
postulate. Lets look at both parts of these scenarios.
COMMON ANCESTOR GENES?
Nearly all of the scenarios developed in the papers that Long cites start
with an inferred common ancestral gene from which two or more modern
genes diverged and developed. These scenarios treat the similarity of se-
quence (the information) in two or more genes as unequivocal evidence
for a common ancestral gene (see Fig. 11.2). As I noted in Chapters 5 and
6, standard methods of phylogenetic reconstruction presupposey rather
than demonstrate, that biological similarity results from shared ancestry.
Yet, as we saw in Chapter 6, similarity of sequence by itself is not always
an unequivocal indicator of common ancestry. Sometimes similarity ap-
pears between species where it cannot be explained by inheritance from a
common ancestor (e.g., the similar forelimbs on moles and mole crickets)

Assume a Gene
215
and, at the very least, there are other possible explanations for sequence
similarity.
In the first place, similar gene sequences might have evolved indepen-
dently on two parallel lines of descent starting with two different genes,
as the hypothesis of convergent evolution asserts. Recent examples of con-
vergent genetic evolution now abound in the literature of molecular and
evolutionary biology.
13 For example, molecular biologists have discovered
that both whales and bats use similar systems—involving similar genes
and proteins—for echolocation. The striking similarity of these systems
used in two otherwise disparate mammalian species has led biologists to
posit the parallel evolution of echolocation, including the gene sequences
and proteins that make it possible, from a common ancestor that did not
possess this system.
14
In addition, it is possible that similar genes might have been separately
designed to meet similar functional needs in different organismal con-
texts. Viewed this way, similarity of sequence does not necessarily reflect
descent with modification from a common ancestor, but could reflect
design in accord with common functional considerations, constraints, or
goals.
I recognize, of course, that to this point I have not given any inde-
pendent reasons for considering the design hypothesis, and that, as a hy-
pothesis for sequence similarity by itself, intelligent design may not seem
compelling. (For more compelling reasons to consider intelligent design,
see Chapters 17 through 19.) Nevertheless, I mention both these other pos-
sible explanations for the similarity of gene sequences in order to dem-
onstrate that sequence similarity does not necessarily indicate, or derive
from, a common ancestral gene.
ORFAN GENES
Some genes, and the information-rich sequences they contain, most certainly
cannot be explained by reference to the kind of scenarios that Long cites. All
of these scenarios attempt to explain the origin oftwo similar genes by refer-
ence to descent with modification (via mutation) from common ancestral
genes. Yet genomic studies are now turning up hundreds of thousands of
genes in many diverse organisms that exhibit no significant similarity in
sequence to any other known gene.
15 These “taxonomically restricted genes”

216
DARWIN’S DOUBT
or “ORFans” (for “open reading frames of unknown origin”) now dot the
phylogenetic landscape. ORFans have turned up in every major group of
organisms, including plants and animals as well as both eukaryotic and pro-
karyotic one-celled organisms. In some organisms, as much as one-half of
the entire genome comprises ORFan genes .
16
Thus, even if it could be assumed that similar gene sequences always
point to a common ancestor gene, these ORFan genes cannot be explained
using the kind of scenarios that Long’s article cites. Since ORFans lack se-
quence similarity to any known gene—that is, they have no known homo-
logs in even distantly related species— it is impossible to posit a common
ancestral gene from which a particular ORFan and
its homolog might
have evolved. Remember: ORFans, by definition, have no homologs. These
genes are unique—one of a kind—a fact tacitly acknowledged by the in-
creasing number of evolutionary biologists who attempt to “explain” the
origin of such genes through de novo (“out of nowhere”) origination.
Some might argue that as biologists map the sequence of more genomes
and add more gene sequences to protein databases, homologs of these
ORFans will eventually turn up, thus gradually eliminating the mystery
surrounding the ORFan phenomenon. Yet to date the trend has gone in
the opposite direction. As scientists have explored and sequenced more
genomes, they have discovered more and more ORFans without finding
anything like a corresponding number of homologs. Instead, the number
of “unpaired” ORFan genes continues to grow with no sign of the trend
reversing itself.
17
THE PLAUSIBILITY OF
THE MUTATIONAL PROCESSES
Even if evolutionary biologists could establish the existence of the common
ancestral genes from which their scenarios begin, that would not estab-
lish the plausibility of a neo-Darwinian mechanism for generating genetic
information from that ancestor. Moreover, the term “plausibility” in this
context has a specific scientific and methodologically significant meaning.
Studies in the philosophy of science show that successful explanations in
historical sciences such as evolutionary biology need to provide “causally
adequate” explanations—that is, explanations that cite a cause or mech-
anism capable of producing the effect in question. In On the Origin of

Assume a Gene
217
Species, Darwin repeatedly attempted to show that his theory satisfied this
criterion, which was then called the vera causa (or “true cause”) criterion.
In the third chapter of the Origin, for example, he sought to demonstrate
the causal adequacy of natural selection by drawing analogies between it
and the power of animal breeding and by extrapolating from observed
instances of small-scale evolutionary change over short periods of time.
In this, Darwin hewed to a principle of scientific reasoning that one of
his scientific role models, the great geologist Charles Lyell, used as a guide
for reasoning about events in the remote past. Lyell insisted that good ex-
planations for the origin of geological features should cite “causes now in
operation”—causes known from present experience to have the capacity
to produce the effects under study.
18
Do the scenarios developed by various evolutionary biologists cited
in the Long review essay meet this criterion? Duplication mutations and
various other modes of random mutational change along with natural
selection clearly constitute “causes now in operation.” No one disputes
that. But have these processes demonstrated the capacity to produce the
effect in question, namely, the genetic information necessary to structural
innovation in the history of life? There are several good reasons to think
that they have not.
BEGGING QUESTIONS
First, most of the mutational processes that evolutionary biologists invoke
in the scenarios cited in the Long essay presuppose significant amounts of
preexisting genetic information on preexisting genes or modular sections
ofDNA or RNA. The Long essay highlights seven main mutational mech-
anisms at work in the sculpting of new genes: (1) exon shuffling, (2) gene
duplication, (3) retropositioning of messenger RNA transcripts, (4) lateral
gene transfer,
(5) transfer of mobile genetic units or elements,
(6) gene
fission or fusion, and (7) de novo origination (see Fig.
11.1). Yet each of
these mechanisms, with the exception of de novo generation, begins with
preexisting genes or extensive sections of genetic text. This preexisting
functionally specified information
is in some cases enough to code for
the construction of an entire protein or a distinct protein fold. Moreover,
these scenarios not only assume unexplained preexisting sources of bio-
logical information, they do so without explaining or even attempting to

218
DARWIN’S DOUBT
explain how any of the mechanisms they envision could have solved the
combinatorial search problem described in Chapters 9 and 10.
A closer look at each of these mechanisms will show why scenarios
that rely on them beg important questions about the origin of genetic
information.
Advocates of exon shuffling envision modular sections of a genome
randomly arranging and rearranging themselves to generate entirely new
genes, not unlike rearranging whole paragraphs in an essay to generate a
new article. In genomes that have regions that code for the production of
proteins interspersed with regions that do not code for proteins, the term
“exon” refers to a protein-coding region of the genome. These protein-
coding regions of the genome are often interrupted by nonprotein-coding
sections of the genome (called introns) that serve other functions, such as
coding for the production of regulatory RNAs. In any case, exons store
significant quantities of preexisting functionally specified information.
Though most proteins are encoded by multiple exons, a single exon may
encode a substantial unit of protein structure, such as a functional protein
fold—a fact that advocates of exon shuffling count in their own attempts
to explain novel proteins. They assume that exons can be blindly shuffled
and mixed around to form genes. Nevertheless, this mechanism cannot
produce new protein folds. Either an exon is large enough that it already
encodes a protein fold—in which case it’s not creating a new fold—or it’s
too small, small enough that multiple exons must be combined in order to
form a stable protein fold. In this latter case, other problems—in particu-
lar, something called adverse side-chain interaction—will preclude suc-
cess, as we will see.
Evolutionary scenarios envisioning other mutational mechanisms also
presuppose important sources of preexistent genetic information. Gene du-
plication, as the name implies, involves the production of a duplicate copy of
a preexisting gene, already rich in functionally specified information. Retro-
positioning ofmessenger RNA transcripts occurs when an enzyme called re-
verse transcriptase takes a preexisting strand of messenger RNA and inserts
its corresponding DNA sequence into a genome, also producing a duplicate
of the coding portion of a preexisting gene. Lateral gene transfer involves
transferring a preexisting gene from one organism (usually a bacterium)
into the genome of another. The transfer of mobile genetic elements likewise
occurs when preexisting genes enclosed in circular strands of DNA called

Assume a Gene
219
plasmids enter one organism from another and eventually find themselves
incorporated into a new genome. This process also mainly occurs in single-
celled organisms. A similar process can occur in eukaryotes, where mobile
genetic elements called transposons—often called “jumping genes”
19—can
hop from place to place in the genome. Gene fusion occurs when two ad-
jacent preexisting genes, each rich with specified genetic information, link
together after the deletion of intervening genetic material .”20
Each of these
six mutational mechanisms presupposes
preexisting
modules of specified genetic information. Some of these mutational mech-
anisms also depend upon sophisticated preexistent molecular machines
such as the reverse transcriptase enzyme used in retropositioning or other
complex cellular machinery involved in DNA replication. Since building
these machines requires other sources of genetic information, scenarios
that presuppose the availability of such molecular machines to assist in
the cutting, splicing, or positioning of modular sections of genetic infor-
mation clearly beg the question.
Overall, what evolutionary biologists have in mind is something like
trying to produce a new book by copying the pages of an existing book
(gene duplication, lateral gene transfer, and transfer of mobile genetic ele-
ments), rearranging blocks of text on each page (exon shuffling, retropo-
sitioning, and gene fusion), making random spelling changes to words in
each block of text (point mutations), and then randomly rearranging the
new pages. Clearly, such random rearrangements and changes will have
no realistic chance of generating a literary masterpiece, let alone a coher-
ent read. That is to say, these processes will not likely generate specificity
of arrangement and sequence and, therefore, do not solve the combinato-
rial search problem. In any case, all such scenarios also beg the question.
There is a big difference between shuffling and slightly altering preexist-
ing sequence-specific modules of functional information and explaining
how those modules came to possess information-rich sequences in the
first place.
EVOLUTION EX NIHILO?
Long does cite at least one type of mutation that does not presuppose ex-
isting genetic information, the de novo origination of new genes. For ex-
ample, one paper he discusses sought to explain the origin of a promoter

220
DARWIN’S DOUBT
region for a gene (the part of the gene that helps initiate the transcrip-
tion of the gene’s instructions) and found that “this unusual regulatory
region did not really ‘evolve.’ ” Instead, it somehow snapped into being: “It
was aboriginal, created de novo by the fortuitous juxtaposition of suitable
sequences.”
21
Many other papers invoke de novo origination of genes. Long men-
tions, for example, a study seeking to explain the origin of an antifreeze
protein in an Antarctic fish that cites “de novo amplification of a short
DNA sequence to spawn a novel protein with a new function.”22 Like-
wise, Long cites an article in Science to explain the origin of two human
genes involved in neurodevelopment that appealed to “de novo genera-
tion of building blocks—single genes or gene segments coding for protein
domains,” where an exon spontaneously “originated from a unique non-
coding sequence.”
23 Other papers make similar appeals. A paper in 2009
reported “the de novo origin of at least three human protein-coding genes
since the divergence with chimp[s],” where each of them “has no protein-
coding homologs in any other genome.”24 An even more recent paper in
PLoS Genetics reported “60 new protein-coding genes that originated de
novo on the human lineage since divergence from the chimpanzee,”
25 a
finding that was called “a lot higher than a previous, admittedly conserva-
tive, estimate.”26
Another 2009 paper
in the journal Genome Research was appro-
priately titled “Darwinian Alchemy: Human Genes from Noncoding
RNA.”
It investigated the de novo origin of genes and acknowledged,
“The emergence of complete, functional genes—with promoters, open
reading frames
(ORFs), and
functional
proteins—from
‘junk’ DNA
would seem highly improbable, almost like the elusive transmutation
of lead into gold that was sought by medieval alchemists.”27 Nonethe-
less, the article asserted without saying how that: “evolution by natural
selection can forge completely new functional elements from apparently
nonfunctional DNA—the process by which molecular evolution turns
lead into gold.” 28
The presence of unique gene sequences forces researchers to invoke de
novo origin of genes more often than they would like. After one study
of fruit flies reported that “as many as -12% of newly emerged genes in
the Drosophila melanogaster subgroup may have arisen de novo from
noncoding DNA,”29 the author went on to acknowledge that invoking

Assume a Gene
221
this “mechanism” poses a severe problem for evolutionary theory, since
it doesn’t really explain the origin of any of its “nontrivial requirements
for functionality.”30 The author proposes that “preadaptation” might have
played some role. But that adds nothing by way of explanation, since
it
only specifies when (before selection played a role) and where (in noncod-
ing DNA), not how the genes in question first arose. Details about how the
gene became “preadapted” for some future function
is never explained.
Indeed, evolutionary biologists typically use the term “de novo origina-
tion” to describe unexplained increases in genetic information; it does not
refer to any known mutational process.
Taking stock, then, many of the mutational processes that Long cites
either:
(1) beg the question as to the origin of the specified information
contained in genes or parts of genes, or
(2) invoke completely unex-
plained de novo jumps— essentially evolutionary creation ex nihilo (“from
nothing”).
Thus, ultimately, the scenarios featured in Long’s review essay do not
explain the origin of the specified information in either genes or sections
of genes. That would require a cause capable of solving the combinato-
rial inflation problem discussed in the previous chapters. But none of the
scenarios discussed in Long’s article even addresses this problem, let alone
demonstrates the mathematical plausibility of the mechanisms they cite.
Yet, Gishlick, Matzke, and Elsberry originally cited Long as a definitive
refutation ofmy article—the one in which I argued that the rarity of genes
and proteins in sequence space cast doubt on the power of selection and
mutations to generate novel genetic information. Professor Miller, in his
testimony at the celebrated Dover trial, even convinced a federal judge
to affirm that Long had succeeded in demonstrating how genetic infor-
mation originates in a celebrated legal ruling. Clearly, one cannot solve a
problem or refute an argument by failing to address it.
31
PROTEIN FOLDS: PLAUSIBLE BUT
IRRELEVANT SCENARIOS
There is a second and closely related difficulty associated with the scenarios
cited by Long. Typically, they do not even try to explain the origin of
new protein folds, and few of them analyze genes different enough from
each other that their protein products could, even conceivably, exemplify

iwlrt.
222
DARWIN’S DOUBT
different folds. Instead, they usually attempt to explain the origin of ho-
mologous genes—genes that produce proteins with the same folded struc-
ture performing the same function or a closely related one.
For example, Long cites one study comparing the two genes RNASE1
and RNASE1B, which code for homologous digestive enzymes. 32 The two
proteins perform nearly the same function: breaking down RNA molecules
in the digestive tracts of colobine leaf-eating monkeys, though each does
its job at a slightly different optimal chemical pH. More important, given
that the amino-acid sequences of the two enzymes are 93 percent identi-
cal, structural biologists would expect both enzymes to utilize the same
protein fold to accomplish their closely related tasks.
Long also references a study of a gene that codes for a histone protein,
Cid, in two closely related species of fruit flies—Drosophila melanogaster
and Drosophila simulans. The study didn’t try to explain the “origin” of
the gene— it merely compared the gene in the two species, catalogued
some minor differences between them, and asked how those differences
arose. The study identified some two dozen nucleotide differences be-
tween the genes for Cid in the two species—only 17 of which might have
changed an amino acid in the sequence out of 226 total amino acids
in the Cid protein. 33 Such a slight (7.5 percent) difference would be ex-
tremely unlikely to translate into different protein folds. Indeed, natural
sequences known to have different folds do not have anything like the
correspondingly high degree (92.5 percent) of sequence identity. Instead,
known natural sequences with this high level of sequence identity have
the same fold.
Long also cites two studies of FOXP2, a gene involved in regulating
gene expression in humans, chimps, other primates, and mammals. In
humans and other mammals, this gene is involved in brain development. 34
Nevertheless, according to one study, the protein coded for by this gene in
humans acquired just “two amino-acid changes on the human lineage” 35
during the entire course of its evolution from a common chimp-human
ancestor—again, not likely a sufficient enough change to generate a new
protein fold.
The Long review essay cites numerous scenarios of this type—scenarios
attempting to explain the evolution of slight gene variants (and their simi-
lar proteins), not the origin of new protein folds. This is an important dis-
tinction because, as we saw in Chapter 10, new protein folds represent the

Assume a Gene
223
smallest unit of selectable structural innovation, and much larger struc-
tural innovations in the history of life depend upon them. Explaining the
origin of structural innovation requires more than just explaining the
origin of variant versions of the same gene and protein or even the origin
of new genes capable of coding for new protein functions. It requires pro-
ducing enough genetic information—truly novel genes—to produce new
protein folds.
Thus, even where these scenarios are plausible, they are not relevant to
explaining the origin of the genetic information necessary to produce the
kind of structural innovation that occurs in the Cambrian explosion (or
many other events in the history of life).
PROTEIN FOLDS: RELEVANT BUT
IMPLAUSIBLE SCENARIOS
In a few cases, the evolutionary scenarios cited in the Long paper appear to
be attempts to explain genes that are different enough from each other that
they could conceivably code for proteins with different folds. For example,
Long discusses several papers that equate exon shuffling with the shuf-
fling of protein domains. Recall that a protein domain is a stable “tertiary”
protein structure or fold made of many smaller “secondary” structures
such as alpha helices or beta strands (see Fig.
10.2). Many complex pro-
teins have numerous domains, each exhibiting a unique fold or tertiary
structure. One version of the exon-shuffling hypothesis assumes that each
exon codes for a specific protein domain. It envisions random cutting and
splicing—excising, shuffling, and recombination—of the exon portions of
the genome, resulting in the modular rearrangement of genetic informa-
tion. The resulting composite gene will then code for a new composite pro-
tein structure. As Long proposes, “Exon shuffling, which is also known as
domain shuffling, often recombines sequences that encode various protein
domains to create mosaic proteins.”36
Of the mechanisms that Long discusses, exon shuffling (and the closely
related idea of gene fusion) provides perhaps the most plausible means
of generating new (composite) proteins. 37 Nevertheless, the idea that exon
shuffling can explain the origin of the genetic information necessary to
produce new protein folds or whole composite proteins is problematic for
several reasons.

224
DARWIN’S DOUBT
First, the exon-shuffling hypothesis seems to assume that each exon
involved in the process codes for a protein domain that folds into a dis-
tinctive tertiary structure. To a protein
scientist, a protein domain
is
equivalent to a protein fold, though distinct protein structures (folds) may
be composed of several smaller domains (or folds). Thus, at the very least,
the exon-shuffling hypothesis presupposes the prior existence of a signifi-
cant amount of genetic information—enough information to build an in-
dependent protein domain or fold. As such,
it fails as an explanation for
the origin of protein folds and the information necessary to produce them.
Some advocates of exon shuffling, however, may be using the term
“protein domain” in a slightly fuzzier way. They might be equating do-
mains with smaller structural units such as fragments of a fold made of
several units of secondary structure such as alpha helices or beta strands.
Conceived
this way,
the exon-shuffling hypothesis would then
entail
the construction of a new protein structure by combining these smaller
“fragments.”
But in most cases,
if the amino-acid chain that forms a domain
is
chopped into fragments, then the resulting isolated pieces would cease to
retain their original shapes. Why? Because the three-dimensional shape of
one small section of a protein is heavily dependent upon the overall struc-
ture and shape of the rest of the protein. Snip out a section or fragment,
or synthesize a fragment in isolation from the rest of the protein, and a
floppy amino-acid chain will result—one that has entirely lost its origi-
nal shape, or ability to form a stable structure. Thus, this version of the
exon-shuffling hypothesis lacks credibility because it incorrectly assumes
that shapeless protein fragments can be mixed and matched in a modu-
lar fashion to form new stable, functional protein folds. Moreover, even
if such shuffling were physically plausible, this version of the hypothesis
would have another problem. It still presupposes unexplained functional
information—in particular, the information necessary to specify, not just
the smaller fragments, but also the information required to arrange these
smaller units into stable folds, and ultimately functional proteins.
Second, since the exon-shuffling hypothesis assumes that each exon in-
volved in the shuffling codes for a specific protein domain, it also assumes
that exon boundaries correspond to the boundaries of protein domains or
folds. In existing genes, however, exon boundaries do not typically corre-
spond to the boundaries of folded domains within the larger proteins . 38 If

Assume a Gene
225
the shuffling of exons explained how actual proteins had come into exis-
tence, then there should be a clear correspondence or correlation between
exon boundaries within genes and the corresponding protein domains
within larger composite structures
(i.e., whole proteins). The absence of
such a correspondence suggests that exon shuffling does not account for
the origin of known compound protein structures.
Third, relying on exon shuffling to cobble together a new protein fold
from smaller units of protein structure is physically implausible for an-
other reason. To see why, we need to examine what a “side chain” is. All
twenty protein-forming amino acids have a common backbone (made of
nitrogen, carbon, and oxygen), but each one has a different chemical group
called a side chain sticking out at roughly right angles from that backbone.
The interactions between side chains determine whether secondary units
of protein structure made from chains of amino acids will fold into larger
stable three-dimensional folds. 39 Though many different sequences will
generate secondary structures (alpha helices and beta strands), generat-
ing stable folds is much more difficult and requires much more specific-
ity in the arrangement of amino acids and their side chains. Specifically,
since the elements in smaller secondary structural units in proteins are
surrounded by side chains, they cannot be combined into new folds unless
the elements have the sequence specificity required for the side chains to
complement one another.40 That means smaller secondary structural units
will rarely
41 fuse together to form stable tertiary structures or folds. In-
stead, attempts to form new folds from smaller units of structure repeat-
edly encounter adverse interactions between the side chains of the amino
acids within units of secondary structure.
The need for extreme
specificity in the sequential arrangements of
amino
acids, discussed in the previous chapter, means that the over-
whelming majority of amino-acid sequences in units of secondary struc-
ture will not result in stable folds as these units of structure come into
contact with each other. As discussed in Chapter 10, the extreme rarity of
functional proteins (with stable folds) in sequence space ensures that the
probability of finding a correct fold-stabilizing sequence will be astonish-
ingly small. For this reason, even skilled protein scientists have struggled
to design sequences that will produce stable protein folds.42 Almost in-
variably the units of secondary structure that they attempt to combine
or otherwise place into stable composite structures will not fold because

IkHltUMMl
226
DARWIN’S DOUBT
of the interactions of their amino-acid side chains.43 As molecular biol-
ogist Ann Gauger explains, “Thus,
[alpha] helices and
[beta] sheets are
sequence-dependent structural elements within protein folds. You can’t
swap them around like Lego bricks.”44
Nor
is
it an easy matter to simply find different sequences of amino
acids that will stabilize folds from smaller secondary units of structure,
again, because of the extreme rarity of functional (and folding) sequences
within amino-acid sequence space. Generating specific sequences that
will fold into stable structures, whether in the lab or during the history of
life, requires solving the combinatorial inflation problem. Even small folds
will require five or six units of secondary structure with 10 or so amino
acids in each unit, that
is, 60 or more precisely sequenced amino acids.
Modest-size folds will require a dozen or more units of secondary struc-
ture and 150 to 200 specifically arranged amino acids in order to stabilize
a fold. Larger protein folds will require many more secondary units and
specifically arranged amino acids. Since, however, many mission-critical
functions within even the simplest cell require many folds (of at least 150
amino acids) working in close coordination, the need to produce proteins
of at least this length numerous times through the history of life cannot
be avoided.
All this requires searching for a functional needle in a vast haystack of
combinatorial possibilities. Recall that Douglas Axe estimated the ratio of
needles (functional sequences) to strands of straw in the haystack (non-
functional sequences) to be
1 to 1077 for sequences of modest-length (150
amino acids).
Of course, in naturally occurring proteins, the interactions between
side chains in units of secondary structure do maintain stable folds. But
these
proteins, with
their
stable three-dimensional
folded
structures,
depend upon exceedingly rare and precisely arranged sequences of amino
acids. The question is not whether the combinatorial search problem nec-
essary to produce stable protein folds has ever been solved, but whether
a neo-Darwinian mechanism relying on random mutations (in this case
random shuffling of exons) provides a plausible explanation for how
it
might have been solved.
The papers that Long cites give no reason to think that exon shuffling
(or any other mutational mechanism) has solved this problem. The exon-
shuffling hypothesis ignores the need for side-chain specificity, though the

Assume a Gene
227
need for such specificity has repeatedly defeated attempts in the laboratory
to build new proteins from units of secondary structure in the manner
required.
But advocates of exon shuffling make no attempt to show how random
rearrangements of protein domains—whether the domains are conceived
of as fragments of a fold or whole folds—would solve the combinatorial
problem. Nor do they challenge Sauer’s or Axe’s experimentally derived
quantitative estimates of the rarity of functional genes or proteins. They
do not challenge the probability calculations based on these estimates.
And they do not show that a mechanism exists that can search amino-
acid sequence spaces more effectively or efficiently than random mutation
and selection. Nor do they demonstrate the efficacy of exon shuffling in a
model system in the laboratory. Instead, basic considerations of protein
structure imply the implausibility of exon shuffling as a means of generat-
ing the genetic information necessary to produce a new protein fold . 45 So,
in the end, with few words and with apparent confidence, advocates of
exon shuffling simply assert, as the Long paper does, that “exon shuffling
often recombines sequences that encode various protein domains to create
mosaic proteins.”
WORD SALAD
The assertion of Long and his colleagues about exon shuffling, like many
other statements about postulated mutational mechanisms, blurs the dis-
tinction between theory and evidence. Despite the authoritative tone of
such statements, evolutionary biologists rarely directly observe the mu-
tational processes they envision. Instead, they see patterns of similarities
and differences in genes and then attribute them to the processes they
postulate. Yet the papers that Long cites offer neither mathematical dem-
onstration, nor experimental evidence, of the power of these mechanisms
to produce significant gains in biological information.
In the absence of such demonstrations, evolutionary biologists have
taken to offering what one biologist I know calls “word salad”—jargon-
laced descriptions of unobserved past events—some possible, perhaps, but
none with the demonstrated capacity to generate the information neces-
sary to produce novel forms of life. This genre of evolutionary literature
envisions exons being “recruited
”46 and/or “donated
”47 from other genes

228
DARWIN’S DOUBT
or from an “unknown source”48
;
it appeals to “extensive refashioning
”49
of genes;
it attributes “fortuitous juxtaposition of suitable sequences
” 50 to
mutations or “fortuitous acquisition
” 51 of promoter elements;
it assumes
that “radical change in the structure” of a gene is due to “rapid, adaptive
evolution”; 52 it asserts that “positive selection has played an important role
in the evolution
”53 of genes, even in cases when the function of the gene
under study (and thus the trait being selected)
is completely unknown ;
54
it imagines genes being “cobbled together from DNA of no related func-
tion (or no function at all)”; 55 it assumes the “creation” of new exons “from
a unique noncoding genomic sequence that fortuitously evolved ”; 56 it in-
vokes “the chimeric fusion of two genes ”; 57
it explains “near-identical
”58
proteins in disparate lineages as “a striking case of convergent evolu-
tion”;59 and when no source material for the evolution of a new gene can be
identified,
it asserts that “genes emerge and evolve very rapidly, generat-
ing copies that bear little similarity to their ancestral precursors” because
they are apparently “hypermutable .”60 Finally, when all else fails, scenarios
invoke the “de novo origination” of new genes, as if that phrase—any more
than the others just mentioned— constitutes a scientific demonstration of
the power of mutational mechanisms
to produce significant amounts
of new genetic information .
61
These vague narratives resemble nothing so much as the naming games
of scholastic philosophers in the Middle Ages. Why does opium put people
to sleep? Because
it has a “dormative” virtue. What causes new genes to
evolve so rapidly? Their “hypermutability” or perhaps their ability to un-
dergo “rapid, adaptive evolution.” How do we explain the origin of two
similar genes in two separate, but otherwise widely disparate lineages?
Convergent evolution, of course. What is convergent evolution? The pres-
ence of two similar genes in two separate, but otherwise widely disparate
lineages. How does convergent evolution occur, given the improbability
of finding even one functional gene in sequence space, let alone the same
gene arising twice independently? No one knows exactly, but perhaps
it
was a “fortuitous juxtaposition of suitable sequences,” or “positive
se-
lection,” or “de novo origination.” Need to explain two similar genes in
more closely related lineages? Try “gene duplication,” or “chimerical gene
fusion,” or “retropositioning,” or “extensive refashioning of the genome,”
or some other scientific-sounding combination of words.

Assume a Gene
229
The vagueness of these scenarios raises serious questions about how
scientists could regard them as decisive demonstrations or refutations
of anything—let alone refutations of the kind of experimentally based,
mathematically precise challenges to mutation and selection described in
the previous chapter.
So despite the official pronouncement of a federal judge and claims of
extensive “scientific literature documenting the origin of new genes,” evo-
lutionary biologists have not demonstrated how new genetic information
arises, at least not in amounts sufficient to build protein folds, the cru-
cial units of biological innovation. Biologists have not solved the problem
of combinatorial inflation or refuted the precise quantitative argument
against the creative power of the selection and mutation mechanism pre-
sented in the previous chapter (or in my 2004 article). Nor has anyone
provided a compelling refutation of Douglas Axe’s assessment of the rarity
of genes and proteins on which that argument is based.
In
fairness, neo-Darwinian biologists have mathematical models of
their own—models indicating to them that nearly unlimited evolutionary
change can occur under the right conditions. The assumption that these
models, which are based on the equations of population genetics, accu-
rately represent how much evolution can occur has left many evolutionary
biologists confident in the creative power of various mutational mecha-
nisms. But should they be?
In the next chapter,
I will take up this question. As
I do,
I’ll explain
why evolutionary biologists have been, heretofore, untroubled by math-
ematical challenges to neo-Darwinism. I’ll also show why that has begun
to change as new developments in molecular genetics have introduced
another formidable mathematical challenge to the creative power of the
neo-Darwinian mechanism—a challenge that arises from within the neo-
Darwinian framework and raises yet new questions about the causal ad-
equacy of the neo-Darwinian mechanism.

V Uii u itwt i
12
COMPLEX ADAPTATIONS
AND THE
NEO-DARWINIAN MATH
University of Illinois biologist Tom Frazzetta knew the textbook story as
well as anyone. According to neo-Darwinian theory, organisms with all
their complex systems came into existence via natural selection acting
on randomly arising, small-scale variations and mutations. As Frazzetta
understood, this evolutionary mechanism necessarily transforms organ-
isms gradually, with modifications parceled into increments “as a sort of
continuous change, where one structural condition melts gradually into
another.”
1
Frazzetta had his doubts, however. As an expert in functional bio-
mechanics—studying how animals actually work—he had dissected the
skulls of rare snakes found only on the island of Mauritius, in the Indian
Ocean. These snakes, called bolyerines, are boa-like but have an anatomi-
cal specialization found in no other vertebrate. Their maxilla, the tooth-
bearing bone of the upper jaw, is divided into two segments, linked by a
flexible joint and serviced by many specialized nerves, extra bones, tissues,
and differently arranged ligaments. This unique trait allows the snakes to
bend the front half of their upper jaw backwards when they attack prey
(see Fig. 12.1).
Could this complex system of bones, joints,
tissues, and ligaments
have evolved gradually? “A movable joint dividing the maxilla into two

Complex Adaptations and the Neo-Darwinian Math
231
segments,” observed Frazzetta, “seems to have either a presence or ab-
sence, with no intermediate to connect the two conditions.”
2 That is, either
the maxilla occurs as one bone (as
it does in every other vertebrate) or
as two segments with all the accompanying joints, bones, ligaments, and
tissues necessary to make
it work, as
it does in the bolyerine snakes. No
intermediate condition—a broken maxilla with two pieces ofbone lacking
the necessary joints, tissues, and ligaments, for example—appears viable.
As Stephen Jay Gould asked of the same system, “How can a jawbone be
half broken?”
3 Or as Frazzetta himself observed, “I thus find it difficult to
envision a smooth transition from a single maxilla to the divided condi-
tion seen in bolyerines
”4 Yet because the intermediate forms would not be
viable, building a bolyerine jaw would require all the necessary parts—the
jointed maxilla, the adjoining ligaments, and the necessary muscles and
tissues—arising together.
Yet the problem for neo-Darwinian theory, Frazzetta realized, extended
well beyond the anatomical peculiarities of rare snakes. As a young evolu-
tionary biology professor, he had studied complex features in a wide vari-
ety of species. He knew that almost any biological structure ofinterest—the
inner ear, the amniotic egg, eyes, olfactory organs, gills, lungs, feathers,
the reproductive, circulatory, and respiratory systems—possesses multiple
necessary components. To change such systems requires altering each of
the many independent parts upon which their functions are based. This
cannot be done willy-nilly. For example, changing any of the three bones
of the mammalian inner ear—the incus, stapes, or malleus—will perforce
CA5AR6A
CAUOOIA
FIGURE 12.1
A complex adaptation: the jointed upper jaw of the bolyerine snake, made possible by its
accompanying tendons, ligaments, and musculature. The other skull shows the single-
boned jaw, found in other related snakes.

232
DARWIN’S DOUBT
require corresponding changes in the other bones and in other parts of
the ear as well, such as the tympanic membrane or the cochlea. Complex
biological systems depend for their functions on tens or hundreds of such
independent, yet jointly necessary parts. As the number of necessary com-
ponents increases, the requisite number of coordinated changes increases
too, rapidly driving up the difficulty of maintaining the functional integ-
rity of the system while modifying any of its parts.
And that was the problem, as Frazzetta understood it. Any system that
depends for its function on the coordinated action ofmany parts could not
be changed gradually without losing function. But in the neo-Darwinian
scheme of things, natural selection acts to preserve only functional ad-
vantages. Changes that result in death or reduced function will not be
preserved. The integrated complexity of many biological systems thus im-
poses limitations on the evolutionary process—limitations that human
engineers do not face when they design complex integrated systems. In
1975, Frazzetta wrote a minor classic entitled Complex Adaptations in
Evolving Populations explaining this concern. He wrote:
When modifying the design ofa machine, an engineer is not bound
by the need to maintain a real continuity between the first machine
and the modification.
.
.
. But in evolution, transitionsfrom one type
to the next presumably involve a greater continuity by means of a vast
number of intermediate types. Not only must the end product— the
final machine— befeasible, but so must be all the intermediates. The
evolutionary problem
is, in a real sense, the gradual improvement ofa
machine while it is running!
5
Historically, evolutionary biologists tried to solve this problem one ad-
vantageous variation or mutation at a time. Starting with Darwin himself,
they have attempted to explain how natural selection and random varia-
tion could build complex systems as the result of a series of incremental
changes, each of which might confer some selectable advantage. Darwin
famously employed this strategy to explain the origin of the eye, asking
his readers to imagine a series of incremental, advantageous changes to a
simple “nerve sensitive to light.”6
As Frazzetta thought about the problem of explaining the origin of
complex systems, he came to doubt both the classical and the modern

Complex Adaptations and the Neo-Darwinian Math
233
Darwinian accounts of such systems.
Frazzetta acknowledged that he
was influenced in part by the skepticism expressed by the Wistar “out-
siders” (see Chapter 9). He admitted “revealing some hideous personalia
”
in confessing that he was attracted to the worries about neo-Darwinism
expressed by Murray Eden and other Wistar skeptics.
7
Frazzetta’s concerns about the adequacy of the neo-Darwinian mecha-
nism, like Eden’s, turned on the growing appreciation of the nature and
importance of genetic information. Though biologists then (as now) didn’t
fully understand how genetic information in DNA correlates or “maps”
to these higher-level complex morphological structures, by 1975 they did
know that many hundreds of genes can be involved in coding for a single
complex integrated structure. Thus, altering the anatomical structure of
the mammalian ear or the vertebrate eye, for example, would involve al-
tering the genes that code for
its constituents, which implies, most im-
plausibly,
that
multiple coordinated mutations would occur
virtually
simultaneously.
As Frazzetta explained, “Phenotypic alteration of integrated systems re-
quires an improbable coincidence of genetic (and hence, heritable pheno-
typic) modifications of a tightly specified kind.”
8 Yet the extreme specificity
of the fit of the components and the functional dependence of the whole
system on this fit imply limits to allowable genetic change. Genetic change
affecting any one of the necessary components, unless matched by many
corresponding—and vastly improbable—genetic changes, will result in
functional loss and often death. For this reason, as Frazzetta concluded,
“We are still left with the unabating need to explain evolutionary changes
in systems that have the operational integration characteristic of things we
recognize as ‘machines.’
” 9 At the time, the doubts he expressed gained little
traction in the evolutionary biology community, because neo-Darwinian
evolutionary biologists assumed that mutation and selection had nearly
unlimited creative power, enough to generate even complex systems of the
kind described in Frazzetta’s book.
The mathematical expression of neo-Darwinian theory, as represented
in the equations of a subdiscipline of biology known as population genet-
ics, seemed to confirm this conviction. Population genetics models how
gene frequencies change as the result of processes such as mutation, ge-
netic drift (neutral changes in the genome that natural selection neither
favors nor eliminates), and natural
selection. On the assumption that

234
DARWIN’S DOUBT
advantageous variations or traits will arise as the result of even single
mutations, the mathematical models of population genetics describe how
much evolutionary change can occur in a given period of time. These es-
timates are based upon, among others, three primary factors: mutation
rates, effective population sizes, and generation times. When evolutionary
biologists plug estimates for these factors into the equations of popula-
tion genetics, their calculations seem to imply that standard evolutionary
mechanisms could generate significant amounts of evolutionary change
in many groups of organisms—even enough to build complex systems. As
long as mutations generate a continuous supply of new traits, any system,
however complex, can be built one trait at a time—trait upon trait—via the
creative power of natural selection. Or so the story goes.
Confidence in these mathematical models (and their underlying as-
sumptions) led many neo-Darwinists to disregard the need to give de-
tailed accounts of the specific evolutionary pathways by which complex
systems might have arisen. For example, in an evolutionary biology text
widely used about the time Frazzetta first posed this challenge, evolution-
ary biologists Paul Ehrlich and Richard Holm advised:
One need not go into the details of the evolution of the bird’s wing, the
giraffe’s neck, the vertebrate eye, the nest building ofsome fish, etc.,
as the selective origins of these and other structures and of behavioral
patterns may be assumed to be basically the same in outline as those,
such as industrial melanism, which have already been discussed. Even a
slight advantage or disadvantage in a particular genetic change provides
a sufficient differentialfor the operation of natural selection .
10
The phrase “sufficient differential for the operation of natural selection”
refers to the equations of population genetics and one of the factors (the
so-called selection
coefficient)
that determines how rapidly particular
traits would be likely to disseminate through a population. The message
was clear: the math tells the story; the biological details of the origin of
complex systems don’t matter.
The neo-Darwinian focus on mathematical modeling helps to explain
why mainstream evolutionary biologists haven’t worried about the prob-
lem of the origin of new genes and proteins or the problem of combi-
natorial inflation, discussed in Chapters 9 and
10. Many contemporary

Complex Adaptations and the Neo-Darwinian Math
235
evolutionary biologists, like the founders of population genetics, assumed
that some mechanism for building new genes already existed. Indeed, they
assumed that new traits (and the genes for building them) can arise as the
result of even single mutations (or a series of such mutations that each
confer a small, incremental, selectable advantage). Thus, the mathemati-
cal expression of neo-Darwinian theory seemed to certify the plausibility
of even large-scale evolutionary changes—again, provided these changes
could occur one mutation at a time.
But what if there are systems in living organisms that cannot be built
one mutation at a time, and instead must be built by simultaneous coordi-
nated changes? What if building just a single new gene or protein requires
such coordinated mutational changes? What if individual genes turned
out to be complex adaptations?
Mathematical challenges of the kind first advanced at Wistar, and that
Douglas Axe’s experimental findings have exacerbated,
initially did not
dent confidence in the adequacy of neo-Darwinian explanations. Many
evolutionary biologists have simply regarded mathematical challenges to
the creative power of the mechanism, coming as they mostly do from scien-
tists and engineers in other fields, as exotic or irrelevant.
That has begun to change. And it has begun to change in a way that has
not only introduced a new mathematical challenge to the creative power of
the neo-Darwinian mechanism, but also in a way that indirectly confirms
Axe’s key insight about the rarity of genes and proteins. In the last decade,
developments in molecular genetics and population genetics have exposed
a connection between the problem of the origin of new genes and pro-
teins and the origin of complex adaptations, a connection first perceived
by Tom Frazzetta back in 1975. As more biologists have recognized that
connection, they too have begun to share Frazzetta’s doubt.
POPULATION GENETICS AND THE ORIGIN
OF GENETIC INFORMATION
The neo-Darwinian synthesis was formulated during the 1930s before the
elucidation of the structure of DNA. Biologists at that time did not yet
understand the nature, structure, or precise location of genetic informa-
tion.
11 They did not associate genes with long strings of nucleotide bases
along the spine of the DNA molecule. They did not think of genes as long

236
DARWIN’S DOUBT
sections of digital code stored in complex biomacromolecules. Instead,
after Mendel, but before Watson and Crick, genes were defined operation-
ally as those entities, associated with chromosomes, that produced specific
visible or selectable anatomical traits, such as eye color or beak shape.
The architects of neo-Darwinism working in the 1930s reformulated
evolutionary theory to emphasize the importance of mutations as the
source of genetic variation.
It followed, therefore, that the mutations
which they regarded as the source of heritable variation—must operate on
genes. Not knowing the nature of genes, they also assumed that a single
mutation could alter a gene in such a way as to produce a new trait.
The equations of population genetics are predicated upon this assump-
tion. The rate of mutation thus emerges as an important factor in com-
puting the amount of evolutionary change that can occur in any given
population. If every individual mutation can produce a new, potentially
selectable trait, then the rate at which such variation accumulates partially
determines how much change can occur in a given time.
After 1953, biologists no longer conceived of the gene as an abstract
entity. Watson and Crick showed that the gene had a definite locus and
structure and that individual genes contain hundreds or thousands of
precisely sequenced nucleotide bases, each functioning as digital char-
acters in a larger instruction set. Consequently, biologists changed their
understanding of mutations as well. Biologists came to understand muta-
tions as something like typographic errors in long strings of digital code.
As a result, many scientists began to realize that individual mutations
were unlikely by themselves to produce new beneficial traits. Some scien-
tists realized that mutations were instead overwhelmingly more likely to
degrade the information contained in a gene than to produce a new func-
tion or trait, and that the accumulation ofmutations would eventually and
typically result in the loss of function.
This change of perspective called for an explanation of how mutations
could generate new genes—an explanation that was provided beginning
in the 1970s with the ideas of gene duplication, subsequent neutral evolu-
tion, and positive selection.
Though the theory of gene duplication played no formal role in the
mathematical structure of population genetics,
it did serve to buttress a
critical assumption of the whole enterprise. After the 1950s, evolution-
ary biologists no longer assumed that single mutations would necessarily

Complex Adaptations and the Neo-Darwinian Math
237
generate whole new traits. That left a critical assumption of population
genetics essentially undefended. For many evolutionary biologists, the
theory of gene duplication closed that conceptual gap. After the theory
was formulated, many evolutionary biologists thought that a mechanism
had been discovered by which sections of genetic text could accumulate
multiple changes without compromising the fitness of an organism, thus
ensuring the eventual production ofnew genes and a steady supply of new
traits.
So when Frazzetta confronted evolutionary biology with the problem
of complex adaptations in the mid-1970s, most neo-Darwinian biologists
responded with a collective yawn, if they noticed
it at all. His challenge
was no challenge after all. So implied the math of population genetics
provided its assumptions about the ease with which new mutations could
generate new traits were valid.
But were they valid? Could a series of separate mutations generate the
new genes necessary to build new proteins and new traits, or did building
genes require multiple coordinated mutations?
ARE GENES COMPLEX ADAPTATIONS?
Classically, Darwinian biologists have assumed that small, separate step-
by-step changes could produce all biological structures and features, pro-
vided each change confers some survival or reproductive advantage. In
his chapter in the 1909 anthology Darwin and Modern Science, the British
geneticist William Bateson wryly described how this widespread assump-
tion prevented evolutionary biologists from confronting the real difficulty
of explaining the origin of complex adaptations:
By suggesting that the steps through which an adaptive mechanism
arises are indefinite and insensible, all further trouble is spared.
While it could be said that species arise by an insensible and imper-
ceptible process of variation, there was clearly no use in tiring our-
selves by trying to perceive that process. This labour-saving counsel
found greatfavor.
12
One of the first prominent evolutionary biologists to consider the possi-
bility that building new genes and proteins might require multiple coordi-
nated mutations was John Maynard Smith. Maynard Smith worked as an

238
DARWIN’S DOUBT
aeronautical engineer during World War II, but then took up the formal
study of evolutionary biology after the war. He eventually helped to found
the University of Sussex, where he also served as a distinguished professor
of biology until the mid-1980s.
13
In 1970, Maynard Smith wrote an article in Nature responding to an
earlier article by Frank Salisbury, a biologist from Utah State University.
Salisbury had raised questions about whether random mutations could
explain the specificity of the arrangement of nucleotide bases necessary
to produce functional proteins. Salisbury worried, following discussions
at Wistar, that the probability of random mutations generating functional
arrangements of bases or amino acids was prohibitively low. Accord-
ing to Salisbury’s calculations, “The mutational mechanism as presently
imagined could fall short by hundreds of orders of magnitude of produc-
ing, in a mere four billion years, even a single required gene.”
14
To overcome this improbability, Maynard Smith proposed a model of
protein evolution. While admitting that the origin of the first proteins re-
mained a mystery, he suggested that one protein could evolve into another
as the result of small incremental changes in amino-acid sequences, pro-
vided each sequence maintained some function at each step along the way.
Maynard Smith compared protein-to-protein evolution to changing one
letter in an English word in order to generate a different word (while at
each step generating a different meaningful word). He used this example
to convey how he thought protein evolution might work:
WORD
WORE —
GORE —>- GONE —
GENE
He explained:
The words [in this analogy] represent proteins; the letters represent
amino acids; the alteration of a single letter corresponds to the simplest
evolutionary step, the substitution ofone amino acidfor another;
and the requirement of meaning corresponds to the requirement that
each unit step in evolution should befrom onefunctional protein
to another.
15
As a self-professed “convinced Darwinist,” Maynard Smith realized
that natural selection and random mutation could only build new biologi-
cal structures from preexisting structures if each intermediate structure
along the way conferred some adaptive advantage. He thought that this

Complex Adaptations and the Neo-Darwinian Math
239
requirement applied as much to the evolution of new genes and proteins as
it did to the evolution of new phenotypic traits or larger-scale anatomical
structures.
16
Nevertheless, the essentially digital or alphabetic character of the ge-
netic information that directs protein synthesis suggested a problem to
Maynard Smith. How, he asked, could one gene or protein evolve into an-
other if such a transformation required multiple simultaneous changes in
the bases of the genetic text (or arrangement of amino acids)? If building
new genes required multiple coordinated mutations, then the probability
of generating a new gene or protein would drop precipitously, since such a
transformation would require not just one improbable mutational event,
but two or three or more, occurring more or less at once. Here’s how he
described the potential problem:
Suppose that a protein ABCD
.
.
. exists, and that a protein abCD
.
.
.
would befavoured by selection if it arose. Supposefurther that the
intermediates aBCD
.
.
. and AbCD
.
.
. are nonfunctional. Theseforms
would arise by mutation, but would usually be eliminated by selection
before a second mutation could occur. The double stepfrom abCD
.
.
. to
ABCD would thus be very unlikely to occur.
17
In Maynard Smith’s view, the improbability associated with “double-
step” or multiple-step coordinated mutations presented a significant po-
tential problem for molecular evolution. In the end, however, he concluded
that such mutations were so improbable that they must not have played a
significant role in the evolution of novel structures. As he explained, “Such
double steps
.
.
. may occasionally occur, but are probably too rare to be
important in evolution.”
18
For several decades, the problem he flagged receded into obscurity. As
biochemist H. Allen Orr pointed out in 2005 in the journal Nature Re-
views Genetics, “Although Maynard Smith’s work appeared early in the
molecular revolution,” his ideas about problems facing protein evolution
“were almost entirely ignored for two decades.”
19 Thus, Orr noted that evo-
lutionary biologists stopped thinking about molecular evolution as a con-
sequence of adaptive changes at the amino-acid level. Not until the first
decade of the twenty-first century would biologists confront the challenge
of making a rigorous quantitative analysis of the plausibility of protein-to-
protein evolution.

240
DARWIN’S DOUBT
WAITING FOR COMPLEX ADAPTATIONS
In 2004, Lehigh University biochemist Michael Behe (see Fig. 12.2), intro-
duced briefly at the end of Chapter 9, and University of Pittsburgh phys-
icist David Snoke published a paper in the journal Protein Science that
returned to the problem first described by Maynard Smith. 20 By this time,
Behe had established himself as a prominent
critic of neo-Darwinism
by arguing that the neo-Darwinian mechanism did not provide an ad-
equate explanation for the origin of functionally integrated “irreducibly
complex” molecular machines. In his 2004 paper, Behe sought to extend
his critique of neo-Darwinism by assessing its adequacy as an explanation
for new genes and proteins. He and Snoke attempted to assess the plausi-
bility of protein evolution in the case that it does indeed require multiple
coordinated mutations. They applied standard neo-Darwinian modes of
analysis derived from population genetics to make their evaluation. They
considered the plausibility of the main neo-Darwinian model of gene evo-
lution in which evolutionary biologists envision new genes arising by gene
duplication and subsequent mutations in the duplicated gene.
Behe and Snoke assessed the plausibility of this model for multicellular
organisms in the case that multiple (two or more) point mutations must
occur simultaneously in order to generate a new selectable gene or protein.
Whereas Maynard Smith saw the need for multiple coordinated mutations
as a potential problem, one that ultimately needn’t trouble evolutionary
biologists, Behe and Snoke argued that evolutionary biologists do need to
worry about it, and they quantified its severity.
Behe and Snoke first noted that many proteins, as a condition of their
function, require unique combinations of amino acids interacting in a co-
ordinated way. For example, ligand binding sites on proteins—places where
small molecules bind to large proteins to form larger functional complexes
typically require a combination of several amino acids. Behe and Snoke
argued that in such cases the combinations of amino acids would have to
arise in a coordinated fashion since the capacity for ligand binding depends
on all the necessary amino acids being present together. In support of this
inference, they cited an authoritative textbook, Molecular Evolution, by
University of Chicago evolutionary biologist Wen-Hsiung Li. In it, Li notes
that evolving ligand binding capacity in proteins such as hemoglobin may
require “many mutational steps,”
21 even though the first steps on the way to

Complex Adaptations and the Neo-Darwinian Math
241
building such capacity would confer no selective advantage. As Li explains,
“Acquiring a new function may require many mutational steps, and a point
that needs emphasis is that the early steps might have been selectively neu-
tral [non-advantageous] because the new function might not be manifested
until a certain number of steps had already occurred .” 22
Behe and Snoke point out that this observation implies that a series
of separate mutations could not generate a ligand binding function in a
protein that previously did not have this capacity, since individual amino -
acid changes would initially confer no selectable advantage on the protein
lacking this function. Instead, evolving ligand binding capability would
require multiple coordinated mutations. Behe and Snoke make a similar
argument about the requirements for the evolution of protein-to -protein
interactions. They note that for proteins to interact with each other in
specific ways, typically at least several individually necessary amino acids
must be present in combination in each protein, again, suggesting the
need for multiple coordinated mutations.
SO MANY CHANGES, SO LITTLE TIME
Behe and Snoke used the principles of population genetics to assess the
likelihood of various numbers of coordinated mutational changes occur-
ring in a given period of time. They asked: Is
it probable that there was
enough time in evolutionary history to generate coordinated mutations? If
so, how many coordinated mutations is it reasonable to expect in a period

242
DARWIN'S DOUBT
of time given various population sizes, mutation rates, and generation
times? Then, for different combinations of these various factors, they as-
sessed how long it would typically take to generate two or three or more
coordinated mutations. They determined that generally the probability of
multiple mutations arising in close (functionally relevant) coordination
to each other was “prohibitively” low— it would likely take an immensely
long time, typically far longer than the age of the earth.
THE POWERBALL LOTTERY-POPULATION
GENETICS MADE EASY
Before going on, it might be helpful to understand a bit more about how
the equations and principles of population genetics can be used to calcu-
late what evolutionary biologists call “waiting times,” the expected time
that it will take for a given trait to arise by various evolutionary processes.
In his book The Edge of Evolution, Michael Behe illustrates these prin-
ciples using a charming analogy to the Powerball lottery game that many
American state governments use to raise money.
To win at Powerball, contestants must purchase tickets with six num-
bers that match the numbers printed on six balls drawn from two drums.
Five of the balls are selected from a drum containing 59 white balls, num-
bered 1 through 59. A sixth red ball, the so-called power ball, is chosen out
of a drum of 35 red balls numbered 1 to 35. To win the jackpot—which can
exceed $100 million—a player must purchase a ticket listing all six of the
chosen numbers in any order. The Powerball website lists the probability
of matching all six balls at roughly
1 in 175 million. Depending on how
many tickets have been purchased and how frequently drawings occur, it
may take a very long time for someone to win.
Behe asked his readers first to consider how long
it will take, on av-
erage, to generate a lottery ticket with the winning numbers. He notes
that knowing the probability of drawing such a winning ticket isn’t suf-
ficient. The calculation also requires knowing how often drawings occur
and how many tickets are sold. As Behe explains: “If the odds of winning
are one in a hundred million, and if a million people play every time, then
it will take on average about a hundred drawings for someone to win.” If
there are about a hundred drawings per year, with a million people playing

Complex Adaptations and the Neo-Darwinian Math
243
per drawing, “then
it would take about a year before someone won. But
if there were only one drawing per year, on average
it would take a cen-
tury to hit the jackpot.”23 More frequent drawings produce shorter waiting
times. Less frequent drawings tend to require longer waiting times. Simi-
larly, more players will decrease the average time necessary to produce a
winner, while fewer players result in longer waits.
Similar mathematical principles apply when calculating the expected
waiting times for the evolution of biological features by mutation and se-
lection. Biologists first need to assess the complexity of the system—or its
inverse, the improbability of the feature occurring. As in Powerball, how-
ever, knowing the probability of an event by itself does not allow someone
to calculate how long it will likely take for that event to occur. Such a cal-
culation requires also knowing the size of the population (equivalent to
how many people are playing Powerball) and how frequently new genetic
sequences arise (equivalent to how frequently drawings are held).
In Powerball, a new sequence of numbers arises in every drawing. But
when organisms reproduce, they do not always generate a new sequence of
nucleotide bases in their individual genes. For this reason, to calculate the
rate at which new sequences arise in living organisms requires knowing two
factors: the generation time and the mutation rate. More rapid rates of mu-
tation and/or shorter generation times will increase the rate at which new
genetic sequences arise, resulting in shorter waiting times. Slower rates of
mutation and/or longer times between generations produce longer waiting
times. Also, as in Powerball, the number of “players” is important. Larger
populations generate new genetic sequences more frequently than smaller
ones and, thus, decrease expected waiting times. Smaller populations reduce
the rate at which new sequences are generated, increasing waiting times.
Now, under the rules of Powerball, you can “win” without picking all
six numbers correctly—you just won’t win the entire jackpot.24 If you pick
just the red “power ball” correctly, you win $4. Pick three white balls cor-
rectly, and you win
$7. If you correctly pick the numbers of four white
balls, you win $100. Guess all five white balls correctly (but not the red
ball), and you can win a cool $1 million.
With each additional ball necessary to secure a new level of winnings,
the probability of winning decreases exponentially, while the values of the
prizes increase dramatically. The Powerball website lists the probability of

244
DARWIN’S DOUBT
DUMBER or ball<
4U£#Et> doRREdTLy
i04idi4 mu^tBE
ot>t>< of i*)iwwiw4
2
•i-P
J-CREK.-
3 (ALL uH+ITE;
i IN 55.41
1 id 2Cepj„±
.
4 (ALL ID4ITE;
1 ID 19,087.^3
fioo
—
-
-
—
-
—
—
5 (4 umrrs,
1 red;
1 id &>48 ,97? 9&>
no.ooo
5 (ALL VOHite;
.1 IK) 5,i53>3z,fcg
-
£1,000,000
6> {5 I/OUITS, 1 RED)
I IN 175,2.2.3,510.00
jAdfcPOT
FIGURE 12.3
A chart showing the probability of winning and the corresponding payouts for different
combinations of balls in the Powerball lottery game.
winning a $4 prize at just
1 in 55, the probability of winning $1 million
dollars at roughly 1 in 5 million, and the probability of winning the jack-
pot as 1 in 175 million (see Fig. 12. 3).
25
Neo-Darwinists have long assumed that biological evolution works
something like matching one number in Powerball. In their view, natural
selection acts to reward or preserve small but relatively probable changes
in gene sequences—like winning the small but more likely $4 prize in
Powerball over and over again. They assume the mutation and selection
mechanism doesn’t depend on winning extremely unlikely “prizes” (like
the whole Powerball jackpot) all at once.
But what if, to produce a functional advantage at the genetic level, the
mutation and selection mechanism had to generate the biological equiv-
alent of all six (or more) correct balls in the Powerball lottery with no
reward for guessing a smaller number of balls correctly first? Clearly, the
probability of this would be extremely small. And the waiting time for
winning such a lottery could become prohibitively long.
BACK TO THE BIOLOGY
That brings us back to Behe and Snoke’s conclusion. In their 2004 paper,
they argued that generating a single new protein will often require many
improbable mutations occurring
at once. They took into account the
improbability of multiple functionally necessary mutations appearing

Complex Adaptations and the Neo-Darwinian Math
245
together—the equivalent of needing to get a Powerball ticket matching
several numbers to win any money at all. Then they sought to determine
how long
it would take and/or how large the population
sizes would
need to be to generate a new gene via multiple coordinated mutational
changes—the genetic equivalent of the “jackpot scenario.”
Behe and Snoke found that if generating a new gene required multiple
coordinated mutations, then the waiting time would grow exponentially
with each additional necessary mutational change. They also assessed
how population sizes affected how long
it would take to generate new
genes,
if multiple coordinated mutations were necessary to produce
those genes. They found, not surprisingly, that just as larger populations
diminished expected waiting times, smaller populations dramatically
increased them.
More important, they found that even if building a new gene required
just two coordinated mutations, the neo-Darwinian mechanism would
likely either require huge population sizes or extremely long waiting times
or both. If coordinated mutations were necessary, then evolution at the
genetic level faced a catch-22: for the standard neo-Darwinian mechanism
to generate just two coordinated mutations, it typically either needed un-
reasonably long waiting times, times that exceeded the duration of life
on earth, or
it needed unreasonably large population sizes, populations
exceeding the number of multicellular organisms that have ever lived. To
get population sizes that were reasonable, they had to have waiting times
that were unreasonable. To get waiting times that were reasonable, they
had to have population sizes that were unreasonable. As they put it, either
way the “numbers seem prohibitive.”26
Behe and Snoke found that mutation and selection could generate
two coordinated mutations in a mere
1 million generations, a reasonable
length of time given the age of the earth. But that was only in a popula-
tion of 1 trillion or more multicellular organisms, a number that exceeds
the size of the effective breeding populations of practically all individual
animal species that have lived at any given time. 27 Conversely, they found
that mutation and selection could generate two coordinated mutations in
a population of only 1 million organisms, but only if the mechanism had
10 billion generations at its disposal. Yet on the assumption that each mul-
ticellular organism lived only one year, 10 billion generations computes to
10 billion years—more than twice the age of the earth. This is clearly an

246
DARWIN’S DOUBT
unreasonable length of time to wait for the emergence of a single gene, let
alone more significant evolutionary innovations.
Behe and Snoke did, however, find one tiny “sweet spot” in which a
gene requiring only two coordinated mutations could arise (see Fig. 12.4).
Such a gene could conceivably arise from
1 billion organisms in a “mere”
100 million generations. Since many more than
1 billion multicellular or-
ganisms have lived on earth during its history and since multicellular life
on earth has existed for more than 500 million years, these numbers offer
(assuming, again, one year per generation) the prospect of enough time
and organisms to generate one new gene—if only two coordinated muta-
tions are necessary. (Of course, if the population evolving a two-mutation
trait had fewer than
1 billion organisms, then the waiting times again in-
creased to unreasonable lengths.)
\A
2L
0
£
to*
§
•0,
£
x
It
_J0
10
n-
0
2
£
ID®
a
£
10
6*
X
.101
POPULATION
z
4
U>
a
io
NUM^EP oF KUTATlON^PE^UlPEb
-
FIGURE 12.4
This diagram shows the population sizes and times (measured in number of genera-
tions) required to produce a gene or trait if building that gene or trait requires multiple
coordinated mutations. The shaded gray area shows the “sweet spot”—population sizes
and available time sufficient to generate the coordinated mutations necessary to produce
a new gene. Note that any multi-mutation feature requiring more than two mutations
could not, in all probability, evolve by gene duplication and subsequent coordinated mu-
tation in a population of multicellular organisms, however large. Note also that for most
normal population sizes and reasonable generation times, even evolving two mutations
lies beyond the reach of gene duplication, mutation, and selection. Courtesy John Wiley
and Sons and The Protein Society.

Complex Adaptations and the Neo-Darwinian Math
247
Nevertheless, these numbers only apply to the case in which only two
coordinated mutations are necessary to build a new gene. Behe and Snoke
found that if generating a new functional gene or trait required more than
two coordinated mutations, then excessively long waiting times were neces-
sary regardless of the size of the population. If three or more coordinated
mutations were necessary, their calculations generated no “sweet spots” at
all. Thus, they concluded that “the mechanism of gene duplication and point
mutation alone would be ineffective, at least for multicellular
.
.
. species.”28
In summary, Behe and Snoke applied the
principles derived from
population genetics to evaluate the creative power of the standard neo-
Darwinian model of gene evolution. They showed that the standard model
encounters clear probabilistic limits if the structures it needs to build re-
quire more than two coordinated mutations in multicellular eukaryotic
organisms.
THE EDGE OF EVOLUTION AND ITS CRITICS
Behe and Snoke are well-known critics of the creative power of the neo-
Darwinian mechanism, so their conclusion might seem suspect to some
observers. Nevertheless, evolutionary biologists attempting to defend the
creative power of the neo-Darwinian mechanism have inadvertently con-
firmed Behe and Snoke’s conclusions.
Two recent scientific publications tell this story. First, in 2007, Michael
Behe published a book, The Edge ofEvolution, amplifying the results of his
2004 paper with David Snoke. Using public-health data about a genetic
trait—resistance to the antimalarial drug chloroquine in the one-celled
organism that causes malaria—Behe provided another line of evidence
and argument to support the conclusion that multiple coordinated muta-
tions are often necessary to produce even minor genetic adaptations.
Based on public-health data, Behe determined that resistance to chloro-
quine only arises once in every 1020 malaria-causing cells. Behe inferred,
by working the problem backwards,
that the
trait probably required
multiple—though not
necessarily coordinated—mutations
to
develop.
He called this trait a “chloroquine complexity cluster,” or a “CCC.”29 Behe
wanted to explore what he called the “edge of evolution,” the limits to the
creative power ofmutation and selection at the genetic level. Having estab-
lished that this trait could arise by random mutation in a reasonably short

248
DARWIN’S DOUBT
period of time, he wondered how much time would be required to produce
traits of greater complexity in populations of various sizes.
He asked his readers to consider a hypothetical genetic trait twice as
complex as a CCC cluster—a feature requiring the origin oftwo coordinated
traits, each as complex as a CCC. In other words, Behe wondered how long it
would take to develop a hypothetical trait that required two genetic changes
as complex as a chloroquine complexity cluster, i/both changes had to occur
together in the same organism—in a coordinated fashion—in order to pro-
duce the trait. He then showed, using the principles of population genetics,
that multi-mutation traits of that complexity—the molecular equivalent of
two coordinated CCCs—would require many more organisms or vastly
more time than was reasonable given the history of life. Remember the
Powerball lottery: waiting times increase exponentially with each additional
coordinated change or winning element needed. Behe showed, for example,
that if 1020 organisms were required to obtain one CCC, then the square
of that amount—1040 organisms—would be required to evolve a trait that
required two coordinated CCCs before providing any advantage.30 But, as
we saw in Chapter 10, only 1040 total organisms have ever existed on earth,
implying that the entire history of the earth would barely provide enough
opportunities to generate a trait of this complexity.
31
Similarly, Behe reasoned that for organisms in smaller population sizes,
developing a trait of twice the complexity of a CCC would require im-
mensely long waiting times. He also determined that exceedingly long
waiting times are typically required to generate even less complex genetic
adaptations in smaller populations.
Behe showed that the problem ofcoordinated mutations was particularly
acute for longer-lived organisms with small population sizes—organisms
such as mammals or, more specifically, human beings and their presumed
prehuman ancestors. Behe estimated, based upon relevant mutation rates,
known human population sizes, and generation times, the time required
for two coordinated mutations to occur in the hominid line. He calculated
that producing even such a modest evolutionary change would require
many hundreds of millions of years. Yet, humans and chimps are thought
to have diverged from a common ancestor only 6 million years ago. Behe’s
calculation implied that the neo-Darwinian mechanism does not have the
capacity to generate even two coordinated mutations in the time available
for human evolution—and thus does not explain how humans arose.

Complex Adaptations and the Neo-Darwinian Math
249
Here the story gets really interesting. Soon after the publication of
The Edge of Evolution, two Cornell University mathematical biologists,
Rick Durrett and Deena Schmidt, both defenders of neo-Darwinism, at-
tempted to refute Behe’s conclusion by making their own calculations.
Their paper, “Waiting for Two Mutations: With Applications to Regula-
tory Sequence Evolution and the Limits of Darwinian Evolution,” also
applied a model based upon population genetics to calculate the amount
of time necessary to generate two coordinated mutations in the homi-
nid line. Although they calculated a shorter waiting time then Behe did,
their result nevertheless underscored the implausibility of relying on the
neo-Darwinian mechanism to generate coordinated mutations during
the relevant evolutionary timescale. Their calculation suggested that
it
would take not several hundred million years, but "only” 216 million
years to generate and
fix two coordinated mutations in the hominid
line—more than thirty times the amount of time available to produce
humans and chimps and all their distinctive complex adaptations and
differences from their inferred common ancestor.
In seeking to refute Behe, Durrett and Schmidt inadvertently con-
firmed his main contention. As they acknowledged, their calculation im-
plies that generating two or more coordinated mutations is “very unlikely
to occur on a reasonable timescale.”32 In sum, calculations performed by
both critics and defenders of neo-Darwinian evolution now reinforce the
same conclusion: (/coordinated mutations are necessary to generate new
genes and proteins, then the neo-Darwinian math itself, as expressed in
the principles of population genetics, establishes the implausibility of the
neo-Darwinian mechanism.
TESTING THE CO-OPTION OPTION
But does generating novel genes and proteins require coordinated muta-
tions? Behe and Snoke inferred as much based upon an undisputed fact
of molecular biology: many proteins rely on sets of amino acids acting in
close coordination in order to perform their functions. In addition, in The
Edge ofEvolution, Behe argued on functional grounds that many complex
biological systems would require coordinated adaptive mutations since in
these systems, the absence of even one or a few gene products (proteins
or traits) will cause them to lose function. Behe specifically showed that
IT 'IWH

250
DARWIN’S DOUBT
several molecular machines within cells (such as the cilium and intrafla-
gellar transport system, and the bacterial flagellar motor 33
) require the co-
ordinated interaction of multiple protein parts in order to maintain their
function. Nevertheless, in making this argument, Behe did not address an
alternative idea about the pathway by which new genes and proteins might
have evolved, and thus did not establish conclusively that new genes and
proteins themselves represent complex adaptations.
Some neo-Darwinists have proposed a model of protein evolution known
as “co-option.” In this model, a protein that performs one function is trans-
formed, or “co-opted” to perform some other function. This model envi-
sions new features requiring multiple “mutations” arising in a step-by-step
way to produce some protein, call
it “Protein B ,” from some other protein
that lacked those features, call it “Protein A.” In proposing a series of single
separate mutations, advocates of co-option acknowledge that the initial in-
dividual amino-acid changes, the first few steps in evolution, from Protein
A, the protein lacking the multisite feature, would not allow Protein A to
perform the function of Protein B. Nevertheless, they propose that these ini-
tial changes might have allowed Protein A to perform some other advanta-
geous function, thus making it selectable and preventing protein evolution
from terminating due to diminution or loss of its initial function. Eventu-
ally, as mutations continued to generate new proteins with slightly different
functions, they would have generated a protein close enough in sequence
and structure that just one or a very few additional changes would suffice to
convert it into Protein B.
Aware of these imaginative scenarios, Douglas Axe and his colleague,
molecular biologist Ann Gauger (see Fig.
12.5), now working together at

Complex Adaptations and the Neo-Darwinian Math
251
the Biologic Institute in Seattle, decided to put them to an ingenious ex-
perimental test. 34 In so doing, they sought to determine whether the evo-
lution of new multisite features does indeed typically require multiple
coordinated mutations, or instead whether such a feature could arise by
co-option.
Axe and Gauger scoured protein databases looking for proteins that
are as similar as possible in sequence and structure, but that neverthe-
less perform different functions. They identified two proteins that meet
those criteria. One of these proteins (KblJ is needed for breaking down an
amino acid called threonine, and the other (BioF
2 ) is needed for building
a vitamin called biotin. (See Fig. 12.6.)
Gauger and Axe realized that if they could transform Kbl, into a pro-
tein performing the function of BioF
2 with just one or very few coordi-
nated amino-acid
changes,
then
that might demonstrate
(depending
upon how few) that the two proteins were close enough in sequence that
a conversion in function of the kind envisioned by co-option advocates is
plausible in evolutionary time. What’s more, because they knew the diffi-
culty scientists have had in showing any real change of protein function to
be feasible, a positive result would suggest that they had at last discovered
a functional gap that one or very few mutations could plausibly jump—as
co-option envisioned.
If, however,
they found
that many coordinated mutational changes
were needed, then that could establish—depending upon how many were
needed—that the Darwinian mechanism could not accomplish the func-
tional jump from A to B in a reasonable time. That would imply that an even
greater degree of structural similarity between proteins would be needed
FIGURE 12.6
The proteins, Kbl
2 (left) and BioF
2 (right) are enzymes that use similar catalytic mecha-
nisms to accelerate different chemical reactions in the bacterium E.
coli. Courtesy Ann
Gauger and Douglas Axe.

252
DARWIN’S DOUBT
for the co-option hypothesis to be plausible. Having carefully examined the
structural similarities between members of a large class of structurally simi-
lar enzymes, they knew that Kbl
2 and BioF
2 were about as close in sequence
and structure as any two known proteins that performed different func-
tions. Thus, if it turned out that converting one protein function into the
other required many coordinated mutations—more than could be expected
to occur in a reasonable time—then the outcome of their experiment would
have devastating implications for standard accounts of protein evolution. If
proteins that perform two different functions have to be even more similar
than Kbl
2 and BioF
2 in order for mutational changes to convert the func-
tion of one to the other, then for all practical purposes co-option would not
work. There simply aren’t many known jumps that small.
Axe and Gauger first identified those amino-acid sites that were most
likely,
if mutated, to cause a change from Kbl
2 function to BioF
2 func-
tion. They then systematically mutated those
sites individually and in
groups involving various amino-acid combinations. Their results were
unambiguous. They found that they could not induce, with either one or a
small number of amino acids, the change in function they sought. In fact,
they found that they could not get Kbl
2 to perform the function of BioF
2
,
even if they mutated larger numbers of amino acids in concert—that
is,
even if they made many more coordinated mutations than could plausibly
occur by chance in all of evolutionary history.
Although their attempts to convert Kbl
to perform the function of
BioF
2 failed, their experiment did not. It allowed them to establish experi-
mentally for the first time that the co-option hypothesis of protein evolu-
tion lacks credibility—simply too many coordinated mutations would be
required to convert one protein function to another, even in the case of
extremely similar proteins. That implied that generating new genes and
proteins would require multiple coordinated mutations, and thus, the
waiting times that Behe and Snoke had calculated do present a problem
for neo-Darwinian theory.
The experimental work also enabled Axe to calculate expected wait-
ing times for various numbers of coordinated mutations given differ-
ent variables and factors. Axe developed a refined population-genetics
mathematical model
to
calculate various waiting
times.
His
results
roughly confirmed the previous calculations of Behe and Snoke. He
found, for example, that if he took into account the probable fitness cost

Complex Adaptations and the Neo-Darwinian Math
253
to an organism of carrying unnecessary gene duplicates (as was neces-
sary to give the evolution of a new gene a reasonable chance), that the
probable waiting time for even three coordinated mutations exceeded
the duration of life on earth.
He therefore effectively determined an upper bound of two
for the
number of coordinated mutations that could be expected to occur in a
duplicate gene during the history of life on earth (taking into account the
negative effects of carrying gene duplicates in the evolutionary process).
He also calculated six coordinated mutations as an upper bound, neglect-
ing the fitness cost of carrying gene duplicates. Nevertheless, in their
experiments, he and Gauger could not induce a functional change in a
single gene with more than six coordinated mutations. So, even that more
generous—and, again, unrealistically generous upper bound—does little
to render the co-option hypothesis credible. Indeed, Axe and Gauger’s ex-
periments showed that the smallest realistically conceivable step exceeded
what was plausible given the time available to the evolutionary process.
In their words, “evolutionary innovations requiring that many changes
.
.
. would be extraordinarily rare, becoming probable only on timescales
much longer than the age of life on earth.”
WHAT IT ALL MEANS
By showing the implausibility of the co-option model of protein evolu-
tion and the need for multiple coordinated mutations in order to generate
multisite features in proteins, Axe and Gauger confirmed that genes and
proteins themselves represent complex adaptations—entities that depend
upon the coordinated interaction of multiple subunits that must arise as a
group to confer any functional advantage.
The need for coordinated mutations means that evolutionary biolo-
gists cannot just assume that mutations will readily generate new genes
and traits, as neo-Darwinists have long presupposed. Indeed, by applying
mathematical models based on the standard principles of population ge-
netics to the questions of the origin of genes themselves, Behe and Snoke,
Durrett and Schmidt (inadvertently). Axe and Gauger, and other biolo-
gists35 have recently shown that generating the number of multiple co-
ordinated mutations needed to produce even one new gene or protein is
unlikely to occur within a realistic waiting time. Thus, these biologists

254
DARWIN’S DOUBT
establish the implausibility of the neo-Darwinian mechanism as a means
of generating new genetic information.
There is one other aspect of this. The body of work published between
2004 and 2011 also provides additional confirmation of Axe’s research
showing the rarity of genes and proteins in sequence space. In fact, that
research helps to explain why such long waiting times are necessary. If
functional sequences are rare in sequence space,
it stands to reason that
finding them by purely random and undirected means will take a long
time. Moreover, waiting times increase exponentially with each additional
necessary mutation. Thus, long waiting times for the production of new
functional genes and proteins is exactly what we should expect if indeed
functional genes and proteins are rare, and if coordinated mutations are
necessary to produce them. Thus, the various experiments and calcula-
tions performed between 2004 and 2011 indirectly confirm Axe’s earlier
conclusion about the rarity of functional genes and proteins and supply
further evidence that the neo-Darwinian mechanism cannot generate the
information necessary to build new genes, let alone a new form of animal
life, in the time available to the evolutionary process.
THE MATH AND THE MECHANISM
There is a concluding irony in all this. The researchers calculating wait-
ing times for the appearance of complex adaptations have in each case
done so using models based on the core principles of population genet-
ics, the mathematical expression of neo-Darwinian
theory.
In
a
real
sense, therefore, the neo-Darwinian math is itself showing that the neo-
Darwinian mechanism cannot build complex adaptations—including the
new information-rich genes and proteins that would have been necessary
to build the Cambrian animals. To adapt a metaphor that Tom Frazzetta
might appreciate, the snake has eaten its own tail.

13
THE ORIGIN OF
BODY PLANS
Rarely have the implications of a Nobel Prize-winning scientific discovery
received so little notice. Of course, the discovery itself received great ac-
claim. But the deeper meaning was another matter.
Starting in the autumn of 1979,
at the European Molecular Biology
Laboratory in Heidelberg, two venturesome young geneticists, Christiane
Niisslein-Volhard and Eric Wieschaus (see Fig. 13.1), generated thousands
of mutations to investigate the genomes of tens of thousands of fruit flies
(species: Drosophila melanogaster). They hoped to get them to divulge
the secrets of embryological development. In technical jargon, Niisslein-
Volhard and Wieschaus performed “saturation mutagenesis” experiments.
After feeding male flies the potent mutation-causing chemical (i.e., muta-
gen) ethyl methane sulphonate (EMS), Niisslein-Volhard and Wieschaus
bred the males with virgin females. They then examined the offspring
larvae for visible defects.
In generating many thousands of mutants, thereby “saturating” the
Drosophila genome, Niisslein-Volhard and Wieschaus induced variations
in the small subset of genes that specifically regulate embryonic develop-
ment. These regulatory genes normally control the expression of many
other genes that build the fly embryo, progressively subdividing it into re-
gions that will become the head, thorax, and abdomen of the adult fly. The
EMS mutagen disrupts DNA replication, thereby mutating genes. These
mutations affect the process of development, leaving visible defects in the
r.

256
DARWIN’S DOUBT
fly larvae. By observing the damaged larvae, Wieschaus and Nusslein-
Volhard inferred how specific genes regulate the development of different
parts of the fly body plan. In essence, Wieschaus and Niisslein-Volhard
reverse-engineered the fly’s genome to determine the function of the dif-
ferent genes, including the regulatory genes crucial to fly development.
1
The thoroughness and novelty of the “Heidelberg screens” (as the ex-
periments came to be known) and their importance for revealing the
mechanisms of regulatory control during animal embryogenesis won
the attention of the Nobel committee. In 1995, the committee awarded
the Nobel
Prize
in Medicine or Physiology
to Niisslein-Volhard and
Wieschaus. “This work was revolutionary,” University of Cambridge ge-
neticist Daniel St. Johnston explained, “because it was the first mutagen-
esis in any multicellular organism that attempted to find most or all of
the mutations that affect
.
.
. the essential patterning genes that are used
throughout development.” 2
That’s the story as
it is usually told. And
it’s correct, as far as
it goes.
But the mutant fruit flies obtained by Niisslein-Volhard and Wieschaus
tell another story—one less widely known, but one containing important
clues for the unsolved mystery of the origin of animal body plans.
Wieschaus himself alluded to these clues in a memorable interaction
at the 1982 meeting of the American Association for the Advancement
of Science (AAAS). After a session on the processes of macroevolution in
which Wieschaus had presented a paper, one audience member asked him
what he meant by the term “strong” as he used
it to describe the muta-
tions he and Niisslein-Volhard had induced in flies. Wieschaus explained
with a laugh that “strong” certainly did not mean alive. Without excep-
tion, the mutants he studied perished as deformed larvae long before
achieving reproductive age. “No, dead is dead,” he joked, “and you can’t
be more dead.”
3
Another questioner then asked Wieschaus about the implications of
his findings for evolutionary theory. Here Wieschaus responded more
soberly, wondering aloud about whether his collection of mutants of-
fered any insights into how the evolutionary process could have con-
structed novel body plans. “The problem
is, we think we’ve hit all the
genes required to specify the body plan of Drosophila,” he said, “and yet
these results are obviously not promising as raw materials for macro-

The Origin ofBody Plans
257
evolution. The next question then,
I guess, is what are— or what would
be—the right mutations for major evolutionary change? And we don’t
know the answer to that .”4
Thirty years later, developmental and evolutionary biologists still don’t
know the answer to that question. At the same time, mutagenesis exper-
iments—on fruit flies as well as on other organisms such as nematodes
(roundworms), mice, frogs, and sea urchins—have raised troubling ques-
tions about the role of mutations in the origin of animal body plans. If
mutating the genes that regulate body-plan construction destroy animal
forms as they develop from an embryonic state, then how do mutations
and selection build animal body plans in the first place?
The neo-Darwinian mechanism has failed to explain the generation of
new genes and proteins needed for building the new animal forms that
arose in the Cambrian explosion. But even if mutation and selection could
generate fundamentally new genes and proteins, a more formidable prob-
lem remains. To build a new animal and establish its body plan, proteins
need to be organized into higher-level structures. In other words, once
new proteins arise, something must arrange them to play their parts in
distinctive cell types. These distinctive cell types must, in turn, be orga-
nized to form distinctive tissues, organs, and body plans. This process of
organization occurs during embryological development. Thus, to explain
how animals are actually built from smaller protein components, scien-
tists must understand the process of embryological development.
FIGURE 13.1
Figure 13.1a (left): Christiane Nusslein-Volhard. Courtesy Wikimedia Commons, user
Rama. Figure 13.1b (right): Eric F. Wieschaus.

258
DARWIN’S DOUBT
THE ROLE OF GENES AND PROTEINS
IN ANIMAL DEVELOPMENT
As much as any other subdiscipline of biology, developmental biology has
raised disquieting questions for neo-Darwinism. Developmental biology
describes the processes, called ontogeny, by which embryos develop into
mature organisms. Within the past three decades the field has dramati-
cally advanced our understanding of how body plans arise during ontog-
eny. Much of this new knowledge has come from studying so-called model
systems—organisms that biologists can easily mutate in the lab, such as
the fruit fly Drosophila and the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.
Although the exact details of animal development can vary in bewil-
dering ways depending on the species, all animal development exemplifies
a common imperative: start with one cell, end with many different cells.
In most animal species, development begins with the fertilized egg. Once
the egg divides into its daughter cells, becoming an embryo, the organism
begins heading toward a well-defined target, namely, an adult form that can
reproduce. Arriving at that distant target requires the embryo to produce
many specialized cell types, in the correct positions and at the right time.
Cell differentiation involves coordinating the expression of specific
genes in space and time, as the number of cells, taking on their different
roles, rises from one to two to four to eight, doubling and doubling until
it reaches thousands, millions, and even trillions, depending on the spe-
cies. The number of cell divisions and the total number of cells reflects
the number of different cell types the adult needs. This in turn requires
producing different proteins for different cell types.
For example, the specialized digestive proteins that service the cells
lining the adult intestine differ from proteins expressed in a neuron found
in the nerve tract of a limb. They must differ because each performs dra-
matically different functions. So, during development, the appropriate
genes must be turned on, or “up-regulated,” and turned off, or “down-
regulated,” to ensure the production of the correct protein products at the
right time and in the right cell types.
Specific proteins play active roles in regulating the expression of genes
for building other proteins. The protein actors playing these coordinating
roles
are known
as
transcriptional
regulators
(TRs)
or
transcription
factors (TFs). TRs (or TFs) usually bind directly to specific sites in DNA,

The Origin ofBody Plans
259
either preventing
(repressing) or enabling
(activating) the transcription
of specific genes into RNA. TRs or TFs convey instructions about which
genes to turn on or turn off. Their three-dimensional geometries exhibit
characteristic DNA-binding features, including a specific domain of 61
amino acids that wraps around the DNA double helix. Other transcrip-
tion factors include the zinc finger and leucine zipper motifs that also bind
to DNA. Transcriptional regulators and factors are themselves controlled
by complex circuits and signals transmitted by other genes and proteins,
the overall complexity and precision of which is breathtaking.
Painstaking
genetic
research—performed by Niisslein-Volhard and
Wieschaus and many other developmental biologists
5—has uncovered
many of the key embryonic regulatory genes that help switch cells into
their differentiated adult types. This research also uncovered a profound
difficulty cutting to the very core of the neo-Darwinian view of life.
EARLY-ACTING BODY-PLAN MUTATIONS
AND EMBRYONIC LETHALS
To create significant changes in the forms of animals requires atten-
tion to timing. Mutations in genes expressed late in the development
of an animal will affect relatively few cells and architectural features.
That’s because by late in development the basic outlines of the body plan
have already been established. 6 Late-acting mutations therefore cannot
cause any significant or heritable changes in the form or body plan of the
whole animal. Mutations that are expressed early in development, how-
ever, may affect many cells and could conceivably produce significant
changes in the form or body plan, especially if these changes occur in
key regulatory genes.
7 Thus, mutations that are expressed early in the de-
velopment of animals have probably the only realistic chance of produc-
ing large-scale macroevolutionary change.
8 As evolutionary geneticists
Bernard John and George Miklos explain, “macroevolutionary change”
requires changes in “very early embryogenesis.” 9 Former Yale Univer-
sity evolutionary biologist Keith Thomson concurs: only mutations ex-
pressed early in the development of organisms can produce large-scale
macroevolutionary change.
10
Yet from the first experiments by geneticist T. H. Morgan systematically
mutating fruit flies early in the twentieth century until today, as many

260
DARWIN’S DOUBT
model species have been subjected to mutagenesis, developmental biology
has shown that mutations affecting body-plan formation expressed early
in development inevitably damage the organism.
11 (See Fig.
13.2, for ex-
amples.) As one of the founders of neo-Darwinism geneticist R. A. Fisher
noted, such mutations
are
“either
definitely pathological (most
often
lethal) in their effects,” or they result in an organism that cannot survive
“in the wild state.”
12
Normal development in any animal can be represented as an expand-
ing network of decisions, where the earliest (upstream) decisions have
greater impact than those occurring
later. Regulatory genes and their
DNA-binding protein products help to control this unfolding network
of decisions—such that if regulatory proteins are altered or destroyed by
mutation, the effects cascade downstream into the whole developmental
process. The earlier the failure, the more widespread the destruction. Ge-
neticist Bruce Wallace explains why early-acting mutations are thus over-
whelmingly likely to disrupt animal development. “The extreme difficulty
encountered,” he observes, “when attempting to transform one organism
into another
.
.
.
still functional one lies in the difficulty in resetting a
number of the many controlling switches in a manner that still allows for
the individual’s orderly (somatic) development.”
13
Nusslein-Volhard and Wieschaus discovered this problem in experi-
ments performed on fruit flies after their first Nobel Prize-winning efforts.
In these later experiments they studied protein molecules that influence
the organization of different types of cells early in the process of embry-
ological development. These molecules, called “morphogens,” including
one called Bicoid, are critical to establishing the fruit
fly’s head-to-tail
axis. They found that when these early-acting, body-plan-affecting mol-
ecules are perturbed, development shuts down. When mutations occur
in the gene that codes for Bicoid, the resulting embryos die
14—as they do
in all other known cases in which mutations occur early in the regulatory
genes that affect body-plan formation.
There are good functional reasons for this, familiar to us from the logic
of other complex systems. If an automaker modifies a car’s paint color or
seat covers, nothing else needs to be altered for the car to operate, because
the normal function of the car does not depend upon these features. But
if an engineer changes the length of the piston rods in the car’s engine,

The Origin ofBody Plans
261
and does not modify the crankshaft accordingly, the engine wont run.
Similarly, animal development is a tightly integrated process in which var-
ious proteins and cell structures depend upon each other for their func-
tion, and later events depend crucially on earlier events. As a result, one
change early in the development of an animal will require a host of other
coordinated changes in separate but functionally interrelated develop-
mental processes and entities downstream .
15 This tight functional integra-
tion helps explain why mutations early in development inevitably result
in embryonic death and why even mutations expressed somewhat later in
development commonly leave organisms crippled.
Looking more closely at a specific experimental
result of this kind
further illuminates the problem. A mutation in the regulatory Ultrabi-
thorax gene (expressed midway in the development of a fly) produces an
extra pair of wings on a normally two-winged creature. Although an extra
set of wings may sound like a useful piece of equipment, its not at all. This
“innovation” results in a crippled insect that cannot fly because
it lacks,
TUB "q+ofeT u)in<^" mutant
TUB "CUPty u)in4<" mutant
cannot fly
CAnnot FLY
TUB "BYBLBtf" MUTANT
complete/ $LrNt>
TUB "AntennAPEMA" MUtAnt<
UAvB LBb<> \a)UBF.B T-4EIP
AntennAE {UoULb f>B AnI>
CAnnot P£PPot>UC£.
FIGURE 13.2
Examples of deleterious macromutations produced by experiments on fruit flies, includ-
ing the “short wings,” “curly wings,” “eyeless,” and Antennapedia mutants.

262
DARWIN’S DOUBT
among other things, a musculature to support the use of its new wings.
Because the developmental mutation was not accompanied by the many
other coordinated developmental changes that were needed to make the
wings useful, the mutation is decidedly harmful.
This problem has led to what Georgia Tech geneticist John F. McDonald
has called a “great Darwinian paradox.”
16 He notes that the genes that are
obviously variable within natural populations seem to affect only minor
aspects
of form and
function—while
those genes
that govern major
changes, the very stuff of macroevolution, apparently do not vary or vary
only to the detriment of the organism. As he puts it, “Those [genetic] loci
that are obviously variable within natural populations do not seem to lie at
the basis of many major adaptive changes, while those loci that seemingly
do constitute the foundation of many if not most major adaptive changes
are not variable within natural populations.”
17 In other words, the kind of
mutations the evolutionary process would need to produce new animal
body plans—namely,
beneficial regulatory changes expressed
early in
development—don’t occur. Whereas, the kind that it doesn’t need—viable
genetic mutations in DNA generally expressed late in development—do
occur. Or put more succinctly, the kind of mutations we need for major
evolutionary change we don’t get; the kind we get we don’t need.
My Discovery Institute colleague Paul Nelson (see Fig. 13.3), a philoso-
pher of biology who specializes in evolutionary theory and developmental
biology, summarizes the challenge to neo-Darwinism posed by animal
development as three premises:
1. Animal body plans are built in each generation by a stepwise
process, from the fertilized egg to the many cells of the adult. The
earliest stages in this process determine what follows.
2.
Thus, to evolve any body plan, mutations expressed early in de-
velopment must occur, must be viable, and must be stably trans-
mitted to offspring.
3.
Such early-acting mutations of global effect on animal devel-
opment, however, are those least likely to be tolerated by the
embryo and, in fact, never have been tolerated in any animals
that developmental biologists have studied.

The Origin ofBody Plans
263
FIGURE 13.3
Paul Nelson. Courtesy Paul Nelson.
Nelson came to appreciate the depth of the problem posed by these facts
after many years of discussion with two members of his University of Chi-
cago Ph.D. committee, evolutionary biologist Leigh Van Valen (1935-2010)
and evolutionary theorist and philosopher of biology William Wimsatt.
Van Valen, famous for his “Red Queen hypothesis” about the need for or-
ganisms to continue to evolve in order to maintain fitness, was passionately
interested in the mechanisms of macroevolution. Wimsatt originated the
theory of “generative entrenchment,” an account of the “causal asymme-
tries” at work in complex systems, including those responsible for animal
development.
18 Both acknowledged to Nelson that the scientific literature
offers no examples of viable mutations affecting early animal develop-
ment and body-plan formation (Premise 3, on previous page) and also that
the macroevolution of novel animal form requires just such early-acting
mutations (Premise 2, on previous page). Nevertheless, both Van Valen
and Wimsatt remained committed to the descent of animal forms from a
common ancestor via some kind of undirected mutations. Nelson argues,
however, that those premises strongly imply that the neo-Darwinian mech-
anism does not—and indeed cannot—provide an adequate mechanism for
producing new animal body plans. As he has told me: “If the only kind of
mutations that can conceivably produce enough morphological change to
alter whole body plans never causes beneficial and heritable changes, then it
is difficult to see how mutation and selection could ever produce new body
plans in the first place.”
19
Thus, he concludes:

264
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Research on animal development and macroevolution over the
last thirty years— research donefrom within the neo-Darwinian
framework—has shown that the neo-Darwinian explanation for the
origin ofnew body plans is overwhelmingly likely to be false—andfor
reasons that Darwin himself would have understood.
Indeed, Darwin himself insisted that “nothing can be effected” by nat-
ural selection, “unless favorable variations occur.”20 Or as Swedish evolu-
tionary biologist Soren Lovtrup succinctly explains: “Without variation,
no selection; without selection, no evolution. This assertion
is based on
logic of the simplest kind.
.
.
. Selection pressure as an evolutionary agent
becomes void of sense unless the availability of the proper mutations
is
assumed .” 21 Yet the “proper” kind of mutations—the mutations that pro-
duce favorable changes to
early-acting, body-plan-shaping, regulatory
genes—do not occur.
Microevolutionary change is insufficient; macromutations—large-scale
changes—are harmful. This paradox has beset Darwinism from its incep-
tion, but discoveries about the genetic regulation of development in ani-
mals have made this paradox more acute and cast serious doubt on the
efficacy of the modern neo-Darwinian mechanism as an explanation for
the new body plans that arise in the Cambrian period.
DEVELOPMENTAL GENE REGULATORY NETWORKS
Another line of research in developmental biology has revealed a related
challenge to the creative power of the neo-Darwinian mechanism. Devel-
opmental biologists have discovered that many gene products (proteins and
RNAs) needed for the development of specific animal body plans trans-
mit signals that influence the way individual cells develop and differentiate
themselves. Additionally, these signals affect how cells are organized and
interact with each other during embryological development. These
sig-
naling molecules influence each other to form circuits or networks of co-
ordinated interaction, much like integrated circuits on a circuitboard. For
example, exactly when a signaling molecule gets transmitted often depends
upon when a signal from another molecule is received, which in turn af-
fects the transmission of still others— all of which are coordinated and in-
tegrated to perform specific time-critical functions. The coordination and

The Origin ofBody Plans
265
integration of these signaling molecules in cells ensures the proper differ-
entiation and organization of distinct cell types during the development of
an animal body plan. Consequently, just as mutating an individual regula-
tory gene early in the development of an animal will inevitably shut down
development, so too will mutations or alterations in the whole network of
interacting signaling molecules destroy a developing embryo.
No biologist has explored the regulatory logic of animal development
more deeply than Eric Davidson, at the California Institute of Technology.
Early in his career, collaborating with molecular biologist Roy Britten,
Davidson formulated a theory of “gene regulation for higher cells.”22 By
“higher cells” Davidson and Britten meant the differentiated, or special-
ized, cells found in any animal after the earliest stages of embryological
development. Davidson observed that the cells of an individual animal,
no matter how varied in form or function, “generally contain identical
genomes.”23 During the life cycle of an organism, the genomes of these
specialized cells express only a small fraction of their DNA at any given
time and produce different RNAs as a result. These facts strongly suggest
that some animal-wide system of genetic control functions to turn specific
genes on and off as needed throughout the life of the organism—and that
such a system functions during the development of an animal from egg to
adult as different cell types are being constructed.
When they proposed their theory in 1969, Britten and Davidson ac-
knowledged that “little
is known ... of the molecular mechanisms by
which gene expression
is controlled in differentiated cells.”24 Neverthe-
less, they deduced that such a system must be at work. Given:
(1) that
tens or hundreds of specialized cell types arise during the development of
animals, and (2) that each cell contains the same genome, they reasoned
(3) that some control system must determine which genes are expressed
in different cells at different times to ensure the differentiation of differ-
ent cell types from each other—some system-wide regulatory logic must
oversee and coordinate the expression of the genome. 25
Davidson has dedicated his career to discovering and describing the
mechanisms by which these systems of gene regulation and control work
during embryological development. During the last two decades, research
in genomics has revealed that nonprotein-coding regions of the genome
control and regulate the timing of the expression of the protein-coding
regions of the genome. Davidson has shown that the nonprotein-coding

266
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Skeletogenic Mic
Lineage
FIGURE 13.4
Developmental gene regulatory net-
works (dGRNs) and development in the
purple sea urchin, Strongylocentrotus
purpuratus. Figure 13.4a (top, left):
shows the actual embryo, starting at
6 hours and progressing through cell
division to 55 hours, when the larval
skeleton appears. Figure 13.4b (bottom,
left): depicts the major classes of genes
involved in specifying the larval skel-
eton. Figure 13.4c (top, right): shows the
detailed genetic circuitry implicated in
the overall “gene regulatory network”
(“GRN”) that controls the construction
of the larval skeleton. Courtesy National
Academy of Sciences, U.S.A.

The Origin ofBody Plans
267
regions ofDNA that regulate and control gene expression and the protein-
coding regions of the genome together function as circuits. These
cir-
cuits, which Davidson calls “developmental gene regulatory networks” (or
dGRNs) control the embryological development of animals.
On arriving at Caltech in 1971, Davidson chose the purple sea urchin,
Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, as his experimental model system. The
biology of S. purpuratus makes
it an attractive laboratory subject: the
species occurs abundantly along the Pacific coast, produces enormous
quantities of easily fertilized eggs in the lab, and lives for many years. 26
Davidson and his coworkers pioneered the technology and experimen-
tal protocols required to dissect the sea urchin’s genetic regulatory
system.
The remarkable complexity of what they found needs to be depicted
visually. Figure 13.4a shows the urchin embryo as
it appears six hours
after development has begun
(top
left of diagram). This
is the
16-cell
stage, meaning that four rounds of cell division have already occurred
(l-+2-+4-*8-»-
16). As development proceeds in the next four
stages, both the number of cells and the degree of cellular specialization
increases, until, at 55 hours, elements of the urchin skeleton come into
focus. Figure 13.4b shows, corresponding to these drawings of embryo
development, a schematic diagram with the major classes of genes (for
cell and tissue types) represented as boxes, linked by control arrows. Last,
Figure 13.4c shows what Davidson calls “the genetic circuitry” that turns
on the specific biomineralization genes that produce the structural pro-
teins needed to build the urchin skeleton.27
This
last diagram
represents
a developmental gene regulatory
net-
work (or dGRN), an integrated network of protein and RNA-signaling
molecules responsible for the differentiation and arrangement of the spe-
cialized cells that establish the rigid skeleton of the sea urchin. Notice that,
to express the biomineralization genes that produce structural proteins
that make the skeleton, genes far upstream, activated many hours earlier
in development, must first play their role.
This process does not happen fortuitously in the sea urchin but via
highly regulated and precise control systems, as
it does in
all animals.
Indeed, even one of the simplest animals, the worm C. elegans, possess-
ing just over 1,000 cells as an adult,
is constructed during development
by dGRNs of remarkable precision and complexity. In
all animals, the

268
DARWIN’S DOUBT
various dGRNs direct what Davidson describes as the embryo’s “progres-
sive increase in complexity”—an increase, he writes, that can be measured
in “informational terms .”28
Davidson notes that, once established, the complexity ofthe dGRNs as in-
tegrated circuits makes them stubbornly resistant to mutational change—
a
point he has stressed in nearly every publication on the topic over the past
fifteen years. “In the sea urchin embryo,” he points out, “disarming any one
of these subcircuits produces some abnormality in expression .”29
Developmental gene regulatory networks resist mutational change be-
cause they are organized hierarchically. This means that some develop-
mental gene regulatory networks control other gene regulatory networks,
while some influence only the individual genes and proteins under their
control. At the center of this regulatory hierarchy are the regulatory net-
works that specify the axis and global form of the animal body plan during
development. These dGRNs cannot vary without causing catastrophic ef-
fects to the organism.
Indeed, there are no examples of these deeply entrenched, functionally
critical circuits varying at all. At the periphery of the hierarchy are gene
regulatory networks that specify the arrangements for smaller-scale fea-
tures that can sometimes vary. Yet, to produce a new body plan requires
altering the axis and global form of the animal. This requires mutating the
very circuits that do not vary without catastrophic effects. As Davidson
emphasizes, mutations affecting the dGRNs that regulate body-plan de-
velopment lead to “catastrophic loss of the body part or loss of viability
altogether.” 30 He explains in more detail:
There is always an observable consequence ifa dGRN subcircuit is
interrupted. Since these consequences are always catastrophically bad,
flexibility is minimal, and since the subcircuits are all interconnected,
the whole network partakes of the quality that there is only one wayfor
things to work. And indeed the embryos ofeach species develop in only
one way.
31
ENGINEERING CONSTRAINTS
Davidson’s findings present a profound challenge to the adequacy of the
neo-Darwinian mechanism. Building a new animal body plan requires

The Origin ofBody Plans
269
not just new genes and proteins, but new dGRNs. But to build a new
dGRN from a preexisting dGRN by mutation and selection necessar-
ily requires altering the preexisting developmental gene regulatory net-
work (the very kind of change that, as we saw in Chapter
12, cannot
arise without multiple coordinated mutations). In any case, Davidson’s
work has also shown that such alterations inevitably have catastrophic
consequences.
Davidson’s work highlights a profound contradiction between the neo-
Darwinian account of how new animal body plans are built and one of
the most basic principles of engineering—the principle of constraints.
Engineers have long understood that the more functionally integrated a
system is, the more difficult it is to change any part of it without damaging
or destroying the system as a whole. Davidson’s work confirms that this
principle applies to developing organisms in spades. The system of gene
regulation that controls animal-body-plan development is exquisitely in-
tegrated, so that significant alterations in these gene regulatory networks
inevitably damage or destroy the developing animal. 32 But given this, how
could a new animal body plan, and the new dGRNs necessary to produce
it, ever evolve gradually via mutation and selection from a preexisting
body plan and set of dGRNs?
Davidson makes clear that no one really knows: “contrary to classical
evolution theory, the processes that drive the small changes observed as
species diverge cannot be taken as models for the evolution of the body
plans of animals.”
33 He elaborates:
Neo-Darwinian evolution
.
.
. assumes that all process works the same
way, so that evolution ofenzymes orflower colors can be used as current
proxiesfor study ofevolution of the body plan. It erroneously assumes
that change in protein-coding sequence is the basic cause ofchange in
developmental program; and it erroneously assumes that evolutionary
change in body-plan morphology occurs by a continuous process. All of
these assumptions are basically counterfactual. This cannot be surpris-
ing, since the neo-Darwinian synthesisfrom which these ideas stem
was a premolecular biology concoction focused on population genetics
and
.
.
.
natural history, neither of which have any direct mechanistic
importfor the genomic regulatory systems that drive embryonic devel-
opment of the body plan . 34

270
DARWIN’S DOUBT
NOW AND THEN
Eric Davidson’s work,
like
that
of Niisslein-Volhard and Wieschaus,
highlights a difficulty of obvious relevance to the Cambrian explosion.
Typically, paleontologists understand the Cambrian explosion as the geo-
logically sudden appearance of new forms of animal life. Building these
forms requires new developmental programs—including both new early-
acting regulatory genes and new developmental gene regulatory networks.
Yet if neither early-acting regulatory genes nor dGRNs can be altered by
mutation without destroying existing developmental programs (and thus
animal form), then mutating these entities will leave natural selection
with nothing favorable to select and the evolution of animal form will, at
that point, terminate.
Darwin’s doubt about the Cambrian explosion centered on the problem
of missing fossil intermediates. Not only have those forms not been found,
but the Cambrian
explosion
itself illustrates
a profound engineering
problem that fossil evidence does not address—the problem of building a
new form of animal life by gradually transforming one tightly integrated
system of genetic components and their products into another. Yet, in the
next chapter, we will see that an even more formidable problem remains.

THE EPIGENETIC
REVOLUTION
In 1924, two German scientists, Hans Spemann and Hilda Mangold, re-
ported an intriguing experiment, the significance of which could not have
been fully appreciated at the time, three decades before the discovery of
the information-bearing properties of DNA. Using microsurgery, Spe-
mann and Mangold excised a portion of a newt embryo and transplanted
that portion into another developing newt embryo.
1
They achieved a startling
result. The second embryo produced two
bodies, each with a head and tail, joined together at the belly, not unlike
Siamese
twins.
Yet
despite
dramatically
altering the anatomy of the
embryo, Spemann and Mangold did not alter its DNA.
Their experiment later suggested a radical possibility: that something in
addition to DNA profoundly influences the development of animal body
plans. Other experiments suggested as much. In the 1930s and 1940s,
American biologist Ethel Harvey showed experimentally that sea urchin
embryos could undergo development up to about 500 cells after removal
of their nuclei—in other words, without their nuclear DNA.
2 In the 1960s,
Belgian scientists chemically blocked the transcription of DNA into RNA
in amphibian embryos and found that the embryos could still develop to
the point of containing several thousand cells.
3 In the 1970s, Canadian
biologists showed that a frog embryo could undergo early development
without its nucleus if the cell division apparatus from a sea urchin was
injected into the egg.4

272
DARWIN’S DOUBT
None of these results indicate that embryos can develop fully without
DNA. In every case, DNA was eventually necessary to complete embryo-
logical development. Yet these results suggest that DNA is not the whole
story, that other sources of information are playing important roles in di-
recting at least the early stages of animal development.
ABOVE AND BEYOND: EPIGENETIC INFORMATION
In 2003, MIT Press published a groundbreaking collection of scien-
tific essays titled Origination of Organismal Form: Beyond the Gene in
Developmental and Evolutionary Biology, edited by two distinguished
developmental and evolutionary biologists, Gerd Muller, of the Uni-
versity of Vienna, and Stuart Newman, of New York Medical College.
In their volume, Muller and Newman included a number of scientific
articles describing recent
discoveries
in
genetics and developmental
biology—discoveries suggesting that genes alone do not determine the
three-dimensional form and structure
of an animal.
Instead, many
of the
scientists
in
their volume
reported
that
so-called
epigenetic
information—information stored in
cell structures, but not in DNA
sequences—plays a crucial
role. The Greek prefix epi means “above”
or “beyond,” so epigenetics refers to a source of information that lies
beyond the genes. As Muller and Newman explain in their introduction,
“Detailed information at the level of the gene does not serve to explain
form.”
5 Instead, as Newman explains, “epigenetic” or “contextual infor-
mation” plays a crucial role in the formation of animal “body assem-
blies” during embryological development.
6
Muller and Newman not only highlighted the importance of epigenetic
information to the formation of body plans during development; they also
argued that
it must have played a similarly important role in the origin
and evolution of animal body plans in the first place. They concluded that
recent discoveries about the role of epigenetic information in animal de-
velopment pose a formidable challenge to the standard neo-Darwinian
account of the origin of these body plans—perhaps the most formidable
of all.
In the introductory essay to their volume, Muller and Newman list a
number of “open questions” in evolutionary biology, including the ques-
tion of the origin of Cambrian-era animal body plans and the origin of

The Epigenetic Revolution
273
organismal form generally, the latter being the central topic of their book.
They note that though “the neo-Darwinian paradigm still represents the
central explanatory framework of evolution,” it has “no theory of the gen-
erative
” 7 In their view, neo-Darwinism “completely avoids [the question
of] the origination of phenotypic traits and of organismal form.”
8 As they
and others in their volume maintain, neo-Darwinism lacks an explana-
tion for the origin of organismal form precisely because it cannot explain
the origin of epigenetic information.
I
first learned about the problem of epigenetic information and the
Spemann and Mangold experiment while driving to a private meeting of
Darwin-doubting scientists on the central coast of California in 1993. In
the car with me was Jonathan Wells (see Fig. 14.1), who was then finishing
a Ph.D. in developmental biology at the University of California at Berke-
ley. Like some others in his field, Wells had come to reject the (exclusively)
“gene-centric” view of animal development and to recognize the impor-
tance of nongenetic sources of information.
By that time, I had studied many questions and challenges to standard
evolutionary theories arising out of molecular biology. But epigenetics was
new to me. On our drive,
I asked Wells why developmental biology was
so important to evolutionary theory and to assessing neo-Darwinism. I’ll
never forget his reply. “Because” he said, “that’s where the whole theory is
going to unravel.”
In the years since, Wells has developed a powerful argument against
the adequacy of the neo-Darwinian mechanism as an explanation for
FIGURE 14.1
Jonathan Wells. Courtesy Laszlo Bencze.

274
DARWIN’S DOUBT
the origin of animal body plans. His argument turns on the importance
of epigenetic information to animal development. To see why epigenetic
information poses an additional challenge to neo-Darwinism and what
exactly biologists mean by “epigenetic” information, let’s examine the re-
lationship between biological form and biological information.
FORM AND INFORMATION
Biologists typically define “form” as a distinctive shape and arrangement
of body parts. Organismal forms exist in three spatial dimensions and
arise in time—in the case of animals during development from embryo
to adult. Animal form arises as material constituents are constrained to
establish specific arrangements with an
identifiable three-dimensional
shape or “topography”—one that we would recognize as the body plan of
a particular type of animal. A particular “form,” therefore, represents a
highly specific arrangement of material components among a much larger
set of possible arrangements.
Understanding form in this way suggests a connection to the notion of
information in its most theoretically general sense. As
I noted in Chap-
ter 8, Shannon’s mathematical theory of information equated the amount
of information transmitted with the amount of uncertainty reduced or
eliminated in a series of symbols or characters. Information, in Shannon’s
theory, is thus imparted as some options, or possible arrangements, are ex-
cluded and others are actualized. The greater the number of arrangements
excluded, the greater the amount of information conveyed. Constrain-
ing a set of possible material arrangements, by whatever means, involves
excluding some options and actualizing others. Such a process generates
information in the most general sense of Shannon’s theory. It follows that
the constraints that produce biological form also impart information, even
if this information is not encoded in digital form.
DNA contains not only Shannon information but also functional or
specified information. The arrangements of nucleotides in DNA or of
amino acids in a protein are highly improbable and thus contain large
amounts of Shannon information. But the function of DNA and proteins
depends upon extremely specific arrangements of bases and amino acids.
Similarly, animal body plans represent, not only highly improbable,
but also highly specific arrangements of matter. Organismal form and

The Epigenetic Revolution
275
function depend upon the precise arrangement of various constituents
as they arise during, or contribute to, embryological development. Thus,
the specific arrangement of the other building blocks of biological form
cells, clusters of similar cell types, dGRNs, tissues, and organs—also rep-
resent a kind of specified or functional information.
In Chapter 8,
I noted that the ease with which Shannon’s informa-
tion theory applies to molecular biology has sometimes led to confusion
about the kind of information contained in DNA and proteins.
It may
have also created confusion about the places that specified information
might reside in organisms. Perhaps because the information-carrying
capacity of the gene can be so easily measured, biologists have often
treated DNA, RNA, and proteins as the sole repositories of biological
information. Neo-Darwinists have assumed that genes possess
all the
information necessary to specify the form of an animal. They have also
assumed that mutations in genes will suffice to generate the new infor-
mation necessary to build a new form of animal life. 9 Yet if biologists un-
derstand organismal form as resulting from constraints on the possible
arrangements of matter at many levels in the biological hierarchy—from
genes and proteins, to cell types and tissues, to organs and body plans
then biological organisms may well exhibit many levels of information-
rich structure. Discoveries in developmental biology have confirmed
this possibility.
BEYOND GENES
Many biologists no longer believe that DNA directs virtually everything
happening within the
cell. Developmental biologists, in particular, are
now discovering more and more ways that crucial information for build-
ing body plans is imparted by the form and structure of embryonic cells,
including information from both the unfertilized and fertilized egg.
Biologists now refer to these sources of information as “epigenetic.”
10
Spemann and Mangold’s experiment is only one of many to suggest that
something beyond DNA may be influencing the development of animal
body plans. Since the 1980s, developmental and cell biologists such as
Brian Goodwin, Wallace Arthur,
Stuart Newman, Fred Nijhout, and
Harold Franklin have discovered or analyzed many sources of epigene-
tic information. Even molecular biologists such as Sidney Brenner, who

276
DARWIN’S DOUBT
pioneered the idea that genetic programs direct animal development, now
insist that the information needed to code for complex biological systems
vastly outstrips the information in DNA .
11
DNA helps direct protein synthesis. Parts ofthe DNA molecule also help
to regulate the timing and expression of genetic information and the syn-
thesis of various proteins within cells. Yet once proteins are synthesized,
they must be arranged into higher-level systems of proteins and structures.
Genes and proteins are made from simple building blocks—nucleotide
bases and amino acids, respectively—arranged in specific ways. Similarly,
distinctive cell types are made of, among other things, systems of special-
ized proteins. Organs are made of specialized arrangements of cell types
and tissues. And body plans comprise specific arrangements of specialized
organs. Yet the properties of individual proteins do not fully determine
the organization of these higher-level structures and patterns .
12 Other
sources of information must help arrange individual proteins into systems
of proteins, systems of proteins into distinctive cell types, cell types into
7
AW iWFofcKATTOW-'fcldU +4l£fcAfcO+V'
7y&s''2
r
COKPUTEfc
dlPOIlTTjoAPD
ELECTRICAL
COMPONENT
+4i<fr^£P-
LEVEL
A&EMBLy
lN<TPUCTIOWS
or-;/ «
*UUULnjl3UtlUU
{ifU^LE-dOKPONENTr
l!^TfcUCTTOD{
FLOU) of
Information
FIGURE 14.2
The hierarchical layering or arrangement of different sources of information. Note that
the information necessary to build the lower-level electronic components does not de-
termine the arrangement of those components on the circuit board or the arrangement
of the circuit board and the other parts necessary to make a computer. That requires ad-
ditional informational inputs.

The Epigenetic Revolution
277
tissues, and different tissues into organs. And different organs and tissues
must be arranged to form body plans.
Two analogies may help clarify the point. At a construction site, build-
ers will make use of many materials: lumber, wires, nails, drywall, piping,
and windows. Yet building materials do not determine the floor plan of
the house or the arrangement of houses in a neighborhood. Similarly,
electronic circuits are composed of many components, such as resistors,
capacitors, and transistors. But such lower-level components do not deter-
mine their own arrangement in an integrated circuit (see Fig. 14.2).
In a similar way, DNA does not by itself direct how individual pro-
teins are assembled into these larger systems or structures— cell types,
tissues, organs, and body plans—during animal development.
13 Instead,
the three-dimensional structure or spatial architecture of embryonic cells
plays important roles in determining body-plan formation during em-
bryogenesis. Developmental biologists have identified several sources of
epigenetic information in these cells.
CYTOSKELETAL ARRAYS
Eukaryotic cells have internal skeletons to give them shape and stabil-
ity. These “cytoskeletons” are made of several different kinds of filaments
including those called the “microtubules.” The structure and location of
the microtubules in the cytoskeleton influence the patterning and devel-
opment of embryos. Microtubule “arrays” within embryonic cells help to
distribute essential proteins used during development to specific locations
in these cells. Once delivered, these proteins perform functions critical
to development, but they can only do so if they are delivered to their cor-
rect locations with the help of preexisting, precisely structured microtu-
bule or cytoskeletal arrays (see Fig. 14.3). Thus, the precise arrangement of
microtubules in the cytoskeleton constitutes a form of critical structural
information.
These microtubule arrays are made of proteins called tubulin, which are
gene products. Nevertheless, like bricks that can be used to assemble many
different structures, the tubulin proteins in the
cell’s microtubules are
identical to one another. Thus, neither the tubulin subunits, nor the genes
that produce them, account for the differences in the shape of the microtu-
bule arrays that distinguish different kinds of embryos and developmental

278
DARWIN’S DOUBT
FIGURE 14.3
Figure 14.3a (left) shows a still shot from an animation of microtubule (at the bottom of
the image) made of tubulin proteins. Courtesy Joseph Condeelis. Figure 14.3b (right) shows
a microscopic image of a large section of cytoskeleton made of many microtubules (and
other elements) inside the cell in cross section. Courtesy The Company of Biologists and
Journal of Cell Science.
pathways. Instead, the structure of the microtubule array itself is, once
again, determined by the location and arrangement of its subunits, not the
properties of the subunits themselves. Jonathan Wells explains it this way:
“What matters in [embryological] development is the shape and location
of microtubule arrays, and the shape and location of a microtubule array
is not determined by its units .” 14 For this reason, as University of Colorado
cell biologist Franklin Harold notes,
it is impossible to predict the struc-
ture of the cytoskeleton of the cell from the characteristics of the protein
constituents that form that structure .
15
Another cell structure influences the arrangement of the microtubule
arrays and thus the precise structures they form and the functions they
perform. In an animal cell, that structure is called the centrosome (liter-
ally, “central body”), a microscopic organelle that sits next to the nucleus
between cell divisions in an undividing cell. Emanating from the cen-
trosome is the microtubule array that gives a cell its three-dimensional
shape and provides internal tracks for the directed transport of organ-
elles and essential molecules to and from the nucleus .
16 During cell di-
vision the centrosome duplicates itself. The two centrosomes form the
poles of the cell-division apparatus, and each daughter cell inherits one
of the centrosomes; yet the centrosome contains no DNA .
17 Though

The Epigenetic Revolution
279
centrosomes
are made
of proteins—gene products—the centrosome
structure is not determined by genes alone.
MEMBRANE PATTERNS
Another important source of epigenetic information resides in the two-
dimensional patterns of proteins in cell membranes .
18 When messenger
RNAs are transcribed, their protein products must be transported to the
proper locations in embryonic cells in order to function properly. Directed
transport involves the cytoskeleton, but it also depends on spatially local-
ized targets in the membrane that are in place before transport occurs.
Developmental biologists have shown that these membrane patterns play
a crucial role in the embryological development of fruit flies.
Membrane Targets
For example, early embryo development in the fruit fly Drosophila me-
lanogaster requires the regulatory molecules Bicoid and Nanos (among
others). The former is required for anterior (head) development, and the
latter is required for posterior (tail) development .
19 In the early stages of
embryological development, nurse cells pump Bicoid and Nanos RNAs
into the egg. (Nurse
cells provide the cell that will become the egg
known as the oocyte—and the embryo with maternally encoded messen-
ger RNAs and proteins.) Cytoskeletal arrays then transport these RNAs
through the oocyte, where they become attached to specified targets on
the inner surface of the egg . 20 Once in their proper place—but only then
Bicoid and Nanos play critical roles in organizing the head-to-tail axis of
the developing fruit fly. They do this by forming two gradients (or differ-
ential concentrations), one with Bicoid protein most concentrated at the
anterior end and another with Nanos protein most concentrated at the
posterior end.
Insofar as both of these molecules are RNAs—that is, gene products
genetic information plays an important role in this process. Even so, the
information contained in the bicoid and nanos genes does not by itself
ensure the proper function of the RNAs and proteins for which the genes
code. Instead, preexisting membrane targets, already positioned on the

280
DARWIN’S DOUBT
inside surface of the egg cell, determine where these molecules will attach
and how they will function. These membrane targets provide crucial
information—spatial coordinates—for embryological development.
Ion Channels and Electromagnetic Fields
Membrane patterns can also provide epigenetic information by the precise
arrangement of ion channels—openings in the cell wall through which
charged electrical particles pass in both directions. For example, one type
of channel uses a pump powered by the energy-rich molecule ATP to
transport three sodium ions out of the cell for every two potassium ions
that enter the cell. Since both ions have a charge of plus one (Na+, K+), the
net difference sets up an electromagnetic field across the cell membrane .
21
Experiments have shown that electromagnetic fields have “morpho-
genetic” effects—in other words, effects that influence the form of a de-
veloping organism. In particular, some experiments have shown that the
targeted disturbance of these electric fields disrupts normal development
in ways that suggest the fields are controlling morphogenesis . 22 Artificially
applied electric fields can induce and guide cell migration. There is also
evidence that direct current can affect gene expression, meaning internally
generated electric fields can provide spatial coordinates that guide em-
bryogenesis .23 Although the ion channels that generate the fields consist
of proteins that may be encoded by DNA (just as microtubules consist of
subunits encoded by DNA), their pattern in the membrane is not. Thus, in
addition to the information in DNA that encodes morphogenetic proteins,
the spatial arrangement and distribution of these ion channels influences
the development of the animal.
The Sugar Code
Biologists know of an additional source of epigenetic information stored
in the arrangement of sugar molecules on the exterior surface of the cell
membrane. Sugars can be attached to the lipid molecules that make up
the membrane itself (in which case they are called “glycolipids”), or they
can be attached to the proteins embedded in the membrane (in which case
they are called “glycoproteins”). Since simple sugars can be combined in
many more ways than amino acids, which make up proteins, the result-

The Epigenetic Revolution
281
ing cell surface patterns can be enormously complex. As biologist Ronald
Schnaar explains, “Each [sugar] building block can assume several differ-
ent positions.
It is as if an A could serve as four different letters, depend-
ing on whether
it was standing upright, turned upside down, or laid on
either of its sides. In fact, seven simple sugars can be rearranged to form
hundreds of thousands of unique words, most ofwhich have no more than
five letters .”24
These sequence-specific information-rich structures influence the ar-
rangement of different
cell types during embryological development.
Thus, some cell biologists now refer to the arrangements of sugar mol-
ecules as the “sugar code” and compare these sequences to the digitally
encoded
information
stored
in DNA . 25 As biochemist Hans-Joachim
Gabius notes, sugars provide a system with “high-density coding” that is
“essential to allow cells to communicate efficiently and swiftly through
complex surface interactions .”26 According to Gabius, “These [sugar] mol-
ecules surpass amino acids and nucleotides by far in information-storing
capacity.”27 So the precisely arranged sugar molecules on the surface of
cells clearly represent another source of information independent of that
stored in DNA base sequences.
NEO-DARWINISM AND THE CHALLENGE
OF EPIGENETIC INFORMATION
These different sources of epigenetic information in embryonic cells pose
an enormous challenge to the sufficiency of the neo-Darwinian mecha-
nism. According to neo-Darwinism, new information, form, and structure
arise from natural selection acting on random mutations arising at a very
low level within the biological hierarchy—within the genetic text. Yet both
body-plan formation during embryological development and major mor-
phological innovation during the history of life depend upon a specificity
of arrangement at a much higher level of the organizational hierarchy, a
level that DNA alone does not determine. IfDNA isn’t wholly responsible
for the way an embryo develops—for body-plan morphogenesis—then
DNA sequences can mutate indefinitely and still not produce a new body
plan, regardless of the amount of time and the number of mutational trials
available to the evolutionary process. Genetic mutations are simply the
wrong tool for the job at hand.

282
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Even in a best-case scenario—one that ignores the immense improb-
ability of generating new genes by mutation and selection—mutations
in DNA sequence would merely produce new genetic information. But
building a new body plan requires more than just genetic information. It
requires both genetic and epigenetic information—information by defini-
tion that is not stored in DNA and thus cannot be generated by mutations
to the DNA. It follows that the mechanism of natural selection acting on
random mutations in DNA cannot by itself generate novel body plans,
such as those that first arose in the Cambrian explosion.
GENE-CENTRIC RESPONSES
Many ofthe biological structures that impart important three-dimensional
spatial
information—such
as
cytoskeletal
arrays and membrane
ion
channels—are made of proteins. For this reason, some biologists have in-
sisted that the genetic information in DNA that codes for these proteins
does account for the spatial information in these various structures after
all. In each case, however, this exclusively “gene-centric” view of the lo-
cation of biological information—and the origin of biological form—has
proven inadequate.
First, in at least the case of the sugar molecules on the cell surface,
gene products play no direct role. Genetic information produces proteins
and RNA molecules, not sugars and carbohydrates. Of course, impor-
tant glycoproteins and glycolipids (sugar-protein and sugar-fat composite
molecules) are modified as the result of biosynthetic pathways involving
networks of proteins. Nevertheless, the genetic information that generates
the proteins in these pathways only determines the function and structure
of the individual proteins; it does not specify the coordinated interaction
between the proteins in the pathways that result in the modification of
sugars . 28
More important, the location of specific sugar molecules on the exterior
surface of embryonic cells plays a critical role in the function that these
sugar molecules play in intercellular communication and arrangement.
Yet their location is not determined by the genes that code for the pro-
teins to which these sugar molecules might be attached. Instead, research
suggests that protein patterns in the cell membrane are transmitted di-
rectly from parent membrane to daughter membrane during cell division

The Epigenetic Revolution
283
rather than as a result of gene expression in each new generation of cells .
29
Since the sugar molecules on the exterior of the cell membrane are at-
tached to proteins and lipids,
it follows that their position and arrange-
ment probably result from membrane-to-membrane transmission as well.
Consider next the membrane targets that play a crucial role in embry-
ological development by attracting morphogenetic molecules to specific
places on the inner surface of the cell. These membrane targets consist
largely of proteins, most of which are mainly specified by DNA. Even so,
many “intrinsically disordered
” 30 proteins fold differently depending on
the surrounding cellular context. This context thus provides epigenetic in-
formation. Further, many membrane targets include more than one pro-
tein, and these multiprotein structures do not automatically self-organize
to form properly structured targets .
31 Finally, it is not only the molecular
structure of these membrane targets, but also their specific location and
distribution that determines their function. Yet the location of these tar-
gets on the inner surface of the cell is not determined by the gene products
out of which they are made any more than, for example, the locations of
the bridges across the River Seine in Paris are determined by the proper-
ties of the stones out of which they are made.
Similarly, the sodium-potassium ion pumps in
cell membranes are
indeed made of proteins. Nevertheless, it is, again, the location and distri-
bution of those channels and pumps in the cell membrane that establish
the contours of the electromagnetic field that, in turn, influence embryo-
logical development. The protein constituents of these channels do not de-
termine where the ion channels are located.
Like membrane targets and ion channels, microtubules are also made
of many protein subunits, themselves undeniably the products of genetic
information. In the case of microtubule arrays, defenders of the gene-
centric view do not claim that individual tubulin proteins determine the
structure of these arrays. Nevertheless, some have suggested that other
proteins, or suites of proteins, acting in concert could determine such
higher-level form. For example, some biologists have noted that so-called
helper proteins—which are gene products—called “microtubule associ-
ated proteins” (MAPs) help to assemble the tubulin subunits in the mi-
crotubule arrays.
Yet MAPs, and indeed many other necessary proteins, are only part of
the story. The locations of specified target sites on the interior of the cell

284
DARWIN’S DOUBT
membrane also help to determine the shape of the cytoskeleton. And, as
noted, the gene products out of which these targets are made do not de-
termine the location of these targets. Similarly, the position and structure
of the centrosome—the microtubule-organizing center—also influences
the structure of the cytoskeleton. Although centrosomes are made of pro-
teins, the proteins that form these structures do not entirely determine their
location and form. As Mark McNiven, a molecular biologist at the Mayo
Clinic, and cell biologist Keith Porter, formerly of the University of Colo-
rado, have shown, centrosome structure and membrane patterns as a whole
convey three-dimensional structural information that helps determine the
structure of the cytoskeleton and the location of its subunits . 32 Moreover,
as several other biologists have shown, the centrioles that compose the cen-
trosomes replicate independently of DNA replication: daughter centrioles
receive their form from the overall structure of the mother centriole, not
from the individual gene products that constitute them .
33
Additional evidence of this kind comes from
ciliates,
large
single-
celled eukaryotic organisms.
Biologists have shown that microsurgery
on the cell membranes of ciliates can produce heritable changes in mem-
brane patterns without altering the DNA . 34 This suggests that membrane
patterns (as opposed to membrane constituents) are impressed directly on
daughter cells. In both cases—in membrane patterns and centrosomes
form is transmitted from parent three-dimensional structures to daughter
three-dimensional structures directly. It is not entirely contained in DNA
sequences or the proteins for which these sequences code . 35
Instead, in each new generation, the form and structure of the cell arises
as the result of both gene products and the preexisting three-dimensional
structure and organization inherent in cells, cell membranes, and cyto-
skeletons. Many cellular structures are built from proteins, but proteins
find their way to correct locations in part because of preexisting three-
dimensional patterns and organization inherent in cellular structures.
Neither structural proteins nor the genes that code for them can alone
determine the three-dimensional shape and structure of the entities they
build. Gene products provide necessary, but not sufficient, conditions for
the development of three-dimensional structure within cells, organs, and
body plans .
36 If this is so, then natural selection acting on genetic varia-
tion and mutations alone cannot produce the new forms that arise in the
history of life.

The Epigenetic Revolution
285
EPIGENETIC MUTATIONS
When I explain this in public talks, I can count on getting the same ques-
tion. Someone in the audience will ask whether mutations could alter the
structures in which epigenetic information resides. The questioner won-
ders if changes in epigenetic information could supply the variation and
innovation that natural selection needs to generate new form, in much the
same way that neo-Darwinists envision genetic mutations doing so. It’s a
reasonable thing to ask, but it turns out that mutating epigenetic informa-
tion doesn’t offer a realistic way of generating new forms of life.
First,
the
structures
in
which
epigenetic
information
inheres
cytoskeletal arrays and membrane patterns,
for example—are much
larger than individual nucleotide bases or even stretches of DNA. For
this reason, these structures are not vulnerable to alteration by many of
the typical sources of mutation that affect genes such as radiation and
chemical agent.
Second, to the extent that cell structures can be altered, these alterations
are overwhelmingly likely to have harmful or catastrophic consequences.
The original Spemann and Mangold experiment did, of course, involve
forcibly altering an important repository of epigenetic information in a
developing embryo. Yet the resulting embryo, though interesting and il-
lustrative of the importance of epigenetic information, did not stand a
chance of surviving in the wild, let alone reproducing.
Altering the cell structures in which epigenetic information inheres
will likely result in embryo death or sterile offspring—for much the same
reason that mutating regulatory genes or developmental gene regulatory
networks also produces evolutionary dead ends. The epigenetic informa-
tion provided by various cell structures is critical to body-plan develop-
ment, and many aspects of embryological development depend upon the
precise three-dimensional placement and location of these information-
rich cell structures. For example, the specific function of morphogenetic
proteins, the regulatory proteins produced by master regulatory
(Hox)
genes, and developmental gene regulatory networks (dGRNs) all depend
upon
the
location
of
specific,
information-rich, and
preexisting
cell
structures. For this reason, altering these cell structures will in all like-
lihood damage something else crucial during the developmental trajec-
tory of the organism. Too many different entities involved in development

286
DARWIN’S DOUBT
depend for their proper function upon epigenetic information for such
changes to have a beneficial or even neutral effect.
In Chapter 16 I will examine several new theories of evolution, includ-
ing one known as “epigenetic inheritance.” We’ll see that there are some
additional difficulties associated with the idea that mutations in epigenetic
structures can produce significant evolutionary innovation.
DARWIN’S GROWING ANOMALY
With the publication of On the Origin of Species in 1859, Darwin ad-
vanced,
first and foremost, an explanation for the origin of biological
form. At the time, he acknowledged that the pattern of appearance of the
Cambrian animals did not conform to his gradualist picture of the history
of life. Thus, he regarded the Cambrian explosion as primarily a problem
of incompleteness in the fossil record.
In Chapters 2, 3, and 4,
1 explained why the problem of fossil disconti-
nuity exemplified by the Cambrian forms has, since Darwin’s time, only
intensified. Yet clearly a more fundamental problem now afflicts the whole
edifice ofmodern neo-Darwinian theory. The neo-Darwinian mechanism
does not account for either the origin of the genetic or the epigenetic in-
formation necessary to produce new forms of life. Consequently, the prob-
lems posed to the theory by the Cambrian explosion remain unsolved. But
further, the central problem that Darwin set out to answer in 1859, namely
the origin of animal form in general, remains unanswered—as Muller and
Newman in particular have noted. 37
Contemporary critics of neo-Darwinism acknowledge, of course, that
preexisting forms of life can diversify under the twin influences of natural
selection and genetic mutation. Known microevolutionary processes can
account for small changes in the coloring of peppered moths, the acquisi-
tion of antibiotic resistance in different strains of bacteria, and cyclical
variations in the size of Galapagos finch beaks. Nevertheless, many biolo-
gists now argue that neo-Darwinian theory does not provide an adequate
explanation for the origin of new body plans or events such as the Cam-
brian explosion.
For example, evolutionary biologist Keith Stewart Thomson, formerly
of Yale University, has expressed doubt that large-scale morphological
changes
could
accumulate by minor
changes
at
the
genetic
level. 38

The Epigenetic Revolution
287
Geneticist George Miklos, of the Australian National
University, has
argued that neo-Darwinism fails to provide a mechanism that can pro-
duce large-scale innovations
in form and
structure. 39
Biologists Scott
Gilbert, John Opitz, and Rudolf Raff have attempted to develop a new
theory of evolution to supplement classical neo-Darwinism, which, they
argue, cannot adequately explain large-scale macroevolutionary change.
As they note:
Starting in the 1970s, many biologists began questioning its [neo-
Darwinism’s] adequacy in explaining evolution. Genetics might be
adequatefor explaining microevolution, but microevolutionary changes
in genefrequency were not seen as able to turn a reptile into a mammal
or to convert a fish into an amphibian. Microevolution looks at ad-
aptations that concern the survival of the fittest, not the arrival of the
fittest. As Goodwin (1995) points out, “the origin ofspecies—Darwin’s
problem—remains unsolved.”40
Gilbert and his colleagues have tried to solve the problem of the origin of
form by invoking mutations in genes called Hox genes, which regulate the
expression of other genes involved in animal development—an approach
that
I will examine in Chapter
16.
41 Notwithstanding, many leading bi-
ologists and paleontologists—Gerry Webster and Brian Goodwin, Gunter
Theissen, Marc Kirschner, and John Gerhart, Jeffrey Schwartz, Douglas
Erwin, Eric Davidson, Eugene Koonin, Simon Conway Morris, Robert
Carroll, Gunter Wagner, Heinz-Albert Becker and Wolf-Eckhart Lonnig,
Stuart Newman and Gerd Muller, Stuart Kauffman, Peter Stadler, Heinz
Saedler, James Valentine, Giuseppe Sermonti, James Shapiro and Michael
Lynch, to name several—have raised questions about the adequacy of the
standard neo-Darwinian mechanism, and/or the problem of evolutionary
novelty in particular.42 For this reason, the Cambrian explosion now looks
less like the minor anomaly that Darwin perceived it to be, and more like a
profound enigma, one that exemplifies a fundamental and as yet unsolved
problem—the origination of animal form.


PART THREE
AFTER DARWIN,
WHATe


15
THE POST-DARWINIAN
WORLD AND
SELF-ORGANIZATION
The year 2009 marked the 150th anniversary of the publication of The
Origin of Species. In that year, the renowned Cambrian paleontologist
Simon Conway Morris published an essay in the journal Current Biol-
ogy titled “Walcott, the Burgess Shale and rumours of a post-Darwinian
world,” assessing the current state of evolutionary biology. “Everywhere
elsewhere in the Origin the arguments slide one by one skillfully into
place, the towering edifice rises, and the creationists are left permanently
in its shadow,” he wrote. “But not when it comes to the seemingly abrupt
appearance of animal fossils.”
1 Instead, unresolved problems exposed by
the Cambrian explosion have, in Conway Morris’s view, “opened the way
to a post-Darwinian world.”
2 The evidence we reviewed in the previous
sections of the book—evidence/or a real, rather than merely apparent, ex-
plosion of animal form in the fossil record, and against the neo-Darwinian
mechanism as an explanation for the origin of form and information
may help to explain why biology has begun to enter such a world.
Moreover, any doubts that at least some biologists have begun to em-
brace a post-Darwinian perspective should have been laid to rest in the
summer of 2008, when sixteen influential evolutionary biologists met for
a private conference at the Konrad Lorenz Institute in Altenberg, Austria.
The scientists, whom the science media later dubbed the “Altenberg 16,
3

292
DARWIN’S DOUBT
met to explore the future of evolutionary theory. These biologists had
many different, and sometimes conflicting, ideas about how new forms
of life might have evolved. But all were united by the conviction that the
neo-Darwinian synthesis had run
its course and that new evolutionary
mechanisms were needed to explain the origin of biological form. As pa-
leontologist Graham Budd, who was in attendance, explained, “When the
public thinks about evolution, they think about [things like] the origin
of wings.
.
.
. But these are things that evolutionary theory has told us
little about.”
4
Of course, explaining the origin of form
is precisely what has made
the Cambrian explosion so mysterious. In Chapter
7, in discussing the
idea of punctuated equilibrium, I quoted Cambrian paleontologists James
Valentine and Douglas Erwin, who concluded exactly that. They argued
that neither punctuated equilibrium nor neo-Darwinism has accounted
for the origin of new body plans and that, consequently, biology needs a
new theory to explain “the evolution of novelty.”
5
The Altenberg 16 sought to address this challenge. Since the conference,
and for nearly two decades preceding it, many evolutionary biologists have
been working to formulate new theories of evolution, or at least new ideas
about evolutionary mechanisms with more creative power than mutation
and natural selection alone. Each of these new theories attempts to answer
the increasingly urgent question: After Darwin—or neo-Darwinism
what?
THE NEO-DARWINIAN TRIAD
The neo-Darwinian mechanism
rests on three core claims:
first,
that
evolutionary change occurs as the result of random, minute variations
(or mutations); second, that the process of natural selection sifts among
those variations and mutations, such that some organisms leave more off-
spring than others (differential reproduction) based on the presence or
absence of certain variations; and third, favored variations must be inher-
ited faithfully in subsequent generations of organisms, thus causing the
population in which they reside to change or evolve over time. 6 Biologists
Marc Kirschner and John Gerhart call these three elements—variation,
natural selection, and heritability—the “three pillars” of neo-Darwinian
evolution. 7

The Post-Darwinian World and Self-Organization
293
Those evolutionary biologists who now doubt orthodox neo-Darwinian
theory typically question or reject one or more of the elements of this neo-
Darwinian triad (see Fig.
16.1). Eldredge and Gould questioned Darwin-
ian gradualism, which led them to reject the idea that mutational change
occurs in minute increments (i.e., the first element of the neo-Darwinian
triad just mentioned). Other evolutionary biologists have since rejected
other core elements of the neo-Darwinian mechanism and sought to
replace them with other mechanisms or processes. This chapter will ex-
amine a new class of post-neo-Darwinian evolutionary models that at-
tempt to explain the origin of biological form by deemphasizing the role
of random mutations. These models instead emphasize the importance of
“self-organizational” laws or processes to the evolution of biological form.
SELF-ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS
Well before the Altenberg 16 convened, a significant number of evolu-
tionary theorists had already begun to explore alternatives to the neo-
Darwinian synthesis. Punctuated equilibrium was one such alternative.
But as scientific criticisms of that theory began to mount during the 1980s
and
1990s, a group of scientists associated with a think tank in New
Mexico, the Santa Fe
Institute, developed a new theoretical approach.
They called it “self-organization.”
Whereas neo-Darwinism explains the origin of biological form and
structure as the consequence of natural selection acting on random mu-
tations, self-organizational theorists suggest that biological form often
arises (or “self-organizes”) spontaneously as a consequence of the laws
of nature
(or “laws of form”). Natural selection, they theorize, acts to
preserve this spontaneously arising order. They think spontaneous self-
organizing order, not random genetic mutations, typically provides the
ultimate source ofnew biological form. Thus, they deemphasize two of the
three parts of the classical neo-Darwinian triad: random mutations and,
to a lesser extent, natural selection.
In 1993, the most prominent scientist associated with the Santa Fe Insti-
tute, former University of Pennsylvania biochemist Stuart Kauffman (see
Fig.
15.1), released an eagerly awaited treatise, The Origins of Order: Self-
Organization and Selection in Evolution ,
8 Kauffman articulated a trenchant

294
DARWIN’S DOUBT
FIGURE 15.1
Stuart Kauffman. Courtesy Wikimedia
Commons, user Teemu Rajala.
critique of the creative power of the mutation and selection mechanism,
emphasizing some of the criticisms described here in previous chapters.
Kauffman advanced a comprehensive alternative theory to account for the
emergence of new form. In addition, he advanced a specific proposal for
explaining the Cambrian explosion .
9
Kauffman notes that the development of animal body plans involves
two phases: cell differentiation and body-plan morphogenesis (cell orga-
nization). He explores the possibility that self- organizational processes at
work today— specifically in cell differentiation and body-plan formation
might help explain how new animal forms originated in the past.
Kauffman proposes,
first, that gene regulatory networks in animal
cells—genes that regulate other genes—influence cell differentiation. They
do this by generating predictable “pathways of differentiation ,” 10 patterns
by which one type of cell will emerge from another over the course of em-
bryological development as cells divide. For example, early in embryologi-
cal development, one type of cell (call it cell type “A”) will divide and give
rise to two other types of cells (call them types “B” and “C”), which will
eventually generate cell types “D” and “E,” and
UF and G,” respectively,
and many other cell types as the process continues. Kauffman suggests
that these pathways of differentiation “may reflect self- organizing features
of complex genomic regulatory networks .” 11 In other words, networks of
regulatory genes in embryonic cells determine the pathways by which cells
divide and differentiate. Since these patterns of cell differentiation may be
determined by regulatory genes, Kauffman regards them as the inevitable

The Post-Darwinian World and Self-Organization
295
by-products of self-organizational processes. Moreover, since “pathways
of cell differentiation [have been] present in all multicellular organisms
presumably since the Precambrian,”
12 he suggests that self-ordering prop-
erties “inherent in a wide class of genomic regulatory networks”
13 played a
significant role in the origin of the animal forms.
Kauffman makes a similar case for the importance ofself-organizational
processes during body-plan morphogenesis, the second phase of animal
development. This phase involves not so much the differentiation of one
cell type from another, but the arrangement and organization of different
cell types into the distinct tissues and organs that jointly constitute vari-
ous animal body plans.
Kauffman again points
to known processes of body-plan develop-
ment and suggests that they could have played an important role in the
formation of the first animal body plans. He cites the importance of the
structural or “positional”
14 information in cells and cell membranes as
the crucial determinants of how different cell types are organized into
different animal forms.
I discussed the importance of such “epigenetic”
information to animal development in Chapter 14 and explained why it
poses a problem for neo-Darwinian theory. By recognizing the impor-
tance of such information, Kauffman
also
rejects the neo-Darwinian
assumption that a “genetic program” entirely determines animal develop-
ment. He further regards the patterns of development that result from this
positional information as evidence of self-ordering tendencies in matter
and the existence of laws of biological form.
Do these self-ordering tendencies or laws of form, if they exist, explain
the origin of animal body plans and the information necessary to build
them? They don’t.
Self-Organization and Epigenetic Information
To see why let’s look first at how Kauffman attempts to explain the epi-
genetic “positional” information that directs the organization of cells in
the second phase of animal development. Kauffman attempts to explain
this “positional” information by offering an entirely hypothetical and,
ultimately, question-begging proposal. He invokes an idea sketched out
in the 1940s by the famous English mathematician Alan Turing.
15 Turing
proposed that specific arrangements of cells in animal development might

296
DARWIN’S DOUBT
ultimately derive from the diffusion and specific arrangement of crucial
molecules—presumably something like the morphogen proteins present
in embryonic cells. (Recall that morphogens, or morphogen proteins, in-
fluence cell differentiation and organization during animal development.)
Rather than attributing the distribution of these morphogenic proteins to
preexisting genetic and epigenetic information in cells, as occurs during
development in modern animals, Turing postulated that the distribu-
tion of these molecules might have originated in the first place indepen-
dently of such information as the result of simple chemical reactions. He
imagined one molecule producing both a copy of itself (“autocatalyzing”)
and, in addition, producing a different molecule as well. Then he envi-
sioned one of these molecules inhibiting the production of the other, thus
allowing, through repeated cycles, the production of more and more of
one molecule and less and less of the other. Turing thought the resulting
nonuniformities in the patterns of distribution of those molecules would
eventually result in nonuniform patterns in the distributions of different
cells, possibly resulting in different animal forms.
Kauffman expanded upon this proposal as a way of understanding how
crucial positional information might organize as the result of chemical
interactions of different molecules. Nevertheless, his proposal suffers from
an obvious difficulty: it lacks any chemical or biological specificity. In ex-
plaining the proposal, Kauffman does not mention any specific chemi-
cals or proteins that would behave in the way he envisions. Instead, he
describes the behavior of hypothetical molecules that he labels with the
indistinct monikers “X” and “Y.” More important, Kauffman offers no
evidence that chemicals interacting in the way he envisions could create
specific biologically relevant configurations or distributions of morphogen
proteins—apart, that is, from the processes that generate specifically ar-
ranged distributions of these proteins in preexisting information-rich em-
bryonic cells today.
Instead,
it is inherently implausible to think that the specificity nec-
essary to coordinate the movements and arrangements of the billions or
trillions of cells present in adult animal forms could be established by the
interactions of one or two simple chemicals, even
if they formed auto-
catalytic cycles. Kauffman himself seems tacitly to acknowledge the dif-
ficulty of generating biological specificity from the reactions of chemicals
alone. He notes, in critique of his own model, that patterns of molecular

The Post-Darwinian World and Self- Organization
297
diffusion produced by chemical autocatalysis would depend crucially upon
“the initial conditions .”16 In other words, getting a biologically relevant
information-rich arrangement of morphogenic proteins would require
starting with a very specific (presumably information-rich) arrangement
of autocatalyzing molecules.
Kauffman encounters this same problem in attempting to explain the
origin of the first life as the result of autocatalytic reactions starting from
a prebiotic soup. In The Origins of Order, he acknowledges that generating
an autocatalytic, or self-reproducing, set of molecules—a crucial step in
his origin-of-life scenario—would require “high molecular specificity
” 17
in the initial set of peptides or RNA molecules. In other words,
it would
require specificity of arrangement and structure, that is to say, functional
information.
Self- Organization and Genetic Information
And what about the specifically genetic information necessary to the ear-
lier phase of animal development? Does Kauffman’s self-organizational
theory explain the origin of the “genetic regulatory networks” necessary
to cell differentiation? Again,
it does not. Instead, in an even more obvi-
ous way,
it begs the question of the origin of these regulatory networks.
Indeed, though Kauffman discusses cell differentiation as a kind of “self-
ordering” or self-organizational process, he acknowledges that the pre-
dictable pathways of differentiation that characterize this process derive
from preexisting gene regulatory networks. As Kauffman notes, the spon-
taneous ordering tendencies in cell differentiation are “inherent in a wide
class of genomic regulatory networks .” 18 Indeed, the genetic information
in the gene regulatory networks does not come from self-ordering pro-
cesses of cell differentiation. Instead, cell differentiation, to the extent that
it can be properly described as “self-ordering,” results from preexisting
genetic sources of information. Thus, the self-organizational process that
Kauffman cites cannot explain the origin of genetic information, because
it derives from it, as Kauffman’s own description reveals.
In a later book, At Home in the Universe: The Search for the Laws of
Self- Organization and Complexity, Kauffman does offer computer simula-
tions of two “model systems
” 19 that seek to explain, at least in principle,
how genetic information might have self-organized. In one example, he

298
DARWIN’S DOUBT
describes a system of buttons connected by strings . 20 The buttons repre-
sent novel genes or proteins and the strings represent self-organizational
forces of attraction between the proteins. Kauffman suggests that when
the complexity of this system reaches a critical threshold (as represented
by the number of buttons and strings), new modes of organization might
arise in the system “for free” 21—without intelligent guidance—similar to
the way that water spontaneously changes to ice or vapor under specific
conditions.
Kauffman asks his readers to imagine a system of many interconnected
lights. Each light can flash in a variety of states—on, off, twinkling, and
so on. Since each light can adopt more than one possible state, the system
may adopt a vast number of possible states. Further, in his system, rules
determine how past states influence future states. Kauffman asserts that,
as a result of these rules, the system would, if properly tuned , eventually
produce a kind of order in which a few basic patterns of light activity recur
with greater than random frequency. Since these patterns represent a small
portion of the total number of possible states in which the system can reside,
Kauffman suggests that self-organizational laws might similarly find highly
improbable biological outcomes—perhaps even functional sequences of
bases or amino acids within a much larger sequence space of possibilities .
22
It’s not hard to see why these simulations also would fail to account
for the origin of the new genes and proteins needed to produce the Cam-
brian animals. In both of his examples Kauffman presupposes significant
sources of preexisting information. In his buttons and strings simulation,
he intends the buttons to represent proteins, themselves the result of pre-
existing genetic information. Where did that information come from?
Kauffman doesn’t say, but it is an essential part of what needs explanation
in the history of life. Similarly, in his light system, the order that allegedly
arises “for free”—that is, apart from an intelligent input of information
only does so
if, as Kauffman acknowledges, the programmer “tunes” the
system to keep
it from either (a) generating an excessively rigid order or
(b) devolving into chaos .
23 This tuning presumably involves an intelligent
programmer selecting certain parameters and excluding others—that is,
inputting information. In fact, in summarizing the import of this illus-
tration, Kauffman insists that
it shows how the “orderliness of the
cell,
long attributed
to the honing of Darwinian
evolution, seems instead

The Post-Darwinian World and Self- Organization
299
likely to arise from the dynamics of the genome network,”24 that
is, from
preexisting—unexplained—sources of genetic information.
In addition, Kauffman’s model systems are not analogous to biological
systems because they are not constrained by functional considerations. A
system of interconnected lights governed by preprogrammed rules may
well settle into a small number of patterns within a much larger space of
possibilities. But since these patterns have no function and need not meet
any functional requirements, they have no specificity analogous to that in
the genes of actual organisms. Kauffman’s model systems do not produce
sequences or systems characterized by specified complexity or functional
information. They produce modules of repetitive order distributed in an
aperiodic manner, yielding mere complexity (i.e., information only in the
Shannon sense).
25 Getting a law-governed system to generate repetitive
patterns of flashing lights, even with a certain amount of variation, is in-
teresting, but not biologically relevant. A system of lights flashing “Vote for
Jones,” on the other hand, would model a biologically relevant outcome,
at least, if such a functional sequence of letters arose without intelligent
agents programming the system with equivalent amounts of functionally
specified information.
Kauffman on the Cambrian
Kauffman also proposes a specific self- organizational mechanism to ex-
plain some aspects of the Cambrian explosion. According to Kauffman,
new Cambrian animals emerged through “long-jump” mutations that
established new body plans in a discrete rather than gradual fashion . 26
He recognizes that mutations affecting early development are almost in-
evitably harmful . 27 Thus he concludes that body plans, once established,
will not change, whatever subsequent evolution may occur. This keeps his
proposal consistent with a top-down pattern in the fossil record in which
higher taxa (and the body plans they represent) appear first, only later
to be followed by the multiplication of lower taxa representing variations
within those original body designs.
Even so, Kauffman’s proposal begs the most important question: What
produces the new Cambrian bodyplans in thefirst place
?
By invoking “long-
jump mutations,” he identifies no specific self-organizational process that

300
DARWIN’S DOUBT
can produce such changes. Moreover, he concedes a principle that under-
mines his own proposal. As noted above, Kauffman acknowledges that
mutations early in development are almost inevitably deleterious. Yet de-
velopmental biologists know that these are the only kind of mutations that
have a realistic chance of producing large-scale evolutionary change—the
big jumps that Kauffman invokes. Though Kauffman repudiates the neo-
Darwinian reliance upon random mutations, he must invoke the most
implausible kind of random mutation to provide a self-organizational ac-
count of the new Cambrian body plans.
DEVELOPMENTAL TOOLKITS AND SELF-
ORGANIZATIONAL PROCESSES
More recently, another advocate of self-organization, Stuart Newman,
a cell biologist at the New York Medical College, has published several
papers suggesting that self-organizational processes can help explain the
origin of body plans. In a paper in the volume produced from the Alten-
berg 16 conference, Newman develops a model that resembles Kauffman’s,
but one that offers more biological specificity. 28
Newman,
like Kauffman, invokes self-organizational processes. But
Newman sees these processes acting dynamically and
in coordination
with a genetic “toolkit.” His model emphasizes the importance of a highly
conserved (i.e., similar) set of regulatory genes in all the major Cambrian
taxa. In his view, this common “developmental genetic toolkit”29 has been
used “to generate animal body plans and organ forms for more than half a
billion years” 30 since the inception of the animal kingdom.
But if all the animal taxa have the same toolkit, why are the various
forms of animals and higher metazoan taxa so different from one an-
other? For Newman, the answer to this question requires understanding
how self-organizing processes influence the interaction of cells during de-
velopment and how they cause genes to acquire different functions affect-
ing the interactions of cells.
For example, he attributes the emergence of multicellularity to cells ac-
quiring the capacity “to remain attached to one another after dividing.”
31
This capacity in turn derives not from generating new genes and proteins
(as neo-Darwinism would assume). Instead, it derives from the repurpos-
ing of old genes and proteins in response to specific self-organizational

The Post-Darwinian World and Self- Organization
301
(and
epigenetic)
processes such
as the
“physical
force of adhesion.”
32
Newman proposes, further, that once the
first multicellular organisms
had arisen, they would have “set the stage for additional physical pro-
cesses to come into play”
33—processes that could alter the expression and
function of still other genes in the developmental genetic toolkit, resulting
in wholly new and different body plans. As Newman explains, “The phe-
nomenon of multicellularity opened up possibilities for these molecules to
become involved in the molding of bodies and organs.” 34
Newman envisions new animal body plans resulting from different
cells sticking to each other in different configurations because of dif-
ferent forces of attraction between molecules on the surface of cells and
because of different patterns of distribution of crucial molecules within
cells. He
calls these self-organizational forces and factors “dynamical
patterning modules” (or DPMs). 35 Figure
15.2 shows some typical ways
that
cells cluster together or arrange themselves as the result of these
lat
TAKeiAirteUP e>F AtrtftefrATBb.cells AmD
(LATERAL
ALLOTS Co-EXI^TEmCE OF ALTERATIVE
iuHrvrrr&u)
cell States u)iT+4ru the
PoUP
t>A0
TAKE* Am A46fc£4ATEt> 4fcOL>F or t>IFFEF£MT
(t>IFF£F£MTTAL
TY?E<> OF CELLS Am!> ALLOTS ^EFAFATTOM OF
AI>++E^I0m;
CELLS IMTO K U LttLAYEPEb TISSUES.
~FoLA
(folafity,
TAKES A ftPoUP OF Adr4F£drAT£t> CELLS Aut>
CAUSeS FOFKATIOM OF IMTEFIoF CAVITIES.
APICAL-VASAL)
POL^
TAKES am A6[6rPE6rATEX> 6feoUP OF CELLS
(POLAPITY
AmI> CAUSES ELom^ATTom OFTISSUES
flamaf;
vormiM a flame.
oSC
TAKES Am ELOMdrATEt> TISSUE Am£> CHEMICALLY
(chemical
ImI>uceS o^cillattom of cell FATTER^
OF
FIGURE 15.2
Dynamical Patterning Modules (DPMs), showing the different ways that, according to
biologist Stuart Newman, cells can stick to one another (“aggregate”) and form structures
during animal development.

302
DARWIN’S DOUBT
self-organizational
forces. Newman
lists many “dynamical patterning
modules,” or self-organizational forces, responsible for the spontaneous
emergence of these different cell clusters, including “adhesion, shape and
surface polarization, switching between alternative biochemical
states,
biochemical oscillation, and the secretion of diffusible and nondiffusible
factors.”36
To get a handle on what Newman has in mind, think of cells as Lego
blocks. There are many different ways of connecting Lego blocks, depend-
ing on the shape of the blocks and the pattern of raised bumps and inden-
tations on the blocks. These patterns allow small groups of Legos to be
arranged into different modular structures: cubes, walls, circular rings,
and so forth. Each of these smaller modular structures can then be com-
bined to make many different larger structures, from airplanes and sky-
scrapers to submarines and castles. In a similar way, Newman suggests
that different forces of adhesion between cells and different patterns of
molecular diffusion within and between cells will generate many different
patterns or motifs of multicellular organization, which in turn function as
modular elements that can be combined in various ways to make diverse
animal forms. 37
Do these self-organizational processes account for the origin ofanimal
body plans in the Cambrian explosion or the information necessary to
produce new animal forms? Again, they do not. Instead, Newman, like
Kauffman, either fails to offer an adequate mechanism for generating
crucial sources of biological information, or he begs the question by pre-
supposing the existence of various sources of information.
ASSUME A TOOLKIT
In the first place, Newman obviously presupposes the existence of a “devel-
opmental genetic toolkit,” that is, a whole set of genes, including regulatory
genes, that help to direct the development of animal body plans. Where
does this genetic information come from? He doesn’t specify, though pre-
sumably he might be assuming the neo-Darwinian mechanism somehow
produced the genetic information in the toolkit. If so, he leaves his model
vulnerable to the criticisms outlined in Chapters 9 through
12. He cer-
tainly does not cite any specifically self-organizational process to explain
the origin of the genetic toolkit. He also incorrectly seems to presuppose

The Post-Darwinian World and Self- Organization
303
that the genes present in this common toolkit provide all the genetic in-
formation necessary to specify individual body plans. But this overlooks
a host of recent findings showing that individual species within specific
taxa often require genes for development that are specific to those species
and taxa .
38 Thus, these genes would not have been present in a common
metazoan toolkit of the kind Newman postulates.
Second, Newman does not account for the origin of the information
necessary to organize modular arrangements or groups of cells into whole
animal body plans. The forces at work in his dynamical patterning mod-
ules explain, at best, only the arrangements of small groups of cells, not
the arrangements of those modular cell clusters into tissues, organs, and
whole body plans.
Think, again, of arranging Lego blocks. There are many ways of ar-
ranging small numbers of Lego blocks. These various arrangements form
common structural motifs such
as: two blocks stuck together
at right
angles; several curved blocks forming circular rings, stacked blocks form-
ing hollow squares or walls or cube-like shapes; blocks arranged as prisms
or cylinders; flat layers of blocks stacked two bumps thick or three bumps
thick or more. Though these structural elements stick together because
of interactions between the bumps and indentations on each block, those
bumps and indentations themselves do not specify any particular larger
structure—a castle or an airplane, for example—because each motif may
be combined or recombined with many other structural motifs in nu-
merous different ways. The shape and properties of the modular elements
do not dictate the type of larger structure that must be built from them.
Instead, to build a particular structure, the modular elements must be
arranged in particular ways. And since there are many possible ways to
arrange these modular elements, only one or a few of which will result in
a desired structure, every Lego set includes a blueprint with step-by-step
instructions—in other words, additional information.
In a similar way, producing a body plan from the different types of cell
clusters generated by Newman’s dynamical patterning modules (DPMs),
would also require additional information. Newman does not account for
this information. He correctly highlights the way certain recurrent motifs
for organizing groups of cells seem to form spontaneously as the result of
physical interactions between individual cells (his DPMs). He does not,
however, establish that these groups of cells must arrange themselves into

304
DARWIN’S DOUBT
specific tissues, organs, or body plans in response to any known physi-
cal process or law. Instead,
it seems entirely possible that these modular
elements (cell clusters) have many “degrees of freedom” and can be ar-
ranged in innumerable ways. If so, then some additional information—an
overall organismal blueprint or set of assembly instructions—would need
to direct the arrangement of these modular elements. Newman does not
consider this possibility. Nor does he cite any law-like self-organizational
process that would eliminate the need for such information to direct
animal development.
There is yet a further problem with Newman’s proposal. Even the ca-
pacity for cells to self-organize into dynamical patterning modules prob-
ably derives from prior unexplained sources of information. Newman’s
DPMs undoubtedly form as the result of interactions between molecules
on the surface of cells, and as the result of chemical gradients between
cells—with the specific configuration and properties of those molecules
determining the exact structure of the individual DPMs. In that sense, the
DPMs do, of course, self-organize, but clearly the specific ways that cells
typically cluster together will depend upon highly specific and complex
forces of interaction between the molecules and groups of molecules on
the surface of these cells. Many of the molecules that contribute to these
interactions are no doubt proteins, obvious products of genetic informa-
tion. But, in addition, cell-to-cell interactions are affected by the arrange-
ment of proteins and other molecules on the surface of cells (such as the
sugars in the sugar code, see Chapter
14) as well as by the arrangement
of structures made of proteins. But these molecular arrangements are, in
turn, specified by either preexisting genetic or, more probably, epigenetic
sources of information and structure. Thus, Newman’s analysis shows
that the self-ordering tendencies (or biological laws of form), to the extent
they exist, depend upon preexisting sources of biological information.
Newman, again, does not explain where that information comes from.
Newman does emphasize how epigenetic sources of information affect
the expression and the function of gene products during the process of
animal development. He notes that different gene products may perform
different functions depending upon the organismal context in which they
find themselves. But Newman does not explain with any specificity how
the genes in the common toolkit acquire different functions in response to

The Post-Darwinian World and Self-Organization
305
self-organizational processes or where the epigenetic information comes
from that determines those functions. Yet, clearly context-dependent gene
expression depends upon a host of other preexisting epigenetic sources of
information and structure.
Recall,
for example, the discussion of cell membrane
targets from
Chapter
14. These targets provide an important source of epigenetic in-
formation by influencing the positioning of crucial morphogenic proteins.
Yet, the arrangements of the targets on the cell membrane do not self-
organize as the result of simple chemical interactions between the proteins
out of which they are made39—that is, the proteins do not determine the
location of the membrane targets on the interior of the cell. Instead, the lo-
cation and the structure ofmembrane targets are transmitted from parent
membrane to daughter membrane, a process that transmits preexisting
epigenetic structural information from the parent membrane. Newman
does not attempt to explain the origin of this information or structure
by any known self-organizational process. Instead, the evidence indicates
that interior and exterior membrane targets, cytoskeletal arrays, the sugar
code, and many other sources of epigenetic structural information do not
self-organize as the result of physical interactions between their respective
molecular subunits.40
ORDER VS. INFORMATION
Self-organizational theorists face, in addition, a conceptual distinction
that has cast doubt on the relevance of their theories to biological systems.
Self-organizational theorists seek to explain the origin of “order” in living
systems by reference to purely physical or chemical processes (or laws de-
scribing those processes). But what needs to be explained in living systems
is not mainly order in the sense of simple repetitive or geometric patterns.
Instead, what requires explanation is the adaptive complexity and the in-
formation, genetic and epigenetic, necessary to build it.
Yet advocates of self-organization fail to offer examples of either bio-
logical information or complex anatomical structures arising from phys-
ics and chemistry alone. They either point, as Newman and Kaulfman do,
to embryological development unfolding predictably as the result of pre-
existing information-rich gene products, cell membranes, and other cell

306
DARWIN’S DOUBT
structures. Or they offer examples of purely physical and chemical pro-
cesses generating a kind of order that has little relevance to the features of
living systems that most need explanation.
In the latter case,
self- organizational theorists often point to simple
geometric shapes or repetitive forms of order arising from or being modi-
fied by purely physical or chemical processes. They suggest that such order
provides a model for understanding the origin of biological information
or body-plan morphogenesis.
41
Self-organizational theorists have cited
crystals, vortices, and convection currents (or stable patterns of flashing
lights) to illustrate the supposed power of physical processes to generate
“order for free.” Crystals of salt do form as the result of forces of attraction
between sodium and chloride ions; vortices can result from gravitational
and other forces acting on water in a draining bathtub; convection cur-
rents do emerge from warm air (or molten rock) rising in enclosed spaces.
And some molecules found in living systems do adopt highly ordered
structures and recognizable geometric shapes as the result of the physi-
cal interactions of their constituent parts alone. Nevertheless, the type of
order evident in these molecules or physical systems has nothing to do
with the specific “order” of arrangement—the information or specified
complexity—that characterizes the digital code in DNA and other higher-
level information-rich biological structures.
This is easiest to see in the case of the information encoded in DNA and
RNA. Some of what follows may be familiar from my discussion in Chap-
ter 8, but it bears repeating. The bases in the coding region of a section of
DNA or in an RNA transcript are typically arranged in a nonrepetitive
or aperiodic way. These sections of genetic text display what information
scientists call “complexity,” not simple “order” or “redundancy.”
To see the difference between order and complexity consider the differ-
ence between the following sequences:
Na-Cl-Na-Cl-Na-Cl-Na-Cl
AZFRT < MPGRTSHKLKYR
The first sequence, describing the chemical structure of salt crystals,
displays what information scientists call “redundancy” or simple “order.”
That’s because the two constituents, Na and Cl (sodium and chloride), are
highly ordered in the sense of being arranged in a simple, rigidly repeti-
tive way. The sequence on the bottom, by contrast, exhibits complexity. In

The Post-Darwinian World and Self-Organization
307
this randomly generated string of characters, there is no simple repetitive
pattern. Whereas the sequence on the top could be generated by a simple
rule or computer algorithm, such as “Every time Na arises, attach a Cl to
it, and vice versa,” no rule shorter than the sequence itself could generate
the second sequence.
The information-rich sequences in DNA, RNA, and proteins, by con-
trast, are characterized not by either simple order or mere complexity, but
instead by “specified complexity.” In such sequences, the irregular and
unpredictable arrangement of the characters (or constituents)
is critical
to the function that the sequence performs. The three sequences below
illustrate these distinctions:
Na-Cl-Na-Cl-Na-Cl-Na-Cl (Order)
AZFRT < MPGRTSHKLKYR (Complexity)
Time and tide wait for no man (Specified complexity)
What does all this have to do with self-organization? Simply this: the
law-like, self-organizing processes that generate the kind of order present
in a crystal or a vortex do not also generate complex sequences or struc-
tures; still less do they generate specified complexity, the kind of “order”
present in a gene or functionally complex organ.
Laws of nature by definition describe repetitive phenomena— order in
that sense—that can be described with differential equations or universal
“if-then” statements. Consider, for example, these informal expressions of
the law of gravity: “All unsupported bodies fall” or “Ifan elevated body is
left unsuspended, then it will fall.” These statements represent reasonably
accurate law-like descriptions of natural gravitational phenomena pre-
cisely because we have repeated experience of unsupported bodies falling
to the earth. In nature, repetition provides grist for lawful description.
The information-bearing sequences in protein-coding DNA and RNA
molecules do not exhibit such repetitive “order,” however. As such, these
sequences can be neither described nor explained by reference to a natural
law or law-like “self-organizational” process. The kind of non-repetitive
“order” on display in DNA and RNA—a precise sequential “order” neces-
sary to ensure function— is not the kind that laws of nature or law-like
self-organizational processes can—in principle—generate or explain.
Otherwise, the nucleotide bases would repeat rigidly—such as ACA-
CACACACACACACAC—in a way that would not allow DNA to store or

308
DARWIN’S DOUBT
convey specified information. A curious feature of the chemistry of DNA
allows any one of the four nucleotide bases to attach to any site on the
interior backbone of the DNA molecule. This chemical indeterminacy
makes
it possible for DNA and RNA to store any one of a virtually un-
limited number of different arrangements of nucleotide bases—in effect,
to encode any genetic message. But this indeterminacy also categorically
defies explanation by deterministic law-like forces of chemical attraction.
And because forces of attraction do not determine the sequence of nucleo-
tide bases in DNA or RNA, the origin of the specific arrangement of the
bases—the information in DNA and RNA—cannot be attributed to self-
organizing forces of attraction either.
Hubert Yockey, a leading innovator in the application of information
theory to molecular biology, first recognized the problems associated with
invoking self-organization to explain the origin of biological information.
These theories fail, he argued, for two reasons. First, they do not distin-
guish order from information. And, second, the information in the DNA
molecule does not derive from law-like forces of attraction. 42 As he ex-
plained in 1977: “Attempts to relate the idea of order
.
.
. with biological or-
ganization or specificity must be regarded as a play on words that cannot
stand careful scrutiny. Informational macromolecules can code genetic
messages and therefore can carry information because the sequence of
bases or residues is affected very little, if at all, by [self-organizing] physi-
cochemical factors.”43
Much the same thing is true of many vital sources of epigenetic in-
formation. The forces of attraction between constituent proteins in mem-
brane targets or cytoskeletal arrays, for example, do not determine the
structure or location of these epigenetic structures and the positional in-
formation they provide. The origin of these structures cannot be attrib-
uted to self-organizing forces of attraction either. Instead, in each case,
information-rich
epigenetic
structures are generated from preexisting
sources of epigenetic information.
Thus, self-organizational theories explain well what does not mainly
need explaining in biology, namely, repetitive or simple geometric forms
of order. Self-organizational theorists do cite structures that might have
self-organized. But these examples are typically extremely modest
in
scope. They include repeating patterns of atoms in crystals; simple geo-
metric figures; patterns of lines, triangles, and streaks; vortices; spiral

The Post-Darwinian World and Self-Organization
309
wave currents; and simple shapes that glide across computer screens.44
None exhibit the specified complexity that characterizes the digital infor-
mation in DNA and RNA or the complex arrangements of proteins, cells,
tissues, and organs necessary to build a functioning form of animal life.
NATURAL MAGIC OR TRUE CAUSE?
In 2007,
I participated in a private meeting of evolutionary biologists
and other scientists who shared the conviction that a new theory of bi-
ological origins
is now needed. In attendance were several prominent
advocates of the self-organization approach. During the meeting, these
scientists presented intriguing analogies from physics and chemistry to
show how order might have arisen “for free”—that is, without intelligent
guidance—in the biological realm. Yet the order they described in these
analogies seemed to have no direct relevance to the complexity—indeed
the specified complexity— of genes or cell membranes or animal body
plans. Other scientists at the conference challenged the advocates of self-
organization to cite known processes that could produce biologically rel-
evant form and information.
Near the end of the meeting one advocate of self- organization privately
acknowledged to me the validity of these critiques, admitting that, for
now, “self-organization
is really more of a slogan than a theory.” Stuart
Kauffman, perhaps attempting to make a virtue of the necessity of accept-
ing this explanatory deficit, has recently celebrated the self-organizational
perspective for embracing what he calls “natural magic.” In a lecture at
MIT, he concluded: “Life bubbles forth in a natural magic beyond the con-
fines of entailing law, beyond mathematization.”45 He went on to explain
that one benefit of the self-organizational perspective is that it allows us
to be “reenchanted” with nature and to “find a way beyond modernity.”46
Since the beginning of modern science, scientists have championed a
commonsense principle of scientific reasoning known as the vera causa
principle. This principle holds that explaining a particular phenomenon
or event requires identifying a “true cause” that is known from experi-
ence to have the power to produce the event or phenomenon in question.
The early modern scientists affirmed this principle as one of the key as-
pects of a scientific approach to understanding nature. This stood in op-
position to the magical thinking that had gone before in which people

310
DARWIN’S DOUBT
attributed powers to nature that they had never observed it manifesting.
As the scientific revolution matured, endeavors such as alchemy, for ex-
ample, were eventually rejected precisely because the alchemists could not
identify a cause that could effect the transformation they were seeking to
demonstrate.
Self-organizational theories have clearly failed to provide a vera causa
for the origin of biologically relevant forms of “order”—the functional
complexity and
specified
information
present
in
living
systems.
In-
stead, they either beg the question as to the ultimate origin of biological
information or point to physical and chemical processes that do not pro-
duce the specified complexity that characterizes actual animals.
Viewed in this light, Kauffman’s recent discussion of natural magic
and calls for a “reenchantment” with nature sound less like a bold new
initiative to reconcile science and spirituality (which is what he intended)
than a tacit admission that self-organizational theories have failed to iden-
tify known physical and chemical processes capable of generating the form
and information present in actual living systems. Indeed, after years of
attempting to solve the problem of the origin of form, Kauffman’s recent
ruminations about “natural magic” sound a lot like an admission that a
profound mystery remains.

OTHER POST-
NEO-DARWINIAN
MODELS
When Stephen Jay Gould was first wrestling with the question of how
new forms of animal life could have arisen so quickly in the fossil record,
he considered many possible mechanisms of change. In the famed 1980
paper in which he declared neo-Darwinism “effectively dead,”
1 he didn’t
just propose allopatric speciation and species selections as new evolution-
ary mechanisms. He also granted a rehearing to a long discredited idea.
Specifically, he argued that large-scale “macromutations” might generate
significant innovations in form relatively quickly.
2
In the 1930s and 1940s, this idea had been associated with University of
California at Berkeley geneticist Richard Goldschmidt. Aware of the many
discontinuities in the fossil record, Goldschmidt envisioned radical trans-
formations in the form of animals arising in even one generation as the
result of such large-scale mutations. He endorsed, for instance, the view
of the German paleontologist Otto Schindewolf (1896-1971) that “the first
bird hatched from a reptilian egg” and, thus, in Goldschmidt’s words,
“that the many missing links in the paleontological record are sought for
in vain because they have never existed.” 3 If a bird hatched directly from
a reptilian egg as the result of heritable, large-scale mutations, then such
a sudden leap or “saltation” would obviously leave no fossil intermediates
behind.

312
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Neo-Darwinists rejected this idea as biologically implausible in the
extreme. They argued that changing so many functionally integrated
anatomical and physiological systems so quickly would inevitably result
in deformed mutants, not different integrated systems of organs consti-
tuting a whole new animal .
4 Goldschmidt’s macromutations, they con-
tended, would produce not what Goldschmidt called “hopeful monsters,”
but “hopeless monsters”—that is, nonviable organisms .
5
Though Gould wanted to reconsider a role for large-scale mutations, he
carefully disassociated his proposal from Goldschmidt’s much ridiculed
idea. Instead, he suggested that the mutations affecting genes in animal
development might generate larger increments of morphological innova-
tion than the mutations that affected other genes. These “developmental
mutations,” he thought, might generate modular parts of biological sys-
tems in a short time—without needing to generate whole new forms of life
in a single generation. He offered, as an example, the possibility that the
gill arch bones of ancient jawless fish, though not the whole fish, might
have arisen in one step as the result of a developmental macromutation.
Gould explained:
“I do not refer to the saltational origin of entire new
designs, complete in all their complex and integrated features
Instead,
I envisage a potential saltational origin for the essential features of key
adaptations .”6
In response to heavy criticism from neo-Darwinists, Gould later down-
played the role of such larger-scale developmental mutations in the theory
of punctuated equilibrium. Other evolutionary biologists, however, took
his idea as an inspiration and developed theories that emphasize such de-
velopmental mutations as a driving force in macroevolution. Evolution-
ary theorists and developmental biologists such as Rudolf Raff, Sean B.
Carroll, and Wallace Arthur have developed a subdiscipline of biology
known as evolutionary developmental biology, or “evo-devo” for short.
The evolutionary developmental biologists have since formulated
alter-
native models that challenge a key aspect of the neo-Darwinian triad.
Whereas neo-Darwinism envisions new form arising as the result of slow,
incremental accumulations of minor mutations, evolutionary develop-
mental biologists argue that mutations affecting genes involved in animal
development can cause large-scale morphological change and even whole
new body plans.
This chapter will not only examine the ideas of evolutionary develop-

Other Post-Neo-Darwinian Models
313
mental biologists, but three of the other most prominent alternatives to
neo-Darwinism, some proposed by members of the Altenberg 16 (see Fig.
16.1). Each of these alternatives emphasizes certain elements of the “triad”
at the expense of others. Whereas the self-organizational alternatives that
I discussed in the last chapter emphasize the role of law-like processes
over random mutations, these other new theories reaffirm the impor-
tance of mutations, though each also reconceptualizes how mutations act.
One approach falls under the rubric of “evo-devo” and conceives of mu-
tations producing modifications in larger increments. Another, the neu-
tral theory of evolution, sees mutations acting absent selection. Another,
neo-Lamarckian “epigenetic inheritance,” envisions heritable alterations
in epigenetic information influencing the future course of evolution. Still
another, called “natural genetic engineering,” affirms that nonrandom ge-
netic rearrangements drive evolutionary innovation.7
NATURAL GENETIC ENGINEERING
(SHAPlRo)
</K'5ro4EwEfi<
fMARGUUS, <WAn£m)
facilitated
VARIATION
iAERHARrd.
KIR&HnER)
.
..SELF-
ORGANIZATION
(KAUFFMAN,
DEPSW
<5. INST5SR,
NEWMAN)
Evolutional
Developmental
3ioLo4y
(RAFF, CARROL,
4 SCHlOARrz)
NEUTRAL
- Evolution
(LYtJCU. <TOLTZFUfl
FIGURE 16.1
The
tenets of neo-Darwinian orthodoxy and
the
different ways
that various non-
Darwinian models of evolution deviate from those tenets. The boxes representing new
evolutionary models are positioned under the headings of the neo-Darwinian tenets that
they challenge.
__NPN-NEO-.
DARWINIAN
MpDEL<:
.NATURAL
9?
/
HEREDITY
.{election
-
(DnA-BASeD.
(AS THE MAIN
—VERTICAL-
CAUSE OF
..
INHERITANCE,
ADAPTIVE
change).
omIY DnA-TjaSeD)
tsnstIof
NEO-
DARWINIAN
THEORY
RAnDomneA &
SMALL SCALE OF
VARIATIONS &
MUTATIONS
(UN&IRECTSfr
WITH RESPECT
TO FITNESS)
U4,i.i
..t*

314
DARWIN'S DOUBT
Let’s see if one of these proposals solves the twin problems of the origin
of form and information and whether, therefore, it might also help to re-
solve the mystery of the Cambrian explosion.
8
EVO-DEVO AND ITS PROPOSALS
The neo-Darwinian synthesis has long emphasized that large-scale mac-
roevolutionary change occurs as the inevitable by-product of the accu-
mulation of small-scale “microevolutionary” changes within populations.
The consensus in support of this idea began to fray in evolutionary biology
during the early 1970s, when young paleontologists such as Gould, Niles
Eldredge, and Steven Stanley realized that the fossil record did not show
a pattern of gradual “micro -to-macro” change. In 1980, at a now famous
symposium on macroevolution at the Field Museum in Chicago, the re-
bellion burst into full view, exposing what developmental biologist Scott
Gilbert called “an underground current in evolutionary theory” among
theorists who had concluded that “macroevolution could not be derived
from microevolution.” 9
At the conference, paleontologists who doubted the “micro-to-macro”
consensus found
allies among younger developmental biologists. They
were dissatisfied with neo-Darwinism in part because they knew that
population genetics,
its mathematical expression, sought only to quan-
tify changes in gene frequency rather than explain the origin of genes or
novel body plans. Thus, many developmental biologists thought that neo-
Darwinism did not offer a compelling theory of macroevolution. 10
To formulate a more robust theory, many developmental biologists,
such as Rudolf Raff, a developmental biologist at the University of Indi-
ana and one of the founders of “evo-devo,” urged evolutionary theorists
to incorporate insights from their discipline.
11 For example, developmen-
tal biologists know that mutations expressed early in the development of
animals are necessary to alter body-plan morphogenesis. Thus, they argue
that these mutations must have played a significant role in generating
whole new animal forms during the history of life. They assert that this
understanding of developmental processes
is crucial to understanding
animal evolution. Some evo-devo advocates such as Sean B. Carroll and
Jeffrey Schwartz have pointed specifically to homeotic (or Hox) genes

Other Post-Neo-Darwinian Models
315
master regulatory genes that affect the location, timing, and expression of
other genes—as entities capable of producing such large-scale change in
animal form.
12 These evo-devo advocates have broken with classical neo-
Darwinism primarily in their understanding of the size or increment of
mutational change.
MAJOR BUT NOT VIABLE, VIABLE BUT NOT MAJOR
Despite the enthusiasm surrounding the field, evo-devo fails, and for an
obvious reason: its main proposal, that early-acting developmental muta-
tions can cause stably heritable, large-scale changes in animal body plans,
contradicts the results of one hundred years of mutagenesis experiments.
13
As we saw in Chapter 13, the experiments of scientists such as Nusslein-
Volhard and Wieschaus have shown definitively that early-acting body-
plan mutations
invariably generate embryonic
lethals—dead animals
incapable of further evolution. The
results of these experiments have
generated the dilemma for evolutionary biologists that geneticist John
McDonald aptly described as the “great Darwinian paradox.” Recall that
McDonald noted that early-acting regulatory mutations do not produce
viable alterations in form that will persist in populations, as evolution ab-
solutely requires. Instead, these mutations are eliminated immediately by
natural selection because of their invariably destructive consequences. On
the other hand, later-acting mutations can generate viable changes in the
features of animals, but these changes do not affect global animal archi-
tectures. This generates a dilemma: major changes are not viable; viable
changes are not major. In neither case do the kinds of mutation that actu-
ally occur produce viable major changes of the kind necessary to build
new body plans.
In 2007,
I coauthored a textbook with several colleagues titled Ex-
plore Evolution. In
it, we explained this “either/or” (“major-not-viable,
viable-not-major”) dilemma and suggested that it posed a challenge to
theories that rely on the mutation and selection mechanism to explain
the origin of major morphological changes.
14 The National Center for
Science Education (NCSE)—an influential activist group that opposes
allowing students to learn about
scientific criticisms of evolutionary
theory—challenged our critique. They charged that our textbook “fails

316
DARWIN’S DOUBT
FIGURE 16.2
Superficial changes in insect wing coloration thought to be caused by mutations in
cis-
regulatory elements. Such examples show that mutations that affect development and that
also result in viable offspring tend to be minor. Courtesy National Academy ofSciences,
JJ. S.A.
to acknowledge the extensive research on mutations in DNA sequences
that do not encode proteins, but which have important morphological
effects .” 15 In other words, they claimed that some viable mutations do
produce major large-scale changes.
The NCSE cited papers from the “evo-devo” literature claiming that a
type of mutation in the regulatory regions of the genome, “ds-regulatory”
regions, have been shown to produce large-scale changes in winged in-
sects. According to the NCSE, mutations in these ds-regulatory elements
(or CREs) are “considered by many evolutionary biologists to have the
greatest potential
for generating evolutionary change .” 16 Whats more,
they insisted that “mutations in CREs play an important role in morpho-
logical evolution .” 17 The NCSE cited a paper in the Proceedings of the Na-

Other Post-Neo-Darwinian Models
317
tional Academy of Sciences by three developmental biologists, Benjamin
Prud’homme, Nicolas Gompel, and Sean B. Carroll.
18
The paper did not show what the NCSE claimed, however. It did assert
that changes in regulatory DNA produce “both relatively modest mor-
phological differences among closely related species and more profound
anatomical divergences among groups at higher taxonomical levels.”
19 But
the study only showed how changes in the ds-regulatory elements in fruit
fly DNA might have affected the coloration of wing spots in several differ-
ent types of flying insects. It did not report any significant change in the
form or body plan of these insects. Instead, the study highlighted a clear
case of a viable mutation generating merely a minor or superficial change
(see Fig. 16.2).
Not
surprisingly, many evolutionary biologists recognize that such
regulatory mutations do not explain the evolution of new body plans. For
example, Hopi Hoekstra, of Harvard University, and Jerry Coyne, two tra-
ditional neo-Darwinists, have published an article reviewing various evo-
devo proposals in the journal Evolution. They note, “Genomic studies lend
little support to the ds-regulatory theory” of evolutionary change.
They also argue, tellingly, that most ds-regulatory mutations result in
the loss of genetic and anatomical traits, including a famous case in which
evolutionary biologists attributed the loss of pelvic spines in stickleback
fish to mutations in ds-regulatory elements. 20 Yet, as they argue, “sup-
porting the evo-devo claim that ds-regulatory changes are responsible for
morphological innovations requires showing that promoters are impor-
tant in the evolution of new traits, not just the losses of old ones.” Hoekstra
and Coyne conclude, “There is no evidence at present that ds-regulatory
changes play a major role—much
less a pre-eminent one—in adaptive
evolution.”
21
Given
their commitment
to neo-Darwinism,
it’s
fair
to
assume that Hoekstra and Coyne probably did not intend, in making this
argument, to refute the NCSE’s criticism of our textbook Explore Evolu-
tion. Nevertheless, science,
like
politics, sometimes makes
for strange
bedfellows.
WHAT ABOUT HOX GENESe
When biology students hear my colleague Paul Nelson describe the “great
Darwinian paradox”
(see Chapter
13)
in public lectures on university

318
DARWIN’S DOUBT
campuses, they often ask, “What about Hox genes?” Recall that Hox (or
homeotic) genes regulate the expression of other protein-coding genes
during the process of animal development. Some biologists have likened
them to the conductor of an orchestra who plays the role of coordinating
the contributions of the players. And because Hox genes affect so many
other genes, many evo-devo advocates think that mutations in these genes
can generate large-scale changes in form.
For example, Jeffrey Schwartz, at the University of Pittsburgh, invokes
mutations in Hox genes to explain the sudden appearance of animal forms
in the fossil record. In his book Sudden Origins, Schwartz acknowledges
the discontinuities in the fossil record. As he notes, “We are still in the dark
about the origin of most major groups of organisms. They appear in the
fossil record as Athena did from the head of Zeus—full-blown and raring
to go, in contradiction to Darwin’s depiction of evolution as resulting from
the gradual accumulation of countless infinitesimally minute variations.”22
What resolves this mystery? Schwartz, an evo-devo advocate, reveals his
answer: “A mutation affecting the activity of a homeobox [Hox] gene can
have a profound effect—such as turning
.
.
. larval tunicates into the first
chordates. Clearly, the potential homeobox genes have for enacting what
we call evolutionary change would seem to be almost unfathomable.”23
But can mutations in Hox genes transform one form of animal life—one
body plan—into another? There are several reasons to doubt that they can.
First, precisely because Hox genes coordinate the expression of so many
other different genes, experimentally generated mutations in Hox genes
have proven harmful. William McGinnis and Michael Kuziora, two bi-
ologists who have studied the effects of mutations on Hox genes, have ob-
served that in fruit flies “most mutations in homeotic [Hox] genes cause
fatal birth defects.”24 In other cases, the resulting Hox mutant phenotype,
while viable in the short term,
is nonetheless markedly less
fit than the
wild type. For example, by mutating a Hox gene in a fruit fly, biologists
have produced the dramatic Antennapedia mutant, a hapless fly with legs
growing out of its head where the antennae should be (see Fig.
16.3).
25
Other Hox mutations have produced fruit
flies in which the balancers
(tiny structures behind wings that stabilize the insect in
flight, called
“halteres”) are transformed into an extra pair of wings.
26 Such mutations
alter the structure of the animal, but not in a beneficial or permanently

Other Post-Neo-Darwinian Models
319
FIGURE 16.3
Photograph of an Antennapedia
mutant with a pair of legs growing
out of its head, where antennae
would normally develop. Such ex-
amples show that mutations that
occur early in animal develop-
ment and that also produce major
changes typically result in less fit
offspring—in this case offspring
that cannot reproduce. Courtesy
Elsevier, Inc.
heritable way. The Antennapedia mutant cannot survive in the wild; it has
difficulty reproducing, and its offspring die easily. Similarly, fruit-fly mu-
tants sporting an extra set of wings lack the musculature to make use of
them and, absent their balancers, cannot fly. As Hungarian evolutionary
biologist Eors Szathmary notes with cautious understatement in the jour-
nal Nature, “macromutations of this sort
[i.e., in Hox genes] are probably
frequently maladaptive.”27
Second, Hox genes in all animal forms are expressed after the begin-
ning of animal development, and well after the body plan has begun to
be established. In fruit
flies, by the time that Hox genes are expressed,
roughly 6,000 cells have already formed, and the basic geometry of the
fly— its anterior, posterior, dorsal, and ventral axes— is already well es-
tablished. 28 So Hox genes don’t determine body-plan formation. Eric Da-
vidson and Douglas Erwin have pointed out that Hox gene expression,
although necessary for correct regional or local differentiation within a
body plan, occurs much later during embryogenesis than global body-
plan specification
itself, which
is regulated by entirely different genes.
Thus, the primary origin of animal body plans in the Cambrian explosion
is not merely a question ofHox gene action, but of the appearance of much
deeper
control
elements—Davidson’s
“developmental gene
regulatory
networks” (dGRNs). 29 And yet, as we saw in Chapter 13, Davidson argues

320
DARWIN’S DOUBT
that it is extremely difficult to alter dGRNs without damaging their ability
to regulate animal development.
Third, Hox genes only provide information for building proteins that
function as switches that turn other genes on and off. The genes that they
regulate contain information for building proteins that form the parts of
other structures and organs. The Hox genes themselves, however, do not
contain information for building these structural parts. In other words,
mutations in Hox genes do not have all the genetic information necessary
to generate new tissues, organs, or body plans.
Nevertheless, Schwartz argues
that biologists can explain complex
structures such as the eye just by invoking Hox mutations alone. He as-
serts that “[tjhere are homeobox genes for eye formation and that when
one ofthem, the Rx gene in particular, is activated in the right place and at
the right time, an individual has an eye .”30 He also thinks that mutations
in Hox genes help arrange organs to form body plans.
In a review of Schwartz’s book, Eors Szathmary finds Schwartz’s rea-
soning deficient. He too notes that Hox genes don’t code for the proteins
out of which body parts are made. It follows, he insists, that mutations in
Hox genes cannot by themselves build new body parts or body plans. As
he explains, “Schwartz ignores the fact that homeobox genes are selector
genes. They can do nothing if the genes regulated by them are not there .” 31
Though Schwartz says he has “marveled” at “the importance ofhomeobox
genes in helping us to understand the basics of evolutionary change ,” 32
Szathmary doubts that mutations
in these genes have much
creative
power. After asking whether Schwartz succeeds in explaining the origin
of new forms of life by appealing to mutations in Hox genes, Szathmary
concludes, “I’m afraid that, in general, he does not .” 33
Nor, of course, do Hox genes possess the epigenetic information neces-
sary for body-plan formation. Indeed, even in the best of cases mutations
in Hox genes still only alter genes. Mutations in Hox genes can only gener-
ate new genetic information in DNA. They do not, and cannot, generate
epigenetic information.
Instead, epigenetic information and structures actually determine
the function of many Hox genes, and not the reverse. This can be seen
when the same Hox gene (as determined by nucleotide sequence homol-
ogy) regulates the development of different anatomical features found

Other Post-Neo-Darwinian Models
321
in different phyla. For instance, in arthropods the Hox gene Distal-less
is required for the normal development of jointed arthropod legs. But
in vertebrates a homologous gene
(e.g., the Dlx gene in mice) builds
a different kind of (nonhomologous)
leg. Another homologue of the
Distal-less gene in echinoderms regulates the development of tube feet
and spines—anatomical features classically thought not to be homolo-
gous to arthropod limbs, nor to limbs of tetrapods . 34 In each case, the
Distal-less homologues play different roles determined by the higher-
level organismal context. And since mutations in Hox genes do not
alter higher-level epigenetic contexts ,
35 they cannot explain the origin
of the novel epigenetic information and structure that establishes the
context and that is necessary to building a new animal body plan . 36
NEUTRAL OR NONADAPTIVE EVOLUTION
Michael Lynch, a geneticist at Indiana University, has offered a differ-
ent mechanism of evolutionary change, and a different explanation for
the origin (or growth) of the genome as well as the origin of anatomical
novelty. Lynch proposes a neutral or “non-adaptive” theory of evolution
in which natural selection plays a largely insignificant role. His theory is
based on contrasting observations about the features and strength of evo-
lutionary mechanisms at work in populations of different sizes.
He observes, first, that in general, the larger the population of organ-
isms, the lower the mutation rate and (in sexually reproducing eukaryotes)
the higher the rate of genetic recombination. He notes that the genomes
of organisms in larger populations (such as those of bacteria and unicel-
lular eukaryotic organisms) tend to be smaller and more streamlined
meaning they have fewer intervening nonprotein-coding sequences
(i.e.,
introns). Most important, he notes that in large populations, natural se-
lection tends to be relatively effective in eliminating deleterious mutations
and fixing beneficial ones, whereas the process of genetic drift (the ten-
dency for gene variants to be lost through random processes) plays a rela-
tively less significant role.
By contrast, Lynch observes that small populations—which would in-
clude almost
all animal groups— are characterized by higher mutation
rates and lower rates of genetic recombination. They also tend to have

322
DARWIN’S DOUBT
large genomes with a lot of nonprotein-coding DNA—introns, pseudo-
genes, transposons and various repetitive DNA elements—as well as gene
duplicates. Lynch argues that in these small populations, natural selec-
tion tends to be weak—unable to remove mildly deleterious mutations
or to fix mildly beneficial ones efficiently. As Lynch summarizes, “Three
factors (low population sizes, low recombination rates and high mutation
rates) conspire to reduce the efficiency of natural selection with increasing
organism size .”37 Consequently, nonprotein-coding elements are not re-
moved from the genome, but instead tend to accumulate, causing the ge-
nomes of organisms living in small populations to grow—even though
these sequences may be neutral or even deleterious. Moreover, in small
populations, “neutral” processes such as random mutation, genetic re-
combination, and genetic drift predominate in their effects over natural
selection.
What does
all this have to do with the origin of animals and the
Cambrian explosion? Evolutionary biologists think that the ancestral
groups of the Cambrian animals would likely have existed in relatively
small populations. Lynch argues that in small populations, animal ge-
nomes will inevitably grow over time as nonprotein-coding sections of
DNA (as well as gene duplicates) accumulate due to the weakness of
natural selection. He thinks these neutral mutations drive the evolu-
tion and growth of genomic and phenotypic complexity in animals. In
short, Lynch attempts to explain the expansion of the genome and the
origin of anatomical complexity as the result of neutral, non-adaptive
processes of genetic accretion, rather than as an adaptive process in-
volving natural selection acting on random mutations. As he states,
“Many of the unique complexities of the eukaryotic gene arose by
semi-neutral processes with little, if any, direct involvement of positive
selection .” 38
In his work, Lynch has also advanced a powerful mathematical cri-
tique of the efficacy of the neo-Darwinian mechanism. He has argued
that natural selection plays a lesser role in shaping the features of evolving
populations than many evolutionary theorists have previously assumed
especially in the case of relatively small populations. Lynch has argued,
instead, that random environmental factors—an organism being in the
right place at the right time (near an abundant food source, for example)

Other Post-Neo-Darwinian Models
323
or in the wrong place at the wrong time (in a drought-stricken region or
near an erupting volcano, for example)—will play a more important role
in determining reproductive success than variations in the fitness of or-
ganisms within the same population.
COUNTERINTUITIVE APPROACH
Lynch develops his mathematical critique of the creative power of natu-
ral selection based on the principles of population genetics. Nevertheless,
it does not follow from his analysis showing the weakness of natural se-
lection that neutral processes alone are sufficient to build new functional
genes and proteins. Nor does it follow that neutral processes alone can ac-
count for the many complex anatomical systems that require new sources
of genetic (and epigenetic) information for their construction. Indeed,
it
may seem counterintuitive, at least from a neo-Darwinian point of view,
to think that the accumulation of random mutations alone can accom-
plish what neo-Darwinists have long invoked both mutations and natural
selection to do. In effect, Lynch’s theory attempts to explain the origin
of anatomical complexity by reference to what would seem on its face to
be a less—not a more—potent mechanism than the one offered by neo-
Darwinism. Could such a counterintuitive theory be correct?
Perhaps, but as a comprehensive theory of how biological information
and anatomical complexity arises, Lynch’s neutral theory leaves much to
be desired.
In the first place, Lynch’s theory offers no explanation for some of the
crucial molecular machinery present in eukaryotes—machinery that
is
necessary to rendering his mechanism for the accumulation and subse-
quent expression of genetic information credible. Recall that Lynch thinks
that small populations of multi-cellular organisms in particular would
have inevitably accumulated many insertional genomic elements. But for
the functional information in these growing genomes to be expressed, the
cell must have some way of excising the non-functional randomly accret-
ing genetic elements— at least, until some of them mutate to the point that
they contribute to producingfunctional genes and proteins.
Extant eukaryotic organisms depend on
a sophisticated molecular
machine called a spliceosome—a machine that excises introns and fuses

324
DARWIN’S DOUBT
together exons (the portions of the genome that code for proteins) before
gene expression takes place. “This large complex,” observes cell biologist
Melissa Jurica, is “composed of over 150 individual proteins” and several
structural RNAs, and thus “may indeed deserve the moniker ‘the most
complicated macromolecular machine in the cell.’
” 39
So where do spliceosomes, and the genes necessary to produce them,
come from? Lynch doesn’t say, though he recognizes, of course, the impor-
tance of this molecular machinery to gene expression and to his scenario.
As he explains, “The problem is that introns are inside genes and get tran-
scribed to mRNA but then have to be spliced out perfectly. If you’re one
nucleotide off, you get a dead transcript.”40 Nevertheless, Lynch’s theory
presupposes, but does not explain, the origin of the genetic information
necessary to produce the spliceosomes that perform this function. He cer-
tainly does not explain the origin of these massive multi-protein, multi-
RNA complexes by reference to any neutral evolutionary process. Nor can
he, since his theory of genomic accretion and expression presupposes the
existence of precisely such intricate machines. Instead, as my colleague
Paul Nelson has put it rather colorfully, “to get Lynch’s theory of genomic
accretion up and running, a great deal of complicated molecular machin-
ery must be rolled in from offstage.”
Of course,
it could be argued that these machines and systems arose
much earlier with the origin of the eukaryotic cell as the result of selection-
driven evolution in the large populations of simpler unicellular organisms
in which, according to Lynch’s theory, natural selection played a more
significant role. Nevertheless, Lynch does not make that argument—and
for good reason. Most evolutionary biologists today recognize the origin
of the eukaryotic cell as a completely unsolved problem—unexplained by
either neutral or adaptive theories of evolution.
41
Of course, insofar as these molecular machines are present in even one-
celled eukaryotic organisms, they would have arisen, presumably, well
before the origin of animals. Thus, explaining their origin is not, strictly
speaking, directly relevant to explaining the Cambrian explosion. Never-
theless, Lynch’s inability to account for their origin reflects directly on
the credibility of his theory— at least insofar as it seeks to offer a compre-
hensive account of the mechanisms by which biological information and
complexity arise during the history of life.

Other Post-Neo-Darwinian Models
325
Drifting In and Out
In any case, there are good reasons to doubt that Lynch’s neutral mecha-
nism could generate the novel biological information and form necessary
to explain the origin of animals, even granting the prior existence of the
molecular machinery (in small populations of eukaryotic organisms) that
his scenario requires.
First, Lynch assumes a false gene-centric view of the origin of biologi-
cal form. As he writes: “Most of the phenotypic diversity that we perceive
in the natural world is directly attributable to the peculiar structure of the
eukaryotic gene.”42 His view overlooks the crucial role of epigenetic infor-
mation and structure in the origin of animal form discussed in Chapter 14
and, therefore, does nothing to explain its origin.
Second, neutral processes such as genetic drift do not favor beneficial
mutations, and thus do notfix, with any efficiency, those mutation-induced
genetic traits in small populations.43 Natural selection, as we saw in Chap-
ter 10, is something of a double-edged sword. On the one hand, natural
selection helps to fix beneficial traits in a population. On the other hand,
natural selection also makes it difficult for functional genes to vary widely
without being eliminated. Neutral theories of evolution attempt to avoid
the latter problem by invoking gene duplication and other processes that
can add nonfunctional sequences to the genome—sequences that are un-
affected, at least initially, by selective pressure. In so doing, however, these
theoretical formulations significantly diminish the role of natural selec-
tion as a mechanism that can fix beneficial mutations in place once they
have arisen. Thus, in all neutral theories, including Lynch’s, any beneficial
mutations that arise and begin to drift through a population, can just as
readily—without a significant influence from natural selection to impede
it— drift out of a population as well. This limitation vastly increases the
time it will take for neutral processes to fix beneficial genetic changes in a
population. Both skeptics and proponents of neo-Darwinism have recog-
nized this deficiency in Lynch’s model.44
Third, and most important, Lynch’s theory not only fails to account for
the fixation of new genes and traits in small populations,
it also fails to
account for their origin. Lynch’s mechanism of neutral mutational change
does envision the addition of brute genomic complexity as the result of the

326
DARWIN’S DOUBT
accretion of preexisting genetic elements (introns, transposons, pseudo-
genes and gene duplicates). Nevertheless, the addition of these elements
does not generate any novel functional (or specified) genetic information.
Instead, it merely transfers preexisting genetic sequences from one organ-
ismal context where those sequences may have performed a function, to
another where they likely will not. Indeed, the point of neutral theory is
to postulate the addition of genetic elements that, initially, do not perform
crucial functions such that they can experience mutations without del-
eterious consequence to the organism. Lynch himself assumes that these
added elements will not perform functions in their new context, which is
why he envisions the need for spliceosomes to excise them, at least initially.
Instead, for Lynch’s theory to explain the origin of new and functional
genes and proteins (and the anatomical complexities
that depend on
them), his theory would have to solve the problem of combinatorial infla-
tion discussed in Chapter 10. He would have to show that purely random
mutations could efficiently search the relevant combinatorial space of pos-
sible sequences corresponding to a given novel functional gene or protein.
Nevertheless, Lynch does not even address the problem of combina-
torial inflation or the closely related problem of the rarity of genes and
proteins in sequence space. He provides no experimental evidence that
recombination and/or mutation (given genetic drift) will actually produce
functional or specified genetic complexity. Instead, the examples he pro-
vides are entirely hypothetical. In addition, he offers no reason to think
that the probability of a successful search for functional genes or proteins
would be any higher (i.e., more likely to occur) than the probabilities cal-
culated in Chapter 10. He does not, therefore, answer the challenge of the
problem of combinatorial inflation and the rarity of functional genes and
proteins in sequence space.
Lynch does provide, perhaps, a more detailed characterization than other
neutral theories ofwhere neutral, nonadaptive processes must predominate.
Nevertheless, he does not show that such processes—random genetic mu-
tations unhinged from natural selection—are sufficient to generate novel
functional genes and proteins, let alone complex anatomical novelties re-
quiring the origin of many such genes and proteins. Instead, as Axe’s ex-
perimental results have shown, random mutations ofwhatever kind will not
generate enough trials to render probable (or plausible) a successful search
of the sequence space corresponding to a givenfunctional gene or protein.

Other Post-Neo-Darwinian Models
327
LYNCH AND WAITING TIMES
Lynch does argue in one paper that neutral evolutionary processes can
generate new complex adaptations—adaptations requiring multiple co-
ordinated mutations—within realistic waiting times. In particular, writ-
ing in a recent paper with colleague Adam Abegg of St. Louis University,
he argues that “conventional population genetic mechanisms” such as
random mutation and genetic drift can cause the “relatively rapid emer-
gence of specific complex adaptations.”45 Lynch makes two specific claims
in this regard. First, he claims that in large populations, arbitrarily com-
plex adaptations can occur if the mutational intermediates are neutral in
their effects on the organism. That is, Lynch purports to show that in large
microbial populations, complex adaptations requiring a virtually unlim-
ited number of mutations can occur within realistic waiting times. Ac-
cording to Lynch, this can occur provided that each mutation in a series
of mutations has neutral (but not deleterious)
effects on the organism.
Second, Lynch argues that even though
it generally takes longer to build
complex traits in small populations, such traits can still evolve within re-
alistic waiting times provided, again, that the mutational intermediates
are neutral in their effects. In fact, he concludes that “the elevated power
of both random genetic drift and mutation may enable the acquisition of
complex adaptations in multicellular species at rates that are not apprecia-
bly different from those achievable in enormous microbial populations.”46
Though Lynch makes these assertions in the context of a densely mathe-
matical scientific article, the significance of his claims, if true, can hardly
be overstated. In essence, he claims that his population genetics-based
mathematical model shows that purely random mutations and genetic
drift can generate extremely complex adaptations in
realistic waiting
times—that his neutral evolutionary theory solves the problem of complex
adaptations and long expected waiting times discussed in Chapter 12.
But some things are just too good to be true, and it turns out that Lynch
and Abegg made a subtle but fundamental mathematical error in coming
to their conclusion. Appropriately, perhaps, the first person to demonstrate
that Lynch’s incredible claim was problematic was Douglas Axe. Although
Axe could see that much of the math in Lynch’s paper with Abegg was cor-
rect, Axe suspected from his own calculations and experiments that they
had made some crucial error. In the end, he traced Lynch and Abegg’s

328
DARWIN’S DOUBT
claims to two erroneous equations, both of which were based on an erro-
neous assumption. In essence, Lynch and Abegg assumed that organisms
will acquire a given complex adaptation by traversing a direct path to the
new anatomical structure. Each mutation would build on the previous
one in the most efficient manner possible—with no setbacks, false starts,
aimless wandering, or genetic degradation—until the desired structure or
system (or gene) is constructed. Thus, they formulated an undirected model
of evolutionary change, and one that assumes, moreover, that there is no
mechanism available (such as natural selection) that can lock in potentially
favorable mutational changes on the way to some complex advantageous
structure. Nevertheless, they calculated the waiting times required to pro-
duce such structures as if a process for locking in potentially advantageous
changes did exist, and as if their undirected and purely random mechanism
was in some way directed to these functionally propitious outcomes. As Axe
notes in a trenchant mathematical critique of Lynch and Abegg’s argument,
“Of all the possible evolutionary paths a population can take, the analysis of
Lynch and Abegg considers only those special paths that lead directly to the
desired end—the complex adaptation.’*
47
Yet nothing in Lynch’s neutral model ensures that potentially advanta-
geous mutations will remain in place while other mutations accrue. As
Axe explains, “Productive changes cannot be ‘banked’, whereas Equation 2
[one of Lynch’s equations] presupposes that they can.’*
48 Instead, Axe shows,
mathematically, that degradation (the fixation of mutational changes that
make the complex adaptation less likely to arise) will occur much more
rapidly than constructive mutations, causing the expected waiting time to
increase exponentially.
The illustration I developed in Chapter 10 to explain the problem facing
neutral models of gene evolution may help illuminate the mistaken as-
sumption underlying Lynch and Abegg’s calculations. Recall from that
chapter that my hypothetical blindfolded man dropped in the middle of
an enormous shark-free pool did not face any predators (by analogy the
purifying effects of natural selection). But he
still faced the problem of
finding the ladder at the edge of the enormous body of water (by analogy,
the need to search an enormous number of possible mutational paths and
possible sequences to find the rare functional ones). Now suppose some-
one were to calculate how long on average it would take for the blindfolded
man to swim to the ladder at the edge of the enormous pool. If someone

Other Post-Neo-Darwinian Models
329
simply divided the distance to the ladder at the edge of the pool by the
maximum speed that man could swim, he or she would get a fantasti-
cally optimistic estimate of the severity of the problem facing our unfor-
tunate swimmer. Why? Because calculating the probable waiting time in
this manner would overlook the main problem the man faced, namely, the
man does not know where the ladder is or how to get there. Nor does he
have any way to gauge his progress.
Thus, any realistic estimate ofhow long it will actually take him to swim
to the ladder—as opposed to an estimate of the theoretically fastest route
possible—must take into account his probable aimless wandering, fits and
starts, swimming in circles and drifting in various directions. Similarly,
Lynch and Abegg fail to reckon in their calculation on the random, un-
directed and, literally, aimless nature of the mechanism that they propose.
Instead, they mistakenly assume that neutral processes of evolution will
make a beeline for some specific complex adaption. In fact, these processes
will—in all probability—also wander aimlessly in a vast sequence space of
neutral, functionless possibilities with nothing to direct them, or preserve
them in any forward progress they happen to make, toward the rare and
isolated islands of function represented by complex adaptations. For this
reason. Lynch vastly underestimates the waiting times required to gener-
ate complex adaptations and, therefore, does not solve the problem of the
origin of genes and proteins or any other complex adaptation. Instead,
Axe shows in his own mathematical model, which accompanies his cri-
tique of Lynch, that the waiting times problem is just as severe as he (Axe)
had previously calculated.
NEO-LAMARCKIAN EPIGENETIC INHERITANCE
The third element of the neo-Darwinian triad concerns the transmission
and inheritance of genetic information. Not surprisingly, a new version of
evolutionary theory questions the neo-Darwinian understanding of he-
redity as well.
Darwin himself lacked an accurate theory of how features of organ-
isms are transmitted from one generation to the next. He thought that
changes in organisms that occurred during their lifetimes, as the result
of the “use and disuse” of different organs and anatomical systems, would
be transmitted to offspring through reproduction .49 In this respect, his

330
DARWIN’S DOUBT
theory of inheritance resembled that of an earlier evolutionary theorist,
Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck (1744-1829), who also believed in the inheri-
tance of acquired characteristics.
Lamarckian mechanisms, although unsupported by any evidence at the
time, came to play an increasingly important role in Darwin’s thinking, as
criticisms of natural selection caused Darwin to place more weight on the
direct influence of the environment in evolutionary change. Indeed, by
the sixth edition of the Origin (1872), Darwin specifically emphasized the
importance of these modes of inheritance. 50
But with the rediscovery of Mendel’s laws in 1900 and the identification
of chromosomes as the material entity responsible for the transmission of
inheritance, Lamarckian theories of inheritance fell out of favor. Follow-
ing the rise of the neo-Darwinian synthesis, most evolutionary biologists
came to regard the gene as the locus of all heritable change in the organ-
ism. And after 1953, biologists equated the gene with specifically arranged
nucleotide bases within the DNA molecule.
Recently, however, as more biologists have recognized that some bio-
logical information—epigenetic information—resides in structures out-
side of DNA, interest has grown in the possibility that these nongenetic
sources of information may influence the course of evolution. The discov-
ery that epigenetic information can be altered and directly inherited inde-
pendently of DNA has attracted further attention. This discovery has, in
turn, led to the formulation of a contemporary “neo-Lamarckian”
51 theory
that envisions changes in the nongenetic structures of an organism affect-
ing subsequent generations.
Today, prominent defenders of neo-Lamarckism include Eva Jablonka,
of Tel Aviv University, and Massimo Pigliucci, of the City University of
New York. Lamarck, of course, knew nothing about the role of genes
and believed that inheritance of acquired characteristics was an impor-
tant driving force in evolution. Modern neo-Lamarckians, fully apprised
of the reality of genetic inheritance, nevertheless think that nongenetic
sources of information and structure may play some role in the evolution
of biological form. According to Jablonka, neo-Lamarckism “allow[s] evo-
lutionary possibilities denied by the ‘Modern Synthesis’ version of evolu-
tionary theory, which states that variations are blind, are genetic (nucleic
acid-based), and that saltational events do not significantly contribute to
evolutionary change.” 52

Other Post-Neo-Darwinian Models
331
Jablonka has collected
several categories of evidence in support of
what she calls “epigenetic inheritance systems.” In the first place, in some
single-celled organisms (such as E.
coli and yeast) environmentally in-
duced changes in metabolic pathways can be transmitted to the next gen-
eration independently of any changes in the cell’s DNA. Second, she notes
that structural information mediating organismal form (and function)
does pass from parent to offspring independently of DNA, via membranes
and other three-dimensional cellular patterns.
Third, she discusses the process of DNA methylation—a process in
which special enzymes attach a methyl group (CH
3 ) to nucleotide bases
within the double helix. Processes like this can alter gene regulation and
chromatin structure. Jablonka notes that the changes produced by pro-
cesses that alter gene regulation are often transmitted to subsequent gen-
erations of cells without any changes to DNA base sequences. Finally, she
cites a process called “RNA-mediated” epigenetic inheritance, a recently
discovered phenomenon. Here, small RNAs, again acting in concert with
special enzymes,
affect gene expression and chromatin structure, and
these modifications appear to be heritable independently of genes.
Can any of these mechanisms help to explain the origin of animal form
in the Cambrian explosion? Not really.
By its nature, macroevolution requires stable—meaning permanently
heritable— changes. But Jablonka’s evidence shows that where nongenetic
inheritance occurs in animals,
it involves structures that either
(a) do
not change (such as membrane patterns and other persistent templates of
structural information), or (b) do not persist over more than several gen-
erations. And neither case generates significant evolutionary innovation
in animal form. Instead, for directional evolutionary change to occur in a
population of organisms, changes must not only be heritable, but perma-
nent. Stability—the irreversible and enduring heritability of traits—is a
logically inescapable requirement for any theory of evolution. This is pre-
cisely what “descent with modification” means.
And here Jablonka’s evidence for stable nongenetic inheritance is equiv-
ocal at best, as she readily admits. Reviewing Jablonka’s assembled data
for animals reveals no case where an induced epigenetic change persisted
permanently in any population. The heritability of such changes is tran-
sient, lasting (depending on the species in question) from a few genera-
tions up to forty.

332
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Jablonka candidly addresses this lack of evidence for stability, noting,
“We believe that epigenetic variants
in every locus
in the eukaryotic
genome can be inherited, but in what manner, for how long, and under
what conditions, has yet to be qualified
” 53 Consequently, despite its intrigu-
ing aspects, the evolutionary significance of neo-Lamarckian epigenetic
inheritance remains uncertain or, in Jablonka’s own words, “inevitably,
somewhat speculative .” 54
NATURAL GENETIC ENGINEERING
University of Chicago geneticist James Shapiro has formulated another
post-Darwinian perspective on how evolution works that he calls “natural
genetic engineering.” Shapiro has developed an understanding of evolu-
tion that takes account of the integrated complexity of organisms as well
as the importance of nonrandom mutations and variations in the evolu-
tionary process.
He observes that organisms within a population often modify them-
selves in response to different environmental challenges. He cites evidence
showing that when populations are challenged by environmental stresses,
signals, or triggers, organisms do not generate mutations or make genetic
changes randomly, that is, without respect to, or unguided by, their sur-
vival needs. Instead, they often respond to environmental stresses or sig-
nals by inducing mutations in a directed or regulated way. As he explains,
“The continued insistence on the random nature of genetic change by evo-
lutionists should be surprising for one simple reason: empirical studies of
the mutational process have inevitably discovered patterns, environmen-
tal influences, and specific biological activities at the roots of novel genetic
structures and altered DNA sequences .” 55
The depth of Shapiro’s challenge to orthodox neo-Darwinism
is pro-
found. He rejects the randomness of novel variation that Darwin himself
emphasized and that neo-Darwinian theorists throughout the twentieth
century have reaffirmed . 56 Instead, he favors a view of the evolutionary pro-
cess that emphasizes preprogrammed adaptive capacity or “engineered”
change, where organisms respond in a “cognitive” way to environmental
influences, rearranging or mutating their genetic information in regulated
ways to maintain viability.

Other Post-Neo-Darwinian Models
333
As an example, Shapiro notes that—contrary to the neo-Darwinian
assumption that “DNA alterations are accidental” 57— all organisms pos-
sess sophisticated cellular systems for proofreading and repairing their
DNA during
its replication. He notes that these systems are “equiva-
lent to a quality-control system in human manufacturing,” where the
“surveillance and correction” functions represent “cognitive processes,
rather than mechanical precision .”58
As an example of regulated mutation, Shapiro observes that in response
to environmental assault—UV damage from sunlight or the presence of
an antibiotic, for instance—bacteria activate what is known as the “SOS
response” system. This system makes use of specialized error-prone DNA
polymerases, normally left unexpressed, that are synthesized and set into
action, allowing the population to generate a much wider range of genetic
variation than usual. Bacterial cells regulate this process using a DNA-
binding protein known as LexA, which normally represses the error-
prone polymerases. When the SOS system is activated by environmental
damage, the production ofLexA first drops dramatically, allowing expres-
sion of the error-prone polymerases, but then rises, which “ensures that as
soon as DNA repair occurs
.
.
. LexA [will] reaccumulate and repress the
SOS genes .”59 This system allows cells to “replicate DNA that carries un-
repaired damage ,”60 keeping their essential replication machinery moving
past a stall, in the absence of which the bacterium would die.
An analogy may help to illustrate what the cell
is doing when con-
fronted with an environmental challenge. Imagine
a military
unit, a
combined armor and infantry battalion, crossing an open plain. Sud-
denly, the battalion falls under a fierce, unrelenting enemy artillery bar-
rage, wounding many of its soldiers. To keep the wounded alive until the
barrage ceases or reinforcements arrive, the commander instructs certain
members of the unit with destructive skills to disassemble
(in military
jargon, “cannibalize”) a few of the tanks to provide temporary armored
cover from further incoming shells. His order tells them, however, to cease
their tank-modifying actions as soon as the barrage ends. That is, the unit
as a whole tolerates “damage” to some of its equipment to save as many of
its members as possible.
In the same way, while at one level their “error-prone” role may appear
counterintuitive,
these mutation-generating DNA polymerases
of the

334
DARWIN’S DOUBT
SOS system actually constitute essential hardware in the cell’s defensive
armory.
61 From Shapiro’s perspective, this survival strategy does not exem-
plify Darwinian randomness, but rather sophisticated preprogramming,
an “apparatus that even the smallest cells possess” to maintain viability. 62
What’s more, the carefully regulated expression of the SOS response pro-
vides evidence that cells employ the system only when needed . 63
In addition to ramping up their mutation rates in specific sections of
the genome, cells may also change the way they express the genetic in-
formation that they already carry, expressing some genes that were pre-
viously unexpressed and suppressing others. Organisms in populations
under particular stresses may retrieve and access modular elements of
genetic information stored in disparate locations on the genome or even
on different chromosomes.
Cells will then assemble, or concatenate,
those modular elements to form a new gene or RNA-transcript capable
of directing the synthesis of a novel protein or proteins that can help the
organism survive.
Shapiro argues that these and other kinds of directed, rather than
random, genetic changes and responses to stimuli occur under “algo-
rithmic control.” He describes the cell as “a powerful real-time distrib-
uted computing system
”64 implementing various “if-then” subroutines.
This emphatically challenges one of the three key elements of the neo-
Darwinian
triad:
the claim
that mutations and variations occur in
a
strictly random way.
During the last fifteen years, Shapiro has published a series of fasci-
nating papers about the newly discovered capacities of cells to direct or
“engineer” the genetic changes they need to remain viable in a range of
environmental conditions. His work represents a promising avenue of
new biological research, bringing insight into how the cell’s information-
processing system modifies and directs the expression of its genetic infor-
mation in real time in response to different signals. Shapiro’s work also
provides new insights into how observable evolutionary changes occur in
living populations.
Could it, then, also provide a solution to the problem of the origin of
the information necessary to build an animal body plan? It could, except
for one question that Shapiro’s otherwise brilliant characterization of how
organisms modify themselves doesn’t address.

Other Post-Neo-Darwinian Models
335
Where does the programming come from that accounts for the “pre-
programmed adaptive capacity” of living organisms? If, as James Shapiro
argues, natural selection and exclusively random mutations don’t produce
this information-rich pre-programming, then what did? In the next chap-
ters, I’ll propose an answer to precisely this question.

17
THE POSSIBILITY OF
INTELLIGENT DESIGN
The owner of a remote island estate has been murdered while out riding.
When the local sheriff arrives, he learns there are several obvious suspects:
the volatile gamekeeper, the owner of a neighboring estate with whom the
murder victim has had a long-running feud, and the estate owner’s es-
tranged wife, who had been living on the island in a small mother-in-law
cottage. The sheriff quickly learns the basic facts of the case. The victim
was found dead, facedown on the beach, with his horse standing nearby.
Any one of the three suspects could have taken a rifle, from an unlocked
shed at the edge of the property. All were healthy enough to have hiked to
the scene of the crime. Each of them has a motive. And none has an alibi.
But as the investigation unfolds additional facts come to light. Most
importantly, when the coroner arrives, he determines that although the
victim was shot in the stomach and then his head was harshly bludgeoned
by the butt of the rifle, these injuries served merely to conceal the bullet
wound that actually killed the estate owner. The man was dead when he
hit the ground. What killed him was a perfect shot entering the head just
behind the right ear, exactly where an expert marksman would place a
bullet. Moreover, ballistics shows that this bullet came from a different
gun altogether from the one stored in the shed, a weapon likely fired from
quite a distance.
The
sheriff then
returns
to
the
list
of suspects
and, one by one,
eliminates them. Abundant evidence shows that none of the three prime

The Possibility ofIntelligent Design
337
suspects is a particularly good shot, much less a world-class marksman.
The landowner’s estranged wife has a shaky hand and no experience with
firearms. The volatile gamekeeper has extremely poor eyesight. And the
neighboring landowner turns out to have an alibi after all—as well as a
broken arm, which would have prevented him from holding the kind of
rifle from which the bullet was fired. There is, however, one other person
living on the estate, though not even the other suspects suspect him. He is
the victim’s loyal and longtime personal assistant, a timorous older man
much beloved by both the family and the other servants. No one wants to
consider him as a possible suspect. But is it possible that he could have had
something to do with the crime after all? Might an unexpected suspect
indeed “the butler”—have done it?
Clearly, standard evolutionary theory has reached an impasse. Neither
neo-Darwinism nor a host of more recent proposals (punctuated equi-
librium, self-organization, evolutionary developmental biology, neutral
evolution, epigenetic inheritance, natural genetic engineering) have suc-
ceeded in explaining the origin of the novel animal forms that arose in
the Cambrian period. Yet all these evolutionary theories have two things
in common: they rely on strictly material processes, and they also have
failed to identify a cause capable of generating the information necessary
to produce new forms of life.
This raises a question. Is it possible that a different or unexpected kind
of cause might provide a more adequate explanation for the origin of
the newform and information—as well as the other distinctive features
present in the Cambrian explosion? In particular,
is
it possible that in-
telligent
design—the
purposeful
action
of a
conscious and
rational
agent—might have played a role in the Cambrian explosion?
INTRODUCING INTELLIGENT DESIGN
When the case for intelligent design is made, it’s often hard to get con-
temporary evolutionary biologists to see why such an idea should even
be considered or why discussions of design should play any role in biol-
ogy at all. Though many biologists now acknowledge serious deficien-
cies in current strictly materialistic theories of evolution, they resist
considering alternatives that involve intelligent guidance, direction, or
design.

338
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Much of this resistance seems to come simply from not understanding
what the theory of intelligent design
is. Many evolutionary biologists see
intelligent design as a religiously based idea—a form of biblical creation-
ism. Others think the theory denies all forms of evolutionary change. But
contrary to media reports, intelligent design is not a biblically based idea,
but instead an evidence-based theory about life’s origins—one that chal-
lenges some, but not all, meanings of the term “evolution.”
Perhaps the best way to explain the theory of intelligent design is to
contrast it with the specific aspect of the theory of Darwinian evolution
that it directly challenges. Recall from our opening discussion in Chapter
1 that the term “evolution” has many different meanings and that Darwin’s
theory of evolution by natural selection affirmed several of them:
first,
change over time; second, universal common descent; and third, the cre-
ative power of natural selection acting on random variations. In affirming
this third meaning of evolution, both classical Darwinism and modern
neo-Darwinism also affirm what neo-Darwinist Richard Dawkins has
called the “blind watchmaker” hypothesis. This hypothesis holds that the
mechanism of natural selection acting on random genetic variations (and
mutations) can produce not just new biological form and structure, but
also the appearance of design in living organisms.
1
Darwin argued for this idea in The Origin of Species as well as in his
letters. Recall the sheep breeding illustration from Chapter
1 where
I
described how both
intelligent human breeders and environmental
change (a series of bitterly cold winters) might produce an adaptive ad-
vantage in a population of sheep. During the nineteenth century, biolo-
gists regarded the adaptation of organisms to their environment as one
of the most powerful pieces of evidence of design in the living world. By
observing that natural selection had the power to produce such adap-
tations, Darwin not only affirmed that his mechanism could generate
significant biological change, but that
it could explain the appearance
of design—without invoking the activity of an actual designing intelli-
gence. In doing so, he sought to refute the design hypothesis by provid-
ing a materialistic explanation for the origin of apparent design in living
organisms. Modern neo-Darwinists also affirm that organisms look as if
they were designed. They also affirm the sufficiency of an unintelligent
natural mechanism—mutation and natural
selection— as an explana-
tion for this appearance. Thus, in both Darwinism, and neo-Darwinism,

The Possibility ofIntelligent Design
339
the selection/variation (or selection/mutation) mechanism functions as
a kind of “designer substitute.” As the late Harvard evolutionary biolo-
gist Ernst Mayr explains: “The real core of Darwinism ... is the theory of
natural selection. This theory is so important for the Darwinian because
it permits the explanation of adaptation, the ‘design’ of the natural theo-
logian, by natural means .” 2 Or as another prominent evolutionary bi-
ologist, Francisco Ayala, has put it succinctly, natural selection explains
“design without a designer.” 3
Other
contemporary
neo-Darwinian
biologists
including
Richard
Dawkins, Francis Crick, and Richard Lewontin have also emphasized
that biological organisms only appear to have been designed .
4 They rec-
ognize that many biological structures—whether the chambered nautilus,
the compound eye of a trilobite, the electrical system of the mammalian
heart, or numerous molecular machines—attract our attention because
the sophisticated organization of such systems is reminiscent of our own
designs. Dawkins has noted, for example, that the digital information in
DNA bears an uncanny resemblance to computer software or machine
code .
5 He explains that many aspects of livings systems “give the appear-
ance of having been designed for a purpose .”6
Nevertheless, neo-Darwinists
regard
that appearance
of design
as
entirely illusory, as did Darwin himself, because they think that purely
mindless, materialistic processes such as natural selection and random
mutations can produce the intricate designed-like structures in living or-
ganisms. In this view, natural selection and random mutation mimic the
powers of a designing intelligence without themselves being intelligently
directed or guided in any way.
That’s where the theory of intelligent design comes into play. Intelli-
gent design challenges the idea that natural selection and random muta-
tion (and other similarly undirected materialistic processes) can explain
the most striking appearances of design in living organisms. Instead,
it
affirms that there are certain features of living systems that are best ex-
plained by the design of an actual intelligence—a conscious and ratio-
nal agent, a mind—as opposed to a mindless, materialistic process. The
theory of intelligent design does not reject “evolution” defined as “change
over time” or even universal common ancestry, but
it does dispute Dar-
win’s idea that the cause of major biological change and the appearance of
design are wholly blind and undirected.

340
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Nor does the theory seek to insert into biology an extraneous reli-
gious concept. Intelligent design addresses a key scientific question that
has long been part of evolutionary biology:
Is design real or illusory?
Indeed, part of what Darwin set out to explain was precisely the ap-
pearance of design. With current
materialistic evolutionary theories
now failing to explain many of the most striking appearances of design
in the Cambrian animals, including the presence of digital information
as well as other complex adaptations, the possibility emerges that these
appearances of design may not be just appearances after
all. The Dar-
winian formulation of evolutionary theory in opposition to the design
hypothesis,
7 coupled with the inability of neo-Darwinian and other ma-
terialistic theories to account for salient appearances of design, would
seem logically to reopen the possibility of actual (as opposed to appar-
ent) design in the history of animal life.
Either life arose as the result of purely undirected material processes
or a guiding or designing intelligence played a role. Advocates of intel-
ligent design favor the latter option and argue that living organisms look
designed because they really were designed. Design proponents argue that
living systems exhibit telltale indicators of prior intelligent activity that
justify this claim, indicators that make intelligent design scientifically de-
tectable from the evidence of the living world.
But that, for many evolutionary biologists, is precisely the rub. Because
they think of intelligent design as a religiously based idea, they under-
stand that people might want to affirm the intelligent design of life as part
of their religious beliefs—but not as a consequence of scientific evidence.
Indeed, most evolutionary biologists don’t see how the idea of intelligent
design could contribute to a scientific explanation of life’s origins, nor do
they see how intelligent design could ever be detected or inferred scientifi-
cally from evidence in nature. Exactly how would researchers justify such
an inference?
MY STORY
When
I left for my graduate studies in England in 1986,
I was asking a
similar set of questions. At that time, I wasn’t thinking about the scientific
legitimacy of the intelligent design hypothesis as an explanation for the
origin of animals. Instead,
I wanted to know if intelligent design could

The Possibility ofIntelligent Design
341
help explain the origin of life
itself. My questions eventually led me to
learn about a distinctive method of historical scientific inquiry. That dis-
covery led me to a method of reasoning that allows for the detection or
inference of past causes, including intelligent causes.
A year earlier, in 1985, 1 had met one of the first contemporary scientists
to revive the idea that intelligent design might have played a causal role
in the origins of life. Chemist Charles Thaxton (see Fig. 17.1) had recently
published a book, The Mystery ofLife's Origin. His coauthors were polymer
scientist and engineer Walter Bradley and geochemist Roger Olsen. Their
book received acclaim as a groundbreaking critique of current theories of
chemical evolution. They showed that attempts to explain the origin of the
first living cell from simpler nonliving chemicals had failed and that these
theories had specifically failed to explain the origin of the information
necessary to produce the first life.
But it was in the books epilogue that the three scientists proposed a rad-
ical alternative. There they suggested that the information-bearing prop-
erties of DNA might point to the activity of a designing intelligence—to
the work of a mind, or an “intelligent cause” as they put
it.
8 Drawing on
the analysis of the British-Hungarian physical chemist Michael Polanyi,
they argued that chemistry and physics alone could not produce the in-
formation in DNA any more than ink and paper alone could produce the
information in a book. Instead, they argued that our uniform experience
suggests a cause-and-effect relationship between intelligent activity and
the production of information.
9
FIGURE 17.1
Charles Thaxton. Courtesy
Charles Thaxton.

342
DARWIN’S DOUBT
At the time the book appeared,
I was working as a geophysicist for an
oil company in Dallas where Thaxton happened to live. I met him at a sci-
entific conference and became intrigued by his work. Over the next year,
I began dropping by his office to discuss his book and the radical idea he
was developing about DNA.
The first part of Thaxton’s argument made sense to me. Experience does
indeed seem to affirm that (specified or functional) information typically
arises from the activity of intelligent agents, from minds as opposed to
mindless, material processes. When a “tweet” appears on your smart phone’s
Twitter feed (ifyou’re into that kind of thing), it clearly originated first in the
mind of a person who created a Twitter account, scripted the “tweet,” and
then sent it out across the Internet. Information does arise from minds.
But Thaxton went further. He acknowledged that most branches of
science didn’t consider intelligent activity as an explanation because, he
thought, intelligent agents don’t usually generate repeatable or predictable
phenomena and because they are difficult to study under controlled labo-
ratory conditions. Nevertheless, Thaxton argued that scientists might pro-
pose an intelligent cause as a positive scientific explanation for some events
in the past, as part of a special mode of scientific inquiry he called origins
science. He noted that scientific disciplines such as archaeology, evolution-
ary biology, cosmology, and paleontology often infer the occurrence of
singular, nonrepeatable events and that the methods used to make such
inferences could help scientists identify positive indicators of intelligent
causes in the past as well.
Here
I wasn’t
initially so
sure. Thaxton’s ideas about a distinctive
method of science concerned with origins, or at least with the past gener-
ally, seemed intuitively plausible. After all, evolutionary biologists and pa-
leontologists do seem to use a method of investigation different from that
employed by laboratory chemists. Nevertheless, I wasn’t exactly sure what
those methods were, how they were different from those used in other sci-
ences, and whether using them in any way justified considering intelligent
design as a scientific hypothesis.
So the next year when
I left Dallas, Texas, for Cambridge, England, to
pursue my studies in the history and philosophy of science,
I had a lot
on my mind. Is there a distinctive method of historical scientific inquiry?
If so, does that method of reasoning and investigation justify a scientific

The Possibility ofIntelligent Design
343
reformulation of the design hypothesis? In particular, does the intuitive
connection between information and the prior activity of a designing in-
telligence justify a positive (historical)
scientific inference to intelligent
design? Does it make intelligent design detectable?
HISTORICAL SCIENTIFIC METHOD AND
THE DESIGN HYPOTHESIS
In my research,
I discovered that historical scientists often do make in-
ferences with a distinctive logical form. This type of inference is known
technically as an abductive inference .
10 During the nineteenth century,
American logician C. S. Peirce characterized this mode of reasoning and
distinguished
it from two better-known forms, inductive and deductive
reasoning. He noted that in inductive reasoning, general rules are inferred
from particular facts, whereas in deductive reasoning, general rules are
applied to particular facts in order to deduce specific outcomes. In abduc-
tive reasoning, however, inferences are often made about past events or
causes based on present clues or facts .
11
To see the difference between these three types of inference, consider
the following argument forms:
Inductive argument:
Aj is B.
A
2 is B.
A
3 is B.
A. is B.
4
A
is B.
n
All As are B.
Deductive argument:
major premise:
If A has occurred, then B will follow as a matter
of course.
minor premise:
A has occurred.
conclusion:
Hence, B will follow as well.

344
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Abductive argument:
major premise:
IfA occurs, then B would be expected as a
matter of course.
minor premise:
The surprisingfact B is observed.
conclusion:
Hence, there is reason to suspect that A has
occurred.
Note the difference between deductive and abductive forms of infer-
ence. In deduction, the minor premise affirms the antecedent variable
(“A”), while the conclusion deduces the consequent variable
(“B”), an
anticipated outcome. In this sense, deductive inferences look forward to
something that will happen in the future. A classic illustration of deduc-
tive reasoning has this character:
major premise:
All men are mortal.
minor premise:
Socrates is a man.
conclusion:
Therefore, Socrates is a mortal (i.e., he will die).
In an abductive argument, the minor premise affirms the consequent
variable (“B”) and its conclusion infers the antecedent variable (“A”)—the
variable referring to something that went before, either logically or tempo-
rally. Abductive reasoning, thus, often affirms a past occurrence. For this
reason, forensic or historical scientists such as geologists, paleontologists,
archaeologists, and evolutionary biologists often use abductive reasoning
to infer past conditions or causes from present clues. As Stephen Jay Gould
notes, historical scientists typically “infer history from its results .” 12
For example, a geologist might reason as follows:
major premise:
If a mudslide occurred, we would expect to find
felled trees.
minor premise:
Wefind evidence offelled trees.
conclusion:
Therefore, we have reason to think that a
mudslide may have occurred.
In the deductive form, if the premises are true, the conclusion follows
with certainty. The logic of the abductive arguments is different, however.

The Possibility ofIntelligent Design
345
Abductive arguments do not produce certainty, but instead merely plausi-
bility or possibility. To see why, consider the following variation of the
preceding abductive argument:
major premise:
If a mudslide occurred, we would expect to find
felled trees.
minor premise:
Wefindfelled trees.
conclusion:
Therefore, a mudslide occurred,
or symbolically:
major premise:
If MS, then FT.
minor premise:
FT.
conclusion:
Therefore, MS.
Notice that unlike the
first version of the abductive argument in
which the conclusion was stated tentatively (“We have reason to think
that a mudslide may have occurred”), in this version the conclusion is
affirmed definitively (“A mudslide occurred”). Obviously, this latter form
of argument has a problem.
It does not follow that, because the trees
have fallen, a mudslide necessarily occurred. The trees may have fallen
for some other reason. A hurricane may have blown them down; perhaps
an ice storm occurred and the trees
fell under the weight of accumu-
lating ice; or loggers may have cut them down. In logic, affirming the
consequent variable of a minor premise (with certainty) constitutes a
formal fallacy—-a fallacy that derives from the failure to acknowledge
that more than one cause (or antecedent) might produce the same evi-
dence (or consequent).
Even so, the presence of downed timber might indicate that a mudslide
has occurred. Thus, amending the above argument to conclude: “We have
reason to think that a mudslide may have occurred” does not commit a
fallacy. Even if we may not affirm the consequent with certainty, we may
affirm it as a possibility. This is precisely what abductive reasoning does. It
provides a reason for considering that a hypothesis—and often a hypothe-
sis about the past—might be true, even if one cannot affirm the hypothesis
(or conclusion) with certainty.
13

346
DARWIN’S DOUBT
THE METHOD OF MULTIPLE COMPETING HYPOTHESES
To address this limitation in abductive reasoning and to make it possible
to strengthen inferences about the past, the nineteenth-century geolo-
gist Thomas Chamberlain developed a form of reasoning he called “the
method of multiple working hypotheses.”
14 Historical and forensic scien-
tists employ this method when more than one cause or hypothesis can ac-
count for the same evidence. They use it to adjudicate between competing
hypotheses by comparing them to see which one best explains not just one
piece of evidence but, usually, a wider class of relevant facts.
For example, consider how this method of reasoning was used to estab-
lish the hypothesis of continental drift as the best explanation for a wide
range of geological observations. During the early 1900s, a German geolo-
gist and meteorologist named Alfred Wegener became fascinated with the
way the African and South American continents fit together on the map
like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle.
15 He proposed that the continents had once
been fused together as a single giant continent that he called “Pangea,”
which later separated and drifted apart.
Initially, many geologists ridiculed Wegener’s idea. They thought that
given the vast distances separating the continents—the matching shapes
were most likely just a coincidence. Wegener’s critics dismissed his theory
of continental drift as “delirious ravings,” “Germanic pseudo-science,” or
a “fairy tale.”
16 But Wegener cited other evidence that he thought continen-
tal drift could explain that the coincidence hypothesis could not. He noted
that fossil forms discovered on the east coast of South America matched
those on the west coast of Africa in corresponding places and sedimentary
strata. This fact seemed too coincidental to him to be explained away by
chance alone. Nevertheless, other geologists attempted to explain match-
ing fossil forms an ocean apart not as the result of the movement of the
continents, but instead as the result of the migration of flora and fauna
either across oceans or over ancient land bridges.
17 This introduced a third
hypothesis into the mix, one that, in conjunction with the coincidence
hypothesis, could explain each of the same facts that Wegener’s hypoth-
esis could.
Later, however, an additional set of facts came to light—one that helped
scientists to decide between the competing hypotheses. During World War
II, the United States Navy surveyed the seafloor topography and measured

The Possibility ofIntelligent Design
347
the
earth’s magnetic
field
across the
oceans. These magnetic surveys
showed parallel stripes of magnetized rock, each with the same polarity on
either side of mountain ridges running down the middle of the ocean floor
at equal distances from the mid-oceanic mountain ranges.
18 Geologists
also learned that magma was continually seeping out at the middle of these
mid-oceanic mountain ranges. They discovered that as the magma cools,
it “acquires” a characteristic magnetic signature reflecting the polarity of
the earth’s magnetic field at that location at the time of its cooling. When
ships towing sensitive magnetometers measured this “remanent magneti-
zation,” scientists learned that the magnetization of the seafloor alternated
between sections of “normal” and “reverse” polarity as the magnetometer
was towed away from a mid-ocean ridge in each direction. This led to the
discovery of a famous symmetrical “piano key” pattern on each side of a
mid-ocean ridge, seen in Figure 17.2.
To explain this symmetrical pattern of alternating magnetism, geolo-
gists proposed that the magnetic stripes were formed as the result of the
seafloor spreading away from the mid-ocean ridge as magma was ex-
truded and cooled in the presence of earth’s changing magnetic field—in
other words, that the continents were literally drifting apart. This hypoth-
esis not only explained the symmetrical pattern of magnetic stripes but
—i—i—i—*
1—•—•—«—
1—*—«—»-
**
A6rB IN KY
U>
4
2.
o
2.
4
U>
Po^rnve ma6rvenc
AwoMAiy
MA^errc
4
tOflITE (tJBdf.)
,
3
tJefrAiTve magnetic
AwoHALy
FIGURE 17.2
This diagram shows the symmetrical pattern of alternating magnetic stripes of either
“normal” or “reversed” polarity on either side of a mid-ocean ridge. Because this “piano
key” pattern could only be explained by plate tectonics and seafloor spreading, it contrib-
uted to the widespread acceptance of those theories within contemporary geology.

348
DARWIN’S DOUBT
also other relevant evidence. Although the other hypotheses could explain
(or explain away) the
fit of the continents and/or the similar pattern of
fossilization across the oceans, only continental drift (driven by seafloor
spreading) could explain the magnetic seafloor stripes and these other
pieces of evidence. Consequently, as the result of its superior explanatory
power, a decisive case for continental drift was soon established, strength-
ening a merely plausible abductive inference about the past movement of
the continents by showing that this inference provided the best (and only
adequate) explanation of all the relevant facts.
19
Contemporary philosophers of science such as Peter Lipton have called
this method of reasoning “inference to the best explanation.”20 Scientists
often use this method when trying to explain the origin of an event or
structure from the past. They compare various hypotheses to see which
would, if true, best explain it.
21 They then provisionally affirm the hypoth-
esis that best explains the data as the one that is most likely to be true.
Obviously, saying, “The best explanation is the one that best explains
the facts or that best explains the most facts,” begs an important question.
What does it mean to explain something well or best?
As
it happens, historical scientists have developed criteria for deciding
which explanation, among a group of competing possible hypotheses, pro-
vides the best explanation for some event in the remote past. The most im-
portant of these criteria is “causal adequacy.” As a condition of formulating
a successful explanation, historical scientists must identify causes that are
known to have the power to produce the kind of effect, feature, or event in
question. In seeking to identify such causes, historical scientists evaluate hy-
potheses in light of their present knowledge of cause and effect. Causes that
are known to produce the effect in question (or are thought capable of doing
so) are judged to be better candidates than those that are not. For instance, a
volcanic eruption provides a better explanation for an ash layer in the earth
than an earthquake or a flood, because eruptions have been observed to
produce ash layers, whereas earthquakes and floods have not.
One of the first historical scientists to develop the criterion of causal
adequacy was the geologist Charles
Lyell (1797-1875), who
in turn
influenced Charles Darwin. Darwin read Lyell’s magnum opus, The
Principles of Geology, during his voyage on the HMS Beagle and em-
ployed Lyell’s principles of reasoning in On the Origin of Species. The
subtitle of Lyell’s book summarized his central methodological prin-

The Possibility ofIntelligent Design
349
ciple: Being an Attempt to Explain the Former Changes of the Earth’s
Surface, by Reference to Causes Now in Operation (1830-1833). Lyell
argued that when scientists seek to explain events in the past, they
should not invoke some unknown type of cause, the effects of which
we have not observed. Instead, they should cite causes that are known
from our uniform experience to have the power to produce the effect
in question. 22 Historical scientists should cite presently acting causes,
that is, “causes now in operation.” This was the idea behind his unifor-
mitarian method and its famous dictum: “The present is the key to the
past.” According to Lyell, our present experience of cause and effect
should guide our reasoning about the causes of past events. Darwin
adopted this methodological principle as he sought to demonstrate
that natural selection qualified as a vera causa, that is, a true, known,
or actual cause of significant biological change. 23 In other words, he
sought to show that natural selection was “causally adequate” to pro-
duce the effects he was trying to explain.
THE ONLY KNOWN CAUSE
Both philosophers of science and leading historical scientists have empha-
sized causal adequacy as the key criterion by which competing hypotheses
are judged. But philosophers of science have insisted that assessments of
explanatory power lead to conclusive inferences only when there
is just
one known cause for the effect or evidence24 (see Fig. 17.3) in question. If
there are many causes that can produce the same effect, then the pres-
ence of the effect does not definitively establish the cause. When scientists
know of only one cause for a given effect, however, they can infer that
cause and yet avoid the fallacy of affirming the consequent—the error of
ignoring other possible causes with the power to produce the same effect.25
In that case, they can infer or detect a uniquely plausible past cause from
the clues that are left behind.
This can happen in one of two ways. First, historical scientists might
focus their investigation on a single fact (in isolation) for which only one
cause happens to be known. In such a case, they can quickly and deci-
sively infer the cause from the effect alone—without risk of affirming
the consequent, because no other known cause produces the same effect.
For example, because a volcanic eruption is the only known cause of a

350
DARWIN’S DOUBT
FIGURE 17.3
Schematic of the logical problem of retrodiction. Whether it is possible to reconstruct the
past definitively or not depends upon whether there
is a single cause or condition that
gives rise to a present state or whether there are many possible past causes or conditions
that give rise to a given present state. The diagram on the left portrays an information-
destroying situation in which many past causes (or conditions) correspond to a given
present state. The diagram on the right portrays an information-preserving situation in
which only one past cause (or condition) corresponds to a present state. Adapted from
Sober, Reconstructing the Past, 4.
volcanic ash layer, the presence of such a layer at an archeological site
strongly indicates the prior eruption of a volcano.
In other cases where historical scientists encounter evidence for which
there are many known causes, they will often broaden their investigation
beyond an initial fact or set of facts. In such cases, they will use the strat-
egy described above (as part of the method of multiple competing hypoth-
eses), by looking for additional evidence until they find a piece for which
there is only one known cause. They can then compare the explanatory
power of the competing hypotheses. Using this strategy, historical scien-
tists will choose the proposed cause with the demonstrated power to pro-
duce all the relevant evidence, including the new fact or piece of evidence
for which there is only one known cause. For example, the discovery of
the symmetrical pattern of ocean-floor magnetism on opposite sides of a
mid-oceanic ridge allowed for a comparison of the explanatory power of
the three hypotheses under consideration, leaving only seafloor spreading
as a causally adequate explanation of all the relevant facts.
Such an approach often allows historical scientists to pick out a piece
of evidence (from some combination of effects) for which there
is only
one known (or theoretically plausible) cause, thus making
it possible to

The Possibility of Intelligent Design
351
establish a past cause decisively. Though this strategy involves looking
at a wider class of facts than the
first strategy, the logical status of the
inferences involved is the same. In each case, the presence of a fact (either
standing on
its own or in combination with other facts) for which only
one cause is known allows historical scientists to make a definitive infer-
ence about the causal history in question without committing the fallacy
of affirming the consequent. Logically, if a postulated cause is known to
be a necessary condition or cause of a given event or effect, then historical
scientists can validly infer that condition or cause from the presence of the
effect. If it’s true that where there is smoke there is always first fire, then
the presence of smoke wafting up over a distant mountain range decisively
indicates the prior presence of a fire on the other side of the ridge.
HISTORICAL INFERENCE AND INTELLIGENT DESIGN
What does all this have to do with the Cambrian explosion?
Quite a lot. In my investigation of the historical scientific method,
I
found that whether they always realize it or not, historical scientists typi-
cally use the method of inference to the best explanation. They make
abductive inferences about past causes from present clues, evidence, or ef-
fects. This later suggested to me that if there were features of the Cambrian
explosion or the Cambrian animals that would be “expected as a matter
of course” if an intelligent designer had played a role in that event, then
it was at least possible to formulate the hypothesis of intelligent design
as a historical (abductive) scientific inference. An advocate of intelligent
design could reason in a standard historical scientific way:
major premise:
If intelligent design played a role in the
Cambrian explosion, then feature (X) known
to be produced by intelligent activity would be
expected as a matter of course.
minor premise:
Feature (X) is observed in the Cambrian explosion
ofanimal life.
conclusion:
Hence, there is reason to suspect that an
intelligent cause played a role in the Cambrian
explosion.

352
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Of course, a historical scientist would only be justified in making such
an abductive inference to the past activity of an intelligent cause if “fea-
ture X” is evident in the Cambrian explosion and if intelligent design is
known to produce “feature X.” Moreover, just because the Cambrian ex-
plosion may exhibit some feature or features for which intelligent design
is a known cause does not mean that intelligent design was necessarily the
actual cause (or the best explanation) of those features. Only if the Cam-
brian event and animals exhibit features for which intelligent design is the
only known cause may a historical scientist make a decisive inference to a
past intelligent cause.
We are left with two crucial questions. Are there in fact such features
present in the record of the Cambrian explosion or in the animals that
arise in it—features that are known from our experience to be produced by
intelligent causes such that they would justify making a tentative abduc-
tive inference to intelligent design? Are there also perhaps features of the
Cambrian event that are known from our experience to be produced by
intelligent causes, and only intelligent causes, justifying a more definitive
inference to past intelligent activity as the best explanation for the relevant
evidence? Might “the butler” have done it after all?

18
SIGNS OF DESIGN IN THE
CAMBRIAN EXPLOSION
Well- crafted mystery novels, like real-world crime investigations, unfold
with a distinctive logic. There is a death to be explained and, at the start,
an indefinitely large universe of possible causes. That universe can be
made smaller, narrowing to the one true cause, as more and more clues
come to light. Those clues typically come in two forms: positive evidence,
or indicators of what likely happened (e.g., .38 caliber shell casings on the
ground and bullet wounds in a body) and negative evidence, or indicators
of what could not have happened.
Let’s say that the local sheriff who discovered the body of the estate
owner (from my illustration in the previous chapter), did so as he was
making his rounds on a dirt road that makes a close approach to the beach
at the end of the estate where the owner died. And let’s say that, as a result,
the sheriffjust happened to find the body soon after the murder had taken
place. Let’s suppose, further, that the sheriff had the presence of mind to
immediately measure the temperature of the body only to find that the
victim was still warm, indeed almost as warm as a living person. Clearly,
in this situation, the sheriff would conclude that the victim had just died.
At that point in the investigation, a physical regularity would govern
the sheriff’s reasoning, one that tells a lot about who didn’t commit the
murder. Following death, the human body cools to the surrounding tem-
perature at a known rate. So, making allowances for vehicular transport,

354
DARWIN'S DOUBT
whoever committed the murder could not have gone beyond a certain dis-
tance from the remote estate at the time the body was found.
These facts would immediately provide a rock-solid alibi to the vast
majority of humanity, anyone located safely outside that radius when the
body was discovered. Of course, calling this information a negative clue
is really only a convention of naming. “Negative” and “positive” refer to
how we conceive of the implications of a fact, but not to the fact itself:
the evidence, after all, is what it is. Even so, facts both exclude and allow
competing possible hypotheses. As they accumulate, they typically paint
a picture, a profile, of the actual cause of the event in need of explanation.
Thus, when we say “the body temperature of the deceased rules out the
7 billion people who were well beyond the radius set by the cooling rate,”
we could equally well have said, “the body temperature implicates some
person within 30 miles of the estate when the sheriff arrived,” a population
of possible suspects much smaller than when we started.
As I have described the many attempts to explain the scientific enigma
motivating this book, that mystery has, in one sense, progressively deep-
ened. As more and more attempts to explain the Cambrian explosion of
animal life have failed, the evidence that these various competing theories
fail to explain may be considered a set of negative clues—evidence that ef-
fectively precludes certain possible causes or explanations. I’ve already ex-
plained why the received version of evolutionary theory, neo-Darwinism,
fails to account for the explosion of information and form in the Cambrian
period. I’ve also examined more recent evolutionary theories and shown
why they too fail to explain key aspects of the evidence. To this point, then,
much of the evidence has returned a negative verdict.
It has told us a lot
about what, in all probability, did not cause the Cambrian explosion. But,
as in our hypothetical murder case, an accumulating body of evidence that
makes one set of explanations less and less plausible may also begin to paint
a picture of an alternative cause and the true explanation.
PROFILE OF THE SUSPECT
Long before detectives know the actual identity of a suspect, they will
often compose a profile of the person they are seeking. One leading pa-
leontologist has used this strategy to begin to draw a bead on the cause
responsible for the Cambrian explosion. Douglas Erwin has dedicated his

Signs ofDesign in the Cambrian Explosion
355
career to solving the problem of the origin of animal body plans (see Fig.
18.1). Trained at the University of California by James Valentine, another
Cambrian expert, Erwin has worked closely over the past decade with Eric
Davidson, whom we
first met in Chapter
13, trying to determine what
happened to cause dozens of novel body plans to appear—and appear rap-
idly—in the Cambrian period.
Both Erwin and Davidson have now ruled out standard neo-Darwinian
theory—vehemently in Davidson s case. He says that the standard theory
“gives rise to lethal errors.”
1 But Erwin and Davidson go further. They
have assembled what
is, in essence, a clue sheet— a list of key evidences
that must be explained. Using that list, they have begun to sketch, at least
in outline, a profile of the cause behind the Cambrian explosion.
On the positive side of the ledger, they conclude that this cause must
have several attributes in order to explain key facts about the fossil record
as well as what
it takes to build animals. In particular, the cause must
be capable of generating a top-down pattern of appearance;
it must be
capable of generating new biological form relatively rapidly; and
it must
be capable of constructing, not merely modifying, complex integrated
genetic circuits (specifically, the developmental gene regulatory networks
discussed in Chapter 13).
On the negative side, Davidson and Erwin rule out both observed micro-
evolutionary processes and postulated macroevolutionary mechanisms
(such as punctuated equilibrium and species selection) as explanations for
the origin of the key features of the Cambrian explosion. They insist that
FIGURE 18.1
Douglas Erwin. Courtesy
UPHOTO/Cornell University.

356
DARWIN’S DOUBT
the requirements for constructing animal body plans de novo “cannot be
accommodated by microevolutionary [or] macroevolutionary theory.”
2
In Chapter 13,
I discussed their reason for coming to this conclusion:
developmental gene regulatory networks, once in place, cannot be per-
turbed (or mutated) without “catastrophic”
3 consequences to the develop-
ing animal. Thus, fundamentally new gene regulatory networks (dGRNs)
cannot evolve gradually from preexisting dGRNs,
if those evolutionary
changes require perturbing the deepest nodes of the earlier dGRNs. Yet
building new dGRNs capable ofproducing new animals requires precisely
such fundamental alterations in preexisting dGRNs. But then how would
new regulatory networks ever arise? Davidson and Erwin insist that no
current theory of evolution explains the origin of these systems. Thus,
they conclude that the cause of the Cambrian explosion is not described
by any currently proposed theory of micro- or macroevolution.
In saying this, Erwin emphasizes the uniqueness of the innovations that
occurred in the Cambrian explosion. He explains: “Unlike later events, the
most significant developmental events of the Cambrian radiation involved
the proliferation of cell types, developmental hierarchies and epigenetic
cascades.”4 Consequently, he concludes, “The crucial difference between
the developmental events of the Cambrian and subsequent events is that
the former involved the establishment of these developmental patterns, not
their modification.”
5 For this reason, Erwin denies that the central event of
the Cambrian explosion—the origin of novel body plans—has any paral-
lel to currently observed biological processes. Rather, he insists that the
events of the past were fundamentally different—that profound asymme-
tries exist between evolution then, and evolution now.
6 Thus, he amplifies
his denial of the sufficiency of current evolutionary theory by adding one
additional attribute, albeit a negative one, to his portrait of “the suspect”:
the cause responsible for generating the new animal forms, whatever
it
was, must have been unlike any observed biological process operating in
actual living populations today.
PROFILING A CAUSE
All of this raises an obvious question. Could the negative clues that in-
creasingly disconfirm materialistic evolutionary theories also be positive
indicators of a different kind of cause—perhaps even an intelligent cause?

Signs ofDesign in the Cambrian Explosion
357
By sketching the profile of the kind of cause needed to explain the origin
of animal life, Davidson, Erwin, and many other evolutionary biologists
may have, inadvertently, rendered the idea of intelligent design a bit less
inconceivable. To see why, let’s quickly review Erwin and Davidson’s pro-
file of the suspect. They have concluded that the cause of the origin of the
new animal forms in the Cambrian explosion must be capable of:
•
generating new form rapidly
•
generating a top-down pattern of appearance
•
constructing, not merely modifying, complex integrated circuits
They have also concluded that this cause is:
•
not described by any currently proposed theory of micro- or mac-
roevolution
•
unlike any observed biological process operating in actual living
populations today
Erwin and Davidson, no friends of intelligent design, have sketched a
partial profile of an adequate cause as befits their particular interest in the
importance of gene regulatory networks (Davidson) and fossil disconti-
nuity (Erwin). But other evolutionary biologists have contributed to this
picture as well. Simon Conway Morris marvels at “the uncanny ability of
evolution to navigate to the appropriate solution through immense ‘hyper-
spaces’ of biological possibility.” 7 As a result, he argues that evolution may
in some way be “channeled” toward propitious functional and/or struc-
tural end points—without specifying any known evolutionary mechanism
that can so direct evolution to such end points .
8 James Shapiro proposes a
mechanism of evolutionary change that relies on preprogrammed adap-
tive capacity—without explaining where such preprogramming comes
from .
9 Several of the new evolutionary theories discussed in the previous
chapters presuppose, but do not explain, the existence ofboth genetic and
epigenetic forms of information, highlighting the need for a cause capable
of generating such information in the first place.
Erwin and Davidson have made a bold start with their clue list ruling
out neo-Darwinism. But the evidence explored in these pages suggests ad-
ditional attributes that need to be added to their profile of the actual cause
of the Cambrian explosion. Our previous investigations have suggested

358
DARWIN’S DOUBT
that building an animal requires specified or functional information and
that any explanation for the origin of the Cambrian animals must identify
a cause capable of generating:
•
digital information
•
structural (epigenetic) information
•
functionally integrated and hierarchically organized layers of
information
Still, do any or even all of these clues add up to a reason for considering
that an alternative kind of cause—a designing intelligence—might have
played a role in the origin of animal life?
They do. As it turns out, each of the features of the Cambrian animals
and the Cambrian fossil record that constitute negative clues— clues that
render neo-Darwinism and other materialistic theories inadequate
as
causal explanations—also happen to be features of systems known from
experience to have arisen as the result of intelligent activity. In other
words, standard materialistic evolutionary theories have failed to iden-
tify an adequate mechanism or cause/or precisely those attributes of living
forms that we know from experience only intelligence—conscious ratio-
nal activity—is capable of producing. That suggests, in accord with the
method of historical scientific reasoning elucidated in the previous chap-
ter, the possibility of making a strong historical inference to intelligent
design as the best explanation for the origin of those attributes.
Let’s have a look at each of these features of the Cambrian event, start-
ing with key features of the Cambrian animals themselves, to see how they
might point to the past activity of a designing intelligence, thereby making
intelligent design scientifically detectable.
THE CAMBRIAN INFORMATION EXPLOSION
We have seen that building a Cambrian (or any other) animal would re-
quire vast new, functionally specified digital information. Moreover, the
presence of such digitally encoded information in DNA presents, at least, a
striking appearance ofdesign in all living organisms. As Richard Dawkins

Signs ofDesign in the Cambrian Explosion
359
observes,
for example, “The machine code of the genes
is uncannily
computer-like .” 10 Similarly, biotechnology pioneer Leroy Hood refers to
the information stored in DNA as “digital code” and describes it in terms
reminiscent of computer software .
11 And as we have seen, Microsoft’s Bill
Gates notes: “DNA is like a computer program but far, far more advanced
than any software ever created .” 12
Yet we’ve also seen that neither neo-Darwinism nor any other ma-
terialistic evolutionary model or mechanism explains the origin of the
genetic information (the digital code) necessary to produce the Cambrian
animals or even the simplest structural innovations that they exhibit.
Could this—from a materialistic point of view
unexplained appearance
of design point instead to actual intelligent design?
I think it does. But to explain why,
I need to tell a bit more about the
“evolution” of my own thinking on the matter.
After learning about how historical scientists make inferences about
the causes of events in the remote past, I first applied these methods of rea-
soning to the question of the origin of the information necessary to pro-
duce the first living cell. My book Signature in the Cell used the method
of multiple competing hypotheses (or inference to the best explanation)
to evaluate the “causal adequacy” of proposed explanations for the ulti-
mate origin of biological information.
I showed that chemical evolution-
ary models (whether based upon chance, physical-chemical necessity, or
the combination of the two) failed to identify a cause capable of producing
the digital information in DNA and RNA. Yet we do know of a cause that
has demonstrated the causal power to produce digital code. That cause is
intelligent agency. Since intelligent agency is the only cause known to be
capable of generating information (at least starting from nonliving chemi-
cals), intelligent design offers the best explanation for the origin of the
information necessary to produce the first organism.
The case for intelligent design in Signature was carefully limited as a
challenge to chemical evolution. Many evolutionary biologists acknowl-
edge that chemical evolutionary theory has failed to account for the origin
of the first life. Many cite its inability to account for the origin of biological
information as one of the main reasons for that failure. Moreover, because
they do not think that natural selection could have played a significant
role in evolution until after the first self-replicating organisms had arisen,

360
DARWIN’S DOUBT
most evolutionary biologists also think that explaining the origin of infor-
mation in a prebiotic context is much more difficult than explaining the
origin of new information in already living organisms.
For this reason, in Signature
I did not try to argue that intelligent
design might help explain the origin of the information necessary to ac-
count for the origin of new animals from simpler preexisting forms of
life. That would have required a separate demonstration showing the in-
adequacy of natural selection and mutation as a mechanism for generat-
ing new genetic information in already living organisms. This book—in
Chapters 9-14—has provided that demonstration. These chapters show
how neo-Darwinism fails to explain the origin of genetic information—at
least, in amounts necessary to build a new protein fold. Chapters 15 and 16
showed, in addition, that the other main materialistic evolutionary theo-
ries also fail to account for the information necessary to build new forms
of animal life. These theories presuppose, rather than explain, the origin
of the information necessary for structural innovation in the history of
life. And since the Cambrian explosion of animal life is an explosion of
information and structural innovation, that raises a question. Is it possible
that this increase of biological information not only represents evidence
against materialistic theories of biological evolution, but also positive evi-
dence/or intelligent design?
A Cause Now in Operation
It does. Intelligent agents, due to their rationality and consciousness, have
demonstrated the power to produce specified or functional information
in the form of linear sequence-specific arrangements of characters. Digi-
tal and alphabetic forms of information routinely arise from intelligent
agents. A computer user who traces the information on a screen back to its
source invariably comes to a mind—a software engineer or programmer.
The information in a book or inscription ultimately derives from a writer
or scribe. Our experience-based knowledge of information flow confirms
that systems with large amounts of specified or functional information
invariably originate from an intelligent source. The generation of func-
tional information is “habitually associated with conscious activity.”
13 Our
uniform experience confirms this obvious truth.
It also suggests, therefore, that intelligent design meets the key “causal

Signs ofDesign in the Cambrian Explosion
361
adequacy” requirement of a good historical scientific explanation. Cer-
tainly, intelligence
is a “cause now in operation” capable of generating
functional or specified information in a digital form. As
I write this, my
mind is generating specified information. Intelligent agents generate in-
formation in the form of software code, ancient inscriptions, books, en-
crypted military codes, and much else. And since we know ofno “presently
acting” materialistic cause that also generates large amounts
14 of specified
information (especially in a digital or alphabetic form), only intelligent
design meets the causal adequacy requirement of a historical scientific
explanation. In other words, our uniform experience of cause and effect
shows that intelligent design is the only known cause of the origin of large
amounts of functionally specified digital information. It follows that the
great infusion of such information in the Cambrian explosion points deci-
sively to an intelligent cause.
Intelligent design stands alone as an explanation
for the origin of
genetic information for another reason: purposive agents have just those
necessary powers that natural selection lacks as a condition of its causal
adequacy. We have seen that natural selection lacks the ability to gener-
ate novel information precisely because
it can only act after new func-
tional information has arisen. Natural selection can favor new proteins
and genes, but only after they perform some function (influencing re-
productive output). The job of generating new functional genes, proteins,
and systems of proteins therefore falls entirely to random mutations. Yet
without functional criteria to guide a search through the space of possible
sequences, random variation is probabilistically doomed. What is needed
is not just a source of variation (i.e., the freedom to search a space of possi-
bilities) or a mode of selection that can operate after the fact of a successful
search, but instead a means of selection that (a) operates during a search
before success—and that (b) is guided by information about or knowledge
of a functional target.
Demonstration of this requirement has come from an unlikely quar-
ter: genetic algorithms. Genetic algorithms are programs that allegedly
simulate the creative power of mutation and selection. Richard Dawkins,
Bernd-Olaf Kiippers, and others have developed computer programs
that putatively simulate the production of genetic information by muta-
tion and natural selection .
15 Yet these programs succeed only by the
il-
licit expedient of providing the computer with a “target sequence” and

362
DARWIN'S DOUBT
then treating proximity to future function
(i.e., the target sequence), not
actual present function, as a selection criterion. As mathematician David
Berlinski shows, genetic algorithms need something akin to a “forward-
looking memory” in order to succeed .
16 Yet such foresighted selection has
no analogue in nature. In biology, where differential survival depends
upon maintaining function, natural selection cannot occur before new
functional sequences arise. Natural selection lacks foresight; the process,
as evolutionary theorists Rodin and Szathmary note, works strictly ‘“in
the present moment,’ right here and right now
.
.
. lacking the foresight of
potential future advantages .” 17
What
natural
selection
lacks,
intelligent
design—purposive,
goal-
directed selection—provides. Rational agents can arrange both matter and
symbols with distant goals in mind. They also routinely solve problems
of combinatorial inflation. In using language, the human mind routinely
“finds” or generates highly improbable linguistic sequences to convey an
intended or preconceived idea. In the process of thought, functional objec-
tives precede and constrain the selection of words, sounds, and symbols
to generate functional (and meaningful) sequences from a vast ensemble
of meaningless alternative possible combinations of sound or symbol .
18
Similarly, the construction of complex technological objects and products,
such as bridges, circuit boards, engines, and software, results from the
application of goal-directed constraints .
19 Indeed, in all functionally inte-
grated complex systems where the cause is known by experience or obser-
vation, designing engineers or other intelligent agents applied constraints
on the possible arrangements of matter to limit possibilities in order to
produce improbable forms, sequences, or structures. Rational agents have
repeatedly demonstrated the capacity to constrain possible outcomes to
actualize improbable but initially unrealized future functions. Repeated
experience affirms that intelligent agents (minds) uniquely possess such
causal powers.
Analysis of the problem of the origin of biological information, there-
fore, exposes a deficiency in the causal powers of natural selection and
other undirected evolutionary mechanisms
that corresponds precisely
to powers that agents are uniquely known to possess. Intelligent agents
have foresight. Such agents can determine or select functional goals before
they are physically instantiated. They can devise or select material means
to accomplish those ends from among an array of possibilities. They can

Signs ofDesign in the Cambrian Explosion
363
then actualize those goals in accord with a preconceived design plan or set
of functional requirements. Rational agents can constrain combinatorial
space with distant information-rich outcomes in mind. The causal powers
that natural selection lacks—by definition—are associated with the
at-
tributes of consciousness and rationality—with purposive intelligence.
Thus, by invoking intelligent design to overcome a vast combinatorial
search problem and to explain the origin of new specified information,
contemporary advocates of intelligent design are not positing an arbitrary
explanatory element unmotivated by a consideration of the evidence. In-
stead, we posit an entity possessing precisely the causal powers that a key
feature of the Cambrian explosion—the explosive increase in specified
information—requires as a condition of its production and explanation.
INTEGRATED CIRCUITRY: DEVELOPMENTAL
GENE REGULATORY NETWORKS
Keep in mind, too, that animal forms have more than just genetic infor-
mation. They also need tightly integrated networks of genes, proteins,
and other molecules to regulate their development—in other words,
they require developmental gene regulatory networks, the dGRNs that
Eric Davidson has so meticulously mapped over the course of his career.
Developing animals face two main challenges. First, they must produce
different types of proteins and cells and, second, they must get those pro-
teins and cells to the right place at the right time .
20 Davidson has shown
that embryos accomplish this task by relying on networks of regulatory
DNA-binding proteins (called transcription factors) and their physical
targets. These physical targets are typically sections of DNA (genes) that
produce other proteins or RNA molecules, which in turn regulate the
expression of still other genes.
These interdependent networks of genes and gene products present a
striking appearance of design. Davidson’s graphical depictions of these
dGRNs look for all the world like wiring diagrams in an electrical en-
gineering blueprint or a schematic of an integrated circuit, an uncanny
resemblance Davidson himself has often noted. “What emerges, from
the analysis of animal dGRNs,” he muses, “is almost astounding: a net-
work of logic interactions programmed
into the DNA sequence
that
amounts essentially to a hardwired biological computational device .” 21

364
DARWIN’S DOUBT
These molecules collectively form a tightly integrated network of signal-
ing molecules that function as an integrated circuit. Integrated circuits
in electronics are systems of individually functional components such as
transistors, resistors, and capacitors that are connected together to per-
form an overarching function. Likewise, the functional components of
dGRNs—the DNA-binding proteins, their DNA target sequences, and the
other molecules that the binding proteins and target molecules produce
and regulate—also form an integrated circuit, one that contributes to ac-
complishing the overall function of producing an adult animal form.
Yet, as explained in Chapter 13, Davidson himself has made clear that
the tight functional constraints under which these systems of molecules
(the dGRNs) operate preclude their gradual alteration by the mutation and
selection mechanism. For this reason, neo-Darwinism has failed to explain
the origin of these systems of molecules and their functional integration.
Like advocates of evolutionary developmental biology, Davidson himself
favors a model of evolutionary change that envisions mutations generating
large-scale developmental effects, thus perhaps bypassing nonfunctional
intermediate circuits or systems. Nevertheless, neither proponents of “evo-
devo,” nor proponents of other recently proposed materialistic theories of
evolution, have identified a mutational mechanism capable of generating
a dGRN or anything even remotely resembling a complex integrated cir-
cuit. Yet, in our experience, complex integrated circuits—and the func-
tional integration of parts in complex systems generally—are known to
be produced by intelligent agents— specifically, by engineers. Moreover,
intelligence is the only known cause of such effects. Since developing ani-
mals employ a form of integrated circuitry, and certainly one manifesting
a tightly and functionally integrated system of parts and subsystems, and
since intelligence is the only known cause of these features, the necessary
presence of these features in developing Cambrian animals would seem to
indicate that intelligent agency played a role in their origin (see Fig. 13.4).
THE HIERARCHICAL ORGANIZATION OF
GENETIC AND EPIGENETIC INFORMATION
In addition to the information stored in individual genes and the
in-
formation present in the integrated networks of genes and proteins in
dGRNs, animal forms exemplify hierarchical arrangements or layers of

Signs ofDesign in the Cambrian Explosion
365
information-rich molecules, systems, and structures. For example, de-
veloping embryos require epigenetic information in the form of specifi-
cally arranged (a) membrane targets and patterns, (b) cytoskeletal arrays,
(c) ion channels, and (d) sugar molecules on the exterior of cells (the sugar
code). As noted in Chapter 13, much of this epigenetic information resides
in the structure of the maternal egg and is inherited directly from mem-
brane to membrane independently of DNA.
This three-dimensional
structural information
interacts with other
information-rich molecules and systems of molecules to ensure the proper
development of an animal. In particular, epigenetic information influ-
ences the proper positioning and thus the function of regulatory proteins
(including DNA-binding proteins), messenger RNAs, and various mem-
brane components. Epigenetic information also influences the function of
developmental gene regulatory networks. Thus, information at a higher
structural level in the maternal egg helps to determine the function of
both whole networks of genes and proteins (dGRNs) and individual mol-
ecules (gene products) at a lower level within a developing animal. Genetic
information is necessary to specify the arrangement of amino acids in a
protein or bases in an RNA molecule. Similarly, dGRNs are necessary to
specify the location and/or function of many gene products. And, in a
similar way, epigenetic information
is necessary to specify the location
and determine the function of lower-level molecules and systems of mol-
ecules, including the dGRNs themselves.
Furthermore, the
role of epigenetic information provides
just one
of many examples
of the
hierarchical
arrangement
(or
layering)
of
information-rich
structures,
systems, and
molecules
within
animals.
Indeed, at every level of the biological hierarchy, organisms require speci-
fied and highly improbable (information-rich) arrangements of lower-level
constituents in order to maintain their form and function. Genes require
specified arrangements of nucleotide bases; proteins require specified ar-
rangements of amino acids; cell structures and cell types require speci-
fied arrangements of proteins or systems of proteins; tissues and organs
require specific arrangements of specific cell types; and body plans require
specialized arrangements of tissues and organs. Animal forms contain
information-rich lower-level components (such as proteins and genes).
But they also contain information-rich arrangements of those compo-
nents (such as the arrangement of genes and gene products in dGRNs or

366
DARWIN’S DOUBT
proteins in cytoskeletal arrays or membrane targets). Finally, animals also
exhibit information-rich arrangements of higher-level systems and struc-
tures (such as the arrangements of specific cell types, tissues, and organs
that form specific body plans).
The highly specified, tightly integrated, hierarchical arrangements of
molecular components and systems within animal body plans also sug-
gest intelligent design. This
is, again, because of our experience with the
features and systems that intelligent agents—and only intelligent agents
produce. Indeed, based on our experience, we know that intelligent human
agents have the capacity to generate complex and functionally specified
arrangements of matter—that is, to generate specified complexity or spec-
ified information. Further, human agents often design information-rich
hierarchies, in which both individual modules and the arrangement of
those modules exhibit complexity and specificity—specified information
as defined in Chapter 8. Individual transistors, resistors, and capacitors
in an integrated circuit exhibit considerable complexity and specificity of
design. Yet at a higher level of organization, the specific arrangement and
connection of these components within an integrated circuit requires ad-
ditional information and reflects further design (see Fig. 14.2).
Conscious and rational agents have, as part of their powers ofpurposive
intelligence, the capacity to design information-rich parts and to organize
those parts into functional information-rich systems and hierarchies. We
know of no other causal entity or process that has this capacity. Clearly, we
have good reason to doubt that mutation and selection, self- organizational
processes, or any of the other undirected processes cited by other mate-
rialistic evolutionary theories, can do so. Thus, based upon our present
experience of the causal powers of various entities and a careful assess-
ment of the efficacy of various evolutionary mechanisms, we can infer in-
telligent design as the best explanation for the origin of the hierarchically
organized layers of information needed to build the animal forms that
arose in the Cambrian period.
LOCATION, LOCATION, LOCATION
There is another remarkable aspect of the hierarchical organization of in-
formation in animal forms. Many of the same genes and proteins play very
different roles, depending upon the larger organismal and informational

Signs ofDesign in the Cambrian Explosion
367
context in which they find themselves in different animal groups. 22 For ex-
ample, the same gene (Pax-6 or its homolog, called eyeless), helps to regulate
the development of the eyes of fruit flies (arthropods) and those of squid
and mice (cephalopods and vertebrates, respectively). Yet arthropod eyes
exemplify a completely different structure from vertebrate or cephalopod
eyes. The fruit fly possesses a compound eye with hundreds of separate
lenses (ommatidia), whereas both mice and squid employ a camera-type
eye with a single lens and retinal surface. In addition, although the eyes
of squid and mice resemble each other optically (single lens, large inter-
nal chamber, single retinal surface), they focus differently. They undergo
completely different patterns of development and utilize different internal
structures and nerve connections to the visual centers of the brain. Yet
the Pax-
gene and
its homologs play a key role in regulating the con-
struction of all three of these different adult sensory structures. Moreover,
evolutionary and developmental biologists have found that this pattern of
“same genes, different anatomy” recurs throughout the bilaterian phyla,
for features as fundamental as appendages, segmentation, the gut, heart,
and sense organs (see Fig. 18. 2).
23
This pattern
contradicts the expectations of textbook evolutionary
theory. Neo-Darwinism predicts that disparate adult structures should
be produced by different genes. This prediction follows directly from the
neo-Darwinian assumption that all evolutionary (including anatomical)
transformations begin with mutations
in DNA sequences—mutations
that are fixed in populations by natural selection, genetic drift, or other
evolutionary processes. The arrow of causality flows one way from genes
A. MAMKAL
JL IhliBCT
C, CB'?UALo'?Ot>
FIGURE 18.2
The same genes can be used in different animals to produce dramatically different struc-
tures, contradicting neo-Darwinian expectations.

368
DARWIN’S DOUBT
(DNA) to development to adult anatomy. Thus, if biologists observe dif-
ferent animal forms, it follows that they should expect that different genes
will specify those forms during animal development. Given the profound
differences between the fruit-fly compound eye and the vertebrate camera
eye, neo-Darwinian theory would not predict that the “same” genes would
be involved in building different eyes in arthropods and chordates. 24
Many leading evolutionary theorists have acknowledged this problem.
University of Wisconsin evo-devo researcher Sean B. Carroll has noted
that the neo-Darwinian prediction of similar genes producing similar
structures is “entirely incorrect.” 25 Stephen Jay Gould described the discov-
ery of the polyfunctional role of similar genes as “explicitly unexpected”
and “discombobulat[ing] the confident expectations of orthodox theory.” 26
The theory of intelligent design suggests a solution to the problem—
a
solution familiar to us from the construction and operation of our own
artifacts. Figure 18.3 shows a general-purpose switching transistor. These
electronic components can be used to help build many electronic systems,
from a computer to a microwave oven to a radio. And the exact functional
role that the transistor will play will be governed by the system in which it
finds itself. (One must, of course, make allowances for the particular spec-
ifications of the transistor itself; a transistor cannot function as a battery).
Nowhere, however,
is this feature of polyfunctional modularity more
intuitively clear than in our use of natural languages, such as English.
To illustrate this, my colleague Paul Nelson once “disassembled” the last
forty-four words of Abraham Lincoln s Gettysburg Address (see Fig. 18.4)
FIGURE 18.3
A general purpose transistor—an
example of a component that can
be used to perform different func-
tions in different designed systems.
Courtesy iStockphoto.com/S230.

Signs ofDesign in the Cambrian Explosion
369
.'•riyVZi
,»
COMTEXT- t>E?£ KJ t>£ NTT FU WCTLOV
5^?
PAXG 6(EKJE
(Awt> dpENE
LEXICON)
y-j#-'"
Sjt-
LEXICow
a
last
and
measure
birth
nation
by
new
cause
not
dead
of
devotion
people
died
perish
earth
resolve
1
for
shall
freedom
take
from
that
full
the
gave
these
God
they
government
this
have
to
here
under
highly
vain
honored
we
in
which
increased
y
7
46ttY<13U^4 Abbtttf
.
.
. .that from these honored dead we take
increased devotion to that cause for
which they gave the last full measure of
devotion—that we here highly resolve that
these dead shall not have died in vain
that this nation, under God, shall have a
new birth of freedom—and that govern-
ment of the people, by the people, for the
people, shall not perish from the earth.
u -y-y
"
)
"
7
Am AMAfe04l<T'< KAmIFE^to
.
. .by this we highly resolve that we shall
have freedom from this nation—that
devotion to government shall perish.
These people honored the last government
in vain. The dead increased. Measure that
full devotion! The earth under here gave
these people birth, not a dead God. And
for that they shall take their new cause,
for which people have not died.
iS
^77
.
FIGURE 18.4
This comparison of Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address and an “Anarchist’s Manifesto” shows
how the same modular elements (words) can perform different functions depending
on their surrounding context, just as many genes do in biological systems. Courtesy
Paul Nelson.

370
DARWIN’S DOUBT
into a lexicon. Using the same words, at roughly the same frequency, he
then wrote an “Anarchist’s Manifesto,” with a meaning diametrically op-
posite to that of Lincoln’s. What had changed were not the words—that
is, the lower-level modules. Rather, the higher-level context, or the system
as a whole, differed. Lincoln wrote with one meaning in mind, the anar-
chist with another—and that made all the difference to the functions of
the elements, or modules, within the respective systems. Nelson calls this
context dependency “the organismal context principle” when it occurs in
biology and he likens it to the context dependence of words in language or
low-level parts in a technological system.
He also argues that intelligent design provides a compelling explana-
tion for the presence of polyfunctional modularity in living systems. Why?
Not only is the polyfunctionality of genetic modules unexpected in a neo-
Darwinian view, it is a common feature of intelligently designed systems.
As Nelson and Jonathan Wells note, “An intelligent cause may reuse or
redeploy the same module in different systems, without there necessarily
being any material or physical connection between those systems .”27 They
also observe that intelligent agents “can generate identical patterns inde-
pendently” and put them to different uses in different systems of parts:
If we suppose that an intelligent designer constructed organisms using a
common set ofpolyfunctional genetic modules—just as human design-
ers, for instance, may employ the same transistor or capacitor in a car
radio or a computer,
.
.
. then we can explain why we find the “same”
genes expressed in the development of what are very different organ-
isms.
.
.
. A particular gene, employedfor its DNA-binding properties,
finds its functional role in a higher-level system whose ultimate origin
was intelligently caused . 26
Wells and Nelson go on to explain that “the overall system, not the gene
itself” determines the ultimate functional significance of the lower level
modules, just as
it does in all human technological or communication
systems. Certainly, both the computer software and computer hardware
(integrated circuits) exhibit this feature—what might be called “context-
dependent,
polyfunctional
modularity.”
Similarly,
in
information-rich
texts—such as the Gettysburg Address or the Anarchist’s Manifesto-
humans convey
different meanings with
the same
low-level modules

Signs ofDesign in the Cambrian Explosion
371
(words) depending upon
their surrounding context. Experience shows
that when we know how systems possessing this feature arose, invariably
they arose by intelligent design.
FEATURES OF THE PRE-CAMBRIAN-
CAMBRIAN FOSSIL RECORD
Intelligent design not only helps to explain many key features of the Cam-
brian animals themselves; it also helps to explain many otherwise anoma-
lous features of the Cambrian fossil record.
An Inverted Cone: Disparity Preceding Diversity
As discussed in Chapter 2, the fossil record shows a “top-down” pattern
in which phyla-level morphological disparity appears first followed only
later by species-level diversity. Major innovations in body plans precede
minor variations on basic designs.
29 This “inverted cone of diversity” also
suggests intelligent design.
Neo-Darwinism seeks to explain the origin of novel body plans by
starting with simpler body plans and gradually assembling animals with
more complex body plans via the gradual accumulation of small succes-
sive material variations. Thus, neo-Darwinism employs a “bottom-up”
mode of causation. With a bottom-up approach, small-scale diversifica-
tion should eventually produce
large-scale morphological
disparity
differences in body plan. The “bottom-up” metaphor thus describes a kind
of self-assembly in which the gradual production of the material parts
eventually generates the organization of the whole. This suggests in turn
that the parts stand causally prior to the organization of the whole. As I
have argued, however, this approach encounters both paleontological and
biological difficulties: the fossil record leaves no evidence of such a process
and the morphological innovation and transformations that
it requires
are, in any case, biologically implausible.
But if a bottom-up approach fails, perhaps a “top-down” approach will
succeed. “Top-down” causation begins with a basic architecture, blueprint,
or plan and then proceeds to assemble parts in accord with
it. The blue-
print stands causally prior to the assembly and arrangement of the parts.

372
DARWIN’S DOUBT
But where could such a blueprint come from? One possibility involves a
mental mode of causation. Intelligent agents often conceive of plans prior
to their material instantiation—that is, the preconceived design of a blue-
print often precedes the assembly of parts in accord with
it. An observer
touring the parts section of a General Motors plant will see no direct evi-
dence of a prior blueprint for GM’s new models, but will perceive the basic
design plan immediately upon observing the finished product at the end
of the assembly line. Designed systems, whether automobiles, airplanes,
or computers, invariably manifest a design plan that preceded their first
material instantiation. But the parts do not generate the whole. Rather, an
idea of the whole directed the assembly of the parts.
This form of causation can certainly explain the pattern in the fossil
record. As new species appear in the Cambrian, they manifest completely
novel, morphologically disparate, and functionally integrated body plans.
Thus, although the fossil record does not directly establish the existence
of a prior mental plan or blueprint, such a plan could certainly explain, or
be inferred from, the top-down pattern of fossil evidence. In other words,
if the body plans of the Cambrian animals did arise as the result of a “top-
down” mode of causation involving a preconceived design plan, we would
expect, based on our experience of complex designed systems, to find pre-
cisely the pattern of evidence that we do see in the fossil record. Further,
materialistic “bottom-up” models of causation fail to explain this same
pattern of fossil evidence. Thus, intelligent design provides a better ex-
planation of this feature of the Cambrian fossil record than do competing
materialistic evolutionary theories.
The design hypothesis can also explain why smaller-scale diversity
arises after, not before, morphological disparity in the fossil record or, to
put
it more poetically, why the basic themes of life precede the variation
on those themes. Complex designed systems have a fundamental func-
tional integrity that makes their alteration difficult. For this reason, we
should not expect gradual mechanisms of change to produce new body
plans or alter them fundamentally after they have arisen. We might, how-
ever, expect to find variations on these basic themes within the functional
limits established by a basic architecture or body plan. Fundamentally new
forms of organization require design from scratch. For example, airplanes
did not arise gradually or incrementally from automobiles. Nevertheless,

Signs ofDesign in the Cambrian Explosion
373
new innovations often accrete to novel designs provided the fundamental
organizational plan is not altered.
Since the invention of the automobile, all cars have included the same
basic structural and functional elements, including a motor, at least three
(and usually four) wheels, a carriage with seats for passengers, a structure
connecting the wheels to the carriage, a steering wheel and column (or
analogous mechanism), and a means of translating energy generated by
the motor to the wheels. These are minimal requirements, of course; many
cars have used axles to connect the wheels, though some have not and a
“stretch” limousine may need additional axles or wheels. Indeed, though
many new variations on the original model have arisen after the inven-
tion of the basic automobile design, all exemplify this same basic design.
Interestingly, we also observe this pattern in the fossil record. The major
animal body plans appear first instantiated by a single (or very few) species
or genera. Then, later, many other varieties arise with many new features,
yet all still exhibit the same basic body plan.
Experience shows a hierarchical relationship between functionally
necessary and functionally optional features in designed systems. An
automobile cannot function without a motor or steering mechanism;
it
can function with or without twin I-beam suspension, antilock brakes,
or “stereo surround sound.” This distinction between functionally nec-
essary and optional features suggests the possibility of future innovation
and variation on basic design plans, even as
it imposes limits on the
extent to which the basic designs themselves can be altered. The logic
of designed systems, therefore, suggests precisely the kind of top-down
pattern that we see in both the history of our own technological innova-
tion 30 and in the history of life following the Cambrian explosion (com-
pare Figs. 18.5a and 18.5b). On the other hand, competing materialistic
evolutionary theories would not lead us to expect the fossil record to
manifest such a “top-down” pattern, but the opposite.
Sudden Appearance and Missing Ancestors
The theory of intelligent design can also help to account for the abrupt
appearance of complex anatomical structures and animal body plans in
the fossil record. Intelligent agents sometimes produce material entities
through a series of gradual modifications
(as when a sculptor shapes a

374
DARWIN’S DOUBT
top-Doi/Om "M^pAPiry
<>*^T/s/ss'y,
Di<RARrry
kingdom: AnimAL
p^ytUM
CLA#
order
FAKILY
drCWCK
tovEi^rry
minor Difference^
Doh)n
A.
'tofc'S_
ife
--^
f <;><
top-PoiOm " Disparity ~g£Fc>P£ EavgfeftTy"
Disparity
_«XTV
MODE OF
TRAN ^RoRtATIon
(train vY CAR)
TOR
t>lV£R^ITY
minor difference^
t>OU)N
U-
hot>BL
or cak
FIGURE 18.5
F*£wre I8.5a (top): A top-down pattern of appearance found in the history of animal life.
Figure 18.5b (bottom): A top-down pattern of appearance in human technology.

Signs ofDesign in the Cambrian Explosion
375
sculpture over time). Nevertheless, intelligent agents also have the ca-
pacity to introduce complex technological systems into the world fully
formed. Often such systems bear no resemblance to earlier technologi-
cal systems—their invention occurs without a material connection to ear-
lier, more rudimentary technologies. When the radio was first invented,
it was unlike anything that had come before, even other forms of com-
munication technology. For this reason, although intelligent agents need
not generate novel structures abruptly, they can do so. Thus, invoking the
activity of a mind provides a causally adequate explanation for the pattern
of abrupt appearance in the Cambrian fossil record.
On the other hand, strictly materialistic theories of evolution neces-
sarily envision a “bottom-up” mode of causation in which material parts
or materially instantiated intermediate forms of organization necessarily
precede the emergence of fully developed body plans. For this reason, the
sudden appearance of novel animal forms contradicts the expectations of
most materialistic evolutionary theories. Neo-Darwinism, in particular,
would not expect the sudden appearance of animal forms. As Darwin
himself insisted:
“Natura non facit saltum” (“Nature takes no
leaps”).
Yet intelligent agents can act suddenly or discretely in accord with their
powers of rational choice or volition, even if they do not always do so.
Thus, the sudden appearance of the Cambrian animals does suggest, at
least, the possibility of a volitional act of a conscious agent—a designer.
Intelligent design likewise helps explain the absence of ancestral pre-
cursors. If body plans arose as the result of an intelligent agent actualizing
an immaterial plan or idea, then an extensive series of material precursors
to the first animals need not exist in the fossil record, anymore than such
a series is always present in the history of technology. The radio did not
evolve gradually from the telegraph. Mental plans or concepts need not
leave a material trace. Thus, intelligent design can account for the dearth
of material precursors in the Precambrian strata, whereas “bottom-up”
materialistic evolutionary theories cannot, especially given the failure of
the artifact hypothesis discussed earlier.
Stasis (or Persistent Morphological Isolation)
Finally, intelligent design also explains the observed stasis in the fossil
record. As advocates of punctuated equilibrium established, Cambrian

376
DARWIN’S DOUBT
mm
"jr
yy
,„y
y
/y>^
_
?S^<I^TEMT MomJoLoftKlAL ISOLATION
of animal fo*m<
ruyiuh
yy>
y-y
-*
—
y* >
T
yy'y
y?
yyr
dTEwoPJloPA
04©RDATA
'>•'
,,:••
'
;-’C
"
1
/-
Dr^pAfeiry in FofeK
LAMU'MAn
' yyy
S'.:
f yy*.
P£fe<I<T£NT MOfcWoLodrlLAL ISOLATION
OF T£L4+NOLod|I£AL ^TEM^
oy
y
PttyLUM
"AUTOMOTJILIA"
pwluh
"AIPPLAk/IA"
FIGURE 18.6
Comparison of persistent morphological isolation in two animal forms that first arose in
the Cambrian period, and similar morphological isolation in two technological systems.

Signs ofDesign in the Cambrian Explosion
377
species tend to persist unchanged in their basic forms over time. Animal
body plans that define the higher taxa, including classes and phyla, also
remain especially stable in their basic architectural designs, showing “no
directional change”
31 over geological history after their first appearance in
the Cambrian. As a result, the morphological disparity between distinct
animal body plans remains unbridged. Moreover, as noted in Chapter 13,
developmental mechanisms constrain the degree to which organisms may
vary without deleterious consequences.
The persistent morphological disparity and isolation of animal body
plans
is completely unexpected by neo-Darwinian, and all other gradu-
alist, evolutionary theories, at least. Given such models of evolutionary
change, theorists should expect the fossil record to exhibit forms of life
that grade imperceptibly from one to another. Indeed, absent either a
compelling version of the artifact hypothesis or an adequate mechanism
of punctuated large-scale evolutionary change, “morphospace” should be
mostly filled in. The fossil record should not display mostly morphologi-
cally disparate or separate forms of animal life.
Yet, if living systems did arise as the result of intelligent design, then
such morphological isolation, and such persistent isolation over time, is
just what we should expect to see—precisely because that is what we do
see in the history of other intelligently designed systems (see Fig.
18.6).
Indeed, experience suggests that designed objects have a functional in-
tegrity that makes the modification of some of their essential parts and
their basic organization and architecture difficult or impossible. Though
the Model-A has been replaced by everything from the Yugo to the Honda
Accord, the automobile “body plan” with several essential functional and/
or structural elements has remained unchanged from its first appearance
in the late nineteenth century.
Further, despite the design of many innovative variations, automo-
biles have retained their “morphological distance” or structural disparity
from other functionally distinct technological devices. Indeed, persistent
morphological disparity in biological systems (manifested as stasis in the
fossil record) has a direct parallel in our own technology. In biology, what
we recognize as different organismal body plans are systems that differ
fundamentally from each other in their overall organization. A crab and
a starfish, for example, may exhibit some similarities in their low-level
protein parts, but they differ fundamentally in their digestive and nervous

378
DARWIN’S DOUBT
systems and in the overall organization of their organs and body parts. In
the same way, automobiles and airplanes may have many similar parts,
even as they differ in the composition of their distinguishing parts and
overall organization.
The presence of such structural disparities and isolation among com-
plex functionally integrated systems represents another distinctive feature
of the intelligently designed systems known from our own world of tech-
nology. For example, the basic technology of the CD-ROM (as employed
in audio systems and computers) did not “evolve” incrementally from ear-
lier technologies, such as magnetic media (e.g., digital tape or disc storage)
or analog systems such as the once standard long-playing (LP) record.
Indeed,
it could not. In an analog recording, information
is stored as
three-dimensional microscopic grooves in a vinyl surface and is detected
mechanically by a diamond stylus. This means of storing and detecting
information differs fundamentally, as a system, from the digitally encoded
pits storing data in the silvered surface of a CD-ROM, where information
is detected optically, not mechanically, by a laser beam. The CD-ROM had
to be engineered from scratch and, as a result, displays a striking struc-
tural difference and isolation from other technological devices, even those
that perform roughly the same function. Although minor new features
may “accrete” to its basic design architecture, a deep and impassable func-
tional gulf separates the CD-ROM as a system from other technological
systems. As biologist Michael Denton expresses
it, “What is true of sen-
tences and watches is also true of computer programs, airplane engines,
and in fact of all known complex systems. Almost invariably, function
is restricted to unique and fantastically improbable combinations of sub-
systems, tiny islands of meaning lost in an infinite sea of incoherence .”32
In fact, such structural disparity or morphological isolation constitutes
a diagnostic of designed systems—that is, a feature of systems for which
only one kind of cause—an intelligent cause—is known.
ACTS OF MIND
Studies in the history and philosophy of science have shown that to ex-
plain an event or a set of facts, scientists must typically cite a cause capable
of producing that event or those facts. When scientists do not have the

Signs ofDesign in the Cambrian Explosion
379
luxury of directly observing the cause of a particular event or effect under
study, as historical scientists typically do not, they must cite a cause that
is otherwise known to produce the facts in question. That means historical
scientists must show that the event or facts of interest must in some way
represent the expected outcome of a particular cause having acted in the
past—that the event or facts should have occurred “as a matter of course.”
To many scientists, especially those steeped in the materialistic as-
sumptions of contemporary scientific culture, the idea of intelligent design
seems inherently implausible or even incoherent. Science to them involves
not only observing and studying material entities and phenomena, but
explaining them by reference to materialistic entities. For these scientists,
it makes no sense even to consider the idea of intelligent design, with its
explicit reference to the activity of a designing mind.
Yet it turns out that both the Cambrian animal forms themselves and
their pattern of appearance in the fossil record exhibit precisely those fea-
tures that we should expect to see if an intelligent cause had acted to pro-
duce them (see Fig.
18.7). Further, the Cambrian animal forms and their
manner of appearance contradict what we should expect to find in the
fossil record and in the animal world given a purely materialistic “bot-
tom-up” process of evolution. Thus, despite its potential for disturbing the
materialistic sensibilities of many scientists,
it
is hard logically to avoid
the conclusion that the design hypothesis actually provides a better, more
casually adequate explanation for key features of the Cambrian event.
When Darwin first acknowledged the problem of the Cambrian fossil
record, and the small but persistent doubt
it raised for him about his
theory, his nemesis Louis Agassiz not only rejected his theory of evolution,
but also affirmed an alternative understanding of the nature and origin of
animal life. To Agassiz, the pattern of animal classification and the fossil
record reinforced the idea that living forms exemplified basic “types”
ideas that had originated in the mind of a designing intelligence. Thus, he
would argue that the Cambrian fossils tell of “acts of mind.” 33
As noted in Chapter
1, Darwin himself acknowledged both Agassiz’s
immense paleontological knowledge and the validity of the problems
that Agassiz raised. Even so, his affirmation of a positive alternative to
Darwin’s theory in the form a design hypothesis might well have seemed
premature in the 1860s and certainly did reflect something of the preju-

380
DARWIN’S DOUBT
I
5S?TTNjiCTTVE^i^ZLMAi<?^F^E^r^
I
'\zv . T'T-nAr'r^ ^-i
1 .?
1
,?s
t-'. ..*
'
.„-jV *"''
•me inlpea^e
AnU
LA/E^XMdr
OF FUNCTIONAL
INFORMATION
"to?- 1>oi0n"
PATTERN OF
APPEARAnLE
ANATOMICAL
isolation
m^cpete
APPEARANCE
OF NEU)
INNOVATION
vrwyL L&b)6r-
}>lay necctet>
PoLy£AP5ofuAT£
PLASTIC doKPACT
t>l{C
FIGURE 18.7
Both the Cambrian animal forms and their pattern of appearance in the fossil record
exhibit distinctive features or hallmarks of designed systems—features that we should
expect to see if an intelligence acted to produce them.

Signs ofDesign in the Cambrian Explosion
381
dice of the times. But more than a century and a half later, after many
failed attempts to discover—and explain away—the missing fossil ances-
tors, and after discoveries in molecular and developmental biology have
revolutionized our understanding of the complexity of animal life, con-
tinuing to regard the Cambrian explosion as merely a niggling problem
for established theory—a lone question mark or negative clue—now seems
not so much cautious, as simply unresponsive to the evidence.
The animal forms that arose in the Cambrian not only did so without
any clear material antecedent; they came on the scene complete with digital
code, dynamically expressed integrated circuitry, and multi-layered, hierar-
chically organized information storage and processing systems.
In light of these marvels and the persistent pattern of the fossil record,
should we now continue, as Darwin did (who knew nothing of them), to
regard the Cambrian explosion as just an anomaly? Or may we now con-
sider the features of the Cambrian event as evidence supporting another
view of the origin of animal life? If so, is there now a compelling logic for
considering a different kind of causal history?
In fact, there
is. The features of the Cambrian event point decisively
in another direction—not to some as-yet-undiscovered materialistic pro-
cess that merely mimics the powers of a designing mind, but instead to
an actual intelligent cause. When we encounter objects that manifest any
of the key features present in the Cambrian animals, or events that ex-
hibit the patterns present in the Cambrian fossil record, and we know how
these features and patterns arose, invariably we find that intelligent design
played a causal role in their origin. Thus, when we encounter these same
features in the Cambrian event, we may infer—based upon established
cause-and-effect
relationships and uniformitarian
principles—that the
same kind of cause operated in the history of life. In other words, intel-
ligent design constitutes the best, most causally adequate explanation for
the origin of information and circuitry necessary to build the Cambrian
animals. It also provides the best explanation for the top-down, explosive,
and discontinuous pattern of appearance of the Cambrian animals in the
fossil record.

THE RULES OF SCIENCE
The argument of the previous chapter raises an obvious question. If intel-
ligent design provides such a clear and satisfying resolution to the mystery
of the Cambrian explosion, why have so many brilliant scientists missed it?
While reflecting on this question, I came across a short story by G. K.
Chesterton called “The Invisible Man,” which may cast some light on
it. In “The Invisible Man,” Chesterton tells the story of someone who is
murdered in an apartment with only one entrance, an entrance watched
by four honest men. These men insist that during their watch no one en-
tered or left the building. A brilliant French detective investigates the case,
along with his friend, a dusty little Catholic priest. They query the guards,
each of whom insists that no one entered or exited the building. But then
the unimpressive looking priest, Father Brown,
all but forgotten in the
background, pipes up to ask, “Has nobody been up and down stairs, then,
since the snow began to fall?”
“Certainly not,” they assure him.
“Then
I wonder what that is?” Father Brown asks, gazing at the white
snow on the outside entrance stairs. Everyone turns to find a “stringy pat-
tern of grey footprints” there.
“God!” one of them cries, “An invisible man!”
After asking a few more questions, Father Brown quickly unravels the
mystery. “When those four quite honest men said that no man had gone
into the Mansions, they did not really mean that no man had gone into
them,” Father Brown explains to his detective friend. “They meant no man

The Rules ofScience
383
whom they could suspect of being your man. A man did go into the house
and did come out of it, but they never noticed him.”
“An invisible man?”
“A mentally invisible man,” the priest explains.
What does a mentally invisible man look like?
“He is dressed rather handsomely in red, blue and gold,” the priest ex-
plains, “and in this striking, and even showy, costume he entered Himy-
laya Mansions [the name of the apartment complex] under eight human
eyes; he killed
.
.
. [the murder victim] in cold blood, and came down into
the street again carrying the dead body.
.
.
. You have not noticed such a
man as this.”
At that moment, he reaches out and puts his hand on “an ordinary pass-
ing postman,” one who had almost slipped by them unnoticed.
“Nobody ever notices postmen somehow,” Father Brown muses. “Yet
they have passions like other men, and even carry large bags where a small
corpse can be stowed quite easily.” 1
The passing postman, of course,
is the murderer. He walked up and
down the stairs under the four men’s noses, but because of their mental
blinders telling them whom to consider and whom to ignore, they over-
looked the postman entirely.
The theme
is a favorite of detective-story authors: the obvious pos-
sibility missed by the experts, because their assumptions prevent them
from considering what might otherwise seem to be an obvious possibility.
Could something like that be at work in the investigation of the Cambrian
explosion? Could evolutionary biologists and paleontologists be wearing a
set of mental blinders that keeps them from considering a possible expla-
nation of the Cambrian mystery?
Odd as it may seem, that is exactly what has been going on in the in-
vestigation of the Cambrian explosion. In this case, however, those wear-
ing the mental blinders have elevated an unwillingness to consider certain
explanations to a principle of scientific method. That principle
is called
“methodological naturalism” or “methodological materialism.” Method-
ological naturalism asserts that to qualify as scientific, a theory must ex-
plain phenomena and events in nature—even events such as the origin
of the universe and life or phenomena such as human consciousness—by
reference to strictly material causes. According to this principle, scientists

384
DARWIN’S DOUBT
may not invoke the activity of a mind or, as one philosopher of science
puts it, any “creative intelligence.”
2
To see how adherence to this principle has prevented scientists from
considering a possibly true (even “causally adequate”) explanation
for
the Cambrian explosion, lets revisit the case reported in Chapter
11 of
Richard Sternberg (see Fig.
19.1), the evolutionary biologist at the Smith-
sonian’s National Museum of Natural History. After Sternberg published
my article arguing for intelligent design as the best explanation of the
Cambrian information explosion in the technical journal Proceedings of
the Biological Society of Washington,
3, he suffered professional retribution
at the hands of Smithsonian administrators.
4 The Biological Society of
Washington, the governing body that oversees the publication of the jour-
nal that Sternberg then edited, also issued a public statement repudiating
his decision.
5 Its statement did not, however, cite any factual errors in the
article or seek to rebut it. Further, the president of the society, Smithson-
ian zoologist Roy McDiarmid, wrote Sternberg privately and told him that
he (McDiarmid) had reviewed the file containing the peer-review reports
and had found everything to be in order.6
What, then, had Sternberg done to deserve public rebuke?
Sternberg published
a paper that violated
a presumed
rule of sci-
ence: methodological naturalism. Without saying
it in so many words,
the Biological Society made crystal clear that this was the crucial issue.
When
it distanced itself from Sternberg and the review essay,
it did not
invite a scientific refutation of the article, as if the problem had been a
FIGURE 19.1
Richard Sternberg.
Courtesy Laszlo Bencze.

The Rules ofScience
385
misrepresentation or misinterpretation of the evidence.
Instead,
it
at-
tempted to settle the issue by releasing a policy statement. As a writer in
the Wall Street Journal reported at the time, “The Biological Society of
Washington released a vaguely ecclesiastical statement regretting its as-
sociation with the article. It did not address its arguments but denied its
orthodoxy, citing a resolution of the American Association for the Ad-
vancement of Science that defined ID [the theory of intelligent design] as,
by its very nature, unscientific.” 7
The Biological Society of Washington “deemed the paper inappropri-
ate for the pages of the Proceedings .” 8 The Society attempted to justify this
claim, first, on thin procedural grounds, claiming that a paper about the
origin of animal body plans represented a “departure” from its more typi-
cal concern with issues of animal classification. Second, and more tell-
ingly,
it cited the policy statement of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science (AAAS) “calling upon its members to understand
the nature of science” and to recognize “the inappropriateness of ‘intelli-
gent design theory’ as subject matter for science education.”
9 Setting aside
the obvious point that my paper was written not as a curricular manifesto
but as an evidence-based scientific argument, the AAAS statement
af-
firmed an implicitly and strictly materialistic understanding of the nature
of science. It did so to disqualify intelligent design from consideration
not only in science education, but in science itself.
The Sternberg case—like numerous others in which the academic free-
dom of scientists advocating intelligent design has been abridged
10—goes
a long way to answering the question of why so many otherwise brilliant
and knowledgeable scientists have overlooked such a seemingly obvious
possible answer to the Cambrian conundrum. As in Chesterton’s story
about the invisible postman, they have accepted a self-imposed limitation
on the hypotheses they are willing to consider. These scientists think they
are doing their duty to science. Yet if researchers refuse as a matter of
principle to consider the design hypothesis, they will obviously miss any
evidence that happens to support it. And the cultural pressure within biol-
ogy to avoid considering the intelligent design hypothesis has long been
nontrivial. Francis Crick, for example, famously admonished biologists to
“constantly keep in mind that what they see was not designed, but rather
evolved.”
11 In 1997, in an article in the New York Review ofBooks, Harvard

386
DARWIN’S DOUBT
geneticist Richard Lewontin made
explicit a similar commitment to a
strictly materialistic explanation—whatever the evidence might seem to
indicate. As he explained in a now often quoted passage:
We take the side ofscience in spite of the patent absurdity ofsome of
its constructs, in spite of its failure to fulfill many of its extravagant
promises ofhealth and life, in spite of the tolerance of the scientific
communityfor unsubstantiated just-so stories, because we have a prior
commitment, a commitment to materialism. It is not that the methods
and institutions ofscience somehow compel us to accept a material
explanation of the phenomenal world, but, on the contrary, that we
areforced by our a priori adherence to material causes to create an
apparatus of investigation and a set of concepts that produce material
explanations, no matter how counter-intuitive, no matter how mystify-
ing to the uninitiated. Moreover, that materialism is absolute, for we
cannot allow a Divine Foot in the door.
12
The commitment to methodological naturalism
that Lewontin
de-
scribes, as well as the behavior of scientists in cases such as Sternberg’s,
leave no doubt that many in science simply will not consider the design
hypothesis as an explanation for the Cambrian explosion or any other
event in the history of life, whatever the evidence. To do so would be to
violate the “rules of science” as they understand them.
BUT IS IT SCIENCE?
But are these scientists right? Perhaps science must limit itself to purely
naturalistic or materialistic explanations. If so, are there perhaps good rea-
sons for excluding the design hypothesis from consideration as a scientific
hypothesis? Is methodological naturalism the correct policy for science?
Though scientists routinely assert methodological naturalism as a sci-
entific norm, that principle and its exclusion of the design hypothesis have
proven difficult to justify. To claim that a specific theory does not qualify
as scientific requires a definition of science or a set of definitional criteria
by which to make that kind of a judgment. Some philosophers and scien-
tists have asserted that for a scientific theory to qualify as scientific, it must
meet various criteria of testability, falsifiability, observability, repeatabil-
ity, and the like. Philosophers of science call these “demarcation criteria,”

The Rules ofScience
387
because some scientists purport to use them to define or “demarcate”
science and to distinguish it from pseudo science or from other forms of
inquiry such as history, religion, or metaphysics.
13
THE GENERAL PROBLEM OF DEMARCATION
The demarcation question has long been a vexing one. Historically, scien-
tists and philosophers of science have thought that science could be distin-
guished by its especially rigorous method of study. But attempts to define
science by reference to a distinctive method have proven problematic be-
cause different branches and types of science use different methods.
For example, some scientific disciplines distinguish and classify natu-
ral entities, while others attempt to formulate overarching laws that apply
to
all
entities. Some disciplines perform laboratory experiments under
controlled and replicable conditions, while others attempt to reconstruct
or explain singular events in the past, often based on field studies of evi-
dence or clues rather than laboratory experiments. Some disciplines gen-
erate mathematical descriptions of natural phenomena without positing
mechanisms to explain them. Others look for mechanisms or explain law-
like regularities by reference to underlying mechanisms. Some scientific
disciplines make predictions to test theories, while others test competing
theories by comparing their explanatory power. Some disciplines use both
these methods, while some conjectures (particularly in theoretical phys-
ics) may not be testable at all. And on it goes.
An episode in the history of science illustrates the problem. During
the seventeenth century, a group of scientists called the “mechanical phi-
losophers” insisted, based largely on advances in early chemistry, that
scientific theories must provide mechanistic explanations. Such explana-
tions had to involve one material entity pushing or pulling another. Yet in
physics, Isaac Newton (1642-1727) formulated an important theory that
provided no mechanistic explanation. His theory of universal gravitation
described mathematically, but did not explain in a mechanistic way, the
gravitational attraction between planetary bodies—bodies separated from
each other by miles of empty space with no means of mechanical interac-
tion with each other whatsoever.
14 Despite provocation from the German
mathematician Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646-1716), who defended
the mechanistic ideal, Newton expressly refused to give any explanation,

388
DARWIN’S DOUBT
mechanistic or otherwise, for the mysterious “action at a distance” that his
theory described .
15
Did that make Newton’s theory unscientific?
Strictly speaking, the
answer depends upon which definition of science someone chooses to
apply. Today one would be hard-pressed to find anybody who denies that
Newton’s famous theory qualified as scientific. Yet we could easily find
scientists still willing to say scientific theories must provide mechanisms
as well as others who would deny as much.
And that is the problem. If scientists and philosophers of science do not
have an agreed-upon definition of science, how can they settle questions
about which theories do and do not qualify as scientific? If scientists lack
such a definition, it’s difficult to argue that any particular theory is unsci-
entific by definition. For this reason, philosophers of science, the scholars
who study the nature and definition of science, now almost universally
reject the use of demarcation arguments to decide the validity of theories
or settle competition between them .
16 They increasingly regard demarca-
tion as an essentially semantic question and nothing more.
Is theory X
scientific or not? Answer: that depends upon which definition of science is
used to decide the question.
Moreover, as the philosopher of science Larry Laudan has shown in a
seminal article, “The Demise of the Demarcation Problem,” attempts to
apply demarcation criteria to decide the scientific status of specific theo-
ries have invariably generated irreconcilable contradictions .
17 The vortex
theory of gravity that Newton’s theory replaced envisioned planets swirl-
ing around the sun pushed by a substance called ether.
18 It did provide a
mechanistic explanation for gravitational attraction. It failed, however, to
explain the evidence and was judged by Newton and physicists following
him to be manifestly false. Nevertheless, because it proposed a mechanis-
tic cause of gravitation, it qualified as “scientific”— at least given the con-
ception of science favored by Leibniz and the mechanical philosophers .
19
Conversely, Newton’s theory failed to
as
scientific by their
definition,
though it much more accurately fit the evidence.
Such contradictions have long beset the whole enterprise of demarca-
tion. Theories that scientists have rejected as false because of their inability
to explain or describe the evidence often meet the very criteria or method-
ological features (testability, falsifiability, repeatability, observability, etc.)

The Rules ofScience
389
that allegedly characterize true science. On the other hand, many highly
esteemed or successful theories often lack allegedly necessary features of
genuine science.
Thus, philosophers of science generally think it much more important
to assess whether a theory is true, or whether the evidence supports
it,
than whether it should or should not be classified as “science.” The ques-
tion of whether a theory is “scientific”
is really a red herring. What we
really want to know is whether a theory is true or false, supported by the
evidence or not, worthy of our belief or not. And we cannot decide those
questions by applying a set of abstract criteria that purport to tell in ad-
vance what all good scientific theories must look like . 20
DEFINE AND DISMISS: DEMARCATION
ARGUMENTS AGAINST INTELLIGENT DESIGN
The rejection of demarcation arguments among philosophers of science has
not stopped critics of intelligent design from attempting to settle debates
about biological origins by the expedient of formulating such arguments
against intelligent design. Some use these arguments to justify methodolog-
ical naturalism (which has the same effect).
Advocates of methodological naturalism have argued that the theory of
intelligent design is inherently unscientific for some, or all, of the following
reasons: (a) is not testable ,
21 (b) is not falsifiable ,
22 (c) does not make predic-
tions ,
23 (d) does not describe repeatable phenomena,
(e) does not explain
by reference to natural law,
24 (f) does not cite a mechanism ,
25
(g) does not
make tentative claims ,
26 and (h) has no problem-solving capability. 27 They
have also claimed that it is not science because it (i) refers to an unobservable
entity. 28 These critics also assume, imply, or assert that materialistic evolu-
tionary theories do meet such criteria of proper scientific method.
Readers may wish to consult Signature in the Cell for a more detailed
response to these specific arguments. There
I show that many of these
claims are simply false (e.g., contrary to the claims of its critics intelligent
design
is testable;
it does make predictions;
it does formulate
its claims
tentatively; and
it does have scientific problem-solving capability). But
I
also show that when the claims of those making demarcation arguments
are true—when intelligent design doesn’t meet a specific criterion—that

390
DARWIN’S DOUBT
fact does not provide good reason for excluding intelligent design from
consideration as a scientific theory. Why? Because the materialistic evo-
lutionary theories that intelligent design challenges, theories widely re-
garded by convention as “scientific,'"fail to meet the very same demarcation
standard. In other words, there is no defensible definition of science, and
no specific demarcation criterion, that justifies both excluding intelligent
design from science and including competing materialistic evolutionary
theories. Instead, attempts to use demarcation criteria specifically to dis-
qualify intelligent design as a scientific theory have repeatedly failed to
differentiate the scientific status of intelligent design from that of compet-
ing theories. Depending upon which criteria are used to adjudicate their
scientific status, and provided metaphysically neutral criteria are selected
to make such assessments, intelligent design and materialistic origins the-
ories invariably prove equally scientific or unscientific.
For example, some critics of intelligent design have argued that
it
fails to qualify as a scientific theory because
it makes reference to an
unseen or unobservable entity, namely, a designing mind in the remote
past. Yet many accepted theories—theories assumed to be scientific
postulate unobservable events and entities. Physicists postulate forces,
fields, and quarks; biochemists infer submicroscopic structures; psy-
chologists discuss their patients’ mental states. Evolutionary biologists
themselves infer unobserved past mutations and invoke the existence of
extinct organisms and transitional forms for which no fossils remain.
Such things, like the actions of an intelligent designer, are inferred from
observable evidence in the present, because of the explanatory power
they may offer.
If the demarcation criterion of observability
is applied rigidly, then
both intelligent design and materialistic theories of evolution fail to qual-
ify as scientific. If the standard is applied more liberally (or realistically)
acknowledging the way in which historical scientific theories often infer
unobservable past events, causes, or entities—then both theories qualify
as scientific.
And so it goes with other such criteria as well. There is no specific (non-
question-begging) demarcation criterion that succeeds in disqualifying
the theory of intelligent design from consideration as a scientific theory
without also doing the same to its materialistic rivals.

The Rules ofScience
391
REASONS TO REGARD INTELLIGENT
DESIGN AS A SCIENTIFIC THEORY
Demarcation
arguments
fail
to
justify
excluding
intelligent
design
from science. But
it turns out that there are some good—if convention-
dependent—reasons to regard intelligent design as a scientific theory.
For example, many scientists and philosophers of science regard test-
ability as an important feature of scientific inquiry. And intelligent design
is testable in three specific and interrelated ways. First, like other scien-
tific theories concerned with explaining events in the remote past, intel-
ligent design is testable by comparing its explanatory power with that of
competing theories. Second, intelligent design, like other historical sci-
entific theories,
is tested against our knowledge of the cause-and-etfect
structure of the world. As we have discussed, historical scientific theories
provide adequate explanations when they cite causes that are known to
produce the effects in question or “causes now in operation .”29 Because of
this, the plausibility of historical scientific theories, including intelligent
design, can be tested by reference to independent knowledge of cause-and-
effect relationships. Third, although historical scientific theories typically
cannot be tested under controlled laboratory conditions, they do some-
times generate predictions that enable scientists to compare their merit
to that of other theories.
Intelligent design has generated a number of
specific empirical predictions that distinguish
it from competing evolu-
tionary theories and that serve to confirm the design hypothesis over its
competitors. (In Signature in the Cell,
I described ten such predictions that
the theory of intelligent design has generated).
30
There is another compelling, if convention-dependent, reason to regard
intelligent design as a scientific theory. The inference to intelligent design
is based upon the same method of historical
scientific reasoning and
the same uniformitarian principles that Charles Darwin used in On the
Origin ofSpecies. The similarity in logical structure runs quite deep. Both
the argument for intelligent design and the Darwinian argument for de-
scent with modification were formulated as abductive inferences to the
best explanation. Both theories address characteristically historical ques-
tions; both employ typically historical forms of explanation and testing;
and both have metaphysical implications. Insofar as we regard Darwin’s

392
DARWIN’S DOUBT
theory as a scientific theory,
it seems appropriate to designate the theory
of intelligent design as a scientific theory as well.
Indeed, neo-Darwinism and the theory of intelligent design are not
two different kinds of inquiry, as some
critics have asserted. They are
two different answers—formulated using a similar logic and method of
reasoning—to the same question: “What caused biological forms and the
appearance of design to arise in the history of life?” It stands to reason that
ifwe regard one theory, neo-Darwinism or intelligent design, as scientific,
we should regard the other as the same. Of course, whether either theory
is true or not is another matter. An idea may be scientific and incorrect.
In the history of science, many theories have proven to be so. The vortex
theory of gravity, to which I referred earlier, would be one of nearly count-
less illustrations.
For readers who would like to consider more detailed responses to argu-
ments about whether intelligent design qualifies as “science,” I recommend
Chapters 18 and 19 in Signature in the Cell.
31 In Signature, I respond in detail
to other philosophical objections to the case for intelligent design. These
include challenges such as:
(a) intelligent design
is religion, not science, 32
(b) the case for intelligent design is based on flawed analogical reasoning, (c)
intelligent design is a fallacious argument from ignorance, sometimes called
the “God of the Gaps” objection, (d) intelligent design is a science stopper,
(e) the famous zinger, popularized by Richard Dawkins, that asks “Who de-
signed the designer?”33 and many others.
A NEW OBJECTION TO THE SCIENTIFIC
STATUS OF INTELLIGENT DESIGN
Since the publication of Signature in the Cell, Robert Asher, a University
of Cambridge paleontologist, has offered another reason to contest my
characterization of intelligent design as a scientific theory. In his book,
Evolution and Belief, he challenges my claim to have used the uniformitar-
ian method of Lyell and Darwin to develop the case for intelligent design.
Since his objection is new, published only in 2012 by Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, it deserves discussion.
Asher characterizes my thinking as follows: “The processes we know
and observe today are relevant to explaining the phenomena of the past,
and we know that particularly complicated things we see today have an

The Rules ofScience
393
intelligence behind them .”34 He notes that
I argue certain complex tech-
nologies, such as computer software, have “only one source: human inge-
nuity.” 35 It follows, according to Asher’s paraphrase ofmy argument that “a
similarly complex device we observe in the geological past must also have
arisen as a result of something like human ingenuity, i.e., intelligence .”36
Asher doesn’t seem to understand the importance of specified informa-
tion, as opposed to “complicated things,” as a key indicator of design. That
aside, he does claim to recognize the role of uniformitarian principles of
reasoning in my argument for intelligent design. In spite of this, Asher
elsewhere disputes that I employ the uniformitarian method of reasoning.
Why? According to Asher, the inference to intelligent design is actually
“anti-uniformitarian” because
it doesn’t provide a “mechanism.” As he
puts it, “by attempting to replace a causal mechanism (natural selection)
with an attribution of agency (design), ID advocates such as Meyer are
decidedly anti-uniformitarian. What process of today could possibly lead
to his understanding of the past?”37
The answer to Asher’s question seems pretty obvious. The answer
is:
intelligence. Conscious activity. The deliberate choice of a rational agent.
Indeed, we have abundant experience in the present of intelligent agents
generating specified information. Our experience of the causal powers of
intelligent agents—of “conscious activity” as “a cause now in operation”
provides a basis for making inferences about the best explanation of the
origin of biological information in the past. In other words, our experi-
ence of the cause-and-effect structure of the world—specifically the cause
known to produce large amounts of specified information in the present
provides a basis for understanding what likely caused large increases in
specified information in living systems in the past. It is precisely my reli-
ance on such experience that makes possible an understanding of the type
of causes at work in the history of life. It also makes my argument decid-
edly uniformitarian—not “anti-uniformitarian”—in character.
Asher confuses the uniformitarian imperative in historical scientific
explanations (the need to cite a presently known or adequate cause) with
a demand for citing a material cause, or mechanism. The theory of in-
telligent design does cite a cause, and indeed one known to produce the
effects in question, but
it does not necessarily cite a mechanistic or ma-
terialistic cause. Proponents of intelligent design may conceive of intel-
ligence as a strictly materialistic phenomenon, something reducible to the

394
DARWIN’S DOUBT
neurochemistry of a brain, but they may also conceive of it as part of a
mental reality that is irreducible to brain chemistry or any other physical
process. They may also understand and define intelligence by reference to
their own introspective experience of rational consciousness and take no
particular position on the mind-brain question.
Asher assumes that intelligent design denies a materialistic or “physi-
calist” account of the mind (as I personally do, in fact) and rejects
it as
unscientific on that basis. But he offers no noncircular reason for making
that judgment. He cannot say that the principle of methodological natu-
ralism requires that all genuinely scientific theories invoke only mecha-
nistic causes, because the principle of methodological naturalism itself
needs justification. And asserting that “all genuinely scientific theories
must provide mechanisms” is just to restate the principle of methodolog-
ical naturalism in different words. Indeed, to say that all scientific expla-
nations must provide a mechanism is equivalent to saying that they must
cite materialistic causes—precisely what the principle of methodologi-
cal naturalism asserts. Asher seems to be assuming without justification
that all scientifically acceptable causes are mechanistic or materialistic.
His argument thus assumes a key point at issue, which is whether there
are independent—that is, metaphysically neutral—reasons for requiring
historical scientific theories to cite materialistic causes in their explana-
tions as opposed to explanations that invoke possibly immaterial entities
such as creative intelligence, mind, mental action, agency, or intelligent
design.
In any case, he confuses the logical requirement of citing a vera causa,
a true or known cause, with an arbitrary requirement to cite only materi-
alistic causes. He confuses uniformitarianism with methodological natu-
ralism . 38 He then critiques my design argument for rejecting the former,
though
it only rejects the latter. In so doing, he imposes an additional
requirement on explanations of past events that leads him to mistake my
argument as anti-uniformitarian and to miss the evidence for intelligent
design. His implicit commitment to methodological naturalism makes the
evidence for intelligent design—“the postman,” as
it were—mentally in-
visible to him.
Nevertheless, the concern that he raises about the theory of intelligent
design not citing a mechanism still troubles people. In fact,
I frequently
get questions about this issue. People will ask something like this: “I can

The Rules of Science
395
see your point about digital code providing evidence for intelligent design,
but how exactly did the designing intelligence generate that information
or arrange matter to form cells or animals?” Or: “How did the intelligent
designer that you infer impress its ideas on matter to form animals?” As
Asher puts it, “How could a biological phenomenon, even if designed, be
simply willed into existence without an actual mechanism?” 39
To help clear things up, several points need to be considered. First, the
theory of intelligent design does not provide a mechanistic account of the
origin of biological information or form, nor does
it attempt to. Instead,
it offers an alternative causal explanation involving a mental, rather than
a necessarily or exclusively material, cause for the origin of that reality. It
attributes the origin of information in living organisms to thought, to the
rational activity of a mind, not a strictly material process or mechanism.
That does not make
it deficient as a materialistic or mechanistic explana-
tion.
It makes
it an alternative to that kind of explanation. Advocates of
intelligent design do not propose intelligent causes because they cannot
think of a possible mechanistic explanation for the origin of form or infor-
mation. They propose intelligent design because they think it provides a
better, more causally adequate explanation for these realities. Given what
we know from experience about the origin of information, materialistic
explanations are the deficient ones.
There is a different context in which someone might want to ask about a
mechanism. He or she may wish to know by what means the information,
once originated, is transmitted to the world of matter. In our experience,
intelligent agents, after generating information, often use material means
to transmit that information. A teacher may write on a chalkboard with
a piece of chalk or an ancient scribe may have chiseled an inscription in
a piece of rock with a metal implement. Often, those who want to know
about the mechanism of intelligent design are not necessarily challenging
the idea that information ultimately originates in thought. They want to
know how, or by what material means, the intelligent agent responsible for
the information in living systems transmitted that information to a mate-
rial entity such as a strand of DNA. To use a term from philosophy, they
want to know about “the efficient cause” at work.
The answer is: We simply don’t know. We don’t have enough evidence
or information about what happened,
in the Cambrian explosion or
other events in the history of life, to answer questions about what exactly

396
DARWIN’S DOUBT
happened, even though we can establish from the clues left behind that an
intelligent designer played a causal role in the origin of living forms.
An illustration from archaeology helps explain how this can be so (see
Fig.
19.2). Years ago explorers of a remote island in the southwestern Pa-
cific Ocean discovered a group of enormous stone figures. The figures dis-
played the distinctive shape of human faces. These figures left no doubt as
to their ultimate origin in thought. Nevertheless, archeologists still don’t
know the exact means by which they were carved or erected. The ancient
head carvers might have used metallic hammers, rock chisels, or lasers for
that matter. Though archaeologists lack the evidence to decide between
various hypotheses about how the figures were constructed, they can still
definitely infer that intelligent agents made them. In the same way, we can
infer that an intelligence played a causal role in the origin of the Cam-
brian animals, even if we cannot decide what material means, if any, the
designing intelligence used to transmit the information, or shape matter,
or impart its design ideas to living form. Although the theory of intelligent
design infers that an intelligent cause played a role in shaping life’s history,
FIGURE 19.2
Group of carvings of giant heads, called “Moais,” on Easter Island. Courtesy iStockphoto/
Think-stock.

The Rules ofScience
397
it does not say how the intelligent cause affected matter. Nor does it have
to do so.
There
is a logical reason we cannot without further information de-
termine the mechanism or means by which the intelligent agent respon-
sible for life transmitted its design to matter. We can infer an intelligent
cause from certain features of the physical world, because intelligence is
known to be a necessary cause, the only known cause, of those features.
That allows us to infer intelligence retrospectively as a cause by observ-
ing its distinctive effects. Nevertheless, we cannot establish a unique sce-
nario describing how the intelligent agent responsible for life arranged or
impressed its ideas on matter, because there are many different possible
means by which an idea in the mind of an intelligent agent could be trans-
mitted or instantiated in the physical world.
There is another even more profound reason that intelligent design
indeed, science itself—may not be able to offer a completely mechanistic
account of the instantiation of thought into matter. Robert Asher worries
about how “a biological phenomenon, even if designed,” could be “simply
willed into existence without an actual mechanism.” In Asher’s under-
standing, the uniformitarian principle asks for a precedent, a known cause
that not only generates information, but translates immaterial thought
into material reality, impressing itself on and shaping the physical world.
Asher complains that the argument for intelligent design cannot cite such
a precedent and is thus “anti-uniformitarian.”
Yet a precedent comes very readily to mind, an intimately familiar one
for us
all. At present no one has any idea how our thoughts—the deci-
sions and choices that occur in our conscious minds— affect our material
brains, nerves, and muscles, going on to instantiate our will in the mate-
rial world of objects. However, we know that is exactly what our thoughts
do. We have no mechanistic explanation for the mystery of consciousness,
nor what is called the “mind-body problem”—the enigma of how thought
affects the material state of our brains, bodies, and the world that we affect
with them. Yet there is no doubt that we can—as the result of events in
our conscious minds called decisions or choices—“will into existence”
information-rich arrangements of matter or otherwise
affect material
states in the world. Professor Asher did this when he wrote the chapter
in his book—representing his ideas impressed as words onto a material
object, a printed page—attempting to refute intelligent design.
I am doing

398
DARWIN’S DOUBT
this right now. This example, representative of countless daily experiences
in life, surely satisfies the demands of uniformitarianism.
Though neuroscience can give no mechanistic explanation for con-
sciousness or the mind-body problem, we also know that we can recognize
the product of thought, the effect of intelligent design, in
its distinctive
information-rich manifestations. Professor Asher recognized evidence of
thought when he read the text in my book; I did so when
I read his; you
are doing so right now. Thus, even though it remains entirely possible that
we may never know how minds affect matter and, therefore, that there
may always be a gap in our attempt to account for how a designing mind
affected the material out of which living systems were formed, it does not
follow that we cannot recognize evidence of the activity of mind in living
systems.
WHY IT MATTERS FOR SCIENCE
But if proponents of intelligent design admit that they do not, or perhaps
even cannot, answer the question of how the mind responsible for the
design of animal life impressed its ideas on matter, why does it matter that
we recognize the evidence for intelligent design at all? If intelligent design
just replaces one mystery with another, why not limit ourselves to materi-
alistic explanations after all, as methodological naturalism requires, and
be content with accepting the mystery we already have? Wouldn’t that be
simpler and more intellectually economical?
Perhaps. But
it puts the mystery in the wrong place. We do know of
a cause that can produce the functional information necessary to build
complex systems. But we do not know exactly how mind interfaces with
matter. If we were to ask what caused the Rosetta Stone to arise, and
then insist despite
all evidence to the contrary that a purely material
process
is capable of producing the information-rich etchings on that
stone, we would be deluding ourselves. The information etched into that
black slab of igneous rock at the British Museum provides overwhelm-
ing evidence that an intelligent agent did cause those inscriptions. Any
rule that prevents us from considering such an explanation diminishes
the rationality of science, because
it prevents scientists from consider-
ing a possibly—and in this case obviously—true explanation. And the
truth matters, not least in science. For this reason, the “rules of science”

The Rules ofScience
399
should not commit us to rejecting possibly true theories before we even
consider the evidence. But that is exactly what methodological natural-
ism does.
Moreover, adhering to methodological naturalism and refusing to con-
sider the evidence for intelligent design in life does not just affect the ex-
planations that we are willing to consider for the origins and history of life.
They also affect the questions we ask about life as
it exists, and thus the
entire biological research agenda that we pursue.
An analogy to a human artifact again shows why. If we ask exactly how
the scribe responsible for the inscriptions on the Rosetta Stone accom-
plished his or her task—with a metal chisel, a sharpened piece of obsidian,
a diamond stylus, or some other material means—we may not have enough
evidence to answer that question. Nevertheless, it will help archaeologists
to know that they are looking at an artifact of intelligence, rather than a
byproduct of strictly natural processes. This will lead them to ask other
more relevant questions about the stone, such as: “What do the inscrip-
tions mean?” “Who wrote them?” and “What do they tell us about the
surrounding cultures at the time?” In a similar way, what we think about
how animal life arose and developed will lead us to ask different questions
about living forms—questions that we might never think to ask ifwe were
assuming that they had arisen by a purely undirected mechanism such as
natural selection.
Intelligent agents and natural selection do their work very differently.
The mutation and selection mechanism is a blind, trial-and-error process,
one that must maintain or optimize functional advantage through a series
of incremental steps. Given Darwinian assumptions, we would not expect
to see structures or systems in living organisms that required foresight.
Nor would we expect to see structures that needed to be produced all at
once in large jumps rather than by a series of function-preserving incre-
mental steps. We would, however, expect to see evidence of a trial-and-
error process in the genomes of organisms.
But what happens if we open ourselves to the possibility of detecting
design in life? We know a lot about how intelligent designers do their
work.
Intelligent designers use many established design
strategies
(or
“design patterns,” as engineers would say). They also have foresight that
allows them to reach functional goals without the need to maintain func-
tion through a series of intermediate structures. They typically engineer

400
DARWIN’S DOUBT
new systems from scratch without relying on random, incremental, trial-
and-error modifications in one system to produce another.
Because these two different types of causes operate differently and often
produce different types of structures and systems, scientists should expect
living systems (and the history of life) to look differently depending upon
which type of cause produced the organisms or structures in question.
And these differing perspectives and expectations can lead scientists to
ask different research questions and make
different predictions about
what we should find in the structure of life itself.
THE ENCODE PROJECT AND AN ID PREDICTION
In 2012, a dramatic confirmation of one such prediction made by advo-
cates of intelligent design occurred in the field of genomics. Three lead-
ing science journals, Nature, Genome Research, and Genome
Biology,
published a series of groundbreaking papers reporting on the results of
a massive study of the human genome called the ENCODE project (short
for Encyclopedia of DNA Elements).40 The conclusion: at least 80 percent
of the genome performs significant biological functions, “dispatching the
widely held view that the human genome is mostly ‘junk DNA.’
”41
The discovery challenged a long held neo-Darwinian interpretation of
the genome. According to neo-Darwinism, the genome as a whole should
display evidence of the random trial-and-error process that gave rise to
new genetic information. The discovery in the 1970s that only a small
percentage of the genome contains information for building proteins was
hailed at the time as powerful confirmation of the Darwinian view of life.
The noncoding regions of the genome were assumed to be nonfunctional
detritus of the trial-and-error mutational process—the same process that
produced the functional code in the genome. As a result, these noncoding
regions were deemed “junk DNA,” including by no less a scientific lumi-
nary than Francis Crick.42
Because intelligent design asserts that an intelligent cause produced the
genome, design advocates have long predicted that most of the nonprotein-
coding sequences in the genome should perform some biological function,
even if they do not direct protein synthesis. Design theorists do not deny
that mutational processes might have degraded some previously functional
DNA, but we have predicted that the functional DNA (the signal) should

The Rules ofScience
401
dwarf the nonfunctional DNA (the noise), and not the reverse. As William
Dembski, a leading design proponent, predicted in 1998, “On an evolution-
ary view we expect a lot of useless DNA. If, on the other hand, organisms are
designed, we expect DNA, as much as possible, to exhibit function.”43
The ENCODE project and other recent research in genomics have con-
firmed this prediction. As the lead article in Nature reported, ENCODE
has “enabled us to assign biochemical functions for 80 percent of the
genome
in
particular
outside
of the
well-studied protein-coding
re-
gions.”44 Other research in genomics has shown that, overall, the non-
coding regions of the genome function much like the operating system
in a computer. Indeed, the noncoding regions of the genome direct the
timing and regulate the expression of the data modules or coding regions
of the genome, in addition to possessing myriad other functions.45 Before
ENCODE, neo-Darwinists would often ask: If the information in DNA
provides such compelling evidence for the activity of a designing intel-
ligence, why is over 90 percent of the genome composed of functionless
nonsense sequences? The latest genomics research now provides a ready
answer to this question: it isn’t.
The significance of these discoveries in genomics to the debate about
design has passed largely unnoticed in the media. But repeated attempts
to stigmatize the ENCODE researchers as aiding and abetting “intelligent
design creationists” have inadvertently highlighted what
is at stake. In
this effort, a biochemist at the University of Toronto, Laurence A. Moran,
emerged as point man. The Moran strategy centered on tarring scientists
and science journalists who publicized ENCODE and
its implications
with the brush of “Intelligent Design Creationism”—an all too familiar
conflation of intelligent design with a very different idea, the biblical lit-
eralism of young-earth creationism. When the distinguished journal Sci-
ence selected ENCODE as one of the top ten science news stories of 2012,
reminding readers that
it had detonated the notion of junk DNA by re-
vealing overwhelming functionality in the genome,46 Moran jeered, “Oh
well, I guess I’ll just have to be content to point out that many scientists are
as stupid as many Intelligent Design Creationists!”47 In the science world,
as in the media, “creationist”
is a dirty word;
it’s like calling someone a
Communist used to be in the 1950s. Such attempts to stigmatize results
that challenge a favored theory illustrate how an ideological monopoly in
science can stifle inquiry and discussion.

402
DARWIN'S DOUBT
The demise of the idea of junk DNA illustrates too, in a more positive
way, how a competing perspective can inspire research that contributes
to new discovery. Although clearly not every scientist who performed
research helping to establish the functional significance of nonprotein-
coding DNA was inspired by the theory of intelligent design, at least one
noteworthy scientist was. During the early part of the decade, before
ENCODE made the headlines, this scientist published many articles chal-
lenging the idea of junk DNA based on genomics research that he was
conducting at the National Institutes of Health. After the publication of
ENCODE in 2012, his coauthor on many of those articles, the prominent
University of Chicago geneticist James Shapiro, wrote an article in the
Huffington Post commending the scientist for his groundbreaking research
and for anticipating the ENCODE results years before. In the article, Sha-
piro acknowledged that he and his coauthor had “different evolutionary
philosophies”—his charitable way of referring to his coauthor’s growing
interest in the theory of intelligent design.
Who was that other scientist? None other than Richard Sternberg, the
evolutionary biologist who was punished for his openness to intelligent
design while serving at the Smithsonian Institution (and the National In-
stitutes of Health) in 2004. Around that time, Sternberg’s doubts about
neo-Darwinism and his growing interest in intelligent design led him to
consider the possibility that the majority of the genome could really be
functional.48 His research subsequently confirmed what was for him, an
idea inspired in part by intelligent design.
In Signature in the Cell,
I described many other discriminating pre-
dictions of the theory of intelligent design—predictions that differ from
those of competing materialistic evolutionary theories—and how those
predictions might help to guide new research in various subdisciplines
of biology, including some in medicine. These predictions may also lead
scientists to make new discoveries— discoveries that proponents of a com-
peting perspective might not have been inclined to make—or to accept.
OPEN VISTAS
By now
it should be clear why so many brilliant scientists have missed
the evidence of design in the Cambrian explosion. Scott Todd, a biologist
writing in Nature, succinctly stated the reason: “Even if all the data point

The Rules ofScience
403
to an intelligent designer, such a hypothesis is excluded from science be-
cause
it
is not naturalistic .”49 When scientists decide by fiat that intelli-
gent design lies beyond the bounds of science, their decision will prevent
them from considering this possibly or probably true explanation for the
origin of animal form. But
it will also deprive them of a new perspec-
tive that can generate new research questions and foster new avenues of
discovery. Knowing this helps solve the final mystery of this book, but it
also suggests a more productive way forward to address mysteries yet un-
solved. Scientists committed to methodological naturalism have nothing
to lose but their chains—fetters that bind them to a creaky and exhausted
nineteenth-century materialism. The future lies open before them, and us.
As we in the intelligent design research community like to say, let’s break
some rules and follow the evidence wherever it leads.

20
WHAT’S AT STAKE
In the summer of 2002,
I had the opportunity to hike up to the Burgess
Shale with a group of geologists, geophysicists, and marine biologists. Our
group also included my then eleven-year- old son and a teenage friend of
his who was interested in the Cambrian fossils and the debate about Dar-
winism and design.
When we got to the top of the mountain,
I was unprepared for the
impact the fossils would have on me.
I had seen many fossils before, of
course. But seeing these fossils—marine animals from the dawn of animal
life at the top of a mountain with their beautifully preserved appendages
and organs—rendered the idea of the “Cambrian explosion” a good deal
less theoretical for me than it had been. These complex sea creatures, now
brushed by the thin air at an elevation of 7,500 feet in the middle of the
Canadian Rockies, had apparently arisen suddenly, almost from nothing
by way of ancestral forms, in the sedimentary record. Everything about
them cried out for a story—a big story.
It set my mind and imagination
racing (see Fig. 20.1).
As wonderful as the fossils were, our trip to see them was made more
memorable by two things that happened en route—one on the way up
the mountain and one on the way down. As we were making our ascent,
crossing a large talus slope—a section of the mountain void of vegetation
and covered with only fragments of sedimentary rock— I heard my son
unexpectedly call out to me from up at the front of our group. His voice
had a trembling quality.
I looked forward to see him, normally a fear-
less kid blessed by energy without bound, standing locked in place, pale

What's at Stake
405
and wide-eyed.
I stepped around several of the other hikers on the trail
to catch up with him. It turned out he was experiencing a kind of vertigo,
though the mountain was not dangerously steep at that point (see Fig.
20.2). As he set out across the path that cut through the rocky slope, he
had made the mistake of looking down the mountain. Without trees as a
reference point and with hundreds of feet of loose rock fragments above
and beneath him, he became disoriented and frightened.
I steadied him
as we walked in step, stride for stride, with me directly behind him across
that open stretch of the mountain. Before long we were back to a place
on the trail where trees and other plants appeared, providing a steadying
presence as a point of reference. My son’s perspective quickly returned. He
relaxed and soon was smiling and leaping confidently ahead of me again.
On the way down the mountain,
I had a striking interaction with a
member of our group, who gave voice to a different kind of disorienta-
tion.
It began as a conversation between my son’s friend and our official
field guide, who had been assigned to us by the local Burgess Shale Geo-
science Foundation. Our guide was a paleontologist and did a terrific job.
FIGURE 20.1
A trilobite fossil found at the Burgess Shale. Courtesy Michael Melford/National Geo-
graphic Image Collection/Getty Images.

406
DARWIN’S DOUBT
FIGURE 20.2
Figure 20. a (left): Photograph of the author and his son Jamie at the Walcott Quarry of the
Burgess Shale in British Columbia, Canada. Figure 20.2b (right): Pausing for a moment to
reflect on the slope below the Burgess Shale outcrop.
He told many a fine story about the geological history of the surrounding
formations, about the discovery of the fossils, and of course about the evo-
lutionary history of animal
life. In fact, just before we turned the final
corner on the trail to ascend to a large collection of excellent fossils avail-
able for viewing at the top of the mountain, he slipped a statement of sup-
port for evolutionary orthodoxy into his description of the fossil site. Our
guide was clearly unaware that many of us in the group knew the fossils
we were about to see challenged the standard Darwinian story.
We hadn’t made an issue of our views, of course, but nearly all the
scientists on the hike were skeptical of neo-Darwinism. Paul Chien, the
University of San Francisco marine biologist who had worked with
J. Y.
Chen in China on the sponge embryo fossils, was on the trip, and he had
more than a passing acquaintance with Cambrian-era paleontology— as
did several of the Canadian geologists with us. Still, not wanting to intro-
duce any needless discord, we carefully avoided engaging the issue. We
just wanted to see the fossils.

What’s at Stake
407
As we descended the mountain, however, my son’s young friend asked
our guide how he squared what we had just seen with his support for
Darwinian evolution. The guide at first maintained his commitment to
the Darwinian party line. He said he thought that Darwin would feel
“vindicated” by the discovery of the Burgess fossils. This proved too much
for the precocious, intellectual teenager, who loudly blurted out, “What?!
Darwin would feel vindicated? By the sudden appearance of all those ani-
mals without any ancestors in the fossil record! Are you kidding?!”
You would have to know this endearing young man to understand how
his uninhibited outburst only charmed and amused our guide. But fortu-
nately it did. The rest of us, however, were initially mortified. This was the
discussion we were trying to avoid, knowing exactly the intense emotions
it often provokes. With scientists,
it is generally safer to discuss religion
and politics.
Nevertheless, to his credit, our guide took the challenge in stride. He
explained how the Burgess fossils demonstrated evidence of change over
time, how the rock column showed the great age of the earth, and how
the discovery of the fossils high on a mountain revealed the evolution of
the planet. Our young friend had spent too much time reading up on the
subject to let the point go at that. He brushed aside the issue of the earth’s
age, which like our guide he reckoned in billions of years, and assured the
man that he accepted evidence for change over time in the sedimentary
record. He didn’t question evolution in that sense. He questioned Darwin-
ian evolution. “Where is the evidence of gradual change?” he demanded,
as his teenage voice cracked with excitement as
it moved into the upper
register. He continued, “What mechanism could produce so many new
animals so quickly?”
An odd thing happened then. The paleontologist now leading us down
the trail suddenly ceased to act the part of “guide.” He dropped any pre-
tense of superior authority and said, “You know, I’ve wondered about that
myself.”
I thought I could hear in his voice the candid amazement of the
fourteen-year-old boy he once was.
“How do you explain it?” he asked my son’s friend.
Our young spokesman confidently piped up and asserted, “Intelligent
design, of course!”
At which point, our guide began to ask the probing questions. Soon my
son’s friend had exhausted his store of knowledge and began to look to me

408
DARWIN’S DOUBT
to join the conversation. I did so, reluctantly at first. I explained the infor-
mation argument for intelligent design and how the Cambrian explosion
contributed to
it. Our guide asked me the hard questions: How can we
detect design? Is intelligent design science? Aren’t we just arguing from
ignorance and giving up on science, or at least mainstream evolutionary
science, too soon? He also wanted to know who
I personally thought the
designer was. His challenges were tough and honest. A terrific conversa-
tion ensued.
When we reached the trailhead, he surprised me, thanking me for the
conversation—and thanking my young friend for starting
it. He then
spoke a bit more personally and revealed that he sometimes found think-
ing about biological origins disturbing. He said that as a scientist he was
committed to the evolutionary perspective. But he also found its denial of
purpose depressing. He wondered if there was some way to affirm both
science and the kind of purpose and meaning in life that religion speaks
about. As we parted ways, he said he would like to learn more about in-
telligent design. He told me he was intrigued by the perspective we were
developing.
I
felt that we had made a genuine human connection rather
than, as sometimes happens in the evolution debate, merely flinging as-
sertions at one another.
Over the years, as I’ve researched and thought about biological origins,
I have had numerous similar conversations with people of many persua-
sions and backgrounds: religious and nonreligious; scientists, engineers,
medical doctors; businessmen and -women, appliance repairmen and taxi
drivers. These conversations usually start innocently enough as the result
of someone asking me what I do for a living. Though I often euphemize my
response (“I work for a research organization”) to avoid getting trapped
in a heavy conversation on an airplane or over a broken dishwasher, often
the conversations come whether I want them or not. People are interested
in how life began and they instinctively understand that whatever theory
we adopt has larger philosophical, religious, or worldview implications.
People are usually energized by considering those larger implications and
questions. Many would like to find a way to harmonize the evidence from
science with a view of the world that addresses their deepest existential
longings as human beings, their yearning for purpose and significance.
But like our guide, many have been frustrated by the difficulty of arriving
at a coherent synthesis.

What’s at Stake
409
It’s not hard to see why. On the one hand, many people of faith have
little real interest in what science has to say about life’s origins. Indeed,
many well-meaning religious believers have adopted a view of the rela-
tionship between science and faith that rejects the testimony of science as
irrelevant or even dangerous and affirms that just reading the Bible will
give all the insight needed to understand how life came to be. Their ap-
proach does not really attempt to harmonize faith and science, since
it
takes faith in the Bible, and often a particular interpretation of the Bible,
as the only reliable source of information about life’s origin.
On the other hand, many scientists and others who think that science
has something to teach us about the big questions have started by assum-
ing the neo-Darwinian account of biological origins, despite
its many
scientific difficulties—and despite its denial of any role for purposive in-
telligence in the history of life.
In particular, two popular ideas about how Darwinism informs world-
view have come to different conclusions about the worldview it affirms— or
allows. The first view, the “New Atheism,” has been articulated by spokes-
men such as Richard Dawkins in his book The God Delusion and the late
Christopher Hitchens in God Is Not Great.
1 It purports to refute the exis-
tence of God as “a failed hypothesis,”
2 as another New Atheist book puts
it. Why? Because, according to Dawkins and others, there is no evidence
of design in nature. Indeed, Dawkins’s argument for atheism hinges upon
his claim that natural selection and random mutation can explain away all
“appearances” of design in nature. And since, he asserts, the design argu-
ment always provided the strongest argument for believing in God’s exis-
tence, belief in God, he concludes, is extremely improbable—tantamount
to “a delusion.” For the New Atheists, Darwinism makes theistic belief
both implausible and unnecessary. As Dawkins has famously put
it,
“Darwin made it possible to be an intellectually fulfilled atheist.”3
The New Atheists took the publishing world by storm in 2006 when The
God Delusion first appeared. But nothing about the “New” Atheism was
actually “new.” Instead,
it represents a popularization of a science-based
philosophy, called scientific materialism, that came into currency among
scientists and philosophers during the late nineteenth century in the wake
of the Darwinian revolution. For many scientists and scholars at the time,
a scientifically informed worldview was a materialistic worldview in which
entities such as God, free will, mind, soul, and purpose played no role.

410
DARWIN’S DOUBT
Scientific materialism, following classical Darwinism, denied evidence of
any design in nature and, therefore, any ultimate purpose to human exis-
tence. As British philosopher and mathematician Bertrand Russell put it
early in the twentieth century, “Man is the product of causes which had no
prevision of the end they were achieving” and which predestine him “to
extinction in the vast death of the solar system.”
4
An alternative and increasingly popular view is known as theistic evo-
lution. Popularized by Christian geneticist Francis Collins in his book
The Language of God (also published in 2006),
5 this perspective affirms
the existence of God and the Darwinian account of biological origins. Yet
it provides few details about how God might or might not influence the
evolutionary process, or how to reconcile seemingly contradictory claims
in the Darwinian and Judeo-Christian accounts of origins. For example,
Collins has declined to say whether he thinks God in any way directed
or guided the evolutionary process, though he affirms neo-Darwinism,
which specifically denies that natural selection is guided in any way. Dar-
winism and neo-Darwinism insist that the appearance of design in living
organisms
is an illusion because the mechanism that produces that ap-
pearance is unguided and undirected. Does God, in Collins’s view, guide
the unguided process of natural selection? He, and many other theistic
evolutionists, don’t say. This ambiguity has made an uneasy reconciliation
of science and faith possible, but
it has also
left many questions unan-
swered. In fairness, many theistic evolutionists would argue that not all
such questions can be answered, because science and faith occupy sepa-
rate, non-overlapping realms of inquiry, knowledge, and experience. But
that answer itself underscores the limits of the harmonization of science
and faith that Collins and others holding his view has achieved.
The argument of this book presents a scientific challenge to both of
these views. In the first place, the evidence and arguments we have seen
show that the scientific premise of the New Atheist argument is flawed.
The mechanism of mutation and natural selection does not have the cre-
ative power attributed to it and, thus, cannot explain all “appearances” of
design in life. The neo-Darwinian mechanism does not explain, for exam-
ple, either the new genetic or epigenetic information necessary to produce
fundamentally new animal body plans.
This book has presented four separate scientific critiques demonstrat-
ing the inadequacy of the neo-Darwinian mechanism, the mechanism

What’s at Stake
411
that Dawkins assumes can produce the appearance of design without
intelligent guidance.
It has shown that the neo-Darwinian mechanism
fails to account for the origin of genetic information because:
(1)
it has
no means of efficiently searching combinatorial sequence space for func-
tional genes and proteins and, consequently, (2) it requires unrealistically
long waiting times to generate even a single new gene or protein.
It has
also shown that the mechanism cannot produce new body plans because:
(3) early acting mutations, the only kind capable of generating large-scale
changes, are also invariably deleterious, and (4) genetic mutations cannot,
in any case, generate the epigenetic information necessary to build a body
plan. Thus, despite the commercial success of The God Delusion and its
wide cultural currency, the New Atheist philosophy lacks credibility be-
cause
it has based its understanding of the metaphysical implications of
modern science on a scientific theory that itself lacks credibility— as even
many leading evolutionary biologists now acknowledge.6
Second, this book poses a strong challenge to theistic evolutionists such
as Francis Collins for many of the same scientific reasons. Collins places
great trust in modern Darwinism as the unifying theory of biology, but
seems completely unaware of the formidable scientific problems now af-
flicting the theory—in particular, the challenges to the creative power of
the natural selection/mutation mechanism. He makes no attempt to ad-
dress or answer any of these challenges. In addition, many of his argu-
ments for universal common descent—the defense of which was his main
concern in The Language of God—are based upon the alleged presence of
nonfunctional or “junk” elements in the genomes of different organisms.
Though the theory of intelligent design, which Collins says he opposes,
does not necessarily challenge this part (common descent) of Darwinian
theory, the factual basis of his arguments has now also largely evaporated
as the result ofENCODE and other developments in genomics.
7 Thus, this
popular view of biological origins, and its conception of God’s relation-
ship to the natural world, now stands starkly at odds with the evidence.
But why attempt to reconcile traditional Christian theology with Darwin-
ian theory, as Collins tries to do, if the theory itself has begun to collapse?
The perspective of this book offers a potentially more coherent and
satisfying way of addressing the big questions, of synthesizing science
and metaphysics (or faith), than either of the currently popular views on
offer. The Cambrian explosion, like evolutionary theory itself, raises larger

412
DARWIN’S DOUBT
worldview questions precisely because
it raises questions of origins and
of design, and with them, the question that all worldviews must address:
What is the thing or the entity from which everything comes? But unlike
strict Darwinian materialism and the New Atheism built atop
it, the
theory of intelligent design affirms the reality of a designer—a mind or
personal intelligence behind life. This case for design restores to Western
thought the possibility that human life in particular may have a purpose
or significance beyond temporary material utility. It suggests the possibil-
ity that life may have been designed by an intelligent person, indeed, one
that many would identify as God.
Unlike the theistic evolution of Francis Collins, however, the theory of
intelligent design does not seek to confine the activity of such an agency
to the beginning of the universe, conveying the impression of a decidedly
remote and impersonal deistic entity. Nor does the theory of intelligent
design merely assert the existence of a creative intelligence behind life. It
identifies and detects activity of the designer of life, and does so at differ-
ent points in the history of life, including the explosive show of creativity
on display in the Cambrian event. The ability to detect design makes belief
in an intelligent designer (or a creator, or God) not only a tenet of faith, but
something to which the evidence of nature now bears witness. In short, it
brings science and faith into real harmony.
Just as importantly, perhaps, the case for design supports us in our ex-
istential confrontation with the void and the seeming meaninglessness of
physical existence—the sense of survival for survival’s sake that follows
inexorably from the materialist worldview. Richard Dawkins and other
New Atheists may find it untroubling, even amusing and certainly profit-
able, to muse over the prospect of a universe without purpose. But for the
vast majority of thoughtful people, that idea is tinged with terror. Modern
life suspends many of us, so we feel, high over a chasm of despair.
It pro-
vokes feelings of dizzying anxiety—in a word, vertigo. The evidence of a
purposeful design behind life, on the other hand, offers the prospect of
significance, wholeness, and hope.
As my son walked out across the mountain high above the Yoho Valley,
he was surrounded by many slabs of rock containing some of the very
fossils we had come to see. But as he surveyed that barren portion of land-
scape, he lost perspective on where he was and what he had come to do.
Without landmarks or steadying points of reference, he felt as if he were

What’s at Stake
413
lost in a sea of sensory impressions. Without his sense of balance, he feared
even to take a step. He called out for his father.
It occurred to me only much later how closely his experience parallels
our own as human beings trying to make sense of the world around us.
To gain a true picture of the world and our place in
it we need facts
empirical data. But we also need perspective, sometimes called wisdom,
the reference points that a coherent view ofthe world provides. Historically,
that wisdom was provided for many men and women by the traditions
of Western monotheism—by our belief in God. The theory of intelligent
design generates both excitement and loathing because, in addition to
providing a compelling explanation of the scientific facts, it holds out the
promise of help in integrating two things of supreme importance—science
and faith—that have long been seen as at odds .
8
The theory of intelligent design is not based upon religious belief, nor
does
it provide a proof for the existence of God. But
it does have faith-
affirming implications precisely because it suggests the design we observe
in the natural world is real, just as a traditional theistic view of the world
would lead us to expect. Of course, that by itself is not a reason to accept
the theory. But having accepted it for other reasons, it may be a reason to
find it important.
ilUi
.
..if

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Though I am not a biologist, but a philosopher of biology,
I have the good
fortune of overseeing an interdisciplinary scientific research
effort that
gives me a bird’s-eye view on some cutting-edge discoveries and insights
coming from some exceptional scientists. With that in mind,
I would like
to thank my colleagues at the Discovery Institute and Biologic Institute, in
particular Paul Nelson, Douglas Axe, Jonathan Wells, Michael Behe, Ann
Gauger, Richard Sternberg, Paul Chien, and Casey Luskin—whose research
has made the argument of this book possible. I would especially like to ac-
knowledge Paul Nelson for his assistance writing Chapters 6 and
13, ex-
panded versions of which we plan to publish jointly as technical articles.
In addition, Casey Luskin, Discovery research coordinator, has repeatedly
gone above and beyond the call of duty in his commitment to, and skillful
work on, this book. I’d also like to acknowledge the two anonymous biolo-
gists and two paleontologists who gave such careful attention to improving
the scientific rigor and accuracy of the manuscript during the peer-review
process. I would also like to express my thanks to Paul Chien, Marcus Ross,
and Paul Nelson for the research they did in support ofour 2003 article “The
Cambrian Explosion: Biology’s Big Bang,” which provided a scaffolding for
the argument developed here in a much expanded form.
In addition, I deeply appreciate the work of our Discovery Institute writ-
ers and editors—Jonathan Witt, David Klinghoffer, Bruce Chapman, and
Elaine Meyer—who have made this manuscript infinitely more readable.
Jonathan Witt deserves special mention for helping me to launch this proj-
ect and for his help developing story elements and ideas. I’d like to thank
my assistant Andrew McDiarmid for his diligent work on the bibliography
and managing the flow of information. And Ray Braun cannot be thanked
enough for his beautiful artwork. Finally, I’d like to express my gratitude
to the good people at Harper: Lisa Zuniga for her exceptional coordination
and skill in moving the book through the production process; Ann Moru
for her expert copyediting; and to my senior editor Roger Freet for his vision,
patience, and uncommon strategic guidance.

NOTES
PROLOGUE
1.
Quastler, The Emergence ofBiological Organization, 16.
2.
In fairness I should mention that a few of my critics did attempt to refute the book’s actual
arguments about the origin of life, and my colleagues and I addressed those in several essays
collected into a book called Signature of Controversy, ed. David Klinghoffer (Seattle: Discovery
Institute Press, 2010; http://www.discovery.0rg/f/686l).
3.
See Francisco Ayala, “On Reading the Cell’s Signature,” Biologos.org, January 7, 2010,
http://biologos.org/blog/on-reading-the-cells-signature.
4. Venema, “Seeking a Signature,” 278.
5. Dobzhansky, “Discussion of G. Schramm’s Paper,” 310.
6. De Duve, Blueprintfor a Cell, 187.
7. Gould, “Is a New and General Theory of Evolution Emerging?” 120.
8.
For examples, see such books as Kauffman, The Origins of Order; Goodwin, How the Leop-
ard Changed Its Spots; Eldredge, Reinventing Darwin; Raff, The Shape ofLife; Muller and Newman,
On the Origin of Organismal Form; Valentine, On the Origin ofPhyla; Arthur, The Origin ofAnimal
Body Plans; and Shapiro, Evolution, to name but a few.
9. Futuyma asserts, “There is absolutely no disagreement among professional biologists on
the fact that evolution has occurred
But the theory of how evolution occurs is quite another
matter, and is the subject of intense dispute” (“Evolution as Fact and Theory,” 8). Of course, to
admit that natural selection cannot explain the appearance of design is in effect to admit that it has
failed to perform the role that is claimed for it as a “designer substitute.”
10.
See Scott Gilbert, Stuart Newman, and Graham Budd, as quoted in Whitfield, “Biological
Theory”; Mazur, The Altenberg 16.
11.
See, e.g., Kauffman, 361; Raff, The Shape of Life; Miklos, “Emergence of Organizational
Complexities During Metazoan Evolution.”
12.
Gilbert et al., “Resynthesizing Evolutionary and Developmental Biology.”
13. Webster, How the Leopard Changed Its Spots, 33; Webster and Goodwin, Form and Trans-
formation, x; Gunter Theissen, “The Proper Place of Hopeful Monsters in Evolutionary Biology,”
351; Marc Kirschner and John Gerhart, The Plausibility of Life, 13; Schwartz, Sudden Origins, 3,
299-300; Erwin, “Macroevolution Is More Than Repeated Rounds of Microevolution”; Davidson,
“Evolutionary Bioscience as Regulatory Systems Biology,” 35; Koonin, “The Origin at 150,” 473-75;
Conway Morris, “Walcott, the Burgess Shale, and Rumours of a Post-Darwinian World,” R928-
R930; Carroll, “Towards a New Evolutionary Synthesis,” 27; Wagner, “What Is the Promise of
Developmental Evolution?”; Wagner and Stadler, “Quasi-independence, Homology and the Unity
of Type”; Becker and Lonnig, “Transposons: Eukaryotic,” 529-39; Lonnig and Saedler, “Chromo-
somal Rearrangements and Transposable Elements,” 402; Muller and Newman, “Origination of
Organismal Form,” 7; Kauffman, At Home in the Universe, 8; Valentine and Erwin, “Interpreting
Great Developmental Experiments,” 96; Sermonti, Why Is a Fly Not a Horse?; Lynch, The Origins
ofGenome Architecture, 369; Shapiro, Evolution, 89, 128. David J. Depew and Bruce H. Weber,
writing in the journal Biological Theory, are even more frank, “Darwinism in its current scientific
incarnation has pretty much reached the end of its rope” (89-102).
14. “Statement on Teaching Evolution by the Board of Directors of the American Association
for the Advancement of Science,” St. Louis, Missouri, February 16, 2006; www.aaas.org/news
/releases/2006/pdf/0219boardstatement.pdf (accessed October 26, 2012).
15. Dean, “Scientists Feel Miscast in Film on Life’s Origin.”
16. Eugenie Scott, quoted in Stutz, “State Board of Education Debates Evolution Curriculum”;
also requoted in Stoddard, “Evolution Gets Added Boost in Texas Schools.”
CHAPTER
i: DARWIN’S NEMESIS
1. Darwin, On the Origin of Species, 484. In other places in The Origin, Darwin hedged his
bets, referring to life “having been originally breathed into a few forms or into one.” Darwin, The
Origin of Species, 490.

416
Notes
2. Though Darwin emphasized natural selection as the “chief agent of change,” he also
emphasized “sexual selection”—the preference that sexually reproducing animals have for some
traits over others in prospective mates—as a mechanism responsible for some changes in evolving
populations.
3. Darwin, On the Origin of Species, 30.
4. Darwin, On the Origin of Species, 21.
5. Darwin, On the Origin ofSpecies, 306-7.
6.
See the University of California at Berkeley Museum of Paleontology, “Brachiopoda,”
www.ucmp.berkeley.edu/brachiopoda/brachiopodamm.html (accessed October 23, 2012).
7.
See www.geo.ucalgary.ca/~macrae/trilobite/siluria.html (accessed October 23, 2012), where
Roderick Murchison’s skillful trilobite drawings are reproduced.
8.
Agassiz, “Evolution and the Permanence of Type,” 99.
9. Ward, On Methuselah’s Trail, 29.
10. Darwin, On the Origin ofSpecies, 307. Darwin’s original quotation used the “Silurian”
rather than the “Cambrian,” because in Darwin’s time what we now label as the Cambrian period
was subsumed within the concept of the lower Silurian. In a later sixth edition of the Origin,
Darwin adopted the term “Cambrian” in place of “Silurian.” See Darwin, On the Origin of Species;
sixth edition, 286.
11.
Agassiz, Essay on Classification, 102.
12.
Agassiz, “Evolution and the Permanence of Type,” 10.
13. Murchison, Siluria, 469.
14.
Letter from Adam Sedgwick to Charles Darwin, November 24, 1859.
15. Between approximately 450 and 440 million years ago, many animal species went extinct.
Known as the Ordovician extinction, this event resulted in the disappearance of a huge number of
marine invertebrates. This was the second biggest extinction in the history of life, being super-
seded only by the great Permian extinction (about 252 million years ago). Dott and Prothero,
Evolution of the Earth, 259.
16. Mintz, Historical Geology, 146, 153-54, 124-27.
17.
Prothero, Bringing Fossils to Life: An Introduction to Paleobiology, 84-85. Dott and
Prothero, Evolution of the Earth, 376-79.
18. Dott and Prothero, Evolution of the Earth, 425-26; Li et al., “An Ancestral Turtle from the
Late Triassic of Southwestern China”; Gaffney, “The Comparative Osteology of the Triassic Turtle
Proganochelys.”
19. William Smith, 1815 Geological Map of England and Wales.
20. Radiometric dating methods estimate the age of rocks based upon measurements of the ratios
of unstable radioactive isotopes and their daughter products given known radioactive decay rates.
21. Gould, Wonderful Life, 54.
22. Darwin, On the Origin ofSpecies, 302.
23. Darwin, On the Origin ofSpecies, 311.
24. Gould, Wonderful Life, 57.
25.
Agassiz, “Evolution and the Permanence of Type,” 97.
26.
Robinson, Runner on the Mountain Tops, 215.
27.
Lurie, Louis Agassiz, vii.
28. Robinson, Runner on the Mountain Tops, foreword.
29. Quoted in Holder, Louis Agassiz, 180.
30. Dupree, Asa Gray, 227.
31. Dupree, Asa Gray, 226. Though the German idealists believed that living forms reflected
divine archetypes, they did not all oppose the idea of the transmutation of species. In Schelling’s
view, for example, each species reflected a pre-existing archetype, but emerged in time through a
gradual transition of form.
32. Dupree, Asa Gray, 260.
33.
Lurie, Louis Agassiz, 284.
34.
Lurie, Louis Agassiz, 88.
35.
Lurie, Louis Agassiz, 282.
36.
Gillespie, Charles Darwin and the Problem of Creation.
37.
Agassiz, “Evolution and the Permanence of Type,” 101.
38. Robinson, Runner on the Mountain Tops, 231-34.
39. Quoted in Lurie, Nature and the American Mind, 41.
40. Quoted in Lurie, Nature and the American Mind, 42.
41. Thanks go to my former student Jack Ross Harris and his probing, unpublished 1993
essay “Louis Agassiz: A Re-evaluation of the Nature of His Opposition to the Darwinian View of
Natural History.” His work on the subject first brought to my attention the way in which historians

Notes
417
writing after the widespread acceptance of Darwinism had attempted to minimize the scientific
basis of Agassiz’s objections to his theory.
42.
Lurie, Louis Agassiz, 244.
43.
Lurie, Louis Agassiz, 246.
44. Quoted in Lurie, Louis Agassiz, 373.
45.
Gillespie, Charles Darwin and the Problem of Creation, 51.
46.
Agassiz, “Evolution and the Permanence of Type,” 92-101.
47.
Gray, Darwiniana, 127.
48.
See the parallel lines on the sides of the hills on either side of the valley in this beautiful
picture: www.swisseduc.ch/glaciers/earth_icy_planet/icons-15/16.jpg (last accessed Oct. 23rd,
2012). www.uh.edu/engines/epi857.htm (last accessed Oct. 23rd, 2012). See also Tyndall, “The
Parallel Roads of Glen Roy.”
49. Darwin, Autobiography, 84. Also, Gertrude Himmelfarb notes that Darwin took more
than twenty years to concede his mistake. In his autobiography, Darwin labeled it “one long gigan-
tic blunder from beginning to end
Because no other explanation was possible under our then
state of knowledge, I argued in favour of sea-action; and my error has been a good lesson to me
never to trust in science to the principle of exclusion.” See Himmelfarb ’s discussion in Darwin and
the Darwinian Revolution, 107.
50.
See Oosthoek, “The Parallel Roads of Glen Roy and Forestry.”
51. Darwin, On the Origin ofSpecies, 307.
52. Darwin, On the Origin ofSpecies, 308.
53.
Agassiz, “Evolution and the Permanence of Type,” 97. That Agassiz’s objection was first
and foremost empirically driven can be seen from his comments elsewhere as well. For instance,
in “Researches on the Fossil Fishes,” he writes, “More than fifteen hundred species of fossil fishes,
which I have learned to know, tell me that species do not pass insensibly one into another, but
that they appear and disappear unexpectedly, without direct relations with their precursors; for I
think no one will seriously pretend that the numerous types of Cycloids and Ctenoids, almost all
of which are contemporaneous with one another, have descended from the Placoids and Ganoids.
As well might one affirm that the Mammalia, and man with them, have descended directly from
fishes.” Quoted in Agassiz, Louis Agassiz and Correspondence, 244-45.
CHAPTER 2: THE BURGESS BESTIARY
1. Gould, Wonderful Life, 71. A slightly different version of this story is found in Charles
Schuchert, “Charles Doolittle Walcott,” 124. See also Schuchert, “Charles Doolittle Walcott
Paleontologist— 1850-1927,” 455-58.
2. Gould, Wonderful Life, 71.
3. Gould, Wonderful Life, 71-75.
4. A distant relationship between Marrella and chelicerates is currently the favored hypo-
thesis. See Garcia-Bellido, D. C., and Collins, D. H., “A New Study of Marrella Splendens (Ar-
thropoda, Marrelomorpha) from the Middle Cambrian Burgess Shale, British Columbia, Canada,”
721-42; Hou, X. G., and Bergstrom, J., “Arthropods of the Lower Cambrian Chengjiang Fauna,
Southwest China,” 109; Bergstrom, }., and Hou, X. G., “Arthropod Origins,” 323-34.
5. Other authorities, such as Douglas Erwin at the Smithsonian, arrive at a slightly higher
total. By counting groups that some paleontologists count as subphyla or classes as phyla, Erwin
argues that about twenty-five phyla first appear in the Cambrian out of about thirty-three total (by
his way of counting) phyla known from the fossil record. [See Erwin et al., “The Cambrian Conun-
drum: Early Divergence and Later Ecological Success in the Early History of Animals,” 1091-97.]
I’ve used a slightly more conservative method for estimating the total number of phyla that first
appear in the Cambrian (see Fig. 2.5). I came to my count consulting the following sources:
Phylum references listed in same order as they appear on the chart.
Cnidaria: Chen et al., “Precambrian Animal Life: Probable Developmental and Adult Cnidar-
ian Forms from Southwest China.”
Mollusca: Fedonkin and Waggoner. “The Late Precambrian Fossil Kimberella Is a Mollusc-
Like Bilaterian Organism.”
Porifera: Love, G. D. “Fossil steroids record the appearance of Demospongiae during the
Cryogenian period.”
Annelida: Conway Morris and Peel, “The Earliest Annelids: Lower Cambrian Polychaetes from
the Sirius Passet Lagerstatte, Peary Land, North Greenland.”
Brachiopoda: Skovsted and Holmer, “Early Cambrian Brachiopods from North-East Greenland.”
Bryozoa: Landing et al., “Cambrian Origin of All Skeletalized Metazoan Phyla—Discovery of
Earth’s Oldest Bryozoans (Upper Cambrian, southern Mexico).”

418
Notes
Chaetognatha: Szaniawski, H. “Cambrian Chaetognaths Recognized in Burgess Shale Fossils.”
Chordata: Chen et al., “A Possible Early Cambrian Chordate”; Chen, “Early Crest Animals and
the Insight They Provide into the Evolutionary Origin of Craniates”; Janvier, “Catching the
First Fish”; Monnereau, “An Early Cambrian Craniate-Like Chordate”; Conway Morris and
Caron, “Pikaia gracilens Walcott, a Stem-Group Chordate from the Middle Cambrian of
British Columbia”; Sansom et al., “Non-Random Decay of Chordate Characters Causes Bias
in Fossil Interpretation”; Shu et al., “An Early Cambrian Tunicate from China”; Shu et al.
“Lower Cambrian Vertebrates from South China.”
Coeloscleritophora: Bengtson and Hou, “The Integument of Cambrian Chancelloriids.”
Ctenophora: Chen, J. Y. et al. “Raman Spectra of a Lower Cambrian Ctenophore Embryo from
Southwestern Shaanxi, China”; Conway Morris and Collins, “Middle Cambrian Cteno-
phores from the Stephen Formation, British Columbia, Canada.”
Echinodermata: Foote, “Paleozoic Record of Morphological Diversity in Blastozoan
Echinoderms”; Shu et al., “Ancestral Echinoderms from the Chengjiang Deposits of China”;
Zamora et al., “Middle Cambrian Gogiid Echinoderms from Northeast Spain: Taxonomy,
Palaeoecology, and Palaeogeographic Implications.”
Entoprocta: Zhang et al., “A Sclerite-Bearing Stem Group Entoproct from the Early Cambrian
and Its Implications.”
Euarthropoda: Cisne,
J. L., “Trilobites and the Origin of Arthropods”; Daley, “The Morphol-
ogy and Evolutionary Significance of the Anomalocaridids”; Grosberg, “Out on a Limb:
Arthropod Origins”; Siveter, “A Phosphatocopid Crustacean with Appendages from the
Lower Cambrian.”
Hemichordata: Shu et al., “Reinterpretation of Yunnanozoon as the Earliest Known Hemi-
chordate”; Shu et al., “A New Species of Yunnanozoan with Implications for Deuterostome
Evolution.”
Hyolitha: Malinky and Skovsted, “Hyoliths and Small Shelly Fossils from the Lower Cambrian
of North-East Greenland”; note that some authors consider Hyolitha to belong to phylum
Mollusca, whereas others consider Hyolitha to represent an independent phylum.
Lobopodia: Liu et al., “A Large Xenusiid Lobopod with Complex Appendages from the Lower
Cambrian Chengjiang Lagerstatte”; Liu et al., “Origin, Diversification, and Relationships of
Cambrian Lobopods”; Liu et al., “An Armoured Cambrian Lobopodian from China with
Arthropod-Like Appendages”; Ou et al., “A Rare Onychophoran-Like Lobopodian from
the Lower Cambrian Chengjiang Lagerstatte, Southwestern China, and Its Phylogenetic
Implications.”
Loricifera: Peel, “A Corset-Like Fossil from the Cambrian Sirius Passet Lagerstatte of North
Greenland and Its Implications for Cycloneuralian Evolution.”
Nematomorpha: Xian-guang and Wen-guo, “Discovery of Chengjiang Fauna at Meishucun,
Jinning, Yunnan.”
Phoronida: Erwin et al., “The Cambrian Conundrum: Early Divergence and Later Ecological
Success in the Early History of Animals.”
Priapulida: Wills et al., “The Disparity of Priapulid, Archaeopriapulid and Palaeoscolecid
Worms in the Light ofNew Data”; Hu et al., “A New Priapulid Assemblage from the Early
Cambrian Guanshan Fossil Lagerstatte of SW China.”
Sipuncula: Huang et al., “Early Cambrian Sipunculan Worms from Southwest China.” Some
consider sipunculan worms to be a subgroup of the phylum Annelida based on phylo-
genomic analyses. See Struck et al., “Phylogenomic Analyses Unravel Annelid Evolution.”
Tardigrada: Muller et al.,
“ ‘Orsten’ Type Phosphatized Soft-Integument Preservation and a
New Record from the Middle Cambrian Kuonamka Formation in Siberia.”
Vetulicolia: Shu, “On the Phylum Vetulicolia.”
Nematoda: Erwin et al., “The Cambrian Conundrum: Early Divergence and Later Ecological
Success in the Early History of Animals.”
Nemertea(?): Schram, “Pseudocoelomates and a Nemertine from the Illinois Pennsylvanian.”
Note that the presence of Nemertea in the fossil record is contested.
Platyhelminthes: Poinar, “A Rhabdocoel Turbellarian (Platyhelminthes, Typhloplanoida) in
Baltic Amber with a Review of Fossil and Sub-Fossil Platyhelminths.”
Rotifera: Swadling et al., “Fossil Rotifers and the Early Colonization of an Antarctic Lake.”
6. Erwin and Valentine, The Cambrian Explosion, 66-70.
7. Hennig, Phylogenetic Classification.
8.
If anything, using a “rank-free” classification system may actually intensify the mystery of
the Cambrian explosion. A single phylum may include many unique modes of organizing tissues,
organs, and body parts, and these differences in organization may deserve to be recognized as
different body plans as much as the differences that distinguish different phyla. As one proponent

Notes
419
of the rank-free approach put it to me, “Why shouldn’t clams and squids [both of which belong to
the single phylum Mollusca] be recognized as exemplifying unique body architectures every bit
as much as trilobites and star fish [which belong to two different phyla, the arthropods and the
echinoderms]?” In the traditional system, however, both clams and squids, and many other ani-
mals that exemplify equally pronounced differences in form within other phyla, will all fall within
their respective individual phyla. For this reason, measuring the explosiveness of the Cambrian
radiation solely by reference to the number of phyla that first appear in the Cambrian may actually
minimize the severity of the problem, whereas dispensing with taxonomic ranking may actually
tend to accentuate it.
9.
In addition, in 1999 paleontologists in southern China also found fossil remains of fish in
the Cambrian period. Fish are vertebrates and members of the phylum chordata. Shu et al., “Lower
Cambrian Vertebrates from South China,” 42-46; Shu et al., “Head and Backbone of the Early
Cambrian Vertebrate Haikouichthys.”
10. Quoted in Yochelson, Charles Doolittle Walcott, Paleontologist, 33.
11. Gould, Wonderful Life, 49.
12. Gould, Wonderful Life, 125-36; Budd, “The Morphology of Opabinia Regalis and the
Reconstruction of the Arthropod Stem-Group,” 1-14.
13. Darwin, On the Origin of Species, 307.
14. Ward, On Methuselah's Trail, 29-30.
15. Darwin’s prediction is, of course, not a prediction in the narrow sense of forecasting a
future event or process. But historical scientists regularly speak of predictions in the sense of
expectations about what will be revealed about the past if and when the relevant body of evidence
is uncovered.
16. Great Canadian Parks, Yoho National Park, www.greatcanadianparks.com/bcolumbia
/yohonpk/page3.htm (accessed October 23, 2012).
17. Dawkins, Unweaving the Rainbow, 201.
18. Darwin, On the Origin of Species, 120.
19. Darwin, On the Origin of Species, 125.
20. Lewin, “A Lopsided Look at Evolution,” 292.
21. Erwin, Valentine, and Sepkoski, “A Comparative Study of Diversification Events,” 1183.
See also Erwin et al., “The Cambrian Conundrum: Early Divergence and Later Ecological Success
in the Early History of Animals,” 1091-97; Bowring et al., “Calibrating Rates of Early Cambrian
Evolution,” 1293-98.
22. Hennig, Phylogenetic classification, 219. Erwin and Valentine in their 2013 book, The
Cambrian Explosion, reaffirm the remarkable morphological disparity present from the beginning
of the Cambrian period despite low species diversity. They note that since they first brought atten-
tion to the top-down pattern of Cambrian disparity preceding diversity using classical Linnaean
categories in 1987, paleontologists have developed measures of disparity within the phylogenetic
classification system—measures that reaffirm the same pattern within a rank-free classification
system (217).
23. For a more technical description of the processes behind the Burgess Shale fossil forma-
tion, see Briggs, Erwin, and Collier, The Fossils of the Burgess Shale, 21—32; Conway Morris, The
Crucible of Creation, 106-107.
24. Gould, Wonderful Life, 274-75.
25. Walcott, “Cambrian Geology and Paleontology II,” 15.
26. Gould, Wonderful Life, 108.
27. Gould, Wonderful Life, 273.
CHAPTER 3: SOFT BODIES AND HARD FACTS
1. Nash, “When Life Exploded,” 66-74.
2. Today fossils from the Burgess can be viewed in Canada at the Royal Ontario Museum
in Toronto, the Tyrell Museum in Drumheller, Alberta, and at a smaller exhibition close to the
Burgess Shale in Golden, British Columbia.
3.
Briggs, Erwin, and Collier, Fossils of the Burgess Shale.
4. Desmond Collins, Misadventures in the Burgess Shale, 952-53.
5. Some paleontologists have also gone so far as to argue that the Cambrian explosion is
nothing more than an artifact of classification, and therefore does not require explanation. Budd
and Jensen, for example, argue that the problem of the Cambrian explosion resolves itself if one
keeps in mind the cladistic distinction between “stem” and “crown” groups. Since crown groups
arise whenever new characters are added to simpler, more ancestral stem groups during the evolu-
tionary process, new phyla will inevitably arise once a stem group has arisen. Thus, for Budd and

420
Notes
Jensen, what requires explanation is not the crown groups corresponding to the new phyla, but the
earlier, less derived, stem groups that presumably arose deep in the Precambrian. Yet since these
earlier stem groups are by definition less derived, explaining them will be, in their view, consider-
ably easier than explaining the origin of the Cambrian animals de novo. In any case, for Budd and
Jensen, the explosion of new phyla in the Cambrian does not require explanation. As they put it,
“given that the early branching points of major clades is an inevitable result of clade diversifica-
tion, the alleged phenomenon of phyla appearing early and remaining morphologically static
does not seem to require particular explanation.” [Budd and Jensen, “A Critical Reappraisal of the
Fossil Record of the Bilaterian Phyla,” 253.] Nevertheless, Budd and Jensen’s attempt to explain
away the Cambrian explosion begs crucial questions. Granted, as new characters are added to
existing forms, novel morphology and greater morphological disparity will likely result. But what
causes new characters to arise? And how does the biological information necessary to produce new
characters originate? (See Chapters 9-16.) Budd and Jensen do not specify. Nor can they say how
derived the ancestral forms are likely to have been, and what processes might have been sufficient
to produce them. Instead they simply assume the sufficiency of some unspecified evolutionary
mechanisms. Yet, as I show in Chapters 10-16, this assumption is now problematic. In any case,
Budd and Jensen do not explain what causes the origin of biological form and information in the
Cambrian.
6.
See Cloud, “The Ship That Digs Holes in the Sea,” 108. See also a history of offshore drilling
on the website of the National Ocean Industries Association, http://www.noia.org/website/article
.asp?id=123 (accessed July 8, 2011).
7.
Schuchert and Dunbar, Textbook of Geology, Part II, Historical Geology, 72-76, 125-30;
Stokes, Essentials ofEarth History: An Introduction to Historical Geology, 162-64; Zumberge, Ele-
ments of Geology, 62-67, 214-15; Dunbar, Historical Geology, 13-15, 129-33.
8. Muller et al., “Digital Isochrons of the World’s Ocean Floor,” 3212.
9.
Walcott, “Cambrian Geology and Paleontology II,” 2-4.
10. Gould, Wonderful Life, 275.
11. Some have even suggested that the transitional intermediate forms leading to the Cam-
brian animals only existed in the larval stage. See Davidson, Peterson, and Cameron, “Origin of
Bilaterian Body Plans,” 1319.
12. Wray, Levinton, and Shapiro, “Molecular Evidence for Deep Pre-Cambrian Divergences
Among Metazoan Phyla.” For other recent expressions of this version of the artifact hypoth-
esis, see Simpson, Fossils and the History of Life, 72-74; Ward, Out of Thin Air, 5; Eldredge,
The Triumph of Evolution and the Failure of Creationism, 46; and Schirber, “Skeletons in the
Pre-Cambrian Closet.” Though contemporary paleontologists commonly attribute the absence
of Precambrian ancestral forms to their alleged lack of hard parts or appreciable size, earlier
geologists and paleontologists have also employed this version of the artifact hypothesis. For
example, in 1941 Charles Schuchert and Carl Dunbar stated: “We may infer, therefore, that life
probably was abundant in the seas of Cryptozoic time and especially during the Proterozoic,
but was of a low order and doubtless small and soft-tissued, so that there was little chance for
actual preservation of fossils”
( Textbook of Geology, Part II, 124). And as early as 1894 W. K.
Brooks asserted: “the zoological features of the Lower Cambrian are of such a character as
to indicate that it is a decided and unmistakable approximation to the primitive fauna of the
bottom, beyond which life was represented only by minute and simple surface animals not
likely to be preserved as fossils” (“The Origin of the Oldest Fossils and the Discovery of the
Bottom of the Ocean,” 360-61).
13.
Marshall, “Explaining the Cambrian ‘Explosion’ of Animals,” 357, 372. For an authorita-
tive refutation of this version of the artifact hypothesis, see Conway Morris, The Crucible of Cre-
ation, 140-44; Conway Morris, “Darwin’s Dilemma: The Realities of the Cambrian ‘Explosion’,”
1069-83.
14. Schopf and Packer, “Early Archean (3.3-Billion to 3.5-Billion-Year-Old) Microfossils from
Warrawoona Group, Australia,” 70; Schopf, “Microfossils of the Early Archean Apex Chert.”
15. Schopf and Packer, “Early Archean (3.3-Billion- to 3.5-Billion-Year-Old) Microfossils from
Warrawoona Group, Australia,” 70; Hoffmann et al., “Origin of 3.45 Ga Coniform Stromatolites in
Warrawoona Group, Western Australia.”
16.
Jan Bergstrom states: “Animals such as arthropods and brachiopods cannot exist without
hard parts. The absence of remains of skeletons and shells in the Precambrian therefore proves that
the phyla came into being with the Cambrian, not before, even if the lineages leading to the phyla
were separate before the Cambrian” (“Ideas on Early Animal Evolution,” 464).
17.
Valentine and Erwin, “Interpreting Great Developmental Experiments.”
18.
Valentine, “Fossil Record of the Origin of Bauplan and Its Implications,” especially 215.
19. Chen and Zhou, “Biology of the Chengjiang Fauna,” 21.

Notes
421
20. Chen and Zhou, “Biology of the Chengjiang Fauna,” 21. Or as Valentine explains, “the
interpretation of the explosion as an artifact of the evolution of durable skeletons has got it
backward: the skeletons are artifacts, more or less literally, of the evolutionary explosion.” Valen-
tine, On the Origin ofPhyla, 181.
21.
Ivantsov, “A New Reconstruction of Kimberella, a Problematic Metazoan,” 3.
22. Edgecombe, “Arthropod Structure and Development,” 74-75.
23.
Frederick Schram, The Crustacea.
24. Simpson, Fossils and the History of Life, 73. Indeed, an exoskeleton is far more than a mere
covering for the soft parts of, say, a chelicerate or crustacean, because it provides the sites for the
attachment of the muscles and various other tissues. Further, the limbs (including the mouthparts
and in some instances certain reproductive components) are encased in exoskeletal elements
that can articulate, allowing the arthropod to move, feed, and mate. An exterior skeleton of any
shrimp, for example, also has interior projections that comprise its endophragmal system, which
provides support for the animal’s internal musculature and organs. At the same time, the skeleton
of any arthropod is a product of, and in turn regulates, its metabolism and physiology. In order for
the first members of Fuxianhuia or Marrella to have grown (and possibly metamorphosed during
their development), they would have had to have successively secreted a new skeleton beneath the
old one; to have shed the used exoskeletons; and to have hardened each new exoskeleton. This tight
functional integration suggests the implausibility of evolutionary models that envision the Arthro-
pod exoskeleton arising late as a kind of accretion to an already integrated system of soft parts.
25.
Brocks et al., “Archean Molecular Fossils and the Early Rise of Eukaryotes.”
26. Conway Morris, The Crucible of Creation, 47-48; Gould, “The Disparity of the Burgess
Shale Arthropod Fauna and the Limits of Cladistic Analysis.”
27.
Wiwaxia is considered soft-bodied, but it does have harder scales and spines. See Conway
Morris, The Crucible of Creation, 97-98.
28.
Valentine, “The Macroevolution of Phyla,” sec. 3.2, “Soft-Bodied Body Fossils,” 529-31.
29. Conway Morris, The Crucible of Creation, 82.
30. Conway Morris, The Crucible of Creation, 76, 99.
31. Conway Morris, The Crucible of Creation, 68, 73, 74; “Burgess Shale Faunas and the Cam-
brian Explosion.”
32. Conway Morris, The Crucible of Creation, 107.
33. Conway Morris, The Crucible of Creation, 92, 184.
34. Conway Morris, “Burgess Shale Faunas and the Cambrian Explosion.”
35. Conway Morris, The Crucible of Creation, 103; Conway Morris, “Burgess Shale Faunas and
the Cambrian Explosion.”
36. A recent scientific paper reinterprets Nectocaris as a cephalopod mollusk, though it also
acknowledges the problems long associated with the definitive classification of this animal. See
Smith and Caron, “Primitive Soft-Bodied Cephalopods from the Cambrian.”
37. Conway Morris, The Crucible of Creation, 140.
38. Hou et al., The Cambrian Fossils of Chengjiang, China, 10.
39. Hou et al., The Cambrian Fossils of Chengjiang, China, 10, 12.
40. Hou et al., The Cambrian Fossils of Chengjiang, China, 13.
41. Hou et al., The Cambrian Fossils ofChengjiang, China, 10, 12.
42. Hou et al., The Cambrian Fossils of Chengjiang, China, 23.
43. Bergstrom and Hou, “Chengjiang Arthropods and Their Bearing on Early Arthropod
Evolution,” 152.
44.
Burgess Shale fossils from the middle Cambrian (515 million years ago) confirm that many
of these fully soft-bodied Cambrian organisms were long-lived and geographically widespread.
45. Chen et al., “Weng’an Biota”; Chien et al., “SEM Observation of Precambrian Sponge
Embryos from Southern China.”
46. Chen et al., The Chengjiang Biota: A Unique Window of the Cambrian Explosion. This
book is currently available only in the Chinese language. The translated English version is being
completed by Paul K. Chien, of the University of San Francisco.
47. Chen et al., “Weng’an Biota”; Chien et al., “SEM Observation of Precambrian Sponge
Embryos from Southern China.”
48.
For other alternative interpretations, see Huldtgren et al., “Fossilized Nuclei and Germina-
tion Structures Identify Ediacaran ‘Animal Embryos’ as Encysting Protists,” 1696-99; Xiao et al.,
“Comment on ‘Fossilized Nuclei and Germination Structures Identify Ediacaran ‘Animal Em-
bryos’ as Encysting Protists’,” 1169; Huldtgren et al., “Response to Comment on ‘Fossilized Nuclei
and Germination Structures Identify Ediacaran ‘Animal Embryos’ as Encysting Protists’,” 1169.
49. Erwin and Valentine, The Cambrian Explosion, 778.
50. Chien et al., “SEM Observation of Precambrian Sponge Embryos from Southern China.”

422
Notes
Sponges are assumed by most evolutionary biologists to represent a side branch, not a node on
evolutionary tree of life leading to the Cambrian phyla. Thus, sponges are not regarded as plausible
transitional intermediates between Precambrian and Cambrian forms (nor are they regarded as
ancestral to other Cambrian animals).
51. Some have challenged the interpretation of these Precambrian microfossils as embryos,
arguing that they are, instead, large micro-organisms. For example, Therese Huldtgren and col-
leagues have argued that these fossils “have features incompatible with multicellular metazoan
embryos” and that “the developmental pattern is [more] comparable with nonmetazoan holozo-
ans,” a group that includes one-celled protozoans. [Huldtgren et al., “Fossilized Nuclei and Germi-
nation Structures Identify Ediacaran ‘Animal Embryos’ as Encysting Protists,” 1696-99.]
Critics of Huldtgren’s proposal instead think they may well be tiny metazoan embryos, though
of unknown affiliation. [Xiao et al., “Comment on ‘Fossilized Nuclei and Germination Structures
Identify Ediacaran ‘Animal Embryos’ as Encysting Protists’,” 1169. Huldtgren and colleagues have
defended their interpretation here: Huldtgren et al., “Response to Comment on ‘Fossilized Nuclei
and Germination Structures Identify Ediacaran “Animal Embryos” as Encysting Protists’,” 1169.]
Another interpretation is that the fossils represent giant sulphur bacteria, since “sulphur
bacteria of the genus Thiomargarita have sizes and morphologies similar to those of many
Doushantuo microfossils, including symmetrical cell clusters that result from multiple stages
of reductive division in three planes.” [Bailey et al., “Evidence of giant sulphur bacteria in
Neoproterozoic phosphorites,” 198-201.] Critics of this hypothesis doubt that sulphur bacteria
could be fossilized because they “collapse easily and have only patchy biofilms that are limited
to the multi-layered envelope.” [Cunningham et al., “Experimental taphonomy of giant sulphur
bacteria: implications for the interpretation of the embryo-like Ediacaran Doushantuo fossils,”
1857-64.]
The debate over whether the Doushantuo microfossils should be interpreted as metazoan
embryos, protozoans, or giant sulphur bacteria will doubtless continue. Whatever the outcome,
however, the fact remains: small, fragile, and soft-bodied organisms of some kind have been found
fossilized in this Precambrian strata, raising the question of why the same layers of rock were
unable to preserve the immediate precursors to the numerous metazoan phyla that emerge so
abruptly in the Cambrian layers above them.
52.
Similarly, paleontologists rarely find the remains of parasites that live in the soft tissues
of other organisms (indeed, parasitic organisms represent several of the phyla that have no fossil
record). As noted, the geological record does preserve soft tissues, but only infrequently. When
it does, researchers fortunate enough to make such finds will rarely want to destroy important
specimens (of soft-tissue organs) in order to examine them for traces of parasitic infection or habi-
tation. Not surprisingly, therefore, paleontologists have not found the remains of many parasitic
organisms in the fossil record.
53. The Emergence ofAnimals, 91. This point is also based on personal conversation with Pro-
fessor (Mark) McMenamin.
54. Erwin and Valentine, The Cambrian Explosion, 8.
55.
Foote, “Sampling, Taxonomic Description, and Our Evolving Knowledge of Morphologi-
cal Diversity,” 181. Another statistical paleontologist, Michael J. Benton, and his colleagues have
reached a similar conclusion. They note that “if scaled to the
.
.
. taxonomic level of the family
[and above], the past 540 million years of the fossil record provide uniformly good documenta-
tion of the life of the past” (Benton, Wills, and Hitchin, “Quality of the Fossil Record Through
Time,” 534). In another article Benton also writes: “It could be argued that there are fossils out
there waiting to be found. It is easy to dismiss the fossil record as seriously, and unpredictably,
incomplete. For example, certain groups of organisms are almost unknown as fossils
This kind
of argument cannot be answered conclusively. However, an argument based on effort can be made.
Paleontologists have been searching for fossils for years and, remarkably, very little has changed
since 1859, when Darwin proposed that the fossil record would show us the pattern of the history
of life” (“Early Origins of Modern Birds and Mammals,” 1046).
56.
Foote, “Sampling Taxonomic Description, and Our Evolving Knowledge of Morphologi-
cal Diversity,” 181. 1 should note that there is one way in which my analogy to colored marbles in a
barrel fails to capture the nature of the challenge of Cambrian fossil discontinuity. If after pulling
samples from a barrel for a while you finally came up with a green and orange ball to go along
with the piles of red, blue, and yellow balls, you still wouldn’t have much confidence that the barrel
had a rainbow of ball colors finely grading from one to another. Yet you could at least say that the
orange ball stands between the yellow and red ball, and the green ball stands between the blue and
yellow balls (like the hybrid produced from two plants). But many of the new Cambrian animal
forms that have been discovered since Darwin’s time aren’t seen as intermediates between the
previously known animal forms representing known phyla. They aren’t evolutionary intermediates

Notes
423
between one existing phylum and another. Instead, scientists consider them as existing out in
morphological space all their own, standing not as intermediates but as phyla that themselves are
in need of intermediate forms—almost as if, by stretching my analogy, some new primary color
had been discovered.
57.
See Erwin et al., “The Cambrian Conundrum: Early Divergence and Later Ecological Suc-
cess in the Early History of Animals,” 1091-97.
58. Bowring et al., “Calibrating Rates of Early Cambrian Evolution.”
59. Bowring et al., “Calibrating Rates of Early Cambrian Evolution,” 1297.
60.
Lili, “Traditional Theory of Evolution Challenged,” 10.
61. There are a few putative survivors of the Ediacaran fauna. For example, the enigmatic
and frond-like Thaumaptilon found in the Burgess Shale might be a descendant of Ediacaran
fronds, though this is contested. Jensen et al., “Ediacara-Type Fossils Cambrian Sediment,”
567-69; Conway Morris, “Ediacaran-like Fossils in Cambrian Burgess Shale-Type Faunas of North
America,” 593-635.
62. Bowring et al., “Calibrating Rates of Early Cambrian Evolution,” 1297. See also
McMenamin, The Emergence ofAnimals.
63. Erwin et al., “The Cambrian Conundrum: Early Divergence and Later Ecological Success
in the Early History of Animals,” 1091-97.
64. Shu et al., “Lower Cambrian Vertebrates from South China.”
65. Chen et al., “A Possible Early Cambrian Chordate”; Chen and Li, “Early Cambrian Chor-
date from Chengjiang, China”; Dzik, “Yunnanozoon and the Ancestry of Chordates .” Note, how-
ever, that the assertion that Yunnanozoon is a chordate has been challenged. See Shu, Zhang, and
Chen, “Reinterpretation of Yunnanozoon as the Earliest Known Hemichordate”; Shu, Morris, and
Zhang, “A Pikaia-Mke Chordate from the Lower Cambrian of China.” Paleontologists also have
found a single specimen of a possible cephalchordate, Cathaymyrus, from the lower Cambrian
Qiongzhusi Formation near Chengjiang. The status of Cathaymyrus as a valid taxon has also been
challenged; some paleontologists argue that the single specimen of Cathaymyrus may actually
be a dorsoventrally compressed Yunnanozoon; see Chen and Li, “Early Cambrian Chordate from
Chengjiang, China.”
66. Chen, Huang, and Li, “An Early Cambrian Craniate-like Chordate,” 518.
67. Shu et al., “Lower Cambrian Vertebrates from South China.”
68. Shu et al., “An Early Cambrian Tunicate from China.”
69. The chordates discovered in the Cambrian strata near Chengjiang represent just one
of many new animal body plans found there, some of them designated as new phyla, others
as new subphyla, classes, or families within existing phyla. For example, paleontologists
classify Occacaris oviformis , a round, egg-shaped animal with large forcep-like structures,
as a member of the well-known phylum Arthropoda. [Hou et al.. The Cambrian Fossils of
Chengjiang, China, 130.] Nevertheless, Occacaris, which has been found only in the Mao-
tianshan shale, clearly exemplifies a unique way of arranging organs and tissue— one unlike
any previously known arthropod outside the Chengjiang biota. Arguably, it represents a
unique body plan. In other cases, Chinese paleontologists have discovered animals with such
unusual morphologies that they have been unable to classify them within any known phylum.
These so-called problematica, such as the mysterious Batofasciculus ramificans, a hot-air-
balloon-shaped cactus-like animal, has been given a species and genus name, but as yet, no
specific phyletic designation, though it clearly exemplifies a unique body plan. [Hou et al.,
The Cambrian Fossils of Chengjiang, China, 196.] While such difficult-to-classify organisms
do not increase the official count of novel phyla that first arose during the Cambrian, they do
frequently display novel body plans.
CHAPTER 4: THE NOT MISSING FOSSILS?
1.
Gradstein, Ogg, Schmitz, and Ogg, The Geological Time Scale 2012.
2. Grotzinger et al., “Biostratigraphic and Geochronologic Constraints on Early Animal
Evolution.” A few Ediacarans may have survived until the middle Cambrian. See Conway Morris,
“Ediacaran-like Fossils in Cambrian Burgess Shale-Type Faunas of North America.”
3.
Monastersky, “Ancient Animal Sheds False Identity.”
4. Monastersky, “Ancient Animal Sheds False Identity.”
5. Monastersky, “Ancient Animal Sheds False Identity.”
6. Fedonkin and Waggoner, “The Late Precambrian Fossil Kimberella is a Mollusc-like Bilat-
erian Organism,” 868.
7. For example, Graham Budd, a Swedish paleontologist and Cambrian expert, has expressed
skepticism about this classification. He acknowledges that “the strongest case for an Ediacaran

424
Notes
bilaterian body fossil has been made by Fedonkin and Waggoner (1997) for Kimberella,” but
nevertheless disputes the classification of Kimberella as a true mollusk. He argues that
“Kimberella
does not possess any unequivocal derived molluscan features, and its assignment to the Mollusca
or even the Bilateria must be considered to be unproven” (Budd and Jensen, “A Critical Reappraisal
of the Fossil Record of the Bilaterian Phyla,” 270).
8. Another reason the Ediacaran body fossils cannot be assigned to the animal phyla in a
decisive manner is because of the coarse grain size of the beds in which they occur. Details of body
form are too vague to allow a clear decision, and until better means of analysis or new beds with
finer grain texture are found, these fossils will remain as intriguing “problematica,” problematic
forms about which it is not possible to come to a decision. See Miklos, “Emergence of Organi-
zational Complexities During Metazoan Evolution.” See also Bergstrom, “Metazoan Evolution
Around the Precambrian-Cambrian Transition.”
9.
Retallack, “Growth, Decay and Burial Compaction of Dickinsonia
215. As Retallack goes
on to explain, “Like fungi and lichens, Dickinsonia was firmly attached to its substrate, ground-
hugging, moderately flexible, and very resistant to burial compaction” (236).
10.
Glaessner, The Dawn ofAnimal Life, 122.
11.
Birket-Smith, “A Reconstruction of the Pre-Cambrian Spriggina,” 237-58.
12.
Glaessner, The Dawn ofAnimal Life, 122.
13.
Glaessner, The Dawn ofAnimal Life, 122.
14. McMenamin, “Spriggina Is a Trilobitoid Ecdysozoan,” 105.
15.
Glaessner, The Dawn ofAnimal Life, 122-23. McMenamin, The Emergence ofAnimals, 20,
24, 118.
16.
In addition, a recent depiction of an Ediacaran organism closely related to Spriggina, called
Yorgia, by Ediacaran expert Andrey Ivantsov, shows it exhibiting a smoother, less jagged edge than
the bodies of trilobites with no protruding spines. Ivantsov’s reconstruction seems to underscore a
shift in opinion away from regarding Spriggina-like organisms as basal arthropods in possession
of distinctive arthropod characteristics (such as genal spines). Ivantsov, “Giant Traces of Vendian
Animals.” See also Ivantsov, “Vendia and Other Precambrian ‘Arthropods.’
”
17.
Brasier and Antcliffe,
“Dickinsonia from Ediacara,” 312.
18.
Brasier and Antcliffe, “Dickinsonia from Ediacara,” 312. Ivantsov, “Vendia and other Pre-
cambrian ‘Arthropods.’
”
19. “Asymmetry in the Fossil Record,” 137.
20. Erwin, Valentine, and Jablonski, “The Origin of Animal Body Plans,” 132.
21. Erwin, Valentine, and Jablonski, “The Origin of Animal Body Plans,” 132.
22. Erwin, Valentine, and Jablonski, “The Origin of Animal Body Plans,” 132.
23. Cooper and Fortey, “Evolutionary Explosions and the Phylogenetic Fuse,” 151-56.
24.
Fortey, “Cambrian Explosion Exploded,” 438.
25. Knoll and Carroll, “Early Animal Evolution,” 2129.
26. Ward, On Methuselah’s Trail, 36.
27.
“Life on Land,” 153-54. Recently, Gregory Retallack has published a controversial hy-
pothesis about the Ediacaran fauna. Retallack has studied the depositional environments of key
Ediacaran fossils such as Dickinsonia. He has concluded that these organisms should not be clas-
sified as marine animals, because they were deposited on land. According to Retallack, the rocks
that bore these Ediacaran fossils “have a variety of features that are more like the biological soil
crusts of desert and tundra than the parallel wrinkled, and undulose hydrated microbial mats of
intertidal flats and shallow seas.” [Retallack, “Ediacaran Life on Land,” 89.] Retallack ’s thesis has
received a cool reception from other Ediacaran experts, however. They have not only questioned
his analysis of ancient sediments but pointed out that the Ediacaran forms that he analyzed from
Australia are also preserved in clearly marine sediments (from Newfoundland, for example)
and that it is unlikely that the same organisms would live both on land and in the sea. [Callow,
Brasier, Mcilroy, “Discussion: ‘Were the Ediacaran siliciclastics of South Australia coastal or deep
marine?’ ” 1-3.]
28. Erwin et al., “The Cambrian Conundrum.” Others believe that these Precambrian “worm”
trails could have been created by giant protists. See Matz et al., “Giant Deep-Sea Protist Produces
Bilaterian-like Traces,” 1849-54.
29.
Valentine, Erwin, and Jablonski, “Developmental Evolution of Metazoan Body Plans”;
Runnegar, “Evolution of the Earliest Animals.”
30. Runnegar, “Proterozoic Eukaryotes”; Gehling, “The Case for Ediacaran Fossil Roots to the
Metazoan Tree.”
31. Budd and Jensen, “A Critical Reappraisal of the Fossil Record of the Bilaterian Phyla,” 270.
32.
See Matz et al., “Giant Deep-Sea Protist Produces Bilaterian-like Traces.”
33. Erwin et al., “The Cambrian Conundrum.”

Notes
425
34.
Sperling, Pisani, and Peterson, “Poriferan paraphyly and Its Implications for Precambrian
Palaeobiology”; Erwin and Valentine, The Cambrian Explosion, 80.
35. Conway Morris, “Evolution: Bringing Molecules into the Fold,” 5.
36. McMenamin and McMenamin, The Emergence ofAnimals, 167-68.
37.
Peterson et al., “The Ediacaran Emergence of Bilaterians.”
38. Shen et al., “The Avalon Explosion,” 81.
39.
See, e.g., Cooper and Fortey, “Evolutionary Explosions and the Phylogenetic Fuse.” The
Cambrian period 543 mya is marked by the appearance of small shelly fossils consisting of tubes,
cones, and possibly spines and scales of larger animals. These fossils, together with trace fossils,
gradually become more abundant and diverse as one moves upward in the earliest Cambrian strata
(the Manykaian Stage, 543-530 mya).
40. Bowring et al., “Calibrating Rates of Early Cambrian Evolution,” 1293-98; Erwin et al.,
“The Cambrian Conundrum: Early Divergence and Later Ecological Success in the Early History
of Animals,” 1091-97.
41. Meyer et al., “The Cambrian Explosion: Biology’s Big Bang,” 323-402.
42.
Valentine, “Prelude to the Cambrian Explosion,” 289.
43. Animals with fivefold symmetry extending from a central body cavity are described tech-
nically as radially symmetric “pentamerous” animals.
44. Budd and Jensen, “A Critical Reappraisal of the Fossil Record of the Bilaterian Phyla,” 261.
As Budd and Jensen explain in more detail: “although this fossil possesses pentaradial symmetry,
its small size, combined with preservation in relatively coarse sand means that other echinoderm-
specific features are not readily visible. Its assignment to the Echinodermata thus largely rests on
this single character, and must be at present regarded as an open question” (261).
45.
Valentine, On the Origin ofPhyla, 287, 397.
46.
Bottjer, “The Early Evolution of Animals,” 47.
47. Cnidarians and ctenophores, for example, are radially symmetric. (One might think that
echinoderms, which as adults have pentaradial [fivefold] symmetry, are not bilaterians, but “in
early development, echinoderms are bilateral” and thus classed among the Bilateria.) For more
discussion, see Valentine, On the Origin ofPhyla, 391.
48. Bengtson and Budd, “Comment on ‘Small Bilaterian Fossils from 40 to 55 Million Years
Before the Cambrian,’” 1291a.
49. As Bengtson and Budd explain, “The specimens presented by Chen et al. represent a
common mode of preservation of microfossils in phosphatic sediments, including those of the
Doushantuo.” In particular, they note that “the layers have a regular banding of color and thick-
ness that is different between the specimens but consistent within the individual specimens.”
They argue that “this pattern defies biological explanation but is easily explained as represent-
ing two to three generations of diagenetic overgrowth.” They also note that “rather than being
sinuously folded, as would be expected from deformed tissue layers,” the layers in the imprint
display features typical of (inorganic) diagenetic crusts. They conclude that although the imprint
may have encased the remains of eukaryotic microfossils, “their reconstructed morphology
as bilaterians is an artifact generated by cavities being lined by diagenetic crusts. The appear-
ance of the fossils now has little resemblance to that of the living organisms that generated
them” (“Comment on ‘Small Bilaterian Fossils from 40 to 55 Million Years Before the Cam-
brian,’” 1291a).
50. Bengtson et al., “A Merciful Death for the ‘Earliest Bilaterian,’ Vernanimalcula
421.
51.
Bottjer, “The Early Evolution of Animals,” 47.
52. Bengtson et al., “A Merciful Death for the ‘Earliest Bilaterian,’ Vernanimalcula,” 426.
53. Bengtson et al., “A Merciful Death for the ‘Earliest Bilaterian,’ Vernanimalcula,” 426.
54. Marshall and Valentine, “The Importance of Preadapted Genomes in the Origin of the
Animal Bodyplans and the Cambrian Explosion,” 1190, emphasis added.
55. Budd and Jensen, “The Limitations of the Fossil Record and the Dating of the Origin of the
Bilateria,” 183.
56. Budd and Jensen, “The Limitations of the Fossil Record and the Dating of the Origin of the
Bilateria,” 168.
CHAPTER
5: THE GENES TELL THE STORY?
1. Dawkins, The Greatest Show on Earth, 111.
2. According to Zvelebil and Baum, “The key assumption made when constructing a phylo-
genetic tree from a set of sequences is that they are all derived from a single ancestral sequence,
i.e., they are homologous” (Understanding Bioinformatics, 239). Lecointre and Le Guyader
note: “Cladistics can run into difficulties in its application because not all character states are

426
Notes
necessarily homologous. Certain resemblances are convergent—that is, the result of independent
evolution. We cannot always detect these convergences immediately, and their presence may con-
tradict other similarities, ‘true homologies’ yet to be recognized. Thus, we are obliged to assume
at first that, for each character, similar states are homologous, despite knowing that there may be
convergence among them” ( The Tree of Life, 16).
3. Coyne, Why Evolution Is True, 10.
4. Budd and Jensen, “A Critical Reappraisal of the Fossil Record of the Bilaterian Phyla,”
253-95; Budd and Jensen, “The Limitations of the Fossil Record and the Dating of the Origin of
the Bilateria,” 166-89 (“The expected Darwinian pattern of a deep fossil history of the bilaterians,
potentially showing their gradual development, stretching hundreds of millions of years into the
Precambrian, has singularly failed to materialize
.
.
. whatever the resolution of the misfit between
the fossil record and molecular evidence for the origin of animals, it does not come about through
a misunderstanding of the known fossil record
.
.
. The known fossil record has not been misunder-
stood, and there are no convincing bilaterian candidates known from the fossil record until just
before the beginning of the Cambrian (c. 543 Ma), even though there are plentiful sediments older
than this that should reveal them”); Jensen et al., “Trace fossil preservation and the early evolu-
tion of animals,” 19-29 (“A literal reading of the body fossil record suggests that the diversifica-
tion of bilaterian animals did not significantly precede the Neoproterozoic-Cambrian boundary
(ca. 545 Ma)
.
.
.
Despite reports to the contrary, there is no widely accepted trace fossil record from
sediments older than about 560-555 Ma
The above conclusions place serious constraints on
the time of appearance of bilaterian animals. For example, assuming that key bilaterian features
could only have been acquired in moderately large benthic animals, the absence of an ancient
trace fossil record suggests that the Cambrian ‘explosions’ are a reality in terms of the relatively
rapid appearance and diversification of macroscopic bilaterians”); Conway Morris, “Darwin’s
Dilemma: The Realities of the Cambrian ‘Explosion’,” 1069-83 (“The ‘ancient school’ argues that
animals evolved long before the Cambrian and that the ‘explosion’ is simply an artefact, engen-
dered by the breaching of taphonomic thresholds, such as the onset of biomineralization and/or a
sudden increase in body size. The alternative ‘realist school’, to which
I largely subscribe, proposes
that while the fossil record is far from perfect and is inevitably skewed in significant ways, none
is sufficient to destroy a strong historical signal”); Peterson et al., “MicroRNAs and Metazoan
Macroevolution: Insights into Canalization, Complexity, and the Cambrian Explosion,” 736-47;
Fortey, “The Cambrian Explosion Exploded?” 438-39; Wray et al., “Molecular Evidence for Deep
Precambrian Divergences Among Metazoan Phyla,” 568-73 (“Darwin recognized that the sudden
appearance of animal fossils in the Cambrian posed a problem for his theory of natural selection.
He suggested that fossils might eventually be found documenting a protracted unfolding of Pre-
cambrian metazoan evolution. Many paleontologists today interpret the absence of Precambrian
animal fossils that can be assigned to extant clades not as a preservational artifact, but as evidence
of a Cambrian or late Vendian origin and divergence of metazoan phyla. This would make the
Cambrian the greatest evolutionary cornucopia in the history of the earth. Definitive representa-
tives of all readily fossilizable animal phyla (with the exception of bryozoans) have been found
in Cambrian rocks, as have representatives of several soft-bodied phyla. Recent geochronologi-
cal studies have reinforced the impression of a ‘big bang of animal evolution’ by narrowing the
temporal window of apparent divergences to just a few million years”) (internal citations omitted);
Erwin et al., “The Cambrian Conundrum: Early Divergence and Later Ecological Success in the
Early History of Animals,” 1091-97 (“When Charles Darwin published The Origin ofSpecies (1),
the sudden appearance of animal fossils in the rock record was one of the more troubling facts he
was compelled to address. He wrote: ‘There is another and allied difficulty, which is much graver. I
allude to the manner in which numbers of species of the same group, suddenly appear in the lowest
known fossiliferous rocks’ (306). Darwin argued that the incompleteness of the fossil record gives
the illusion of an explosive event, but with the eventual discovery of older and better-preserved
rocks, the ancestors of these Cambrian taxa would be found. Studies of Ediacaran and Cambrian
fossils continue to expand the morphologic variety of clades, but the appearance of the remains
and traces of bilaterian animals in the Cambrian remains abrupt.”).
5. As Alan Cooper and Richard Fortey explain, “Molecular evidence indicates that pro-
longed periods of evolutionary innovation and cladogenesis lit the fuse long before the ‘explosions’
apparent in the fossil record. (“Evolutionary Explosions and the Phylogenetic Fuse,” 151.) Also,
according to Welch, Fontanillas, and Bromham: “However, a wide range of molecular dating stud-
ies have suggested that the major lineages of animals arose long before the Cambrian, at over 630
mya [million years ago]. This raises the possibility that there was a long cryptic period of animal
evolution preceding the explosion of fossils in the Cambrian” (“Molecular Dates for the ‘Cambrian
Explosion,”’ 672-73).

Notes
427
6. “The molecular clock ... is the assumption that lineages have evolved at equal rates”
(Felsenstein, Inferring Phytogenies, 118).
7. Smith and Peterson, “Dating the Time and Origin of Major Clades,” 72.
8. Wray, Levinton, and Shapiro, “Molecular Evidence for Deep Precambrian Divergences
Among Metazoan Phyla”; for another similar study of molecular sequence data that comes to the
same conclusion, see Wang, Kumar, and Hedges, “Divergence Time Estimates for the Early His-
tory of Animal Phyla and the Origin of Plants, Animals and Fungi,” 163; see also Vermeij, “Animal
Origins”; and Fortey, Briggs, and Wills, “The Cambrian Evolutionary ‘Explosion’ Recalibrated.”
9. These proteins were ATP-ase, cytochrome c, cytochrome oxidase
I and II, alpha and beta
hemoglobin, and NADH
I.
10. The ribosomal RNA they used was 18S rRNA.
11. These proteins were aldolase, methionine adenosyltransferase, ATP synthase beta chain,
catalase, elongation factor
1 alpha, triosephosphate isomerase, and phosphofructokinase.
12. The three RNA molecules they used were 5.8S rRNA, 18S rRNA, and 28S rRNA.
13. Erwin et al., “The Cambrian Conundrum,” 1092.
14.
For example, Bronham and colleagues find that mitochondrial DNA and 18S rRNA data
yielded divergence dates that varied by more than
1 billion years (“Testing the Cambrian Explo-
sion Hypothesis by Using a Molecular Dating Technique”); Xun suggests that from a total of 22
nuclear genes the divergence time between Drosophila and vertebrates was about 830 mya (million
years ago; “Early Metazoan Divergence Was About 830 Million Years Ago”); Doolittle and col-
leagues date the protostome-deuterostome split at 670 million years ago (“Determining Divergence
Times of the Major Kingdoms of Living Organisms with a Protein Clock”); Nikoh and colleagues
date the split between eumetazoa and parazoa—animals with tissues, such as cnidarians, from
those without, like sponges— at 940 mya, and the split between vertebrates and amphioxus at 700
mya (“An Estimate of Divergence Time of Parazoa and Eumetazoa and That of Cephalochordata
and Vertebrata by Aldolase and Triose Phosphate Isomerase Clocks”); and Wang, Kumar, and
Hedges suggest the basal animal phyla (Porifera, Cnidaria, Ctenophora) diverged between about
1200-1500 mya, and that nematodes were found to have diverged from the lineage leading to
arthropods and chordates at 1177-79 mya (“Divergence Time Estimates for the Early History of
Animal Phyla and the Origin of Plants, Animals and Fungi”).
15. Wray, Levinton, and Shapiro, “Molecular Evidence for Deep Precambrian Divergences
Among Metazoan Phyla,” 568.
16. Wray, Levinton, and Shapiro, “Molecular Evidence for Deep Precambrian Divergences
Among Metazoan Phyla,” 569.
17. Wray, Levinton, and Shapiro, “Molecular Evidence for Deep Precambrian Divergences
Among Metazoan Phyla,” 568.
18. Quoted in Hotz, “Finding Turns Back Clock for Earth’s First Animals,” Al, A14.
19.
See, e.g., Xun, “Early Metazoan Divergence Was About 830 Million Years Ago”; Aris-
Brosou and Yang, “Bayesian Models of Episodic Evolution Support a Late Precambrian Explo-
sive Diversification of the Metazoa.” See also an early study by Bruce Runnegar in 1982, which
measured the percent sequence difference between globin molecules in various animal phyla and,
from this, postulated that “the initial radiation of the animal phyla occurred at least 900-1000
million years ago” (Runnegar, “A Molecular-Clock Date for the Origin of the Animal Phyla,” 199).
For other examples, see Bronham et al., “Testing the Cambrian explosion hypothesis by using a
molecular dating technique,” 12386-12389 (finding that mitochondrial DNA and 18S rRNA data
yielded divergence dates that varied by more than
1 billion years); Xun, “Early Metazoan Diver-
gence Was About 830 Million Years Ago,” 369-71 (suggesting “From a total of 22 nuclear genes,
we estimate that the divergence time between Drosophila and vertebrates was about 830 million
years ago (mya)”); Doolittle, “Determining Divergence Times of the Major Kingdoms of Living
Organisms with a Protein Clock,” 470-77 (dating the protostome-deuterostome split at 670 million
years ago); Nikoh et al., “An Estimate of Divergence Time of Parazoa and Eumetazoa and That of
Cephalochordata and Vertebrata by Aldolase and Triose Phosphate Isomerase Clocks,” 97-106
(dating the split between eumetazoa and parazoa—animals with tissues from those without, like
sponges— at 940 mya, and the split between vertebrates and amphioxus at 700 mya); Wang et
al., “Divergence Time Estimates for the Early History of Animal Phyla and the Origin of Plants,
Animals and Fungi,” 163-71 (suggesting “the basal animal phyla (Porifera, Cnidaria, Ctenophora)
diverged between about 1200-1500 Ma” and “Nematodes were found to have diverged from the
lineage leading to arthropods and chordates at 1177-79 Ma”).
20.
Valentine, Jablonski, and Erwin, “Fossils, Molecules and Embryos,” 851.
21. Nikoh et al., “An Estimate of Divergence Time of Parazoa and Eumetazoa and That of
Cephalochordata and Vertebrata by Aldolase and Triose Phosphate Isomerase Clocks.”

428
Notes
22. Wang, Kumar, and Hedges, “Divergence Time Estimates for the Early History of Animal
Phyla and the Origin of Plants, Animals and Fungi,” 163.
23. Bronham et al., “Testing the Cambrian Explosion Hypothesis by Using a Molecular Dating
Technique.”
24. Xun, “Early Metazoan Divergence Was About 830 Million Years Ago.”
25. Aris-Brosou and Yang, “Bayesian Models of Episodic Evolution Support a Late Precam-
brian Explosive Diversification of the Metazoa.” Other literature surveys report that molecular
clock-based estimates of the split between protostomes and deuterostomes have ranged from
588 million to 1.5 billion years ago. See Erwin, Valentine, and Jablonski, “The Origin of Animal
Body Plans”; and Benton and Ayala, “Dating the Tree of Life.”
26. Graur and Martin, “Reading the Entrails of Chickens: Molecular Timescales of Evolution
and the Illusion of Precision.”
27. Graur and Martin, “Reading the Entrails of Chickens,” 85. Smith and Peterson also note:
“The second area where molecules and morphology are in serious disagreement concerns the
origins of the metazoan phyla. Although the difference between the molecular and morphological
estimates for bird and mammal origins may be as much as 50 million years, the discord between
the two for the animal phyla may be as much as 500 million years, almost the entire length of the
Phanerozoic” (“Dating the Time and Origin of Major Clades,” 79).
28.
Ayala, Rzhetsky, and Ayala, “Origin of the Metazoan Phyla.”
29. Ayala and his team eliminated the 18S rRNA, an RNA-coding gene because of problems
with obtaining a reliable alignment. They also added an additional twelve protein-coding genes.
30.
Ayala, Rzhetsky, and Ayala, “Origin of the Metazoan Phyla,” 611.
31.
Valentine, Jablonski, and Erwin, “Fossils, Molecules and Embryos,” 856.
32.
Behe, “Histone Deletion Mutants Challenge the Molecular Clock Hypothesis.”
33. Some evolutionary biologists have attempted to explain their extreme conservation (simi-
larity) by “strong selection” for their essential functional role: the close packing, or wrapping, of
DNA in eukaryotic chromosomes. This hypothesis is hard to square, however, with experimental
data showing that yeast tolerates dramatic deletions in their H4 histones. Behe, “Histone Deletion
Mutants Challenge the Molecular Clock Hypothesis.”
34. As Baverstock and Moritz explain in more detail: “The single most important component
.
.
. of a phylogenetic analysis is the decision as to which method(s) or sequence(s) are appropriate
to the phylogenetic question at hand. The method chosen must yield sufficient variation as to be
phylogenetically informative, but not so much variation that convergence and parallelisms over-
whelm informative changes” (“Project Design,” 25).
35.
Valentine, Jablonski, and Erwin, “Fossils, Molecules and Embryos,” 856.
36. Ho et al., “Accuracy of Rate Estimation Using Relaxed-Clock Models with a Critical Focus
on the Early Metazoan Radiation,” 1355.
37. Smith and Peterson, “Dating the Time and Origin of Major Clades,” 73.
38. Smith and Peterson, “Dating the Time and Origin of Major Clades,” 73. Smith and
Peterson elaborate: “All molecular clock approaches require one or more calibration points using
dates derived either from the fossil record or from biogeographic constraints. There are two
approaches— either calibration can rely on one or a small number of ‘well documented’ dates
where paleontological evidence seems highly reliable, or calibration can be achieved using a large
number of independent dates so that a range of estimates is arrived at. The former approach has
been criticized by both Lee (1999) and Alroy (1999) for placing too much reliance on a single pa-
leontological date without considering its error” (75). See Lee, “Molecular Clock Calibrations and
Metazoan Divergence Dates”; and Alroy, “The Fossil Record of North American Mammals.” Dan
Graur and William Martin concur. They note that gross uncertainties often afflict assumptions
about (1) the age of fossils used to calibrate the molecular clock, (2) the rate of mutations in various
genes, and (3) the conclusions of comparative sequence analyses based upon the use of molecular
clocks (“Reading the Entrails of Chickens”).
39. Conway Morris, “Evolution,” 5-6.
40. Valentine Jablonski, and Erwin, “Fossils, Molecules and Embryos,” 856.
41.
Zvelebil and Baum, Understanding Bioinformatics, 239.
42.
Lecointre and Le Guyader, The Tree of Life, 16.
43. For a related discussion see Wagner and Stadler, “Quasi-Independence, Homology and the
Unity of Type.”
44.
Osigus, Eitel, Schierwater, “Chasing the Urmetazoon: Striking a Blow for Quality Data?”
551-57; Conway Morris, “The Cambrian ‘Explosion’ and Molecular Biology,” 505-506.
45.
Osigus, Eitel, Schierwater, “Chasing the Urmetazoon: Striking a Blow for Quality Data?”
551-57. As Osigus and colleagues note: “The sum of molecular trees based on large numbers of
gene sequences does not resolve phylogenetic relationships at the base of the Metazoa. Conflicting

Notes
429
scenarios have been published in short sequence and each single analysis can be criticized for one
or the other reason. It is unclear to many whether the base of Metazoa can ever be resolved by
means of sequence data even if whole genomes and extensive taxon sampling is used” (555).
46. Conway Morris, “Early Metazoan Evolution,” 870.
47. Graur and Martin, “Reading the Entrails of Chickens”; Smith and Peterson, “Dating the
Time and Origin of Major Clades”; Valentine, Jablonski, and Erwin, “Fossils, Molecules and
Embryos.”
CHAPTER 6: THE ANIMAL TREE OF LIFE
1. “The Darwinian Sistine Chapel,” April 14, 2009, www.bbc.co.uk/darwin/?tab=21 (accessed
October 31, 2012).
2.
Hellstrom, “The Tree as Evolutionary Icon,”
1.
3.
Ruse, Darwinism Defended, 58.
4. Dobzhansky, “Nothing in Biology Makes Sense Except in the Light of Evolution,” 125.
5. Dawkins, The Greatest Show on Earth, 315.
6. As Coyne has asserted, “both the visible traits of organisms and their DNA sequences usu-
ally give the same information about evolutionary relationships” (Why Evolution Is True, 10).
7.
Atkins, Galileo’s Finger, 16.
8. Coyne, Why Evolution Is True, 7.
9. An enormous literature exists analyzing how “similarity,” which can be directly observed
and measured, comes to be interpreted as “homology,” a theoretical construct that cannot be
directly observed. The two terms should not be equated. According to Van Valen, “For molecular
biologists ... a good touchstone is that homology is always an inference, never an observation.
What we observe is similarity or identity, never homology” (“Similar, but Not Homologous,” 664).
10.
Prothero, Evolution, 140.
11. Dawkins, A Devil’s Chaplain: Reflections on Hope, Lies, Science, and Love, 112.
12. Wiley and Lieberman, Phylogenetics, 6.
13. Degnan and Rosenberg, “Gene Tree Discordance, Phylogenetic Inference and the Multi-
species Coalescent,” 332.
14. Davalos et al., “Understanding Phylogenetic Incongruence: Lessons from Phyllostomid
Bats,” 993.
15. Syvanen and Ducore, “Whole Genome Comparisons Reveals a Possible Chimeric Origin
for a Major Metazoan Assemblage,” 261-75.
16. Quoted in Lawton, “Why Darwin Was Wrong About the Tree of Life,” 39.
17.
Rokas, “Spotlight: Drawing the Tree of Life.”
18.
Rokas, Kruger, and Carroll. “Animal Evolution and the Molecular Signature of Radiations
Compressed in Time,” 1933-34.
19. Rokas and Carroll, “Bushes in the Tree of Life,” 1899-1904.
20. Rokas and Carroll, “Bushes in the Tree of Life,” 1899-1904 (internal citations omitted).
21. Rokas and Carroll, “Bushes in the Tree of Life,” 1899-1904 (internal citations omitted).
22. Rokas and Carroll, “Bushes in the Tree of Life,” 1899-1904.
23.
Rokas, Kruger, and Carroll, “Animal Evolution and the Molecular Signature of Radiations
Compressed in Time,” 1935.
24. Zuckerkandl and Pauling, “Evolutionary Divergence and Convergence in Proteins,” 101.
25. Zuckerkandl and Pauling, “Evolutionary Divergence and Convergence in Proteins,” 101.
26. Theobald, “29+ Evidences for Macroevolution.”
27. Hyman, The Invertebrates, vol.
1: Protozoa Through Ctenophora.
28. Holton and Pisani, “Deep Genomic-Scale Analyses of the Metazoa Reject Coelomata.”
29. Aguinaldo et al., “Evidence for a Clade of Nematodes, Arthropods and Other Moulting
Animals.” See also Telford et al., “The Evolution of the Ecdysozoa”; Halanych and Passamaneck, “A
Brief Review of Metazoan Phylogeny and Future Prospects in Hox-Research”; and Mallatt, Garey,
and Shultz, “Ecdysozoan Phylogeny and Bayesian Inference.”
30. Aguinaldo et al., “Evidence for a Clade of Nematodes, Arthropods and Other Moulting
Animals.” See also Halanych, “The New View of Animal Phylogeny.”
31.
Telford et al., “The Evolution of the Ecdysozoa.”
32. Aguinaldo et al., “Evidence for a Clade of Nematodes, Arthropods and Other Moulting
Animals,” 492.
33.
In 2004, for instance, researcher Yuri Wolf and his colleagues at the National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) published a phylogeny based on molecular data (500 sets of
proteins as well as insertion/deletion patterns in similar proteins) supporting the earlier Coelo-
mata hypothesis. Wolf’s team concluded, “All of these approaches supported the coelomate clade

430
Notes
and showed concordance between evolution of protein sequences and higher-level evolutionary
events” (“Coelomata and Not Ecdysozoa
29). Another NCBI study, by Jie Zheng and colleagues
published in 2007, analyzed conserved intron positions in the genomes of various animals; it sup-
ported the Coelomata clade and rejected Ecdysozoa (introns are sections of the genome that do
not encode information for building proteins and occur in the genome between the regions, called
exons, that do code for proteins; “Support for the Coelomata Clade of Animals from a Rigorous
Analysis of the Pattern of Intron Conservation”).
34.
In 2008, for example, Scott Roy (who also works at the NCBI) and Manuel Irimia (at the
University of Barcelona) argued that the intron data actually supported the Ecdysozoa hypothesis
(“Rare Genomic Characters Do Not Support Coelomata”).
35. Holton and Pisani, “Deep Genomic-Scale Analyses of the Metazoa Reject Coelomata.”
36.
In this tree, now generally known as the Ecdysozoa hypothesis, the bilaterians are divided
first into the protostomes and deuterostomes. the protostomes (or Protostomia) are then further
subdivided into two distinct groups: (1) the Lophotrochozoa (so called because of two distinctive
anatomical characters, a ciliated larva [trochophore] and a ciliated feeding structure [lophophore])
and (2) the Ecdysozoa (the molting animals).
37. Maley and Marshall, “The Coming of Age of Molecular Systematics,” 505.
38. As Maley and Marshall conclude, “Different representative species, in this case brine
shrimp or tarantula for the arthropods, yield wildly different inferred relationships among phyla”
(“The Coming of Age of Molecular Systematics,” 505).
39. According to Valentine, Jablonski, and Erwin, “Molecular evidence has produced a new
view of metazoan phylogeny, prompting new analyses of morphological, ultrastructural and devel-
opmental characters” (“Fossils, Molecules and Embryos,” 854).
40.
See Nielsen, Animal Evolution, 82.
41. Rokas et al., “Conflicting Phylogenetic Signals at the Base of the Metazoan Tree”; Ha-
lanych, “The New View of Animal Phylogeny”; Borchiellini et al., “Sponge Paraphyly and the
Origin of Metazoa.”
42. Rokas et al., “Conflicting Phylogenetic Signals at the Base of the Metazoan Tree”; Ha-
lanych, “The New View of Animal Phylogeny.”
43. Gura, “Bones, Molecules ... or Both?” 230. A 2004 paper in the Annual Review ofEcology
and Systematics puts it this way: “Molecular tools have profoundly rearranged our understanding
of metazoan phylogeny.” (Halanych, “The New View of Animal Phylogeny,” 229.)
44. Davalos et al., “Understanding Phylogenetic Incongruence: Lessons from Phyllostomid
Bats,” 993.
45. One might object here that building phylogenetic trees among the higher taxonomic
groups, such as the animal phyla, is an inherently tricky business—but that phylogenetic trees de-
scribing lower taxonomic groups, such as those within the phyla, show consistency among differ-
ent kinds of evidence. Of course, strictly speaking, even if there was evidence of a single coherent
tree connecting groups within a phylum, it would do nothing to establish ancestors of the phyla
themselves, but instead only members of the smaller groups within specific phyla. Nevertheless,
even among lower taxa the primary literature on phylogenetic inference challenges the treelike
picture of animal history.
Consider the Crustacea, for instance, a large group within the phylum Arthropoda. The
Crustacea include such familiar creatures as shrimp and lobsters. (Darwin himself published his
major technical work in biology on the classification of barnacles, a group [Cirripedia] within
the Crustacea.) Given the claims of Dawkins, Coyne, and Atkins, we might have expected that
evolutionary biologists would have long ago established a single univocal evolutionary history for a
well-studied group such as the Crustacea, and that molecular data would by now only be confirm-
ing what biologists have known all along. But note, instead, that Ronald Jenner, a zoologist and
expert on Crustacea at the British Museum of Natural History, describes crustacean phylogeny as
“essentially unresolved.” As he explains the situation, “Conflict is rife, irrespective of whether one
compares different morphological studies, molecular studies, or both” (“Higher-Level Crustacean
Phylogeny,” 143). The area of study remains “intensely contentious,” he continues, and “published
studies show very few points of consensus, even if one constrains the comparison to just the most
comprehensive and careful analyses” (151).
Other studies of different classes of organisms within the arthropod phyla introduce further
uncertainty. Insects provide another important example of such incongruity. Based on anatomi-
cal evidence, systematists have long held that insects are most closely related to the group that
contains centipedes and millipedes (called the myriapod group). Nevertheless, molecular studies
by F. Nardi and colleagues indicate that insects are more closely related to crustaceans. Simi-
larly, the same molecular study suggested that some wingless insects are more closely related to
crustaceans than they are to other insects, though anatomical studies indicate the opposite for

Notes
431
obvious reasons. This led the authors of the paper to conclude that insects (hexapods) are not
monophyletic— a view never anticipated by most evolutionary biologists. Because of incongrui-
ties between molecular and morphology-based trees, the Nardi team offered a puzzled observa-
tion: “Although this tree shows many interesting outcomes, it also contains some evidently
untenable relationships, which nevertheless have strong statistical support” (“Hexapod Origins,”
1887). But see Delsuc et al., “Comment on ‘Hexapod Origins: Monophyletic or Paraphyletic?’”
1482d; Nardi et al., “Response to Comment on ‘Hexapod Origins: Monophyletic or Paraphy-
letic?’ ” 1482e.
Studies of vertebrates, a subphylum of another phylum, the chordates, have revealed similar
contradictory phylogenetic relationships. For example, a recent paper on bat phylogenetics, noted
that “For more than a decade, evolutionary relationships among members of the New World bat
family Phyllostomidae inferred from morphological and molecular data have been in conflict.” The
authors “ruled out paralogy, lateral gene transfer, and poor taxon sampling and outgroup choices
among the processes leading to incongruent gene trees in phyllostomid bats.” The authors further
note that “differential rates of change and evolutionary mechanisms driving those rates produce
incongruent phylogenies. Incongruence among phylogenies estimated from different sets of
characters is pervasive. Phylogenetic conflict has become a more acute problem with the advent of
genome-scale data sets. These large data sets have confirmed that phylogenetic conflict is common,
and frequently the norm rather than the exception.” Davalos et al., “Understanding phylogenetic
incongruence: lessons from phyllostomid bats,” 991-1024 (internal citations omitted). See also
Patterson et al., “Congruence Between Molecular and Morphological Phylogenies,” 153-88.
46. Schwartz and Maresca, “Do Molecular Clocks Run at All?” 357.
47. James Valentine, for example, disputes the reality of the coelom as a shared characteristic
that defines a group, as advocates of the Coelomata hypothesis contended. As Valentine notes, the
“assumption of the monophyly of coelomic spaces” was one of the “major principles used to relate
the phyla.” In his view, however, the coelom evolved multiple times independently and thus cannot
be used as a homologous character defining a monophyletic group. He argues, instead, that “coe-
loms are polyphyletic. Few characters are simpler than fluid-filled cavities, and it is not difficult to
visualize them as evolving many times for a number of purposes” {On the Origin ofPhyla, 500).
48.
Figure 6.2 derived from: Figure
1 of Edgecombe et al., “Higher-Level Metazoan Relation-
ships: Recent Progress and Remaining Questions.”
49. For further discussion of the central position of germ cells in evolution, see Ewen-Campen,
Schwager, and Extavour, “The Molecular Machinery of Germ Line Specification.” As they explain:
“Sexually reproducing animals must ensure that one particularly important cell type is deter-
mined: the germ cells. These cells will be the sole progenitors of eggs and sperm in the sexually
mature adult, and as such, their correct specification during embryonic development is critical for
reproductive success and species survival” (3).
50. As is the case with mutations affecting other major organismal features, there is a remark-
able absence of examples of successful (i.e., stably transmitted) mutations that significantly modify
PGC formation in any animal group. Searching the experimental literature of the model systems
in developmental biology, such as fruit flies
(Drosophila), mice {Mus), and nematodes (C. elegans),
reveals instead many loss-of-function or loss-of-structure examples, including total absence of egg
cells (oocytes) in fruit flies (Lehmann, “Germ-Plasm Formation and Germ-Cell Determination in
Drosophila ’), germ-cell reduction and sterility in mice (Pellas et al., “Germ-Cell Deficient [gcd], an
Insertional Mutation Manifested as Infertility in Transgenic Mice”), and oocyte elimination with
consequent sterility in hermaphroditic nematodes (Kodoyianni, Maine, and Kimble, “Molecu-
lar Basis of Loss-of-Function Mutations in theglp-1 Gene of Caenorhabditis elegans”). See also
Youngren, “The Ter mutation in the dead end gene causes germ cell loss and testicular germ cell
tumours,” 360-64. Such examples of deleterious or catastrophic mutations could be multiplied
indefinitely from these and other model systems.
51. Andrew Johnson, associate professor and reader in genetics at the University of Not-
tingham, and several coauthors frame the point this way: “Germ cell development acting as a
constraint on embryonic morphogenesis is at first difficult to accept. However, the retention of
a pool of PGCs, which will later produce gametes, is a fundamental constraint on any sexually
reproducing organism, because the inability to pass inherited traits to subsequent generations will
terminate an individual's lineage. Therefore, changes in developmental processes that endanger the
maintenance ofPGCs will not be retained ” (“Evolution of Predetermined Germ Cells in Vertebrate
Embryos: Implications for Macroevolution,” 425, emphasis added).
52.
Extavour, “Evolution of the Bilaterian Germ Line,” 774. See Fig. 6.4.
53. Extavour, “Gray Anatomy,” 420. Instead, she postulates that “convergent evolution has
resulted in many different morphological, and possibly molecular genetic, solutions to the various
problems posed by sexual reproduction.”

432
Notes
54. Willmer and Holland, “Modern Approaches to Metazoan Relationships,” 691, emphasis in
original.
55. Willmer and Holland, “Modern Approaches to Metazoan Relationships,” 690.
56. Brusca and Brusca, Invertebrates, 120; 2nd ed., 115.
57.
Jenner, “Evolution of Animal Body Plans,” 209.
58.
In addition to convergent evolution, evolutionary biologists have offered a whole host of
explanations to account for the many instances where shared anatomical and molecular similar-
ity is not explicable by reference to vertical descent from a common ancestor, including: differing
rates of evolution (resulting from positive selection or purifying selection), long branch attraction,
rapid evolution, whole genome-fusion, coalescent (e.g., incomplete lineage sorting), DNA contami-
nation, and horizontal gene transfer.
Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) occurs when organisms (usually prokaryotes such as bacteria)
transfer genes to neighboring individuals. This mechanism provides a plausible explanation for
some phylogenetic incongruence in prokaryotes, although some mission-critical housekeeping
genes are thought to resist HGT. The mechanisms by which HGT occurs are well characterized,
and include transformation (incorporation of free DNA from the environment into a recipient
cell), transduction (transfer of DNA from one cell to another by a bacterial virus called a bacte-
riophage), and conjugation (transfer ofDNA by direct cell-to-cell contact via a pilus). Horizontal
gene transfer is less plausible however, in eukaryotes, where it occurs much less frequently and
potential mechanisms are far less well characterized, although it is thought to occur in some rare
cases between eukaryotes and prokaryotes, though more rarely, if at all, between different animals.
[See Doolittle, “Phylogenetic Classification and the Universal Tree,” 2124-28; Hall, “Contribu-
tion of Horizontal Gene Transfer to the Evolution of Saccharomyces cerevisiae,” 1102-15; Kondo,
“Genome Fragment of Wolbachia Endosymbiont Transferred to X Chromosome of Host Insect,”
14280-85.]
Another proposed explanation of phylogenetic conflict is called long-branch attraction, an
artifact of the phylogenetic algorithms, that results in preferentially grouping together related
lineages that diverged quickly, and then evolved separately over long periods of time. [Bergsten, “A
Review of Long-Branch Attraction,” 163-93.]
Another proposed cause of incongruity is a phenomenon called incomplete lineage sorting.
This occurs when a lineage splits and then rapidly splits again to yield three daughter species.
This second split takes place before the process of sorting is complete (i.e., the process by which a
daughter species gradually acquires its own unique set of genetic variants). This event is followed
by the loss of a random variant by genetic drift, and this may cause two species to group together
which otherwise would not. This process only accounts for phylogenetic incongruity between
closely related species, however.
While some of these explanations may be plausible in some cases, they remain what they are:
attempts to explain how two similar genes or traits could have arisen without those genes or traits
having been inherited from a common ancestor. Thus in each case they provide counter-examples
to the premise upon which all phylogenetic reconstruction is based—namely that similarity is an
indicator of common ancestry.
CHAPTER 7: PUNK EEK!
1.
Lecture Notes, Paul Nelson, University of Pittsburgh, 9-28-83.
2. Gould and Eldredge, “Punctuated Equilibrium: The Tempo and Mode of Evolution Recon-
sidered,” 147.
3. Gould and Eldredge, “Punctuated Equilibrium: The Tempo and Mode of Evolution Recon-
sidered,” 115.
4.
Eldredge, The Pattern ofEvolution, 21.
5.
Sepkoski,
“ ‘Radical’ or ‘Conservative’? The Origin and Early Reception of Punctuated
Equilibrium,” 301-25. Gould and Eldredge continued to jointly offered papers elaborating and
refining the theory of punctuated equilibrium until 1993. See Gould and Eldredge, “Punctuated
Equilibrium Comes of Age,” 223-27.
6. As the U.S. National Academy of Sciences explained, punctuated equilibrium sought to ac-
count for the absence of transitional intermediates by showing that “changes in populations might
occur too rapidly to leave many transitional fossils” (Teaching About Evolution and the Nature of
Science, 57).
7. Though Gould and Eldredge formulated punctuated equilibrium several years before
studies of the molecular evidence discussed in Chapter 6, their theory could also help explain the
conflicting phylogenetic histories discussed there as well. As Rokas, Kruger, and Carroll would
later argue (“Animal Evolution and the Molecular Signature of Radiations Compressed in Time”),

Notes
433
if the evolutionary process acts quickly enough, leaving little time for differences to accumulate in
key molecular markers, then biologists should expect phylogenetic studies to generate conflicting
trees.
8.
Sepkoski,
“ ‘Radical’ or ‘Conservative’?” 304.
9. Gould and Eldredge, “Punctuated Equilibrium Comes of Age”; Theobald, “Punctuated
Equilibrium” (“Punctuated equilibrium immediately lit a scientific controversy that has smol-
dered ever since”); Bell, “Gould’s Most Cherished Concept” (“Whether or not you agree with
Gould that punctuated equilibrium has become the conventional wisdom, it certainly has led to
a healthy debate concerning the sufficiency of neo-Darwinian theory to explain macroevolution,
the analysis of biostratigraphic sequences, and the increased incorporation of paleontological data
into evolutionary theory”); Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker, 240-41; Dennett, Darwins Danger-
ous Idea, 282-99; Ridley, “The Evolution Revolution”; Gould, “Evolution: Explosion, Not Ascent”;
Boffey, “100 Years after Darwin’s Death, His Theory Still Evolves”; Gleick, “The Pace of Evolution”;
Maynard Smith, “Darwinism Stays Unpunctured”; Levinton, “Punctuated Equilibrium”; Schopf,
Hoffman, and Gould, “Punctuated Equilibrium and the Fossil Record”; Lewin, “Punctuated
Equilibrium Is Now Old Hat” (noting that “the tenor of the debate” over punctuated equilibrium
“at times has been strident”); Levinton, “Bryozoan Morphological and Genetic Correspon-
dence”; Lemen and Freeman, “A Test of Macroevolutionary Problems with Neontological Data”;
Charlesworth, Lande, and Slatkin, “A Neo-Darwinian Commentary on Macroevolution”; Douglas
and Avise, “Speciation Rates and Morphological Divergence in Fishes
”
10.
Rose, ed. The Richness of Life: The Essential Stephen Jay Gould, 6. See also Turner, “Why We
Need Evolution by Jerks”; Ree, “Evolution by Jerks.”
11.
Sepkoski,
“ ‘Radical’ or ‘Conservative’?”
12. For an urn with 100 balls, 50 being red and 50 being blue, the probability of getting only
blue balls by randomly taking 50 balls out of the urn is given by the following considerations:
First, there’s only one way to select only blue balls. Second, in general for an urn with N
balls, there are C(N,k) different ways of choosing k balls from among these N (with k greater
than or equal to 0 but less than or equal to N). C(N,k) is equal to N! divided by the product
of k! and (N-k)!, where the exclamation mark is read “factorial” and equals the product of all
numbers less than or equal to the number in question down to
1. Thus “six factorial” = 6! = 6 x
5x4x3x2xl = 720. Factorials increase very quickly, faster than exponentials. C(N,k) is read
“N choose k.”
So for the problem above, the total number of ways to choose 50 specific balls out of 100 balls,
ignoring color, is C(100,50), which equals 100! divided by 50! times 50!, or 100!/(50! x 50!).
This number admits an exact calculation, which can be expressed in Mathematica as the fol-
lowing:
C(100,50) = 100,891,344,545,564,193,334,812,497,256 which is approximately 1.00891 x 1029
.
Thus, the probability of selecting k specific balls out of N total balls is of course the inverse of
that number, and can be distilled to the following equation:
p = k! x (N - k)! / N!
Applied to this problem, the odds of randomly selecting all 50 blue balls in a collection of 50
blue and 50 red balls is 1 divided by C(100,50), or approximately 9.91165 x 10'30
.
13. Using the same equation discussed in the above endnote, the probability of selecting 4
specific balls out of 8 total balls is given by the same equation as follows: 4! x (8 - 4)! / 8! =
1 in 70.
14. Gould and Eldredge, “Punctuated Equilibria: The Tempo and Mode of Evolution Reconsid-
ered,” 117.
15. Eldredge and Gould, “Punctuated Equilibria: An Alternative to Phyletic Gradualism,” 84.
16. Lieberman and Vrba, “Stephen Jay Gould on Species Selection: 30 Years of Insight”; Gould,
“The Meaning of Punctuated Equilibrium and Its Role in Validating a Hierarchical Approach to
Macroevolution.”
17. Gould, The Structure ofEvolutionary Theory, 703. As Gould and Eldredge also emphasized
elsewhere: “The main insight for revision [of evolutionary theory] holds that all substantial evolu-
tionary change must be reconceived as higher-level sorting based on differential success of certain
kinds of stable species, rather than as progressive transformation within lineages
[i.e., species]”
(“Punctuated Equilibrium Comes of Age,” 224).
18.
If natural selection acts upon a larger unit of selection, the species rather than the individ-
ual, it followed logically that evolution would occur in larger more discrete jumps. Nevertheless,
Gould and Eldredge rarely emphasized this implication of their conception of species selection
explicitly, instead highlighting allopatric speciation as the main reason for fossil discontinu-
ity. Stanley did, however, often draw a connection between the activity of species selection as a

434
Notes
mechanism of evolutionary change and fossil discontinuity. As he noted, “The validity of the spe-
cies as the fundamental unit of large-scale evolution depends upon the presence of discontinuities
between many species in the tree of life”
(Macroevolution
,
3).
19.
Schopf, Editorial Introduction to Eldredge and Gould, “Punctuated Equilibria: An Alter-
native to Phyletic Gradualism,” 82; Stanley, Macroevolution: Pattern and Process, 3.
20. Valentine and Erwin, “Interpreting Great Developmental Experiments”; see diagram
on p. 92.
21. Valentine and Erwin note that “transitional alliances are unknown or unconfirmed for any
of the [Cambrian] phyla,” and yet “the evolutionary explosion near the beginning of Cambrian
time was real and produced numerous [new] body plans” (“Interpreting Great Developmental
Experiments,” 84, 89).
22. Valentine and Erwin, “Interpreting Great Developmental Experiments,” 96.
23. Gould and Eldredge, “Punctuated Equilibrium Comes of Age.”
24. Gould and Eldredge, “Punctuated Equilibrium Comes of Age.”
25.
Schopf, Editorial Introduction to Eldredge and Gould, “Punctuated Equilibria: An Alter-
native to Phyletic Gradualism,” 84.
26.
Foote argued that “given estimates of [a] completeness [of the fossil record], [b] median
species duration,
[c] the time required for evolutionary transitions, and [d] the number of
.
.
.
higher-level transitions, we could obtain an estimate of the number of major transitions we should
expect to see in the fossil record.” His method provided a way to evaluate, as he puts it, “whether
the small number of documented major transitions provides strong evidence against evolution”
(“On the Probability of Ancestors in the Fossil Record,” 148).
Because variables [a], [b], and [d] are reasonably well established,
[c] the time required for
plausible mechanisms to produce macroevolutionary transitions stands as the crucial variable
in the analysis of any specific evolutionary model, including punctuated equilibrium. If the time
required to produce major evolutionary change is high, as it is for the neo-Darwinian mechanism
of change, then given current estimates of [a], [b], and [d], neo-Darwinism fails to account for the
data of the fossil record. Conversely, if a theory such as punctuated equilibrium can identify a fast
enough acting mechanism, then it could account for the paucity of transitional intermediates.
27.
Foote and Gould, “Cambrian and Recent Morphological Disparity,” 1816.
28. Darwin, On the Origin ofSpecies, 177.
29. As Gould and Eldredge explained: “Most evolutionary change, we argued, is concentrated
in rapid (often geologically instantaneous) events of speciation in small, peripherally isolated
populations (the theory of allopatric speciation)” (“Punctuated Equilibria: The Tempo and Mode
of Evolution Reconsidered,” 116-17). See also Lewin, “Punctuated Equilibrium Is Now Old Hat.”
30. Shu et al., “Lower Cambrian Vertebrates from South China.”
31. Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker, 265.
32.
Levinton, Genetics, Paleontology, and Macroevolution, 208.
33. Gould, The Structure ofEvolutionary Theory, 710.
34. Charlesworth, Lande, and Slatkin, “A Neo-Darwinian Commentary on Macroevolution,”
493. As David Jablonski concluded in 2008, “The extent and efficacy of the specific processes [of
species selection] remain poorly known” (“Species Selection,” 501).
35. Gould, The Structure ofEvolutionary Theory, 1005.
36. Gould, The Structure ofEvolutionary Theory, 55, emphasis added.
37. Gould and Eldredge, “Punctuated Equilibria: The Tempo and Mode of Evolution Reconsid-
ered,” 134.
38.
Sepkoski,
“ ‘Radical’ or ‘Conservative’?” 307.
39.
Sepkoski, “‘Radical’ or ‘Conservative’?” 7.
40. Gould, “Is a New and General Theory of Evolution Emerging?” 120. Because his colleagues
understood Gould to be offering a theory of macroevolution, many of Gould’s scientific colleagues
at the time thought of him, as Sepkoski notes, as an “ardent proponent of a radical (and perhaps
misguided) view of evolutionary change” (“‘Radical’ or ‘Conservative’?” 302).
41.
Sepkoski, “‘Radical’ or ‘Conservative’?” 302.
42.
Valentine and Erwin, “Interpreting Great Developmental Experiments,” 96.
CHAPTER 8: THE CAMBRIAN INFORMATION EXPLOSION
1.
Bowler, Theories ofHuman Evolution, 44-50.
2. Vorzimmer, “Charles Darwin and Blending Inheritance,” 371-90.
3.
Jenkins, Genetics, 13-15.
4.
Muller, “Artificial Transmutation of the Gene,” 84-87.
5. As Mayr and Provine put it, “Various geneticists
.
.
. demonstrated that seemingly

Notes
435
continuous variation is caused by discontinuous genetic factors [mutations] that obey the Mende-
lian rules in their mode of inheritance”
( The Evolutionary Synthesis, 31).
6.
Bowler, Evolution: The History ofan Idea, 331-39.
7.
Huxley, “The Evolutionary Vision,” 249, 253.
8.
Huxley, quoted in
“
‘At Random’: A Television Preview,” 45.
9. Watson and Crick, “A Structure for Deoxyribose Nucleic Acids,” 737-38.
10. For an animated demonstration, see the short video “Journey Inside the Cell” on my web-
site at SignatureintheCell.com.
11.
Valentine, “Late Precambrian Bilaterians.”
12.
Brocks et al., “Archean Molecular Fossils and the Early Rise of Eukaryotes.”
13.
Grotzinger et al., “Biostratigraphic and Geochronologic Constraints on Early Animal
Evolution.”
14. Ruppert et al, Invertebrate Zoology, 82.
15. Bowring et al., “Calibrating Rates of Early Cambrian Evolution.”
16.
Valentine, Origin of the Phyla, 73.
17. Koonin, “How Many Genes Can Make a Cell?”
18. Gerhart and Kirschner, Cells, Embryos, and Evolution, 121; Adams et al., “The Genome
Sequence of Drosophila melanogaster”; see also www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/?term=
drosophila%20melanogaster (accessed November 1, 2012).
19. Moreover, in addition to requiring a vast amount of new genetic information, building
a new animal from a single-celled organism also requires a way of arranging gene products
proteins—into higher levels of organization, including cell types, organs, and body plans. Later,
in Chapter 14, 1 will discuss the importance of these higher-level arrangements and why they also
constitute a kind of information—one that, although not stored in genes alone, nevertheless has to
be explained as well.
20. Shannon, “A Mathematical Theory of Communication.”
21. To determine how much Shannon information is present in any sequence of characters,
information scientists use a formula that converts probability measures into informational mea-
sures using a negative logarithmic function. A simple form of that equation can be expressed as
I = —log
2 p, where the negative sign indicates the inverse relationship between probability and
information.
22. Yockey, Information Theory and Molecular Biology, 110.
23. Shannon and Weaver, The Mathematical Theory ofCommunication, 8.
24.
Schneider, “Information Content of Individual Genetic Sequences”; Yockey, Information
Theory and Molecular Biology, 58-177.
25. DNA clearly does not convey meaningful information in the sense of “knowledge” con-
veyed to, and comprehended by, a conscious agent, although the precise sequences of bases could
be said to be meaningful in the sense that they are ‘significant’ to the function DNA performs.
Clearly, however, the cellular machinery that uses and “reads” the information in DNA to build
proteins is not conscious. Nevertheless, semantically meaningful information— a message, the
meaning of which is understood by a conscious agent—represents only a special kind offunctional
information. And all sequences of characters containing functional information can be distin-
guished from mere Shannon information in that the precise arrangement of characters or symbols
in such sequences matters to the function that they perform.
26.
Crick, “On Protein Synthesis,” 144, 153. See also Sarkar, “Biological Information,” 191.
CHAPTER 9: COMBINATORIAL INFLATION
1. Eden, “Inadequacies of Neo-Darwinian Evolution as a Scientific Theory,” 11.
2. The quotation and the historical material about the Geneva gathering are drawn from
G. R. Taylor, Great Evolution Mystery, 4.
3.
Schiitzenberger, “Algorithms and the Neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution,” 73-75.
4.
Schiitzenberger, “Algorithms and the Neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution,” 74-75.
5. Commenting on the symposium thirty years later in a now infamous article in Commen-
tary magazine, mathematician David Berlinski amplified Eden’s argument. As he explains, “How-
ever it may operate in life, randomness in language is the enemy of order, a way of annihilating
meaning. And not only in language, but in any language-like system” (“The Deniable Darwin”).
6. King and Jukes, “Non-Darwinian Evolution,” 788.
7. Eden, “Inadequacies of Neo-Darwinian Evolution as a Scientific Theory,” 110.
8.
Schiitzenberger, “Algorithms and the Neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution,” 74.
9. Ulam, “How to Formulate Mathematically Problems of Rate of Evolution,” 21.
10.
Eden, “Inadequacies of Neo-Darwinian Evolution as a Scientific Theory,” 7.

436
Notes
11. Denton, Evolution: A Theory in Crisis, 309-11.
12. Maynard Smith, “Natural Selection and the Concept of a Protein Space.”
13. Denton, Evolution, 324.
14.
Reidhaar- Olson and Sauer, “Functionally Acceptable Substitutions in Two Alpha-Helical
Regions of Lambda Repressor.”
15. Yockey, “On the Information Content of Cytochrome C.”
16.
Yockey, “On the Information Content of Cytochrome C.”
17.
Behe, “Experimental Support for Regarding Functional Classes of Proteins,” 66.
18. Lau and Dill, “Theory for Protein Mutability and Biogenesis.”
19.
Behe, “Experimental Support for Regarding Functional Classes of Proteins.”
CHAPTER 10: THE ORIGIN OF GENES AND PROTEINS
1. Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker: Why the Evidence ofEvolution Reveals a Universe With-
out Design, 46-47.
2.
For a critique of Dawkins’ simulation see Chapter 13 of Signature in the Cell. See
also Ewert, et al., “Efficient Per Query Information Extraction from a Hamming Oracle,”
290-97; Dembski, No Free Lunch, 181-216. See also Weasel Ware-Evolutionary Simulation at
http://evoinfo.org/weasel.
3. Reidhaar-Olson and Sauer, “Functionally Acceptable Substitutions in Two Alpha-Helical
Regions of Lambda Repressor,” 315.
4.
Protein scientists recognize an additional level of structure called quaternary structure.
Quaternary structures are formed from multiple protein folds, or multiple whole proteins.
5. As Reidhaar-Olson and Sauer note: “At [amino-acid] positions that are buried in the
structure, there are severe limitations on the number and type of residues allowed. At most surface
positions, many different [amino-acid] residues and residue types are tolerated” (“Functionally
Acceptable Substitutions in Two Alpha-Helical Regions of Lambda Repressor,” 306).
6. Axe, “Extreme Functional Sensitivity to Conservative Amino Acid Changes on Enzyme
Exteriors.”
7. Dawkins, Climbing Mount Improbable.
8.
Jensen, “Enzyme Recruitment in Evolution of New Function,” 409-25.
9. Axe, “Extreme Functional Sensitivity to Conservative Amino Acid Changes on Enzyme
Exteriors.”
10.
Axe, “Extreme Functional Sensitivity to Conservative Amino Acid Changes on Enzyme
Exteriors,” 585-96. Experimental work that Axe performed with colleague Ann Gauger, published
in 2011, also confirmed this result. See Gauger and Axe, “The Evolutionary Accessibility of New
Enzyme Functions: A Case Study from the Biotin Pathway.”
11. Axe, “Extreme Functional Sensitivity to Conservative Amino Acid Changes on Enzyme
Exteriors.”
12. Unfolded proteins also stick to other molecular entities within the cell or form what are
called inclusion bodies, in both cases impeding proper protein function. Moreover, even slight
elevations in temperature will accelerate the unfolding of already destabilized protein folds.
13. Axe’s experiments using a more sensitive screen for function had shown him that even
most single amino-acid changes will diminish the function of a protein enough to diminish its
fitness, even in cases where such changes do not eliminate function altogether.
14.
Blanco, Angrand, and Serrano, “Exploring the Conformational Properties of the Sequence
Space Between Two Proteins with Different Folds: An Experimental Study.” As they explain, “Both
the hydrophobic core residues and the surface residues are important in determining the structure
of the proteins” (741).
15. Neutral evolution in this context refers to a process alleged to explain the origin of new
functional genes and proteins from gene duplicates unhinged from selection pressure. A neutral
model of gene evolution is part of a more expansive and general neutral theory of evolution
proposed by Motoo Kimura in 1968. As Long et al. explain, Kimura’s model helped “describe
how gene duplicates could acquire new functions and ultimately be preserved in a lineage” (“The
Origin ofNew Genes,” 868). However, Kimura’s model of neutral evolution attempted to explain
facts and phenomena beyond just the origin of new genes. Thus, not everyone who accepts a neu-
tral model of gene origins subscribes to the whole of Kimura’s theory. Kimura, The Neutral Theory
ofMolecular Evolution.
16. Matthew Hahn notes that, “There appear to be 4 major mechanisms by which DNA is
duplicated: (1) unequal crossing-over, (2) duplicative (DNA) transposition, (3) retrotransposition,
and (4) polyploidization” (“Distinguishing Among Evolutionary Models for the Maintenance of
Gene Duplicates,” 606).

Notes
437
17. Axe, “Estimating the Prevalence of Protein Sequences Adopting Functional Enzyme Folds.”
18. Dembski, The Design Inference, 175.
19. Michael Behe made this calculation in The Edge ofEvolution based on a paper in
Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences U.S.A. that observed that approximately 1030 pro-
karyotes are formed on earth each year. [Whitman, “Prokaryotes: The unseen majority,” 6578-83.]
Since prokaryotes make up the overwhelming majority of organisms, he multiplied that number
by 10
10
, which is about twice the number of years the age of the earth. This allowed him to estimate
the total number of organisms that have lived on earth as “slightly fewer than 10 40 cells.” Behe, The
Edge ofEvolution, 64.
20. Bowring et al., “Calibrating Rates of Early Cambrian Evolution”; “A New Look at Evolu-
tionary Rates in Deep Time”; “Geochronology Comes of Age”; Kerr, “Evolution’s Big Bang Gets
Even More Explosive”; Monastersky, “Siberian Rocks Clock Biological Big Bang.”
21. Ohno, “The Notion of the Cambrian Pananimalia Genome.”
22. Dembski, The Design Inference, 175-223. Dembski often uses the figure
1 in 10150 as his
universal probability bound, but this figure derives from Dembski rounding up the exponent in
the figure that he actually calculates. See my discussion of the derivation of Dembski’s universal
probability bound in Signature in the Cell, Chapter 10.
23. Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker, 139.
CHAPTER 11: ASSUME A GENE
1. Stephen C. Meyer, “The Origin of Biological Information and the Higher Taxonomic
Categories.”
2. For detailed discussions of facts of the Sternberg case, see “Smithsonian Controversy,”
www.richardsternberg.com/smithsonian.php; U.S. Office of Special Counsel Letter (2005) at
www.discovery.org/f/1488; United States House of Representatives Committee on Govern-
ment Reform, Subcommittee Staff Report, “Intolerance and the Politicization of Science at the
Smithsonian” (December 2006), at www.discovery.org/f/1489; Appendix, United States House of
Representatives Committee on Government Reform, Subcommittee Staff Report (December 2006)
at www.discovery.org/f/1490.
3.
See Holden, “Defying Darwin”; Giles, “Peer-Reviewed Paper Defends Theory of Intelligent
Design,” 114; Agres, “Smithsonian ‘Discriminated ’Against Scientist”; Stokes, “
.
.
. And Smithson-
ian Has ID Troubles”; Monastersky, “Society Disowns Paper Attacking Darwinism.”
4.
Powell, “Controversial Editor Backed”; Klinghoffer, “The Branding of a Heretic.”
5.
Hagerty, “Intelligent Design and Academic Freedom.
6.
See www.talkreason.org/AboutUs.cfm.
7.
Gishlick, Matzke, and Elsberry, “Meyer’s Hopeless Monster,” www.talkreason.org/About
Us.cfm.
8.
Jones, Kitzmiller et al.
v. Dover Area School District.
9. Matzke and Gross, “Analyzing Critical Analysis,” 42.
10. Matzke and Gross, “Analyzing Critical Analysis,” 42.
11. Matzke and Gross, “Analyzing Critical Analysis,” 42.
12.
See Chapter 10, n. 15, for the four major mechanisms by which DNA is duplicated.
13. For example, see Zhen et al., “Parallel Molecular Evolution in an Herbivore Community”;
Li et al., “The Hearing Gene Prestin Unites Echolocating Bats and Whales”; Jones, “Molecular Evo-
lution”; Christin, Weinreich, and Bresnard, “Causes and Evolutionary Significance of Genetic Con-
vergence”; Rokas and Carroll, “Frequent and Widespread Parallel Evolution of Protein Sequences.”
According to Davalos and colleagues, “In-depth analyses of specific genes in the context of multi-
locus phylogenies have also shown that adaptive evolution leading to convergence, once thought to
be extremely rare, is as much a source of conflict among gene trees as it is between morphological
and molecular phylogenies” (“Understanding Phylogenetic Incongruence,” 993).
14. Shen et al., “Parallel Evolution of Auditory Genes for Echolocation in Bats and Toothed
Whales”; Li et al., “The Hearing Gene Prestin Unites Echolocating Bats and Whales”; Jones, “Mo-
lecular Evolution.”
15. Khalturin et al., “More Than Just Orphans”; Merhej and Raoult, “Rhizome of Life, Ca-
tastrophes, Sequence Exchanges, Gene Creations, and Giant Viruses”; Beiko, “Telling the Whole
Story in a 10,000-Genome World.”
16. Suen et al., “The Genome Sequence of the Leaf- Cutter Ant Atta cephalotes Reveals Insights
into Its Obligate Symbiotic Lifestyle” (“We also found 9,361 proteins that are unique to A. cepha-
lotes, representing over half of its predicted proteome,” 5). See also Smith et al., “Draft Genome
of the Globally Widespread and Invasive Argentine Ant (Linepithema humile)” (“A total of 7,184
genes (45%) were unique to L. humile relative to these three other species,” 2).

438
Notes
17. Tautz and Domazet-LoSo, “The Evolutionary Origin of Orphan Genes”; Beiko, “Telling
the Whole Story in a 10,000-Genome World”; Merhej and Raoult, “Rhizome of Life, Catastrophes,
Sequence Exchanges, Gene Creations, and Giant Viruses.”
18.
Lyell, Principles of Geology.
19.
See Pray and Zhaurova, “Barbara McClintock and the Discovery of Jumping Genes (Trans-
posons).”
20. Long et al., “The Origin of New Genes,” 867.
21. Nurminsky et al., “Selective Sweep of a Newly Evolved Sperm-Specific Gene in Drosoph-
ila
574.
22. Chen, DeVries, and Cheng, “Evolution of Antifreeze Glycoprotein Gene from a Trypsino-
gen Gene in Antarctic Notothenioid Fish,” 3816.
23. Courseaux and Nahon, “Birth of Two Chimeric Genes in the Hominidae Lineage.”
24. Knowles and McLysaght, “Recent de Novo Origin of Human Protein-Coding Genes.”
25. Wu, Irwin, and Zhang, “De Novo Origin of Human Protein-Coding Genes.”
26. Guerzoni and McLysaght, “De Novo Origins of Human Genes”; see also Wu, Irwin, and
Zhang, “De Novo Origin of Human Protein-Coding Genes.”
27.
Siepel, “Darwinian Alchemy.”
28.
Siepel, “Darwinian Alchemy.”
29.
Siepel, “Darwinian Alchemy.”
30. As Siepel notes, “These apparent de novo gene origins raise the question of how evolution
by natural selection can produce functional genes from noncoding DNA. While a single gene is
not as complex as a complete organ, such as an eye or even a feather, it still has a series of non-
trivial requirements for functionality, for instance, an ORF [an open reading frame], an encoded
protein that serves some useful purpose, a promoter capable of initiating transcription, and pres-
ence in a region of open chromatin structure that permits transcription to occur. How could all of
these pieces fall into place through the random processes of mutation, recombination, and neutral
drift
.
.
. ?” (“Darwinian Alchemy”).
31. Of course, one could argue that the mutational processes that Long invokes to explain the
origin of new genes from preexisting cassettes of genetic information themselves explain the origin
of the information in those cassettes in the first place. This view would suggest that the scenarios
that Long cites do not so much beg the question as much as generate a regress of explanation
terminating with the ultimate origin of biological information at the point of the origin of the first
life. This view implies that, although the ultimate origin of biological information and the closely
associated question of life’s first origin may remain a mystery, the processes that Long cites ac-
count for all subsequent informational increases during the course of biological evolution. But this
view still does not explain how shuffling preexisting cassettes of information generates the specific
arrangements of the characters that make up those cassettes.
32. Zhang, Zhang, and Rosenberg, “Adaptive Evolution of a Duplicated Pancreatic Ribo-
nuclease Gene in a Leaf-Eating Monkey.” The genes that code for these two proteins differ by
12 nucleotides in their coding sequences. Those nucleotide differences produce two proteins
that differ from each other in their overall electronegativity. This difference, in turn, allows the
protein RNASE1B to operate at a slightly lower pH than the other protein, RNASE1. Since other
primates have only the RNASE1 protein, Zhang, Zhang, and Rosenberg hypothesize that the
evolution of this second gene and protein gave individuals within the species of monkey a selec-
tive advantage. To explain the origin of the second gene, they posit a common ancestral gene, a
gene duplication event, and the accumulation of different mutations on the duplicate copy (the
RNASE1B) over time.
33.
In this study (“Adaptive Evolution of Cid, a Centromere-Specific Histone in Drosophila”),
Malik and Henikoff infer that “adaptive evolution has occurred on both the D. melanogaster and
D. simulans lineages since their split from a common ancestor.” They base this inference on an
analysis of the ratio of “synonymous” and “nonsynonymous” mutations in the genomes of these
organisms. The study found that many of the differences/mutations in nucleotide base sequences
changed amino-acid sequence (called “nonsynonymous” mutations), while some did not (called
synonymous, or “silent,” mutations). A higher percentage of these differences changed the amino-
acid sequence than would be expected from neutral evolution alone, leading the authors to infer
that “adaptive evolution has occurred on both the D. melanogaster and D. simulans lineages since
their split from a common ancestor.” Since some of these differences exist in the region of the
protein that binds to the chromosome, they may have affected the protein’s functional binding
ability. But the authors of the paper identify no specific functional effects of these amino-acid
differences and base their claim of “strong evidence for the adaptive evolution of Cid” solely upon
comparisons of the relative numbers of a handful of synonymous and nonsynonymous differences
between the genes.

Notes
439
34. Enard et al., “Molecular Evolution of FOXP2, a Gene Involved in Speech and Language”;
Zhang, Webb, and Podlaha, “Accelerated Protein Evolution and Origins of Human-Specific
Features.”
35. Enard et al., “Molecular Evolution of FOXP2, a Gene Involved in Speech and Language.”
36. Long et al., “The Origin of New Genes,” 866.
37.
Darnell and Doolittle, “Speculations on the Early Course of Evolution”; Hall, Liu, and
Shub, “Exon Shuffling by Recombination Between Self- Splicing Introns of Bacteriophage T4”;
Rogers, “Split-Gene Evolution”; Gilbert, “The Exon Theory of Genes”; Doolittle et al., “Relation-
ships of Human Protein Sequences to Those of Other Organisms.”
38.
For example, Arli A. Parikesit and colleagues note that “Although there is a statistically
significant correlation between protein domain boundaries and exon boundaries, about two thirds
of the annotated protein domains are interrupted by at least one intron, and on average a domain
contains 3 or 4 introns” (“Quantitative Comparison of Genomic-Wide Protein Domain Distribu-
tions,” 96-97; internal citations omitted).
39. Gauger, “Why Proteins Aren’t Easily Recombined.”
40. Axe, “The Limits of Complex Adaptation.” See also Voigt et al., “Protein Building Blocks
Preserved by Recombination.”
41. Experimental shuffling of genes has proven fruitful only when the parent genes are highly
similar. See He, Friedman, and Bailey-Kellogg, “Algorithms for Optimizing Cross-Overs in DNA
Shuffling.”
42.
In 2012, a research group at the University of Washington reported success in designing a
few stable protein folds using a few rules, a lot of computational analysis, and trial and error (only
10 percent of the designed proteins folded as predicted). Though these proteins did form stable
folds, they did not perform any actual biological function. The researchers acknowledge that there
is likely a tradeoff between stability and functionality in natural proteins. It remains to be seen
whether these methods of sequence engineering can create new, stable folds capable of enzymatic
activity. What this research highlights is the extreme difficulty of intelligently designing a stable
and functional protein from scratch, even with the best minds and computational resources
working on the problem. There is, therefore, little reason to think that unguided process of exon
shuffling could generate both a stable and functional protein. See Nobuyasu et al., “Principles for
Designing Ideal Protein Structures”; Marshall, “Proteins Made to Order.”
43. Altamirano et al., “Directed Evolution of New Catalytic Activity Using the Alpha/Beta-
Barrel Scaffold.” See also Altamirano et al., “Retraction: Directed Evolution of New Catalytic
Activity Using the Alpha/Beta-Barrel Scaffold.”
44. Gauger, “Why Proteins Aren’t Easily Recombined.”
45. Axe, “The Case Against Darwinian Origin of Protein Folds.”
46.
See, e.g., Long and Langley, “Natural Selection and the Origin of Jingwei, a Chimeric
Processed Functional Gene in Drosophila ”; Wang et al., “Origin of Sphinx, a Young Chimeric RNA
Gene in Drosophila melanogaster”; Begun, “Origin and Evolution of a New Gene Descended from
Alcohol Dehydrogenase in Drosophila .”
47. Long et al., “Exon Shuffling and the Origin of the Mitochondrial Targeting Function in
Plant Cytochrome cl Precursor.”
48. Long et al., “The Origin of New Genes. See also Begun, “Origin and Evolution of a New
Gene Descended from Alcohol Dehydrogenase in Drosophila .”
49. Nurminsky et al., “Selective Sweep of a Newly Evolved Sperm-Specific Gene in Drosoph-
ila”
50. Nurminsky et al., “Selective Sweep of a Newly Evolved Sperm-Specific Gene in Drosoph-
ila .”
51.
Brosius, “The Contribution of RNAs and Retroposition to Evolutionary Novelties.”
52. Begun, “Origin and Evolution of a New Gene Descended from Alcohol Dehydrogenase in
Drosophila .”
53. Begun, “Origin and Evolution of a New Gene Descended from Alcohol Dehydrogenase in
Drosophila .”
54.
Papers cited by Long where natural selection was invoked even though the function of the
gene and thus the function being selected for was unknown include Begun, “Origin and Evolution
of a New Gene Descended from Alcohol Dehydrogenase in Drosophila ”; Long and Langley, “Natu-
ral Selection and the Origin of Jingwei, a Chimeric Processed Functional Gene in Drosophila”;
and Johnson et al., “Positive Selection of a Gene Family During the Emergence of Humans and
African Apes.”
55. Logsdon and Doolittle, “Origin of Antifreeze Protein Genes.”
56. Courseaux and Nahon, “Birth of Two Chimeric Genes in the Hominidae Lineage.”
57.
Paulding, Ruvolo, and Haber, “The Tre2
( USP6 ) Oncogene Is a Hominoid-Specific Gene.”

440
Notes
58. Chen, DeVries, and Cheng, “Convergent Evolution of Antifreeze Glycoproteins in Antarc-
tic Notothenioid Fish and Arctic Cod.”
59. Logsdon and Doolittle, “Origin of Antifreeze Protein Genes.”
60. Johnson et al., “Positive Selection of a Gene Family During the Emergence of Humans and
African Apes.”
61.
See Nurminsky et al., “Selective Sweep of a Newly Evolved Sperm-Specific Gene in Dro-
sophila ”; Chen, DeVries, and Cheng, “Evolution of Antifreeze Glycoprotein Gene from a Tryp-
sinogen Gene in Antarctic Notothenioid Fish”; Courseaux and Nahon, “Birth of Two Chimeric
Genes in the Hominidae Lineage”; Knowles and McLysaght, “Recent de Novo Origin of Human
Protein-Coding Genes”; Wu, Irwin, and Zhang, “De Novo Origin of Human Protein-Coding
Genes”; Siepel, “Darwinian Alchemy.”
CHAPTER 12: COMPLEX ADAPTATIONS AND THE NEO-DARWINIAN MATH
1.
Frazzetta, “From Hopeful Monsters to Bolyerine Snakes?” 62-63.
2.
Frazzetta, “From Hopeful Monsters to Bolyerine Snakes?” 63.
3. Gould, “Return of the Hopeful Monsters,” 28.
4.
Frazzetta, “From Hopeful Monsters to Bolyerine Snakes?” 63.
5.
Frazzetta, Complex Adaptations in Evolving Populations, 20.
6. As Darwin wrote in the Origin, “If we must compare the eye to an optical instrument,
we ought in imagination to take a thick layer of transparent tissue, with a nerve sensitive to light
beneath, and then suppose every part of this layer to be continually changing slowly in density, so
as to separate into layers of different densities and thicknesses, placed at different distances from
each other, and with the surfaces of each layer slowly changing in form” (188-89).
7.
Frazzetta, Complex Adaptations in Evolving Populations, 21.
8.
Frazzetta, “Modeling Complex Morphological Change in Evolution,” 129.
9.
Frazzetta, “Modeling Complex Morphological Change in Evolution,” 130.
10.
Ehrlich and Holm, The Process ofEvolution, 157.
11.
Until a famous experiment performed by Oswald Avery of the Rockefeller Institute in
1944, many biologists still suspected that proteins might actually be the repositories of genetic
information. Meyer, Signature in the Cell, 66. Avery, MacCleod, and McCarty, “Induction of
Transformation by a Deoxyribonucleic Acid Fraction Isolated from Pneumococcus Type III.”
12.
Bateson, “Heredity and Variation in Modern Lights,” 83-84.
13. Withgott, “John Maynard Smith Dies.”
14.
Salisbury, “Natural Selection and the Complexity of the Gene,” 342-43.
15. Maynard Smith, “Natural Selection and the Concept of a Protein Space,” 564.
16. As Maynard Smith writes in Nature: “If evolution by natural selection is to occur, func-
tional proteins must form a continuous network which can be traversed by unit mutational steps
without passing through nonfunctional intermediates” (“Natural Selection and the Concept of a
Protein Space,” 564).
17. Maynard Smith, “Natural Selection and the Concept of a Protein Space,” 564, emphasis
added.
18. Maynard Smith, “Natural Selection and the Concept of a Protein Space,” 564.
19.
Orr, “The Genetic Theory of Adaptation,” 123.
20. Behe and Snoke, “Simulating Evolution by Gene Duplication of Protein Features That
Require Multiple Amino Acid Residues.”
21. Wen-Hsiung , Molecular Evolution, 427
22. Wen-Hsiung, Molecular Evolution, 427.
23.
Behe, The Edge ofEvolution, 54.
24. “Powerball—Prizes and Odds,” Powerball, http://www.powerball.com/powerball
/pb_prizes.asp.
25. “Powerball— Prizes and Odds,” Powerball, http://www.powerball.com/powerball
/pb_prizes.asp.
26. Behe and Snoke, “Simulating Evolution by Gene Duplication of Protein Features That
Require Multiple Amino Acid Residues,” 2661.
27. Lynch and Conery, “The Origins of Genome Complexity,” 1401-02.
28. Behe and Snoke, “Simulating Evolution by Gene Duplication of Protein Features That
Require Multiple Amino Acid Residues,” 2661.
29. For the purpose of Behe’s argument it did not matter whether the mutations involved
in a single CCC trait arose in a stepwise, or coordinated fashion. Behe was not calculating how
long it would take for a single CCC trait to arise. That chloroquine resistance only arises once in
every 1020 malarial cells was an observed empirical fact based upon public health studies, not a

Notes
441
calculation of waiting times based upon a population genetics model. [See White, “Antimalarial
Drug Resistance,” 1085.] What Behe was calculating was how long it would take for a hypothetical
trait to arise that did require two coordinated mutations, each of the complexity of a single CCC,
in order to function—what he called a “double CCC.” Whether or not generating a single CCC
itself required coordinated mutations was irrelevant. This aspect of his argument has been largely
misunderstood by his critics. [See Miller, “Falling Over the Edge,” 1055-56; Gross, “Design for
Living,” 73; Coyne, “The Great Mutator (Review of The Edge ofEvolution, by Michael J. Behe),”
40-42; Nicholas J. Matzke, “The Edge of Creationism,” 566-67.] It’s worth noting that although
Behe s calculation was for a hypothetical trait, he went on to argue on independent biological
grounds that “life is bursting” (63) with features that would require a double CCC to arise.
30.
Behe, The Edge ofEvolution, 135.
31.
This assumes that every one of these organisms would be under selection for that particu-
lar trait— a completely unrealistic assumption.
32.
Durrett and Schmidt, “Waiting for Two Mutations,” 1507.
33.
Behe, The Edge ofEvolution, 84-102.
34. Gauger and Axe, “The Evolutionary Accessibility of New Enzyme Functions: A Case Study
from the Biotin Pathway.”
35. Gauger et al., “Reductive Evolution Can Prevent Populations from Taking Simple Adaptive
Paths to High Fitness”; Durrett and Schmidt, “Waiting for Two Mutations.”
CHAPTER 13: THE ORIGIN OF BODY PLANS
1.
Niisslein-Volhard and Wieschaus, “Mutations Affecting Segment Number and Polarity”;
Wieschaus, “From Molecular Patterns to Morphogenesis.” As he comments: “If transcription of
a gene was essential for embryonic development, homozygous embryos [i.e., those missing both
copies of the gene] should develop abnormally when that gene was eliminated
Based on these
defects, it should be possible to reconstruct the normal role of each gene” (316).
2.
St. Johnston, “The Art and Design of Genetic Screens,” 177.
3. Quotes recorded in contemporaneous notes taken by philosopher of biology Paul Nelson,
who was in attendance at this lecture.
4. Quotes recorded in contemporaneous notes taken by philosopher of biology Paul Nelson,
who was in attendance at this lecture.
5.
Arthur, The Origin ofAnimal Body Plans, 21; Cameron et al., “Evolution of the Chordate
Body Plan: New Insights from Phylogenetic Analyses of Deuterostome Phyla”; Michael, “Arthro-
pods: Developmental Diversity Within a (Super) Phylum”; Peterson and Davidson, “Regulatory
Evolution and the Origin of the Bilaterians”; Carroll, “Endless Forms: The Evolution of Gene
Regulation and Morphological Diversity”; Haider et al., “Induction of Ectopic Eyes by Targeted
Expression of the Eyeless Gene in Drosophila .”
6.
Arthur, The Origin ofAnimal Body Plans, 21.
7. Van Valen, “How Do Major Evolutionary Changes Occur?” 173.
8. Thomson, “Macroevolution,” 111.
9. John and Miklos, The Eukaryote Genome in Development and Evolution, 309.
10. Thomson, “Macroevolution.”
11.
See, e.g., the special issue of Development (December 1996) dedicated to the large-scale
mutagenesis of the model vertebrate Danio rerio (the zebrafish), especially Haffter et al., “The
Identification of Genes with Unique and Essential Functions in the Development of the Zebraf-
ish, Danio rerio”; or the many fruit-fly mutagenesis experiments summarized in Bate and Arias,
eds., The Development ofDrosophila melanogaster. Summarizing the evidence from a wide range
of animal systems, Wallace Arthur writes, “Those genes that control key early developmental
processes are involved in the establishment of the basic body plan. Mutations in these genes
will usually be extremely disadvantageous, and it is conceivable that they are always so” (The
Origin ofAnimal Body Plans, 14, emphasis in original). Arthur goes on to speculate that because
developmental regulatory genes often differ between phyla, perhaps “mutations of these genes are
sometimes advantageous” (15). He offers no evidence for such mutations, however, other than as a
deduction from his prior assumption of common descent.
12.
Fisher, The Genetical Theory ofNatural Selection, 44.
13. Wallace, “Adaptation, Neo-Darwinian Tautology, and Population Fitness,” 70.
14.
Niisslein-Volhard and Wieschaus, “Mutations Affecting Segment Number and Polarity in
Drosophila”; Lawrence and Struhl, “Morphogens, Compartments and Pattern.”
15. Van Valen, “How Do Major Evolutionary Changes Occur?” 173.
16. McDonald, “The Molecular Basis of Adaptation,” 93.
17. McDonald, “The Molecular Basis of Adaptation,” 93.

442
Notes
18. Wimsatt, “Generativity, Entrenchment, Evolution, and Innateness: Philosophy, Evo-
lutionary Biology, and Conceptual Foundations of Science”; Wimsatt and Schank, “Genera-
tive Entrenchment, Modularity and Evolvability: When Genic Selection Meets the Whole
Organism.”
19. Nelson notes that there is one noteworthy exception to this generalization: the loss of
structures. A wide range of well-documented cases—including cave animals, island birds and
insects, and marine and freshwater fishes—show that many animals will tolerate, or actually
thrive, after losing traits to mutation—as long as those traits are not essential for survival in some
specialized environment. For example, macromutations resulting in loss of vision have had no del-
eterious effects on some species of now blind cave fish that no longer have a need to see. Similarly,
macromutations that disrupt wing formation in an insect— ordinarily devastating in an environ-
ment where functional wings are essential equipment—might well be tolerated in an island setting
where that species faces no need to fly. The processes that generate these exceptions, however, do
not help to explain the origin of form such as occurs in the Cambrian explosion. Clearly, processes
that result in a loss of form and structure cannot be credibly invoked to explain the origin of form
and structure in the first place.
20. Darwin, On the Origin ofSpecies, 108.
21. Lovtrup, “Semantics, Logic and Vulgate Neo-Darwinism,” 162.
22.
Britten and Davidson, “Gene Regulation for Higher Cells,” 57.
23.
Britten and Davidson, “Gene Regulation for Higher Cells,” 57. One exception to this rule
are cells called “erythrocytes” in humans.
24.
Britten and Davidson, “Gene Regulation for Higher Cells,” 57.
25.
Britten and Davidson, “Gene Regulation for Higher Cells,” 353.
26. Cameron et al., “A Sea Urchin Genome Project,” 9514.
27.
Oliveri, Tu, and Davidson, “Global Regulatory Logic for Specification of an Embryonic
Cell Lineage.”
28. Davidson, The Regulatory Genome, 16.
29. Davidson, The Regulatory Genome, 16.
30. Davidson, “Evolutionary Bioscience as Regulatory Systems Biology,” 38.
31. Davidson, “Evolutionary Bioscience as Regulatory Systems Biology,” 40, emphasis added.
32. As Davidson explains, “Interference with expression of any [multiply linked dGRNs] by
mutation or experimental manipulation has severe effects on the phase of development that they
initiate. This accentuates the selective conservation of the whole subcircuit, on pain of develop-
mental catastrophe” (Davidson and Erwin, “An Integrated View of Precambrian Eumetazoan
Evolution,” 8).
33. Davidson, The Regulatory Genome, 195.
34. Davidson, “Evolutionary Bioscience as Regulatory Systems Biology,” 35-36.
CHAPTER 14: THE EPIGENETIC REVOLUTION
1. Spemann and Mangold, “Induction of Embryonic Primordia by Implantation of Organiz-
ers from a Different Species.”
2.
Harvey, “Parthenogenetic Merogony or Cleavage Without Nuclei in Arbacia punctulata”;
“A Comparison of the Development of Nucleate and Non-nucleate Eggs of Arbacia punctulata.”
3.
Brachet, Denis, and De Vitry, “The Effects of Actinomycin D and Puromycin on Morpho-
genesis in Amphibian Eggs and Acetabularia mediterranean
4. Masui, Forer, and Zimmerman, “Induction of Cleavage in Nucleated and Enucleated Frog
Eggs by Injection of Isolated Sea-Urchin Mitotic Apparatus.”
5. Muller and Newman, “Origination of Organismal Form,” 8.
6. Muller and Newman, “Origination of Organismal Form,” 8.
7. Muller and Newman, “Origination of Organismal Form,” 7.
8. Muller and Newman, “Origination of Organismal Form,” 7. Or as Muller also explains,
the question of how “individualized constructional elements” are organized during “the evolution
of organismal form” is “not satisfactorily answered by current evolutionary theories”; Muller,
“Homology,” 57-58.
9.
Levinton, Genetics, Paleontology, and Macroevolution, 485.
10.
In 1942 Conrad Waddington coined the word “epigenetics” to refer to the study of “the
processes involved in the mechanism by which the genes of the genotype bring about phenotypic
effects” (“The Epigenotype,”
1). Some more recent biologists have used it to refer to information in
chromosomal structures that do not depend on the underlying DNA sequence. I will use it to refer
to any biological information that is not encoded in a DNA sequence.
11. Goodwin, “What Are the Causes of Morphogenesis?” Nijhout, “Metaphors and the Role of

Notes
443
Genes in Development”; Sapp, Beyond the Gene; Muller and Newman, “Origination of Organismal
Form”; Brenner, “The Genetics of Behaviour”; Harold, The Way of the Cell.
12.
Harold, The Way of the Cell, 125.
13.
Harold, “From Morphogenes to Morphogenesis,” 2774; Moss, What Genes Cant Do. Of
course, many proteins bind chemically with each other to form complexes and structures within
cells. Nevertheless, these “self-organizational” properties do not fully account for higher levels
of organization in cells, organs, or body plans. Or, as Moss has explained “Neither DNA nor any
other aperiodic crystal constitutes a unique repository of heritable stability in the cell; in addition,
the chemistry of the solid state does not constitute either a unique or even an ontologically or
causally privileged basis for explaining the existence and continuity of order in the living world
.
.
.” Moss, What Genes Cant Do, 76.
14.
Wells, “Making Sense of Biology,” 121.
15.
Harold, The Way of the Cell, 125.
16.
Ally et al., “Opposite-Polarity Motors Activate One Another to Trigger Cargo Transport in
Live Cells”; Gagnon and Mowry, “Molecular Motors.”
17. Marshall and Rosenbaum, “Are There Nucleic Acids in the Centrosome?”
18.
Poyton, “Memory and Membranes”; Edidin, “Patches, Posts and Fences.”
19. Frohnhofer and Niisslein-Volhard, “Organization of Anterior Pattern in the Drosophila
Embryo by the Maternal Gene Bicoid”; Lehmann and Niisslein-Volhard, “The Maternal Gene
Nanos Has a Central Role in Posterior Pattern Formation of the Drosophila Embryo.”
20. Roth and Lynch, “Symmetry Breaking During Drosophila Oogenesis.”
21. Skou, “The Identification of the Sodium-Pump as the Membrane-Bound Na+ /K
+-ATPase.”
22.
Levin, “Bioelectromagnetics in Morphogenesis.”
23.
Shi and Borgens, “Three-Dimensional Gradients of Voltage During Development.”
24.
Schnaar, “The Membrane Is the Message,” 34-40.
25.
Schnaar, “The Membrane Is the Message,” 34-40; Gabius et al., “Chemical Biology of the
Sugar Code,” 740-764; Gabius, “Biological Information Transfer Beyond the Genetic Code: The
Sugar Code,” 108-121.
26. Gabius et al., “Chemical Biology of the Sugar Code,” 741. See also Gabius, “Biological
Information Transfer Beyond the Genetic Code: The Sugar Code,” 108-21.
27.
Gabius, “Biological Information Transfer Beyond the Genetic Code,” 109; Gabius et al.,
“Chemical Biology of the Sugar Code,” 741.
28.
Spiro, “Protein Glycosylation.”
29.
Palade, “Membrane Biogenesis.”
30.
Babu, Kriwacki, and Pappu, “Versatility from Protein Disorder”; Uversky and Dunker,
“Understanding Protein Non-Folding”; Fuxreiter and Tompa, “Fuzzy Complexes.”
31.
Wells, “Making Sense of Biology: The Evidence for Development by Design,” 121.
32. McNiven and Porter, “The Centrosome.”
33. Lange et al., “Centriole Duplication and Maturation in Animal Cells”; Marshall and
Rosenbaum, “Are There Nucleic Acids in the Centrosome?”
34. Sonneborn, “Determination, Development, and Inheritance of the Structure of the Cell
Cortex,” 1-13; Frankel, “Propagation of cortical differences in tetrahymena ,” 607-623; Nanney,
“The ciliates and the cytoplasm,” 163-170.
35. Moss, What Genes Cant Do.
36.
Harold, “From Morphogenes to Morphogenesis,” 2767.
37.
See Muller and Newman, “The Origination of Organismal Form,” 7.
38. Thomson, “Macroevolution,” 107.
39.
Miklos, “Emergence of Organizational Complexities During Metazoan Evolution.”
40.
Gilbert, Opitz, and Raff, “Resynthesizing Evolutionary and Developmental Biology,” 361.
The Brian Goodwin quotation is from How the Leopard Changed Its Spots.
41.
Gilbert, Opitz, and Raff, “Resynthesizing Evolutionary and Developmental Biology.” Specifi-
cally, they argue that changes in morphogenetic fields might produce large-scale changes in the
developmental programs and, ultimately, in the body plans of organisms. However, they offer no
evidence that such fields—if indeed they exist—can be altered to produce advantageous variations in
body plan, though such a condition is necessary to any successful causal theory of macroevolution.
42. Webster, How the Leopard Changed Its Spots, 33; Webster and Goodwin, Form and Trans-
formation, x; Gunter Theifien, “The Proper Place of Hopeful Monsters in Evolutionary Biology,”
351; Marc Kirschner and John Gerhart, The Plausibility of Life, 13; Schwartz, Sudden Origins, 3,
299-300; Erwin, “Macroevolution Is More Than Repeated Rounds of Microevolution”; Davidson,
“Evolutionary Bioscience as Regulatory Systems Biology,” 35; Koonin, “The Origin at 150,” 473-5;
Conway Morris, “Walcott, the Burgess Shale, and Rumours of a Post-Darwinian World,” R928-
R930; Carroll, “Towards a New Evolutionary Synthesis,” 27; Wagner, “What Is the Promise of

444
Notes
Developmental Evolution?”; Wagner and Stadler, “Quasi-independence, Homology and the Unity-
of Type”; Becker and Lonnig, “Transposons: Eukaryotic,” 529-39; Lonnig and Saedler, “Chromo-
somal Rearrangements and Transposable Elements,” 402; Muller and Newman, “Origination of
Organismal Form,” 7; Kauffman, At Home in the Universe , 8; Valentine and Erwin, “Interpreting
Great Developmental Experiments,” 96; Sermonti, Why Is a Fly Not a Horse?; Lynch, The Origins of
Genome Architecture, 369; Shapiro, Evolution, 89, 128.
The perspective of Eugene Koonin, a biologist at the National Center for Biotechnol-
ogy Information at the National Institutes of Health, provides just one good example of this
skepticism. He argues: “The edifice of the modern synthesis has crumbled, apparently, beyond
repair
.
.
. The summary of the state of affairs on the 150th anniversary of the Origin is somewhat
shocking. In the postgenomic era, all major tenets of the modern synthesis have been, if not out-
right overturned, replaced by a new and incomparably more complex vision of the key aspects of
evolution. So, not to mince words, the modern synthesis is gone. What comes next? The answer
suggested by the Darwinian discourse of 2009 is a postmodern state, not so far a postmodern
synthesis. Above all, such a state is characterized by the pluralism of processes and patterns in
evolution that defies any straightforward generalization.” Koonin, “The Origin at 150,” 473-75.
David J. Depew and Bruce H. Weber, writing in the journal Biological Theory, are even more
frank: “Darwinism in its current scientific incarnation has pretty much reached the end of its
rope” (89-102).
CHAPTER 15: THE POST-DARWINIAN WORLD AND SELF-ORGANIZATION
1. Conway Morris, “Walcott, the Burgess Shale and Rumours of a Post-Darwinian World,”
R928.
2. Conway Morris, “Walcott, the Burgess Shale and Rumours of a Post-Darwinian
World,” R930.
3. Mazur, The Altenberg 16: An Expose of the Evolution Industry. See also Whitfield, “Biologi-
cal Theory.”
4. Budd, quoted in Whitfield, “Biological Theory,” 282.
5. Valentine and Erwin, “Interpreting Great Developmental Experiments,” 97.
6.
Endler, Natural Selection in the Wild, 46, 248; Lewontin, “Adaptation,” 212-30.
7. Gerhart and Kirschner, The Plausibility of Life: Resolving Darwins Dilemma, 10.
8. Kauffman, The Origins of Order: Self-Organization and Selection in Evolution.
9.
In The Origins of Order, Kauffman seeks to show that self-organizational processes could
help account for both the origin of the first life and the origin of subsequent forms of life, includ-
ing new animal body plans. In Signature in the Cell,
I examined Kauffmans specific proposal for
explaining the origin of the first life. Here I’ll examine his proposal for explaining the origin of
animal form.
10. Kauffman, The Origins of Order, 443.
11. Kauffman, The Origins of Order, 443.
12. Kauffman, The Origins of Order, 443.
13. Kauffman, The Origins of Order, 537.
14. Kauffman, The Origins of Order, 539.
15. Kauffman, The Origins of Order, 549-66.
16. Kauffman, The Origins of Order, 590.
17. Kauffman, The Origins of Order, 298.
18. Kauffman, The Origins of Order, 537, emphasis added.
19. Kauffman, At Home in the Universe, 68.
20. Kauffman, At Home in the Universe, 47-92.
21. Kauffman, At Home in the Universe, 71.
22. Kauffman, At Home in the Universe, 75-92.
23. Kauffman, At Home in the Universe, 86-88.
24. Kauffman, At Home in the Universe, 85, emphasis added.
25. Kauffman, At Home in the Universe, 53, 89, 102.
26. Kauffman, At Home in the Universe, 200.
27.
Indeed, Kauffmann explicitly notes, “Mutants affecting early stages of development disrupt
development more than do mutants affecting late stages of development. A mutation disrupting
formation of the spinal column and cord is more likely to be lethal than one affecting the number
of fingers that form” (At Home in the Universe, 200).
28. Newman, “Dynamical Patterning Modules.”
29. Newman, “Dynamical Patterning Modules,” 296; see also “The Developmental Genetic
Toolkit and the Molecular Homology-Analogy Paradox.”

Notes
445
30. Newman, “Dynamical Patterning Modules,” 284.
31. Newman, “Dynamical Patterning Modules,” 284.
32. Newman, “Dynamical Patterning Modules,” 285.
33. Newman, “Dynamical Patterning Modules,” 285.
34. Newman, “Animal Egg as Evolutionary Innovation,” 570.
35. Newman, “Animal Egg as Evolutionary Innovation”; “Dynamical Patterning Modules.”
36. Newman, “Animal Egg as Evolutionary Innovation,” 470—71; see also Newman and Bhat,
“Dynamical Patterning Modules: Physico-Genetic Determinants.”
37.
In a 2011 paper, Newman attempts to account for the origin of the crucial egg stage in
animal development, a long-unsolved puzzle for neo-Darwinism. He does this by proposing,
again, an interplay between the developmental-genetic regulatory toolkit and a host of self-
organizational and epigenetic processes. He envisions the egg stage arising in three steps. First,
he sees the interaction between “the metazoan developmental-genetic toolkit and certain physical
processes” organizing “primitive animal body plans independently of an egg stage.” Second, he
envisions the emergence of a “proto-egg” arising as the result of the “adaptive specialization of
cells” as they are released from aggregates of other cells. Third, he notes that since self-organizing
processes (such as “egg-patterning processes”) are known to reorganize the contents of the cel-
lular cytoplasm during development, these same processes could have done so in the past, further
sculpting the proto-egg into something more like the egg stage in animal development observed
today. He insists, moreover, that the structures induced by these egg-patterning processes are not
adaptive “in the sense of having been gradually arrived at through multiple cycles of selection,”
but instead that they have resulted from self-organizational physical and chemical processes. See
Newman, “Animal Egg as Evolutionary Innovation: A Solution to the ‘Embryonic Hourglass’
Puzzle,” 467-83.
38.
Khalturin et al., “More Than Just Orphans: Are Taxonomically-Restricted Genes Impor-
tant in Evolution?” 404-413; Tautz and Domazet-Loso, “The evolutionary origin of orphan genes,”
692-70; Beiko, “Telling the Whole Story in a 10,000-Genome World,” 34.
39.
See the discussion in Chapter 14, pages 277-81.
40.
See the discussion in Chapter 14, pages 277-81.
41.
Pivar, Lifecode ; On the Origin ofForm; Prigogine, Nicolis, and Babloyantz, “Thermody-
namics of Evolution”; Wolfram, “A New Kind of Science,” 398.
42. Meyer, Signature in the Cell
,
254-55.
43. Yockey, “A Calculation of the Probability of Spontaneous Biogenesis by Information
Theory,” 380.
44. For example, see the popular computer game among amateur programmers, the “Game of
Life,” created by the British mathematician John Horton Conway.
45. Kauffman, “The End of a Physics Worldview: Heraclitus and the Watershed of Life.”
46. Kauffman, “The End of a Physics Worldview: Heraclitus and the Watershed of Life.”
CHAPTER 16: OTHER POST-NEO-DARWINIAN MODELS
1.
See Gould, “Is a New and General Theory of Evolution Emerging?” 120.
2. Gould does not use the term “macromutation” anywhere in his famous 1980 article (“Is a
New and General Theory of Evolution Emerging?”). He does, however, use the term “micromuta-
tion” (see 120) and challenges the sufficiency of accumulated micromutations to explain “macro-
evolution” (a term used throughout the article).
3. Goldschmidt, The Material Basis ofEvolution, 395.
4. The rejection of large-scale mutations affecting morphology and function as adaptive non-
starters emerged early and persisted as one of the defining aspects of the neo-Darwinian synthesis.
Neo-Darwinian paleontologist and macroevolution theorist Jeffrey Levinton, for instance, gives
expression to the widely held skepticism about the evolutionary plausibility of such mutants in his
major textbook dealing with macroevolution:
As a general rule, major developmental mutants give a picture ofhopeless monsters, rather than
hopeful change. Epigenetic and genetic pleiotropy [i.e., side effects] both impart great burden to
any major developmental perturbation. Thus it is unlikely that mutants affecting anyfundamen-
tal prepattern in development are likely to produce afunctional organism. Genes that activate
switches in prepatterns are not sufficiently isolated in effect on other parts of the phenotype to
expect major saltations. The cyclops mutant of the [brine shrimp] Artermia is lethal. The homeo-
tic mutants ofDrosophila melanogaster suffer similarfates
Disruptions,
i.e., mutants, have
drastic effects on other parts of the phenotype
Thus, the accumulated evidence suggests that
major developmental mutants are of minor significance in evolution. The side effects are drastic.
(Genetics, Paleontology, and Macroevolution, 252-54)

446
Notes
5.
The central difficulty with relying on developmental macro-mutations to generate innova-
tions in form, many neo-Darwinians noted, arises from the consequence of rapidly changing
a system of genetic and developmental switches directed toward producing one “target” (stable
adult form) to another system of such switches directed toward producing another form. Geneti-
cist Bruce Wallace, trained by Theodosius Dobzhansky at Columbia University, explains: “The
Bauplan [body plan] of an organism
.
.
. can be thought of as the arrangement of genetic switches
that control the course of the embryonic and subsequent development of the individual; such
control must operate properly both in time generally and sequentially in the separately differenti-
ated tissues. Selection, both natural and artificial, that leads to morphological change and other
developmental modification does so by altering the settings and triggerings of these switches
The extreme difficulty encountered when attempting to transform one organism into another but
still functioning one lies in the difficulty in resetting a number of the many controlling switches in
a manner that still allows for the individual’s orderly (somatic) development” (“Adaptation, Neo-
Darwinian Tautology, and Population Fitness,” 70). Our discussion in Chapter 13 suggests that the
need to alter these functionally integrated switches also presents an obstacle to the efficacy of the
neo-Darwinian mechanism.
6. Gould, “Is a New and General Theory of Evolution Emerging?” 127.
7. Of course, the range of post-neo-Darwinian theories is not exhausted by this chapter’s
survey of four prominent contenders. In a recent review paper, evolutionary biologist Armin
Moczek, of Indiana University, examined three additional ideas attempting to move beyond what
Moczek calls the “unrealistic and unproductive” assumptions of gene-centered neo-Darwinian
theory. Those ideas are, respectively: (1) the theory of “facilitated variation” (Gerhart and
Kirschner, “The Theory of Facilitated Variation”), the theory of “genetic accommodation” and
“niche construction theory.” See Moczek, “The Nature of Nurture and the Future of Evodevo
.”
Short explanations and critiques of these models are posted on the website for this book, www.
darwinsdoubt.com.
8. Gould, “Is a New and General Theory of Evolution Emerging?”
9.
Gilbert, Opitz, and Raff, “Resynthesizing Evolutionary and Developmental Biology,” 362.
10. The assumption that evolutionary biologists could ignore the role of developmental biology
derived in part from the need for population geneticists to make simplifying assumptions in order
“to keep the mathematics tractable,” note developmental biologists Michael Palopoli and Nipam
Patel. As they explain, “It was assumed that evolutionary changes in genotype are translated
into phenotypic changes by an undefined set of epigenetic laws; in other words, developmental
evolution was ignored [by neo-Darwinism] in order to focus on the dynamics of allele frequency
changes in populations” (“Neo-Darwinian Developmental Evolution, 502).
11.
Raff, The Shape of Life.
12. Schwartz, “Homeobox Genes, Fossils, and the Origin of Species”; Schwartz, Sudden Ori-
gins; Goodwin, How the Leopard Changed Its Spots; Carroll, Endless Forms Most Beautiful.
13. Experimental mutagenesis of fruit flies (Drosophila melanogaster) began in earnest at Co-
lumbia University, in the breeding laboratories of Thomas FI. Morgan and others, during the first
decade of the twentieth century.
14. Meyer et al., Explore Evolution, 108.
15. Body Plans, http://ncse.com/book/export/html/2585 (accessed November 6, 2012).
16. Normal Protein, http://ncse.com/book/export/html/2580 (accessed November 6, 2012).
17. Body Plans, http://ncse.com/book/export/html/2585 (accessed November 6, 2012).
18. Prud’homme, Gompel, and Carroll, “Emerging Principles of Regulatory Evolution.”
19. Prud’homme, Gompel, and Carroll, “Emerging Principles of Regulatory Evolution,” 8605.
20. Hoekstra and Coyne note explicitly that the best examples of alleged CRE-induced muta-
tions showed “losses of traits rather than the origin of new traits” (“The Locus of Evolution,” 1006).
21. Hoekstra and Coyne, “The Locus of Evolution,” 996.
22.
Schwartz, Sudden Origins, 3.
23.
Schwartz, Sudden Origins, 13. According to Schwartz, “At the genetic level, major morpho-
logical novelty can indeed be accomplished in the twinkling of an eye. All that is necessary is that
homeobox genes are either turned on or they are not” (362).
24. McGinnis and Kurziora, “The Molecular Architects of Body Design,” 58.
25. Lindsey and Grell, Guide to Genetic Variations ofDrosophila melanogaster.
26.
Lewis, “A Gene Complex Controlling Segmentation in Drosophila
n
; Peifer and Bender,
“The Anterobithorax and Bithorax Mutations of the Bithorax Complex”; Fernandes et al., “Muscle
Development in the Four-Winged Drosophila and the Role of the Ultrabithorax Gene.”
27. Szathmary, “When the Means Do Not Justify the End,” 745.
28.
Scott and Carroll, “The Segmentation and Homeotic Gene Network in Early Drosophila
Development.”

Notes
447
29. Davidson and Erwin, “An Integrated View of Precambrian Eumetazoan Evolution.”
30.
Schwartz, Sudden Origins, 362.
31. Szathmary, “When the Means Do Not Justify the End,” 745.
32.
Schwartz, Sudden Origins, 362.
33. Szathmary, “When the Means Do Not Justify the End,” 745.
34. Panganiban et al., “The Origin and Evolution of Animal Appendages.”
35.
Instead, epigenetic information and structures actually determine the function of many
Hox genes. This can be seen dramatically when the same Hox gene (as determined by nucleotide
sequence homology) regulates the development of the strikingly different (i.e., classically nonho-
mologous) anatomical features found in different phyla. For instance, in arthropods, the Hox gene
Distal-less is required for the normal development of limbs, but homologous genes are found in
vertebrates (e.g., the Dlx gene in mice), where the gene also plays a key role in limb development
albeit a vertebrate (internal skeleton), not arthropod (external skeleton) limb. Distal-less ho-
mologues in yet other phyla, such as echinoderms, regulate the development of tube feet and
spines— again, anatomical features classically not homologous to arthropod or vertebrates limbs.
In each case, the roles of the Hox genes are governed “top-down” by the higher-level organ-
ismal contexts in which they occur. Panganiban et al., “The Origin and Evolution of Animal
Appendages.”
36.
Despite all this, some evolutionary theorists have argued that the emergence of Hox genes
in Precambrian organisms may have triggered the Cambrian explosion by providing the raw
materials for the diversification of body plans (Carroll, Patterns and Processes of Vertebrate Evolu-
tion). Yet, in addition to those difficulties already noted, recent studies have highlighted another
problem with attributing the origin of body plans to Hox genes. Hox genes first emerged long
before the diversification of the various bilaterian phyla, suggesting—because of the length of the
time lag—that something else must have responsible for the Cambrian explosion. As a paper in
the journal Science explains, “The temporal lag between the initial construction of these networks
and the eventual appearance of bilaterian fossils suggests that the solution to the dilemma of the
Cambrian explosion lies not solely with this genomic and developmental potential, but instead
must also be found in the ecology of the Cambrian radiation itself” (Erwin et al., “The Cambrian
Conundrum,” 1095). See also de Rosa et al., “Hox Genes in Brachiopods and Priapulids and Proto-
stome Evolution.”
37.
Lynch, “The Origins of Eukaryotic Gene Structure,” 454.
38.
Lynch, “The Origins of Eukaryotic Gene Structure,” 450. He actually goes even further,
contending that “random genetic drift can impose a strong barrier to the advancement of molecu-
lar refinements by adaptive processes.” Lynch, “Evolutionary Layering and the Limits to Cellular
Perfection.”
39.
Jurica, “Detailed Closeups and the Big Picture of Spliceosomes,” 315. See also Butcher, “The
Spliceosome as Ribozyme Hypothesis Takes a Second Step,” 12211-12; Nilsen, “The Spliceosome:
The Most Complex Macromolecular Machine in the Cell?” 1147-49.
40. Quoted in Azar, “Profile of Michael Lynch,” 16015.
41. On my website for this book, www.darwinsdoubt.com, I explain why the origin of the
eukaryotic cell presents such a formidable challenge to all theories of unguided evolution.
42.
Lynch, “The Origins of Eukaryotic Gene Structure,” 450-68 (emphasis added).
43.
See Lynch, “The Frailty of Adaptive Hypotheses for the Origin of Organismal Complexity,”
8597-604.
44. Gauger points out that Lynch, “offers no explanation of how non-adaptive forces can
produce the functional genomic and organismal complexity we observe in modern species.”
[Ann Gauger, “The Frailty of the Darwinian Hypothesis, Part 2.”] Jerry Coyne observes much the
same: “Both drift and natural selection produce genetic change that we recognize as evolution.
But there’s an important difference. Drift is a random process, while selection is the anti-thesis of
randomness
Asa purely random process, genetic drift can’t cause the evolution of adaptations.
It could never build a wing or an eye. That takes nonrandom natural selection.” [Coyne, Why
Evolution Is True, 123.]
45. Lynch and Abegg, “The Rate of Establishment of Complex Adaptations,” 1404.
46. Lynch and Abegg, “The Rate of Establishment of Complex Adaptations,” 1414.
47. Axe, “The Limits of Complex Adaptation: An Analysis Based on a Simple Model of Struc-
tured Bacterial Populations,” 3.
48. Axe, “The Limits of Complex Adaptation: An Analysis Based on a Simple Model of Struc-
tured Bacterial Populations,” 3.
49. Darwin, On the Origin of Species, 134-38. Darwin’s own theory of transmission genetics,
dubbed “pangenesis,” postulated that a host of minute heredity particles, which he called “gem-
mules,” accumulated in the reproductive organs of organisms, carrying information about the life

448
Notes
history and environmental circumstances of the parent. This information would then be transmit-
ted at reproduction to offspring, allowing the “inheritance” of “acquired” characteristics.
50. Darwin. The Illustrated Origin of Species (6th edition), 95, writes, “I think there can be no
doubt that use in our domestic animals has strengthened and enlarged certain parts, and disuse
diminished them; and such modifications are inherited.”
51. Some question exists about the historical accuracy of calling these twenty-first-century
ideas “neo-Lamarckian” in light of the actual content of Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck’s views when
compared with the enormous growth of knowledge about heredity over the past two hundred
years. Given that Jablonka adapts the term “Lamarckism” to her own position, however, I follow
that practice, with the caveats about differences in content noted.
52. Jablonka and Raz, “Transgenerational Epigenetic Inheritance,” 168.
53. Jablonka and Raz, “Transgenerational Epigenetic Inheritance,” 138, emphasis added.
54. Jablonka and Raz, “Transgenerational Epigenetic Inheritance,”162.
55.
Shapiro, Evolution, 2.
56. Shapiro contends that the neo-Darwinian insistence on fundamental randomness arose
for philosophical, not empirical (or observational) reasons, having to do with the exclusion of
“supernatural intervention” in the origin of organisms.
57.
Shapiro, Evolution, 12.
58.
Shapiro, Evolution, 14.
59.
Shapiro, Evolution, 14.
60.
Shapiro, Evolution, 16.
61.
Shapiro, Evolution, 16.
62.
Shapiro, Evolution, 14.
63. As biologist Benedicte Michel observes, “Clearly, it is important for bacteria to keep all
levels of the SOS response under tight control. There is no utility to the organism of using error-
prone polymerases longer than absolutely necessary” (“After 30 Years, the Bacterial SOS Response
Still Surprises Us,” 1175).
64.
Shapiro, “Darwin’s Black Box: The Biochemical Challenge to Evolution-Book Reviews.”
CHAPTER 17: THE POSSIBILITY OF INTELLIGENT DESIGN
1. As Dawkins explains: “Natural selection, the blind, unconscious, automatic process which
Darwin discovered and which we now know is the explanation for the existence and apparently
purposeful form of all life, has no purpose in mind. It has no mind and no mind’s eye” (7he Blind
Watchmaker, 5).
2. Mayr, Foreword, in Ruse, ed., Darwinism Defended, xi-xii.
3.
Ayala, “Darwin’s Greatest Discovery,” 8572.
4. As Dawkins notes: “Biology is the study of complicated things that give the appear-
ance of having been designed for a purpose” (The Blind Watchmaker,
1). Crick likewise explains:
“Organisms appear as if they had been designed to perform in an astonishingly efficient way, and
the human mind therefore finds it hard to accept that there need be no Designer to achieve this”
(What Mad Pursuit, 30). Lewontin also observes that living organisms “appear to have been care-
fully and artfully designed” (“Adaptation”).
5. Dawkins, River Out ofEden, 17.
6. Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker,
1.
7.
Gillespie, Charles Darwin and the Problem of Creation, 83-108.
8. Thaxton, Bradley, and Olsen, The Mystery of Life’s Origin, 211.
9. We have observational evidence in the present that intelligent investigators can (and do)
build contrivances to channel energy down nonrandom chemical pathways to bring about some
complex chemical synthesis, even gene building. May not the principle of uniformity then be used
in a broader frame of consideration to suggest that DNA had an intelligent cause at the beginning?
(Thaxton, Bradley, and Olsen, The Mystery ofLife’s Origin, 211).
10.
Peirce, Collected Papers, 2:372-88; Meyer, “Of Clues and Causes,” 25. See also Whewell,
“Lyell’s Principles of Geology”; The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences.
11.
Peirce, Collected Papers, 2:372-88. See also Fann, Peirce’s Theory ofAbduction, 28-34;
Whewell, “Lyell’s Principles of Geology”; The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences.
12. Gould, “Evolution and the Triumph of Homology,” 61. See also Whewell, “Lyell’s Prin-
ciples of Geology”; The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences.
13.
Peirce, “Abduction and Induction,” 150-54.
14. Chamberlain, “The Method of Multiple Working Hypotheses.”
15.
Conniff, “When Continental Drift Was Considered Pseudoscience.”
16.
Conniff, “When Continental Drift Was Considered Pseudoscience.”

Notes
449
17.
Oreskes, “From Continental Drift to Plate Tectonics,” 12.
18.
Heirtzler, “Sea-Floor Spreading”; Hurley, “The Confirmation of Continental Drift”; Vine,
“Reversals of Fortune.”
19.
For example, Xavier Le Pichon recalls: “I was progressively forced by the convincing power
of the magnetic [data]” (“My Conversion to Plate Tectonics,” 212).
20.
Lipton, Inference to the Best Explanation,
1.
21.
Lipton, Inference to the Best Explanation,
1 .
22.
Lyell, Principles of Geology, 75-91.
23.
Kavalovski, “The Vera Causa Principle,” 78-103.
24.
Scriven, “Explanation and Prediction in Evolutionary Theory,” 480; Gallie, “Explanations
in History and the Genetic Sciences”; Sober, Reconstructing the Past, 1-5.
25. Meyer, “Of Clues and Causes,” 96-108.
CHAPTER l8: SIGNS OF DESIGN IN THE CAMBRIAN EXPLOSION
1. Davidson, “Evolutionary Bioscience as Regulatory Systems Biology,” 35.
2. Erwin and Davidson, “The Evolution of Hierarchical Gene Regulatory Networks,” 141.
3. Davidson, “Evolutionary Bioscience as Regulatory Systems Biology,” 6.
4. Erwin, “Early Introduction of Major Morphological Innovations,” 288.
5.
Erwin, “Early Introduction of Major Morphological Innovations,” 288, emphasis added.
6. As Erwin puts it:
“ There is every indication that the range of morphological innovation
possible in the Cambrian is simply not possible today” (“The Origin of Body Plans,” 626, emphasis
added).
7. Conway Morris, Life's Solution: Inevitable Humans in a Lonely Universe, 327; see also “Evo-
lution: Bringing Molecules into the Fold”; “The Cambrian Explosion of Metazoans.”
8. Conway Morris, Life's Solution, 327. See also Conway Morris, “Bringing Molecules into the
Fold,” 8.
9.
Shapiro, Evolution.
10. Dawkins, River Out ofEden,
17.
11. Hood and Galas, “The Digital Code of DNA
.”
12.
Gates, The Road Ahead, 188.
13.
Quastler, The Emergence ofBiological Organization, 16.
14. Of course, the phrase “large amounts of specified information” begs a quantitative ques-
tion, namely, “How much specified information would the minimally complex cell have to have
before it implied design?” In Signature in the Cell, I give and justify a precise quantitative answer
to this question.
I show that the de novo emergence of 500 or more bits of specified information
reliably indicates design. Meyer, Signature in the Cell, 294.
15. Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker, 47-49; Kiippers, “On the Prior Probability of the Ex-
istence of Life”; Scheider, “The Evolution of Biological Information”; Lenski, “The Evolutionary
Origin of Complex Features.” For a critique of these genetic algorithms and claims that they simu-
late the ability of natural selection and random mutation to generate new biological information
apart from intelligent activity, see Meyer, Signature in the Cell, 281-95.
16.
Berlinski, “On Assessing Genetic Algorithms.”
17. Rodin, Szathmary, and Rodin, “On the Origin of the Genetic Code and tRNA Before
Translation,” 2.
18. Denton, Evolution: A Theory in Crisis, 309-11.
19.
Polanyi, “Life Transcending Physics and Chemistry”; “Life’s Irreducible Structure.”
20.
Oliveri and Davidson, “Built to Run, Not Fail.” All animal embryos, notes Davidson,
must
“turn on the right regulatory genes in the right place. These genes must also be dynamically
locked on; the regulatory state of cells in a given spatial domain must further be made dependent
on signaling among them all; the expression of these same regulatory genes must be specifically
forbidden anywhere else; and then, on top of all that, specific alternative states must be excluded.
These components are of course interlinked
In the sea urchin embryo, where all of the above
are to be found, disarming any one of these subcircuits produces some abnormality in expression"
(511; emphasis added).
21. Davidson, Genomic Regulatory Systems, 54.
22. “Sameness” (i.e., homology) is determined by nucleotide-sequence conservation within a
reading frame.
23. Newman, “The Developmental Genetic Toolkit and the Molecular Homology-Analogy
Paradox,” 12.
24. Within evolutionary theory, several proposals have attempted to resolve the paradox.
Perhaps the most popular modifies the neo-Darwinian definition of the concept of “homology” by

450
Notes
preceding it with the adjective “deep,” a verbal slipcover that— if one is cynically inclined—ought
to elicit sardonic commentary befitting a late-night comedy sketch. Strictly speaking, we should
remember that the neo-Darwinian prediction about genes, phenotypes, and homology was found
to be wrong. Nothing wrong ever turned out right by putting the adjective “deep” in front of it.
25.
Carroll, Endless Forms Most Beautiful
,
72.
26. Gould, The Structure ofEvolutionary Theory, 1065. Stuart Newman observes: “It came
as a big surprise to workers in the fields of evolutionary and developmental biology
.
.
. that the
Drosophila eyeless (ey) gene has extensive DNA similarity to the mouse and human Pax-6 genes”
because “evolutionary theory has traditionally held that very long periods of time were needed for
natural selection to generate extreme differences in morphological organization.” Yet, he notes,
if over long periods of time, natural selection and mutation had produced extensive changes in
morphology, it ought to have produced extensive changes in genes as well (“The Developmental
Genetic Toolkit and the Molecular Homology-Analogy Paradox,” 12).
27. Nelson and Wells, “Homology in Biology,” 316.
28. Nelson and Wells, “Homology in Biology,” 316.
29. Erwin, “Disparity.” Erwin observes: “The distribution oforganicforms is clumpy at any
scale from populations to the highest taxonomic categories, and whether considered within clades
or within eco-systems. The fossil record provides little supportfor expectations that the morpho-
logical gaps between species or groups ofspecies have increased through time as it might if the gaps
were created by extinction of a more homogeneous distribution of morphologies. As the quantita-
tive assessments of morphology have replaced counts of higher taxa as a metric of morphological
disparity, numerous studies have demonstrated the rapid construction of morphospace early in
evolutionary radiations” (57, emphasis added).
30. Dembski, “Intelligent Design as a Theory of Technological Evolution”; Savransky, Engi-
neering of Creativity, 8, 24; Bracht, “Inventions, Algorithms, and Biological Design.”
31.
Valentine, “Why No New Phyla After the Cambrian?”; see also Bergstrom, “Ideas on Early
Animal Evolution.” Bergstrom comments: “There is absolutely no sign of convergence between
phyla as we follow them backwards to the Early Cambrian. They were as widely apart from the
beginning as they are today. Hierarchical levels apparently include a biological reality, not only
classificatory convention. In fact, the overwhelming taxonomic difficulty is to recognize relation-
ships between phyla, not to distinguish between them” (464).
32. Denton, Evolution, 313.
33.
Agassiz, “Evolution and the Permanence of Type,” 101.
CHAPTER 19: THE RULES OF SCIENCE
1.
Chesterton, “The Invisible Man.”
2. Murphy, “Phillip Johnson on Trial,” 33. Nancey Murphy is a philosopher and seminary
professor who strongly affirms methodological naturalism. Here’s what she says in full: “Science
qua science seeks naturalistic explanations for all natural processes. Christians and atheists alike
must pursue scientific questions in our era without invoking a Creator
Anyone who attributes
the characteristics of living things to creative intelligence has by definition stepped into the arena
of either metaphysics or theology.” See also Willey, “Darwin’s Place in the History of Thought,” 15
(“Science must be provisionally atheistic, or cease to be itself”); Grizzle, “Some Comments on the
‘Godless’ Nature of Darwinian Evolution,” 176.
3. Meyer, “The Origin of Biological Information and the Higher Taxonomic Categories.”
4. For detailed discussions of facts of the Sternberg case, see “Smithsonian Controversy,”
www.richardsternberg.com/smithsonian.php; U.S. Office of Special Counsel Letter (2005) at
www.discovery.org/f/1488; United States House of Representatives Committee on Government
Reform, Subcommittee Staff Report, “Intolerance and the Politicization of Science at the Smith-
sonian” (December 2006), at www.discovery.org/f/ 1489; Appendix, United States House of Repre-
sentatives Committee on Government Reform, Subcommittee Staff Report (December, 2006) at
www.discovery.org/f/ 1490.
5.
See “Statement from the Council of the Biological Society of Washington,” originally at
http://www.biolsocwash.org/id_statement.html; now at http://ncse.com/news/2004/10
/bsw-strengthens-statement-repudiating-meyer-paper-00528 or http://web.archive.org
/web/20070926214521/http://www.biolsocwash.org/id_statement.html.
6. E-mail from Roy McDiarmid to Hans Sues, “Re: Request for information” (January 28,
2005, 2:25 p.m.), cited in United States House of Representatives Committee on Government
Reform, “Intolerance and the Politicization of Science at the Smithsonian,” available at http://
www.discovery.org/f/ 1489 (“I have seen the review file and comments from 3 reviewers on the
Meyer paper. All three with some differences among the comments recommended or suggested

Notes
451
publication. I was surprised but concluded that there was not inappropriate behavior vs a vis [sic]
the review process”).
7.
Klinghoffer, “The Branding of a Heretic.”
8.
See “Statement from the Council of the Biological Society of Washington,” originally at
http://www.biolsocwash.org/id_statement.html; now at http://ncse.com/news/2004/10
/bsw-strengthens-statement-repudiating-meyer-paper-00528 or http://web.archive.org
/web/20070926214521/http://www.biolsocwash.org/id_statement.html.
9. “AAAS Board Resolution on Intelligent Design Theory,” AAAS News Archives, October 18,
2002, at http://www.aaas.org/news/releases/2002/1106id2.shtml.
10.
See Siegal, “Riled by Intelligent Design”; World Net Daily, “Intelligent Design Torpedoes
Tenure”; Brumfiel, “Darwin Sceptic Says Views Cost Tenure”; Dillon, “Regents Deny Gonzalez’s
Tenure Appeal”; Meyer, “A Scopes Trial for the ’90s”; West, Darwin Day in America, 234-38; “Back-
ground to the Guillermo Gonzalez Story,” at http://www.evolutionnews.org/gg-bckgrndr.final.pdf;
“Intelligent Design Was the Issue After All (Updated),” at http://www.evolutionnews.org/ID_was
_the_Issue_Gonzalez_Tenure.pdf; LeVake v. Independent School District, 625 N.W.2d 502, 506
(Minn. Ct. App. 2001), cert, denied, 534 U.S. 1081 (2002); Mims, “The Scientific American Affair”;
Crocker, Free to Think; Vedantam, “Eden and Evolution”; Luskin, “Darwin’s Dilemma”; Anderson,
“Cancellation of Darwin Film Creates Uproar”; Reardon, “California Science Center to Pay $110,000
Settlement Over Intelligent Design Film”; Boehm, “California Science Center Is Sued for Canceling a
Film Promoting Intelligent Design”; Crowther, “Academic Freedom Expelled from Baylor Univer-
sity”; Briggs and Maaluf, “BU Had Role in Dembski Return”; Luskin, “Credibility Gap”; Black, “Intel-
ligent Design Proponent Fired from NASA Lab”; Pitts, “Design Flaw?”; Associated Press, “Former
NASA Specialist Claims He Was Fired over Intelligent Design”; Associated Press, “JPL Worker Sues
over Intelligent Design Demotion”; Gallegos, “Intelligent Design Proponent Who Works at JPL Says
He Experienced Religious Discrimination”; Luskin, “Intelligent Design Demoted.”
11.
Crick, What Mad Pursuit, 138.
12. Lewontin, “Billions and Billions of Demons,” 28. The role of methodological materialism
in artificially buttressing Darwin’s theory began with Darwin himself. According to historian of
science Neal Gillespie: “The uneasy reservations about natural selection among Darwin’s contem-
poraries and the widespread rejection of it from the 1890s to the 1930s suggest that ... it was more
Darwin’s insistence on totally natural explanations than on natural selection that won their adher-
ence
The primary change had not been in speciation theory but in beliefs about the nature of
science.” In short, Darwin’s new definition of science excluded “both direct and indirect design”
in living things and thereby protected it from competition
(Charles Darwin and the Problem of
Creation, 123, 147, 152).
13. Laudan, “The Demise of the Demarcation Problem”; Meyer, “The Demarcation of Science
and Religion.”
14. Newton, Newtons Principia, 543-44; Alexander, The Leibniz- Clarke Correspondence,
92; Hutchison, “What Happened to Occult Qualities in the Scientific Revolution?”; Leibniz, New
Essays on Human Understanding, 61, 65-67.
15. As Newton wrote in his famous letter to Bishop Bentley: “The cause of gravity is what I do
not pretend to know” (Cohen, Isaac Newtons Papers and Letters on Natural Philosophy, 302).
16. Laudan says, “There is no demarcation line between science and nonscience, or between
science and pseudo-science, which would win assent from a majority of philosophers”
(Beyond
Positivism and Relativism, 210).
17. Laudan, “The Demise of the Demarcation Problem.
18. Newton, Newtons Principia, 543-44; Alexander, The Leibniz- Clarke Correspondence,
92; Hutchison, “What Happened to Occult Qualities in the Scientific Revolution?”; Leibniz, New
Essays on Human Understanding, 61, 65-67.
19. Hutchison, “What Happened to Occult Qualities in the Scientific Revolution?” Leibniz,
New Essays on Human Understanding, 61, 65-67.
20. Laudan, “The Demise of the Demarcation Problem”; Eger, “A Tale of Two Controversies.”
21. Gould, “Creationism”; Ruse, “Witness Testimony Sheet”; Ebert et al., Science and Creation-
ism, 8-10.
22.
Kline, “Theories, Facts and Gods,” 42; Gould, “Evolution as Fact and Theory,” 120; Root-
Bernstein, “On Defining a Scientific Theory,” 72.
23.
Root-Bernstein, “On Defining a Scientific Theory,” 73; Ruse, “A Philosopher’s Day in
Court,” 28; Ebert et al., Science and Creationism, 8-10.
24.
Ruse, “Witness Testimony Sheet,” 301; “A Philosopher’s Day in Court,” 26; “Darwinism:
Philosophical Preference, Scientific Inference, and a Good Research Strategy,” 1-6.
25.
Ruse, Darwinism Defended, 59; “Witness Testimony Sheet,” 305; Gould, “Evolution as Fact
and Theory,” 121; Root-Bernstein, “On Defining a Scientific Theory,” 74.

452
Notes
26. Kehoe, “Modern Anti-Evolutionism”; Ruse, “Witness Testimony Sheet,” 305; “A Philoso-
pher’s Day in Court,” 28; Ebert et al., Science and Creationism, 8.
27.
Kitcher, Abusing Science, 126-27, 176-77.
28.
Skoog, “A View from the Past”; Root-Bernstein, “On Defining a Scientific Theory,” 74;
Scott, “Keep Science Free from Creationism,” 30.
29.
Lyell, Principles of Geology.
30. Meyer, Signature in the Cell, 481-97.
31.
See Meyer, Signature in the Cell, 416-38; see also Meyer, “The Scientific Status of Intelligent
Design: The Methodological Equivalence of Naturalistic and Non-Naturalistic Origins Theories,”
151-212; Meyer, “The Nature of Historical Science and the Demarcation of Design and Descent”
91-130; Meyer, “Laws, Causes and Facts: A Response to Professor Ruse,” 29-40; Meyer, “Sauce for
the Goose: intelligent Design, Scientific Methodology, and the Demarcation Problem,” 95-131;
Meyer, “The Methodological Equivalence of Design and Descent,” 67-112.
32.
See Meyer, Signature in the Cell, 441-42.
33. Meyer, Signature in the Cell, 373-95.
34.
Asher, Evolution and Belief, 32.
35. Asher, Evolution and Belief, 32.
36.
Asher, Evolution and Belief, 32.
37.
Asher, Evolution and Belief, 32.
38.
Oddly, also Asher observes that overall “Meyer professes a low regard for naturalism, but
high regard for uniformitarianism”
(Evolution and Belief, 32). If by naturalism, he means treating
the principle of methodological naturalism as normative for all scientific inquiry, his characteriza-
tion of my position is, in this respect, accurate.
39.
Asher, Evolution and Belief, 32.
40. Ecker et al., “Genomics.”
41. Ecker et al., “Genomics,” 52.
42. Orgel and Crick, “Selfish DNA.”
43. Dembski, “Science and Design,” 26.
44. The ENCODE Project Consortium, “An Integrated Encyclopedia of DNA Elements in the
Human Genome,” 57.
45.
Shapiro and Von Sternberg, “Why Repetitive DNA is Essential to Genome Function”; Von
Sternberg and Shapiro, “How Repeated Retroelements Format Genome Function”; Han, Szak, and
Boeke, “Transcriptional Disruption by the LI Retrotransposon”; Janowski et al., “Inhibiting Gene
Expression at Transcription Start Sites in Chromosomal DNA with Antigene RNAs”; Goodrich
and Kugel, “Non-coding-RNA Regulators of RNA Polymerase II Transcription”; Li et al., “Small
dsRNAs Induce Transcriptional Activation in Human Cells”; Pagano et al., “New Small Nuclear
RNA Gene-like Transcriptional Units”; Van de Lagemaat et al., “Transposable Elements in Mam-
mals”; Donnelly, Hawkins, and Moss, “A Conserved Nuclear Element”; Dunn, Medstrand, and
Mager, “An Endogenous Retroviral Long Terminal Repeat”; Burgess-Beusse et al., “The Insulation
of Genes from External Enhancers and Silencing Chromatin”; Medstrand, Landry, and Mager,
“Long Terminal Repeats Are Used as Alternative Promoters”; Marino-Ramirez et al., “Transpos-
able Elements Donate Lineage-Specific Regulatory Sequences to Host Genomes”; Green, “The Role
of Translocation and Selection”; Figueiredo et al., “A Central Role for Plasmodium Falciparum
Subtelomeric Regions”; Henikoff, Ahmad, and Malik, “The Centromere Paradox”; Bell, West, and
Felsenfeld, “Insulators and Boundaries”; Pardue and Debaryshe,
“Drosophila Telomeres”; Henikoff,
“Heterochromatin Function in Complex Genomes”; Schueler et al., “Genomic and Genetic
Definition of a Functional Human Centromere”; Jordan et al., “Origin of a Substantial Fraction
of Human Regulatory Sequences from Transposable Elements”; Chen, DeCerbo, and Carmichael,
“A/w Element-Mediated Gene Silencing”; Jurka, “Evolutionary Impact of Human Alu Repetitive
Elements”; Lev-Maor et al., “The Birth of an Alternatively Spliced Exon”; Kondo-Iida et al., “Novel
Mutations and Genotype-Phenotype Relationships in 107 Families”; Mattick and Makunin, “Non-
coding RNA”; McKenzie and Brennan, “The Two Small Introns of the Drosophila affinidisjuncta
Adh Gene”; Arnaud et al., “SINE Retroposons Can Be Used In Vivo”; Rubin, Kimura, and Schmid,
“Selective Stimulation of Translational Expression by Alu RNA”; Bartel, “MicroRNAs”; Mattick
and Makunin, “Small Regulatory RNAs in Mammals”; Dunlap et al., “Endogenous Retroviruses
Regulate Periimplantation Placental Growth and Differentiation”; Hyslop et al., “Downregula-
tion ofNANOG Induces Differentiation”; Peaston et al., “Retrotransposons Regulate Host Genes
in Mouse Oocytes and Preimplantation Embryos”; Morrish et al., “DNA Repair Mediated by
Endonuclease-Independent LINE-1 Retrotransposition”; Tremblay, Jasin, and Chartrand, “A
Double-Strand Break in a Chromosomal LINE Element Can Be Repaired”; Grawunder et al., “Ac-
tivity of DNA Ligase IV Stimulated by Complex Formation with XRCC4 Protein in Mammalian
Cells”; Wilson, Grawunder, and Liebe, “Yeast DNA Ligase IV Mediates Non-Homologous DNA

Notes
453
End Joining”; Mura et al., “Late Viral Interference Induced by Transdominant Gag of an Endog-
enous Retrovirus”; Goh et al., “A Newly Discovered Human Alpha-Globin Gene”; Kandouz et al.,
“Connexin43 Pseudogene Is Expressed”; Tam et al., “Pseudogene- Derived Small Interfering RNAs
Regulate Gene Expression in Mouse Oocytes”; Watanabe et al., “Endogenous siRNAs from Natu-
rally Formed dsRNAs Regulate Transcripts in Mouse Oocytes”; Piehler et al., “The Human ABC
Transporter Pseudogene Family”; Mattick and Gagen, “The Evolution of Controlled Multitasked
Gene Networks”; Pandey and Mukerji, “From ‘JUNK’ to Just Unexplored Noncoding Knowledge”;
Balakirev and Ayala, “Pseudogenes”; Pink et al., “Pseudogenes”; Wen et al., “Pseudogenes Are
Not Pseudo Any More”; Franco-Zorrilla et al., “Target Mimicry Provides a New Mechanism for
Regulation of MicroRNA Activity”; Colas et al., “Whole-Genome MicroRNA Screening Identifies
let-7 and miR-18 as Regulators”; Carrier et al., “Long Non-Coding Antisense RNA Controls Uchll
Translation”; Kelley and Rinn, “Transposable Elements Reveal a Stem Cell Specific Class of Long
Noncoding RNAs”; Wang et al., “Alternative Isoform Regulation in Human Tissue Transcrip-
tomes”; Louro et al., “Conserved Tissue Expression Signatures of Intronic Noncoding RNAs”;
Hoeppner et al., “Evolutionarily Stable Association of Intronic SnoRNAs and MicroRNAs with
Their Host Genes”; Monteys et al., “Structure and Activity of Putative Intronic miRNA Promot-
ers”; Mondal et al., “Characterization of the RNA Content of Chromatin”; Rodriguez-Campos and
Azorin, “RNA Is an Integral Component of Chromatin That Contributes to Its Structural Orga-
nization”; George et al., “Evolution of Diverse Mechanisms for Protecting Chromosome Ends”;
Von Sternberg, “On the Roles of Repetitive DNA Elements in the Context of a Unified Genomic-
Epigenetic System.”
46. “Breakthrough of the Year Newsfocus: Genomics Beyond Genes,” Science 338 (December
21,2012); 1528.
47. Moran, “Intelligent Design Creationists Chose ENCODE as the #1 Evolution Story of
2012 .”
48.
Shapiro and von Sternberg, “Why Repetitive DNA Is Essential to Genome Function”;
Von Sternberg and Shapiro, “How Repeated Retroelements Format Genome Function.” See also
Von Sternberg, “On the Roles of Repetitive DNA Elements in the Context of a Unified Genomic-
Epigenetic System.”
49. Todd, “A View from Kansas on That Evolution Debate.”
CHAPTER 20: WHAT’S AT STAKE
1. Dawkins, The God Delusion; Hitchens, God Is Not Great; Stenger, God: The Failed Hypoth-
esis.
2.
Stenger, God: The Failed Hypothesis.
3. Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker, 6.
4.
Russell, quoted in Conant, Modern Science and Modern Man , 139-40.
5.
Collins, The Language of God. See also Giberson, Saving Darwin; Miller, Finding
Darwins God.
6. For prominent critics of the neo-Darwinian consensus, see Chapter 14, n. 42.
7. For some of the latest studies, see Chapter 19, n. 45.
8. As Alfred North Whitehead said, “When we consider what religion is for mankind and
what science is, it is no exaggeration to say that the future course of history depends upon the deci-
sion of this generation as to the relations between them”
(Science and the Modern World, 260).

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adams, Melissa D., et al. “The Genome Sequence of Drosophila melanogaster.
n Science 287 (2000):
2185-95.
Agassiz, Louis. “Evolution and the Permanence of Type.” Atlantic Monthly 33 (1874): 92-101.
. Louis Agassiz: His Life and Correspondence. Vol.
1, edited by E. C. Agassiz. Boston: Hough-
ton, Mifflin; Cambridge, MA: Riverside, 1890.
. Essay on Classification. Edited by Edward Lurie. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press,
Belknap Press, 1962.
Agres, Ted. “Smithsonian ‘Discriminated ’Against Scientist.” The Scientist, December 22, 2006.
Aguinaldo, Anna Marie, James M. Turbeville, Lawrence S. Linford, Maria C. Rivera, James R.
Garey, Rudolf A. Raff, and James A. Lake. “Evidence for a Clade of Nematodes, Arthropods
and Other Moulting Animals.” Nature 387 (1997): 489-93.
Akam, Michael. “Arthropods: Developmental Diversity Within a (Super) Phylum.” Proceedings of
the National Academy ofSciences USA 97 (2000): 4438-41.
Alean, Jiirg, and Michael Hambrey. “Glaciers Online.” http://www.swisseduc.ch/glaciers/earth
_icy_planet/icons-15/16.jpg.
Alexander, H. G., ed. The Leibniz-Clarke Correspondence. New York: Manchester Univ. Press,
1956.
Ally, Shabeen, A. G. Larson, K. Barlan, S. E. Rice, and V. Gelfand. “Opposite-Polarity Motors Acti-
vate One Another to Trigger Cargo Transport in Live Cells.” Journal of Cell Biology 187 (2009):
1071-82. http://jcb.rupress.Org/content/187/7/1071.full.pdffhtml (accessed October 30, 2012).
Alroy, John. “The Fossil Record of North American Mammals: Evidence for a Paleocene Evolu-
tionary Radiation.” Systematic Biology 48 (1999): 107-18.
Altamirano, Myriam M., Jonathan M. Blackburn, Cristina Aguayo, and Alan R. Fersht. “Directed
Evolution of New Catalytic Activity Using the Alpha/Beta-Barrel Scaffold.” Nature 403 (2000):
617-22.
American Association for the Advancement of Science Board of Directors. “Statement on Teaching
Evolution.” St. Louis, Missouri, February 16, 2006. http://www.aaas.org/news/releases/2006
/pdf/0219boardstatement.pdf.
Anderson, Troy. “Cancellation of Darwin Film Creates Uproar.” Los Angeles Daily News, October
8, 2009.
Aris-Brosou, Stephane, and Ziheng Yang. “Bayesian Models of Episodic Evolution Support a Late
Precambrian Explosive Diversification of the Metazoa.” Molecular Biology and Evolution 20
(2003): 1947-54.
Arnaud, Phillipe, Chantal Goubely, Thierry Pe’Lissier, and Jean-Marc Deragon. “SINE Retropo-
sons Can Be Used In Vivo as Nucleation Centers for De Novo Methylation.” Molecular and
Cellular Biology 20, no. 10 (2000): 3434-41.
Arthur, Wallace. The Origin ofAnimal Body Plans: A Study in Evolutionary Developmental Biology.
Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1997.
Asher, Robert J. Evolution and Belief: Confessions ofa Religious Paleontologist. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge Univ. Press, 2012.
Associated Press. “JPL Worker Sues over Intelligent Design Demotion.” USA Today, April 19, 2010.
. “Former NASA Specialist Claims He Was Fired over Intelligent Design.” FoxNews.com,
March 11, 2012.
Avery, Oswald T., Colin M. MacCleod, and Maclyn McCarty. “Induction of Transformation by a
Deoxyribonucleic Acid Fraction Isolated from Pneumococcus Type III.” Journal ofExperimen-
tal Medicine 79 (1944): 137-58.
Axe, Douglas D. “Extreme Functional Sensitivity to Conservative Amino Acid Changes on
Enzyme Exteriors.” Journal ofMolecular Biology 301 (2000): 585-95.
. “Estimating the Prevalence of Protein Sequences Adopting Functional Enzyme Folds.”
Journal ofMolecular Biology 341 (2004): 1295-1315.

Bibliography
455
. “The Case Against Darwinian Origin of Protein Folds.” BIO-Complexity 2010, no.
1 (2010):
1- 12 .
. “The Limits of Complex Adaptation: An Analysis Based on a Simple Model of Structured
Bacterial Populations.” BlO-Complexity 2010, no. 4 (2010): 1-10.
Ayala, Francisco J. “Design Without Designer: Darwin’s Greatest Discovery.” In Debating Design:
From Darwin to DNA, edited by M. Ruse and W. Dembski, 55-80. Cambridge: Cambridge
Univ. Press, 2004.
. “Darwin’s Greatest Discovery: Design Without Designer.” Proceedings of the National
Academy ofSciences USA 104 (2007): 8567-73.
Ayala, Francisco, A. Rzhetsky, and F.
J. Ayala. “Origin of the Metazoan Phyla: Molecular Clocks
Confirm Paleontological Estimates.” Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences USA 95
(1998): 606-11.
Azar, Beth. “Profile of Michael Lynch.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 107
(2010): 16013-15.
Babcock, Loren E. “Asymmetry in the Fossil Record.” European Review 13 (2005): 135-43.
Babu, M. Madan, Richard W. Kriwacki, and Rohit V. Pappu. “Versatility from Protein Disorder.”
Science 337 (2012): 1460-61.
Bailey,
J. V., S. B. Joye, K. M. Kalanetra, B. E. Flood, and F. A. Corsetti. “Evidence of Giant Sulphur
Bacteria in Neoproterozoic Phosphorites.” Nature 445 (2007): 198-201.
Balakirev, E. S., and F.
J. Ayala. “Pseudogenes: Are They ‘Junk’ or Functional DNA?” Annual
Review of Genetics 37 (2003): 123-51.
Bartel, David P. “MicroRNAs: Genomics, Biogenesis, Mechanism, and Function.” Cell 116 (2004):
281-97.
Bate, Michael, and Alfonso Martinez Arias, eds. The Development ofDrosophila melanogaster.
2 vols. Plainview, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1993.
Bateson, William. “Heredity and Variation in Modern Lights.” In Darwin and Modern Science
,
edited by A. C. Seward, 85-101. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1909.
Baverstock, Peter R., and Craig Moritz. “Project Design.” In Molecular Systematics , 2nd ed., edited
by D. M. Hillis, C. Moritz, and B. K. Mable, 17-27. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer, 1996.
BBC News, “The Darwinian Sistine Chapel,” April 14, 2009, http://www.bbc.co.uk/darwin/?tab=21
(accessed October 31, 2012).
Becker, H., and W. Lonnig. “Transposons: Eukaryotic.” In Nature's Encyclopedia ofLife Sciences,
18: 529-39. London: Nature Publishing, 2001.
Begun, David J. “Origin and Evolution of a New Gene Descended from Alcohol Dehydrogenase in
Drosophila." Genetics 145 (1997): 375-82.
Behe, Michael. “Histone Deletion Mutants Challenge the Molecular Clock Hypothesis.” Trends in
Ecology and Evolution 15 (1990): 374-76.
. “Experimental Support for Regarding Functional Classes of Proteins to Be Highly Isolated
from Each Other.” In Darwinism: Science or Philosophy? edited by J. Buell and V. Hearn, 60-71.
Richardson, TX: Foundation for Thought and Ethics, 1994.
. Darwin's Black Box: The Biochemical Challenge to Evolution. New York: Free Press, 1996.
. The Edge ofEvolution: The Search for the Limits ofDarwinism. New York: Free Press, 2007.
Behe, Michael J., and David W. Snoke. “Simulating Evolution by Gene Duplication of Protein Fea-
tures That Require Multiple Amino Acid Residues.” Protein Science 13 (2004): 2651-64.
Beiko, Robert G. “Telling the Whole Story in a 10,000-Genome World.” Biology Direct 6 (2011): 34.
Bell, C., A. G. West, and G. Felsenfeld. “Insulators and Boundaries: Versatile Regulatory Elements
in the Eukaryotic Genome.” Science 291 (2001): 447-50.
Bell, Michael A. “Gould’s Most Cherished Concept.” Trends in Ecology and Evolution 23, no. 3
(2008): 121-22.
Bengtson, Stefan, and Graham E. Budd. “Comment on ‘Small Bilaterian Fossils from 40 to 55 Mil-
lion Years Before the Cambrian.’ ” Science 306 (2004): 1291-92.
Bengtson, Stefan, John A. Cunningham, Chongyu Yin, and Philip C.
J. Donoghueb. “A Merci-
ful Death for the ‘Earliest Bilaterian’ Vernanimalcula.” Evolution and Development 14, no. 5
(2012): 421-27.
Bengtson, Stefan, and Xian-guang Hou. “The Integument of Cambrian Chancelloriids.” Acta
Paleontological Polonica 46 (2001): 1-22.
Benton, Michael J. “Early Origins of Modern Birds and Mammals: Molecules vs. Morphology.”
BioEssays 21 (1999): 1043-51.
Benton, Michael, and Francisco J. Ayala. “Dating the Tree of Life.” Science 300 (2003): 1698-1700.

456
Bibliography
Benton, Michael J., M. A. Wills, and R. Hitchin. “Quality of the Fossil Record Through Time.”
Nature 402 (2000): 534-37.
Bergsten, J. “A Review of Long-Branch Attraction.” Cladistics 21 (2005): 163-93.
Bergstrom, Jan. “Metazoan Evolution Around the Precambrian-Cambrian Transition.” In The
Early Evolution ofMetazoa and the Significance ofProblematic Taxa, edited by A. M. Simonetta
and S. Conway Morris, 25-34. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1991.
. “Ideas on Early Animal Evolution.” In Early Life on Earth, Nobel Symposium No. 84, edited
by S. Bengtson, 460-66. New York: Columbia Univ. Press, 1994.
Bergstrom, Jan, and Xian-Guang Hou. “Chengjiang Arthropods and Their Bearing on Early Ar-
thropod Evolution.” In Arthropod Fossils and Phylogeny, edited by G. D. Edgecombe, 151-84.
New York: Columbia Univ. Press, 1998.
. “Arthropod Origins.” Bulletin of Geosciences 78 (2003): 323-34.
Berlinski, David. “The Deniable Darwin.” Commentary 101 (1996): 19-29. http://www.discovery
.org/a/130.
. “On Assessing Genetic Algorithms.” Public lecture, “Science and Evidence of Design in the
Universe” Conference, Yale University, November 4, 2000.
Birket-Smith, S. J. R. “A Reconstruction of the Precambrian Spriggina.” Zoologische Jahrbiicher
Anatomie und Ontogenie der Here 105 (1981): 237-58.
Black, Nathan. “Intelligent Design Proponent Fired from NASA Lab.” Christian Post, January 26,
2011.
Blanco, F., I. Angrand, and L. Serrano. “Exploring the Conformational Properties of the Sequence
Space Between Two Proteins with Different Folds: An Experimental Study.” Journal ofMolecu-
lar Biology 285 (1999): 741-53.
Boehm, Mike. “California Science Center Is Sued for Canceling a Film Promoting Intelligent
Design.” Los Angeles Times, December 29, 2009.
Boffey, Philip M. “100 Years After Darwin’s Death, His Theory Still Evolves.” New York Times,
April 20, 1982.
Borchiellini, C., M. Manuel, E. Alivon, N. Boury-Esnault, J. Vacelet, and Y. Le Parco. “Sponge
Paraphyly and the Origin of Metazoa.” Journal ofEvolutionary Biology 14 (2001): 171-79.
Borel, Emile. Probability and Certainty. Translated by D. Scott. New York: Walker, 1963.
Bottjer, David. “The Early Evolution of Animals.” Scientific American 293 (2005): 42-47.
Bowler, P.
J. Theories ofHuman Evolution: A Century ofDebate, 1844-1944. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins Univ. Press, 1986.
. Evolution: The History ofan Idea. 3rd ed. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 2003.
Bowring, Samuel A., J. P. Grotzinger, C. E. Isachsen, A. H. Knoll, S. M. Pelechaty, and P. Kolosov.
“Calibrating Rates of Early Cambrian Evolution.” Science 261 (1993): 1293-98.
. “A New Look at Evolutionary Rates in Deep Time: Uniting Paleontology and High-
Precision Geochronology.” GSA Today 8 (1998): 1-8.
. “Geochronology Comes of Age.” Geotimes 43 (1998): 36-40.
Brachet, J., H. Denis, and F. De Vitry. “The Effects of Actinomycin D and Puromycin on Morpho-
genesis in Amphibian Eggs and Acetabularia mediterranean Developmental Biology 9 (1964):
398-434.
Bracht, John. “Inventions, Algorithms, and Biological Design.” Progress in Complexity, Informa-
tion, and Design 1.2 (2002). Available at http://www.iscid.org.
Brasier, Martin D., and Jonathan B. Antcliffe.
uDickinsonia from Ediacara: A New Look at Morph-
ology and Body Construction.” Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 270 (2008):
311-23.
Brenner, Sidney. “The Genetics of Behaviour.” British Medical Bulletin 29 (1973): 269-71.
Briggs, Brad, and Grace Maaluf. “BU Had Role in Dembski Return.” The Lariat, November 16,
2007, http://www.baylor.edu/lariat/news.php?action=story&story=48260.
Briggs, Derek, Douglas Erwin, and Frederick Collier. The Fossils of the Burgess Shale. Washington,
DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1994.
Britten, Roy J., and Eric H. Davidson. “Gene Regulation for Higher Cells: A Theory.” Science 165
(1969): 349-57.
Brocks, Jochen J., Graham A. Logan, Roger Buick, and Roger E. Summons. “Archean Molecular
Fossils and the Early Rise of Eukaryotes.” Science 285 (1999): 1033-36.
Bronham, Lindell, Andrew Rambaut, Richard Fortey, Alan Cooper, and David Penny. “Testing the
Cambrian Explosion Hypothesis by Using a Molecular Dating Technique.” Proceedings of the
National Academy ofSciences USA 95 (1998): 12386-89.

Bibliography
457
Brooks, W. K. “The Origin of the Oldest Fossils and the Discovery of the Bottom of the Ocean.”
Journal of Geology 2 (1894): 359-76.
Brosius, Jurgen. “The Contribution of RNAs and Retroposition to Evolutionary Novelties.”
Genetica 118 (2003): 99-116.
Brumfiel, Geoff. “Darwin Sceptic Says Views Cost Tenure.” Nature 447 (2007): 364.
Brusca, Richard C., and Gary J. Brusca. Invertebrates. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer, 1990.
Budd, Graham E. “The Morphology of Opabinia regalis and the Reconstruction of the Arthropod
Stem-Group.” Lethaia 29 (1996): 1-14.
Budd, Graham E., and Soren Jensen. “A Critical Reappraisal of the Fossil Record of the Bilaterian
Phyla.” Biological Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 75 (2000): 253-95.
. “The Limitations of the Fossil Record and the Dating of the Origin of the Bilateria.” In Tell-
ing the Evolutionary Time: Molecular Clocks and the Fossil Record, edited by P. C.
J. Donoghue
and M. P. Smith, 166-89. London: Taylor 8c Francis, 2003.
Burgess-Beusse, B., C. Farrell, M. Gaszner, M. Litt, V. Mutskov, F. Recillas-Targa, M. Simpson,
A. West, and G. Felsenfeld. “The Insulation of Genes from External Enhancers and
Silencing Chromatin.” Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences USA 99 (2002):
16433-37.
Butcher, Samuel E. “The Spliceosome as Ribozyme Hypothesis Takes a Second Step.” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences USA 106 (2009): 12211-12.
Cameron, Chris B., James R. Garey, and Billie J. Swalla. “Evolution of the Chordate Body Plan:
New Insights from Phylogenetic Analyses of Deuterostome Phyla.” Proceedings of the National
Academy ofSciences USA 97 (2000): 4469-74.
Cameron, R. A., et al. “A Sea Urchin Genome Project: Sequence Scan, Virtual Map, and Additional
Resources.” Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences USA 97 (2000): 9514-18.
Canoe, Inc. “Yoho National Park.” http://www.canadianparks.com/bcolumbia/yohonpk/index
.htm (accessed March 22, 2013).
Carrieri, C., et al. “Long Non-Coding Antisense RNA Controls Uchll Translation Through An
Embedded SINEB2 Repeat.” Nature 49 (2012): 454-57.
Carroll, Robert L. Patterns and Processes of Vertebrate Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ.
Press, 1997.
. “Towards a New Evolutionary Synthesis.” Trends in Ecology and Evolution 15 (2000):
27-32.
Carroll, Sean B. Endless Forms Most Beautiful: The New Science ofEvo Devo. New York: Norton,
2006.
Chamberlain, Thomas C. “The Method of Multiple Working Hypotheses.” Science (old series) 15
(1890): 92-96. Reprinted in Science 148 (1965): 754-59. Also reprinted in Journal of Geology
(1931): 155-65.
Chargaff, Erwin. “Chemical Specificity of Nucleic Acids and Mechanism of Their Enzymic Degra-
dation.” In Essays on Nucleic Acids, 1-24. New York: Elsevier, 1963.
Charlesworth, Brian, Russell Lande, and Montgomery Slatkin. “A Neo-Darwinian Commentary
on Macroevolution.” Evolution 36, no. 3 (1982): 474-98.
Chen, J. Y. “Early Crest Animals and the Insight They Provide into the Evolutionary Origin of
Craniates .” Genesis 46 (2008): 623-39.
Chen, J. Y., J. Dzik, G. D. Edgecombe, L. Ramskold, and G.-Q. Zhou. “A Possible Early Cambrian
Chordate.” Nature 377 (1995): 720-22.
Chen, J. Y., D. Y. Huang, and C. W. Li. “An Early Cambrian Craniate-like Chordate.” Nature 402
(1999): 518-22.
Chen, J. Y., and C. W. Li. “Early Cambrian Chordate from Chengjiang, China.” Bulletin of the
National Museum ofNatural Science of Taiwan 10 (1997): 257-73.
Chen, J. Y., C. W. Li, Paul Chien, G.-Q. Zhou, and Feng Gao. “Weng’an Biota: A Light Casting
on the Precambrian World.” Paper presented to “The Origin of Animal Body Plans and Their
Fossil Records” Conference, Kunming, China, June 20-26, 1999, sponsored by the Early Life
Research Center and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Chen, J. Y., P. Oliveri, F. Gao, S. Q. Dornbos, C. W. Li, D. J. Bottjer, and E. H. Davidson. “Pre-
cambrian Animal Life: Probable Developmental and Adult Cnidarian Forms from Southwest
China.” Developmental Biology 248 (2002): 182-96.
Chen, J. Y.,
J. W. Schopf, et al. “Raman Spectra of a Lower Cambrian Ctenophore Embryo from
Southwestern Shaanxi, China.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 104
(2007): 6289-92.

458
Bibliography
Chen, J. Y., and G.-Q. Zhou. “Biology of the Chengjiang Fauna.” In The Cambrian Explosion and
the Fossil Record, edited by Chen, J. Y., Y. Cheng, and H. V. Iten, 11-106. Taiwan: National
Museum of Natural Science, 1997.
Chen, J. Y., G.-Q. Zhou, M. Y. Zhu, and K. Y. Yeh. The Chengjiang Biota: A Unique Window of the
Cambrian Explosion. Taichung, Taiwan: National Museum of Natural Science, 1996.
Chen, Liangbiao, Arthur L. DeVries, and Chi-Hing C. Cheng. “Evolution of Antifreeze Glyco-
protein Gene from a Trypsinogen Gene in Antarctic Notothenioid Fish.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA 94 (1997): 3811-16.
. “Convergent Evolution of Antifreeze Glycoproteins in Antarctic Notothenioid Fish and
Arctic Cod.” Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences USA 94 (1997): 3817-22.
Chen, Ling-Ling, Joshua N. DeCerbo, and Gordon G. Carmichael. “A/u Element-Mediated Gene
Silencing.” EMBO Journal (2008): 1-12.
Chesterton, G. K. “The Invisible Man.” In The Complete “Father Brown,” at ebooks.adelaide.edu.
auu/c/Chesterton/gk/c52fb/chapter5.html. First published in The Saturday Evening Post, Janu-
ary 28, 1911,5-7,30.
Chien, Paul,
J. Y. Chen, C. W. Li, and Frederick Leung. “SEM Observation of Precambrian Sponge
Embryos from Southern China, Revealing Ultrastructures Including Yolk Granules, Secretion
Granules, Cytoskeleton, and Nuclei.” Paper presented to the North American Paleontological
Convention, University of California, Berkeley, June 26-July 1, 2001.
Christin, P. A., D. M. Weinreich, and G. Bresnard. “Causes and Evolutionary Significance of Ge-
netic Convergence.” Trends in Genetics 26 (2010): 400-405.
Cisne, J. L. “Trilobites and the Origin of Arthropods.” Science 186 (1974): 13-18.
Cloud, Wallace. “The Ship That Digs Holes in the Sea.” Popular Mechanics 131 (1969): 108—
11,236.
Cohen, Bernard I., ed. Isaac Newtons Papers and Letters on Natural Philosophy. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge Univ. Press, 1958.
Colas, A. R., et al. “Whole-Genome MicroRNA Screening Identifies let-7 and miR-18 as Regulators
of Germ Layer Formation During Early Embryogenesis.” Genes and Development 26 (2012):
2567-79.
Collins, Desmond. “Misadventures in the Burgess Shale.” Nature 460 (2009): 952-53.
Collins, Francis. The Language of God. New York: Free Press, 2006.
Conant, James B. Modern Science and Modern Man. New York: Doubleday Anchor, 1953.
Conniff, Richard. “When Continental Drift Was Considered Pseudoscience.” Smithsonian Maga-
zine, June 2012. http://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/When-Continental-Drift
-Was-Considered-Pseudoscience.html (accessed December 30, 2012).
Conway Morris, Simon. “Burgess Shale Faunas and the Cambrian Explosion.” Science 246 (1989):
339-46.
. “Ediacaran-like Fossils in Cambrian Burgess Shale-type Faunas of North America.” Pale-
ontology 36 (1993): 593-635.
. “Early Metazoan Evolution: Reconciling Paleontology and Molecular Biology.” American
Zoologist 38 (1998): 867-77.
. “Nipping the Cambrian “Explosion” in the Bud?” BioEssays 22 (2000): 1053-56.
. The Crucible of Creation: The Burgess Shale and the Rise ofAnimals. Oxford: Oxford Univ.
Press, 2000.
. “Evolution: Bringing Molecules into the Fold.” Cell 100 (2000): 1-11.
. “The Cambrian ‘Explosion’ of Metazoans and Molecular Biology: Would Darwin Be Satis-
fied?” International Journal ofDevelopmental Biology 47 (2003): 505-15.
. “The Cambrian ‘Explosion’ of Metazoans.” In Origination ofOrganismal Form : Beyond the
Gene in Developmental and Evolutionary Biology, edited by G. B. Muller and S. A. Newman,
13-32. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003.
. Life's Solution: Inevitable Humans in a Lonely Universe. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ.
Press, 2003.
. “Darwin’s Dilemma: The Realities of the Cambrian ‘Explosion.’ ” Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society B 361 (2006): 1069-83.
. “Walcott, the Burgess Shale and Rumours of a Post-Darwinian World.” Current Biology 19
(2009): R927-31.
Conway Morris, S., and J.-B. Caron.
“Pikaia gracilens Walcott, a Stem-Group Chordate from the
Middle Cambrian of British Columbia.” Biological Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical
Society 87 (2012): 480-512.

Bibliography
459
Conway Morris, S., and D. H. Collins. “Middle Cambrian Ctenophores from the Stephen Forma-
tion, British Columbia, Canada.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences 351 (1996): 279-308.
Conway Morris, S., and J. S. Peel. “Articulated Halkieriids from the Lower Cambrian of North
Greenland and Their Role in Early Protostome Evolution.” Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 347 (1995): 305-58.
. “The Earliest Annelids: Lower Cambrian Polychaetes from the Sirius Passet Lagerstatte,
Peary Land, North Greenland.” Acta Palaeontologica Polonica 53 (2008): 137-48.
Cooper, Alan, and Richard Fortey. “Evolutionary Explosions and the Phylogenetic Fuse.” Trends in
Ecology and Evolution 13 (1998):151—56.
Courseaux, Anouk, and Jean-Louis Nahon. “Birth of Two Chimeric Genes in the Hominidae
Lineage.” Science 291 (2001): 1293-97.
Coyne, Jerry. “The Great Mutator: Review of The Edge ofEvolution, by Michael J. Behe .” New
Republic, June 18, 2007, 38-44.
. Why Evolution Is True. New York: Viking, 2009.
Crick, Francis. “On Protein Synthesis.” Symposium for the Society ofExperimental Biology 12
(1958): 138-63.
. What Mad Pursuit: A Personal View of Scientific Discovery. New York: Basic Books, 1988.
Crick, Francis, and James Watson. “A Structure for Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid.” Nature 171 (1953):
737-38.
Crocker, Caroline. Free to Think: Why Scientific Integrity Matters. Port Orchard, WA: Leafcutter
Press, 2010.
Crowther, Robert. “Academic Freedom Expelled from Baylor University.” Evolution News and
Views, September 5, 2007. http://www.evolutionnews.org/2007/09/academic_freedom_ex-
pelled_from004189.html.
Cunningham, J. A., et al. “Experimental Taphonomy of Giant Sulphur Bacteria: Implications for
the Interpretation of the Embryo-Like Ediacaran Doushantuo Fossils.” Proceedings of the Royal
Society B 279 (2012): 1857-64.
Daley, A. C. “The Morphology and Evolutionary Significance of the Anomalocaridids.” Digital
Comprehensive Summaries of Uppsala Dissertationsfrom the Faculty ofScience and Technology
714 (2010): 9-34.
Darnell, J. E., and W. F. Doolittle. “Speculations on the Early Course of Evolution.” Proceedings of
the National Academy ofSciences USA 83 (1986): 1271-75.
Darwin, Charles. On the Origin of Species by Means ofNatural Selection. A facsimile of the first
edition, published by John Murray, London, 1859. Reprint, Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ.
Press, 1964.
. On the Origin of Species by Means ofNatural Selection. 6th ed. London: John Murray,
1872.
. The Autobiography of Charles Darwin, 1809-1882. Edited by Nora Barlow. New York:
Norton, 1958.
. The Illustrated Origin of Species. Abridged and introduced by Richard Leakey. 6th ed.
London: Faber and Faber, 1979.
Davalos, Liliana M., Andrea L. Cirranello, Jonathan H. Geisler, and Nancy B. Simmons. “Under-
standing Phylogenetic Incongruence: Lessons from Phyllostomid Bats.” Biological Reviews 87
(2012): 991-1024.
Davidson, Eric H. Genomic Regulatory Systems: Development and Evolution. New York: Academic,
2001.
. The Regulatory Genome: Gene Regulatory Networks in Development and Evolution. Burling-
ton: Elsevier, 2006.
. “Evolutionary Bioscience as Regulatory Systems Biology.” Developmental Biology 357
(2011): 35-40.
Davidson, Eric H., and Douglas Erwin. “An Integrated View of Precambrian Eumetazoan Evolu-
tion.” Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 74 (2010): 1-16.
Davidson, Eric H., Kevin J. Peterson, and R. Andrew Cameron. “Origin of Bilaterian Body Plans:
Evolution of Developmental Regulatory Mechanisms.” Science 270 (1995): 1319-24.
Dawkins, Richard. The Blind Watchmaker: Why the Evidence Reveals a Universe Without Design.
New York: Norton, 1986.
. River Out ofEden: A Darwinian View ofLife. New York: Basic Books, 1995.
. Climbing Mount Improbable. New York: Norton, 1996.

460
Bibliography
. Unweaving the Rainbow: Science , Delusion, and the Appetitefor Wonder. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1998.
. A Devil’s Chaplain: Reflections on Hope, Lies, Science, and Love. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
2003.
. The God Delusion. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2006.
. The Greatest Show on Earth: The Evidencefor Evolution. New York: Free Press, 2009.
Dean, Cornelia. “Scientists Feel Miscast in Film on Life’s Origin.” New York Times, September 27,
2007.
De Duve, C. Blueprintfor a Cell: The Nature and Origin ofLife. Burlington, NC: Patterson, 1991.
Degnan, James H., and Noah A. Rosenberg. “Gene Tree Discordance, Phylogenetic Inference and
the Multispecies Coalescent.” Trends in Ecology and Evolution 24 (2009): 332-40.
Delsuc, Frederic, Matthew J. Phillips, and David Penny. “Comment on ‘Hexapod Origins: Mono-
phyletic or Paraphyletic?’ ” Science 301 (2003): 1482.
Dembski, William A. “Intelligent Science and Design.” First Things 86 (1998): 21-27.
. The Design Inference: Eliminating Chance Through Small Probabilities. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge Univ. Press, 1998.
. “Intelligent Design as a Theory of Technological Evolution.” Progress in Complexity, Infor-
mation, and Design 1.2 (2002). Available at http://www.iscid.org.
. No Free Lunch: Why Specified Complexity Cannot Be Purchased Without Intelligence.
Boston: Rowman 8c Littlefield, 2002.
Demuth, J. P., T. De Bie, J. E. Stajich, N. Cristianini, and M. W. Hahn. “The Evolution of Mamma-
lian Gene Families.” PLoS One
1 (2006): e85.
Dennett, Daniel C. Darwins Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life. New York: Simon
8c Schuster, 1995.
Denton, Michael. Evolution: A Theory in Crisis. London: Adler and Adler, 1985.
De Rosa, R., J. K. Grenier, T. Andreeva, C. E. Cook, A. Adoutte, M. Akam, S. B. Carroll, and G.
Balavoine. “Hox Genes in Brachiopods and Priapulids and Protostome Evolution.” Nature 399
(1999): 772-76.
Dillon, William. “Regents Deny Gonzalez’s Tenure Appeal.” Ames Tribune, February 7, 2008.
Dobzhansky, Theodosius. “Discussion of G. Schramm’s Paper.” In The Origins ofPrebiological Sys-
tems and of Their Molecular Matrices, edited by S. W. Fox, 309-15. New York: Academic, 1965.
. “Nothing in Biology Makes Sense Except in the Light of Evolution.” American Biology
Teacher 35 (1973): 125-29.
Donnelly, S. R., T. E. Hawkins, and S. E. Moss, “A Conserved Nuclear Element with a Role in
Mammalian Gene Regulation.” Human Molecular Genetics 8 (1999): 1723-28.
Doolittle, Russell F„ D. F. Feng, S. Tsang, G. Cho, and E. Little. “Determining Divergence Times of
the Major Kingdoms of Living Organisms with a Protein Clock.” Science 271 (1996): 470-77.
Doolittle, W. F. “Phylogenetic Classification and the Universal Tree.” Science 284 (1999):
2124-28.
Dott, Robert H., Jr., and Donald R. Prothero. Evolution of the Earth. 5th ed. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1994.
Douglas, Michael Edward, and John C. Avise. “Speciation Rates and Morphological Divergence
in Fishes: Tests of Gradual Versus Rectangular Modes of Evolutionary Change.” Evolution 36
(1982): 224-32.
Dunbar, Carl O. Historical Geology. New York: Wiley, 1949.
Dunlap, K.A., M. Palmarini, M. Varela, R. C. Burghardt, K. Hayashi, J. L. Farmer, and T. E. Spen-
cer. “Endogenous Retroviruses Regulate Periimplantation Placental Growth and Differentia-
tion.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 103 (2006): 14390-95.
Dunn, C. A., P. Medstrand, and D. L. Mager. “An Endogenous Retroviral Long Terminal Repeat Is
the Dominant Promoter for Human Bl, 3-galactosyltransferase 5 in the Colon.” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences USA 100 (2003): 12841-46.
Dupree, A. Hunter. Asa Gray: American Botanist, Friend ofDarwin. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
Univ. Press, Belknap Press, 1959.
Durrett, Rick, and Deena Schmidt. “Waiting for Two Mutations: With Applications to Regulatory
Sequence Evolution and the Limits of Darwinian Evolution.” Genetics 180 (2008): 1501-9.
Dzik, J.
uYunnanozoon and the Ancestry of Chordates .” Acta Palaeontologica Polanica 40 (1995):
341-60.
Ebert, James, et al. Science and Creationism: A Viewfrom the National Academy ofScience. Wash-
ington, DC: National Academy Press, 1984.

Bibliography
461
Ecker, J. R., W. A. Bickmore, I. Barroso, J. K. Pritchard, Y. Gilad, and E. Segal. “Genomics:
ENCODE Explained.” Nature 489 (2012): 52-55.
Eden, Murray. “Inadequacies of Neo-Darwinian Evolution as a Scientific Theory.” In Mathematical
Challenges to the Neo-Darwinian Interpretation ofEvolution, edited by P. S. Moorhead and M.
M. Kaplan, 109-11. Wistar Institute Symposium Monograph No. 5. New York: Liss, 1967.
Edgecombe, G. D., G. Giribet, C. W. Dunn, A. Hejnol, R. M. Kristensen, R. C. Neves, G. W. Rouse,
K. Worsaae, and M. V. Sorensen. “Higher-Level Metazoan Relationships: Recent Progress and
Remaining Questions ” Organisms, Diversification, and Evolution 11 (2011): 151-72.
Edidin, Michael. “Patches, Posts and Fences: Proteins and Plasma Membrane Domains.” Trends in
Cell Biology 2 (1992): 376-80.
Eger, Martin. “A Tale of Two Controversies: Dissonance in the Theory and Practice of Rationality.”
Zygon 23 (1988): 291-326.
Ehrlich, Paul, and Richard Holm. The Processes ofEvolution. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1963.
Eldredge, Niles. Reinventing Darwin: The Great Debate at the High Table ofEvolutionary Theory.
New York: Wiley, 1995.
. The Pattern ofEvolution. New York: Freeman, 1999.
. The Triumph ofEvolution and the Failure of Creationism. New York: Freeman, 2000.
Eldredge, Niles, and Stephen Jay Gould. “Punctuated Equilibria: An Alternative to Phyletic Gradu-
alism.” In Models in Paleobiology, edited by T. J. M. Schopf. San Francisco: Freeman, Cooper,
1972.
Enard, Wolfgang et al. “Molecular Evolution of FOXP2, a Gene Involved in Speech and Language.”
Nature 418 (2002): 869-72.
ENCODE Project Consortium. “Identification and Analysis of Functional Elements in 1% of the
Human Genome by the ENCODE Pilot Project.” Nature 447 (2007): 799-816.
Endler, John. Natural Selection in the Wild. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 1986.
Erwin, Douglas H. “Early Introduction of Major Morphological Innovations.” Acta Palaeonto-
logica Polonica 38 (1994): 281-94.
. “The Origin of Body Plans.” American Zoologist 39 (1999): 617-29.
. “Macroevolution Is More Than Repeated Rounds of Microevolution.” Evolution and Devel-
opment 2 (2000): 78-84.
. “Disparity: Morphological Pattern and Developmental Context.” Palaeontology 50 (2007):
57-73.
. “Evolutionary Uniformatarianism.” Developmental Biology 357 (2011): 27-34.
Erwin, Douglas H., and Eric Davidson. “The Last Common Bilaterian Ancestor.” Development 129
(2002): 3021-32.
. “The Evolution of Hierarchical Gene Regulatory Networks.” Nature Reviews Genetics 10
(2009): 141-48.
Erwin, Douglas H., Marc Laflamme, Sarah M. Tweedt, Erik A. Sperling, Davide Pisani, and Kevin
J. Peterson. “The Cambrian Conundrum: Early Divergence and Later Ecological Success in the
Early History of Animals.” Science 334 (2011): 1091-97.
Erwin, Douglas, James Valentine, and David Jablonski. “The Origin of Animal Body Plans.”
American Scientist 85 (1997): 126-37.
Erwin, Douglas, James Valentine, and J.
J. Sepkoski. “A Comparative Study of Diversification
Events: The Early Paleozoic Versus the Mesozoic.” Evolution 41 (1987): 1177-86.
Ewen-Campen, Ben, E. E. Schwager, and C. G. Extavour. “The Molecular Machinery of Germ Line
Specification.” Molecular Reproduction and Development 11 (2010): 3-18.
Ewert, Winston, George Montanez, William Dembski, and Robert J. Marks II. “Efficient Per Query
Information Extraction from a Hamming Oracle.” 42nd South Eastern Symposium on System
Theory (2010): 290-97.
Extavour, Cassandra G. M. “Evolution of the Bilaterian Germ Line: Lineage Origin and Modula-
tion of Specific Mechanisms.” Integrative and Comparative Biology 47 (2007): 770-85.
. “Gray Anatomy: Phylogenetic Patterns of Somatic Gonad Structures and Reproductive
Strategies Across the Bilateria .” Integrative and Comparative Biology 47 (2007): 420-26.
Fedonkin, Mikhail A., and Benjamin M. Waggoner. “The Late Precambrian Fossil Kimberella is a
Mollusc-like Bilaterian Organism.” Nature 388 (1997): 868-71.
Felsenstein, Joseph. Inferring Phylogenies. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer, 2004.
Fernandes, J., S. E. Celniker, E. B. Lewis, and K. VijayRaghavan. “Muscle Development in the
Four-Winged Drosophila and the Role of the Ultrabithorax Gene.” Current Biology 4 (1994):
957-64.

462
Bibliography
Figueiredo, L. M., L. H. Freitas-Junior, E. Bottius, J.-C. Olivo-Marin, and A. Scherf. “A Central
Role for Plasmodium Falciparum Subtelomeric Regions in Spatial Positioning and Telomere
Length Regulation.” EMBO Journal 21 (2002): L815-24.
Fisher, Ronald A. The Genetical Theory ofNatural Selection. New York: Dover, 1958.
Foote, Michael. “Paleozoic Record of Morphological Diversity in Blastozoan Echinoderms.” Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 89 (1992): 7325-29.
. “On the Probability of Ancestors in the Fossil Record.” Paleobiology 22 (1996): 141-51.
. “Sampling, Taxonomic Description, and Our Evolving Knowledge of Morphological Diver-
sity.” Paleobiology 23 (1997): 181-206.
Foote, Michael, and Stephen Jay Gould. “Cambrian and Recent Morphological Disparity.” Science
258 (1992): 1816-17.
Fortey, Richard. “The Cambrian Explosion Exploded?” Science 293 (2001): 438-39.
Fortey, Richard A., Derek E. G. Briggs, and Matthew A. Wills. “The Cambrian Evolutionary ‘Ex-
plosion’ Recalibrated.” BioEssays 19 (1997): 429-34.
Franco-Zorrilla, J. M., et al. “Target Mimicry Provides a New Mechanism for Regulation of Mi-
croRNA Activity.” Nature Genetics 39 (2007): 1033-37.
Frankel, J. “Propagation of Cortical Differences in Tetrahymena.” Genetics 94 (1980): 607-23.
Frazzetta, Thomas H. “From Hopeful Monsters to Bolyerine Snakes?” American Naturalist 104
(1970): 55-72.
. Complex Adaptations in Evolving Populations. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer, 1975.
. “Modeling Complex Morphological Change in Evolution, and A Possible Ecological Anal-
ogy.” Evolutionary Theory 6 (1982): 127-41.
Frohnhofer, Hans Georg, and Christiane Niisslein-Volhard. “Organization of Anterior Pattern in
the Drosophila Embryo by the Maternal Gene Bicoid .” Nature 324 (1986): 120-25.
Futuyma, Douglas J. “Evolution as Fact and Theory.” BIOS 56 (1985): 8.
Fuxreiter, Monika, and Peter Tompa. “Fuzzy Complexes: A More Stochastic View of Protein Func-
tion.” In Fuzziness: Structural Disorder in Protein Complexes, edited by M. Fuxreiter and P.
Tompa, 1-14. Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology 725. Austin, TX: Landes Biosci-
ence, Springer Science, 2012.
Gabius, Hans-Joachim. “Biological Information Transfer Beyond the Genetic Code: The Sugar
Code.” Naturwissenschaften 87 (2000): 108-21.
Gabius, Hans-Joachim, H. C. Siebert, S. Andre, J. Jimenez-Barbero, and H. Riidinger. “Chemical
Biology of the Sugar Code.” Chembiochem 5 (2004): 740-64.
Gagnon, James A., and Kimberly L. Mowry. “Molecular Motors: Directing Traffic During RNA
Localization.” Critical Reviews ofBiochemistry and Molecular Biology 46 (2011): 229-39.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3181 154/?tool=pubmed (accessed October
30, 2012).
Gaffney, Eugene S. “The Comparative Osteology of the Triassic Turtle Proganochelys.” Bulletin of
the American Museum ofNatural History 194 (1990): 1-263.
Gallegos, Emma. “Intelligent Design Proponent Who Works at JPL Says He Experienced Religious
Discrimination.” San Gabriel Valley Tribune, April 18, 2010.
Gallie, Walter Bryce. “Explanations in History and the Genetic Sciences.” In Theories of History,
edited by P. Gardiner, 386-402. Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1959.
Garda-Bellido, D. C., and D. H. Collins. “A New Study of Marrella splendens (Arthropoda, Mar-
relomorpha) from the Middle Cambrian Burgess Shale, British Columbia, Canada.” Canadian
Journal ofEarth Sciences 43 (2006): 721-42.
Gauger, Ann. “The Frailty of the Darwinian Hypothesis, Part 2.” Evolution News & Views, July 14,
2009. http://www.evolutionnews.org/2009/07/the_frailty_of_the_darwinian_h_1022911.html.
. “Why Proteins Aren’t Easily Recombined.” May 7, 2012. http://www.biologicinstitute.org
/post/22595615671/why-proteins-arent-easily-recombined.
Gauger, Ann K., and Douglas D. Axe. “The Evolutionary Accessibility of New Enzyme Functions:
A Case Study from the Biotin Pathway.” BIO-Complexity 2011, no.
1 (2011): 1-17.
Gauger, Ann K., Stephanie Ebnet, Pamela F. Fahey, and Ralph Seelke. “Reductive Evolution Can
Prevent Populations from Taking Simple Adaptive Paths to High Fitness.” BIO-Complexity
2010, no. 2 (2010): 1-9.
Gehling, J. G. “The Case for Ediacaran Fossil Roots to the Metazoan Tree.” In The World ofMartin
F. Glaessner, Memoir No. 20, edited by B. P. Radhakrishna, 181-223. Bangalore: Geological
Society of India, 1991.

Bibliography
463
George, J. A., K. L. Traverse, P. G. DeBaryshe, K.
J. Kelley, and M. L. Pardue. “Evolution of Diverse
Mechanisms for Protecting Chromosome Ends by Drosophila TART Telomere Retrotranspo-
sons.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 107 (2010): 21052-57.
Gerhart, John, and Marc Kirschner. Cells, Embryos, and Evolution. London: Blackwell Science,
1997.
. “The Theory of Facilitated Variation.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA
104 (2007): 8582-89.
Gilbert, S. F., J. M. Opitz, and R. A. Raff. “Resynthesizing Evolutionary and Developmental Biol-
ogy.” Developmental Biology 173 (1996): 357-72.
Gilbert, W. “The Exon Theory of Genes.” Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on Quantitative Biology
52 (1987): 901-5.
Giles, Jim. “Peer-Reviewed Paper Defends Theory of Intelligent Design.” Nature 431 (2004): 114.
Gillespie, Neal C. Charles Darwin and the Problem of Creation. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press,
1979.
Gishlick, Alan, Nicholas Matzke, and Wesley R. Elsberry. “Meyers Hopeless Monster.” Talk
Reason.org, September 12, 2004. http://www.talkreason.org/articles/meyer.cfm.
Glaessner, M. F. “A New Genus of Late Precambrian Polychaete Worms from South Australia.”
Transactions of the Royal Society ofSouth Australia 100 (1976): 169-70.
Gleick, James. “The Pace of Evolution: A Fossil Creature Moves to Center of Debate.” New York
Times, December 22, 1987.
Goh, Sung-Ho, Y. T. Lee, N. V. Bhanu, M. C. Cam, R. Desper, B. M Martin, R. Moharram, R.
B. Gherman, and J. L. Miller. “A Newly Discovered Human Alpha-Globin Gene.” Blood 106
(2005): 1466-72.
Goldschmidt, Richard. The Material Basis ofEvolution. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1940.
Gon III, S. M. “Origins of Trilobites.” http://www.trilobites.info/origins.htm.
Goodrich, J. A., and J. F. Kugel. “Non-coding RNA Regulators of RNA Polymerase II Transcrip-
tion.” Nature Reviews Molecular and Cell Biology 7 (2006): 612-16.
Goodwin, Brian C. “What Are the Causes of Morphogenesis?” BioEssays 3 (1985): 32-36.
. “Structuralism in Biology.” Science Progress 74 (1990): 227-44.
. How the Leopard Changed Its Spots: The Evolution of Complexity. New York: Scribner, 1994.
Gould, Stephen Jay. “The Return of Hopeful Monsters.” Natural History 86 (1977): 22-30.
. “Evolution: Explosion, Not Ascent; When Change Was Slow and Safe; No Evolutionary
Ladder; Everyone Has Prejudices.” New York Times, January 22, 1978.
. “Is a New and General Theory of Evolution Emerging?” Paleobiology 6 (1980): 119-30.
. “The Meaning of Punctuated Equilibrium and Its Role in Validating a Hierarchical Ap-
proach to Macroevolution.” In Perspectives on Evolution, edited by R. Milkman, 83-104.
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer, 1982.
. “Creationism: Genesis Versus Geology.” In Science and Creationism, edited by A. Montagu,
126-35. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1984.
. “Evolution as Fact and Theory.” In Science and Creationism, edited by A. Montagu, 118-24.
New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1984.
. “Evolution and the Triumph of Homology: Or, Why History Matters.” American Scientist
74 (1986): 60-69.
. Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature ofHistory. New York: Norton, 1990.
. “The Disparity of the Burgess Shale Arthropod Fauna and the Limits of Cladistic Analysis:
Why We Must Strive to Quantify Morphospace.” Paleobiology 17 (1991): 411-23.
. The Structure ofEvolutionary Theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press, 2002.
Gould, Steven Jay, and Niles Eldredge. “Punctuated Equilibria: The Tempo and Mode of Evolution
Reconsidered.” Paleobiology 3 (1977): 115-51.
. “Punctuated Equilibrium Comes of Age.” Nature 366 (1993): 223-27.
Graur, Dan, and William Martin. “Reading the Entrails of Chickens: Molecular Timescales of
Evolution and the Illusion of Precision.” Trends in Genetics 20, no. 2 (2004): 80-86.
Grawunder, U., M. Wilm, X. Wu, P. Kulesza, T. E. Wilson, M. Mann, and M. R. Lieber. “Activity of
DNA Ligase IV Stimulated by Complex Formation with XRCC4 Protein in Mammalian Cells.”
Nature 388 (1997): 492-95.
Gray, Asa. Darwiniana. Edited by A. Hunter Dupree. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 1963.
Green, David G. “The Role of Translocation and Selection in the Emergence of Genetic Clusters
and Modules.” Artificial Life 13 (2007): 249-58.

464
Bibliography
Grizzle, Raymond. “Some Comments on the ‘Godless’ Nature of Darwinian Evolution, and a Plea
to the Philosophers Among Us.” Perspectives on Science and Christian Faith 44 (1993): 175-77.
Grosberg, R. K. “Out on a Limb: Arthropod Origins.” Science 250 (1990): 632-33.
Gross, Paul. “Design for Living.” New Criterion 26 (October 2007): 70-73.
Grotzinger, John P., Samuel A. Bowring, Beverly Z. Saylor, and Alan J. Kaufman. “Biostrati-
graphic and Geochronologic Constraints on Early Animal Evolution.” Science 270 (1995):
598-604.
Guerzoni, Daniele, and Aoife McLysaght. “De Novo Origins of Human Genes,” PLoS Genetics 7
(2011): el002381.
Gura, Trisha. “Bones, Molecules, or Both?” Nature 406 (2000): 230-33.
Haffter, et al. “The Identification of Genes with Unique and Essential Functions in the Develop-
ment of the Zebrafish, Danio rerio .” Development 123 (1996): 1-36.
Hagerty, Barbara. “Intelligent Design and Academic Freedom.” NPR, November 17, 2005.
Hahn, Matthew W. “Distinguishing Among Evolutionary Models for the Maintenance of Gene
Duplicates.” Journal ofHeredity 100 (2009): 605-17.
Halanych, Kenneth M. “The New View of Animal Phylogeny.” Annual Review ofEcology and
Systematics 35 (2004): 229-56.
Halanych, Kenneth M., and Yale Passamaneck. “A Brief Review of Metazoan Phylogeny and
Future Prospects in Hox-Research .” American Zoologist 41 (2001): 629-39.
Haider, Georg, Patrick Callaerts, and Walter J. Gehring. “Induction of Ectopic Eyes by Targeted
Expression of the eyeless Gene in Drosophila.” Science 267 (1995): 1788-92.
Hall, C., S. Brachat, and F. S. Dietrich. “Contribution of Horizontal Gene Transfer to the Evolution
of Saccharomyces cerevisiae” Eukaryotic Cell 4 (2005): 1102-15.
Hall, Dwight H., Ying Liu, and David A. Shub. “Exon Shuffling by Recombination Between Self-
Splicing Introns of Bacteriophage T4 .” Nature 340 (1989): 574-76.
Han, Jeffrey S., Suzanne T. Szak, and JefFD. Boeke. “Transcriptional Disruption by the LI Ret-
rotransposon and Implications for Mammalian Transcriptomes.” Nature 429 (2004): 268-74.
Harold, Franklin M. “From Morphogenes to Morphogenesis.” Microbiology 141 (1995): 2765-78.
. The Way of the Cell: Molecules, Organisms, and the Order of Life. New York: Oxford Univ.
Press, 2001.
Harris, Jack Ross. “Louis Agassiz: A Reevaluation of the Nature of His Opposition to the Darwin-
ian View of Natural History.” Senior thesis, Whitworth College, 1993.
Harvey, Ethel Browne. “Parthenogenetic Merogony or Cleavage Without Nuclei in Arbacia
punctulata.” Biological Bulletin 71 (1936): 101-21. http://www.biolbull.Org/content/71/l/101
.full.pdf+html (accessed October 30, 2012).
. “A Comparison of the Development of Nucleate and Non-nucleate Eggs of Arbacia punctu-
lata” Biological Bulletin 79 (1940): 166-87. http://www.biolbull.Org/content/79/l/166.full.
pdf+html (accessed October 30, 2012).
He, Lu, Alan M. Friedman, and Chris Bailey-Kellogg. “Algorithms for Optimizing Cross-Overs in
DNA Shuffling.” ACM Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology and Biomedi-
cine 2011. BMC Bioinformatics 2012, 13 (Suppl 3): S3.
Heirtzler, J. R. “Sea-Floor Spreading.” In Continents Adrift: Readingsfrom Scientific American,
edited by J. T. Wilson, 68-78. San Francisco: Freeman, 1970.
Hellstrom, Nils Petter. “The Tree as Evolutionary Icon: TREE in the Natural History Museum,
London.” Archives ofNatural History 38.1 (2011): 1-17.
Henikoff, Steven. “Heterochromatin Function in Complex Genomes.” Biochimica et Biophysica
Acta 1470 (2000): 01-08.
Henikoff, Steven, Kami Ahmad, and Harmit S. Malik. “The Centromere Paradox: Stable Inheri-
tance with Rapidly Evolving DNA.” Science 293 (2001): 1098-1102.
Himmelfarb, Gertrude. Darwin and the Darwinian Revolution. 1959. Reprint, Chicago: Ivan R.
Dee, 1996.
Ho, Simon Y. W., Matthew J. Phillips, Alexei J. Drummond, and Alan Cooper. “Accuracy of Rate
Estimation Using Relaxed-Clock Models with a Critical Focus on the Early Metazoan Radia-
tion.” Molecular Biology and Evolution 22, no. 5 (2005): 1355-63.
Hoekstra, Hopi E., and Jerry A. Coyne. “The Locus of Evolution: Evo Devo and the Genetics of
Adaptation.” Evolution 61 (2007): 995-1016.
Hoeppner, M. P., S. White, D. C. Jeffares, and A. M. Poole. “Evolutionarily Stable Association of
Intronic SnoRNAs and MicroRNAs with Their Host Genes.” Genome Biology and Evolution
1
(2009): 420-28.

Bibliography
465
Hoffman, H.
J., K. Grey, A. H. Hickman, and R. I. Thorpe. “Origin of 3.45 Ga Coniform Stromato-
lites in Warrawoona Group, Western Australia.” Geological Society ofAmerica Bulletin 111
(1999): 1256-62.
Holden, Constance. “Defying Darwin.” Science 305 (2004): 1709.
Holder, Charles F. Louis Agassiz: His Life and Works. Leaders in Science Series. New York:
Putnam, 1893.
Holton, Theirese A., and Davide Pisani. “Deep Genomic-Scale Analyses of the Metazoa Reject
Coelomata: Evidence from Single- and Multigene Families Analyzed Under a Supertree and
Supermatrix Paradigm.” Genome Biology and Evolution 2 (2010): 310-24.
Hood, Leroy, and David Galas. “The Digital Code of DNA.” Nature 421 (2003): 444-48.
Hotz, R. L. “Finding Turns Back Clock for Earths First Animals.” Los Angeles Times, October 25,
1996, Al, A14.
Hou, Xian-guang, Richard J. Aldridge, Jan Bergstrom, David J. Siveter, Derek J. Siveter, and Xian-
hong Feng. The Cambrian Fossils of Chengjiang, China: The Flowering ofEarly Animal Life.
Oxford: Blackwell, 2004.
Hou, X.-G., and J. Bergstrom. “Arthropods of the Lower Cambrian Chengjiang Fauna, Southwest
China.” Fossils and Strata 45 (1997): 1-116.
Hou, Xian-guang, and Wen-guo Sun. “Discovery of Chengjiang Fauna at Meishucun, Jinning,
Yunnan.” Acta Paleontologica Sinica 27 (1988): 1-12.
Hu, S., M. Steiner, M. Zhu, H. Luo, A. Forchielli, H. Keupp, F. Zhao, and Q. Liu. “A New Priapulid
Assemblage From the Early Cambrian Guanshan Fossil Lagerstatte of SW China.” Bulletin of
Geosciences 87 (2012): 93-106.
Huang, D.-Y., J.-Y. Chen,
J. Vannier, and J.
I. Saiz Salinas. “Early Cambrian Sipunculan Worms
from Southwest China.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B 271 (2004): 1671-76.
Huldtgren, T.,
J. A. Cunningham, C. Yin, M. Stampanoni, F. Marone, P. C.
J. Donoghue, and S.
Bengtson. “Fossilized Nuclei and Germination Structures Identify Ediacaran ‘Animal Em-
bryos’ as Encysting Protists.” Science 334 (2011): 1696-99.
. “Response to ‘Comment on “Fossilized Nuclei and Germination Structures Identify Edia-
caran ‘Animal Embryos’ as Encysting Protists.”’” Science 335 (2012): 1169.
Hurley, Patrick M. “The Confirmation of Continental Drift.” In Continents Adrift: Readingsfrom
Scientific American, edited by J. T. Wilson, 57-67. San Francisco: Freeman, 1970.
Hutchison, Keith. “What Happened to Occult Qualities in the Scientific Revolution?” Isis 73
(1982): 253.
Huxley, Julian. “‘At Random’: A Television Preview.” In Evolution After Darwin: The University
of Chicago Centennial. Vol. 3, Issues in Evolution, edited by S. Tax and C. Callendar, 41-65.
Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1960.
. “The Evolutionary Vision.” In Evolution After Darwin: The University of Chicago Centen-
nial. Vol. 3, Issues in Evolution, edited by S. Tax and C. Callendar, 249-61. Chicago: Univ. of
Chicago Press, 1960.
Hyman, Libbie H. The Invertebrates. Vol.
1, Protozoa Through Ctenophora. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1940.
Hyslop, L., et al. “Downregulation ofNANOG Induces Differentiation of Human Embryonic Stem
Cells to Extraembryonic Lineages.” Stem Cells 23 (2005): 1035-43.
Ivantsov, A. Yu. “A New Dickinsonid from the Upper Vendian of the White Sea Winter Coast
(Russia, Arkhangelsk Region).” Paleontological Journal 33 (1999): 211-21.
. “Vendia and Other Precambrian ‘Arthropods.’” Paleontological Journal 35 (2001):
335-43.
. “A New Reconstruction of Kimberella, a Problematic Vendian Metazoan.” Paleontological
Journal 43 (2009): 601-11.
Ivantsov, A. Yu, and Ya E. Malakhovskaya. “Giant Traces of Vendian Animals.” Doklady Earth
Sciences 385A (2002): 618-22.
Jablonka, Eva, and Marion J. Lamb. “Transgenerational Epigenetic Inheritance.” In Evolution: The
Extended Synthesis, edited by M. Pigliucci and G. B. Muller, 137-74. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2010.
Janowski, Bethany, K. E. Huffman, J. C. Schwartz, R. Ram, D. Hardy, D. S. Shames, J. D. Minna,
and D. R. Corey. “Inhibiting Gene Expression at Transcription Start Sites in Chromosomal
DNA with Antigene RNAs.” Nature Chemical Biology
1 (2005): 216-22.
Janvier, P. “Catching the First Fish.” Nature 402 (1999): 21-22.
Jenkins, John B. Genetics. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 1975.

466
Bibliography
Jenner, Ronald A. “Evolution of Animal Body Plans: The Role of Metazoan Phylogeny at the Inter-
face Between Pattern And Process.” Evolution and Development 2 (2000): 208-21.
. “Higher-Level Crustacean Phylogeny: Consensus and Conflicting Hypotheses.” Arthropod
Structure and Development 39 (2010): 143-53.
Jensen, Roy A. “Enzyme Recruitment in Evolution of New Function.” Annual Review ofMicrobiol-
ogy 30 (1976): 409-25.
Jensen, S., M. L. Droser, and J. G. Gehling. “Trace Fossil Preservation and the Early Evolution of
Animals.” Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 220 (2005): 19-29.
Jensen, S., J. G. Gehling, and M. L. Droser. “Ediacara-type Fossils in Cambrian Sediments.” Nature
393 (1998): 567-69.
Johnson, Andrew D., M. Drum, R. F. Bachvarova, T. Masi, M. E. White, and B. I. Crother. “Evolu-
tion of Predetermined Germ Cells in Vertebrate Embryos: Implications for Macroevolution.”
Evolution and Development 5 (2003): 414-31.
Johnson, Matthew E., et al. “Positive Selection of a Gene Family During the Emergence of Humans
and African Apes.” Nature 413 (2001): 514-19.
Jones, Gareth. “Molecular Evolution: Gene Convergence in Echolocating Mammals.” Current Biol-
ogy 20 (2010): R62-R64.
Jones, Judge John E., III. Decision in Kitzmiller et al
v. Dover Area School Board. No.04cv2688,
2005 WL 2465563, *66 (M.D.Pa. Dec. 20, 2005). http://www.pamd.uscourts.gov/kitzmiller
/kitzmiller_342.pdf.
Jordan, I. K, I. B. Rogozin, G. V. Glazko, and E. V. Koonin. “Origin of a Substantial Fraction of
Human Regulatory Sequences from Transposable Elements.” Trends in Genetics 19 (2003):
68-72.
Jurica, Melissa. “Detailed Closeups and the Big Picture of Spliceosomes.” Current Opinion in
Structural Biology 18 (2008): 315-20.
Jurka, Jerzy. “Evolutionary Impact of Human Alu Repetitive Elements.” Current Opinion in Genet-
ics and Development 14 (2004): 603-8.
Kandouz, M., A. Bier, G. D Carystinos, M. A. Alaoui-Jamali, and G. Batist. “Connexin43 Pseudo-
gene Is Expressed in Tumor Cells and Inhibits Growth.” Oncogene 23 (2004): 4763-70.
Kauffman, Stuart A. The Origins of Order: Self-Organization and Selection in Evolution. Oxford:
Oxford Univ. Press, 1993.
. At Home in the Universe: The Search for the Laws ofSelf-Organization and Complexity.
Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1995.
. “The End of a Physics Worldview: Heraclitus and the Watershed of Life.” http://www.npr
.org/blogs/13.7/2011/08/08/139006531/the-end-of-a-physics-worldview-heraclitus-and-the
-watershed-of-life (accessed October 25, 2012).
Kavalovski, V. “The Vera Causa Principle: A Historico-Philosophical Study of a Metatheoretical
Concept from Newton Through Darwin.” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago, 1974.
Kehoe, A. “Modern Anti-Evolutionism: The Scientific Creationists.” In What Darwin Began , edited
by L. R. Godfrey, 173-80. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1985.
Kelley, D. R., and J. L. Rinn. “Transposable Elements Reveal a Stem Cell Specific Class of Long
Noncoding RNAs.” Genome Biology 13 (2012): R107.
Kerr, Richard A. “Evolution’s Big Bang Gets Even More Explosive.” Science 261 (1993): 1274-75.
. “Did Darwin Get It All Right?” Science 267 (1995): 1421-22.
Khalturin, K., G. Hemmrich, S. Fraune, R. Augustin, and T. C. Bosch. “More Than Just Orphans:
Are Taxonomically Restricted Genes Important in Evolution?” Trends in Genetics 25 (2009):
404-13.
Kimura, Motoo. The Neutral Theory ofMolecular Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press,
1983.
King, Jack L., and Thomas H. Jukes. “Non-Darwinian Evolution.” Science 164, no. 3881 (1969):
788-98.
Kirschner, Marc W., and John C. Gerhart. The Plausibility of Life: Resolving Darwin’s Dilemma.
New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 2005.
Kitcher, Philip. Abusing Science: The Case Against Creationism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982.
Kline, A. David. “Theories, Facts and Gods: Philosophical Aspects of the Creation-Evolution
Controversy.” In Did the Devil Make Darwin Do It? edited by D. Wilson, 37-44. Ames: Iowa
State Univ. Press, 1983.
Klinghoffer, David. “The Branding of a Heretic.” Wall Street Journal, January 28, 2005, national
edition, Wll.

Bibliography
467
. ed. Signature of Controversy: Responses to Critics ofSignature in the Cell Seattle: Discovery
Institute Press, 2010.
Knoll, Andrew H., and Sean B. Carroll. “Early Animal Evolution: Emerging Views from Compara-
tive Biology and Geology.” Science 84 (1999): 2129-37.
Knowles, David G., and Aoife McLysaght. “Recent de Novo Origin of Human Protein-Coding
Genes.” Genome Research 19 (2009): 1752-59.
Kodoyianni, Voula, E. M. Maine, and J. Kimble. “Molecular Basis of Loss-of-Function Muta-
tions in the glp-1 Gene of Caenorhabditis elegans” Molecular Biology of the Cell 3 (1992):
1199-1213.
Koga, Nobuyasu, Rie Tatsumi-Koga, Gaohua Liu, Rong Xiao, Thomas B. Acton, Gaetano T. Monte-
lione, and David Baker. “Principles for Designing Ideal Protein Structures.” Nature 491 (2012):
222-27.
Kondo, N., N. Nikoh, N. Ijichi, M. Shimada, and T. Fukatsu. “Genome Fragment of Wolbachia
Endosymbiont Transferred to X Chromosome of Host Insect.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 99 (2002): 14280-85.
Kondo-Iida, E., et al. “Novel Mutations and Genotype-Phenotype Relationships in 107 Families
with Fukuyama-Type Congenital Muscular Dystrophy (FCMD).” Human Molecular Genetics 8
(1999): 2303-9.
Koonin, Eugene V. “How Many Genes Can Make a Cell? The Minimal Genome Concept.” Annual
Review of Genomics and Human Genetics
1 (2002): 99-116.
. “The Origin at 150: Is a New Evolutionary Synthesis in Sight?” Trends in Genetics 25 (2009):
473-75.
Kiippers, Bernd-Olaf. “On the Prior Probability of the Existence of Life.” In The Probabilistic
Revolution, vol.
1, edited by L. Kruger, L. Daston, and M. Heidelberger, 355-69. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1987.
Landing, E., A. English, and J. D. Keppie. “Cambrian Origin of All Skeletalized Metazoan Phyla—
Discovery of Earth’s Oldest Bryozoans (Upper Cambrian, Southern Mexico).” Geology 38
(2010): 547-50.
Lange, B. M. H., A. J. Faragher, P. March, and K. Gull. “Centriole Duplication and Maturation in
Animal Cells.” In The Centrosome in Cell Replication and Early Development, edited by R. E.
Palazzo and G. P. Schatten, 235-49. Current Topics in Developmental Biology 49. San Diego,
CA: Academic, 2000.
Lau, K. F., and K. A. Dill. “Theory for Protein Mutability and Biogenesis.” Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy ofSciences USA 87 (1990): 638-42.
Laudan, Larry. Beyond Positivism and Relativism: Theory, Method, and Evidence. Boulder, CO:
Westview, 1996.
Laudan, Larry. “The Demise of the Demarcation Problem.” In But Is It Science? edited by M. Ruse,
337-50. Buffalo, NY: Prometheus, 1988.
Lawrence, P. A., and G. Struhl. “Morphogens, Compartments and Pattern: Lessons from Dro-
sophilaT Cell 85 (1996): 951-61.
Lawton, Graham. “Why Darwin Was Wrong About the Tree of Life.” New Scientist, January 21,
2009, 34-39.
Lecointre, Guillaume, and Herve Le Guyader. The Tree of Life: A Phylogenetic Classification. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press, 2006.
Lee, Michael S. Y. “Molecular Clock Calibrations and Metazoan Divergence Dates.” Journal of
Molecular Evolution 49 (1999): 385-91.
Lehmann, Ruth. “Germ-Plasm Formation and Germ-Cell Determination in Drosophila .” Current
Opinion in Genetics and Development 2 (1992): 543-49.
Lehmann, Ruth, and Christiane Niisslein-Volhard. “The Maternal Gene Nanos Has a Central Role
in Posterior Pattern Formation of the Drosophila Embryo.” Development 112 (1991): 679-91.
http://dev.biologists.Org/content/112/3/679.long (accessed October 30, 2012).
Leibniz, Gottfried. New Essays on Human Understanding. Translated and edited by P. Remnant
and J. Bennett. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1981.
Lemen, Cliff A., and Patricia W. Freeman. “A Test of Macroevolutionary Problems with Neonto-
logical Data.” Paleobiology 7 (1981): 316-31.
Lenski, Richard, Charles Ofria, Robert T. Pennock, and Christopher Adami. “The Evolutionary
Origin of Complex Features.” Nature 423 (2003): 139-44.
Le Pichon, Xavier. “My Conversion to Plate Tectonics.” In Plate Tectonics: An Insiders History of
the Modern Theory of the Earth, edited by N. Oreskes, 201-26. Boulder, CO: Westview, 2003.

468
Bibliography
Levin, Michael. “Bioelectromagnetics in Morphogenesis” Bioelectromagnetics 24 (2003): 295-315.
http://ase.tufts.edu/biology/labs/levin/publications/documents/2003BEMS.pdf (accessed
October 30, 2012).
Levinton, Jeffrey S. “Punctuated Equilibrium.” Science 231 (1986): 1490.
. Genetics, Paleontology, and Macroevolution. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1988.
. “Bryozoan Morphological and Genetic Correspondence: What Does It Prove?” Science 51
(1991): 318-19.
Lev-Maor, G., R. Sorek, N. Shomron, and G. Ast. “The Birth of an Alternatively Spliced Exon: 3’
Splice-Site Selection in Alu Exons.” Science 300 (2003): 1288-91.
Lewin, Roger. “Punctuated Equilibrium Is Now Old Hat.” Science 231 (1986): 672-73.
. “A Lopsided Look at Evolution.” Science 241 (1988): 292.
Lewis, Edward B. “A Gene Complex Controlling Segmentation in Drosophila” Nature 276 (1978):
565-70.
Lewontin, Richard. “Adaptation,” Scientific American 239 (1978): 212-30.
. “Billions and Billions of Demons.” Review of The Demon-Haunted World: Science as a
Candle in the Dark, by Carl Sagan. New York Review ofBooks, January 9, 1997, 28.
Li, Chun, X. C. Wu, O. Rieppel, L. T. Wang, and L. J. Zhao. “An Ancestral Turtle from the Late
Triassic of Southwestern China.” Nature 456 (2008): 497-501.
Li, Long-Cheng, S.T. Okino, H. Zhao, D. Pookot, R. F. Place, S. Urakami, H. Enokida, and R.
Dahiya. “Small dsRNAs Induce Transcriptional Activation in Human Cells.” Proceedings of the
National Academy ofSciences USA 103 (2006): 17337-42.
Li, Wen-Hsiung. Molecular Evolution. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer, 1997.
Li, Ying, Z. Liu, P. Shi, and J. Zhang. “The Hearing Gene Prestin Unites Echolocating Bats and
Whales.” Current Biology 20 (2010): R55-R56.
Lieberman, Bruce S., and Elisabeth S. Vrba. “Stephen Jay Gould on Species Selection: 30 Years of
Insight.” Paleobiology 31 (2005): 113-21.
Lienhard, John H. “No. 857: Tyndall on Parallel Roads.” In Engines ofOur Ingenuity [audio pod-
cast], http://www.uh.edu/engines/epi857.htm (accessed March 22, 2013).
Lili, Cui. “Traditional Theory of Evolution Challenged.” Beijing Review, March 31-April 6,
1997, 10.
Lindsey, Dan L., and E. H. Grell. Guide to Genetic Variations ofDrosophila melanogaster.
Washington, DC: Carnegie Institution of Washington Publication No. 627, 1968. http://www
.carnegiescience.edu/publications_online/genetic_variations.pdf.
Lipton, Peter. Inference to the Best Explanation. London and New York: Routledge, 1991.
Liu, J., D. Shu, J. Han, Z. Zhang, and X. Zhang. “A Large Xenusiid Lobopod with Complex Ap-
pendages from the Lower Cambrian Chengjiang Lagerstatte.” Acta Palaeontologica Polonica 51
(2006): 215-22.
. “Origin, Diversification, and Relationships of Cambrian Lobopods.” Gondwana Research
14 (2008): 277-83.
Liu, J., M. Steiner, J. A. Dunlop, H. Keupp, D. Shu, Q. Ou, J. Han, and Z. Zhang. “An Armoured
Cambrian Lobopodian from China with Arthropod-Like Appendages.” Nature 470 (2011):
526-30.
Logsdon, John M., Jr., and W. Ford Doolittle. “Origin of Antifreeze Protein Genes: A Cool Tale in
Molecular Evolution.” Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences USA 94 (1997): 3485-87.
Long, Manyuan, Ester Betran, Kevin Thornton, and Wen Wang. “The Origin of New Genes:
Glimpses from the Young and Old.” Nature Reviews Genetics 4 (2003): 865-75.
Long, Manyuan, and Charles H. Langley. “Natural Selection and the Origin of Jingwei, a Chimeric
Processed Functional Gene in Drosophila .” Science 260 (1993): 91-95.
Long, Manyuan, S.
J. de Souza, C. Rosenberg, and W. Gilbert. “Exon Shuffling and the Origin of
the Mitochondrial Targeting Function in Plant Cytochrome cl Precursor.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA 93 (1996): 7727-31.
Lonnig, Wolf-Ekkehard, and Heinz Saedler. “Chromosome Rearrangements and Transposable
Elements.” Annual Review of Genetics 36 (2002): 389-410.
Love, G. D., et al. “Fossil Steroids Record the Appearance of Demospongiae During the Cryoge-
nian Period.” Nature 457 (2009): 718-21.
Louro, R., T. El-Jundi, H. I. Nakaya, E. M. Reis, and S. Verjovski-Almeida. “Conserved Tissue Ex-
pression Signatures of Intronic Noncoding RNAs Transcribed from Human and Mouse Loci.”
Genomics 92 (2008): 18-25.

Bibliography
469
Lovtrup, Soren. “Semantics, Logic and Vulgate Neo-Darwinism .” Evolutionary Theory 4 (1979):
157-72.
Lurie, Edward. Nature and the American Mind: Louis Agassiz and the Culture of Science. New
York: Science History Publications, 1974.
Luskin, Casey. “Credibility Gap: Baylor Denies Robert Marks’ Situation Has Anything to Do with
ID.” Evolution and News and Views, October 1, 2007. http://www.evolutionnews.org/2007/10
/credibility_gap_baylor_denies004290.html.
. “Darwin’s Dilemma: Evolutionary Elite Choose Censorship over Scientific Debate.” CNS
News, October 14, 2009.
. “Intelligent Design Demoted.” Liberty Legal Journal, September 7, 2010.
Lyell, Charles. Principles of Geology: Being an Attempt to Explain the Former Changes of the Earth’s
Surface, by Reference to Causes Now in Operation. 3 vols. London: Murray, 1830-33.
Lynch, Michael. “The Origins of Eukaryotic Gene Structure.” Molecular Biology and Evolution 23
(2006): 450-68.
. “The Frailty of Adaptive Hypotheses for the Origins of Organismal Complexity.” Proceed-
ings of the National Academy ofSciences USA 104 (2007): 8597-604.
. “Evolutionary Layering and the Limits to Cellular Perfection.” Proceedings of the National
Academy ofSciences USA 109 (2012): 18851-56.
Lynch, Michael, and Adam Abegg. “The Rate of Establishment of Complex Adaptations.” Molecu-
lar Biology and Evolution 27 (2010): 1404-14.
Ma, Xiaoya, Xianguang Hou, Gregory D. Edgecombe, and Nicholas J. Strausfeld. “Complex Brain
and Optic Lobes in an Early Cambrian Arthropod.” Nature 490 (2012): 258-62.
MacRae, Andrew. “Trilobites in Murchison’s Siluria.” http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/trilobite
/siluria.html.
Maley, Laura E., and Charles R. Marshall. “The Coming of Age of Molecular Systematics.” Science
279 (1998): 505-6.
Malik, Harmit S., and Steven Henikoff. “Adaptive Evolution of Cid, a Centromere-Specific Histone
in Drosophila.” Genetics 157 (2001): 1293-98.
Malinky, J. M., and C. B. Skovsted. “Hyoliths and Small Shelly Fossils from the Lower Cambrian of
Northeast Greenland.” Acta Palaeontologica Polonica 49 (2004): 551-78.
Mallatt, Jon M., James R. Garey, and Jeffrey W. Shultz. “Ecdysozoan Phylogeny and Bayesian
Inference: First Use of Nearly Complete 28S and 18S rRNA Gene Sequences to Classify the
Arthropods and Their Kin.” Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 31, no.
1 (2004): 178-91.
Margulis, Lynn, and Dorion Sagan. Acquiring Genomes: A Theory of the Origins of the Species. New
York: Basic Books, 2002.
Marino-Ramirez, L., K. C. Lewis, D. Landsmana, and I. K. Jordan. “Transposable Elements Donate
Lineage-Specific Regulatory Sequences to Host Genomes.” Cytogenetic and Genome Research
110 (2005): 333-41.
Marshall, Charles R. “Explaining the Cambrian ‘Explosion’ of Animals.” Annual Reviews ofEarth
and Planetary Sciences 34 (2006): 355-84.
Marshall, Jessica. “Proteins Made to Order.” Nature News, November 7, 2012. http://www.nature
.com/news/proteins-made-to-order-1. 11767.
Marshall, Wallace F., and Joel L. Rosenbaum. “Are There Nucleic Acids in the Centrosome?” Cur-
rent Topics in Developmental Biology 49 (2000): 187-205.
Masui, Y., A. Forer, and A. M. Zimmerman. “Induction of Cleavage in Nucleated and Enucleated
Frog Eggs by Injection of Isolated Sea-Urchin Mitotic Apparatus.” Journal of Cell Science 31
(1978): 117-35. http://jcs.biologists.Org/content/31/l/117.long (accessed October 30, 2012).
Mattick, John S., and Michael J. Gagen. “The Evolution of Controlled Multitasked Gene Networks:
The Role of Introns and Other Noncoding RNAs in the Development of Complex Organisms.”
Molecular Biology and Evolution 18 (2001): 1611-30.
Mattick, J. S., and I. V. Makunin. “Small Regulatory RNAs in Mammals.” Human Molecular
Genetics 14 (2005): R121-32.
. “Non-coding RNA.” Human Molecular Genetics 15 (2006): R17-R29.
Matz, Mikhail V., Tamara M. Frank, N. Justin Marshall, Edith A. Widder, and Sonke Johnsen.
“Giant Deep-Sea Protist Produces Bilaterian-like Traces.” Current Biology 18 (December 9,
2008): 1849-54.
Matzke, Nicholas
J. “The Edge of Creationism.” Trends in Ecology and Evolution 22 (2007):
566-67.

470
Bibliography
Matzke, Nicholas J., and Paul R. Gross. “Analyzing Critical Analysis: The Fallback Antievolutionist
Strategy.” In Not in Our Classrooms: Why Intelligent Design Is Wrongfor Our Schools, edited by
E. C. Scott and G. Branch, 28-56. Boston: Beacon, 2006.
Maynard Smith, John. “Natural Selection and the Concept of a Protein Space.” Nature 225 (1970):
563-64.
. “Darwinism Stays Unpunctured.” Nature 330 (1987): 516.
Mayr, Ernst. Foreword. In Darwinism Defended: A Guide to the Evolution Controversies, edited by
M. Ruse, xi-xii. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1982.
Mayr, Ernst, and William B. Provine. The Evolutionary Synthesis: Perspectives on the Unification of
Biology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press, 1998.
Mazur, Suzan. The Altenberg 16: An Expose of the Evolution Industry. Berkeley, CA; North Atlantic
Books, 2010.
McCall, G.
J. H. “The Vendian (Ediacaran) in the Geological Record: Enigmas in Geology’s Pre-
lude to the Cambrian Explosion.” Earth-Science Reviews IT (2006): 1-229.
McDonald, John F. “The Molecular Basis of Adaptation: A Critical Review of Relevant Ideas and
Observations.” Annual Review ofEcology and Systematics 14 (1983): 77-102.
McGinnis, William, and Michael Kurziora. “The Molecular Architects of Body Design.” Scientific
American 270 (1994): 58-66.
McKenzie, Richard W., and Mark D. Brennan. “The Two Small Introns of the Drosophila affinidis-
juncta Adh Gene Are Required for Normal Transcription.” Nucleic Acids Research 24 (1996):
3635-42.
McMenamin, M. A. S. “Ediacaran Biota from Sonora, Mexico.” Proceedings of the National Acad-
emy ofSciences USA 93 (1996): 4990-93.
. The Garden ofEdiacara: Discovering the First Complex Life. New York: Columbia Univ.
Press, 1998.
. The Evolution of the Nodsphere. New York: American Teilhard Association for the Future of
Man, 2001.
. “Spriggina Is a Trilobitoid Ecdysozoan.” Geological Society ofAmerica Abstracts with Pro-
grams 35 (2003): 105-6.
. “Harry Blackmore Whittington, 1916-2010.” Geoscientist 20 (2010): 5.
. “Fossil Chitons and Monomorphichnus from the Ediacaran Clemente Formation, Sonora,
Mexico.” Geological Society ofAmerica Abstracts with Programs 43 (2011): 87.
. “Teilhard de Chardin’s Legacy in Science.” In The Legacy of Teilhard de Chardin, edited by
J. Salmon and J. Farina, 33-45. Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press, 2011.
McMenamin, M. A. S., and D. L. S. McMenamin. The Emergence ofAnimals: The Cambrian Break-
through. New York: Columbia Univ. Press, 1990.
Medstrand, P., J.-R. Landry, and D. L. Mager, “Long Terminal Repeats Are Used as Alternative
Promoters for the Endothelin B Receptor and Apolipoprotein C-I Genes in Humans.” Journal
ofBiological Chemistry 276 (2001): 1896-903.
Merhej, Vicky, and Didier Raoult. “Rhizome of Life, Catastrophes, Sequence Exchanges, Gene Cre-
ations, and Giant Viruses: How Microbial Genomics Challenges Darwin.” Frontiers in Cellular
and Infectious Microbiology 2, no. 113 (2012).
Meyer, Stephen C. “Of Clues and Causes: A Methodological Interpretation of Origin of Life Stud-
ies.” Ph.D. dissertation, Cambridge University, 1990.
. “A Scopes Trial for the ’90s.” Wall Street Journal, December 6, 1993, A 14.
. “Laws, Causes and Facts: A Response to Professor Ruse.” In Darwinism: Science or Philoso-
phy? edited by J. Buell and V. Hearn, 29-40. Dallas: Foundation for Thought and Ethics, 1994.
. “The Methodological Equivalence of Design and Descent.” In The Creation Hypothesis:
Scientific Evidencefor Intelligent Design, edited by J. P. Moreland, 67-112. Downer’s Grove, IL:
InterVarsity Press, 1994.
. “The Nature of Historical Science and the Demarcation of Design and Descent.” In Facets
ofFaith and Science. Vol. 4, Interpreting God's Action in the World, 91-130. Washington, DC:
Univ. Press of America, 1996.
. “The Demarcation of Science and Religion.” In The History ofScience and Religion in the
Western Tradition: An Encyclopedia, edited by G. B. Ferngren, 17-23. New York: Garland,
2000.
. “The Scientific Status of Intelligent Design: The Methodological Equivalence of Naturalistic
and Non-Naturalistic Origins Theories.” In Science and Evidencefor Design in the Universe,
The Proceedings of the Wethersfield Institute, 151-212. San Francisco: Ignatius, 2000.

Bibliography
471
. “The Origin of Biological Information and the Higher Taxonomic Categories,” Proceedings
of the Biological Society of Washington 117 (2004): 213-39.
. “The Origin of Biological Information and the Higher Taxonomic Categories.” In Darwins
Nemesis: Phillip Johnson and the Intelligent Design Movement, edited by W. A. Dembski,
174-213. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2006.
. Signature in the Cell: DNA and the Evidencefor Intelligent Design. San Francisco: Harper-
One, 2009.
. “Sauce for the Goose: Intelligent Design, Scientific Methodology, and the Demarcation
Problem.” In Nature ofNature: Examining the Role ofNaturalism in Science, edited by B. L.
Gordon and W. A. Dembski, 95-131. Wilmington, DE: ISI Books, 2011.
Meyer, Stephen C., Scott Minnich, Jonathan Moneymaker, Paul A. Nelson, and Ralph Seelke.
Explore Evolution: The Argumentsfor and Against Neo-Darwinism. Melbourne and London:
Hill House, 2007.
Meyer, Stephen C., Marcus Ross, Paul Nelson, and Paul Chien. “The Cambrian Explosion: Biol-
ogy’s Big Bang.” In Darwinism, Design and Public Education, edited by J. A. Campbell and S.
C. Meyer, 323-402. East Lansing: Michigan State Univ. Press, 2003.
Michel, Benedicte. “After 30 Years, the Bacterial SOS Response Still Surprises Us.” PLoS Biology 3
(2005): 1174-76.
Miklos, George L. G. “Emergence of Organizational Complexities During Metazoan Evolution:
Perspectives from Molecular Biology, Palaeontology and Neo-Darwinism.” Memoirs of the As-
sociation ofAustralasian Palaeontologists 15 (1993): 7-41.
Miller, Kenneth R. “Falling over the Edge: Review of The Edge ofEvolution, by Michael Behe
.”
Nature 447 (2007): 1055-56.
Mintz, Leigh W. Historical Geology: The Science ofa Dynamic Earth. 2nd ed. Columbus, OH: Mer-
rill, 1977.
Moczek, Armin P. “On the Origins of Novelty in Development and Evolution.” BioEssays 30
(2008): 432-47.
. “The Nature of Nurture and the Future of Evodevo: Toward a Theory of Developmental
Evolution.” Integrative and Comparative Biology 52 (2012): 108-19.
Monastersky, Richard. “Siberian Rocks Clock Biological Big Bang.” Science News 144 (1993): 148.
. “Ancient Animal Sheds False Identity.” Science News 152 (1997): 32.
. “Society Disowns Paper Attacking Darwinism.” Chronicle ofHigher Education 51, no. 5
(2004): A16.
Mondal, T., M. Rasmussen, G. K. Pandey, A. Isaksson, and C. Kanduri. “Characterization of the
RNA Content of Chromatin.” Genome Research 20 (2010): 899-907.
Monteys, A. M., R. M. Spengler, J. Wan, L. Tecedor, K. A. Lennox, Y. Xing, and B. L. Davidson.
“Structure and Activity of Putative Intronic miRNA Promoters.” RNA 16 (2010): 495-505.
Morrish, T. A., N. Gilbert, J. S. Myers, B.
J. Vincent, T. D. Stamato, G. E. Taccioli, M. A. Batzer, and
J. V. Moran. “DNA Repair Mediated by Endonuclease-Independent LINE-1 Retrotransposi-
tion .” Nature Genetics 31 (2002): 159-65.
Moss, Lenny. What Genes Cant Do. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004.
Muller, Dietmar R., Walter R. Roest, Jean-Yves Royer, Lisa M. Gahagan, and John G. Sclater. “Digi-
tal Isochrons of the World’s Ocean Floor.” Journal of Geophysical Research 102 (1997): 3211-14.
Muller, Gerd B. “Homology: The Evolution of Morphological Organization.” In Origination of
Organismal Form: Beyond the Gene in Developmental and Evolutionary Biology, edited by G. B.
Muller and S. A. Newman, 51-69. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003.
Muller, Gerd B., and Stuart A. Newman. “Origination of Organismal Form: The Forgotten Cause
in Evolutionary Theory.” In Origination of Organismal Form: Beyond the Gene in Developmen-
tal and Evolutionary Biology, edited by G. B. Muller and S. A. Newman, 3-10. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2003.
Muller, H.
J. “Artificial Transmutation of the Gene.” Science 66 (1927): 84-87.
Muller, K. J., D. Bonn, and A. Zakharov. “‘Orsten’ Type Phosphatized Soft-Integument Preserva-
tion and a New Record from the Middle Cambrian Kuonamka Formation in Siberia.” Neues
Jahrbuchfiir Geologie und Palaontologie, Monatshefte 197 (1995): 101-18.
Mura, M., P. Murcia, M. Caporale, T. E. Spencer, K. Nagashima, A. Rein, and M. Palmarini. “Late
Viral Interference Induced by Transdominant Gag of an Endogenous Retrovirus.” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences USA 101 (2004): 11117-22.
Murchison, Roderick Impey. Siluria: The History of the Oldest Known Rocks Containing Organic
Remains. London: John Murray, 1854.

472
Bibliography
Murphy, Nancey. “Phillip Johnson on Trial: A Critique of His Critique of Darwin.” Perspectives on
Science and Christian Faith 45 (1993): 26-36.
Nanney, D. L. “The Ciliates and the Cytoplasm.” Journal ofHeredity 74 (1983): 163-70.
Nardi, F., G. Spinsanti,
J. L. Boore, A. Carapelli, R. Dallai, and F. Frati. “Hexapod Origins: Mono-
phyletic or Paraphyletic?” Science 299 (2003): 1887-89.
. “Response to Comment on ‘Hexapod Origins: Monophyletic or Paraphyletic?’” Science 301
(2003): 1482.
Nash, J. Madeleine. “When Life Exploded.” Time 146 (1995): 66-74.
National Academy of Sciences. Teaching About Evolution and the Nature ofScience. Washington
DC: National Academy Press, 1998.
National Ocean Industries Association. “About NOIA.” http://www.noia.org/website/article
.asp?id-51 (accessed March 29, 2013).
Nature editors. “Life on Land.” Nature 492 (2012): 153-54.
Nelson, Paul, and Jonathan Wells. “Homology in Biology: Problem for Naturalistic Science and
Prospect for Intelligent Design.” In Darwinism, Design and Public Education, edited by J. A.
Campbell and S. C. Meyer, 303-22. East Lansing: Michigan State Univ. Press, 2003.
Newman, Stuart. “The Developmental Genetic Toolkit and the Molecular Homology-Analogy
Paradox.” Biological Theory 1 (2006): 12-16.
. “Dynamical Patterning Modules.” In Evolution: The Extended Synthesis, edited by
M. Pigliucci and G. B. Muller, 281-306. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010.
. “Animal Egg as Evolutionary Innovation: A Solution to the ‘Embryonic Hourglass’ Puzzle.”
Journal ofExperimental Zoology B: Molecular and Developmental Evolution 314 (2011): 467-83.
Newman, Stuart, and Ramray Bhat. “Dynamical Patterning Modules: Physico-Genetic Determi-
nants of Morphological Development and Evolution.” Physical Biology 5 (2008): 015008.
Newton, Isaac. Newtons Principia. Translated by Andrew Motte (1686). Translation revised by
Florian Cajori. Berkeley, CA: Univ. of California Press, 1934.
Nielsen, Claus. Animal Evolution: Interrelationships of the Living Phyla. Oxford: Oxford Univ.
Press, 2001.
Nijhout, H. F. “Metaphors and the Role of Genes in Development.” BioEssays 12 (1990): 441-46.
Nikoh, Naruo, et al. “An Estimate of Divergence Time of Parazoa and Eumetazoa and That of
Cephalochordata and Vertebrata by Aldolase and Triose Phosphate Isomerase Clocks.” Journal
ofMolecular Evolution 45 (1997): 97-106.
Nilsen, Timothy W. “The Spliceosome: The Most Complex Macromolecular Machine in the Cell?”
BioEssays 25 (2003): 1147-49.
Nurminsky, D. I., M. V. Nurminskaya, D. De Aguiar, and D. L. Hartl. “Selective Sweep of a Newly
Evolved Sperm-Specific Gene in Drosophila.” Nature 396 (1998): 572-75.
Nusslein-Volhard, C., and E. Wieschaus. “Mutations Affecting Segment Number and Polarity in
Drosophila.” Nature 287 (1980): 795-801.
O’Brien, L. J., and J.-B. Caron. “A New Stalked Filter-Feeder from the Middle Cambrian Burgess
Shale, British Columbia, Canada.” PLoS One 1 (2012): 1-21.
Ohno, S. “The Notion of the Cambrian Pananimalia Genome.” Proceedings of the National Acad-
emy ofSciences USA 93 (1996): 8475-78.
Oliveri, Paola, and Eric H. Davidson. “Built to Run, Not Fail.” Science 315 (2007): 1510-11.
Oliveri, Paola, Qiang Tu, and Eric H. Davidson. “Global Regulatory Logic for Specification of an
Embryonic Cell Lineage.” Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences USA 105 (2008):
5955-62.
Oosthoek, Jan. “The Parallel Roads of Glen Roy and Forestry.” Environmental History Resources.
http://www.eh-resources.org/roy.html.
Oreskes, Naomi. “From Continental Drift to Plate Tectonics.” In Plate Tectonics: An Insider's
History of the Modern Theory of the Earth, edited by N. Oreskes, 3-30. Boulder, CO: West-
view, 2003.
Orgel, L. E., and F. H. Crick. “Selfish DNA: The Ultimate Parasite.” Nature 284 (1980): 604-7.
Orr, H. Allen. “The Genetic Theory of Adaptation: A Brief History.” Nature Reviews Genetics 6
(2005): 119-27.
Osigus, Hans-Jiirgen, Michael Eitel, and Bernd Schierwater. “Chasing the Urmetazoon: Striking a
Blow for Quality Data?” Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 66 (2013): 551-57.
Ou, Q., J. Liu, D. Shu, J. Han, Z. Zhang, X. Wan, and Q. Lei. “A Rare Onychophoran-Like Lobopo-
dian from the Lower Cambrian Chengjiang Lagerstatte, Southwestern China, and Its Phyloge-
netic Implications.” Journal ofPaleontology 85 (2011): 587-94.

Bibliography
473
Pagano, A., M. Castelnuovo, F. Tortelli, R. Ferrari, G. Died, and R. Cancedda. “New Small Nudear
RNA Gene-like Transcriptional Units as Sources of Regulatory Transcripts.” PLoS Genetics 3
(2007): el.
Palade, George E. “Membrane Biogenesis: An Overview.” Methods in Enzymology 96 (1983):
xxix-lv.
Paley, William. Natural Theology: Or Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity Col-
lectedfrom the Appearances ofNature. 1802. Reprint, Boston: Gould and Lincoln, 1852.
Palopoli, Michael, and Nipam Patel. “Neo-Darwinian Developmental Evolution: Can We Bridge
the Gap Between Pattern and Process?” Current Opinion in Genetics and Development 6 (1996):
502-8.
Pandey, R., and M. Mukerji. “From ‘JUNK’ to Just Unexplored Noncoding Knowledge: The Case of
Transcribed Alus.” Briefings in Functional Genomics 10 (2011): 294-311.
Panganiban, G., et al. “The Origin and Evolution of Animal Appendages.” Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy ofSciences USA 94 (1997): 5162-66.
Pardue, M. L., and P. G. DeBaryshe.
“Drosophila Telomeres: Two Transposable Elements with
Important Roles in Chromosomes.” Genetica 107 (1999): 189-96.
Parikesit, A. A., P. F. Stadler, and S. J. Prohaska. “Quantitative Comparison of Genomic-Wide
Protein Domain Distributions.” In Lecture Notes in Informatics P-173, edited by D. Schomburg
and A. Grote, 93-102. Bonn: Gesellschaft fur Informatik, 2010.
Patterson, Colin, David M. Williams, and Christopher J. Flumphries. “Congruence Between Mo-
lecular and Morphological Phytogenies.” Annual Review ofEcology and Systematics 24 (1993):
153-88.
Paulding, Charles A., Maryellen Ruvolo, and Daniel A. Haber. “The Tre2 ( USP6 ) Oncogene Is a
Hominoid-Specific Gene.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 100 (2003):
2507-11.
Peaston, E., A. V. Evsikov, J. H. Graber, W. N. de Vries, A. E. Holbrook, D. Solter, and B. B.
Knowles. “Retrotransposons Regulate Host Genes in Mouse Oocytes and Preimplantation
Embryos.” Developmental Cell 7 (2004): 597-606.
Peel,
J. S. “A Corset-Like Fossil from the Cambrian Sirius Passet Lagerstatte of North Greenland
and Its Implications for Cycloneuralian Evolution.” Journal ofPaleontology 84 (2010): 332-40.
Peifer, Mark, and Welcome Bender. “The Anterobithorax and Bithorax Mutations of the Bithorax
Complex.” EMBO Journal 5 (1986): 2293-303. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles
/PMC1167113/pdf/emboj00172-0253.pdf.
Peirce, Charles S. Collected Papers. Vols. 1-6. Edited by C. Hartshorne and P. Weiss. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard Univ. Press, 1931-35.
. “Abduction and Induction.” In The Philosophy ofPeirce, edited by J. Buchler, 150-54.
London: Routledge, 1956.
. Collected Papers, Vols. 7-8. Edited by A. Burks. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ.
Press, 1958.
Pellas, Theodore C., B. Ramachandran, M. Duncan, S. S. Pan, M. Marone, and K. Chada. “Germ-
Cell Deficient
(gcd ), an Insertional Mutation Manifested as Infertility in Transgenic Mice.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 88 (1991): 8787-91.
Peterson, Kevin J., James A. Cotton, James G. Gehling, and Davide Pisani. “The Ediacaran Emer-
gence of Bilaterians: Congruence Between the Genetic and the Geological Fossil Records.”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B (2008): 1435-43.
Peterson, Kevin J., and Eric H. Davidson. “Regulatory Evolution and the Origin of the Bilaterians.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 97 (2000): 4430-33.
Peterson, Kevin J., Michael R. Dietrich, and Mark A. McPeek. “MicroRNAs and Metazoan Macro-
evolution: Insights into Canalization, Complexity, and the Cambrian Explosion.” BioEssays 31
(2009): 736-47.
Piehler, Armin P., M. Helium, J.
J. Wenzel, E. Kaminski, K. B. F. Haug, P. Kierulf, and W. E.
Kaminski. “The Human ABC Transporter Pseudogene Family: Evidence for Transcription and
Gene-Pseudogene Interference.” BMC Genomics 9 (2008): 165.
Pink, R. C., K. Wicks, D. P. Caley, E. K. Punch, L. Jacobs, and D. R. F. Carter. “Pseudogenes:
Pseudo-Functional or Key Regulators in Health and Disease?” RNA 17 (2011): 792-98.
Pitts, Edward Lee. “Design Flaw?” World Magazine, February 11, 2011.
Pivar, Stuart. Lifecode: The Theory ofBiological Self-Organization. New York: Ryland, 2004.
. On the Origin ofForm: Evolution by Self- Organization. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic
Books, 2009.

474
Bibliography
Poinar, G. “A Rhabdocoel Turbellarian (Platyhelminthes, Typhloplanoida) in Baltic Amber with a
Review of Fossil and Sub-Fossil Platyhelminths.” Invertebrate Biology 122 (2003): 308-12.
Polanyi, Michael. “Life Transcending Physics and Chemistry.” Chemical and Engineering News 45
(1967): 54-66.
. “Life’s Irreducible Structure.” Science 160 (1968): 1308-12.
Powell, Michael. “Controversial Editor Backed.” Washington Post August 19, 2005.
Poyton, Robert O. “Memory and Membranes: The Expression of Genetic and Spatial Memory
During the Assembly of Organelle Macrocompartments.” Modern Cell Biology 2 (1983): 15-72.
Pray, Leslie, and Kira Zhaurova. “Barbara McClintock and the Discovery of Jumping Genes
(Transposons).” Nature Education
1 (2008). http://www.nature.com/scitable/topicpage
barbara-mcclintock-and-the-discovery-of-jumping-34083.
Prigogine, Ilya, Gregoire Nicolis, and Agnessa Babloyantz. “Thermodynamics of Evolution.” Phys-
ics Today 25 (1972): 23-31.
Prothero, Donald R. Bringing Fossils to Life: An Introduction to Paleobiology. Boston: McGraw-
Hill, 1998.
. Evolution: What the Fossils Say and Why It Matters. New York: Columbia Univ. Press, 2007.
Prud’homme, Benjamin, Nicolas Gompel, and Sean B. Carroll. “Emerging Principles of Regula-
tory Evolution.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 104 (2007): 8605-12.
Quastler, Henry. The Emergence ofBiological Organization. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ.
Press, 1964.
Raff, Rudolf A. The Shape of Life: Genes, Development, and the Evolution ofAnimal Form. Chicago:
Univ. of Chicago Press, 1996.
Reardon, Sara. “California Science Center to Pay $110,000 Settlement over Intelligent Design
Film.” Science Insider, August 31, 2011.
Reidhaar-Olson, John, and Robert Sauer. “Functionally Acceptable Solutions in Two Alpha-Helical
Regions of Lambda Repressor.” Proteins: Structure, Function, and Genetics 7 (1990): 306-16.
Retallack, Gregory J. “Growth, Decay and Burial Compaction of Dickinsonia, an Iconic Ediacaran
Fossil.” Alcheringa: An Australasian Journal ofPalaeontology 31 (2007): 215-40.
. “Ediacaran Life on Land.” Nature 493 (2013): 89-92.
. “Reply to the Discussion by Callow et al. on ‘Were the Ediacaran Siliciclastics of South
Australia Coastal or Deep Marine?’” Sedimentology 60 (2013): 628-30.
Ridley, Mark. “The Evolution Revolution.” New York Times, March 17, 2002.
Robinson, Mabel L. Runner on the Mountain Tops. New York: Random House, 1939.
Rodin, Andrei S., Eors Szathmary, and Sergei N. Rodin. “On the Origin of the Genetic Code and
tRNA Before Translation.” Biology Direct 6 (2011).
Rodriguez-Campos, A., and F. Azorin. “RNA Is an Integral Component of Chromatin That Con-
tributes to Its Structural Organization.” PloS One 2 (2007): el 182.
Rogers, John. “Split-Gene Evolution: Exon Shuffling and Intron Insertion in Serine Protease
Genes.” Nature 315 (1985): 458-59.
Rokas, Antonis. “Spotlight: Drawing the Tree of Life.” Broad Institute, November 15, 2006. https://
www.broadinstitute.org/news/168.
Rokas, Antonis, and Sean B. Carroll. “Bushes in the Tree of Life.” PLoS Biology 4, no. 11 (2006):
1899-1904.
. “Frequent and Widespread Parallel Evolution of Protein Sequences.” Molecular Biology and
Evolution 25 (2008): 1943-53.
Rokas, Antonis, Nicole King, John Finnerty, and Sean B. Carroll. “Conflicting Phylogenetic Sig-
nals at the Base of the Metazoan Tree.” Evolution and Development 5 (2003): 346-59.
Rokas, Antonis, Dirk Kruger, and Sean B. Carroll. “Animal Evolution and the Molecular Signature
of Radiations Compressed in Time.” Science 310 (2005): 1933-38.
Rose, Steven, ed. The Richness of Life: The Essential Stephen Jay Gould. New York: Norton, 2006.
Roth, Siegfried, and Jeremy A. Lynch. “Symmetry Breaking During Drosophila Oogenesis.” Cold
Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology 1 (2009): a001891. http://cshperspectives.cshlp.org
/content/l/2/a001891.full.pdf+html.
Roy, Scott William, and Manuel Irimia. “Rare Genomic Characters Do Not Support Coelomata:
Intron Loss/Gain.” Molecular Biology and Evolution 25 (2008): 620-23.
Rubin, C. M., R. H. Kimura, and C. W. Schmid. “Selective Stimulation of Translational Expression
by Alu RNA.” Nucleic Acids Research 30 (2002): 3253-61.
Runnegar, Bruce. “A Molecular-Clock Date for the Origin of the Animal Phyla.” Lethaia 15, no. 3
(1982): 199-205.

Bibliography
475
. “Evolution of the Earliest Animals.” In Major Events in the History ofLife
,
edited by J. W.
Schopf, 65-93. Boston: Jones & Bartlett, 1992.
Ruppert, E. E., R. S. Fox, and R. D. Barnes. Invertebrate Zoology. 7th ed. Belmont, CA: Brooks/
Cole, 2004.
Ruse, Michael. Darwinism Defended: A Guide to the Evolution Controversies. London: Addison-
Wesley, 1982.
. “A Philosophers Day in Court.” In But Is It Science? edited by M. Ruse, 31-36. Buffalo, NY:
Prometheus, 1988.
. “Witness Testimony Sheet: McLean
v. Arkansas.” In But Is It Science? edited by M. Ruse,
287-306. Buffalo, NY: Prometheus, 1988.
. “Darwinism: Philosophical Preference, Scientific Inference and Good Research Strategy.”
In Darwinism: Science or Philosophy? edited by J. Buell and V. Hearn, 21-28. Richardson, TX:
Foundation for Thought and Ethics, 1994.
Salisbury, Frank B. “Natural Selection and the Complexity of the Gene.” Nature 224 (1969): 342-43.
Sansom, R. S., S. E. Gabbott, and M. A. Purnell. “Non-Random Decay of Chordate Characters
Causes Bias in Fossil Interpretation.” Nature 463 (2010): 797-800.
Sapp, Jan. Beyond The Gene. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1987.
. “The Structure of Microbial Evolutionary Theory.” Studies in History and Philosophy of
Biology and Biomedical Sciences 38 (2007): 780-95.
Savransky, Semyon. Engineering of Creativity: Introduction to TRIZ Methodology ofInventive
Problem Solving. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2000.
Schirber, Michael. “Skeletons in the Pre-Cambrian Closet.” PhysOrg.com, January 7, 2011.
Schnaar, Ronald L. “The Membrane Is the Message.” The Sciences, May-June, 1985, 34-40.
Schneider, Thomas D. “Information Content of Individual Genetic Sequences.” Journal of Theoreti-
cal Biology 189 (1997): 427-41.
. “Evolution of Biological Information.” Nucleic Acids Research 28 (2000): 2794-99.
Schopf, Thomas J. M., Antoni Hoffman, and Stephen Jay Gould. “Punctuated Equilibrium and the
Fossil Record.” Science 219 (1983): 438-39.
Schopf, J. William, and Bonnie M. Packer. “Early Archean (3.3-Billion to 3.5-Billion-Year-Old)
Microfossils from Warrawoona Group, Australia.” Science 237 (1987): 70-73.
Schram, F. R. “Pseudocoelomates and a Nemertine from the Illinois Pennsylvanian.” Journal of
Paleontology 47 (1973): 985-89.
Schuchert, Charles. “Charles Doolittle Walcott.” In Annual Report ofNational Academy of Sciences
Fiscal Year 1924-1925. Washington DC: Government Printing Office, 1926.
. “Charles Doolittle Walcott, Paleontologist, 1850-1927.” Science 65 (1927): 455-58.
Schuchert, Charles, and Carl O. Dunbar. A Textbook of Geology, Part IT. Historical Geology. 4th ed.
New York: Wiley, 1941.
Schueler, Mary G., A. W. Higgins, M. K. Rudd, K. Gustashaw, and H. F. Willard. “Genomic and
Genetic Definition of a Functional Human Centromere.” Science 294 (2001): 109-15.
Schiitzenberger, M. “Algorithms and the Neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution.” In Mathematical
Challenges to the Darwinian Interpretation ofEvolution, edited by P. S. Morehead and M. M.
Kaplan, 73-80. Wistar Institute Symposium Monograph No. 5. Philadelphia: Wistar Institute
Press, 1967.
Schwartz, Jeffrey H. “Homeobox Genes, Fossils, and the Origin of Species.” The Anatomical Record
257 (1999): 15-31.
. Sudden Origins: Fossils, Genes, and the Emergence ofSpecies. New York: Wiley, 1999.
Schwartz, Jeffrey H., and Bruno Maresca. “Do Molecular Clocks Run at All? A Critique of Molecu-
lar Systematics.” Biological Theory 1 (2006): 357-71.
Science Daily. “Australian Multicellular Fossils Point to Life on Land, Not at Sea, Geologist Pro-
poses.” December 12, 2012. http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2012/12/121212134050.htm
(accessed March 22, 2013).
Scott, Eugenie. “Keep Science Free from Creationism.” Insight, February 21, 1994.
Scott, Matthew P., and Sean B. Carroll. “The Segmentation and Homeotic Gene Network in Early
Drosophila Development.” Cell 51 (1987): 689-98.
Scriven, Michael. “Explanation and Prediction in Evolutionary Theory.” Science 130 (1959):
477-82.
Sepkoski, David. “‘Radical’ or ‘Conservative’? The Origin and Early Reception of Punctuated
Equilibrium.” In The Paleobiological Revolution: Essays on the Growth ofModern Paleontology,
edited by D. Sepkoski and M. Ruse, 301-25. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 2009.

476
Bibliography
Sermonti, Giuseppe. Why Is a Fly Not a Horse
Seattle: Discovery Institute Press, 2005. Translated
from the original, Dimenticare Darwin. Milan: Rusconi, 1999.
Shannon, Claude E. “A Mathematical Theory of Communication.” Bell System Technical Journal 27
(1948): 379-423, 623-56.
Shannon, Claude E., and Warren Weaver. The Mathematical Theory ofCommunication. Urbana:
Univ. of Illinois Press, 1949.
Shapiro, James A. “A 21st Century View of Evolution: Genome System Architecture, Repetitive
DNA, and Natural Genetic Engineering.” Gene 345 (2005): 91-100.
. Evolution: A Viewfrom the 21st Century. Upper Saddle River, NJ: FT Press Science, 2011.
Shapiro, James, and Richard von Sternberg. “Why Repetitive DNA Is Essential to Genome Func-
tion.” Biological Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 80 (2005): 227-50.
Shen, Bing, Lin Dong, Shuhai Xiao, and Michal Kowalewski. “The Avalon Explosion: Evolution of
Ediacara Morphospace.” Science 319 (2008): 81-84.
Shen, Y. Y., L. Liang, G. S. Li, R. W. Murphy, and Y. P. Zhang. “Parallel Evolution of Auditory
Genes for Echolocation in Bats and Toothed Whales.” PLoS Genetics 8 (2012): el002788.
Shi, Riyi, and Richard B. Borgens. “Three-Dimensional Gradients of Voltage During Development
of the Nervous System as Invisible Coordinates for the Establishment of Embryonic Pattern.”
Developmental Dynamics 202 (1995): 101-14. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/aja
.1002020202/pdf (accessed October 30, 2012).
Schierwater, Bernd, and Rob DeSalle. “Can We Ever Identify the Urmetazoan?” Integrative and
Comparative Biology 47 (2007): 670-76.
Shu, D. G. “On the Phylum Vetulicolia.” Chinese Science Bulletin 50 (2005): 2342-54.
Shu, D. G., L. Chen, J. Han, and X. L. Zhang. “An Early Cambrian Tunicate from China.” Nature
411 (2001): 472-73.
Shu, D. G., S. Conway Morris, J. Han, Z. F. Zhang, and J. N. Liu. “Ancestral Echinoderms from the
Chengjiang Deposits of China.” Nature 430 (2004): 422-28.
Shu, D. G., S. Conway Morris, J. Han, Z. F. Zhang, K. Yasui, P. Janvierk, L. Chen, X. L. Zhang,
J. N.
Liu, Y. Li, and H. Q. Liu. “Head and Backbone of the Early Cambrian Vertebrate Haikouich-
thys.
n Nature 421 (2003): 526-29.
Shu, D. G., S. Conway Morris, and X. L. Zhang. “A Pikaia-like Chordate from the Lower Cambrian
of China.” Nature 384 (1996): 157-58.
Shu, D. G., S. Conway Morris, Z. F. Zhang, J. N. Liu, J. Han, L. Chen, X. L. Zhang, K. Yasui, and Y.
Li. “A New Species of Yunnanozoan with Implications for Deuterostome Evolution.” Science
299 (2003): 1380-84.
Shu, D. G., H. L. Lou, S. Conway Morris, X. L. Zhang, S. X. Hu, L. Chen, J. Han, M. Zhu, Y. Li, and
L. Z. Chen. “Lower Cambrian Vertebrates from South China.” Nature 402 (1999): 42-46.
Shu, D. G., X. Zhang, and L. Chen, “Reinterpretation of Yunnanozoon as the Earliest Known
Hemichordate.” Nature 380 (1996): 428-30.
Shubin, N. H., and C. R. Marshall. “Fossils, Genes, and the Origin of Novelty.” Paleobiology 26,
no. 4 (2000): 324-40.
Siegal, Nina. “Riled by Intelligent Design.” New York Times, November 6, 2005.
Siepel, Adam. “Darwinian Alchemy: Human Genes from Noncoding DNA.” Genome Research 19
(2009): 1693-95.
Simons, Andrew M. “The Continuity of Microevolution and Macroevolution.” Journal ofEvolu-
tionary Biology 15 (2002): 688-701.
Simpson, George Gaylord. Fossils and the History of Life. New York: Scientific American Books,
1983.
Siveter, D. J., M. Williams, and D. Waloszek. “A Phosphatocopid Crustacean with Appendages
from the Lower Cambrian.” Science 293 (2001): 479-81.
Skoog, Gerald. “A View from the Past.” Bookwatch Reviews 2 (1989): 1-2.
Skou, Jens C. “The Identification of the Sodium-Pump as the Membrane-Bound Na
+ /K
+-ATPase: a
Commentary.” Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1000 (1989): 435-38.
Skovsted, C. B., and L. E. Holmer. “Early Cambrian Brachiopods From Northeast Greenland.”
Palaeontology 48 (2005): 325-45.
Smith, Andrew B., and Kevin J. Peterson. “Dating the Time and Origin of Major Clades.” Annual
Review ofEarth and Planetary Sciences 30 (2002): 65-88.
Smith, C. R., et al. “Draft Genome of the Globally Widespread and Invasive Argentine Ant
(Linepi -
thema humile).” Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences USA 108 (2011): 5667-72.

Bibliography
477
Smith, William S. “A Delineation of the Strata of England and Wales with Part of Scotland Ex-
hibiting the Collieries and Mines the Marshes and Fen Lands Originally Overflowed by the
Sea and the Varieties of Soil According to the Variations in the Substrata.” Reproduced by the
British Geological Survey. August 1, 1815.
Sonneborn, T. M. “Determination, Development, and Inheritance of the Structure of the Cell
Cortex.” In Control Mechanisms in the Expression of Cellular Phenotypes, edited by H. A.
Padykula, 1-13. London: Academic Press, 1970.
Spemann, Hans, and Hilde Mangold, “fiber Induktion von Embryonalanlagen durch Implanta-
tion artfremder Organisatoren.” Archivfiir Mikroskopische Anatomie und Entwicklungs-
mechanik 100 (1924): 599-638. Translated by Viktor Hamburger and edited by Klaus Sander as
“Induction of Embryonic Primordia by Implantation of Organizers from a Different Species.”
International Journal ofDevelopmental Biology 45 (2001): 13-38. http://www.ijdb.ehu.es/web
/paper.php?doi=l 1291841.
Sperling, Erik A., and Jakob Vinther. “A Placozoan Affinity for Dickinsonia and the Evolution of
Late Proterozoic Metazoan Feeding Modes.” Evolution and Development 12 (2010): 201-9.
Spiro, Robert G. “Protein Glycosylation: Nature, Distribution, Enzymatic Formation, and Disease
Implications of Glycopeptide Bonds.” Glycobiology 12 (2002): 43R-56R.
Stadler, B. M. R., P. F. Stadler, G. P. Wagner, and W. Fontana. “The Topology of the Possible:
Formal Spaces Underlying Patterns of Evolutionary Change.” Journal of Theoretical Biology 213
(2001): 241-74.
Stanley, Steven M. Macroevolution: Pattern and Process. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ.
Press, 1998.
Stenger, V.
J. God: The Failed Hypothesis—How Science Shows That God Does Not Exist. Amherst,
NY: Prometheus, 2007.
St. Johnston, Daniel. “The Art and Design of Genetic Screens: Drosophila melanogaster.” Nature 3
(2002): 176-88.
Stoddard, Ed. “Evolution Gets Added Boost in Texas Schools.” Reuters, http://blogs.reuters.com
/faithworld/2009/01/23/evolution-gets-added-boost-in-texas-schools/ (accessed October 26,
2012 ).
Stokes, Trevor. “
.
.
. And Smithsonian Has ID Troubles.” The Scientist, July 4, 2005.
Stoltzfus, Arlin. “Mutationism and the Dual Causation of Evolutionary Change.” Evolution and
Development 8 (2006): 304-17.
Struck, T. H., et al. “Phylogenomic Analyses Unravel Annelid Evolution.” Nature 471 (2011): 95-98.
Stutz, Terrence. “State Board of Education Debates Evolution Curriculum.” Dallas Morning News,
January 22, 2009.
Suen, Garret, et al. “The Genome Sequence of the Leaf-Cutter Ant Atta cephalotes Reveals Insights
into Its Obligate Symbiotic Lifestyle.” PLoS Genetics 7 (2011): el002007.
Swadling, K. M., H. J. G. Dartnall, J. A. E. Gibson, £. Saulnier-Talbot, and W. F. Vincent. “Fossil
Rotifers and the Early Colonization of an Antarctic Lake.” Quaternary Research 55 (2001):
380-84.
Syvanen, Michael, and Jonathan Ducore. “Whole Genome Comparisons Reveals a Possible Chime-
ric Origin for a Major Metazoan Assemblage.” Journal ofBiological Systems 18 (2010): 261-75.
Szaniawski, H. “Cambrian Chaetognaths Recognized in Burgess Shale Fossils.” Acta Palaeonto-
logica Polonica 50 (2005): 1-8.
Szathmary, Eors. “When the Means Do Not Justify the End.” Nature 399 (1999): 745-46.
Tam, O. H., et al. “Pseudogene-Derived Small Interfering RNAs Regulate Gene Expression in
Mouse Oocytes.” Nature 453 (2008): 534-38.
Tautz, Diethard, and Tomislav Domazet-Loso. “The Evolutionary Origin of Orphan Genes.”
Nature Reviews Genetics 12 (2011): 692-702.
Taylor, Gordon Rattray. The Great Evolution Mystery. New York: Harper & Row, 1983.
Telford, M. J., S.
J. Bourlat, A. Economou, D. Papillon, and O. Rota-Stabelli. “The Evolution of the
Ecdysozoa.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 363 (2008): 1529-37.
Thaxton, Charles, Walter L. Bradley, and Roger L. Olsen. The Mystery of Life’s Origin: Reassessing
Current Theories. New York: Philosophical Library, 1984.
Theissen, Gunter. “The Proper Place of Hopeful Monsters in Evolutionary Biology,” Theory in
Biosciences 124 (2006): 349-69.
. “Saltational Evolution: Hopeful Monsters Are Here to Stay,” Theory in Biosciences 128
(2009): 43-51.

478
Bibliography
Theobald, Douglas. “Punctuated Equilibrium.” In International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences,
2nd ed., 6: 629-31. Detroit: Macmillan Library Reference, 2008.
. “29+ Evidences for Macroevolution.” http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/comdesc/sectionl
.html (accessed October 31, 2012).
Thomson, K. S. “Macroevolution: The Morphological Problem.” American Zoologist 32 (1992):
106-12.
Todd, Scott C. “A View from Kansas on That Evolution Debate.” Nature 401 (1999): 423.
Tremblay, A., M. }asin, and P. Chartrand. “A Double-Strand Break in a Chromosomal LINE
Element Can Be Repaired by Gene Conversion with Various Endogenous LINE Elements in
Mouse Cells.” Molecular and Cellular Biology 20 (2000): 54-60.
Tyndall, John. “The Parallel Roads of Glen Roy.” In Fragments of Science: A Series ofDetached
Essays, Addresses, and Reviews. Vol.
1. New York: Appleton, 1915.
Ulam, Stanislaw M. “How to Formulate Mathematically Problems of Rate of Evolution.” In
Mathematical Challenges to the Neo-Darwinian Interpretation of Evolution, edited by P. S.
Moorhead and M. M. Kaplan, 21-33. Wistar Institute Symposium Monograph No. 5. New
York: Liss, 1967.
University of California at Berkeley Museum of Paleontology. “Brachiopoda.” http://www.ucmp
.berkeley.edu/brachiopoda/brachiopodamm.html.
Uversky, Vladimir N., and Keith Dunker. “Understanding Protein Non-Folding.” Biochimica at
Biophysica Acta 1804 (2010): 1231-64.
Valentine, James W. “Fossil Record of the Origin of Bauplan and Its Implications.” In Patterns
and Processes in the History ofLife, edited by D. M. Raup and D. Jablonski, 209-22. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag, 1986.
. “Late Precambrian Bilaterians: Grades and Clades .” In Tempo and Mode in Evolution:
Genetics and Paleontology 50 Years After Simpson, edited by W. M. Fitch and F.
J. Ayala, 87-107.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1995.
. “Why No New Phyla After the Cambrian? Genome and Ecospace Hypotheses Revisited.”
Palaios 10 (1995): 190-94.
. “Prelude to the Cambrian Explosion.” Annual Review ofEarth and Planetary Sciences 30
(2002): 285-306.
. On the Origin ofPhyla. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 2004.
Valentine, James W., and Douglas H. Erwin. “Interpreting Great Developmental Experiments: The
Fossil Record.” In Development as an Evolutionary Process, edited by R. A. Raff and E. C. Raff,
71-107. New York: Liss, 1987.
Valentine, James W., Douglas H. Erwin, and David Jablonski. “Developmental Evolution of Meta-
zoan Body Plans: The Fossil Evidence.” Developmental Biology 173 (1996): 373-81.
Valentine, James W., David Jablonski, and Douglas H. Erwin. “Fossils, Molecules and Embryos:
New Perspectives on the Cambrian Explosion.” Development 126 (1999): 851-59.
Van de Lagemaat, L. N., J. R. Landry, D. L. Mager, and P. Medstrand. “Transposable Elements in
Mammals Promote Regulatory Variation and Diversification of Genes with Specialized Func-
tions.” Trends in Genetics 19 (2003): 530-36.
Van Valen, Leigh. “Similar, but Not Homologous.” Nature 305 (1983): 664.
. “How Do Major Evolutionary Changes Occur?” Evolutionary Theory 8 (1988): 173-76.
Vedantam, Shankar. “Eden and Evolution.” Washington Post, February 5, 2006.
Venema, D. R. “Seeking a Signature.” Perspectives on Science and Christian Faith 62 (2010): 276-83.
Vermeij, Geerat J. “Animal Origins.” Science 25 (1996): 525-26.
Von Sternberg, Richard. “On the Roles of Repetitive DNA Elements in the Context of a Unified
Genomic-Epigenetic System.” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 981 (2002): 154-88.
Von Sternberg, Richard, and James A. Shapiro. “How Repeated Retroelements Format Genome
Function.” Cytogenetic and Genome Research 110 (2005): 108-16.
Vorzimmer, P. “Charles Darwin and Blending Inheritance.” Isis 54 (1963): 371-90.
Waddington, Conrad. “The Epigenotype.” Endeavour 1 (1942): 18-20.
Waggoner, B. M. “Phylogenetic Hypotheses of the Relationships of Arthropods to Precambrian
and Cambrian Problematic Fossil Taxa.” Systematic Biology 45 (1996): 190-222.
Wagner, Andreas. “The Molecular Origins of Evolutionary Innovations.” Trends in Genetics 27
(2011): 397-410.
Wagner, G. P. “What Is the Promise of Developmental Evolution? Part II: A Causal Explanation
of Evolutionary Innovations May Be Impossible.” Journal ofExperimental Zoology (Molecular
and Developmental Evolution) 291 (2001): 305-9.

Bibliography
479
Wagner, G. P., and P. F. Stadler. “Quasi-Independence, Homology and the Unity of Type: A Topo-
logical Theory of Characters.” Journal of Theoretical Biology 220 (2003): 505-27.
Walcott, Charles Doolittle. “Cambrian Geology and Paleontology II: Abrupt Appearance of the
Cambrian Fauna on the North American Continent.” Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections
57 (1910): 1-16.
Wallace, Bruce. “Adaptation, Neo-Darwinian Tautology, and Population Fitness: A Reply.” Evolu-
tionary Biology 17 (1984): 59-71.
Wang, Daniel Y. C., Sudhir Kumar, and S. Blair Hedges. “Divergence Time Estimates for the Early
History of Animal Phyla and the Origin of Plants, Animals and Fungi.” Proceedings of the
Royal Society ofLondon B 266 (1999): 163-71.
Wang, E. T., R. Sandberg, S. Luo,
I. Khrebtukova, L. Zhang, C. Mayr, S. F. Kingsmore, G. P.
Schroth, and C. B. Burge. “Alternative Isoform Regulation in Human Tissue Transcriptomes.”
Nature 456 (2008): 470-76.
Wang, Wen, Frederic Brunet, Eviatar Nevo, and Manyuan Long. “Origin of Sphinx, a Young Chi-
meric RNA Gene in Drosophila melanogaster." Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences
USA 99 (2002): 4448-53.
Ward, Peter. On Methuselah's Trail: Living Fossils and the Great Extinctions. New York: Freeman,
1992.
. Out of Thin Air: Dinosaurs, Birds, and Earth's Ancient Atmosphere. Washington, DC:
Joseph Henry Press, 2006.
Watanabe T., et al. “Endogenous siRNAs from Naturally Formed dsRNAs Regulate Transcripts in
Mouse Oocytes.” Nature 453 (2008): 539-43.
Webster, Gerry, and Brian Goodwin. Form and Transformation: Generative and Relational Prin-
ciples in Biology. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1996.
Welch, John J., Eric Fontanillas, and Lindell Bromham. “Molecular Dates for the ‘Cambrian Ex-
plosion’: The Influence of Prior Assumptions.” Systematic Biology 54 (2005): 672-78.
Wells, Jonathan. “Making Sense of Biology: The Evidence for Development by Design.” In Signs
ofIntelligence: Understanding Intelligent Design, edited by J. Kushiner and W. A. Dembski,
118-27. Grand Rapids, MI: Brazos, 2001.
Wen, Y., L. Zheng, L. Qu, F.
J. Ayala, and Z. Lun. “Pseudogenes Are Not Pseudo Any More.” RNA
Biology 9 (2012): 27-32.
West, John G. Darwin Day in America: How Our Politics and Culture Have Been Dehumanized in
the Name ofScience. Wilmington, DE: ISI Books, 2007.
Whewell, William. “Lyell’s Principles of Geology.” British Critic 9 (1830): 180-206.
Whitehead, Alfred North. Science and the Modern World. New York: Macmillan, 1926.
Whitfield, John. “Biological Theory: Postmodern Evolution?” Nature 455 (2008): 281-84.
Whitman, W. B., D. C. Coleman, and W.
J. Wiebe. “Prokaryotes: The Unseen Majority.” Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 95 (1998): 6578-83.
Wieschaus, Eric. “From Molecular Patterns to Morphogenesis: The Lessons from Drosophila .”
Nobel lecture, December 8, 1995.
Wiley, E. O., and Bruce S. Lieberman. Phylogenetics: Theory and Practice ofPhylogenetic Systemat-
ics. New York: Wiley-Blackwell, 2011.
Willey, Basil. “Darwin’s Place in the History of Thought ” In Darwinism and the Study of Society,
edited by M. Banton, 15. Chicago: Quadrangle, 1961.
Willmer, Pat G., and Peter W. H. Holland. “Modern Approaches to Metazoan Relationships.”
Journal ofZoology (London) 224 (1991): 689-94.
Wills, M. A., S. Gerber, M. Ruta, and M. Hughes. “The Disparity of Priapulid, Archaeopriapu-
lid and Palaeoscolecid Worms in the Light of New Data.” Journal ofEvolutionary Biology 25
(2012): 2056-76.
Wilson, T. E., U. Grawunder, and M. R. Liebe. “Yeast DNA Ligase IV Mediates Non-Homologous
DNA End Joining.” Nature 388 (1997): 495-98.
Withgott, Jay. “John Maynard Smith Dies.” Science, April 20, 2004. http://news.sciencemag.org
/sciencenow/2004/04/20-01.html.
Wimsatt, William C. “Generativity, Entrenchment, Evolution, and Innateness: Philosophy, Evolu-
tionary Biology, and Conceptual Foundations of Science.” In Where Biology Meets Psychology:
Philosophical Essays, edited by V. G. Hardcastle, 139-79. Cabridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999.
Wimsatt, William C., and J. C. Schank. “Generative Entrenchment, Modularity and Evolvability:
When Genic Selection Meets the Whole Organism.” In Modularity in Development and Evolu-
tion, edited by G. Schlosser and G. Wagner, 359-94. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 2004.

480
Bibliography
Wolf, Yuri I., Igor B. Rogozin, and Eugene V. Koonin. “Coelomata and Not Ecdysozoa: Evidence
from Genome-wide Phylogenetic Analysis .” Genome Research 14 (2004): 29-36.
Wolfe, Stephen L. Molecular and Cellular Biology. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1993.
Wolfram, Stephen. A New Kind of Science. Champaign, IL: Wolfram Media, 2002.
World Net Daily. “Intelligent Design Torpedoes Tenure.” World Net Daily, May 19, 2007.
Wray, Gregory A., Jeffrey S. Levinton, and Leo H. Shapiro. “Molecular Evidence for Deep Precam-
brian Divergences Among Metazoan Phyla.” Science 274 (1996): 568-73.
Wu, Dong-Dong, David M. Irwin, and Ya-Ping Zhang. “De Novo Origin of Human Protein-
Coding Genes.” PLoS Genetics 7 (2011): el002379.
Xiao, S., A. H. Knoll, J. D. Schiffbauer, C. Zhou, and X. Yuan. “Comment on ‘Fossilized Nuclei and
Germination Structures Identify Ediacaran “Animal Embryos” as Encysting Protists.’ ” Science
335 (2012): 1169.
Xun, Gu. “Early Metazoan Divergence Was About 830 Million Years Ago,” Journal ofMolecular
Evolution 47 (1998): 369-71.
Yochelson, Ellis L. Charles Doolittle Walcott, Paleontologist. Kent, OH: Kent State Univ. Press,
1998.
Yockey, Hubert P. “On the Information Content of Cytochrome C.” Journal of Theoretical Biology
67, no. 3 (1977): 345-76.
. “A Calculation of the Probability of Spontaneous Biogenesis by Information Theory.” Jour-
nal of Theoretical Biology 67 (1977): 377-98.
. Information Theory and Molecular Biology. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1992.
Youngren, K. K., et al. “The Ter mutation in the Dead End Gene Causes Germ Cell Loss and Tes-
ticular Germ Cell Tumours.” Nature 435 (2005): 360-64.
Zamora, S., R. Gozalo, and E. Linnan. “Middle Cambrian Gogiid Echinoderms from Northeast
Spain: Taxonomy, Palaeoecology, and Palaeogeographic Implications.” Acta Palaeontologica
Polonica 54 (2009): 253-65.
Zhang, Jianzhi, David M. Webb, and Ondrej Podlaha. “Accelerated Protein Evolution and Origins
of Human-Specific Features: FOXP2 as an Example.” Genetics 162 (2002): 1825-35.
Zhang, Jianzhi, Y. P. Zhang, and H. F. Rosenberg. “Adaptive Evolution of a Duplicated Pancreatic
Ribonuclease Gene in a Leaf-Eating Monkey.” Nature Genetics 30, no. 4 (2002): 411-15.
Zhang, Z., et al. “A Sclerite-Bearing Stem Group Entoproct from the Early Cambrian and Its Im-
plications.” Scientific Reports 3 (2013): 1066.
Zhen, Ying, M. Aardema, E. M. Medina, M. Schumer, and P. Andolfatto. “Parallel Molecular Evo-
lution in an Herbivore Community.” Science 337 (2012): 1634-37.
Zheng, Jie, Igor B. Rogozin, Eugene V. Koonin, and Teresa M. Przytycka. “Support for the Coe-
lomata Clade of Animals from a Rigorous Analysis of the Pattern of Intron Conservation.”
Molecular Biology and Evolution 24 (2007): 2583-92.
Zvelebil, Marketa, and Jeremy O. Baum. Understanding Bioinformatics. New York: Garland Sci-
ence, 2008.
Zuckerkandl, Emile, and Linus Pauling. “Evolutionary Divergence and Convergence in Proteins.”
In Evolving Genes and Proteins, edited by B. Bryson and H. Vogel, 97-166. New York: Aca-
demic, 1965.

CREDITS AND PERMISSIONS
The inclusion of any figures, illustrations, photographs, diagrams, charts, or other types of images
in this book should not be construed as an endorsement of the ideas and arguments contained in
this book on the part of any copyright holders or creators of those images, other than the author of
the book himself.
Cover: Photograph of trilobite fossil courtesy of J. Y. Chen. Source: Figure 186, Chen, J. Y., Zhou,
G. Q., Zhu, M. Y., and Yeh, K. Y. The Chengjiang Biota—A Unique Window of the Cambrian Explo-
sion, 149. Taichung, Taiwan: National Museum of Natural Science, 1996. Used with permission.
Figure 1.1: Tree of life image from Ernst Haeckel, Volume II ofGenerelle Morphologie (1866). Public
Domain.
Figure 1.2a: Louis Agassiz photograph courtesy of Wikimedia Commons. Public Domain.
Figure 1.2b: Charles Darwin photograph courtesy of Wikimedia Commons. Original photograph
taken by Henry Maull and John Fox. Public Domain.
Figure 1.3a: Drawing of brachiopod by Ray Braun based on information from Figure 18, Brusca,
R. C., and Brusca, G. J. Invertebrates, 794. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, 1990; Figure 7.55,
Mintz, L. W. Historical Geology: The Science of a Dynamic Earth, 130. 2nd ed. Columbus, Charles
E. Merrill Publishing, 1977.
Figure 1.3b: Brachiopod fossil photograph showing internal remains courtesy of Paul Chien. Used
with permission.
Figure 1.3c: Brachiopod fossil photograph © Colin Keates / DK Limited / Corbis. Used with per-
mission.
Figure 1.4a: Drawing of trilobite by Ray Braun based on information from “Fossil Groups,” Uni-
versity of Bristol, http://palaeo.gly.bris.ac.uk/palaeofiles/fossilgroups/trilobites/page2.htm.
Figure 1.4b: Trilobite fossil photograph courtesy of Illustra Media. Used with permission.
Figure 1.5: Drawing of tetracoral by Ray Braun based on information from “Convergence,”
http://www.znam.bg/com/action/showArticle;jsessionid=FA17A83CDA0EC25151F6B80869F07E4
9?encID=790&article=2059773460.
Figure 1.6: Drawing of geological timescale by Ray Braun based on information from Mintz, L. W.
Historical Geology: The Science ofa Dynamic Earth, back page. 2nd ed. Columbus, Charles E.
Merrill Publishing, 1977; Gradstein, F. M., Ogg, J. G., Schmitz, M. D., Ogg, G. M. The Geological
Timescale 2012 Volumes 1 and 2. Elsevier, 2012.
Figure 1.7: Drawing by Sir Thomas Dick-Lauder and published in Tyndall, J., “The Parallel Roads
of Glen Roy.” In Fragments of Science: A Series ofDetached Essays, Addresses, and Reviews, Volume
I. New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1915. Courtesy of Wikimedia Commons. Public Domain.
Figure 1.8: Drawing by Ray Braun based on information from a fossil exhibit that was on display at
the California Academy of Sciences in the 1990s.
Figure 2.1: Photograph of the Burgess Shale © Thomas Kitchin & Victoria Hurst/All Canada
Photos/Corbis. Used with permission.
Figure 2.2: Photograph of Charles Doolittle Walcott courtesy of Smithsonian Institution Archives.
Image #84-16281. Used with permission.
Figure 2.3a: Drawing of Marrella by Ray Braun based on information from Figure 3.12, Gould, S. J.
Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History, 114. New York: Norton, 1990.
Figure 2.3b: Photograph of Marrella fossil © User: Smith609 (Own Work) / Wikimedia Commons
/ CC-BY-SA-3.0. Used with permission; usage not intended to imply endorsement by the author/
licensor of the work.

482
Credits and Permissions
Figure 2.4a: Drawing of Hallucigenia by Ray Braun based on information from Figure 14.6,
Xian-guang, H., Aldridge, R. J., Bergstrom, J., Siveter, D. J., Siveter, D.
J., and Xiang-hong, F. The
Cambrian Fossils of Chengjiang, China: The Flowering ofEarly Animal Life, 88 Oxford: Blackwell
Publishing, 2004; Figure 19(b), Conway Morris, S., The Crucible of Creation: The Burgess Shale and
the Rise ofAnimals, 55. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Figure 2.4b: Photograph of Hallucigenia fossil courtesy of Smithsonian Institution. Used with
permission.
Figures 2.5a, 2.5b, and 2.5c: Chart drawn by Ray Braun based on data compiled from references in
Chapter 2, Endnote 5.
Figure 2.6: Diagram drawn by Ray Braun based on information from Figure
1, Meyer, S. C., Ross,
M., Nelson, P. and Chien, P. “The Cambrian Explosion: Biology’s Big Bang.” In Darwinism, Design
and Public Education, edited by John Angus Campbell and Stephen C. Meyer, 325. East Lansing,
MI: Michigan State University Press, 2003. Courtesy of Brian Gage.
Figure 2.7: Diagram drawn by Ray Braun based on original drawing by Art Battson. Courtesy of
Art Battson.
Figure 2.8: Diagram drawn by Ray Braun based on Figure
1, Wiester, J., and Dehaan, R. F., “The
Cambrian Explosion: The Fossil Record and Intelligent Design.” In Signs ofIntelligence: Under-
standing Intelligent Design, 149. William A. Dembski and James M. Kushiner, eds. Grand Rapids,
MI: Brazos Press, 2001. Courtesy also of Art Battson.
Figure 2.9a: Drawing of Opabinia by Ray Braun based on information from Figure 3.21, Gould,
S.
J. Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature ofHistory, 126. New York: Norton, 1990;
Figure 173, Briggs, D., Erwin, D., and Collier, F. The Fossils of the Burgess Shale, 210. Washington:
Smithsonian Institution Press, 1994.
Figure 2.9b: Photograph of Opabinia fossil from Walcott, C. D., “Middle Cambrian Branchiopoda,
Malacostraca, Trilobita, and Merostomata.” Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Volume 57,
Number 6 (Publication 2051), City of Washington, Published by the Smithsonian Institution,
March 13, 1912. Public Domain.
Figure 2.10a: Drawing of Anomalocaris by Ray Braun based on information from Figure 264,
Chen, J. Y., Zhou, G. Q., Zhu, M. Y., and Yeh, K. Y. The Chengjiang Biota—A Unique Window of the
Cambrian Explosion, 197. Taichung, Taiwan: National Museum of Natural Science, 1996.
Figure 2.10b: Photograph of Anomalocaris fossil courtesy of J. Y. Chen. Source: Figure 265A,
Chen, J. Y., Zhou, G. Q., Zhu, M. Y., and Yeh, K. Y. The Chengjiang Biota—A Unique Window of
the Cambrian Explosion, 198. Taichung, Taiwan: National Museum of Natural Science, 1996. Used
with permission.
Figure 2.11a: Tree of life diagram from Charles Darwin, Origin of Species, 1859. Courtesy of
Wikimedia Commons. Public domain.
Figure 2.11b: Diagram drawn by Ray Braun.
Figure 2.12: Diagram drawn by Ray Braun.
Figure 3.1: Photograph of J. Y. Chen from Icons ofEvolution Documentary, Coldwater Media, 2002.
Copyright © Discovery Institute 2013. Courtesy of Discovery Institute. Used with permission.
Figure 3.2a: Photograph from Chengjiang fossil site courtesy of Illustra Media. Used With
Permission.
Figure 3.2b: Photograph from Chengjiang fossil site courtesy of Paul Chien. Used With
Permission.
Figure 3.2c: Photograph from Chengjiang fossil site courtesy of Paul Chien. Used With
Permission.
Figure 3.3: Photograph of Harry Whittington from the Archives of the Museum of Comparative
Zoology, Ernst Mayr Library, Harvard University. Used with permission.
Figure 3.4a: Drawing of Nectocaris by Ray Braun based on information from Smith, M. R., and
Caron, J.-B., “Primitive soft-bodied cephalopods from the Cambrian,” Nature, 465 (May 27, 2010):
469-472; Nectocaris pteryx at http://commons.wikimedia.Org/wiki/File:Nectocaris_pteryx.JPG,
courtesy of user: Stanton F. Fink at en.wikipedia / Wikimedia Commons / CC BY-SA 2.5.
Figure 3.4b: Photograph of Nectocaris fossil reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers

Credits and Permissions
483
Ltd: Nature, Figure
1, Smith, M. R., and Caron, J.-B., “Primitive soft-bodied cephalopods from the
Cambrian,” Nature, 465 (May 27, 2010): 469-472. Copyright 2010. Used with permission.
Figure 3.4c: Photograph of Nectocaris fossil reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers
Ltd.: Nature, Figure
1, Smith, M. R., and Caron, J.-B., “Primitive soft-bodied cephalopods from the
Cambrian,” Nature, 465 (May 27, 2010): 469-472. Copyright 2010. Used with permission.
Figure 3.5a: Photograph of stromatolite fossil courtesy of user: Rygel, M. C., at en.wikipedia /
Wikimedia Commons / CC-BY-SA-3.0. Used with permission; usage not intended to imply en-
dorsement by the author/licensor of the work.
Figure 3.5b: Photograph of stromatolite fossil courtesy of American Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, Figure 2B, Hoffman, P., “Algal Stromatolites: Use in Stratigraphic Correlation and
Paleocurrent Determination,” Science, 157 (September 1, 1967): 1043-45. Reprinted with permis-
sion from AAAS. Used with permission.
Figure 3.6a-l: Drawing of ctenophore by Ray Braun based on information from Figure 28, Chen,
J. Y., and Zhou, G., “Biology of the Chengjiang fauna.” In “The Cambrian Explosion and the Fossil
Record,” 33, Bulletin of the National Museum ofNatural Science, 10:11-106. Edited by Chen, J. Y.,
Cheng, Y., and Iten, H. V., eds. Taiwan: National Museum of Natural Science, 1997.
Figure 3.6a-2: Photograph of ctenophorefossil courtesy of J. Y. Chen. Source: Figure 102, Chen,
J. Y., Zhou, G. Q., Zhu, M. Y., and Yeh, K. Y. The Chengjiang Biota—A Unique Window of the
Cambrian Explosion, 96. Taichung, Taiwan: National Museum of Natural Science, 1996. Used with
permission.
Figure 3.6b-l: Drawing of phoronid by Ray Braun based on information from Figure 51, Chen,
J. Y., and Zhou, G., “Biology of the Chengjiang fauna.” In “The Cambrian Explosion and the Fossil
Record,”45, Bulletin of the National Museum ofNatural Science, 10:11-106. Edited by Chen, J. Y.,
Cheng, Y., and Iten, H. V., eds. Taiwan: National Museum of Natural Science, 1997.
Figure 3.6b-2: Photograph of phoronid fossil courtesy of J. Y. Chen. Source: Figure 49, Chen, J. Y.,
and Zhou, G., “Biology of the Chengjiang fauna.” In “The Cambrian Explosion and the Fossil
Record,” 44, Bulletin of the National Museum ofNatural Science, 10:11-106. Edited by Chen, J. Y.,
Cheng, Y., and Iten, H. V., eds. Taiwan: National Museum of Natural Science, 1997. Used with
permission.
Figure 3.6c-l: Drawing of Waptia by Ray Braun based on information from Figure 110, Briggs, D.,
Erwin, D., and Collier, F. The Fossils of the Burgess Shale, 157. Washington: Smithsonian Institu-
tion Press, 1994.
Figure 3.6c-2: Photograph of Waptia fossil courtesy of Paul Chien. Used with permission.
Figure 3.6d-l: Drawing of priapulid worm by Ray Braun based on information from Figures 32A
and 32B, Chen, J. Y., and Zhou, G. “Biology of the Chengjiang fauna.” In “The Cambrian Explosion
and the Fossil Record,” 36, Bulletin of the National Museum ofNatural Science, 10:11-106. Edited
by Chen, J. Y., Cheng, Y., and Iten, H. V., eds. Taiwan: National Museum of Natural Science, 1997.
Figure 3.6d-2: Photograph of priapulid worm fossil courtesy of Paul Chien. Used with permission.
Figure 3.6e-l: Drawing of Eldonia by Ray Braun based on information from Figure 147, Chen, J. Y.,
Zhou, G. Q., Zhu, M. Y., and Yeh, K. Y. The Chengjiang Biota—A Unique Window of the Cambrian
Explosion, 124. Taichung, Taiwan: National Museum of Natural Science, 1996; “Cambrian Cafe,”
http://cambrian-cafe.seesaa.net/archives/201003-l.html.
Figure 3.6e-2: Photograph of Eldonia fossil courtesy of J. Y. Chen. Source: Figure 148, Chen, J. Y.,
Zhou, G. Q., Zhu, M. Y., and Yeh, K. Y. The Chengjiang Biota—A Unique Window of the Cambrian
Explosion, 125. Taichung, Taiwan: National Museum of Natural Science, 1996. Used with permis-
sion.
Figure 3.6f-l: Drawing of hyolith by Ray Braun based on information from Figure 172, Chen, J. Y.,
Zhou, G. Q., Zhu, M. Y., and Yeh, K. Y. The Chengjiang Biota—A Unique Window of the Cambrian
Explosion, 132. Taichung, Taiwan: National Museum of Natural Science, 1996.
Figure 3.6f-2: Photograph of hyolith fossil courtesy of J. Y. Chen. Source: Figure 173A, Chen, J. Y.,
Zhou, G. Q., Zhu, M. Y., and Yeh, K. Y. The Chengjiang Biota—A Unique Window of the Cam-
brian Explosion, 139. Taichung, Taiwan: National Museum of Natural Science, 1996. Used with
permission.
Figure 3.7a-l: Photograph of sponge embryo fossil courtesy of Paul Chien. Used with permission.

484
Credits and Permissions
Figure 3.7a-2: Photograph of sponge embryo fossil courtesy of Paul Chien. Used with permission.
Figure 3.7b: Photograph of sponge embryo fossil courtesy of Paul Chien. Used with permission.
Figure 3.8: Diagram drawn by Ray Braun based on information in Figure 2, Meyer, S. C., Ross, M.,
Nelson, P., and Chien, P. “The Cambrian Explosion: Biology’s Big Bang.” In Darwinism, Design
and Public Education, edited by John Angus Campbell and Stephen C. Meyer, 326. East Lansing,
MI: Michigan State University Press, 2003. Courtesy of Brian Gage.
Figure 3.9a: Drawing of Myllokunmingia by Ray Braun based on information from Figure 2A, Shu,
D. G., Lou, FI. L., Conway Morris, S., Zhang, X. L., Hu, S. X., Chen, L., Han, J., Zhu, M., Li, Y., and
Chen, L. Z., “Lower Cambrian Vertebrates from South China.” Nature, 402 (1999): 42-46.
Figure 3.9b: Photograph of Myllokunmingia fossil reprinted by permission from Macmillan
Publishers Ltd.: Nature, Figure 2A, Shu, D. G., Lou, H. L., Conway Morris, S., Zhang, X. L., Hu,
S. X., Chen, L., Han, J., Zhu, M., Li, Y., and Chen L. Z., “Lower Cambrian Vertebrates from South
China.” Nature, 402 (1999): 42-46. Copyright 1999. Used with permission.
Figure 4. la-1: Drawing of Dickinsonia by Ray Braun based on information from “Les premiers
animaux de la Terre,” L’Historie de la vie sur terre, April 23, 2009, http://titereine.centerblog.net
/4-Les-premiers-animaux-de-la-Terre.
Figure 4. la-2: Photograph of Dickinsonia fossil courtesy of Figure 2, Peterson, K.
J., Cotton, J. A.,
Gehling, J. G., and Pisani, D., “The Ediacaran emergence of bilaterians: congruence between the
genetic and the geological fossil records,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 2008,
363 (1496): 1435-43, by permission of the Royal Society.
Figure 4. lb-1: Drawing of Spriggina by Ray Braun based on information from Spriggina flounensi
C.jpg, Wikipedia, http://en.wikipedia.Org/wiki/File:Spriggina_flounensi_C.jpg.
Figure 4. lb-2: Photograph of Spriggina fossil courtesy of Figure 2, Peterson, K. J., Cotton,
J. A.,
Gehling, J. G., and Pisani, D., “The Ediacaran emergence of bilaterians: congruence between the
genetic and the geological fossil records,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 2008,
363 (1496): 1435-43, by permission of the Royal Society.
Figure 4.1c-l: Drawing of Charnia by Ray Braun based on information from Charnia_Species_
BW_by_avancna, http://avancna.deviantart.com/art/Charnia-Species-BW-101515874.
Figure 4.1c-2: Photograph of Charnia masoni fossil courtesy of user: Smith609 at en.wikipedia /
Wikimedia Commons / CC-BY-2.5. Used with permission; usage not intended to imply endorse-
ment by the author/licensor of the work.
Figure 4.2a: Photograph of Arkarua fossil courtesy of Figure 4B, Gehling,
J. G., “Earliest known
echinoderm—a new Ediacaran fossil from the Pound Subgroup of South Australia,” Alcheringa:
An Australasian Journal ofPalaeontology, 11 (1987): 337-45. Used with permission; usage not
intended to imply endorsement by the author / licensor of the work.
Figure 4.2b: Photograph of Parvancorina fossil courtesy of Figure 2, Peterson, K. J., Cotton,
J. A.,
Gehling, J. G., and Pisani, D., “The Ediacaran emergence of bilaterians: congruence between the
genetic and the geological fossil records,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 2008,
363 (1496): 1435-43, by permission of the Royal Society.
Figure 4.3: Photograph of Vernanimalcula fossil courtesy of American Association for the Ad-
vancement of Science, from Figure lb, Chen, J.-Y., Bottjer, D.
J., Oliveri, P., Dornbos, S. Q., Gao,
F., Ruffins, S., “Small Bilaterian Fossils from 40 to 55 Million Years Before the Cambrian,” Science,
305 (July 9, 2004): 218-22. Reprinted with permission from AAAS.
Figure 5.1: Pentadactyl limb drawing courtesy of Jody F. Sjogren and Figure 4-1, Wells, J., Icons of
Evolution: Science or Myth? Washington D.C.: Regnery, 2000. Copyright © Jody F. Sjogren 2000.
Used with permission.
Figure 5.2: Drawing by Ray Braun based on information from Paul Nelson; Smith, A. B., and Pe-
terson, K.
J., “Dating the Time and origin of Major Clades,” Annual Review ofEarth and Planetary
Sciences, 30 (2002): 65-88.
Figure 6.1: Drawing by Ray Braun based on information from Telford, M.
J. et al. “The evolution
of the Ecdysozoa,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, Vol. 363 (2008): 1529-37;
Aguinaldo, A. M., Turbeville, J. M., Linford, L. S., Rivera, M. C., Garey, J. R., Raff, R. A., and Lake,
J. A. “Evidence for a clade of nematodes, arthropods and other moulting animals,” Nature, 387
(1997): 489-93; Mallatt, J. M., Garey, J. R., and Shultz, J. W., “Ecdysozoan phylogeny and Bayesian

Credits and Permissions
485
inference: first use of nearly complete 28S and 18S rRNA gene sequences to classify the arthropods
and their kin "Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution, 31 (2004): 178-91; Halanych, K. M., “The
New View of Animal Phylogeny,” Annual Review ofEcology and Systematics, 35 (2004): 229-56;
Roy, S. W., and Irimia, M., “Rare Genomic Characters Do Not Support Coelomata: Intron Loss/
Gain,” Molecular Biology and Evolution, 25 (2008): 620-23; Hyman, L. H. The Invertebrates. Vol.
1:
Protozoa through Ctenophora. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1940; Holton, T. A., and Pisani, D., “Deep
Genomic-Scale Analyses of the Metazoa Reject Coelomata: Evidence from Single- and Multigene
Families Analyzed Under a Supertree and Supermatrix Paradigm,” Genome Biology and Evolution,
2 (2010): 310-24.
Figure 6.2: Drawing by Ray Braun and Paul Nelson based on information from Figure 1, Edge-
combe, G. D., Giribet, G., Dunn, C. W., Hejnol, A., Kristensen, R. M., Neves, R. C., Rouse, G. W.,
Worsaae, K., and Sorensen, M. V., “Higher-level metazoan relationships: recent progress and
remaining questions,” Organisms, Diversification, & Evolution, 11 (June 2011): 151-72.
Figure 6.3: Drawing by Ray Braun and Paul Nelson based on information from Extavour, C. G.,
and Akam, M., “Mechanisms of germ cell specification across the metazoans: epigenesis and pre-
formation,” Development, 130 (2003): 5869-84.
Figure 6.4: Drawing by Ray Braun and Paul Nelson based on information from Figure
1, Extavour,
C. G. M. “Evolution of the bilaterian germ line: lineage origin and modulation of specific mecha-
nisms,” Integrative and Comparative Biology, 47 (2007): 770-85.
Figure 6.5: Drawing by Ray Braun and Paul Nelson based on information from Willmer, P. G.
Invertebrate Relationships: Patterns in Animal Evolution, 2-14. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1990.
Figure 7.1a: Photograph of Stephen Jay Gould courtesy of Steve Liss / TIME& LIFE Images / Getty
Images. Used with permission.
Figure 7.1b: Photograph of Niles Eldredge © Julian Dufort 2011. Used with permission.
Figure 7.2: Drawn by Ray Braun based on an original drawing by Brian Gage. Courtesy of
Brian Gage.
Figure 7.3: Drawn by Ray Braun based on an original drawing by Brian Gage. Courtesy of
Brian Gage.
Figure 8.1: Photograph of James Watson and Francis Crick courtesy of A. Barrington Brown/
Science Source. Used With Permission.
Figure 8.2: Drawn by Ray Braun based on an original drawing by Fred Hereen. Courtesy of Fred
Hereen.
Figure 8.3: Drawn by Ray Braun based on Figure 10, designed by Brian Gage, in Meyer, S. C.,
Ross, M., Nelson, P., and Chien, P., “The Cambrian Explosion: Biology’s Big Bang.” In Darwinism,
Design and Public Education, edited by John Angus Campbell and Stephen C. Meyer, 336. East
Lansing, MI: Michigan State University Press, 2003.Courtesy of Brian Gage.
Figure 9.1: Photograph of Murray Eden courtesy of MIT Museum. Used with permission.
Figure 9.2: Drawn by Ray Braun.
Figure 9.3: Drawn by Ray Braun.
Figure 10.1: Photograph of Douglas Axe courtesy of Brittnay Landoe. Used with permission.
Figure 10.2: Drawing by Ray Braun based on information from Figures 3.39, 3.40, and 3.44 in Berg,
J. M., Tymoczko, J. L., Stryer, L. Biochemistry, 60-61, 5th ed. New York, NY: W. H. Freeman and
Co, 2002.
Figure 10.3: Drawing by Ray Braun based on information from Figure 21, designed by Brian Gage,
in Meyer, S. C., Ross, M., Nelson, P., and Chien, P. “The Cambrian Explosion: Biology’s Big Bang.”
In Darwinism, Design and Public Education, edited by John Angus Campbell and Stephen C.
Meyer, 374. East Lansing, MI: Michigan State University Press, 2003. Courtesy of Brian Gage.
Figure 10.4: Drawn by Ray Braun.
Figure 11.1: Drawing by Ray Braun and Casey Luskin based on information from Kaessmann, H.,
“Origins, evolution, and phenotypic impact of new genes,” Genome Research, 20 (2010): 1313-26;
Long, M., Betran, E., Thornton, K., and Wang W., “The Origin of New Genes: Glimpses from the
Young and Old,” Nature Reviews Genetics, 4 (November 2003): 865-75.

486
Credits and Permissions
Figure 11.2: Drawn by Ray Braun based on information from Luskin, C., “The NCSE, Judge Jones,
and Citation Bluffs about the Origin ofNew Functional Genetic Information,” Discovery.org
(March 2, 2010), http://www.discovery.Org/a/14251.
Figure 12.1: Drawn by Ray Braun based on information from Figure 27, in Frazzetta, T. H. Com-
plex Adaptations in Evolving Populations, 148. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, 1975.
Figure 12.2: Photograph of Michael Behe courtesy of Laszlo Bencze. Used with permission.
Figure 12.3: Drawing by Ray Braun based on information from “Powerball— Prizes and Odds,”
PowerBall, http://www.powerball.com/powerball/pb_prizes.asp.
Figure 12.4: Drawn by Ray Braun based on information from Figure 6, Behe, M. J., and Snoke, D. W.,
“Simulating evolution by gene duplication of protein features that require multiple amino acid
residues,” Protein Science, 13 (2004): 2651-64. Original image courtesy of John Wiley and Sons and
Protein Science. Original image Copyright © 2004 The Protein Society. Used with permission.
Figure 12.5: Photograph of Ann Gauger courtesy of Laszlo Bencze. Used with permission.
Figure 12.6: Drawn by Ray Braun based on information from Figure 5A, Gauger, A. K., and
Axe, D. D. “The Evolutionary Accessibility of New Enzyme Functions: A Case Study from the
Biotin Pathway.” BlO-Complexity, 2011 (1): 1-17. Original image courtesy of Ann Gauger and
Douglas Axe.
Figure 13.1a: Photograph of Christiane Niisslein-Volhard courtesy of User:Rama / Wikimedia
Commons / CC BY-SA 2.0 FR. Used with permission; usage not intended to imply endorsement by
the author/licensor of the work.
Figure 13.1b: Photograph of Eric Wieschaus courtesy of Matthias Kubisch / Wikimedia Commons
/ CCO 1.0. Public domain; usage not intended to imply endorsement by the author/licensor of the
work.
Figure 13.2: Drawing by Ray Braun and Paul Nelson based on information from “Mutant Fruit
Flies,” Exploratorium, http://www.exploratorium.edu/exhibits/mutant_flies/mutant_flies.html.
Figure 13.3: Photograph of Paul Nelson courtesy of Paul Nelson. Used with permission.
Figure 13.4a: Copyright 2008 National Academy of Sciences U.S.A. Figure ID, Oliveri, P., Tu, Q.,
and Davidson, E. H., “Global Regulatory Logic for Specification of an Embryonic Cell Lineage,”
Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences USA, 105 (2008): 5955-62. Use of PNAS material
does not imply any endorsement by PNAS or the National Academy of Sciences or the authors.
Used with permission.
Figure 13.4b: Copyright 2008 National Academy of Sciences U.S.A. Figure IE, Oliveri, P., Tu, Q.,
and Davidson, E. H., “Global Regulatory Logic for Specification of an Embryonic Cell Lineage,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 105 (2008): 5955-62. Use of PNAS material
does not imply any endorsement by PNAS or the National Academy of Sciences or the authors.
Used with permission.
Figure 13.4c: Copyright 2008 National Academy of Sciences U.S.A. Figure 7, Oliveri, P., Tu, Q.,
and Davidson, E. H., “Global Regulatory Logic for Specification of an Embryonic Cell Lineage,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 105 (2008): 5955-62. Use of PNAS material
does not imply any endorsement by PNAS or the National Academy of Sciences or the authors.
Used with permission.
Figure 14.1: Photograph of Jonathan Wells courtesy of Laszlo Bencze. Used with permission.
Figure 14.2: Diagram drawn by Ray Braun based on PowerPoint slides developed by Michael Keas.
Figure 14.3a: Drawn by Joseph Condeelis. Copyright © Discovery Institute 2013. Used with per-
mission.
Figure 14.3b: Courtesy of The Company of Biologists. Source: Figure IB from Smyth,
J. T., De-
Haven, W. I., Bird, G. S., and Putney, J. W., “Role of the microtubule cytoskeleton in the function
of the store-operated Ca 2+ channel activator STIM1,” Journal of Cell Science, 120 (November
1,
2007): 3762-71. Used with permission.
Figure 15.1: Photograph of Stuart Kauffman courtesy of User: Teemu Rajala/ Wikimedia Com-
mons / CC BY 3.0. Used with permission; usage not intended to imply endorsement by the author/
licensor of the work.
Figure 15.2: Drawing of DPMs by Ray Braun based on information from Table
1, Stuart A.

Credits and Permissions
487
Newman and Ramray Bhat, “Dynamical patterning modules: physico-genetic determinants of
morphological development and evolution,” Physical Biology
,
5 (1): 1-14 (April 9, 2008); Figure
11.1, Stuart A. Newman, “Dynamical Patterning Modules,” in Evolution: The Extended Synthe-
sis, 294, Massimo Pigliucci and Gerd B. Muller eds. (The MIT Press, 2010); Stuart A. Newman,
“Physico-Genetic Determinants in the Evolution of Development,” Science, 338 (October 12, 2012):
217-19.
Figure 16.1: Drawn by Ray Braun and Paul Nelson.
Figure 16.2: Copyright 2007 National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. Figure
1, Prud’homme, B.,
Gompel, N., and Carroll, S. B., “Emerging principles of regulatory evolution,” Proceedings of the
National Academy ofSciences (PNAS), USA, 104 (May 15, 2007): 8605-12. Use of PNAS material
does not imply any endorsement by PNAS or the National Academy of Sciences or the authors.
Used with permission.
Figure 16.3: Reprinted from Current Biology,
11, Starling, E. B., and Cohen, S. M., “Limb develop-
ment: Getting down to the ground state,” R1025-R1027, Figure 1, Copyright 2001, with permission
from Elsevier.
Figure 17.1: Photograph of Charles Thaxton courtesy of Charles Thaxton. Used with permission.
Figure 17.2: Drawing by Ray Braun based on information from Grotzinger, J„ Jordan, T. H., Press,
F., Siever, R. Understanding Earth, 32-33, 5th ed., New York: W. H. Freeman, 2007; Cox., A., and
Hart, R. B. Plate Tectonics: How It Works, 19, Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Science, 1986; Lowrie, W.
Fundamentals of Geophysics, 18-19, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Figure 17.3: Drawing by Ray Braun based on information from Sober, E., Reconstructing the Past,
4-5. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988.
Figure 18.1: Photograph of Douglas Erwin courtesy of Robyn Wishna / UPHOTO/Cornell Univer-
sity. Used with permission.
Figure 18.2: Drawn by Ray Braun based on information from Figure 2:2, Meyer, S. C., Minnich,
S., Moneymaker, J., Nelson, P. A., and Seelke, R. Explore Evolution: The Argumentsfor and Against
Neo-Darwinism, 44. Melbourne and London: Hill House, 2007.
Figure 18.3: Photograph of transistors courtesy of iStockphoto.com/ S230. © iStockphoto.com/
S230. Used with permission.
Figure 18.4: Diagram drawn by Ray Braun based on information from Figure 2, Nelson, P., and
Wells, J., “Homology in Biology: Problem for Naturalistic Science and Prospect for Intelligent
Design.” In Darwinism, Design and Public Education, 317, edited by John Angus Campbell and
Stephen C. Meyer, 303-322. East Lansing, MI: Michigan State University Press, 2003.
Figure 18.5: Diagram drawn by Ray Braun based on PowerPoint slides developed by Michael Keas.
Figure 18.6: Diagram drawn by Ray Braun based on PowerPoint slides developed by Michael Keas.
Figure 18.7: Diagram drawn by Ray Braun based on PowerPoint slides developed by Michael Keas.
Figure 19.1: Photograph of Richard Sternberg courtesy of Laszlo Bencze. Used with Permission.
Figure 19.2: Photograph of Moais courtesy of iStockphoto/Think-stock. Used with permission.
Figure 20.1: Photograph of trilobite fossil at Burgess Shale courtesy of Michael Melford / NA-
TIONAL GEOGRAPHIC IMAGE COLLECTION / Getty Images. Used with permission.
Figure 20.2a: Photograph of Stephen C. Meyer and family copyright © 2013 Stephen C. Meyer.
Figure 20.2b: Photograph of mountainside near Burgess Shale copyright © 2013 Stephen C. Meyer.

INDEX
Page references followed by fig indicate an
illustration.
abductive inference: definition of, 343; inductive
and deductive arguments, 343-44; plausibility
of, 345. See also causal adequacy
Abegg, Adam, 327-28
Agassiz, Louis: belief in a creative intelligence by,
100; “Evolution and the Permanence of Type”
by, 11; extensive fossil specimens collected by,
21; German idealism and cosmic philosophy of,
18-19, 20; on incomplete fossil record challeng-
ing Darwins theory by, 8fig-l0, 17, 18-2 4/ig, 69,
379, 381; photograph of, 7fig
allopatric speciation process: allowing for rapid
fixation of preexisting traits, 146-47; theory of
punctuated equilibrium and, 139-42
Altenberg 16, 291-92, 293, 313
American Association for the Advancement of
Science (AAAS), 385
amino-acid sequences: combinatorial inflation
problem applied to proteins, 173-74fig, 181fig;
forming polypeptide chain, \90fig; ratio of
functional to nonfunctional, 178-79; responses
to Sauers experiment on, 180-84, 187-89,
192-94; Sauer’s experiments on, 180-83,
187-89, 192-94; technologies for calculating
functional, 180-83. See also proteins
“Anarchist’s Manifesto” (Nelson), 370
anatomical characteristics: analysis of animal
life histories using, 125-32; “Coelomata”
hypothesis based on analysis of, 122
animal development: dGRNs (developmental gene
regulatory networks) required for, 264-69,
285, 319-20, 363-66; epigenetic information
required to complete, 271-87; dynamical pat-
terning modules (DPMs) role during, 301/ig-2,
303-4; early-acting body-plan mutations
and embryonic lethals, 259-64; Hox genes
expressed after the beginning of, 319-20;
ontogeny studies on, 258-69; principle of
constraints and, 268-69; self-organizational
models on, 293-310; three challenges to neo-
Darwinism posed by, 262-64; understanding
the Cambrian explosion in context of engineer-
ing, 270. See also body plans; embryos; genetic
information; genetic mutations; organisms
animal life histories: analysis of anatomical
characteristics of different, 125-32; attempts
to confirm evolutionary phylogenies, 121-25;
conflicting molecular data, 119—21; fundamen-
tal difficulties with phylogenetic reconstruction
of, 132-33; molecular homologies studies on,
121-25
animal phyla: chart showing representatives in the
fossil record, 32fig; debate over Vernanimalcula
fossil as bilaterian ancestor, 89, 90, 9\fig-96\
description of, 31; diagrams representing,
24fig; Ediacaran mini-explosion of fauna
and, 86-88; Metazoan, 104, 107, 126-27,
I28fig; “morphological space” between, 70-71;
Precambrian-era, 81-92; rapid divergence of
specifically genetic evidence, 121; representa-
tives of major animal groups, 33fig; selection
of incompatible phylogenetic trees represent-
ing, 131fig; stasis or persistent morphological
isolation evidence in Cambrian fossil record,
375-78; statistical paleontology casting doubt
on animal tree of life, 69-71; Vernanimalcula
bilaterian shape, 89, 90, 9lfig-96. See also
bilaterian phyla; Cambrian phyla (animal
groups); intermediate animal life forms; organ-
isms; phylogenetic classification
animal tree of life: Cambrian explosion and,
12-13; comparing actual animal phyla pattern
to one using Darwin’s, 24fig-, conflicting
histories of anatomical characteristics, 119-32;
convergent evolution invoked for, 133-34;
Darwin’s argument on similar anatomical
structure of distinct organisms, 99/ig-101;
Darwin’s evolutionary, 3-5, 41-42/ig; examin-
ing possibility of Precambrian and Cambrian,
117-32; iconic image and representation of
Darwin’s, 114-17; lack of convergent evidence
supporting, 135; statistical paleontology
analysis failure to support, 69-71. See also
Cambrian phyla (animal groups); evolutionary
biology; universal common ancestry
Anomalocaris fossils, 38-39fig, 53, 60, 62
Antennapedia mutant, 318—19fig
Archives ofNatural History journal, 114
Aris-Brosou, Stephane, 106
Arkarua fossil, 89fg, 90
arthropods: exoskeleton of, 60-61; onychophorans
once proposed as ancestors of, 60
Arthur, Wallace, 275, 312
artifact hypothesis: contemporary versions
of, 57-62, 105; other versions of the, 56-57;
statistical paleontology failure to support,
69-71; Walcott’s conception of, 46-47, 49, 52,
55, 56. See also Darwinian evolutionary theory;
Lipalian interval hypothesis; Walcott, Charles
Doolittle
Asher, Robert, 392, 393, 394, 397, 398
At Home in the Universe: The Search for the
Laws ofSelf-Organization and Complexity
(Kauffman), 297-98
Atkins, Peter, 115
Atlantic Monthly, 11

Index
489
ATP, 280
Axe, Douglas, 185, \86fig-89, 191-95, 196,
198-200, 202-8, 226, 229, 235, 250-51, 253,
254, 327-28
Ayala, Francisco, 107
Babcock, Loren, 83
Bateson, William, 18, 237
Behe, Michael, 184, 240, 241fig, 242-43,
244-49, 253
Bengtson, Stefan, 90-91, 92
Berlinski, David, 362
bilaterian phyla: Coelomata hypothesis on three
classifications of, 122, 123fig, 124; Ecdysozoa
hypothesis on three classifications of, 122—
23fig, 124; Vernanimalcula as possible ancestor
of, 89, 90, 9\fig-96. See also animal phyla
Biological Society of Washington, 384-85
Biological Theory (journal), 125
Birket-Smith, Sven Jorgen, 82
Blanco, Francisco, 197
blended inheritance theory, 156-57
The Blind Watchmaker (Dawkins), 176, 185-86
body plans: dGRNs (developmental gene
regulatory networks) role in, 264-69, 285,
319-20, 363-66; DNA epigenetic information
required for animal development and, 271-87;
embryonic lethals and early-acting mutations,
259-64; Heidelberg screens experiments on
Drosophila melanogaster (fruit flies), 255-57;
Kauffman on self-organizational process of,
295; neo-Darwinian failure to explain genera-
tion of new genes and proteins for, 257; self-
organizational to explain origin of, 300-302.
See also animal development; genetic mutations
Bottjer, David J., 90, 91-92
bottom-up pattern: Burgess Shale’s top-down
pattern contradicting Darwin’s, 39-44; Cam-
brian top-down pattern contradicting punctu-
ated equilibrium’s, 142-44/zg ; Chengjiang
fauna fossil top-down pattern contradicting
Darwin’s, 74-76; neo-Darwinism’s, 144/ig,
145-46, 371. See also top-down pattern
Bowring, Samuel, 73
Brachiopod internal anatomy fossil, 8/zg, 10
brachiopods, 8, 10, 59-61
Bradley, Walter, 341
Brenner, Sidney, 187, 275-76
Britten, Roy, 265
Bromham, Lindell, 106
Budd, Graham, 85, 90-91, 96, 291
Burgess Shale Geoscience Foundation, 405
Burgess Shale site (Canada): Anomalocaris
fossils of, 53, 60, 62; artifact hypothesis used
to explain, 46-47, 49, 52, 55, 56, 105; author’s
hike with son up to, 404-8, 412-13; Cambrian
explosion features challenging Darwinism,
34-44; Cambrian period diversity preserved at,
44-46; discovery of, 26, 27fig-28\ Hallucige-
nia sparsa fossils of, 29, 30/zg, 38, 53; lumping
classification approach to, 47-48, 55; Marrella
splendens fossils of, 29, 30fig, 38, 48, 53, 60,
62; Nectocaris fossils of, 53, 54fig; Opabinia
fossils of, 36, 37fig, 38, 52-53; seafloor fossils
of, 54-56; soft-bodied representatives found at.
61-62; top-down pattern evidenced at, 39-44;
trilobite fossil found at, 405fig; variety of fossils
found at the, 28-34; Whittington’s analysis of,
52-54fig-, Wiwaxia fossils of, 53, 62. See also
Cambrian period fossils; fossil record; Walcott,
Charles Doolittle
Caenorhabditis elegans, 258, 267
Cambrian explosion: Chengjiang fauna fossils
from, 62-64, 65fig, 73-76; Darwin’s growing
anomaly and failure to explain, 8/ig-10, 13-17,
18-24fig, 34-44, 50-52, 69, 71-76, 286-87;
deep-divergence hypothesis explanation for
the, 100, 101-13; evidence redefining the
narrow geological time of, 72fig-74; examining
the deep-divergence hypothesis used to dis-
pute, 100, 101-13; features of, 34-44; firestorm
around Smithsonian’s NMNH journal article
on, 209-11; fossils establishing a “fuse” for,
78; how Axe’s experiments bear on problems
for neo-Darwinian explanations of, 205-7;
intelligent design applied to, 351-52, 353-81;
Kauffman’s self-organizational proposal on,
299-300; neo-Darwinism’s failure to explain,
257, 286-87; new genetic information aris-
ing during, 161-64; serious and important
questions raised by the, 411-13; statistical
paleontology on pattern of, 69-71; theory of
punctuated equilibrium attempt to provide ex-
planation of, 137-52; the tree of life and, 12-13;
understood in context of engineering animal
development, 270; Walcott’s Burgess Shale’s
fossil record of, 31, 33-34. See also Cambrian
phyla (animal groups)
The Cambrian Explosion (Valentine and
Erwin), 69
Cambrian explosion features: completely novel
animal forms, 34, 38-39'fig; radical differences
before more minor, small-scale diversification,
34, 39-44; sudden appearance and missing
intermediates, 34-38
Cambrian explosion mystery: as acknowledged by
Darwin, 23; as noted by Agassiz, 17, 24; as made
more acute by Burgess fauna, 34-44; as made
more acute by Chinese fossils, 62- 69, 74-76;
Cambrian information explosion providing
evidence on, 161-64, 358-63; considering intel-
ligent design as solution to, 378-81; dGRNs
(developmental gene regulatory networks) role
in solving the, 363-66; distinctive features of
design evidence in, 380fig; examining evidence
of design, 351-52; looking for evidence of
design in the fossil record, 371-78; organismal
and informational context considered in the,
366-71; profile of the suspect in, 354-56; profil-
ing a cause of the, 356-58; stasis or persistent
morphological isolation evidence, 375-78; top-
down pattern of fossil evidence, 39-44, 74-76,
142-44fig, 371-73, 374fig, 375
The Cambrian Fossils of Chengjiang, China
(Hou), 63
Cambrian information explosion, 161-64, 358-63
Cambrian period fossils: Agassiz’s challenge to
Darwin using record of, 8/zg-10, 17, 18-24/ig,
69; Chengjiang discoveries (China), 62-64,

490
Index
Cambrian period fossils (continued)
65fig, 71-76; Darwin’s Cambrian dilemma
display (Sam Noble Science Museum) on,
96-97; Darwins Dilemma documentary
challenging Darwin’s theory based on, 77-79;
Darwin’s explanation for discontinuity of,
6, 17-18, 23-24; Darwin’s theory challenged
by evidence of, 6-17; discontinuity evidence
found in Wales, 13-14; examining the deep-
divergence hypothesis to explain discontinuity
of, 100, 101—13; looking for evidence of design
in the, 371-78; punctuated equilibrium’s
bottom-down pattern contradicted by top-
down pattern of, H2-44fig; stasis or persistent
morphological isolation evidence in, 375-78;
top-down pattern of, 39-44, 74-76, \42-44fig,
371-73, 374fig, 375. See also Burgess Shale site
(Canada); fossil record
Cambrian phyla (animal groups): Brachiopod
internal anatomy fossil, 8fig, 10; chart showing
representatives of, 32fig-, diagrams representing,
24fig; Ediacaran Hills exotic fossils as possible
ancestors to, 88-92; examining the possibility
of tree of, 117-32; fossil record showing soft and
hard body parts, 57-62, 105; how Axe’s experi-
ments bear on problems for neo-Darwinian
explanations of, 205-7; “morphological space”
between, 70-71; representatives of, 33fig; soft-
bodied representatives, 59-60, 105; statistical
paleontology casting doubt on Darwin’s tree
of life, 69—71; Trilobite anatomy fossil, 9fig,
10. See also animal phyla; animal tree of life;
Cambrian explosion
Cambrian radiation duration, 88
Cambrian strata: Agassiz’s challenge to Darwin
using lack of fossil evidence, 8/zg-10, 17,
\S-24fig, 69; Darwin’s explanation for disconti-
nuity evidence in, 6, 17-18, 23-24; discontinu-
ity evidence found in Wales, 13-14; geological
time of Cambrian explosion evidenced in,
72fig-74 ; radiometric dating of zircon crystals
in Siberia, 71-72 fig
Carroll, Sean B., 84, 120, 121, 312, 314, 317, 368
causal adequacy: criteria of, 348; only known
cause issue of, 349-51; problem of retrodiction
in testing, 349, 350fig; Signature in the Cell pro-
posed explanations for biological information,
359-60; vera causa (true cause) principle of,
216-17, 309-10. See also abductive inference
CD-ROM technology, 378
cell differentiation: description of, 258-59;
epigenetic information role in, 276-77; self-
organization models on, 294-95, 297-99;
theory gene regulation for higher cells for,
265-68
cells: biological complexity scale as measure in
different organism, 162fig; cytoskeletons of
eukaryotic, 277-79; daughter, 258, 278; dGRNs
(developmental gene regulatory networks)
influencing development of, 264-69, 285,
319-20, 363-66; DNA minimally required
for complex single-celled organisms, 163;
epigenetic information in patterns of proteins
in cell membranes, 279-81, 305; epigenesis
germ-cell mode, 129fg, 130fig-, primordial germ
cells (PGCs), 127, 129fig; studies on ontogeny
process of, 258-59; theory of gene regulation
for higher cells, 265-68
Chamberlain, Thomas, 346
change hypothesis, 201-2
Charlesworth, Brian, 149
Charnia fossil, 80fig, 81, 82, 88
Chen, J. Y., 50, 51 fig, 52, 59, 61, 63, 66, 67, 72, 76, 406
Chengjiang discoveries (China): Cambrian
conundrum of the, 71-74; Cambrian explosion
fossils from fauna of, 62-64, 65fig, 73—76; story
of the discovery, 50-52; top-down pattern
observed at, 74-76
Chesterton, G. K., 382, 385
Cheungkongella ancestralis, 75
Chien, Paul, 64, 66-67, 88, 406
chloroquine complexity cluster (CCC), 247-48
choanoflagellates, 161-62
Christian theology, 410-13
Chronicle ofHigher Education, 210
ds-regulatory elements (CREs), 316, 317
Coelomata hypothesis, 122, 123fig, 124
Collins, Francis, 410, 411, 412
combinatorial inflation problem, 173 -74fig, 181fig
combinatorics: used to calculate DNA mutations,
172-83; description of, 172; looking for the
functional sequences solution, 178-79; problem
of combinatorial inflation, 173-74fig, 181/zg
competition for survival, 10-11
Complex Adaptations in Evolving Populations
(Frazzetta), 232
Comte, August, 19-20
conditional probability, 201
convergent evolution, 133-34
Conway Morris, Simon, 75, 113, 291, 357
Cooper, Alan, 84
co-option model of protein evolution, 249-54
coordinated mutations: chloroquine complexity
cluster (CCC), 247-49; complex adaptations
explained by, 237-41; co-option model of
protein evolution, 249-54
Coyne, Jerry, 100, 115, 116, 124, 317
“creationist” label, 401
creative intelligence, 100
Crick, Francis, 159, 160fig, 166, 168, 187, 236, 339,
385, 400
Current Biology, 291
Cuvier, Georges, 19
cytoskeletons, 277-79
Darwin, Charles: countering Paley’s watch-to-
watchmaker design argument, 37-38; explana-
tion for discontinuity found in fossil record, 6,
17-18, 23-24, 379, 381; Galapagos Islands trip
by, 21; growing anomaly and failure to explain
Cambrian explosion, 8fig-l0, 13-17, 18-24fig,
34-44, 50-52, 69, 71-76, 286-87; Lyell’s influ-
ence on, 348-49; on natural selection requiring
favorable variations, 264; photograph of, 7fig',
ten children of, 118; uniformitarian method
used by, 391-92, 393. See also On the Origin of
Species (Darwin)
Darwin, Emma, 118
Darwin and Modern Science (Bateson), 237
“Darwinian Alchemy: Human Genes from Non-
coding RNA”
(Genome Research), 220

Index
491
Darwinian evolutionary theory: Agassiz’s chal-
lenge to the, 8%-10, 13-17, 18-24%, 69, 379,
381; apparent design suggested by, 338-40;
Burgess Shale’s Cambrian explosion features
challenging the, 34-44; China’s Chengjiang
fossils challenging the, 50-52, 71-76; compar-
ing neo-Darwinism with, 104; comparing
punctuated equilibrium’s tree of life with
traditional one of, 141 fig; Darwin’s Dilemma
documentary challenging, 77-78, 96; Darwin’s
explanation for discontinuity issue of, 6, 17-18,
23-24, 99; discontinuity of fossil record chal-
lenge to, 8%-10, 13-17, 18-24jig, 69, 101, 379,
381; growing anomaly and failure to explain
Cambrian explosion, 8%-10, 13-17, 18-24%,
34-44, 50-52, 69, 71-76, 286-87; introduc-
ing natural selection idea of, 3, 5-6, 10-11;
introducing universal common ancestry idea
of, 3-5, 12-13, 36fig, 41-42fig'. Lamarckian
mechanisms role in, 329-30; theory of blended
inheritance favored by, 155-57; Whittington’s
analysis challenging Walcott’s solution for,
52-54. See also artifact hypothesis; evolution-
ary biology; neo-Darwinism
Darwin’s Cambrian dilemma display (Sam Noble
Science Museum), 96-97
Darwin’s Dilemma (documentary film), 77-79, 96
daughter cells, 258, 278
Davidson, Eric, 57, 265, 267, 269, 270, 319-20, 355,
357, 363-64
Dawkins, Richard, 40-41, 98, 115, 117, 124, 148,
176, 185-86, 207, 339, 358-59, 361, 392, 409, 411
Dawkins’ Shakespearean “Methinks it is like a
weasel” phrase experiment, 185-86
deductive argument, 343-44
deep -divergence hypothesis: common descent
of all animal forms assumption of, 110-11;
description of the, 100, 101; fossil record bring-
ing reasonable doubt to, 105; gene sequencing
studies bringing reasonable doubt to, 105-8;
molecular clock analysis used in, 102%-3, 121;
questionable assumptions of, 109-10; “shmoo-
like” catch-22 of the, 111-13; Wray study
(1990s) argument for, 103-4
degree of difference: deep-divergence explanation
on missing fossils, 100, 101; description and
assumptions about, 100; Wray study (1990s) on
the, 103-4. See also universal common ancestry
demarcation: arguments against intelligent design
using, 389-90; criteria of, 386-87; general
problem of, 387-89
“The Demise of the Demarcation Problem”
(Laudan), 388
de novo origination, 213%, 217, 219-21
Denton, Michael, 178, 179, 180
design: CD-ROM technology, 378; distinctive
hallmarks of, 380% ; looking for evidence of
Cambrian explosion, 351-52, 371-78. See also
intelligent design
developmental genetic toolkit, 300-305
Devonian period fossils, 14
dGRNs (developmental gene regulatory net-
works): as Cambrian explosion evidence,
363-66; Davidson’s findings on principle of
constraints in building, 268; as dependent
on preexisting cell structures, 825; difficulty
to alter without damaging regulation ability,
319-20; principle of constraints for engineer-
ing new, 268-69; research being conducted on,
264-68; Strongylocentrotus purpuratus (purple
sea urchin), 266%, 267-68
Dickinsonia fossil, 80%, 81, 82, 83, 86, 88
Dill, Ken, 183
discontinuity of fossil record: Agassiz’s challenge
to Darwin’s theory using, 8%-10, 13-17, 18-
24fig, 69, 379, 381; of Cambrian period fossils
in Wales, 13-14; Darwin’s explanation for, 6,
17-18, 23-24, 99; deep-divergence hypothesis
to explain, 101. See also fossil record
Discovery Institute, 50
Distal-less Hox gene), 321
DNA: Axe’s experiments on protein natural
selection and, 187-200, 202-8; Cambrian
explosion of new genetic information, 161-64;
combinatorics used to calculate mutations in,
172-83; complexity characterizing informa-
tion in, 306-9; Crick’s sequence hypothesis on,
159, 169, 177; de novo origin of new genes in
Drosophila melanogaster from noncoding, 220-
21; double helix structure of, 159; ENCODE
project study of genome and, 400-402;
functional information contained in, 164, 168,
178-84, 187-200, 202-8, 274-75; information
and genetic variations of, 159-61%; junk, 402;
mechanisms for generating gene duplicates
in, 198-200; minimally required for complex
single-celled organisms, 163; model show-
ing nucleotide bases along sugar-phosphate
molecule, 161fig; natural genetic engineering
understanding of, 332-35; neo-Lamarckian
theory on, 330-32; organismal form and func-
tion determined by, 274-75; Shannon informa-
tion contained in, 164-68, 274, 275. See also
epigenetic information; gene sequences; gene
sequencing; genetic mutations
Doushantuo Phosphorite formation (Maotianshan
Shale), 64, 66-68,90
Dover, Kitzmiller v., 211, 221
Drosophila melanogaster (fruit flies): base pairs
of the, 163; de novo origin of genes from non-
coding DNA, 220-21; epigenetic informa-
tion role in embryo development in, 279-80;
examples of deleterious macromutations of,
260, 261%; germ-cell formation in, 129'fig;
Heidelberg screens experiment on, 255-57;
Hox genes causing fatal mutations in, 318-19;
“morphogens” influencing embryological de-
velopment in, 260-61; ontogeny studies using
model system of, 258; study of a gene that codes
for histone protein in, 222; Ultrabithorax gene
in, 261-62. See also morphological change
Drosophila simulans, 222
Dupree, A. Hunter, 19
Durrett, Rick, 249, 253
dynamical patterning modules (DPMs), 301%-2,
303-4
Easter Island “Moais,” 396%
Ecdysozoa hypothesis, 122-23fig, 124
Eden, Murray, 169-70% 171, 175, 176, 177, 178,
179, 183, 186

492
Index
The Edge ofEvolution (Behe), 242, 247, 249
Ediacaran Hills site (Australia): debate over
Vernanimalcula fossil of, 89, 90, 9\fig-96;
Ediacaran fauna and Vendian radiation, 79-81;
evidence of mini-explosion of organisms, 78,
86-88; exotic fossils as plausible ancestors to
Cambrian animal forms, 88-92; significance of
findings of, 81-86; trace fossils of, 81, 85-86
Ediacaran period, 79
Ehrlich, Paul, 234
Eldonia fossils, 64
Eldredge, Niles, 293, 314; photograph of, 137'fig-,
theory of punctuated equilibrium contribu-
tions by, 136-52
Elsberry, Wesley R., 210-11, 221
embryos: Chengjiang embryo sponge fossils,
66-68, 67/ig; dGRNs (developmental gene
regulatory networks) role in development of,
264-69, 285, 319-20, 363-66; early-acting
body-plan mutations in, 259-64; epigenetic
information role in development of, 279-80;
how microtubules influence development
of, 277-79; Kauffman on genes generating
“pathways of differentiation” in, 294-95; role of
genes and proteins in development of, 258-59;
studies indicating the DNA is required to com-
plete development of, 271-72. See also animal
development
ENCODE project, 400-402
epigenesis germ-cell mode, 129/zg, 130/ig
epigenetic information: cell differentiation role
of, 276-77; challenge posed to neo-Darwinism
by, 281-82; chemically blocking transcription
of DNA into RNA, 271; cytoskeleton, 277-79;
description and function of, 275-77; early
experiments revealing, 271-72; hierarchical
organization of, 364-66; issues to consider for
inheritance of, 286; making the case against
“gene-centric” using, 282-84; mutations of,
285-86; order vs. complexity of, 305-9; Origi-
nation of Organismal Form essays on, 272-73;
in patterns of proteins in cell membranes,
279-81, 305; self-organization models on,
295-97; sugar molecule, 280-81, 282-83. See
also DNA; genetic information; information
Erwin, Douglas, 41, 69, 73, 81, 83-84, 104, 106,
107, 109, 110, 124, 143-44, 151, 292, 319,
354-55fg, 356, 357
ethyl methane sulphonate (EMS), 255
eukaryotic organisms: choanoflagellates, 161-62;
cytoskeletons of, 277-79; spliceosomes of,
323-24; transposons (“jumping genes”)
of, 219
“Evidence for a Clade of Nematodes, Arthro-
pods and Other Moulting Animals”
(Nature
journal), 122-23
evo-devo theory, 314-15, 316
Evolution and Belief (Asher), 392
“Evolution and the Permanence of Type”
(Agassiz), 11
evolutionary biology: Altenberg 16 exploring the
future of, 291-92, 293, 313; Darwin’s argument
on similar anatomical structure of distinct
organisms, 99/ig-101; degree of difference con-
cept of, 100, 101; evo-devo theory of, 314-15,
316; forensic nature of, 98-99; homology
concept of, 100; how new models deviate from
neo-Darwinism, 313/ig-35; impasse reached
by modern, 337; natural genetic engineering,
332-35; neo-Lamarckism, 329-32; neutral
or nonadaptive evolutionary theory, 321-29;
“phylogenetically informative” data chosen
or cherry picked by, 108; self-organizational
theories, 293-310; sequencing DNA to recon-
struct evolutionary relationships of species,
100-101; theory of punctuated equilibrium of,
137-52. See also animal tree of life; Darwinian
evolutionary theory; neo-Darwinism; science
Evolution journal, 317
exon shuffling, 213fig, 217, 218, 219, 223-27
Explore Evolution, 315-17
Extavour, Cassandra, 129
fauna: Chengjiang evidence of Cambrian explo-
sion, 62-64, 65fig, 71-76; Ediacaran Hills site
of Precambrian, 79-81, 80/zg-86; Ediacaran
mini-explosion of organisms and, 78, 86-88;
top-down pattern of Chengjiang, 74-76
Fedonkin, Mikhail, 81
Fersht, Alan, 187, 192
Fisher, R. A., 260
Foote, Michael, 69-70, 145, 146
Fortey, Richard, 84
fossil record: chart showing when representa-
tives of animal phyla appear in, 32/zg; deep-
divergence explanation for fossils missing
from, 100, 101; deep-divergence hypothesis
challenged by gene sequencing and, 105-13;
Ediacaran Hills site (Australia), 78-92; geologi-
cal timescale, 15, 16fig; Hox genes in the, 318;
Ordovician period, 14fig-. Paleozoic period, 14;
theory of punctuated equilibrium (“punk eek”)
problem with, 142-45; Triassic period, 14. See
also Burgess Shale site (Canada); Cambrian
period fossils; discontinuity of fossil record;
Precambrian-Cambrian fossil record
fossil succession phenomenon, 15-17
Franklin, Harold, 275
Frazzetta, Tom, 230-31, 232-33, 234, 235, 237
fruit flies. See Drosophila melanogaster
functional information: amino-acid sequences
ratio of nonfunctional to, 178-79; Axe’s
experiments on protein natural selection and,
187-200, 202-8; description of, 164, 168; DNA
inclusion of, 274-75; genes under selection
pressure and, 19 7fig; Sauer’s experiments on
amino-acid sequence, 180-84, 187-89, 192-94;
technologies to calculate, 180-83. See also gene
sequences; genetic information; information
Fuxianhuia protensa arthropods, 60
Gabius, Hans-Joachim, 281
Galapagos Islands, 21
Gates, Bill, 359
Gauger, Ann, 226, 250/ig-51, 253
Gegenbauer, Carl, 21
gene duplication, 213fig, 217, 218, 219
gene expression: Hox genes coordination in, 285,
287, 314-15, 314-21; TFs (transcription factors)
role in, 258-59; theory of gene regulation for

Index
493
higher cells, 265-68; TRs (transcriptional regu-
lators) role in, 258-59
gene fission/fusion, 213fig, 217, 219
genes: animal development and role of proteins
and, 258-59; dGRNs (developmental gene
regulatory networks), 264-69, 285, 319-20,
363-66; different structures when used in
different animals, 367/zg; homeotic
(Hox), 285,
287, 314-15; Longs inferred common ancestral,
214-15; mutational mechanisms of, 213fig,
216-19; neo-Darwinian failure to explain
generation of new, 257; ORFans, 215-16; organ-
ismal and informational context consideration
of, 363-71
gene sequences: Axe’s experiments on pro-
tein natural selection and, 187-200, 202-8;
combinatorics to calculate possible mutations,
172-83; depiction of how gene duplication
and subsequent gene evolution may occur,
214fig; importance of protein folds in, 189-92;
Long’s inferred common ancestral, 214-15;
mechanisms for DNA generating duplicate,
198-200; problem of combinatorial inflation,
173 -74fig, ISlfig; “purifying selection” of, 195;
under selection pressure, 197/ig. See also DNA;
functional information
gene sequencing: deep-divergence hypothesis
challenged by fossil record and, 105-13; deep-
divergence hypothesis examined by, 100, 101,
103-4; molecular clock analysis of, \02fig-3,
121; questionable assumptions of, 109-10. See
also DNA
genetic information: arguments against a
“gene-centric” view of, 282-84; connecting
process control and regulation over, 186-87;
depiction of how gene duplication and
subsequent gene evolution may occur, 2\4fig;
difficulty of explaining the origin of complex
adaptations to, 237-39; errors in hypothetical
scenarios for origins or mutations of, 211-14;
exon shuffling hypothesis on creating, 2\3fig,
217, 218, 219, 223-27; hierarchical organiza-
tion of, 364-66; mutational mechanisms
assuming preexisting, 213fig, 216-27;
population genetics and the origin of, 235-37;
scientific debate over origins of new, 209-11;
self-organization models on, 297-99; “word
salad” explanations for, 227-29. See also
animal development; epigenetic information;
functional information
genetic mutations: Antennapedia, 318—19fig;
argument that new proteins require multiple
improbable, 244-47; attempt to reconcile
Darwinian theory with Mendelian genetics,
158-59; Axe’s experiments on protein natural
selection and, 187-200, 202-8; ds-regulatory
elements (CREs) theory of, 316-17; combi-
natorics used to calculate, 172-83; co-option
model of protein evolution, 249-54; coordi-
nated chloroquine complexity cluster (CCC),
247-49; difficulty of explaining the origin of
complex adaptations, 237-39; DNA genetic
variation and, 159-61; embryonic lethals and
early-acting body-plan, 259-64; epigenetic
information, 285-86; exploring the process
of, 169-70; the “great Darwinian paradox”
of, 262, 315, 317; Hox genes considered in,
317-21; insect wing coloration, 3\6fig, 317;
looking for the functional sequences solution,
178-79; multiple coordinated mutations
required for complex adaptations, 240-41;
mutational mechanisms of gene, 213fig, 216—
21; population genetics models to explain,
233-44/zg; responses to Sauer’s experiments
on amino-acid sequences, 180-84, 187-89,
192-94; “sweet spot” for, 246fig-, various types
due to different mechanisms, 213fig-, “waiting
times” for, 240-42, 327-29; Wistar Institute
conference (1966) on mechanisms of, 170-77,
187; “word salad” explanations for, 227-29;
X-ray-induced, 157-58. See also animal
development; body plans; DNA; natural
selection; traits
Genome Biology journal, 400
Genome Research journal, 220, 400
genomes: ENCODE project study of, 400-402;
Heidelberg screens experiments of, 255-
57fig; transposons (“jumping genes”) of
eukaryotic, 219
geologic timescale, 15, 16fig
Gerhart, John, 292
germ-cell formation modes: epigenesis, 129/zg,
130/zg; overview of, 127, 129; preformation,
\29fig, 130fig
Gettysburg Address (Lincoln), 368-69fig, 370
Gilbert, Scott, 287, 314
Gillespie, Neal, 21
Gishlick, Alan, 210-11, 221
Glaessner, Martin, 82-83
The God Delusion (Dawkins), 409, 411
God Is Not Great (Hitchens), 409
“God of the Gaps” objection, 392
Goldschmidt, Richard, 311
Gompel, Nicolas, 317
Goodwin, Brian, 275
Gould, Stephen Jay, 15-16, 28-29, 39, 48, 54, 57,
231, 293, 311, 312, 314, 344, 368; photograph
of, 137fig; theory of punctuated equilibrium
contributions by, 136-52
Graur, Dan, 107
Gray, Asa, 18
“great Darwinian paradox,” 262, 315, 317
Gross, Paul, 211
Haeckel, Ernst, 4, 18
Haikouella lanceolata, 74
Haikouichthys ercaicunensis, 75fig
Hallucigenia sparsa fossils, 29, 30fig, 38, 53
Harvey, Ethel, 271
Hedges, S. Blair, 106
Heidelberg screens experiments, 255-57fig
Hennig, Willi, 44
heritability of variations, 10
histones, 107-8
Hitchens, Christopher, 409
Hoekstra, Hopi, 317
Holland, Peter, 132
Holm, Richard, 234
Hood, Leroy, 359
Hooker, Joseph, 18
Hou, Xian-Guang, 62-63

494
Index
Hox genes: considering mutation role of, 317-21;
Distal-less, 321; evo-devo theorists on, 314-15;
in the fossil record, 318; possible harmful
effects of, 318-19; regulatory function of, 285,
287, 318
Huxley, Julian, 158-59
Huxley, T. H., 18, 158
hydrophobic core, 192
Hyman, Libbie, 122
hypotheses: abductive inference basis for develop-
ing, 343-45; method of multiple competing,
346-49; problem of retrodiction in testing, 349,
350/zg. See also specific hypothesis', vera causa
(true cause) principle
inductive argument, 343, 344
information: hierarchical layering or arrangement
of, 276fig; self-organization issue of order vs.,
305-9; Shannon information theory, 164-68,
274. See also epigenetic information; functional
information
insect wing coloration mutations, 316fig, 317
intelligent design: abductive inference arguments
for, 344-45; applied to Cambrian explosion,
351-52, 353-81; theological implications of,
410-13; author’s story on examining, 340-43;
commonalities with neo-Darwinism, 392;
Cambrian explosion mystery solution, 378-81;
attempt to define as unscientific by AAAS, 385;
demarcation arguments against, 389-90; dis-
tinctive features of Cambrian explosion design
evidence for, 380fig; early arguments support-
ing, 338-40; firestorm around Smithsonian’s
NMNH journal article on, 209-11; introducing,
337-40; New Atheists attacks against, 409-10,
412; answers to new objections to scientific
status of, 392-98; reasons to regard as scientific
theory, 391-92; arbitrary “rules of science”
over seeking truth of, 398-400; Sternberg case
controversy over, 384-85; what is at stake for
honest consideration of, 404-13. See also design
intermediate animal life forms: lack of Cambrian
explosion evidence for, 34-38; “morphological
space” between, 70-71; statistical paleontology
failing to find evidence of, 69-71; Wray study
(1990s) explanation for missing, 103-4. See also
animal phyla; universal common ancestry
“Interpreting Great Developmental Experiments:
The Fossil Record” (Erwin and Valentine), 143
“The Invisible Man” (Chesterton), 382-83
Jablonka, Eva, 330, 331-32
Jablonski, David, 83-84, 106, 107, 109, 110, 124
James, William, 20-21
Jensen, Soren, 85, 96
John, Bernard, 259
Jones, Judge John E., 211
Journal ofMolecular Biology, 209
Jukes, Thomas, 173
junk DNA, 402
Kauffman, Stuart, 293-300, 305, 309, 310
Kendrew, John, 187
Kimberella mollusk, 81, 82, 86
King, Jack, 173
Kirschner, Marc, 292
Kitzmiller v. Dover, 21 1, 221
Knoll, Andrew, 84, 104
Kumar, Sudhir, 106
Kiippers, Bernd-Olaf, 361
Kuziora, Michael, 318
Laboratory for Molecular Biology (LMB), 187
Lamarckism, mechanisms of, 329-30
Lande, Russell, 149
The Language ofGod (Collins), 410, 411
lateral gene transfer, 213/zg, 217, 218, 219
Laudan, Larry, 388
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 387
Levinton, Jeffrey S., 57, 103, 148-49
Lewin, Roger, 41
Lewontin, Richard, 171, 339, 386
LexA (DNA-binding protein), 333
Li, Wen-Hsiung, 240-41
Lincoln, Abraham, 368-69/zg, 370
Lipalian interval hypothesis, 46. See also artifact
hypothesis
Lipton, Peter, 348
Long, Manyuan, 211, 214, 216, 220, 221-23, 226
Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth, 18
lumping classification approach, 47-48, 55
Lurie, Edward, 18, 19, 21, 22
Lyell, Charles, 348-49, 392
Lynch, Michael, 321-29
macromutations: description of, 11;
Goldschmidt’s argument for, 311; Gould’s
argument for, 311, 312; neo-Darwinist rejec-
tion of, 312
magnetic seafloor stripe pattern explanation,
346-48
Maley, Laura, 124
Mangold, Hilda, 271, 273, 275
Maotianshan Shale site (China): Cambrian explo-
sion fossils from fauna of, 62-64, 65fig, 73-76;
discovery of the, 50-52; Doushantuo Phos-
phorite formation of, 64, 66-68, 90; top-down
pattern observed at, 74-75
Maresca, Bruno, 125
Marrella splendens fossils, 29, 30fig, 38, 48, 53,
60, 62
Marshall, Charles R., 57-58, 124
Martin, William, 107
materialistic causes, 394
“Mathematical Challenges to the Neo-Darwinian
Interpretation of Evolution” conference (1966),
170-77, 187
Matzke, Nicholas, 210-11, 221
Maynard Smith, John, 237-39, 240
Mayr, Ernst, 171, 339
McDiarmid, Roy, 384
McDonald, John F., 262, 315
McGinnis, William, 318
McMenamin, Dianna, 68
McMenamin, Mark, 68, 83
McNiven, Mark, 284
Medawar, Sir Peter, 171

Index
495
Mendel, Gregor, 156-57, 236
Mendelian genetics, 156-59
“A Merciful Death for the ‘Earliest Bilaterian,’
Vernanimalcula ” (Bengtson and colleagues),
91-92
Metazoan canonical tree, 126-27, 128fig
Metazoan phyla, 104, 107
method of multiple working hypotheses, 346-49
methodological naturalism, 19-20, 384-86
Meyer, Jamie, 404-8, 406fig, 412-13
Meyer, Stephen C.: anti-uniformitarianism of,
393; hiking up to Burgess Shale, 404-8, 412-13;
his story on examining intelligent design,
340-43; photograph with son, 406fig; Signature
in the Cell by, 359-60, 389, 391, 392, 402
“Meyer’s Hopeless Monster” (Gishlick, Matzke,
and Elsberry), 210-11
microtubule associated proteins (MAPs), 282-84
microtubules, 277-79
Miklos, George, 259, 287
Miller, Kenneth, 211, 221
Molecular Biology and Evolution journal, 109
molecular clock analysis, \02fig-3, 121
“Molecular Evidence for Deep Precambrian
Divergences Among Metazoan Phyla” (Wary,
Levinton, and Shapiro), 103-4
Molecular Evolution (Li), 240-41
molecular homologies studies, 121-25
Moran, Laurence A., 401
Morgan, T. H., 259-60
morphological change: Cambrian fossil record
showing persistent morphological isolation,
375-78; Darwin’s theory of descent with,
99-100; Explore Evolution textbook discussion
of, 315-16; “morphogens” molecules critical
for, 260-61; neo-Darwinian evolutionary
estimates on, 87-88; pentadactyl limb five-digit
pattern example of, 99'fig; statistical paleontol-
ogy failure to fill missing “space” of, 70. See also
Drosophila melanogaster (fruit flies)
morphological space, statistical paleontology
failure to fill, 70
Muller, Gerd, 272
Muller, Hermann, 157-58
Murchison, Roderick Impey, 13
mutations. See genetic mutations
The Mystery of Life’s Origin (Thaxton, Olsen, and
Bradley), 341
National Center for Science Education (NCSE),
315-17
National Museum of Natural History (NMNH)
[Smithsonian Institution], 209-11, 384
natural genetic engineering, 332-35
“natural magic,” 309-10
natural selection: Axe’s conclusion that protein
folds are preserved by, 199-200, 202-8; Axe’s
experiments on protein mutation and, 187-200,
202-8; Cambrian fossil evidence challenging
idea of, 8^-10, 18-24/ig; Darwin on favorable
variations required for, 264; Darwin’s theory of
evolution on, 3; Dawkins’ Shakespearean “Me-
thinks it is like a weasel” phrase experiment on,
185-86; description of process of, 5-6; DNA
genetic variation and, 159—61 fig; three discrete
elements driving, 10-11; as understood by neo-
Darwinism, 194. See also genetic mutations
Nature journal, 122, 125, 210, 400, 402-3
Nature Reviews Genetics
,
211, 239
Nectocaris fossils, 53, 54fig
Nelson, Paul, 262-63fig, 317, 368-70
neo-Darwinism: apparent design arguments
offered by, 338-39; artifact hypothesis of,
46-47, 49, 52, 55-62, 69-71, 105; bottom-up
pattern of, 144/zg, 145-46, 371; challenged
posed by epigenetic information for, 281-82;
combinatorics used to calculate DNA muta-
tions, 172-73; commonalities of intelligent
design and, 392; comparing orthodox
Darwinian point of view with, 104; co-option
model of protein evolution, 249-54; estimates
on morphological change by, 87-88; examin-
ing the deep-divergence hypothesis of, 100,
101-13; failure to explain Cambrian explo-
sion by, 257, 286-87; focus on mathematical
modeling by, 230-35; how Axe’s experiments
on proteins are problematic for, 187-200,
202-8; how new evolutionary models deviate
from tenets of, 2>\?>fig, 314—35; macromuta-
tions rejected by, 312; “Mathematical Chal-
lenges to the Neo-Darwinian Interpretation
of Evolution” conference (1996) on, 170-77;
natural selection as understood by, 194; prob-
lem of anatomical peculiarities for, 230-33;
punctuated equilibrium’s bottom-up pattern
similar to, I44fig; responses to Sauer’s experi-
ment, 180-84, 187-89, 192-94; as synthesis of
Mendelian genetics with Darwinian theory,
158-59; theory of punctuated equilibrium
(“punk eek”), 137-52; three challenges posed
by animal development to, 262-64; three core
claims or pillars of, 292-93; Wells’ argument
against animal body plans being adequately
explained by, 273-74. See also Darwinian
evolutionary theory; evolutionary biology;
New Synthesis; “The Origin of New Genes:
Glimpses from the Young and Old” (Long
and colleagues)
neo-Darwinism math: population genetics models
of, 233-54; to solve problem of anatomical
peculiarities, 230-33
neo-Lamarckism, 329-32
Neoproterozic era, 110
neutral or nonadaptive evolutionary theory:
critique of, 323-26; overview of, 321-23; on
waiting times, 327-29
“New Atheism,” 409-10, 412
Newman, Stuart, 272, 275, 300-305
New Scientist journal, 119, 120
New Synthesis, 158-59. See also neo-Darwinism
Newton, Isaac, 387-88
New York Review ofBooks, 385-86
Nijhout, Fred, 275
Nikoh Naruo, 106
Niisslein-Volhard, Christiane, 255-56, 257fig, 260,
270, 315
Ohno, Susumu, 191
Olsen, Roger, 341
only known cause, 349-51

496
Index
On the Origin ofSpecies (Darwin): Agassiz’s
challenge using the fossil record, 8^zg-10, 17,
18-24^#, 69; Centennial celebration of publish-
ing, 158-59; criticism regarding accurate tree
of life goal of, 120; apparent design in living or-
ganisms argument in, 338; expressing concerns
over Cambrian period in, 7; growing anomaly
of arguments set forth in, 286-87; on Lamarck-
ian mechanisms, 330; “The Mutual Affinities of
Organic Beings” on similar anatomical struc-
tures of distinct organisms, 99/zg-100; natural
selection introduced in, 3, 5-6; uniformitar-
ian principles used in, 391-92, 393; universal
common ancestry introduced in, 3-5; vera
causa (true cause) criterion arguments made
by, 216-17. See also Darwin, Charles
ontogeny studies: on dGRNs (developmental gene
regulatory networks), 264-69, 285, 319-20,
363-66; on early-acting body-plan mutations
and embryonic lethals, 259-64; on principle
of constraints, 268-69; on role of genes and
proteins in animal development, 258-59
onychophorans (velvet worms), 60
Opabinia fossil, 36, 37fig, 38, 52-53
Opitz, John, 287
Ordivician period fossils, 14fig
The O'Reilly Factor (TV news show), 210
ORFan genes, 215-16
organismal form and function, 274-75
organisms: biological complexity scale as measure
in cell types of different, 162fig-, Cambrian
explosion fossils of, 78; Cambrian explosion of
DNA information and new, 161-64; Darwin’s
argument on similar anatomical structure of
distinct, 99/zg-101; DNA information required
for form and function of, 274-75; Ediacaran
mini-explosion of, 78, 86-88; estimated DNA
required for minimally complex single-celled,
163; eukaryotic, 161-62, 219, 277-79, 323-24;
ontogeny studies on development of embryos
into mature, 258-69. See also animal develop-
ment; animal phyla
Origination of Organismal Form: Beyond the Gene
in Developmental and Evolutionary Biology
(Muller and Newman), 272-73
“The Origin of New Genes: Glimpses from
the Young and Old” (Long and colleagues):
common ancestor gene inferred in, 211-15;
controversy over, 211; on exon shuffling, 213/zg,
217, 218, 219, 223-27; failure to explain origin
of new protein folds, 221-27; ORFans genes
unexplained by, 215-16; on plausibility of
mutational processes, 216-21. See also neo-
Darwinism
The Origins of Order: Self- Organization and Selec-
tion in Evolution (Kauffman), 293-94, 297
Orr, H. Allen, 239
Owen, Richard, 100
Paleobiology journal, 150
Paley, William, 38
parallel roads of Glen Roy, 22, 23fig
Parvancorina fossil, 89
Pauling, Linus, 121, 122, 125
Peirce, C. S., 343
pentadactyl limb five-digit pattern, 99fig
People’s Daily (Chinese Communist party news-
paper), 64
Perutz, Max, 187
Peterson, Kevin, 87, 109
Phacops rana, 136-37
phyla (animal groups). See animal phyla
phylogenetic classification: description of, 31, 33;
phylogenetic inference assumptions, 132-33;
selection of incompatible phylogenetic trees,
131fig. See also animal phyla
Pigliucci, Massimo, 330
PLoS Genetics journal, 220
Polanyi, Michael, 341
population genetics models: attempting to explain
origin of complex adaptations, 237—41; on chlo-
roquine complexity cluster (CCC) coordinated
mutations, 247-49; co-option model of protein
evolution, 249-54; description and functions
of, 233-34; the origin of genetic information
and, 235-37; Powerball lottery game used to
understand, 242-44/ig; “waiting times” calcu-
lated using, 240-42
positivism scientific approach, 20
post-Darwinian models: evo-devo theory, 314-15;
how new models deviate from tenets of neo-
Darwinism, 3l3fig> 314-35; natural genetic
engineering, 332—35; neo-Lamarckism, 329-32;
neutral or nonadaptive evolutionary theory,
321-29; self-organizational theories, 293-310
Powerball lottery game, 242-44/zg
Precambrian-Cambrian fossil record: Chengji-
ang discoveries (China), 62-64, 65fig, 71-76;
Darwin’s Dilemma documentary challenging
Darwin using the, 77-79, 96; diagram showing
representation of pattern of, 24fig; examining
possibility of tree of animal life from, 117-32;
found at the Burgess Shale site, 26, 27fig-28;
looking for evidence of design in the, 371-78;
puzzling pattern of, 34; sponge fossils, 66-68,
81; statistical paleontology failure to support
Darwin’s tree of life in, 69-71; sudden appear-
ance and missing ancestors evidence in, 373,
375; top-down disparity preceding diversity
evidence in, 371-73, 374fig, 375. See also
fossil record
Precambrian fossil record: animal phyla of, 81-92;
debate over Vernanimalcula as bilaterian
ancestor, 89, 90, 91/ig-96; Ediacaran Hills site,
79-80fig, 81-92; four main types of fossils
found in, 80-81; primitive mollusks, 81; sponge
fossils, 66-68, 81; trace fossils, 81, 85-86
primordial germ cells (PGCs), 127, 129^
The Principles of Geology (Lyell), 348
Proceedings of the Biological Society of Washington
journal, 209, 384, 385
Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences
USA, 106, 192, 316-17
process control, 186-87
protein folds: Axe’s conclusion that natural selec-
tion preserves, 199-200, 202-8; importance
in genetic information producing, 189-92;
Long’s failure to explain origin of new, 221-27;
protein tertiary structure corresponding
to, 189, 190fig; as smallest unit of structural
innovation, 191

Index
497
proteins: animal development and role of genes
and, 258-59; argument that multiple improb-
able mutations are required for new, 244-47;
Axes experiments on natural selection and
mutation of, 187-200, 202-8; combinato-
rial inflation problem applied to amino-acid,
173 -74fig, 181 fig; dynamical patterning
modules (DPMs) and role of, 304; epigenetic
information in patterns of cell membrane,
279-81, 305; Hox genes role in providing infor-
mation for building, 320; LexA (DNA-binding
protein), 333; MAPs (microtubule associated
proteins), 283-84; neo-Darwinian failure to
explain generation of new, 257; organismal and
informational context consideration of, 363-71;
responses to Sauer’s experiment on amino-
acid, 180-84, 187-89, 192-94; TFs (transcrip-
tion factors), 258-59; three levels of structure
of, 189, 190fig; TRs (transcriptional regulators),
258-59; under selection pressure, 19 7fig. See
also amino-acid sequences
Prothero, Donald, 72, 73
Prud’homme, Benjamin, 317
“punk eek.” See theory of punctuated equilibrium
(“punk eek”)
Raff, Rudolf, 287, 312, 314
random variation: competition for survival driv-
ing, 10-11; description of, 10; heritability of, 11;
macromutations form of, 11
rank-free classification scheme, 31, 43
Raymond, Percy, 52
“Reading the Entrails of Chickens: Molecular
Timescales of Evolution and the Illusion of
Precision” (Graur and Martin), 107
Reidhaar-Olson, John, 192
Retallack, Gregory, 82
retro-positioning mRNA transcripts, 213/zg, 217,
218.219
reunion hypothesis, 134-35
RNA: complexity characterizing information in,
306-9; epigenetic information role in function
of, 279-80; often treated with DNA as sole
repositories of biological information, 275;
retro-positioning mRNA transcripts, 213fig,
217.218.219
Robinson, Mabel, 18
Rodin, A. S., 362
Rokas, Antonis, 120, 121
Salisbury, Frank, 238
Sam Noble Science Museum (University of Okla-
homa), 77-78, 96-97
Sanger, Fred, 187
Sauer, Robert, 180-84, 187-89, 192-94
Schelling, Friedrich, 19, 320
Schindewolf, Otto, 311
Schmidt, Deena, 249, 253
Schopf, J. William, 58
Schuchert, Charles, 28, 48
Schutzenberger, Marcel-Paul, 171-72, 176-77
Schwartz, Jeffrey H., 125, 314, 318
science: abductive inference basis for developing
hypotheses in, 343-45; causal adequacy in,
348-51; demarcation criteria issue of, 386-90;
German idealism and cosmic philosophy
of, 18-19, 20; method of multiple competing
hypotheses in, 346-49; methodological natu-
ralism rule of, 19-20, 384-86; new objections
to intelligent design as, 392-98; positivistic
view of, 20; reasons to regard intelligent design
as, 391-92; truth over “rules” of, 398-400. See
also evolutionary biology; vera causa (true
cause) principle
Science journal, 41, 85, 120, 210, 220
Scientific American journal, 92
Scudder, Samuel, 20
Sedgwick, Adam, 13-14, 15
self-organizational models: on epigenetic infor-
mation, 295-97; failure to provide vera causa
(true cause), 309-10; on genetic information,
297-99; Kauffman proposal on the Cambrian
explosion using, 299-300; Kauffman’s system
of interconnected lights, 298-99; order vs.
information dilemma of, 305-9; origin of body
plans explained by, 300-302; overview of the,
293-95; presupposing developmental genetic
toolkit, 300-305
Sepkoski, David, 138, 150
Sepkoski, Jack, 41
sequence hypothesis, 159, 169, 177
Shannon, Claude, 164
Shannon information theory, 164-68, 274, 275
Shapiro, James, 332-35, 402
Shapiro, Leo H., 57, 103
Shu, D. G., 75
Signature in the Cell (Meyer), 359-60, 389, 391,
392, 402
Silurian period. See Cambrian period
Simpson, George Gaylord, 61
Slatkin, Montgomery, 149
Smith, Andrew, 109
Smith, William, 15
Smithsonian’s National Museum of Natural His-
tory (NMNH), 209-11, 384
Snoke, David, 240, 241, 244-47, 253
soft-bodied fossil representatives, 57-62, 105
species selection, eliminating less fit species,
147, 148
Spemann, Hans, 271, 273, 275
spliceosomes, 323-24
sponges: Chengjiang embryo fossils, 66-68, 67fig;
Ediacaran mini-explosion producing, 86-88;
morphological studies on monophyletic nature
of, 125
Spriggina fossil, 80fig, 81, 82-83, 88
St. Johnston, Daniel, 256
Stanley, Steven, 137, 141, 147, 314
statistical paleontology: casting more doubt on
artifact hypothesis, 69-71, 105; Darwin’s tree
of life inconsistency with findings of, 69-71;
theory of punctuated equilibrium questions
raised by, 145-46
Sternberg, Richard, 210, 384/ig, 385, 402
stromatolite fossils, 58fig
Strongylocentrotus purpuratus (purple sea urchin),
266fig, 267-68
The Structure ofEvolutionary Theory (Gould),
149, 150
sugar molecules, 280-81, 282-83

498
Index
Syvanen, Michael, 120
Szathmary, Eors, 320, 362
TalkReason.org, 210-11
TFs (transcription factors), 258-59
Thaxton, Charles, 341/zg-42
Theobald, Douglas, 122
theory of blended inheritance, 155-57
theory of gene regulation for higher cells, 265-68
theory of punctuated equilibrium (“punk eek”):
“allopatric speciation” process used in, 139-42;
Cambrian top-down pattern contradicting the
bottom-up pattern of, 142-43; the fossil record
problem for, 142-45; history of life depicted by
the, 141/zg; initial interest and then decline of,
149-51; origins and development of the, 137-39
Thomson, Keith Stewart, 259, 286
TIME magazine, 50
Todd, Scott, 402-3
top-down pattern: of Chengjiang fauna fossil,
74-76; found at Burgess Shale site, 39-44;
Precambrian-Cambrian fossil record, 371-73,
374fig, 375; punctuated equilibrium history of
life contradicted by Cambrian, \42-44fig. See
also bottom-up pattern
trace fossils (Ediacaran Hills site), 81, 85-86
traits: allopatric speciation allowing for rapid
fixation of preexisting, 146-47; analysis of
anatomical, 125-32; “long periods of stasis”
bringing about new, 147; Mendel’s experiments
with factors and genes for, 157; species selec-
tion eliminating undesirable, 147, 148; theory
of blended inheritance on, 155-57. See also
genetic mutations
transfer of mobile genetic units, 213fig, 217,
218-19
transistor (general purpose), 368fig
The Tree ofLife, 110
tree of life. See animal tree of life
Trends in Ecology and Evolution journal, 119
Trends in Genetics journal, 107
Triassic period fossils, 14
trilobite fossils: anatomy, 9fig, 10; Burgess Shale
site, 405/zg
TRs (transcriptional regulators), 258-59
tubulin subunits, 277-78fig
Turing, Alan, 295-96
“20+ Evidences for Macroevolution” (Theo-
bald), 122
Ulam, Stanislaw, 171, 177
Ultrabithorax gene (fruit fly), 261-62
Understanding Bioinformatics,
1 10
uniformitarian principles, 391-92, 393
universal common ancestry: Burgess Shale’s fail-
ure to support, 36fig; Cambrian explosion and
tree of life of, 12-13; conflicting gene evidence
on the timing of, 105-6; convergent evolu-
tion invoked for, 133-34; Darwin’s theory of
evolution on pattern of, 3-5; deep-divergence
hypothesis argument for, 100, 101-13; Long’s
inferred common ancestral gene of, 214-15;
molecular clock analysis argument for, 102fig-
3, 121; sequencing DNA to attempt to prove,
100-101; “shmoo-like” catch-22 of the assump-
tion of, 111-13; similar anatomical structures
evidence of, 99^-100. See also animal tree of
life; degree of difference; intermediate animal
life forms
universal metamorphism hypothesis, 57
Valentine, James, 41, 59, 69, 83-84, 90, 106,
107, 109, 110, 124, 143-44, 151, 162, 163, 292,
355-56
Vendian period, 79
vera causa (true cause) principle: causal adequacy
criteria of, 348; Darwin’s argument using crite-
rion of, 216-17; description of, 309; materialis-
tic causes compared to, 394; only known cause,
349-51; self-organization “natural magic”
versus, 309-10. See also hypotheses; science
Vernanimalcula fossil, 89, 90, 9\fig-96
Waggoner, Benjamin, 81
“Waiting for Two Mutations: With Applications
to Regulatory Sequence Evolution and the
Limits of Darwinian Evolution” (Durrett and
Schmidt), 249
waiting times: neutral or nonadaptive evolution-
ary theory on, 327-29; population genetics
models calculating, 240-42
Walcott, Charles Doolittle: Burgess Shale
discovery of, 26, 26-29, 34, 40, 48-49, 52;
lumping approach favored by, 47-48, 55; other
versions of artifact hypothesis by, 56-62, 105;
Whittington’s analysis undercutting solution
offered by, 52-54. See also artifact hypothesis;
Burgess Shale site (Canada)
“Walcott, the Burgess Shale and Rumours of a
Post-Darwinian World” (Morris), 291
Wallace, Bruce, 260
Wall Street Journal, 385
Wang, Daniel, 106
Waptia arthropods, 60, 65fig
Ward, Peter, 11
Warrawoona Group fossils (Australia), 58
watch-to-watchmaker design argument, 37-38
Watson, James, 159, I60fig, 166, 187, 236
Wegener, Alfred, 346
Wells, Jonathan, 77, 92, 273fig, 370
Whittington, Harry, 52-54
Wieschaus, Eric, 255-56, 257fig, 260, 270, 315
Willmer, Pat, 132
Wistar Institute conference (1966), 170-77, 187
Wiwaxia fossils, 53, 62
“word salad” explanations, 227-29
Wray, Gregory A., 57, 103
Yang, Ziheng, 106
Yockey, Hubert, 180-81, 308
Yunnanozoon lividum, 74-75
Zhou, Gui-Qing, 59, 61, 63
Zuckerkandl, Emile, 121, 122, 125



STEPHEN
C. MEYER
received
his Ph.D. from the University of
Cambridge in the philosophy of science after
working
as
an
oil
industry
geophysicist.
He now directs the Center for Science and
Culture at the Discovery Institute in Seattle,
Washington. He authored Signature
in the
Cell, a Times Literary Supplement (London)
Book of the Year. Meyer has appeared on all
the top national television networks, major
talk
radio programs and NPR,
as
well
as
major Christian media outlets. He has also
been featured in two New York Times front-
page stories.
HarperOne
An Imprint ofHarperCoMinsPublishers
www.harperone.com
Available from HarperCollins e-books
Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive
ir formation on your favorite HarperCollins authors.
F-ont cover design: LeVan Fisher Design
Frotit cover and spine image: iStockphoto
Author photograph: Nicolas DeSciose

THE EVIDENCE THAT DARWIN
COULD NOT EXPLAIN
“It is hard for us paleontologists, steeped as we are in a tradition of Darwinian analysis, to admit that
neo-Darwinian explanations for the Cambrian explosion have failed miserably. New data acquired
in recent years, instead of solving Darwin’s dilemma, have rather made
it worse. Meyer describes the
dimensions of the problem with clarity and precision. His book is a game changer for the study of
evolution and points us in the right direction as we seek a new theory for the origin of animals.”
DR. MARK MCMENAMIN, paleontologist at Mt. Holyoke College and coauthor of
The Emergence of Animals
“Darwin’s Doubt represents an opportunity for bridge-building rather than dismissive polarization
bridges across cultural divides in great need of professional, respectful dialogue—and bridges to span
evolutionary gaps.”
DR. GEORGE CHURCH, professor of genetics at Harvard Medical School and author of Regenesis
“Meyer writes beautifully. He marshals complex information as well as any writer I’ve read
This book—
and his body of work—challenges scientism with real science and excites in me the hope that the
origins-of-life debate will soon be largely free of the ideology that has long colored
it ... a wonderful,
most compelling read.”
DEAN KOONTZ, New York Times bestselling author
“Darwin’s Doubt is by far the most up-to-date, accurate, and comprehensive review of the evidence
from all relevant scientific fields that
I have encountered
in more than forty years of studying the
Cambrian explosion. An engaging investigation of the origin of animal
life and a compelling case
for intelligent design.”
DR. WOLF-EKKEHARD LONNIG, senior scientist emeritus (biologist) at the Max Planck
Institute for Plant Breeding Research
“Meyer demonstrates, based on cutting-edge molecular biology, why explaining the origin of animals is
now not just a problem of missing fossils, but an even greater engineering problem at the molecular level.
With mathematical precision, he shows why the neo-Darwinian mechanism cannot produce the genetic
information needed to build new animals. An excellent book and a must read.”
DR. RUSSELL CARLSON, professor of biochemistry and molecular biology at the
University of Georgia and technical director of the Complex Carbohydrate Research Center
“Darwin’s Doubt is an intriguing exploration of one of the most remarkable periods in the evolutionary
history of life—the rapid efflorescence of complex body plans written in the fossils of the Burgess
Shale— No matter what convictions one holds about evolution, Darwinism, or intelligent design,
Darwin’s Doubt is a book that should be read, engaged, and discussed.”
DR. SCOTT TURNER, professor of biology at the State University of New York and author of
The Tinkerer’s Accomplice
ISBN
978-0-06-207147-7
5 2 8 9 9
SCIENCE/LIFE SCIENCES/EVOLUTION
7800 62 071477
0613

