
Basic Electrical Installation Work 

 To Joyce, Samantha and Victoria 

Basic Electrical
 Installation Work 
FIFTH EDITION
  TREVOR LINSLEY 
Senior Lecturer 
 Blackpool and The Fylde College 
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON • NEW YORK • OXFORD 
PARIS • SAN DIEGO • SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Newnes is an imprint of Elsevier

 Newnes 
 An imprint of Elsevier 
 Linacre House, Jordan Hill, Oxford OX2 8DP 
 30 Corporate Drive, Burlington, MA 01803 
 First published by Arnold 1998 
 Reprinted by Butterworth-Heinemann 2001, 2002, 2003 (twice), 2004 (twice)  
 Fourth edition 2005  
Fifth edition 2008 
 Copyright © 2008, Trevor Linsley. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved 
  The right of Trevor Linsley to be identiﬁ ed as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 
  Written to meet the requirements of the 2330 Level 2 Certiﬁ cate in Electrotechnical Technology – Installation route 
(buildings and structures), and the Level 2 NVQ in Installing Electrotechnical Systems (2356) from City & Guids.
No part of this publication may be reproduced in any material form (including photocopying or storing in any medium by electronic 
means and whether or not transiently or incidentally to some other use of this publication) without the written permission of the 
copyright holder except in accordance with the provisions of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 or under the terms of a 
licence issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London, England W1T 4LP. Applications for the 
copyright holder’s written permission to reproduce any part of this publication should be addressed to the publisher. 
 Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science and Technology Rights Department in Oxford, UK; 
phone: (+44) (0) 1865 843830; fax: (+44) (0) 1865 853333; e-mail: permissions@elsevier.co.uk. You may also complete 
your request on-line via the Elsevier homepage ( http://www.elsevier.com ), by selecting  ‘ Customer Support ’ and then  ‘ Obtaining Permissions ’ . 
  Whilst the advice and information in this book is believed to be true and accurate at the date of going to press, neither the 
author nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility or liability for any errors or omissions that may be made. 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
 A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
 For information on all Newnes publications 
 visit our website at  www.newnespress.com 
 ISBN 978-0-7506-8751-5 
  Typeset by Charon Tec Ltd., A Macmillan Company (www.macmillansolutions.com) 
 Printed and bound in Great Britain 

Preface
vii
Acknowledgements
ix
UNIT 1 – Working effectively and safely in the electrotechnical environment
1
 Chapter 1 The legal responsibilities of both employers and employees 
3
 Chapter 2 The occupational specialisms and individual roles within the electrotechnical industry 
41
 Chapter 3 Sources of technical information and communications 
63
UNIT 2 – Principles of electrotechnology
77
 Chapter 4 Basic electrotechnical units and theory 
79
 Chapter 5 Basic scientiﬁ c concepts in electrotechnology 
99
 Chapter 6 Basic electrical circuits and cables 
123
 Chapter 7 Tools and equipment used for electrotechnical applications 
139
UNIT 3 – Application of health and safety and electrical principles
151
 Chapter 8 Safe systems of working 
153
 Chapter 9 Using technical information 
181
 Chapter 10 Alternating current theory and electrical machines 
193
 Chapter 11 Polyphase or three-phase electrical systems 
221
 Chapter 12 Overcurrent, short circuit and earth fault protection 
233
UNIT 4 – Installation (buildings and structures)
259
 Chapter 13 Statutory regulations and codes of practice 
261
 Chapter 14 Electrical installations and wiring systems 
279
 Contents 
v

Answers to Check your understanding
367
Appendix A: Abbreviations, symbols and codes 
371
Appendix B: Health and Safety Executive (HSE) publications and information 
373
Glossary of terms
375
 Index 
385
Contents
vi

 Preface 
  The 5th Edition of  Basic Electrical Installation Work  has been completely rewritten in 14 Chapters to closely 
match the 14 Outcomes of the City and Guilds qualiﬁ cation. The technical content has been revised and updated 
to the requirements of the new 17th Edition of the IEE Regulations BS 7671: 2008. Improved page design with new 
coloured illustrations give greater clarity to each topic. 
 This book of electrical installation theory and practice will be of value to the electrical trainee working towards: 
●  The City and Guilds 2330 Level 2 Certiﬁ cate in Electrical Technology, Installation Route. 
●  The City and Guilds 2356 Level 2 NVQ in Installing Electrotechnical Systems. 
●  The SCOTVEC and BTEC Electrical Utilisation Units at Levels I and II. 
●  Those taking Engineering and modern Apprenticeship Courses. 
Basic Electrical Installation Work  provides a sound basic knowledge of electrical practice which other trades in 
the construction industry will ﬁ nd of value, particularly those involved in multi-skilling activities. 
 The book incorporates the requirements of the latest Regulations, particularly: 
●  17th Edition IEE Wiring Regulations. 
●  British Standards BS 7671: 2008. 
●  Part P of the Building Regulation, Electrical Safety in Dwellings: 2006. 
●  Hazardous Waste Regulations: 2005. 
●  Work at Height Regulations: 2005. 
Trevor Linsley 
2008 

This page intentionally left blank

 Acknowledgements 
   I would like to acknowledge the assistance given by the following manufac-
turers and professional organizations in the preparation of this book: 
●  The Institution of Engineering and Technology for permission 
to reproduce Regulations and Tables from the 17th Edition IEE 
Regulations. 
●      The British Standards Institution for permission to reproduce mate-
rial from BS 7671: 2008. 
●  Crabtree Electrical Industries for technical information and data. 
●  RS Components Limited for technical information and photographs. 
●  Stocksigns Limited for technical information and photographs. 
●   Wylex Electrical Components for technical information and 
photographs. 
●      Jason Vann Smith MIET MIEEE MBCS BOOKS for the photograph 
used in the page design. 
   I would like to thank the many College Lecturers who responded to the 
questionnaire from Elsevier the publishers, regarding the proposed new 
edition of this book. Their recommendations have been taken into account 
in producing this improved 5th Edition. 
 I would also like to thank the editorial and production staff at Elsevier the 
publishers for their enthusiasm and support. They were able to publish 
this 5th Edition within the very short timescale created by the publication 
of the 17th Edition of the IEE Regulations. 
   Finally, I would like to thank Joyce, Samantha and Victoria for their support 
and encouragement. 

This page intentionally left blank


This page intentionally left blank

 The legal responsibilities 
of both employers and 
employees 
Ch  1 
3
 Unit 1 – Working effectively and safely in the electrotechnical 
environment – Outcome 1 
 Underpinning knowledge: when you have completed this chapter you should be able to: 
●  state the legal responsibilities under the Health and Safety at Work Act 
●  identify statutory and non-statutory regulations 
●  identify PPE for the task being carried out 
●  state the need for electrical isolation 
●  identify the types and meanings of safety signs 
●  identify the types of ﬁ re extinguisher  
●  state the actions to be taken following an electric shock 
V
U
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3 
4
5 
6 
To 3 phase supply

4
Basic Electrical Installation Work
 Safety regulations and laws 
   At the beginning of the nineteenth century children formed a large part of 
the working population of Great Britain. They started work early in their 
lives and they worked long hours for unscrupulous employers or masters. 
  The Health and Morals of Apprentices Act of 1802 was introduced by 
Robert Peel in an attempt at reducing apprentice working hours to 12       h per 
day and improving the conditions of their employment. The Factories Act 
of 1833 restricted the working week for children aged 13–18 years to 69       h in 
any working week. 
  With the introduction of the Factories Act of 1833, the ﬁ rst four full time 
Factory Inspectors were appointed. They were allowed to employ a small 
number of assistants and were given the responsibility of inspecting fac-
tories throughout England, Scotland, Ireland and Wales. This small over-
worked band of men were the forerunners of the modern HSE Inspectorate, 
enforcing the safety laws passed by Parliament. As the years progressed, 
new Acts of Parliament increased the powers of the Inspectorate and the 
growing strength of the trade unions meant that employers were increas-
ingly being pressed to improve health, safety and welfare at work. 
  The most important recent piece of health and safety law was passed by 
Parliament in 1974 called the Health and Safety at Work Act. This Act gave 
added powers to the Inspectorate and is the basis of all modern statutory 
health and safety laws. This Law not only increased the employer’s liability for 
safety measures, but also put the responsibility for safety on employees too. 
   Health, safety and welfare legislation has increased the awareness of every-
one to the risks involved in the workplace. All statutes within the Acts of 
Parliament must be obeyed and, therefore, we all need an understanding 
of the laws as they apply to our electrotechnical industry. 
 Statutory laws 
   Definition  
   Statutory 
Regulations 
have 
been 
passed by Parliament and have, there-
fore, become laws.      
   Acts of Parliament are made up of Statutes.  Statutory Regulations have been 
passed by Parliament and have, therefore, become laws. Non-compliance
with the laws of this land may lead to prosecution by the Courts and pos-
sible imprisonment for offenders. 
  We shall now look at eight Statutory Regulations as they apply to the elec-
trotechnical industry. 
 The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 
   Many governments have passed laws aimed at improving safety at work, 
but the most important recent legislation has been the Health and Safety 
at Work Act 1974. The purpose of the Act is to provide the legal framework 
for stimulating and encouraging high standards of health and safety at 
work; the Act puts the responsibility for safety at work on both workers and 
managers. 

The legal responsibilities of both employers and employees
5
  The employer has a duty to care for the health and safety of employees 
(Section 2 of the Act). To do this he must ensure that: 
●  the working conditions and standard of hygiene are appropriate; 
●  the plant, tools and equipment are properly maintained; 
●      the necessary safety equipment – such as personal protective equip-
ment (PPE), dust and fume extractors and machine guards – is avail-
able and properly used; 
●  the workers are trained to use equipment and plant safely. 
   Employees have a duty to care for their own health and safety and that of 
others who may be affected by their actions (Section 7 of the Act). To do 
this they must: 
●      take reasonable care to avoid injury to themselves or others as a 
result of their work activity; 
●      co-operate with their employer, helping him or her to comply with 
the requirements of the Act; 
●      not interfere with or misuse anything provided to protect their 
health and safety. 
   Failure to comply with the Health and Safety at Work Act is a criminal 
offence and any infringement of the law can result in heavy ﬁ nes, a prison 
sentence or both. 
 Enforcement 
   Laws and rules must be enforced if they are to be effective. The system of 
control under the Health and Safety at Work Act comes from the Health 
and Safety Executive (HSE) which is charged with enforcing the law. The 
HSE is divided into a number of specialist inspectorates or sections which 
operate from local ofﬁ ces throughout the United Kingdom. From the local 
ofﬁ ces the inspectors visit individual places of work. 
  The HSE inspectors have been given wide-ranging powers to assist them in 
the enforcement of the law. They can: 
 1 .  enter premises unannounced and carry out investigations, take 
measurements or photographs; 
 2.  take statements from individuals; 
 3 .  check the records and documents required by legislation; 
    4 .    give information and advice to an employee or employer about 
safety in the workplace; 
 5 .  demand the dismantling or destruction of any equipment, material 
or substance likely to cause immediate serious injury; 
    6 .    issue an improvement notice which will require an employer to put 
right, within a speciﬁ ed period of time, a minor infringement of the 
legislation;

6
Basic Electrical Installation Work
    7 .    issue a prohibition notice which will require an employer to stop 
immediately any activity likely to result in serious injury, and which 
will be enforced until the situation is corrected; 
 8 .  prosecute all persons who fail to comply with their safety duties, 
including employers, employees, designers, manufacturers, suppli-
ers and the self-employed. 
 Safety documentation 
   Under the Health and Safety at Work Act, the employer is responsible for 
ensuring that adequate instruction and information is given to employ-
ees to make them safety conscious. Part 1, Section 3 of the Act instructs all 
employers to prepare a written health and safety policy statement and to 
bring this to the notice of all employees.  Figure 1.1    shows a typical Health 
and Safety Policy Statement of the type which will be available within your 
Company. Your employer must let you know who your safety representa-
tives are and the new Health and Safety poster shown in  Fig. 1.2    has a blank 
section into which the names and contact information of your speciﬁ c rep-
resentatives can be added. This is a large laminated poster, 595  415  mm 
suitable for wall or notice board display. 
 All workplaces employing ﬁ ve or more people must display the type of 
poster shown in  Fig. 1.2 after 30th June 2000. 
  To promote adequate health and safety measures the employer must 
consult with the employees ’  safety representatives. In companies which 
employ more than 20 people this is normally undertaken by forming a 
safety committee which is made up of a safety ofﬁ cer and employee rep-
resentatives, usually nominated by a trade union. The safety ofﬁ cer is 
usually employed full-time in that role. Small companies might employ a 
safety supervisor, who will have other duties within the company, or alter-
natively they could join a  ‘ safety group ’ . The safety group then shares the 
cost of employing a safety adviser or safety ofﬁ cer, who visits each com-
pany in rotation. An employee who identiﬁ es a dangerous situation should 
initially report to his site safety representative. The safety representative 
should then bring the dangerous situation to the notice of the safety com-
mittee for action which will remove the danger. This may mean changing 
company policy or procedures or making modiﬁ cations to equipment. All 
actions of the safety committee should be documented and recorded as 
evidence that the company takes seriously its health and safety policy. 
 The Electricity Safety, Quality and Continuity 
Regulations 2002 (formerly Electricity Supply 
Regulations 1989) 
  The Electricity Safety, Quality and Continuity Regulations 2002 are issued 
by the Department of Trade and Industry. They are statutory regulations 
which are enforceable by the laws of the land. They are designed to ensure a 
proper and safe supply of electrical energy up to the consumer’s terminals. 

The legal responsibilities of both employers and employees
7
Statement of Health and Safety at Work Policy in accordance with the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974
Company objective
The promotion of health and safety measures is a mutual objective for the Company and for its employees at all levels. It is 
the intention that all the Company’s affairs will be conducted in a manner which will not cause risk to the health and safety of 
its members, employees or the general public. For this purpose it is the Company policy that the responsibility for health and 
safety at work will be divided between all the employees and the Company in the manner outlined below.
Company’s responsibilities
The Company will, as a responsible employer, make every endeavour to meet its legal obligations under the Health and 
Safety at Work Act to ensure the health and safety of its employees and the general public. Particular attention will be paid to 
the provision of the following:
1 Plant equipment and systems of work that are safe.
2 Safe arrangements for the use, handling, storage and transport of articles, materials and substances.
3 Sufficient information, instruction, training and supervision to enable all employees to contribute positively to their own safety  
 and health at work and to avoid hazards.
4 A safe place of work, and safe access to it.
5 A healthy working environment.
6 Adequate welfare services.
Note: Reference should be made to the appropriate safety etc. manuals.
Employees’ responsibilities
Each employee is responsible for ensuring that the work which he/she undertakes is conducted in a manner which is safe to 
himself or herself, other members of the general public, and for obeying the advice and instructions on safety and health 
matters issued by his/her superior. If any employee considers that a hazard to health and safety exists it is his/her 
responsibility to report the matter to his/her supervisor or through his/her Union Representative or such other person as may 
be subsequently defined.
Management and Supervisors’ responsibilities
Management and supervisors at all levels are expected to set an example in safe behaviour and maintain a constant and 
continuing interest in employee safety, in particular by:
1 acquiring the knowledge of health and safety regulations and codes of practice necessary to ensure the safety of employees  
 in the workplace,
2  acquainting employees with these regulations on codes of practice and giving guidance on safety matters,
3  ensuring that employees act on instructions and advice given.
General Managers are ultimately responsible to the Company for the rectification or reporting of any safety hazard which is 
brought to their attention.
Joint consultations
Joint consultation on health and safety matters is important. The Company will agree with its staff, or their representatives, 
adequate arrangements for joint consultation on measures for promoting safety and health at work, and make and maintain 
satisfactory arrangements for the participation of their employees in the development and supervision of such measures. 
Trade Union representatives will initially be regarded as undertaking the role of Safety Representatives envisaged in the 
Health and Safety at Work Act. These representatives share a responsibility with management to ensure the health and safety 
of their members and are responsible for drawing the attention of management to any shortcomings in the Company’s health 
and safety arrangements. The Company will in so far as is reasonably practicable provide representatives with facilities and 
training in order that they may carry out this task.
Review
A review, addition or modification of this statement may be made at any time and may be supplemented as appropriate by 
further statements relating to the work of particular departments and in accordance with any new regulations or codes of 
practice.
This policy statement will be brought to the attention of all employees.
 FIGURE 1.1 
 Typical Health and Safety Policy Statement. 

8
Basic Electrical Installation Work
  These regulations impose requirements upon the regional electricity com-
panies regarding the installation and use of electric lines and equipment. 
The regulations are administered by the Engineering Inspectorate of the 
Electricity Division of the Department of Energy and will not normally con-
cern the electrical contractor except that it is these regulations which lay 
down the earthing requirement of the electrical supply at the meter position. 
  The regional electricity companies must declare the supply voltage and 
maintain its value between prescribed limits or tolerances. 
  The government agreed on 1 January 1995 that the electricity supplies in 
the United Kingdom would be harmonized with those of the rest of Europe. 
Thus the voltages used previously in low-voltage supply systems of 415       V 
and 240  V have become 400  V for three-phase supplies and 230  V for single-
phase supplies. The permitted tolerances to the nominal voltage have also 
been changed from   6% to  10% and  6%. This gives a voltage range of 
216–253  V for a nominal voltage of 230  V and 376–440  V for a nominal sup-
ply voltage of 400  V. 
  The next proposed change is for the tolerance levels to be adjusted to 
 10% of the declared nominal voltage (IEE Regulation, Appendix 2:14). 
 The frequency is maintained at an average value of 50  Hz over 24  h so that 
electric clocks remain accurate. 
 FIGURE 1.2 
 New health and safety law poster. Source : HSE © Crown copyright material is reproduced with the 
permission of the Controller of HMSO and Her Majesty’s Stationery Ofﬁ ce, Norwich. 

The legal responsibilities of both employers and employees
9
   Regulation 29 gives the area boards the power to refuse to connect a sup-
ply to an installation which in their opinion is not constructed, installed 
and protected to an appropriately high standard. This regulation would 
only be enforced if the installation did not meet the requirements of the 
IEE Regulations for Electrical Installations. 
 The Electricity at Work Regulations 1989 (EWR) 
  This legislation came into force in 1990 and replaced earlier regula-
tions such as the Electricity (Factories Act) Special Regulations 1944. 
The Regulations are made under the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974, 
and enforced by the Health and Safety Executive. The purpose of the 
Regulations is to  ‘ require precautions to be taken against the risk of death 
or personal injury from electricity in work activities ’ . 
   Section 4 of the EWR tells us that  ‘ all systems must be constructed so as to 
prevent danger  … , and be properly maintained. …  Every work activity shall 
be carried out in a manner which does not give rise to danger. …  In the case 
of work of an electrical nature, it is preferable that the conductors be made 
dead before work commences ’ . 
  The EWR do not tell us speciﬁ cally how to carry out our work activities and 
ensure compliance, but if proceedings were brought against an individual 
for breaking the EWR, the only acceptable defence would be  ‘ to prove that 
all reasonable steps were taken and all diligence exercised to avoid the 
offence ’ (Regulation 29). 
   An electrical contractor could reasonably be expected to have  ‘ exercised 
all diligence ’  if the installation was wired according to the IEE Wiring 
Regulations (see below). However, electrical contractors must become more 
 ‘ legally aware ’  following the conviction of an electrician for manslaughter 
at Maidstone Crown Court in 1989. The Court accepted that an electrician 
had caused the death of another man as a result of his shoddy work in wir-
ing up a central heating system. He received a 9-month suspended prison 
sentence. This case has set an important legal precedent, and in future any 
tradesman or professional who causes death through negligence or poor 
workmanship risks prosecution and possible imprisonment.  
 The Management of Health and Safety at Work 
Regulations 1999 
  The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 places responsibilities on employ-
ers to have robust health and safety systems and procedures in the work-
place. Directors and managers of any company who employ more than ﬁ ve 
employees can be held personally responsible for failures to control health 
and safety. 
  The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999 tell us that 
employers must systematically examine the workplace, the work activ-
ity and the management of safety in the establishment through a process 

10
Basic Electrical Installation Work
of  ‘ risk assessments ’ . A record of all signiﬁ cant risk assessment ﬁ nd-
ings must be kept in a safe place and be available to an HSE inspector if 
required. Information based on these ﬁ ndings must be communicated to 
relevant staff and if changes in work behaviour patterns are recommended 
in the interests of safety, then they must be put in place. The process of risk 
assessment is considered in detail in Chapter 3 of this book. 
   Risks, which may require a formal assessment in the electrotechnical 
industry, might be: 
●  working at heights; 
●  using electrical power tools; 
●  falling objects; 
●  working in conﬁ ned places; 
●  electrocution and personal injury; 
●  working with  ‘ live ’ equipment; 
●  using hire equipment; 
●  manual handling – pushing – pulling – lifting; 
●      site conditions – falling objects – dust – weather – water – accidents 
and injuries. 
   And any other risks which are particular to a speciﬁ c type of workplace or 
work activity. 
 The Control of Substances Hazardous to Health 
Regulations 2002 (COSHH) 
  The original COSHH Regulations were published in 1988 and came into 
force in October 1989. They were re-enacted in 1994 with modiﬁ cations 
and improvements, and the latest modiﬁ cations and additions came into 
force in 2002. 
  The COSHH Regulations control people’s exposure to hazardous sub-
stances in the workplace. Regulation 6 requires employers to assess the 
risks to health from working with hazardous substances, to train employ-
ees in techniques which will reduce the risk and provide personal protec-
tive equipment (PPE) so that employees will not endanger themselves or 
others through exposure to hazardous substances. Employees should also 
know what cleaning, storage and disposal procedures are required and 
what emergency procedures to follow. The necessary information must be 
available to anyone using hazardous substances as well as to visiting HSE 
inspectors. 
 Hazardous substances include: 
    1.     any substance which gives off fumes causing headaches or respira-
tory irritation; 

The legal responsibilities of both employers and employees
11
 2 .  man-made ﬁ bres which might cause skin or eye irritation (e.g. loft 
insulation);
    3 .    acids causing skin burns and breathing irritation (e.g. car batteries, 
which contain dilute sulphuric acid); 
 4 .  solvents causing skin and respiratory irritation (strong solvents are 
used to cement together PVC conduit ﬁ ttings and tube); 
 5.  fumes and gases causing asphyxiation (burning PVC gives off toxic 
fumes);
 6 .  cement and wood dust causing breathing problems and eye 
irritation; 
 7.  exposure to asbestos – although the supply and use of the most haz-
ardous asbestos material is now prohibited, huge amounts were 
installed between 1950 and 1980 in the construction industry and 
much of it is still in place today. In their latest amendments, the 
COSHH Regulations focus on giving advice and guidance to build-
ers and contractors on the safe use and control of asbestos products. 
These can be found in Guidance Notes EH 71. 
  Where PPE is provided by an employer, employees have a duty to use it to 
safeguard themselves. 
 Provision and Use of Work Equipment Regulations 
1998 
  These regulations tidy up a number of existing requirements already in 
place under other regulations such as the Health and Safety at Work Act 
1974, the Factories Act 1961 and the Ofﬁ ces, Shops and Railway Premises 
Act 1963. 
  The Provision and Use of Work Equipment Regulations 1998 places a gen-
eral duty on employers to ensure minimum requirements of plant and 
equipment. If an employer has purchased good quality plant and equip-
ment, which is well maintained, there is little else to do. Some older equip-
ment may require modiﬁ cations to bring it in line with modern standards 
of dust extraction, fume extraction or noise, but no assessments are 
required by the regulations other than those generally required by the 
Management Regulations 1999 discussed previously. 
 The Construction (Health, Safety and Welfare) 
Regulations 1996 
   An electrical contractor is a part of the construction team, usually as a 
subcontractor, and therefore the regulations particularly aimed at the 
construction industry also inﬂ uence the daily work procedures and envi-
ronment of an electrician. The most important recent piece of legislation is 
the Construction Regulations. 

12
Basic Electrical Installation Work
  The temporary nature of construction sites makes them one of the most 
dangerous places to work. These regulations are made under the Health 
and Safety at Work Act 1974 and are designed speciﬁ cally to promote safety 
at work in the construction industry. Construction work is deﬁ ned as any 
building or civil engineering work, including construction, assembly, 
alterations, conversions, repairs, upkeep, maintenance or dismantling of a 
structure. 
  The general provision sets out minimum standards to promote a good level 
of safety on site. Schedules specify the requirements for guardrails, work-
ing platforms, ladders, emergency procedures, lighting and welfare facili-
ties. Welfare facilities set out minimum provisions for site accommodation: 
washing facilities, sanitary conveniences and protective clothing. There is 
now a duty for all those working on construction sites to wear head protec-
tion, and this includes electricians working on site as subcontractors. 
 Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) at Work 
Regulations 1998 
 FIGURE 1.3 
 Safety signs showing type of PPE to be worn. 
   Definition  
 PPE is defi ned as all equipment 
designed to be worn, or held, to pro-
tect against a risk to health and safety. 
PPE is deﬁ ned as all equipment designed to be worn, or held, to protect 
against a risk to health and safety. This includes most types of protective 
clothing, and equipment such as eye, foot and head protection, safety har-
nesses, life jackets and high visibility clothing. 
   Under the Health and Safety at Work Act, employers must provide free of 
charge any PPE and employees must make full and proper use of it. Safety 
signs such as those shown at  Fig. 1.3    are useful reminders of the type of 

The legal responsibilities of both employers and employees
13
PPE to be used in a particular area. The vulnerable parts of the body which 
may need protection are the head, eyes, ears, lungs, torso, hands and feet 
and, additionally, protection from falls may need to be considered. Objects 
falling from a height present the major hazard against which head pro-
tection is provided. Other hazards include striking the head against pro-
jections and hair becoming entangled in machinery. Typical methods of 
protection include helmets, light duty scalp protectors called  ‘ bump caps ’ 
and hairnets.
 Safety First
PPE 
   Always wear or use the PPE (personal 
protective equipment) provided by 
your employer for your safety. 
  The eyes are very vulnerable to liquid splashes, ﬂ ying particles and light 
emissions such as ultraviolet light, electric arcs and lasers. Types of eye 
protectors include safety spectacles, safety goggles and face shields. 
Screen-based workstations are being used increasingly in industrial and 
commercial locations by all types of personnel. Working with VDUs (visual 
display units) can cause eye strain and fatigue and, therefore, this hazard 
is the subject of a separate section at the beginning of Chapter 3 headed 
 ‘ VDU operation hazards ’ . 
   Noise is accepted as a problem in most industries and surprisingly there 
has been very little control legislation. The Health and Safety Executive 
have published a  ‘ Code of Practice ’  and  ‘ Guidance Notes ’  HSG 56 for reduc-
ing the exposure of employed persons to noise. A continuous exposure limit 
of below 85       dB for an 8-hour working day is recommended by the code. 
 Noise may be deﬁ ned as any disagreeable or undesirable sound or sounds, 
generally of a random nature, which do not have clearly deﬁ ned frequen-
cies. The usual basis for measuring noise or sound level is the decibel 
scale. Whether noise of a particular level is harmful or not also depends on 
the length of exposure to it. This is the basis of the widely accepted limit of 
85  dB of continuous exposure to noise for 8  hours per day. 
   A peak sound pressure of above 200       pascals or about 120       dB is considered 
unacceptable and 130       dB is the threshold of pain for humans. If a person 
has to shout to be understood at 2       m, the background noise is about 85       dB. 
If the distance is only 1       m, the noise level is about 90       dB. Continuous noise 
at work causes deafness, makes people irritable, affects concentration, 
causes fatigue and accident proneness and may mask sounds which need 
to be heard in order to work efﬁ ciently and safely. 
   It may be possible to engineer out some of the noise, for example by plac-
ing a generator in a separate sound-proofed building. Alternatively, it may 
be possible to provide job rotation, to rearrange work locations or provide 
acoustic refuges. 
  Where individuals must be subjected to some noise at work, it may be 
reduced by ear protectors. These may be disposable ear plugs, reusable ear 
plugs or ear muffs. The chosen ear protector must be suited to the user and 
suitable for the type of noise and individual personnel should be trained in 
its correct use. 
   Breathing reasonably clean air is the right of every individual, particu-
larly at work. Some industrial processes produce dust which may present 

14
Basic Electrical Installation Work
a potentially serious hazard. The lung disease asbestosis is caused by the 
inhalation of asbestos dust or particles and the coal dust disease pneumo-
coniosis, suffered by many coal miners, has made people aware of the dan-
gers of breathing in contaminated air. 
   Some people may prove to be allergic to quite innocent products such as 
ﬂ our dust in the food industry or wood dust in the construction industry. 
The main effect of inhaling dust is a measurable impairment of lung func-
tion. This can be avoided by wearing an appropriate mask, respirator or 
breathing apparatus as recommended by the company’s health and safety 
policy and indicated by local safety signs.
 Safety First 
Safety Signs 
 ● 
 Always follow the instructions 
given in the safety signs where 
you are working. 
 ● 
 It will help to keep you safe. 
   A worker’s body may need protection against heat or cold, bad weather, 
chemical or metal splash, impact or penetration and contaminated dust. 
Alternatively, there may be a risk of the worker’s own clothes causing con-
tamination of the product, as in the food industry. Appropriate clothing 
will be recommended in the company’s health and safety policy. Ordinary 
working clothes and clothing provided for food hygiene purposes are not 
included in the Personal Protective Equipment at Work Regulations. 
   Hands and feet may need protection from abrasion, temperature extremes, 
cuts and punctures, impact or skin infection. Gloves or gauntlets provide 
protection from most industrial processes, but should not be worn when 
operating machinery because they may become entangled in it. Care in 
selecting the appropriate protective device is required; for example, barrier 
creams provide only a limited protection against infection.
 Try This
PPE 
 ● 
 Make a list of any PPE which you have used at work. 
 ● 
 What was this PPE protecting you from? 
   Boots or shoes with in-built toe caps can give protection against impact or 
falling objects and, when ﬁ tted with a mild steel sole plate, can also provide 
protection from sharp objects penetrating through the sole. Special slip 
resistant soles can also be provided for employees working in wet areas. 
 Whatever the hazard to health and safety at work, the employer must be 
able to demonstrate that he or she has carried out a risk analysis, made 
recommendations which will reduce that risk and communicated these 
recommendations to the workforce. Where there is a need for PPE to pro-
tect against personal injury and to create a safe working environment, the 
employer must provide that equipment and any necessary training which 
might be required and the employee must make full and proper use of 
such equipment and training. 
 Non-statutory regulations 
   Definition  
 Statutory laws and regulations are 
written in a legal framework. 
Statutory laws and regulations are written in a legal framework, some don’t 
actually tell us how to comply with the laws at an everyday level.

The legal responsibilities of both employers and employees
15
Non-statutory regulations and codes of practice interpret the statutory 
regulations telling us how we can comply with the law. 
  They have been written for every speciﬁ c section of industry, commerce 
and situation, to enable everyone to comply with, or obey the written laws. 
  When the Electricity at Work Regulations (EWR) tell us to  ‘ ensure that 
all systems are constructed so as to prevent danger ’  they do not tell us how 
to actually do this in a speciﬁ c situation. However, the IEE Regulations 
tell us precisely how to carry out our electrotechnical work safely in 
order to meet the statutory requirements of the EWR. In Part 1 of the 
IEE Regulations, at 114, it states  ‘ the Regulations are non-statutory. They 
may, however, be used in a court of law in evidence to claim compliance 
with a statutory requirement ’ . If your electrotechnical work meets the 
requirements of the IEE Regulations, you will also meet the requirements 
of EWR. 
   Over the years, non-statutory regulations and codes of practice have built 
upon previous good practice and responded to changes by bringing out 
new editions of the various regulations and codes of practice to meet the 
changing needs of industry and commerce. 
  We will now look at one non-statutory regulation, what is sometimes called 
 ‘ the electrician’s bible ’ , the most important set of regulations for any one 
working in the electrotechnical industry, the BS 7671: 2008 Requirements 
for Electrical Installations, IEE Wiring Regulations 17th Edition. 
 The IEE Wiring Regulations 17th edition requirements 
for electrical installations to BS 7671: 2008 
  The Institution of Electrical Engineers Requirements for Electrical 
Installations (the IEE Regulations) are non-statutory regulations. They 
relate principally to the design, selection, erection, inspection and test-
ing of electrical installations, whether permanent or temporary, in and 
about buildings generally and to agricultural and horticultural premises, 
construction sites and caravans and their sites. Paragraph 7 of the intro-
duction to the EWR says:  ‘ the IEE Wiring Regulations is a code of practice 
which is widely recognized and accepted in the United Kingdom and com-
pliance with them is likely to achieve compliance with all relevant aspects 
of the Electricity at Work Regulations ’ . The IEE Wiring Regulations are the 
National Standard in the United Kingdom and apply to installations oper-
ating at a voltage up to 1000       V a.c. They do not apply to electrical installa-
tions in mines and quarries, where special regulations apply because of the 
adverse conditions experienced there. 
  The current edition of the IEE Wiring Regulations is the 17th edition 2008. 
The main reason for incorporating the IEE Wiring Regulations into British 
Standard BS 7671: 2008 was to create harmonization with European 
Standards. 
  The IEE Regulations take account of the technical intent of the CENELEC 
European Standards, which in turn are based on the IEC International 
Standards. 
 Definition  
 Non-statutory regulations and codes of 
practice interpret the statutory regu-
lations telling us how we can comply 
with the law. 

16
Basic Electrical Installation Work
  The purpose in harmonizing British and European Standards is to help 
develop a single European market economy so that there are no trade bar-
riers to electrical goods and services across the European Economic Area. 
 To assist Electricians, etc. 
  To assist electricians in their understanding of the Regulations a number 
of guidance notes have been published. The guidance notes which I will 
frequently make reference to in this book are those contained in the  On 
Site Guide.  Eight other guidance notes booklets are also currently available. 
These are: 
●  Selection and Erection
●  Isolation and Switching
●  Inspection and Testing
●  Protection against Fire
●  Protection against Electric Shock
●  Protection against Overcurrent
●  Special Locations
●  Earthing and Bonding
  These guidance notes are intended to be read in conjunction with the 
Regulations. 
  The IEE Wiring Regulations are the electrician’s bible and provide the 
authoritative framework of information for anyone working in the electro-
technical industry.
 Key Fact
IEE Regulations 
 ● 
 They are the UK National Standard 
for all electrical work. 
 ● 
 They are the  ‘ electrician’s bible ’ . 
 ● 
 Comply with the IEE Regulations 
and you also comply with 
Statutory Regulations (IEE 
Regulation 114). 
 Health and safety responsibilities 
  We have now looked at statutory and non-statutory regulations which 
inﬂ uence working conditions in the electrotechnical industry today.
So, who has  responsibility  for these workplace Health and Safety 
Regulations? 
   In 1970, a Royal Commission was set up to look at the health and safety 
of employees at work. The ﬁ ndings concluded that the main cause of acci-
dents at work was apathy on the part of  both employers and employees. 
  The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 was passed as a result of 
recommendations made by the Royal Commission and, therefore, the 
Act puts legal responsibility for safety at work on  both  the employer and 
employee. 
   In general terms, the employer must put adequate health and safety sys-
tems in place at work and the employee must use all safety systems and 
procedures responsibly. 

The legal responsibilities of both employers and employees
17
 In speciﬁ c terms the employer must: 
●      provide a Health and Safety Policy Statement if there are ﬁ ve or more 
employees such as that shown in  Fig. 1.1 ; 
●      display a current employers liability insurance certiﬁ cate as required 
by the Employers Liability (Compulsory Insurance) Act 1969; 
●      report certain injuries, diseases and dangerous occurrences to the 
enforcing authority (HSE area ofﬁ ce – see Appendix for address); 
●  provide adequate ﬁ rst aid facilities (see  Tables 1.1 and 1.2 ); 
●  provide PPE; 
●   provide information, training and supervision to ensure staffs ’ 
health and safety; 
●  provide adequate welfare facilities; 
●      put in place adequate precautions against ﬁ re, provide a means of 
escape and means of ﬁ ghting ﬁ re;  
●      ensure plant and machinery are safe and that safe systems of opera-
tion are in place; 
●  ensure articles and substances are moved, stored and used safely; 
Table 1.1
 Suggested numbers of ﬁ rst aid personnel  
 Category of risk 
 Numbers 
employed at any 
location 
 Suggested number of ﬁ rst 
aid personnel 
Lower risk
 e.g. shops and 
ofﬁ ces, libraries 
 Fewer than 50 
 50–100 
 More than 100 
 At least one appointed 
person 
 At least one ﬁ rst aider 
 One additional ﬁ rst aider 
for every 100 employed 
 Medium risk 
 
 
 e.g. light engineering 
and assembly work, 
food processing, 
warehousing 
 Fewer than 20 
 20–100 
 More than 100 
 At least one appointed 
person 
 At least one ﬁ rst aider for 
every 50 employed 
 (or part thereof) 
 One additional ﬁ rst aider 
for every 100 employed 
Higher risk
 e.g. most 
construction, 
slaughterhouses, 
chemical 
manufacture, 
extensive work with 
dangerous machinery 
or sharp instruments 
 Fewer than ﬁ ve 
 5–50 
 More than 50 
 At least one appointed 
person 
 At least one ﬁ rst aider 
 One additional ﬁ rst aider 
for every 50 employed 

18
Basic Electrical Installation Work
●      make the workplace safe and without risk to health by keeping dust, 
fumes and noise under control. 
 In speciﬁ c terms the employee must: 
●      take reasonable care of his/her own health and safety and that of 
others who may be affected by what they do; 
●      co-operate with his/her employer on health and safety issues by not 
interfering or misusing anything provided for health, safety and wel-
fare in the working environment; 
●      report any health and safety problem in the workplace to, in the ﬁ rst 
place, a supervisor, manager or employer. 
 Employment – rights and responsibilities 
   As a trainee in the electrotechnical industry you will be employed by a 
member company and receive a weekly or monthly wage, which will be 
dependent upon your age and grade as agreed by the appropriate trade 
union, probably Amicus. 
  We have seen in the beginning of this chapter that there are many rules and 
regulations which your employer must comply with in order to make your 
workplace healthy and safe. There are also responsibilities that apply to 
 Table 1.2  Contents of ﬁ rst aid boxes  
 Item 
 Number of employees 
 1–5 
 6–10 
 11–50 
 51–100 
 101–150 
 Guidance card on general ﬁ rst aid 
  1 
  1 
  1 
  1 
  1 
 Individually wrapped sterile adhesive dressings 
 10 
 20 
 40 
 40 
 40 
 Sterile eye pads, with attachment 
  1 
  2 
  4 
  6 
  8 
 (Standard Dressing No. 16 BPC) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Triangular bandages 
  1 
  2 
  4 
  6 
  8 
 Sterile covering for serious wounds (where 
applicable) 
  1 
  2 
  4 
  6 
  8 
 Safety pins 
  6 
  6 
 12 
 12 
 12 
 Medium sized sterile unmedicated dressings 
  3 
  6 
  8 
 10 
 12 
 (Standard Dressings No. 9 and No. 14 and the 
Ambulance Dressing No. 1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Large sterile unmedicated dressings (Standard 
  1 
  2 
  4 
  6 
 10 
 Dressings No. 9 and No. 14 and the Ambulance 
Dressing No. 1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Extra large sterile unmedicated dressings 
  1 
  2 
  4 
  6 
  8 
 (Ambulance Dressing No. 3) 
 
 
 
 
 
Where tap water is not available, sterile water or sterile normal saline in disposable containers (each holding a minimum of 300   ml) must 
be kept near the ﬁ rst aid box. The following minimum quantities should be kept:
 Number of employees 
 1–10 
 11–50 
 51–100 
 101–150 
 Quantity of sterile water 
 1 × 300    ml 
 3 × 300    ml 
 6 × 300    ml 
 6 × 300    ml 

The legal responsibilities of both employers and employees
19
you, as an employee (or worker) in the electrotechnical industry, in order 
to assist your employer to obey the law. 
 As an Employee you must: 
●  obey all lawful and reasonable requests; 
●  behave in a sensible and responsible way at work; 
●  work with care and reasonable skill. 
 Your Employer must: 
●  take care for your safety; 
●  not ask you to do anything unlawful or unreasonable; 
●  pay agreed wages; 
●  not change your contract of employment without your agreement. 
 Most of the other things that can be expected of you are things like hon-
esty, punctuality, reliability and hard work. Really, just common sense 
things like politeness will help you to get on at work. 
 If you have problems relating to your employment rights you should talk it 
through with your supervisor or trade union representative at work. 
  Wages and tax 
  When you start work you will be paid either weekly or monthly. It is quite 
common to work a week in hand if you are paid weekly, which means that 
you will be paid for the ﬁ rst week’s work at the end of the second week. 
When you leave that employment, if you have worked a week in hand, you 
will have a week’s wage to come. Money that you have worked for belongs 
to you and cannot be kept by your employer if you leave without giving 
notice. 
   Every employee is entitled to a payslip along with their wages, which should 
show how much you have earned (gross), how much has been taken off for 
tax and national insurance and what your take home pay (net) is. 
   If you are not given a payslip, ask for one, it is your legal right and you may 
be required to show payslips as proof of income. Always keep your payslips 
in a safe place. 
  We all pay tax on the money we earn (income tax). The Government uses 
tax to pay for services such as health, education, defence, social security 
and pensions. 
 We are all allowed to earn a small amount of money tax free each year and 
this is called the personal allowance. The personal allowance for the tax 
year in which I am writing this book 2007/2008 is  £ 5225. So every pound 
that we earn above  £ 5225 is taxed. The tax year starts on the 6th of April 
each year and ﬁ nishes on the 5th of April the following year. Your personal 
tax code enables the personal allowance to be spread out throughout the 

20
Basic Electrical Installation Work
year and you pay tax on each of your wages on a system called PAYE, pay 
as you earn. 
   At the end of the tax year your employers will give you a form called a P.60 
which shows your tax code, how much you have earned and how much tax 
you have paid during a particular tax year. It is important to keep your P.60 
somewhere safe along with your payslips. If at some time you want to buy 
a house a building society will want proof of your earnings, which these 
documents show. 
  When leaving a particular employment you must obtain from your 
employer a form P.45. On starting new employment this form will be 
required by your new employer and will ensure that you do not initially pay 
too much tax. 
  Working hours 
   Employees cannot be forced to work more than 48       h each week on aver-
age, and 40  h for 16–18 year old trainees. Trainees must also have 12  h 
uninterrupted rest from work each day. Older workers, required to work for 
more than 6       h continuously, are entitled to a 20-min rest break, to be taken 
within the 6       h, and must have 11       h uninterrupted rest from work each day. 
If you think you are not getting the correct number of breaks, talk to your 
supervisor or trade union representative. 
 Sickness 
   If you are sick and unable to go to work, you should contact your employer 
or supervisor as soon as you can on the ﬁ rst day of illness. When you go 
back to work, if you have been sick for up to 7 days, you will have to ﬁ ll in a 
self-certiﬁ cation form. After 7 days you will need a medical certiﬁ cate from 
your doctor and you must send it to work as soon as you can. If you are sick 
for 4 days or more your employer must pay you statutory sick pay (SSP), 
which can be paid for up to 28 weeks. If you are sick after 28 weeks you 
can claim incapacity beneﬁ t. To claim this you will need a form from your 
employer or Social Security Ofﬁ ce. If you have a sickness problem, talk to 
your supervisor or someone at work who you trust, or telephone the local 
Social Security Ofﬁ ce.  
 Accidents 
   It is the employer’s duty to protect the health and safety and welfare of its 
employees, so if you do have an accident at work, however small, inform 
your supervisor, safety ofﬁ cer or ﬁ rst aid person. Make sure that the details 
are recorded in the accident/ﬁ rst aid book. Failure to do so may affect 
compensation if the accident proves to be more serious than you ﬁ rst 
thought.
   Always be careful, use common sense and follow instructions. If in doubt, 
ask someone. A simple accident might prevent you playing your favourite 
sport for a considerable period of time. 

The legal responsibilities of both employers and employees
21
 Holidays 
   Most employees are entitled to at least 4 weeks paid holiday each year. Your 
entitlement to paid holidays builds up each month, so a month after you 
start work you are entitled to one-twelfth of the total holiday entitlement 
for the year. After 2 months it becomes two-twelfths and so on. Ask your 
supervisor or the kind lady in the ofﬁ ce who makes up the wages to explain 
your holiday entitlement to you. 
 Problems at work 
   It is not unusual to ﬁ nd it hard to ﬁ t in when you start a new job. Give it a 
chance, give it time and things are likely to settle down. As a new person 
you might seem to get all the rotten jobs, but sometimes, being new, these 
are the only jobs that you can do for now. 
   In some companies there can be a culture of  ‘ teasing ’ , which may be OK, 
if everyone is treated the same, but not so good if you are always the one 
being teased. If this happens, see if it stops after a while, if not, talk to 
someone about it. Don’t give up your job without trying to get the problem 
sorted out. 
   If you feel that you are being discriminated against or harassed because of 
your race, sex or disability, then talk to your supervisor, trainer or someone 
you trust at work. There are laws about discrimination that are discussed 
in Advanced Electrical Installation Work. 
  You can join a trade union when you are 16 years of age or over. Trade 
unions work toward fair deals for their members. If you join a trade union 
there will be subscriptions (subs) to pay. These are often reduced or sus-
pended during the training period. As a member of a Trade Union you 
can get advice and support from them. If there is a problem of any kind at 
work, you can ask for union’s support. However, you cannot get this sup-
port unless you are a member. 
 Resignation/dismissal 
   Most employers like to have your resignation or  ‘ Notice ’  in writing. Your 
Contract of Employment will tell you how much Notice is expected. The 
minimum Notice you should give is 1 week if you have been employed for 
1 month or more by that employer. However, if your Contract states a lon-
ger period, then that is what is expected. 
   If you have worked for 1 month or more, but less than 2 years, you are 
entitled to 1 week’s Notice. If you have worked for 2 years you are entitled 
to 2 week’s Notice and a further week’s Notice for every additional continu-
ous year of employment (with the same employer) up to 12 weeks for 12 
years service. 
   If you are dismissed or  ‘ sacked ’  you are entitled to the same periods of 
Notice. However, if you do something very serious, like stealing or hitting 
someone, your employer can dismiss you without Notice. 

22
Basic Electrical Installation Work
  You can also be dismissed if you are often late or your behaviour is inap-
propriate to the type of work being done. You should have verbal or written 
warnings before you are dismissed. 
   If there are 20 or more employees at your place of employment then there 
should be a disciplinary procedure written down, which must be followed. 
If you do get a warning, then you might like to see this as a second chance 
to start again. 
   If you have been working for the same employer for 1 year or more, you can 
complain to an Employment Tribunal if you think you have been unfairly 
dismissed. If you haven’t worked for the same employer for this length of 
time, then you should talk to your training ofﬁ cer or trade union. 
   I do not want to ﬁ nish this section in a negative way, talking about prob-
lems at work, so let me ﬁ nally say that each year over 8000 young people 
are in apprenticeships in the electrical contracting industry and very few 
of them have problems. The small problems that may arise, because mov-
ing into full-time work is very different to school, can usually be resolved 
by your training ofﬁ cer or supervisor. Most of the trainees go on to qualify 
as craftsmen and enjoy a well-paid and fulﬁ lling career in the electrotech-
nical industry. 
 Safety signs 
  The rules and regulations of the working environment are communicated 
to employees by written instructions, signs and symbols. All signs in the 
working environment are intended to inform. They should give warning 
of possible dangers and must be obeyed. At ﬁ rst there were many differ-
ent safety signs, but British Standard BS 5499 Part 1 and the Health and 
Safety (Signs and Signals) Regulations 1996 have introduced a standard 
system which gives health and safety information with the minimum use 
of words. The purpose of the regulations is to establish an internationally 
understood system of safety signs and colours which draw attention to 
equipment and situations that do, or could, affect health and safety. Text-
only safety signs became illegal from 24th December 1998. From that date, 
all safety signs have had to contain a pictogram or symbol such as those 
shown in  Fig. 1.4   . Signs fall into four categories: prohibited activities; warn-
ings; mandatory instructions and safe conditions. 
  PROHIBITION SIGNS
 These are must not do signs.    These are circular white signs with a red bor-
der and red cross-bar, and are given in  Fig. 1.5   . They indicate an activity 
which must not be done. 
 FIGURE 1.4 
 Text only safety signs do not comply.    

The legal responsibilities of both employers and employees
23
  WARNING SIGNS
These give safety information .    These are triangular yellow signs with a 
black border and symbol, and are given in  Fig. 1.6   . They  give warning  of a 
hazard or danger. 
  MANDATORY SIGNS
These are  must do signs .    These are circular blue signs with a white symbol, 
and are given in  Fig. 1.7 . They  give instructions which must be obeyed. 
  ADVISORY OR SAFE CONDITION SIGN
These give safety information .    These are square or rectangular green signs 
with a white symbol, and are given in  Fig. 1.8   . They  give information about 
safety provision. 
 FIGURE 1.5 
 Prohibition signs. These are  must not do signs. 
 FIGURE 1.6 
 Warning signs. These give safety information. 

24
Basic Electrical Installation Work
 Accidents at work 
 FIGURE 1.8 
 Advisory or Safe condition signs. These also give safety information.    
   Definition  
 An  accident  may be defi ned as an 
uncontrolled event causing injury or 
damage to an individual or property. 
   Despite new legislation, improved information, education and training, 
accidents at work do still happen. An accident may be deﬁ ned as an uncon-
trolled event causing injury or damage to an individual or property. An acci-
dent can nearly always be avoided if correct procedures and methods of 
working are followed. Any accident which results in an absence from work 
for more than 3 days, causes a major injury or death, is notiﬁ able to the 
HSE. There are more than 40,000 accidents reported to the HSE each year 
which occur as a result of some building-related activity. To avoid having an 
accident you should: 
 1 .  follow all safety procedures (e.g. ﬁ t safety signs when isolating sup-
plies and screen off work areas from the general public); 
  2 .  not misuse or interfere with equipment provided for health and safety; 
 3 .  dress appropriately and use PPE when appropriate; 
 FIGURE 1.7 
 Mandatory signs. These are  must do signs. 

The legal responsibilities of both employers and employees
25
     4.      behave appropriately and with care;  
     5 .     avoid over-enthusiasm and foolishness;  
     6 .     stay alert and avoid fatigue;  
     7 .     not use alcohol or drugs at work;  
     8 .     work within your level of competence;  
     9 .     attend safety courses and read safety literature;  
 10.   take a positive decision to act and work safely. 
   If you observe a hazardous situation at work, ﬁ rst make the hazard safe, 
using an appropriate method, or screen it off, but only if you can do so 
without putting yourself or others at risk, then report the situation to your 
safety representative or supervisor. 
 Fire control 
Oxygen
Heat
Fuel
 FIGURE 1.9 
 The ﬁ re triangle. 
   Definition  
 Fire is a chemical reaction which will 
continue if fuel, oxygen and heat are 
present. 
Fire is a chemical reaction which will continue if fuel, oxygen and heat are 
present. To eliminate a ﬁ re  one  of these components must be removed. 
This is often expressed by means of the ﬁ re triangle shown in  Fig. 1.9 ; all 
three corners of the triangle must be present for a ﬁ re to burn. 
 Fuel 
   Fuel is found in the construction industry in many forms: petrol and paraf-
ﬁ n for portable generators and heaters; bottled gas for heating and solder-
ing. Most solvents are ﬂ ammable. Rubbish also represents a source of fuel: 
off-cuts of wood, rooﬁ ng felt, rags, empty solvent cans and discarded pack-
aging will all provide fuel for a ﬁ re. 
  To eliminate fuel as a source of ﬁ re, all ﬂ ammable liquids and gases 
should be stored correctly, usually in an outside locked store. The work-
ing environment should be kept clean by placing rags in a metal bin with 
a lid. Combustible waste material should be removed from the work site or 
burned outside under controlled conditions by a competent person.

26
Basic Electrical Installation Work
 Oxygen 
   Oxygen is all around us in the air we breathe, but can be eliminated from 
a small ﬁ re by smothering with a ﬁ re blanket, sand or foam. Closing doors 
and windows, but not locking them will limit the amount of oxygen avail-
able to a ﬁ re in a building and help to prevent it spreading. 
   Most substances will burn if they are at a high enough temperature and 
have a supply of oxygen. The minimum temperature at which a sub-
stance will burn is called the  ‘ minimum ignition temperature ’  and for most 
materials this is considerably higher than the surrounding temperature. 
However, a danger does exist from portable heaters, blow torches and hot 
air guns which provide heat and can cause a ﬁ re by raising the temperature 
of materials placed in their path above the minimum ignition temperature. 
A safe distance must be maintained between heat sources and all ﬂ amm-
able materials. 
 Heat 
   Heat can be removed from a ﬁ re by dousing with water, but water must 
not be used on burning liquids since the water will spread the liquid and 
the ﬁ re. Some ﬁ re extinguishers have a cooling action which removes heat 
from the ﬁ re. 
   Fires in industry damage property and materials, injure people and some-
times cause loss of life. Everyone should make an effort to prevent ﬁ res, but 
those which do break out should be extinguished as quickly as possible. 
 In the event of ﬁ re you should: 
●  raise the alarm; 
●  turn off machinery, gas and electricity supplies in the area of the ﬁ re; 
●  close doors and windows but without locking or bolting them; 
●      remove combustible materials and fuels away from the path of the 
ﬁ re, if the ﬁ re is small, and if this can be done safely; 
●  attack small ﬁ res with the correct extinguisher. 
 Only attack the ﬁ re if you can do so without endangering your own safety 
in any way. Always leave your own exit from the danger zone clear. Those 
not involved in ﬁ ghting the ﬁ re should walk to a safe area or assembly 
point.
 Fires are divided into four classes or categories: 
●  Class A are wood, paper and textile ﬁ res.  
●  Class B are liquid ﬁ res such as paint, petrol and oil. 
●  Class C are ﬁ res involving gas or spilled liqueﬁ ed gas.  
●  Class D are very special types of ﬁ re involving burning metal. 
 Electrical ﬁ res do not have a special category because, once started, they 
can be identiﬁ ed as one of the four above types. 
 Safety First
Fire 
   If you discover a fi re: 
 ● 
 raise the alarm; 
 ● 
 attack small fi res with an 
extinguisher; 
 ● 
 BUT only if you can do so without 
risk to your own safety. 

The legal responsibilities of both employers and employees
27
   Fire extinguishers are for dealing with small ﬁ res, and different types of 
ﬁ re must be attacked with a different type of extinguisher. Using the wrong 
type of extinguisher could make matters worse. For example, water must 
not be used on a liquid or electrical ﬁ re. The normal procedure when deal-
ing with electrical ﬁ res is to cut off the electrical supply and use an extin-
guisher which is appropriate to whatever is burning.  Figure 1.10    shows the 
correct type of extinguisher to be used on the various categories of ﬁ re. The 
colour coding shown is in accordance with BS EN3: 1996. 
 Electrical safety and isolation 
 Electrical supplies at voltages above extra low voltages (ELV) – that is, 
above 50       V a.c. – can kill human beings and livestock and should therefore 
be treated with the greatest respect. As an electrician working on electrical 
installations and equipment, you should always make sure that the supply 
Type of
fire
extinguisher
Type of
fire
Class A.
Paper, wood
and fabric
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Class B.
Flammable
liquids
Class C.
Flammable
gases
Electrical
fires
Motor
vehicle
protection
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
Water
Signal red
flash on red
Pale cream
flash on red
French blue
flash on red
Black
flash on red
Emerald green
flash on red
Foam
Carbon
dioxide gas
Vapourizing
foam
Dry powder
 FIGURE 1.10 
 Fire extinguishers and their applications (colour codes to BS EN3: 1996). The base colour of all ﬁ re 
extinguishers is red, with a different coloured ﬂ ash to indicate the type. 

28
Basic Electrical Installation Work
is ﬁ rst switched off. Every circuit must be provided with a means of isola-
tion (Regulation 132.10) and you should isolate and lock off before work 
begins. In order to deter anyone from reconnecting the supply, a  ‘ Danger 
Electrician at Work ’  sign should be displayed on the isolation switch. Where 
a test instrument or voltage indicator such as that shown in  Fig. 1.11    is 
used to prove conductors dead, Regulation 4(3) of EWR 1989 recommends 
that the following procedure should be adopted so that the device itself is 
 ‘ proved ’ :
 FIGURE 1.11 
 Typical voltage indicator. 
 Safety First
Working  ‘ Live ’ 
 ● 
 NEVER work  ‘ live ’ 
 ● 
 ALWAYS isolate fi rst 
 ● 
 SECURE the isolation 
 ● 
 PROVE the supply  ‘ dead ’ before 
starting work. 
    1 .    Connect the test device to the supply which is to be isolated; this 
should indicate mains voltage. 
 2 .  Isolate the supply and observe that the test device now reads 0  V. 
    3 .    Connect the test device to another source of supply to  ‘ prove ’  that 
the device is still working correctly. 
    4 .    Lock off the supply and place warning notices. Only then should 
work commence on the  ‘ dead ’ supply. 
  The test device must incorporate fused test leads to comply with HSE 
Guidance Note GS 38,  Electrical Test Equipment Used by Electricians . 
Electrical isolation of supplies is further discussed in Chapter 3 of 
this book. 
  Temporary electrical supplies on construction sites can save many per-
son-hours of labour by providing energy for ﬁ xed and portable tools and

The legal responsibilities of both employers and employees
29
lighting. However, as stated previously in this chapter, construction sites 
are dangerous places and the temporary electrical supplies must be safe. 
IEE Regulation 110.1 tells us that  ALL  the regulations apply to temporary 
electrical installations such as construction sites. The frequency of inspec-
tion of construction sites is increased to every 3 months because of the 
inherent dangers. Regulation 704.313.4 recommends the following voltages 
for distributing to plant and equipment on construction sites: 
 400  V – ﬁ xed plant such as cranes 
 230  V – site ofﬁ ces and ﬁ xed ﬂ oodlighting robustly installed 
 110  V – portable tools and hand lamps 
 SELV – portable lamps used in damp or conﬁ ned places. 
   Portable tools must be fed from a 110       V socket outlet unit (see  Fig. 1.12(a)   ) 
incorporating splash-proof sockets and plugs with a keyway which pre-
vents a tool from one voltage being connected to the socket outlet of a dif-
ferent voltage. 
   Socket outlet and plugs are also colour-coded for voltage identiﬁ cation: 
25       V violet, 50       V white, 110       V yellow, 230       V blue and 400       V red, as shown in 
 Fig. 1.12(b) . 
 Electric shock 
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 1.12
110 volts distribution unit and cable connector suitable for construction site electrical supplies: (a) 
reduced-voltage distribution unit incorporating industrial sockets to BS 4343; (b) industrial plug and 
connector.
Electric shock occurs when a person becomes part of the electrical cir-
cuit, as shown in  Fig. 1.13   . The level or intensity of the shock will depend 
upon many factors, such as age, ﬁ tness and the circumstances in which 
the shock is received. The lethal level is approximately 50       mA, above which 
muscles contract, the heart ﬂ utters and breathing stops. A shock above the 
50       mA level is therefore fatal unless the person is quickly separated from 
the supply. Below 50       mA only an unpleasant tingling sensation may be 
experienced or you may be thrown across a room, roof or ladder, but the 
resulting fall may lead to serious injury. 
   Definition  
 Electric shock occurs when a person 
becomes part of the electrical circuit. 

30
Basic Electrical Installation Work
  To prevent people receiving an electric shock accidentally, all circuits must 
contain protective devices. All exposed metal must be earthed; fuses and 
miniature circuit breakers (MCBs) are designed to trip under fault condi-
tions and residual current devices (RCDs) are designed to trip below the 
fatal level as described in Chapter 4. 
   Construction workers and particularly electricians do receive electric 
shocks, usually as a result of carelessness or unforeseen circumstances. 
When this happens it is necessary to act quickly to prevent the electric 
shock becoming fatal. Actions to be taken upon ﬁ nding a workmate receiv-
ing an electric shock are as follows: 
●  Switch off the supply if possible. 
●      Alternatively, remove the person from the supply  without touching 
him , e.g. push him off with a piece of wood, pull him off with a scarf, 
dry towel or coat. 
●      If breathing or heart has stopped, immediately call professional help 
by dialling 999 or 112 and asking for the ambulance service. Give 
precise directions to the scene of the accident. The casualty stands 
the best chance of survival if the emergency services can get a rapid 
response paramedic team quickly to the scene. They have extensive 
training and will have specialist equipment with them. 
●      Only then should you apply resuscitation or cardiac massage until 
the patient recovers, or help arrives. 
●  Treat for shock. 
Consumer’s isolation and
protection equipment
L
N
E
Supply
transformer
secondary
winding
 FIGURE 1.13 
 Touching live and earth or live and neutral makes a person part of the electrical circuit and can lead to 
an electric shock. 

The legal responsibilities of both employers and employees
31
 First aid 
   Despite all the safety precautions taken on construction sites to prevent 
injury to the workforce, accidents do happen and  you  may be the only 
other person able to take action to assist a workmate. If you are not a qual-
iﬁ ed ﬁ rst aider limit your help to obvious common sense assistance and 
call for help,  but do remember that if a workmate’s heart or breathing has 
stopped as a result of an accident he has only minutes to live unless you 
act quickly. The Health and Safety (First Aid) Regulations 1981 and relevant 
approved codes of practice and guidance notes place a duty of care on all 
employers to provide  adequate ﬁ rst aid facilities appropriate to the type of 
work being undertaken.  Adequate  facilities will relate to a number of fac-
tors such as: 
●  How many employees are employed? 
●  What type of work is being carried out? 
●  Are there any special or unusual hazards? 
●  Are employees working in scattered and/or isolated locations? 
●  Is there shift work or  ‘ out of hours ’ work being undertaken? 
●  Is the workplace remote from emergency medical services? 
●  Are there inexperienced workers on site? 
●      What were the risks of injury and ill health identiﬁ ed by the com-
pany’s Hazard Risk Assessment? 
 The regulations state that:
  Employers are under a duty to provide such numbers of suitable per-
sons as is adequate and appropriate in the circumstances  for render-
ing ﬁ rst aid to his employees if they are injured or become ill at work. 
For this purpose a person shall not be suitable unless he or she has 
undergone such training and has such qualiﬁ cations as the Health 
and Safety Executive may approve. 
  This is typical of the way in which the health and safety regulations are 
written. The regulations and codes of practice do not specify numbers, but 
set out guidelines in respect of the number of ﬁ rst aiders needed, depen-
dent upon the type of company, the hazards present and the number of 
people employed. 
 Let us now consider the questions  ‘ what is ﬁ rst aid ’ ? and  ‘ who might 
become a ﬁ rst aider? ’ The regulations give the following deﬁ nitions of ﬁ rst 
aid.  ‘ First aid  is the treatment of minor injuries which would otherwise 
receive no treatment or do not need treatment by a doctor or nurse ’   or
 ‘ In cases where a person will require help from a doctor or nurse, ﬁ rst 
aid is treatment for the purpose of preserving life and minimizing the 

32
Basic Electrical Installation Work
consequences of an injury or illness until such help is obtained ’ . A more 
generally accepted deﬁ nition of ﬁ rst aid might be as follows:  ﬁ rst aid is the 
initial assistance or treatment given to a casualty for any injury or sudden 
illness before the arrival of an ambulance, doctor or other medically quali-
ﬁ ed person.
 Now having deﬁ ned ﬁ rst aid, who might become a ﬁ rst aider? A  ﬁ rst aider  
is someone who has undergone a training course to administer ﬁ rst aid 
at work and holds a current ﬁ rst aid certiﬁ cate. The training course and 
certiﬁ cation must be approved by the HSE. The aims of a ﬁ rst aider are to 
preserve life, to limit the worsening of the injury or illness and to promote 
recovery.
 Definition  
 First aid  is the initial assistance or treat-
ment given to a casualty for any injury 
or sudden illness before the arrival of 
an ambulance, doctor or other medi-
cally qualifi ed person. 
 Definition  
 A  fi rst aider  is someone who has 
undergone a training course to 
administer fi rst aid at work and holds 
a current fi rst aid certifi cate. 
 A ﬁ rst aider may also undertake the duties of an  appointed person . An 
appointed person is someone who is nominated to take charge when 
someone is injured or becomes ill, including calling an ambulance if 
required. The appointed person will also look after the ﬁ rst aid equipment, 
including re-stocking the ﬁ rst aid box.
 Definition  
 An  appointed person  is someone who 
is nominated to take charge when 
someone is injured or becomes ill, 
including calling an ambulance if 
required. The appointed person will 
also look after the fi rst aid equipment, 
including re-stocking the fi rst aid box. 
   Appointed persons should not attempt to give ﬁ rst aid for which they 
have not been trained, but should limit their help to obvious common sense 
assistance and summon professional assistance as required. Suggested 
numbers of ﬁ rst aid personnel are given in  Table 1.1 . The actual number of 
ﬁ rst aid personnel must take into account any special circumstances such 
as remoteness from medical services, the use of several separate build-
ings and the company’s hazard risk assessment. First aid personnel must 
be available at all times when people are at work, taking into account shift 
working patterns and providing cover for sickness absences. 
   Every company must have at least one ﬁ rst aid kit under the regula-
tions. The size and contents of the kit will depend upon the nature of the 
risks involved in the particular working environment and the number of 
employees.  Table 1.2  gives a list of the contents of any ﬁ rst aid box to com-
ply with the HSE Regulations. 
  There now follows a description of some ﬁ rst aid procedures which 
should be practised under expert guidance before they are required in an 
emergency. 
 Bleeding 
   If the wound is dirty, rinse it under clean running water. Clean the skin 
around the wound and apply a plaster, pulling the skin together. 
   If the bleeding is severe apply direct pressure to reduce the bleeding and 
raise the limb if possible. Apply a sterile dressing or pad and bandage 
ﬁ rmly before obtaining professional advice. 
  To avoid possible contact with hepatitis or the AIDS virus, when dealing 
with open wounds, ﬁ rst aiders should avoid contact with fresh blood by 
wearing plastic or rubber protective gloves, or by allowing the casualty to 
apply pressure to the bleeding wound. 

The legal responsibilities of both employers and employees
33
 Burns 
   Remove heat from the burn to relieve the pain by placing the injured part 
under clean cold water. Do not remove burnt clothing sticking to the skin. 
Do not apply lotions or ointments. Do not break blisters or attempt to 
remove loose skin. Cover the injured area with a clean dry dressing. 
 Broken bones 
   Make the casualty as comfortable as possible by supporting the broken 
limb either by hand or with padding. Do not move the casualty unless by 
remaining in that position he is likely to suffer further injury. Obtain pro-
fessional help as soon as possible. 
 Contact with chemicals 
  Wash the affected area very thoroughly with clean cold water. Remove any 
contaminated clothing. Cover the affected area with a clean sterile dressing 
and seek expert advice. It is a wise precaution to treat all chemical substances 
as possibly harmful; even commonly used substances can be dangerous if 
contamination is from concentrated solutions. When handling dangerous 
substances, it is also good practice to have a neutralizing agent to hand. 
   Disposal of dangerous substances must not be into the main drains since 
this can give rise to an environmental hazard, but should be undertaken in 
accordance with local authority regulations. 
 Exposure to toxic fumes 
   Get the casualty into fresh air quickly and encourage deep breathing if con-
scious. Resuscitate if breathing has stopped. Obtain expert medical advice 
as fumes may cause irritation of the lungs. 
 Sprains and bruising 
   A cold compress can help to relieve swelling and pain. Soak a towel or cloth 
in cold water, squeeze it out and place it on the injured part. Renew the 
compress every few minutes. 
 Breathing stopped 
   Remove any restrictions from the face and any vomit, loose or false teeth 
from the mouth. Loosen tight clothing around the neck, chest and waist. 
To ensure a good airway, lay the casualty on his back and support the 
shoulders on some padding. Tilt the head backwards and open the mouth. 
If the casualty is faintly breathing, lifting the tongue, clearing of the airway 
may be all that is necessary to restore normal breathing. However, if the 
casualty does not begin to breathe, open your mouth wide and take a deep 
breath, close the casualty’s nose by pinching with your ﬁ ngers, and, seal-
ing your lips around his mouth, blow into his lungs until the chest rises. 
Remove your mouth and watch the casualty’s chest fall. Continue this pro-
cedure at your natural breathing rate. If the mouth is damaged or you have 
difﬁ culty making a seal around the casualty’s mouth, close his mouth and 
inﬂ ate the lungs through his nostrils. Give artiﬁ cial respiration until natu-
ral breathing is restored or until professional help arrives. 

34
Basic Electrical Installation Work
 Heart stopped beating 
  This sometimes happens following a severe electric shock. If the casualty’s 
lips are blue, the pupils of his eyes widely dilated and the pulse in his neck 
cannot be felt, then he may have gone into cardiac arrest. Act quickly and 
lay the casualty on his back. Kneel down beside him and place the heel of 
one hand in the centre of his chest. Cover this hand with your other hand 
and interlace the ﬁ ngers. Straighten your arms and press down on his 
chest sharply with the heel of your hands and then release the pressure. 
Continue to do this 15 times at the rate of one push per second. Check the 
casualty’s pulse. If none is felt, give two breaths of artiﬁ cial respiration and 
then a further 15 chest compressions. Continue this procedure until the 
heartbeat is restored and the artiﬁ cial respiration until normal breathing 
returns. Pay close attention to the condition of the casualty while giving 
heart massage. When a pulse is restored the blueness around the mouth 
will quickly go away and you should stop the heart massage. Look care-
fully at the rate of breathing. When this is also normal, stop giving artiﬁ cial 
respiration. Treat the casualty for shock, place him in the recovery position 
and obtain professional help. 
 Shock 
   Everyone suffers from shock following an accident. The severity of the 
shock depends upon the nature and extent of the injury. In cases of severe 
shock the casualty will become pale and his skin become clammy from 
sweating. He may feel faint, have blurred vision, feel sick and complain of 
thirst. Reassure the casualty that everything that needs to be done is being 
done. Loosen tight clothing and keep him warm and dry until help arrives. 
Do not move him unnecessarily or give him anything to drink. 
 Accident reports 
   Every accident must be reported to an employer and the details of the acci-
dent and treatment given are suitably documented. A ﬁ rst aid Log book or 
accident book such as that shown in  Fig. 1.14    containing ﬁ rst aid treatment 
 FIGURE 1.14 
 First aid log book/accident book with data protection compliant removable sheets. 

The legal responsibilities of both employers and employees
35
record sheets could be used to effectively document accidents which occur 
in the workplace and the treatment given. Failure to do so may inﬂ uence 
the payment of compensation at a later date if an injury leads to perma-
nent disability. To comply with the Data Protection Regulations, from the 
31 December 2003 all First Aid Treatment Log books or Accident Report 
books must contain perforated sheets which can be removed after comple-
tion and ﬁ led away for personal security. 

 Check your Understanding  
  When you have completed the questions, check out the answers at the back 
of the book. 
 Note: more than one multiple choice answer may be correct. 
 1.  For any ﬁ re to continue to burn, three components must be present. 
These are: 
  a.  fuel, wood and cardboard  
  b.  petrol, oxygen and bottled gas  
  c.  flames, fuel and heat  
  d.  fuel, oxygen and heat.  
 2.  A water ﬁ re extinguisher is suitable for use on small ﬁ res of burning 
  a.  wood, paper and fabric  
  b.  flammable liquids  
  c.   flammable gas  
  d.   all of the above.  
 3.  A foam ﬁ re extinguisher is suitable for use on small ﬁ res of burning 
  a.  wood, paper and fabric  
   b.  flammable liquids  
   c.  flammable gas  
  d.   all of the above.  
 4.  A carbon dioxide gas ﬁ re extinguisher is suitable for use on small ﬁ res of 
burning 
   a.  wood, paper and fabric  
  b.  flammable liquids  
  c.   flammable gas  
  d.   all of the above.  
 5.  A dry powder ﬁ re extinguisher is suitable for use on small ﬁ res of burning 
  a.  wood, paper and fabric  
  b.  flammable liquids  
  c.   flammable gas  
  d.   all of the above.  
 6.  A vapourizing foam ﬁ re extinguisher is suitable for use on small ﬁ res of 
burning 
  a.  wood, paper and fabric  
  b.  flammable liquids  
  c.   flammable gas  
  d.   all of the above.  

Ch 1
37
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3 
4 
5 
6 
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
 7.   You should only attack a ﬁ re with a ﬁ re extinguisher if 
 
  a.  it is burning brightly  
 
  b.  you can save someone’s property  
 
  c.  you can save someone’s life  
 
  d.  you can do so without putting yourself at risk.  
 8.  A ﬁ re extinguisher should only be used to ﬁ ght 
 
  a.  car fires  
 
  b.  electrical fires  
 
   c.  small fires  
 
  d.  big fires.  
 9.  A Statutory Regulation 
 
  a.  is the law of the land  
 
  b.  must be obeyed  
 
  c.  tells us how to comply with the law  
 
  d.    is a code of practice.  
 10.  A Non-statutory Regulation 
 
  a.  is the law of the land  
 
  b.  must be obeyed  
 
  c.  tells us how to comply with the law  
 
  d.  is a code of practice.  
 11.  Under the Health and Safety at Work Act an employer is 
responsible for 
 
  a.  maintaining plant and equipment  
 
  b.  providing PPE  
 
   c.  wearing PPE  
 
  d.   taking reasonable care to avoid injury.  
 12.  Under the Health and Safety at Work Act an employee is 
responsible for 
  
a.  maintaining plant and equipment  
  
b.  providing PPE  
  
c.   wearing PPE  
  
d.   taking reasonable care to avoid injury.  

 13.  The IEE Wiring Regulations 
 
  a.  are Statutory regulations  
 
  b.  are Non-statutory regulations  
 
  c.  are codes of good practice  
 
  d.  must always be complied with.  
 14.  Before beginning work on a  ‘ live ’ circuit or piece of equipment you 
should 
 
  a.  only work  ‘ live’ if your supervisor is with you  
 
  b.  only work  ‘ live ’ if you feel that you are  ‘ competent ’ to do so  
 
  c.  isolate the circuit or equipment before work commences  
 
  d.  secure the isolation before work commences.  
 15.  The initial assistance or treatment given to a casualty for any injury or 
sudden illness before the arrival of an ambulance or medically qualiﬁ ed 
person is one deﬁ nition of 
 
  a.  an appointed person  
 
  b.   a first aider  
 
  c.  first aid  
 
  d.  an adequate first aid facility.  
 16.  Someone who has undergone a training course to administer medical 
aid at work and holds a current qualiﬁ cation is one deﬁ nition of 
 
  a.  a doctor  
 
  b.  a nurse  
 
  c.  a first aider  
 
  d.  a supervisor.  
 17.  Use bullet points to describe a safe isolation procedure of a  ‘ live ’ 
electrical circuit. 
 18.  How does the law enforce the regulations of the Health and Safety at 
Work Act?  
 19.  List the responsibilities under the Health and Safety at Work Act of: 
 
  (a)  an employer to his employees  
 
(  b)  an employee to his employer.  
 20.  Safety signs are used in the working environment to give information 
and warning. Sketch and colour, one sign from each of the four 
categories of signs and state the message given by that sign. 

Ch 1
39
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3 
4 
5 
6 
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
 21.  State the name of two important Statutory Regulations and one Non-
statutory Regulation relevant to the electrotechnical industry. 
 22.  Deﬁ ne what is meant by PPE. 
 23.   State ﬁ ve pieces of PPE which a trainee could be expected to wear at 
work and the protection given by each piece. 
 24.   Describe the action to be taken upon ﬁ nding a workmate apparently 
dead on the ﬂ oor and connected to an electrical supply. 
 25.  State how the Data Protection Act has changed the way in which we 
record accident and ﬁ rst aid information at work. 

This page intentionally left blank

U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3 
4
5 
6 
To 3 phase supply
U
V
W
 The occupational specialisms 
and individual roles within 
the electrotechnical industry 
 Ch 2 
41
 Unit 1 – Working effectively and safely in the electrotechnical 
environment – Outcome 2 
 Underpinning knowledge: when you have completed this chapter, you should be able to: 
●  identify the different organizations which have electrotechnical activities 
●  describe the services provided by the electrotechnical industry 
●  state the role of the people working in the electrotechnical industry 
●  identify the professional bodies supporting electrotechnical organizations 

42
Basic Electrical Installation Work
 Organizations having electrotechnical activities 
  When we talk about the Electrotechnical Industry we are referring to all 
those different organizations or companies which provide an electrical ser-
vice of some kind. 
   Electrical contractors install equipment and systems in new buildings. 
Once a building is fully operational, the electrical contractor may provide 
a maintenance service to that client or customer or alternatively the client 
may employ an  ‘ in-house ’  electrician to maintain the installed electrical 
equipment. It all depends on the amount of work to be done and the com-
plexity of the customers’ systems. 
  The City and Guilds Syllabus directs us to look at  twelve different organi-
zations having electrotechnical activities and  ten  services provided by the 
electrotechnical industry, so here goes. 
 1.  Electrical contractors 
 
 ●  electrical contractors provide a design and installation service for 
all types of buildings and construction projects 
 
 ●       the focus of this type of organization is on all types of electrotech-
nical activities in and around buildings 
 
 ●  they install electrical equipment 
 
 ●  they install electrical wiring systems 
 
 ●       they carry out their installation work in domestic, commercial, 
industrial, agricultural and horticultural buildings 
 2.  Factories 
 
 ●  factories contain lots of electrical plant and equipment 
 
 ●       the wheels of all types of industry are driven by electromechani-
cal devices and electrotechnical activities; such as motors and 
control systems 
 3.  Process plants 
 
 ●       whether they process food or nuclear fuels, the prime mover 
for all processes is electrical plant, control and instrumentation 
equipment and machine drives 
 4.  Local councils 
 
 ●       they are responsible for many different types of community 
buildings from town halls to swimming pools 
 
 ●  the buildings all have electrical systems which require installa-
tion, maintenance and repair     
    5.     Commercial buildings and complexes 
 
 ●  the  ‘ ofﬁ ce type ’  activities carried out in these buildings require 
that electrical communication and data transmission systems are 
installed, maintained and repaired 

The occupational specialisms and individual roles within the electrotechnical industry
43
     6.      Leisure centres 
 
 ●   
    these type of buildings contain lots of equipment driven by 
human sweat but which is also controlled and monitored by 
electrical and electronic systems 
 
 ● 
 Leisure centres might contain a swimming pool or  ‘ hot-air ’ 
sauna. Both types of electrical installation are considered 
 ‘ Special Installations ’ by the IEE Regulations BS: 7671 
     7.      Panel builders 
 
 ● 
 build specialist control, protection and isolation main switch-
gear systems for commerce and industry 
 
 ●   
    the panel incorporates the isolation and protection systems 
required by the electrical installation 
     8.      Motor re-wind and repair 
 
 ●   
    electrical motors and their drives usually form an integral part 
of the industrial system or process 
 
 ●   
    electrical motors and transformers sometimes break down or 
burn out 
 
 ● 
 an exact new replacement can often be quickly installed 
 
 ●   
    alternatively the existing motor can be re-wound and recondi-
tioned by a specialist company if time permits 
     9.      Railways 
 
 ●   
    the prime mover for a modern inter-city type electric train is an 
electric motor 
 
 ● 
 electric trains require an infrastructure of electrical transmis-
sion lines throughout the network 
 
 ● 
 all rail movements require signal and control systems 
 
 ● 
 railway station buildings contain electrical and electronic 
installations 
 10.  The armed forces 
 
 ● 
 operate in harsh, hostile and unpredictable environments 
 
 ●   
    they need to adapt, modify and repair electrical and electronic 
systems in a war situation away from their home base and a 
comfortable well equipped workshop 
 
 ●   
    a modern warship can contain as many people as an English vil-
lage. They need electrotechnical systems to support them and 
to keep them safe 24 h per day, 7 days per week 
 11.  Hospitals 
 
 ● 
 contain a great deal of high technology equipment 
 
 ● 
 this equipment requires power and electronic systems 

44
Basic Electrical Installation Work
 
 ●   
    life monitoring equipment must continue to operate in a power 
failure  
 
 ● 
 standby electrical supplies are, therefore, often an important 
part of a hospital’s electrical installations 
 12.  Equipment and machine manufacturers 
 
 ● 
 white goods, brown goods, computer hardware, motors and 
transformers are manufactured to meet the increasing demands 
of the domestic, commercial and industrial markets 
 
 ● 
 they are manufactured to very high standards and often contain 
very sophisticated electrical and electronic circuits and systems 
 
 ● 
 they manufacture to British and European Standards 
 Try This 
Information 
  Which type of electrotechnical organization do you belong to? 
  What types of work have you carried out so far? 
 Services provided by the electrotechnical industry 
 1.  Lighting and power installations ensure that the building in which 
they are installed 
 
 ●      is illuminated to an appropriate level  
 
 ●  is heated to a comfortable level 
 
 ●     has the power circuits to drive the electrical and electronic equip-
ment required by those who will use the buildings 
 2.  Emergency lighting and security systems 
 
 ●       These ensure that the building is safe to use in unforeseen or 
adverse situations 
  
 ●  is secure from unwanted intruders 
 3.  Building Management and control systems 
 
 ●       These systems provide a controlled environment for the people 
who use commercial buildings 
 
 ●       They provide a pleasant environment so that people can work 
effectively and efﬁ ciently 
 4.  Instrumentation 
 
 ●     Electrical instrumentation allows us to monitor industrial pro-
cesses and systems often at a safe distance 

The occupational specialisms and individual roles within the electrotechnical industry
45
     5.      Electrical maintenance 
 
 ●   
    A programme of planned maintenance allows us to maintain 
the efﬁ ciency of all installed systems 
     6.      Live cable jointing 
 
 ● 
 Making connections to  ‘ live ’ cables provides a means of con-
necting new installations and services to existing live supply 
cables without inconvenience to existing supplies caused by 
electrical shutdown. This work requires special training 
     7.      Highway electrical systems 
 
 ● 
 Illuminated motorways, roads and trafﬁ c control systems make 
our roads and pavements safe for vehicles and pedestrians 
     8.      Electrical panel building 
 
 ●   
    Main electrical panels provide a means of electrical isolation 
and protection 
 
 ●   
    They also provide a means of monitoring and measuring elec-
trical systems in our commercial and industrial buildings 
     9.      Electrical machine drive installations 
 
 ●   
    Electrical machine drives drive everything that makes our mod-
ern life comfortable from 
 
 ● 
 trains and trams to 
 
 ● 
 lifts and air conditioning units 
 
 ● 
 refrigerators, freezers and all types of domestic appliances 
    10.     Consumer and commercial electronics 
 
 ● 
 These give us data processing and number crunching 
 
  ● 
 electronic mail and access to information on the world wide web 
 
 ● 
 access to high quality audio and video systems 
 Try This
Information 
   Which services does the company you work for provide within the Electrotechnical 
Industry?  
 Roles and responsibilities of workers in the 
electrotechnical industry 
   Any electrotechnical organization is made up of a group of individuals with 
various duties, all working together for their own good, the good of their 
employer and their customers. 

46
Basic Electrical Installation Work
  There is often no clear distinction between the duties of the individual 
employees, each do some of the others work activities. 
   Responsibilities vary, even by people holding the same job title and some 
individuals hold more than one job title. However, let us look at some of 
the roles and responsibilities of those working in the electrotechnical 
industry. 
 1.  Design engineer 
 
 ●       The design engineer will normally meet with clients and other 
trade professionals to interpret the customers’ requirements 
 
 ●       He or she will produce the design speciﬁ cation which enables the 
cost of the project to be estimated 
 2.  Estimator/cost engineer 
 
 ●       This person measures the quantities of labour and material nec-
essary to complete the electrical project using the plans and 
speciﬁ cations for the project 
 
 ●  From these calculations and the company’s ﬁ xed costs, a project 
cost can be agreed 
 3.  Contracts manager 
 
 ●  may oversee a number of electrical contracts on different sites 
 
 ●       will monitor progress in consultation with the project manager 
on behalf of the electrical companies 
 
 ●  cost out variations to the initial contract 
 
 ●       may have health and safety responsibilities because he or she has 
an overview of all company employees and contracts in progress 
 4.  Project manager 
 
 ●       is responsible for the day-to-day management of one speciﬁ c 
contract 
 
 ●       will have overall responsibility on that site for the whole electrical 
installation
 
 ●       attends site meetings with other trades as the representative of 
the electrical contractor 
 5.  Service manager 
 
 ●       monitors the quality of the service delivered under the terms of 
the contractor 
 
 ●  checks that the contract targets are being met 
 
      ●  checks that the customer is satisﬁ ed with all aspects of the project  
 
 ●  the service manager’s focus is customer speciﬁ c while the Project 
Manager’s focus is job speciﬁ c 

The occupational specialisms and individual roles within the electrotechnical industry
47
     6.      Technician 
 
 ● 
 will be more ofﬁ ce based than site based 
 
 ● 
 will carry out surveys of electrical systems 
 
 ● 
 update electrical drawings 
 
 ● 
 obtain quotations from suppliers 
 
 ● 
 maintain records such as ISO 9000 quality systems 
 
 ●   
    carry out testing inspections and commissioning of electrical 
installations
 
 ● 
 trouble shoot 
     7.      Supervisor/Foreman 
 
 ● 
 This person will probably be a mature electrician 
 
 ● 
 have responsibility for small contracts 
 
 ● 
 have responsibility for a small part of a large contract 
 
 ●   
    be the leader of a small team (e.g. electrician and trainee) 
installing electrical systems 
     8.      Operative or skilled operative 
 
 ●   
    This person will carry out the electrical work under the direc-
tion and guidance of a supervisor 
 
 ●   
    will demonstrate a high degree of skill and competence in elec-
trical work 
 
 ●   
    will have, or be working towards, a recognized electrical qualiﬁ -
cation and status as an electrician, approved electrician or elec-
trical technician. 
     9.      Mechanic/Fitter 
 
 ● 
 An operative who usually has a  ‘ core skill ’ or  ‘ basic skill ’ and 
qualiﬁ cation in mechanical rather than electrical engineering 
 
 ●   
    in production or process work, he or she would have respon-
sibility for the engineering and ﬁ tting aspects of the contract, 
while the electrician and instrumentation technician would 
take care of the electrical and instrumentation aspects 
 
 ●   
    all three operatives must work closely in production and pro-
cess work 
 
 ● 
 ‘ additional skilling ’ or  ‘ multi-skilling ’ training produces a more 
ﬂ exible operative for production and process plant operations 
 10.  Maintenance manager/engineer 
 
 ● 
 is responsible for keeping the installed electrotechnical plant 
and equipment working efﬁ ciently 

48
Basic Electrical Installation Work
 
 ●   
    takes over from the builders and contractors the responsibility 
of maintaining all plant equipment and systems under his or 
her control 
 
 ●   
    might be responsible for a hospital or a commercial building, a 
university or college complex 
 
 ● 
 will set up routine and preventative maintenance programmes 
to reduce possible future breakdowns 
 
 ● 
 when faults or breakdowns do occur he or she will be respon-
sible for the repair using the company’s maintenance staff 
 Try This 
Information 
  Where do you fi t into your company’s workforce? 
  What is your job title – apprentice/trainee? 
  What is your supervisor’s job title? 
  What is the name of the foreman? 
 The electrical team 
   An electrical contractor is responsible for the installation of electrical 
equipment within a building. An electrical contracting ﬁ rm is made up 
of a group of individuals with varying duties and responsibilities (see  Fig. 
2.1   ). There is often no clear distinction between the duties of the individ-
uals, and the responsibilities carried by an employee will vary from one 
employer to another employer. If the ﬁ rm is to be successful, the individu-
als must work together to meet the requirements of their customers. Good 
customer relationships are important for the success of the ﬁ rm and the 
continuing employment of the employee. 
  The customer or his or her representatives will probably see more of the 
electrician and the electrical trainee than the managing director of the 
ﬁ rm and, therefore, the image presented by them is very important. They 
should always be polite and be seen to be capable and in command of the 
situation. This gives a customer conﬁ dence in the ﬁ rm’s ability to meet his 
or her needs. The electrician and his or her trainee should be appropriately 
dressed for the job in hand, which probably means an overall of some kind. 
Footwear is also important, but sometimes a difﬁ cult consideration for an 
electrician. For example, if working in a factory, the safety regulations insist 
that protective footwear be worn, but rubber boots may be most appropri-
ate for a building site. However, neither of these would be the most suit-
able footwear for an electrician ﬁ xing a new light ﬁ tting in the home of the 
managing director! 
  The electrical installation in a building is often carried out alongside other 
trades. It makes sound sense to help other trades where possible and to 
develop good working relationships with other employees. 

49
FLASH-BANG
ELECTRICAL CO.
Interpret
customer
requirements
Demonstrate
good
workmanship
Always work
safely
Maintain good
relationships
with other trades
Keep work
area tidy
Dress and
behave
appropriately
Produce ‘as
fitted’
drawings
Inspect and
test the
installation
Interpret
specifications
and drawings
Meet IEE
Regulations
Cost out
labour and
materials
Produce the
tender
Order
materials
Monitor
progress
Cost out
variations to
contract
The design team
The installation team
 FIGURE 2.1 
  The electrical team. 

50
Basic Electrical Installation Work
  The employer has the responsibility of ﬁ nding sufﬁ cient work for his or her 
employees, paying government taxes and meeting the requirements of the 
Health and Safety at Work Act described earlier. The rates of pay and condi-
tions for electricians and trainees are determined by negotiation between 
the Joint Industry Board and the Union, Amicus, which will also repre-
sent their members in any disputes. Electricians are usually paid at a rate 
agreed for their grade as an electrician, approved electrician or technician 
electrician; movements through the grades are determined by a combina-
tion of academic achievement and practical experience. 
   One of the installation team will have special responsibility for the speciﬁ c 
contract being carried out. He or she might be called the project manager 
or supervisor and will be responsible to his or her electrical company to 
see that the design speciﬁ cation is carried out and will have overall respon-
sibility on that site for the electrical installation. He or she will attend site 
meetings as the representative of the electrical contractor, supported by 
other members of the team, who will demonstrate a range of skills and 
responsibilities. The supervisor himself will probably be a mature electri-
cian of  ‘ technician ’  status. The trainee electrician will initially work along-
side an electrician or  ‘ approved electrician ’ , who might have been given 
responsibility for a small part of a large installation by the supervisor 
on site. 
  The project manager or site supervisor will be supported by the design 
team. The design team might be made up of a contracts manager, who 
will oversee a number of individual electrical contracts at different sites, 
monitoring progress and costing out variations to the initial contractual 
agreement. He or she might also have responsibility for health and safety 
because he or she attends all sites, therefore, has an overview of all com-
pany employees and projects that are being carried out. 
  The contracts manager will also be supported by the design engineer.
The design engineer will meet with clients, architects and other trade 
professionals, to interpret the customer’s requirements. He or she will pro-
duce the design speciﬁ cations, which will set out the detailed design of 
the electrical installation and provide sufﬁ cient information to enable a 
competent person to carry out such installation. The design speciﬁ cations 
will also enable a cost for the project to be estimated and included in the 
legal contracts between the client or main contractor and the electrical 
contractor. 
 Electrotechnical industry 
  The electrical team discussed above are working for an electrical contract-
ing company, which I have called the Flash-Bang Electrical Company (as 
a joke between you and me). Any electrical contractor is part of the elec-
trotechnical industry. The work of an electrical contractor is one of  install-
ing  electrical equipment and systems, but a very similar role is also carried 
out by electrical teams working for local councils, the railways, the armed 
forces and hospitals. 

The occupational specialisms and individual roles within the electrotechnical industry
51
  White goods and electrical control panels are  manufactured and assembled 
to meet speciﬁ c speciﬁ cations by electrical teams working in the manufac-
turing sector of the electrotechnical industry. 
  Whatever section of the electrotechnical industry  you  work for, the organiza-
tional structure of your company will be similar to the one described above 
for the electrical contractor. The electrical team in any section of the electro-
technical industry is made up of a dedicated team of  ‘ electrical craftsmen ’  or 
 ‘ operatives ’ , carrying out their work to a high standard of competence and 
skill while complying with the requirements of the relevant regulations. The 
craftsmen are supported by a supervisor or a foreman, who pulls together 
the various parts of that speciﬁ c job or product, thereby meeting the require-
ments of the client or customer. The supervisor is supported by the manager, 
who is responsible for designing the electrotechnical product within the 
requirements of all relevant regulations and speciﬁ cations. 
  The craftsman, supervisor, foreman or manager, might be called something 
different in your electrotechnical company’s organization, but there will be 
a team of people installing  equipment and systems or  maintaining equip-
ment and systems or manufacturing  panels, equipment and machines or 
re-winding  electrical machines and transformers. Each individual has a 
speciﬁ c role to play within the teams discussed earlier for  ‘ the electrical 
team ’ . Each individual is important to the success of the team and the suc-
cess of the company.
 Definition  
 The electrotechnical industry  is made 
up of a variety of individual compa-
nies, all providing a service within 
their own specialism to a customer, 
client or user. 
 The electrotechnical industry is made up of a variety of individual com-
panies, all providing a service within their own specialism to a customer, 
client or user 
The electrical contracting industry  provides lighting and power installations 
so that buildings and systems may be illuminated to an appropriate level, 
heated to a comfortable level and have the power circuits to drive electri-
cal and electronic equipment. Emergency lighting and security systems are 
installed so that buildings are safe in unforeseen and adverse situations. 
Building management and control systems  provide a controlled environ-
ment for the people who use commercial buildings. 
Instrumentation allows us to monitor industrial processes and systems. 
Electrical maintenance  allows us to maintain the efﬁ ciency of all installed 
systems. 
Computer installations , ﬁ bre optic cables and data cabling provide speedy 
data processing and communications. 
High voltage/low voltage (HV/LV) jointing  provides a means of connecting 
new installations and services to live cables without the need to inconve-
nience existing supplies by electrical shutdown. 
Highway electrical systems  make our roads, pavements and alleyways safer 
for vehicle users and pedestrians. 
Electrical panels  provide electrical protection, isolation and monitoring for 
the electrical systems in commercial and industrial buildings. 

52
Basic Electrical Installation Work
  Electrical machine drive installations  drive everything that makes our mod-
ern life comfortable, from trains and trams to lifts and air conditioning units. 
 Finally,  consumer commercial electronics  allows us to live our modern life 
of rapid personal communication systems while listening to popular or 
classical music and watching wide screen television. 
 Designing an electrical installation 
  The designer of an electrical installation must ensure that the design meets 
the requirements of the IEE Wiring Regulations for electrical installations and 
any other regulations which may be relevant to a particular installation. The 
designer may be a professional technician or engineer whose only job is to 
design electrical installations for a large contracting ﬁ rm. In a smaller ﬁ rm, 
the designer may also be the electrician who will carry out the installation to 
the customer’s requirements. The designer of any electrical installation is the 
person who interprets the electrical requirements of the customer within the 
regulations, identiﬁ es the appropriate types of installation, the most suitable 
methods of protection and control and the size of cables to be used. 
   A large electrical installation may require many meetings with the cus-
tomer and his or her professional representatives in order to identify a 
speciﬁ cation of what is required. The designer can then identify the general 
characteristics of the electrical installation and its compatibility with other 
services and equipment, as indicated in Part 3 of the Regulations. The pro-
tection and safety of the installation, and of those who will use it, must be 
considered, with due regard to Part 4 of the Regulations. An assessment 
of the frequency and quality of the maintenance to be expected (Chapter 
34 of the IEE Regulations) will give an indication of the type of installation 
which is most appropriate. 
  The size and quantity of all the materials, cables, control equipment and 
accessories can then be determined. This is called  ‘ bill of quantities ’ . 
   It is common practice to ask a number of electrical contractors to tender 
or submit a price for work speciﬁ ed by the bill of quantities. The contrac-
tor must cost all the materials, assess the labour cost required to install the 
materials and add on proﬁ t and overhead costs in order to arrive at a ﬁ nal 
estimate for the work. The contractor tendering the lowest cost is usually, 
but not always, awarded the contract. 
  To complete the contract in the speciﬁ ed time the electrical contractor must 
use the management skills required by any business to ensure that men and 
materials are on site as and when they are required. If alterations or modi-
ﬁ cations are made to the electrical installation as the work proceeds which 
are outside the original speciﬁ cation, then a variation order must be issued 
so that the electrical contractor can be paid for the additional work. 
 The speciﬁ cation for the chosen wiring system will be largely determined 
by the building construction and the activities to be carried out in the 
completed building. 

The occupational specialisms and individual roles within the electrotechnical industry
53
   An industrial building, for example, will require an electrical installation 
which incorporates ﬂ exibility and mechanical protection. This can be 
achieved by a conduit, tray or trunking installation. 
   In a block of purpose-built ﬂ ats, all the electrical connections must be 
accessible from one ﬂ at without intruding upon the surrounding ﬂ ats. 
A loop-in conduit system, in which the only connections are at the light 
switch and outlet positions, would meet this requirement. 
   For a domestic electrical installation an appropriate lighting scheme and 
multiple socket outlets for the connection of domestic appliances, all at a 
reasonable cost, are important factors which can usually be met by a PVC 
insulated and sheathed wiring system. 
 The ﬁ nal choice of a wiring system must rest with those designing the 
installation and those ordering the work, but whatever system is employed, 
good workmanship by competent persons is essential for compliance with 
the regulations. (IEE Regulations 134.1.1)  
 Definition  
 By defi nition a competent person is 
one who has the ability to perform a 
particular task properly. 
 By deﬁ nition a competent person is one who has the ability to perform a 
particular task properly.
Generally speaking an electrician will have the necessary skills to perform 
a wide range of electrical activities competently. 
  The HSE Regulation 16 states that persons  ‘ must be competent to prevent 
danger  … . so that the person themselves or others are not placed at risk 
due to a lack of skill when dealing with electrical equipment ’ .
 Key Fact
Defi nitions 
 A person can be described as 
 ● 
 ordinary 
 ● 
 competent 
 ● 
 instructed or 
 ● 
 skilled 
   depending upon that person’s skill or 
ability. 
  The 17th Edition of the IEE Regulations also makes the following deﬁ ni-
tions relating to people.
An ordinary person is a person who is neither a skilled person nor an 
instructed person.
A skilled person is a person with technical knowledge or sufﬁ cient experi-
ence to be able to avoid the dangers which electricity may create.
An instructed person is a person adequately advised or supervised by 
skilled persons to be able to avoid the dangers which electricity may 
create.
 Definition  
 An ordinary person is a person who 
is neither a skilled person nor an 
instructed person. 
 A skilled person is a person with tech-
nical knowledge or suffi  cient experi-
ence to be able to avoid the dangers 
which electricity may create. 
 An instructed person is a person ade-
quately advised or supervised by 
skilled persons to be able to avoid the 
dangers which electricity may create. 
 Try This
Defi nitions 
   People may be described as an ordinary person, a skilled person, an instructed 
person or a competent person. Place people you know into each of these 
categories – for example yourself, your parents, your supervisor, etc. 
  The necessary skills can be acquired by an electrical trainee who has the 
correct attitude and dedication to his or her craft. NVQ Level 3 is  ‘ skilled 
craft level ’ or the level required to be considered  ‘ competent ’ . 

54
Basic Electrical Installation Work
 Legal contracts 
   Before work commences, some form of legal contract should be agreed 
between the two parties, that is, those providing the work (e.g. the 
subcontracting electrical company) and those asking for the work to be 
carried out (e.g. the main building company). 
   A contract is a formal document which sets out the terms of agreement 
between the two parties. A standard form of building contract typically 
contains four sections: 
    1.     The articles of agreement – this names the parties, the proposed 
building and the date of the contract period. 
 2.  The contractual conditions – this states the rights and obligations 
of the parties concerned, for example whether there will be interim 
payments for work or a penalty if work is not completed on time. 
    3.     The appendix – this contains details of costings, for example the rate 
to be paid for extras as day work, who will be responsible for defects, 
how much of the contract tender will be retained upon completion 
and for how long. 
 4.  The supplementary agreement – this allows the electrical contractor 
to recoup any value-added tax paid on materials at interim periods. 
   In signing the contract, the electrical contractor has agreed to carry out 
the work to the appropriate standards in the time stated and for the agreed 
cost. The other party, say the main building contractor, is agreeing to pay 
the price stated for that work upon completion of the installation. 
   If a dispute arises the contract provides written evidence of what was 
agreed and will form the basis for a solution. 
   For smaller electrical jobs, a verbal contract may be agreed, but if a dispute 
arises there is no written evidence of what was agreed and it then becomes 
a matter of one person’s word against another’s. 
 Professional bodies supporting electrotechnical 
organizations 
   If you are reading this book I would guess that you are an electrical trainee 
working in one sector of the electrotechnical industry. You hope to eventu-
ally pass the City  &  Guilds 2330 Parts 2 and 3 qualiﬁ cations, take your AM2 
Practical Assessment and become a qualiﬁ ed electrician. Believe me, I do 
wish you well, because you are the future of the electrotechnical industry. 
   As a trainee, you are probably employed by an electrical company and 
attend your local college on either a  ‘ Day Release ’  or  ‘ Block Release ’  
scheme. The combination of work and College will provide you with the 
skills you will need to become  ‘ fully qualiﬁ ed ’ ! 

The occupational specialisms and individual roles within the electrotechnical industry
55
   So, although you are doing all the work yourself, you are being sponsored 
or supported by the company that you work for, the JTL (JIB Training 
Limited) and the City  &  Guilds of London Institute to become profession-
ally qualiﬁ ed as an electrician. 
   It is in this same way that the professional bodies support the electrotech-
nical industry. They provide a structure of help, support and guidance to 
the individual companies that make up the electrotechnical industry. 
   So let us look at some of the professional bodies which support the electro-
technical organizations like the company you work for. 
 The Institution of Engineering and Technology (IET) 
   ●      The IET was formed in spring 2006 by bringing together the Institution 
of Electrical Engineers (IEE) and the Institution of Incorporated 
Engineers (IIE)  
●  The IET is Europe’s largest professional society for engineers 
 The Institution of Electrical Engineers (IEE) 
●  The IEE was established in 1871 
●  The IEE produces the IEE Wiring Regulations to BS 7671 
●      They also produce many other publications and provide training 
courses to help electricians, managers and supervisors to keep up to 
date with the changes in the relevant regulations 
●  The one Site Guide describes the  ‘ requirements for electrical 
installations ’ 
●  Eight guidance notebooks are available 
●      The Electricians Guide to the Building Regulations clariﬁ es the 
requirements for electrical operatives of the new Part P Regulations 
which came into effect on the 1st January 2005 
●  Wiring Matters  is a quarterly magazine published by the IEE cover-
ing many of the topics which may trouble some of us in the electro-
technical industries 
●      All of these publications can be purchased by visiting the IET web-
site at  www.iet.org/shop or email: sales@iet.org.uk 
 The Electrical Contractors Association (ECA) 
●      The ECA was founded over 100 years ago and is a trade association 
representing electrotechnical companies 
●      Membership is made up of electrical contracting companies both 
large and small 

56
Basic Electrical Installation Work
●      Customers employing an electrical contractor who has ECA mem-
bership are guaranteed that the work undertaken will meet all rel-
evant regulations. If the work undertaken fails to meet the relevant 
standards, the ECA will arrange for the work to be rectiﬁ ed at no cost 
to the customer 
  ●      The work of the ECA member is regularly assessed by the Association’s 
UKAS accredited inspection body  
●      Those electrotechnical companies which are members of the ECA 
are permitted to display the ECA logo on their company vehicles and 
stationery  
●      Further information can be found on the ECA website at  www.eca.
co.uk 
 The National Inspection Council for Electrical 
Installation Contracting (NICEIC) 
●      The NICEIC is an independent consumer safety organization, set up 
to protect users of electricity against the hazards of unsafe electrical 
installations
●  It is the electrical industry’s safety regulatory body 
●      The NICEIC publishes a list of approved contractors whose standard 
of work is regularly assessed by local area engineers 
●      Customers employing an electrical contractor who has NICEIC 
membership can be assured that the work carried out will meet all 
relevant standards. If the work undertaken fails to meet all relevant 
standards, the name of the electrical contractor will be removed 
from the  ‘ NICEIC Approved List ’ 
 
  Some work, such as local authority work, is only available to NICEIC 
approved contractors 
●      Further information can be found at  www.niceic.org.uk      
 Trade Unions 
●      Trade Unions have a long history of representing workers in industry 
and commerce 
●      The relevant unions negotiate with employer organizations the pay 
and working conditions of their members 
●      The Trade Union which represents employees in the electrotechnical 
industry in the new millennium is called Amicus 
●      Through a network of local area ofﬁ ces the union offers advice and 
support for its members. They will also provide legal advice and rep-
resentation if a member has a serious accident as a result of a health 
and safety issue or has a dispute with an employer 
●  Further information can be found at  www.amicustheunion.org 

The occupational specialisms and individual roles within the electrotechnical industry
57
 Try This
Trade Organizations 
 Does the company you work for belong to a trade organization? 
   Why do they belong, and what are the advantages? 
 Do you belong to a Trade Union – if so, which one? 
 If not, why? Trade Union membership is often free while you are training. 

  When you have completed the questions, check out the answers at the back 
of this book. 
 Note : more than one multiple choice answers may be correct. 
 Check your  Understanding 
 1.  An electrotechnical company manufacturing  ‘ white ’ goods would probably 
call itself: 
  a.  an electrical contracting company  
  b.  a panel building company  
  c.  a motor re-wind company  
  d.  an equipment and machine manufacturer.  
 2.  An electrotechnical company installing lighting and power systems in 
buildings would probably call itself: 
  a.  an electrical contracting company  
  b.  a panel building company  
  c.  a motor re-wind company  
  d.  an equipment and machine manufacturer.  
 3.  An electrotechnical company reconditioning transformers and electric 
motors would probably call itself: 
  a.  an electrical contracting company  
  b.  a panel building company  
  c.  a motor re-wind company  
  d.    an equipment and machine manufacturer.  
  4.  An electrotechnical company manufacturing specialist switchgear, 
protection, monitoring and control equipment would probably call itself: 
  a.  an electrical contracting company  
  b.  a panel building company  
  c.   a motor re-wind company  
  d.  an equipment and machine manufacturer.  
 5.  Emergency lighting and security systems 
  a.  make our roads and pavements safe for people  
  b.   monitor industrial processes  
  c.  ensure that a building is safe and secure  
  d.  provide a controlled environment for people in buildings.  
 6.  Building management and control systems 
  a.  make our roads and pavements safe for people  
  b.  monitor industrial processes  
  c.  ensure that a building is safe and secure  
  d.  provide a controlled environment for people in buildings.  

Ch 2
59
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3 
4 
5 
6 
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
 7.   Electrical instrumentation systems 
 
  a.  make our roads and pavements safe for people  
 
  b.  monitor industrial processes  
 
  c.  ensure that a building is safe and secure  
 
  d.  provide a controlled environment for people in buildings.  
 8.  Highway electrical systems 
 
  a.  make our roads and pavements safe for people  
 
  b.  monitor industrial processes  
 
  c.   ensure that a building is safe and secure  
 
  d.  provide a controlled environment for people in buildings.  
 9.  A mature electrician having responsibility for the whole design and
  completion of small contracts will probably be called 
 
  a.  the contracts manager  
 
  b.   supervisor or foreman  
 
  c.  a skilled operative  
 
  d.  a mechanic fitter.  
 10.  A person carrying out electrical work with a high degree of skill and
  competence under the guidance of a supervisor will probably be called 
 
  a.  the contracts manager  
 
  b.  supervisor or foreman  
 
  c.  a skilled operative  
 
  d.  a mechanic fitter.  
 11.  A person responsible for a number of large electrical jobs on different
  sites will probably be called 
 
  a.  the contracts manager  
 
  b.  supervisor or foreman  
 
  c.  a skilled operative  
 
  d.  a mechanic fitter.  
 12.  A skilled operative who has a core skill and qualiﬁ cation in mechanical
  engineering will probably be called 
 
  a.  the contracts manager  
 
  b.  supervisor or foreman  
 
  c.  a skilled operative  
 
  d.  a mechanic fitter.  

 13.  A professional organization representing and supporting individual
  electrotechnical  employees is 
 
  a.  The NICEIC  
 
  b.  The ECA  
 
  c.  The IEE  
 
  d.  Amicus, the Union.  
 14.  A professional organization representing and supporting individual
  electrotechnical  companies is 
 
  a.  The NICEIC  
 
  b.  The ECA  
 
  c.  The IEE  
 
  d.  Amicus, the Union.  
 15.  Deﬁ ne what is meant by the electrotechnical industry.  
 16.  Think about the person in your company who has the job title 
supervisor/foreman. What is his or her name, and what are his or her 
responsibilities at work. 
 17.  Think about the person in your company who has the job title contracts 
manager or project manager. What is his or her name, and what are his 
or her responsibilities at work.  
  18.  Think about the person in your company who might be called a skilled 
operative. What is his or her name, what does he or she do at work and 
what are his or her qualiﬁ cations. 
 19.  Use an annotated block diagram to show the structure of the staff in 
your electrotechnical company from manager to operative and trainee. 
 20.   Does your electrotechnical company belong to the ECA or the
   NICEIC? Do the company vehicles display the ECA or NICEIC logo, 
if so: 
 
  a.  why does your company want to advertise the fact that it belongs 
to the ECA or NICEIC?  
  
b.  what are the advantages of being a company member of the ECA
  or NICEIC?  
  
c.  does the ECA or NICEIC Inspector call once a year, if so why, 
  what does he or she do? 
 
 You might want to ask your supervisor to help you with this question.  

Ch 2
61
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3 
4 
5 
6 
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
 21.  Deﬁ ne the meaning of the words  ‘ ordinary person ’ in an 
electrotechnical context. 
 22.  Deﬁ ne the meaning of the words  ‘ competent person ’ in an 
electrotechnical context. 
 23.  Deﬁ ne the meaning of the words  ‘ skilled person ’ in an electrotechnical 
context. 
 24.  Deﬁ ne the meaning of the words  ‘ instructed person ’ in an 
electrotechnical context. 

This page intentionally left blank

U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply
U
V
W
Sources of technical 
information and 
communications 
 Ch 3 
63
 Unit 1 – Working effectively and safely in the electrotechnical environment – 
Outcome 3 
 Underpinning knowledge: when you have completed this chapter you should be able to: 
●  state the sources of technical information 
●  identify types of drawings and diagrams 
●  recognize BE EN 60617 symbols 

64
Basic Electrical Installation Work
 Communications 
  When we talk about good communications we are talking about trans-
ferring information from one person to another both quickly and accur-
ately. We do this by talking to other people, looking at drawings and plans 
and discussing these with colleagues from the same company and with 
other professionals who have an interest in the same project. The tech-
nical information used within our industry comes from many sources. The 
IEE Regulations (BS 7671) is the  ‘ electrician’s bible ’  and forms the basis 
of all our electrical design calculations and installation methods. British 
Standards, European Harmonised Standards and Codes of Practice provide 
detailed information for every sector of the electrotechnical industry, inﬂ u-
encing all design and build considerations. 
 Sources of technical information 
   Equipment and accessories available to use in a speciﬁ c situation can 
often be found in the very comprehensive manufacturer’s catalogues and 
the catalogues of the major wholesalers that service the electrotechnical 
industries. 
 All of this technical information may be distributed and retrieved by using: 
●      conventional drawings and diagrams which we will look at in more 
detail below 
●      sketch drawing to illustrate an idea or the shape of say a bracket to 
hold a piece of electrical equipment 
●      the Internet can be used to download British Standards and Codes of 
Practice 
●      the Internet can also be used to download health and safety infor-
mation from the health and safety executive at:  www.gov.uk/hse or 
 www.opsi.gov.uk 
●      CDs, DVDs, USB memory sticks and email can be used to communi-
cate and store information electronically 
●      the facsimile (Fax) machine can be used to communicate with other 
busy professionals, information say about a project you are working 
on together.    
   If you are working at your company ofﬁ ce with access to online com-
puters, then technical information is only a ﬁ ngertip or mouse click away. 
However, a construction site is a hostile environment for a laptop and so a 
hard copy of any data is preferable on site. 
   Let us now look at the types of drawings and diagrams which we use 
within our industry to communicate technical information between col-
leagues and other professionals. The type of diagram to be used in any par-
ticular situation is the one which most clearly communicates the desired 
information. 

Sources of technical information and communications
65
 Site plans or layout drawings 
  These are scale drawings based upon the architect’s site plan of the build-
ing and show the position of the electrical equipment which is to be 
installed. The electrical equipment is identiﬁ ed by a graphical symbol. 
The standard symbols used by the electrical contracting industry are those 
recommended by the British Standard EN 60617,  Graphical Symbols for 
Electrical Power, Telecommunications and Electronic Diagrams . Some of 
the more common electrical installation symbols are given in  Fig. 3.1. 
 The site plan or layout drawing will be drawn to a scale, smaller than the 
actual size of the building, so to ﬁ nd the actual measurement, you must 
measure the distance on the drawing and multiply by the scale. 
   For example, if the site plan is drawn to a scale of 1:100, then 10       mm on the 
site plan represents 1  m measured in the building. 
  The layout drawing or site plan of a small domestic extension is shown in 
 Fig. 3.2   . It can be seen that the mains intake position, probably a consumer 
unit, is situated in the storeroom which also contains one light controlled by 
a switch at the door. The bathroom contains one lighting point controlled by 
a one-way pull switch at the door. The kitchen has two doors and a switch 
is installed at each door to control the ﬂ uorescent luminaire. There are also 
three double sockets situated around the kitchen. The sitting room has a 
two-way switch at each door controlling the centre lighting point. Two wall 
lights with built-in switches are to be wired, one at each side of the window. 
Two double sockets and one switched socket are also to be installed in the 
sitting room. The bedroom has two lighting points controlled independently 
by two one-way switches at the door. The wiring diagrams and installation 
procedures for all these circuits can be found in later chapters.
 Try This 
Drawing 
   The next time you are on site ask your supervisor to show you the site plans. 
Ask him: 
 ● 
 how does the scale work 
 ● 
 put names to the equipment represented by British Standard symbols 
 As-ﬁ tted drawings 
  When the installation is completed a set of drawings should be produced 
which indicate the ﬁ nal positions of all the electrical equipment. As the 
building and electrical installation progresses, it is sometimes necessary 
to modify the positions of equipment indicated on the layout drawing 
because, for example, the position of a doorway has been changed. The 
layout drawings or site plans indicate the original intentions for the posi-
tion of equipment, while the  ‘ as-ﬁ tted ’  drawing indicates the actual posi-
tions of equipment upon completion of the contract.

66
Basic Electrical Installation Work
Main control or
intake point
Main or sub-main switch
Socket outlet (mains)
general symbol
Switched socket outlet
Socket outlet with pilot lamp
Multiple socket outlet
Example: for 3 plugs
Push button
Luminous push button
Electric bell:
general symbol
Electric buzzer:
general symbol
Time switch
Projector or lamp with
reflector
Spotlight
Single fluorescent lamp
Single-pole,
one-way switch
Note: Number of switches at
one point may be indicated
Two-pole, one-way switch
Three-pole,
one-way switch
Cord-operated single-pole
one-way switch
Two-way switch
3
Intermediate switch
Lighting point or lamp:
general symbol
Note: The number, power
and type of the light source
sould be specified
Example:
Three 40 W lamps
3  40 W
Lamp or lighting point:
wall mounted
Emergency (safety)
lighting point
Lighting point with
built in switch
Automatic fire detector
 FIGURE 3.1 
 Some BS EN 60617 electrical installation symbols. 
 Try This
Drawings 
  Take a moment to clarify the diff erence between: 
 ● 
 layout drawings and 
 ● 
 as-fi tted drawings. 

Sources of technical information and communications
67
 Detail drawings and assembly drawings 
  These are additional drawings produced by the architect to clarify some 
point of detail. For example, a drawing might be produced to give a fuller 
description of a suspended ceiling arrangement or the assembly arrange-
ments of the metalwork for the suspended ceiling. 
 Location drawings 
   Location drawings identify the place where something is located. It might 
be the position of the manhole covers giving access to the drains. It might 
be the position of all water stop taps or the position of the emergency light-
ing ﬁ ttings. This type of information may be placed on a blank copy of the 
architect’s site plan or on a supplementary drawing. 
 Distribution cable route plans 
   On large installations there may be more than one position for the electrical 
supplies. Distribution cables may radiate from the site of the electrical mains 
Bathroom
Kitchen
Bedroom
Sitting room
Store
2
2
2
2
2
 FIGURE 3.2 
      Layout drawing or site plan of a small electrical installation.    

68
Basic Electrical Installation Work
intake position to other sub-mains positions. The site of the sub-mains and 
the route taken by the distribution cables may be shown on a blank copy of 
the architect’s site plan or on the electricians  ‘ as-ﬁ tted ’ drawings.  
 Block diagrams 
   A block diagram is a very simple diagram in which the various items or 
pieces of equipment are represented by a square or rectangular box. The 
purpose of the block diagram is to show how the components of the circuit 
relate to each other and, therefore, the individual circuit connections are 
not shown.  Figure 3.3 shows the block diagram of a space heating control 
system.
 Wiring diagrams 
   A wiring diagram or connection diagram shows the detailed connections 
between components or items of equipment. They do not indicate how a 
piece of equipment or circuit works. The purpose of a wiring diagram is 
to help someone with the actual wiring of the circuit.  Figure 3.4    shows the 
wiring diagram for a space heating control system. Other wiring diagrams 
can be seen in Figs 4.4–4.7 of Chapter 14. 
 Circuit diagrams 
   A circuit diagram shows most clearly how a circuit works. All the essential 
parts and connections are represented by their graphical symbols. The 
purpose of a circuit diagram is to help our understanding of the circuit. It 
will be laid out as clearly as possible, without regard to the physical lay-
out of the actual components and, therefore, it may not indicate the most 
convenient way to wire the circuit.  Figure 3.5    shows the circuit diagram of 
our same space heating control system. Figures 5.1 and 5.2 in Chapter 5 
are circuit diagrams. 
 Schematic diagrams 
   A schematic diagram is a diagram in outline of, for example, a motor starter 
circuit. It uses graphical symbols to indicate the interrelationship of the 
Fuel supply
Fuel control
valve
Room
thermostat
Cylinder
thermostat
Controller
Programmer
Pump
Boiler
 FIGURE 3.3 
 Block diagram – space heating control system (Honeywell Y. Plan). 

Sources of technical information and communications
69
electrical elements in a circuit. These help us to understand the working 
operation of the circuit but are not helpful in showing us how to wire the 
components. An electrical schematic diagram looks very like a circuit dia-
gram.  Figure 3.6 shows a schematic diagram. 
 Freehand working diagrams 
 Freehand working drawings or sketches are another important way in 
which we communicate our ideas. The drawings of the spring toggle bolt 
in Chapter 14 (Fig. 14.39) were done from freehand sketches. A freehand 
sketch may be done as an initial draft of an idea before a full working draw-
ing is made. It is often much easier to produce a sketch of your ideas or 
intentions than to describe them or produce a list of instructions. 
  To convey the message or information clearly it is better to make your 
sketch large rather than too small. It should also contain all the dimensions 
necessary to indicate clearly the size of the ﬁ nished object depicted by the 
sketch.
Room stat
2
2
C
Blue (neutral)
White
Grey
Grey
White
Orange
Switch
live
(heating)
Switch
live
(hot water)
Neutral
Earth
1
1
4
3
Cylinder
stat
Water control
zone valve
Boiler
terminals
Pump
motor
Programmer
230V
50Hz
L
L
L
N
N
N
E
E
E
On
On
Off
Off
Heating
Hot water
Orange
Yellow/green
 FIGURE 3.4 
 Wiring diagram – space heating control system (Honeywell Y. Plan).    

70
Basic Electrical Installation Work
White and orange of the
zone valve are internally
connected when the room
stat only is calling for heat.
L
N
Programmer
HTG only
DHW off
Room thermostat
N
1
1
2
2
C
Cylinder thermostat
White
Grey
Orange
Water
control
zone
valve
Blue
Yellow/
Green
E
N
N
Pump
Clock
motor
Boiler
N
N
L
3
DHW
on
 FIGURE 3.5 
      Circuit diagram – space heating control system (Honey well Y. plan).    
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C3
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 Hold-in contactor coil
2 
Main contacts
C3 Retaining contact
4
Start/close button
5
Stop/open button
6 
Magnetic or thermal
 
overload trip coils
7 
Overload trip contact
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
7
4
5
 FIGURE 3.6 
 Schematic diagram – DOL motor starter. 

Sources of technical information and communications
71
   All drawings and communications must be aimed at satisfying the client’s 
wishes for the project. It is the client who will pay the ﬁ nal bill which, in 
turn, pays your wages. The detailed arrangements of what must be done 
to meet the client’s wishes are contained in the client’s speciﬁ cation docu-
ments and all your company’s efforts must be directed at meeting the 
whole speciﬁ cation, but no more. 
 The positional reference system 
   A positional reference system can be used to mark exact positions in any 
space. It uses a simple grid reference system to mark out points in the 
space enclosed by the grid. It is easy to understand if we consider a speciﬁ c 
example which I use when building prototype electronic circuits on matrix 
board. Matrix board is the insulated board full of holes into which we insert 
small pins and then attach the electronic components. 
  To set up the grid reference, count along the columns at the top of the 
board, starting from the left and then count down the rows. The position of 
point 4:3 would be 4 holes from the left and 3 holes down. 
 Prepare a matrix board, or any space for that matter, as follows: 
●      Turn the matrix board so that a manufactured straight edge is to the 
top and left-hand side 
●      Use a felt tip pen to mark the holes in groups of ﬁ ve along the top 
edge and down the left-hand edge as shown in  Fig. 3.7 .
  The pins can then be inserted as required.  Figure 3.7  shows a number of 
pin reference points. Counting from the left-hand side of the board there 
are 3:3, 3:16, 10:11, 18:3, 18:11, 25:3 and 25:16. 
5
5
10
15
20
25
10
15
 FIGURE 3.7 
 Positional reference system used to identify points on an electronic matrix board. 

72
Basic Electrical Installation Work
 Telephone communications 
  Telephones today play one of the most important roles in enabling people 
to communicate with each other. You are never alone when you have a 
telephone. If there is a problem, you can ring your supervisor or foreman 
for help. The advantage of a telephone message over a written message is 
its speed; the disadvantage is that no record is kept of an agreement made 
over the telephone. Therefore, business agreements made on the telephone 
are often followed up by written conﬁ rmation. 
 When  taking  a telephone call, remember that you cannot be seen and, 
therefore, gestures and facial expressions will not help to make you under-
stand. Always be polite and helpful when answering your company’s tele-
phone – you are your company’s most important representative at that 
moment. Speak clearly and loud enough to be heard without shouting, 
sound cheerful and write down messages if asked. Always read back what 
you have written down to make sure that you are passing on what the caller 
intended.
   Many companies now use standard telephone message pads such as that 
shown in  Fig. 3.8    because they prompt people to collect all the relevant 
TELEPHONE
MESSAGES
Date
Thurs  11 Aug. 08
Dave Twem
John Gall
Bispham Site
Blackpool.
(01253) 123456
Pick up Megger
from Jim on Saturday and take to Bispham
site on Monday.
Thanks
Dave Lan
09.30
Message to
(Address)
Message from (Name)
(Telephone No.)
Message
Message taken by
Time
 FIGURE 3.8 
 Typical standard telephone message pad. 

Sources of technical information and communications
73
information. In this case, John Gall wants Dave Twem to pick up the 
Megger from Jim on Saturday and take it to the Bispham site on Monday. 
The person taking the call and relaying the message is Dave Low. 
 When  making  a telephone call, make sure you know what you want to say 
or ask. Make notes so that you have times, dates and any other relevant 
information ready before you make the call. 

When you have completed the questions, check out the answers at the back 
of the book. 
Note: more than one multiple choice answer may be correct .
1. A scale drawing which shows the original intention for the position of 
electrical equipment is called a: 
a. wiring diagram 
b. detail assembly drawing 
c. site plan or layout drawing 
d. as-fitted drawing. 
2. The scale drawing which shows the actual position of the electrical 
equipment upon completion of the contract is called: 
a. wiring diagram 
b. detail assembly drawing 
c. site plan or layout drawing 
d. as-fitted drawing. 
3. A scale drawing showing the position of equipment by graphical symbols 
is a description of a: 
a. block diagram 
b. site plan or layout diagram 
c. wiring diagram 
d. circuit diagram. 
4. A diagram which shows the detailed connections between individual 
items of equipment is a description of a: 
a. block diagram 
b. site plan or layout diagram 
c. wiring diagram 
d. circuit diagram. 
5. A diagram which shows most clearly how a circuit works, with all items 
represented by graphical symbols is a description of a: 
a. block diagram 
b. site plan or layout diagram 
c. wiring diagram 
d. circuit diagram. 
 Check your Understanding 

Ch 3
75
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
 6. A site plan has a scale of 1:100. From the scale drawing you can see
   that a socket outlet must be positioned on a wall 40 cm from the 
corner of the room in which you are standing. How far from the 
corner of the room would you actually measure to the centre of the 
socket’s ﬁ xing position taking the scale into account: 
a. 0.4m
b. 4.0m
c. 10.0m
d. 40.0m.
 7. Sketch a site plan or layout drawing for the room which you normally 
use at college and indicate the position of all the electrical accessories 
in the room using BS EN 60617 symbols. 
 8. What methods could you use to ﬁ nd and store some information about : 
●
Health and safety at work 
●
British Standards 
●
Electrical accessories and equipment .
 9. What method would you use to let the ofﬁ ce know that the materials 
you were expecting have not yet arrived. 
10. What method would you use to send a long list of materials required for 
the job you are on to the wholesalers for later delivery to the site. Use 
bullet points. 
11. What are the advantages and disadvantages of having sources of
  technical information on: 
a. some form of electronic storage system such as a CD, DVD or 
USB memory stick or 
b. hard copy such as a catalogue, drawings or On Site Guide. 
Would it make a difference if you were at the ofﬁ ce or on a 
construction site? 
12. State the advantages and disadvantages of: 
a. telephone messages 
b. written messages. 

This page intentionally left blank


This page intentionally left blank

 Basic electrotechnical
units and theory 
 Ch 4 
79
V
U
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3 
4
5 
6 
To 3 phase supply
 Unit 2 – Principles of electrotechnology – Outcome 1 
 Underpinning knowledge: when you have completed this chapter you should be able to: 
●      identify SI units and their symbols for various quantities such as current, voltage, resistance, force, mass, 
power and energy 
●  state the relationship between resistance, length and area 
●  state the relationship between force, mass, weight and turning force (Basic Mechanics) 
●  state the efﬁ ciency of a machine 
●  state the constructional features and principles of a simple alternator 
●  state the maximum rms and average value of an a.c. waveform 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
80
 Table 4.1  Basic SI Units  
 Quantity 
 Measure of 
 Basic unit 
 Symbol 
 Notes 
 Area 
 Length   length 
 Metre squared 
 m 2 
 Current l 
 Electric current 
 Ampere 
 A 
 Energy 
 Ability to do work 
 Joule 
 J 
 Joule is a very small unit 3.6   10 6 
J  1 kWh 
 Force 
 The effect on a body 
 Newton 
 N 
 Frequency 
 Number of cycles 
 Hertz 
 Hz 
 mains frequency is 50 Hz 
 Length 
 Distance 
 Metre 
 m 
 Mass 
 Amount of material 
 kilogram 
 kg 
 One metric tonne     1000   kg 
 Magnetic ﬂ ux  Φ 
 Magnetic energy 
 Weber 
 Wb 
 Magnetic ﬂ ux 
density B 
 Number of lines of 
magnetic ﬂ ux 
 Tesla 
 T 
 Potential or 
pressure 
 Voltage 
 Volt 
 V 
 Period T 
 Time taken to 
complete one cycle 
 Second 
 s 
 The 50    Hz mains supply has a 
period of 20    ms 
 Power 
 Rate of doing work 
 Watt 
 W 
 Resistance 
 Opposition to 
current ﬂ ow 
 Ohm 
  Ω 
 Resistivity 
 Resistance of a 
sample piece of 
material 
 Ohm metre 
  ρ 
 Resistivity of copper is 17.5   
10   9  Ω m 
 Temperature 
 Hotness or coldness 
 Kelvin 
 K 
 0°C    273    K. A change of 1   K is 
the same as 1°C 
 Time 
 Time 
 Second 
 s 
 60   s    1 min 
 
 
 
 
 60    min     1 h 
 Weight 
 Force exerted by a 
mass 
 Kilogram 
 kg 
 1000   kg     1 tonne 
 Note : A more detailed description can be found in this chapter.  
 Units 
  Very early units of measurement were based on the things easily available – 
the length of a stride, the distance from the nose to the outstretched hand, 
the weight of a stone and the time-lapse of one day. Over the years, new 
units were introduced and old ones were modiﬁ ed. Different branches of 
science and engineering were working in isolation, using their own units, 
and the result was an overwhelming variety of units. 
   In all branches of science and engineering there is a need for a practical 
system of units which everyone can use. In 1960, the General Conference 
of Weights and Measures agreed to an international system called the 
Système International d’Unités (abbreviated to SI units).
SI units are based upon a small number of fundamental units from which 
all other units may be derived.  Table 4.1    describes some of the basic units 
that we shall be using in our electrical studies.
 Definition  
 SI units are based upon a small 
number of fundamental units from 
which all other units may be derived. 
   Like all metric systems, SI units have the advantage that preﬁ xes represent-
ing various multiples or sub-multiples may be used to increase or decrease 
the size of the unit by various powers of 10. Some of the more common 
preﬁ xes and their symbols are shown in  Table 4.2 . 

Basic electrotechnical units and theory
81
 Basic circuit theory 
   All matter is made up of atoms which arrange themselves in a regular 
framework within the material. The atom is made up of a central, posi-
tively charged nucleus, surrounded by negatively charged electrons. The 
electrical properties of a material depend largely upon how tightly these 
electrons are bound to the central nucleus.
 A  conductor  is a material in which the electrons are loosely bound to the 
central nucleus and are, therefore, free to drift around the material at ran-
dom from one atom to another, as shown in  Fig. 4.1(a) . Materials which are 
good conductors include copper, brass, aluminium and silver. 
 Definition  
 A  conductor  is a material in which the 
electrons are loosely bound to the 
central nucleus and are, therefore, free 
to drift around the material at random 
from one atom to another, as shown 
in  Fig. 4.1(a)   . Materials which are good 
conductors include copper, brass, alu-
minium and silver. 
(a)
(b)
 Atoms
 Electron movement
FIGURE 4.1
Atoms and electrons on a material.
 Table 4.2    Symbols and Multiples for Use with SI Units  
 Preﬁ x 
 Symbol 
 Multiplication 
factor 
 
 
 Mega 
 M 
  10 6 
 or 
  1,000,000 
 Kilo 
 K 
  10 3 
 or 
  1000 
 Hecto 
 H 
  10 2 
 or 
  100 
 Decca 
 da 
  10 
 or 
   10 
 Deci 
 D 
  10   1 
 or 
  ÷ 10 
 Centi 
 C 
  10   2 
 or 
  ÷ 100 
 Milli 
 M 
  10   3 
 or 
  ÷ 1000 
 Micro 
  μ 
  10   6 
 or 
  ÷ 1,000,000 
 An  insulator  is a material in which the outer electrons are tightly bound 
to the nucleus, so there are no free electrons to move around the material. 
Good insulating materials are PVC, rubber, glass and wood.
Definition
 An  insulator  is a material in which the 
outer electrons are tightly bound to 
the nucleus, so there are no free elec-
trons to move around the material. 
Good insulating materials are PVC, 
rubber, glass and wood. 
 If a battery is attached to a conductor as shown in  Fig. 4.1(b) , the free 
electrons drift purposefully in one direction only. The free electrons close 
to the positive plate of the battery are attracted to it since unlike charges 
attract, and the free electrons near the negative plate will be repelled from 
it. For each electron entering the positive terminal of the battery, one will 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
82
be ejected from the negative terminal, so the number of electrons in the 
conductor remains constant.
The drift of electrons within a conductor is known as an electric  current,
measured in amperes and given the symbol  I .
   For a current to continue to ﬂ ow, there must be a complete circuit for the 
electrons to move around. If the circuit is broken by opening a switch, for 
example, the electron ﬂ ow and therefore the current will stop immediately. 
  To cause a current to ﬂ ow continuously around a circuit, a driving force 
is required, just as a circulating pump is required to drive water around a 
central heating system. This driving force is the  electromotive force (emf). 
Each time an electron passes through the source of emf, more energy is 
provided to send it on its way around the circuit. 
   An emf is always associated with energy conversion, such as chemical 
to electrical in batteries and mechanical to electrical in generators. The 
energy introduced into the circuit by the emf is transferred to the load ter-
minals by the circuit conductors.
 The  potential difference (p.d.) is the change in energy levels measured 
across the load terminals. This is also called the volt drop or terminal voltage,
since emf and p.d. are both measured in volts. Resistance every circuit offers 
some opposition to current ﬂ ow, which we call the circuit  resistance , mea-
sured in ohms (symbol  Ω ), to commemorate the famous German physicist 
Georg Simon Ohm, who was responsible for the analysis of electrical circuits. 
 Ohm’s law 
  In 1826, Ohm published details of an experiment he had done to investi-
gate the relationship between the current passing through and the poten-
tial difference between the ends of a wire. As a result of this experiment, 
he arrived at a law, now known as Ohm’s law, which says that the current 
passing through a conductor under constant temperature conditions is 
proportional to the potential difference across the conductor. This may be 
expressed mathematically as
V
I
V

 R(
)
 Transposing this formula, we also have 
I
V
R
R
V
I


( )
(
)
A
and

 Example 1 
 An electric heater, when connected to a 230   V supply, was found to take a current of 4  A. 
Calculate the element resistance. 
 
R
V
I

 
 Definition  
   The drift of electrons within a con-
ductor is known as an electric  current , 
measured in amperes and given the 
symbol  I . 
 Definition  
  The  potential diff erence  (p.d.) is the 
change in energy levels measured 
across the load terminals. This is also 
called the volt drop or terminal volt-
age, since emf and p.d. are both meas-
ured in volts.  
Definition
Ohm’s law, which says that the current 
passing through a conductor under 
constant temperature conditions is 
proportional to the potential diff er-
ence across the conductor.
Definition
Every circuit off ers some opposition 
to current fl ow, which we call the 
circuit resistance, measured in ohms 
(symbol Ω).

Basic electrotechnical units and theory
83
 
∴R 

230
4
57 5
 V
 A
. 
 
 Example 2 
  The insulation resistance measured between phase conductors on a 400   V supply was found 
to be 2  M Ω . Calculate the leakage current. 
 
I
V
R

 
 
∴I 

 


400 V
2
10  
200
10
 A
200
A
6
6


 
 Example 3 
  When a 4  Ω  resistor was connected across the terminals of an unknown d.c. supply, a current 
of 3  A fl owed. Calculate the supply voltage. 
 
V
I
R
V
 

  
∴
3
4
12
A
V  
 Resistivity 
  The resistance or opposition to current ﬂ ow varies for different materials, 
each having a particular constant value. If we know the resistance of, say, 
1  m of a material, then the resistance of 5  m will be ﬁ ve times the resistance 
of 1  m.
 Definition  
  The  resistivity (symbol   ρ  – the Greek 
letter  ‘ rho ’ ) of a material is defi ned 
as the resistance of a sample of unit 
length and unit cross-section. 
 The  resistivity (symbol  ρ  – the Greek letter  ‘ rho ’ ) of a material is deﬁ ned 
as the resistance of a sample of unit length and unit cross-section. Typical 
values are given in  Table 4.3   . Using the constants for a particular material 
we can calculate the resistance of any length and thickness of that material 
from the equation. 
R
l
a
 ρ (
)

 where 
ρ    the resistivity constant for the material ( Ω m) 
l    the length of the material (m) 
a    the cross-sectional area of the material (m 2 ). 
 Table 4.3    Resistivity Values  
 Material 
 Resistivity ( Ω m) 
 Silver 
 16.4   10   9 
 Copper 
 17.5   10   9 
 Aluminium 
 28.5   10   9 
 Brass 
 75.0   10   9 
 Iron 
 100.0   10   9 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
84
   Table 4.3  gives the resistivity of silver as 16.4   10 –9  Ω  m, which means that 
a sample of silver 1  m long and 1  m in cross-section will have a resist ance 
of 16.4  10 –9  Ω .
 Key Fact
 Resistance If the length is doubled, 
resistance will be doubled. If the csa is 
doubled, the resistance will be halved. 
 Basic mechanics and machines 
   Definition  
  Mechanics is the scientifi c study of 
 ‘ machines ’ , where a machine is defi ned 
as a device which transmits motion or 
force from one place to another.  
 Example 1 
 Calculate the resistance of 100  m of copper cable of 1.5  mm 2 cross-sectional area if the 
resistivity of copper is taken as 17.5   10   9  Ω m. 
 
R
l
a


ρ (
)
 
 
∴R 








17 5
10
100
1 5
10
1 16
9
6
2
.
.
.
 
 m
 m
 m
 
 
 Example 2 
 Calculate the resistance of 100  m of aluminium cable of 1.5  mm 2 cross-sectional area if the 
resistivity of aluminium is taken as 28.5   10   9  Ω m. 
 
R
l
a


ρ (
)
 
 
∴R 








28 5
10
100
1 5
10
1 9
9
6
2
.
.
.
 
 m
 m
 m
 
 
  The above examples show that the resistance of an aluminium cable is some 60% greater than 
a copper conductor of the same length and cross-section. Therefore, if an aluminium cable is 
to replace a copper cable, the conductor size must be increased to carry the rated current as 
given by the tables in Appendix 4 of the  IEE Regulations and Appendix 6 of the  On Site Guide . 
  The other factor which aff ects the resistance of a material is the temperature, and we will 
consider this later. 
 Try This 
Resistance 
 ● 
 Take two 100  m lengths of singles cable (2 coils) 
 ● 
 Measure the resistance of 100  m of cable (1 coil) 
 
 Value  ______________________________ 
 ● 
 Join the two lengths together (200  m) and again measure the resistance 
 
 Value ______________________________ 
 
 Does this experiment prove resistance is proportional to length? 
 
 If the resistance is doubled, it is proved! QED, Quo Erat Demonstration (Latin 
for it is proved). 
Ω
Ω
Mechanics is the scientiﬁ c study of  ‘ machines ’ , where a machine is deﬁ ned 
as a device which transmits motion or force from one place to another. An 
engine is one particular type of machine, an energy-transforming machine, 
converting fuel energy into a more directly useful form of work. 

Basic electrotechnical units and theory
85
   Most modern machines can be traced back to the ﬁ ve basic machines 
described by the Greek inventor Hero of Alexandria who lived about the 
time of Christ. The machines described by him were the wedge, the screw, 
the wheel and axle, the pulley and the lever. Originally they were used for 
simple purposes, to raise water and to move objects which man alone 
could not lift, but today their principles are of fundamental importance to 
our scientiﬁ c understanding of mechanics. Let us now consider some fun-
damental mechanical principles and calculations. 
 Mass 
Mass is a measure of the amount of material in a substance, such as metal, 
plastic, wood, brick or tissue, which is collectively known as a body. The 
mass of a body remains constant and can easily be found by comparing it 
on a set of balance scales with a set of standard masses. The SI unit of mass 
is the kilogram (kg).
   Definition  
 Mass is a measure of the amount of 
material in a substance, such as metal, 
plastic, wood, brick or tissue, which 
is collectively known as a body. The 
mass of a body remains constant and 
can easily be found by comparing it 
on a set of balance scales with a set of 
standard masses. The SI unit of mass is 
the kilogram (kg). 
  Weight 
Weight is a measure of the force which a body exerts on anything which 
supports it. Normally it exerts this force because it is being attracted 
towards the earth by the force of gravity.
  For scientiﬁ c purposes the weight of a body is  not  constant, because gravi-
tational force varies from the equator to the poles; in space a body would be 
 ‘ weightless ’  but here on earth under the inﬂ uence of gravity a 1  kg mass would 
have a weight of approximately 9.81  N (see also the deﬁ nition of  ‘ force ’ ).  
 Speed 
   Definition  
 Weight is a measure of the force which 
a body exerts on anything which sup-
ports it. Normally it exerts this force 
because it is being attracted towards 
the earth by the force of gravity. 
   Definition  
 Speed is concerned with distance trav-
elled and time taken. 
 The feeling of speed is something with which we are all familiar. If we travel 
in a motor vehicle we know that an increase in speed would, excluding acci-
dents, allow us to arrive at our destination more quickly. Therefore, speed is 
concerned with distance travelled and time taken. Suppose we were to travel 
a distance of 30       miles in 1 h; our speed would be an average of 30       miles/h: 
Speed
Distance (m)
Time (s)

  Velocity 
   Definition  
 Velocity In everyday conversation we 
often use the word velocity to mean 
the same as speed, and indeed the 
units are the same. However, for sci-
entifi c purposes this is not acceptable 
since velocity is also concerned with 
direction. 
   In everyday conversation we often use the word velocity to mean the same 
as speed, and indeed the units are the same. However, for scientiﬁ c pur-
poses this is not acceptable since velocity is also concerned with direction. 
Velocity is speed in a given direction. For example, the speed of an aircraft 
might be 200       miles/h, but its velocity would be 200       miles/h in, say, a west-
erly direction. Speed is a scalar quantity, while velocity is a vector quantity. 
Velocity
Distance (m)
Time (s)

 Acceleration 
  When an aircraft takes off, it starts from rest and increases its velocity until 
it can ﬂ y. This change in velocity is called its acceleration. By deﬁ nition, 
acceleration is the rate of change in velocity with time.
 Definition  
  By defi nition, acceleration is the rate of 
change in velocity with time. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
86
Acceleration
Velocity
Time
(m/s )


2
 Example 
 If an aircraft accelerates from a velocity of 15  m/s to 35 m/s in 4  s, calculate its average 
acceleration. 
 Average velocity    35 m/s – 15 m/s    20 m/s 
 
Average acceleration
Velocity
Time
m/s



20
4
5
2
 
  Thus, the average acceleration is 5  m/s2. 
 Force 
   Definition
 Force The presence of a force can only 
be detected by its eff ect on a body. 
A force may cause a stationary object 
to move or bring a moving body to 
rest. 
  The presence of a force can only be detected by its effect on a body.
A force may cause a stationary object to move or bring a moving body to 
rest. For example, a number of people pushing a broken-down motor 
car exert a force which propels it forward, but applying the motor car 
brakes applies a force on the brake drums which slows down or stops 
the vehicle. Gravitational force causes objects to fall to the ground. The 
apple fell from the tree on to Isaac Newton’s head as a result of gravitational 
force. The standard rate of acceleration due to gravity is accepted as 9.81       m/s 2 . 
Therefore, an apple weighing 1  kg will exert a force of 9.81  N since 
 Force    Mass   Acceleration (N) 
  The SI unit of force is the newton, symbol N, to commemorate the great 
English scientist Sir Isaac Newton (1642–1727).
 Example 
 A 50  kg bag of cement falls from a forklift truck while being lifted to a storage shelf. Determine 
the force with which the bag will strike the ground: 
 Force    Mass   Acceleration (N) 
 Force    50  kg   9.81 m/s 2    490.5  N 
   A force can manifest itself in many different ways. Let us consider a few 
examples:
●     ‘ Inertial force ’  is the force required to get things moving, to change 
direction or stop, like the motor car discussed above. 
●       ‘ Cohesive or adhesive force ’  is the force required to hold things 
together.  
●  ‘ Tensile force ’ is the force pulling things apart. 
●  ‘Compressive force ’ is the force pushing things together. 
●       ‘ Friction force ’  is the force which resists or prevents the movement 
of two surfaces in contact. 

Basic electrotechnical units and theory
87
●       ‘ Shearing force ’  is the force which moves one face of a material over 
another.  
●      ‘ Centripetal force ’  is the force acting towards the centre when a mass 
attached to a string is rotated in a circular path.
●       ‘ Centrifugal force ’  is the force acting away from the centre, the oppo-
site to centripetal force. 
●       ‘ Gravitational force ’  is the force acting towards the centre of the 
earth due to the effect of gravity. 
●  ‘ Magnetic force ’ is the force created by a magnetic ﬁ eld.  
●  ‘ Electrical force ’ is the force created by an electrical ﬁ eld. 
 Pressure or stress 
  To move a broken-down motor car I might exert a force on the back of the 
car to propel it forward. My hands would apply a pressure on the body 
panel at the point of contact with the car. Pressure or stress is a measure of 
the force per unit area.
 Definition  
 ● 
 ‘ Inertial force ’ is the force required 
to get things moving, to change 
direction or stop, like the motor 
car discussed above. 
 ● 
 ‘ Cohesive or adhesive force ’ is 
the force required to hold things 
together.  
 ● 
 ‘ Tensile force ’ is the force pulling 
things apart. 
 ● 
 ‘Compressive force ’ is the force 
pushing things together. 
 ● 
 ‘ Friction force ’ is the force which 
resists or prevents the movement 
of two surfaces in contact. 
 ● 
 ‘ Shearing force ’ is the force which 
moves one face of a material over 
another.  
 ● 
 ‘ Centripetal force ’ is the force 
acting towards the centre when 
a mass attached to a string is 
rotated in a circular path. 
 ● 
 ‘ Centrifugal force ’ is the force 
acting away from the centre, the 
opposite to centripetal force. 
 ● 
 ‘ Gravitational force ’ is the force 
acting towards the centre of the 
earth due to the eff ect of gravity. 
 ● 
 ‘ Magnetic force ’ is the force 
created by a magnetic fi eld. 
 ● 
 ‘ Electrical force ’ is the force created 
by an electrical fi eld. 
 Definition  
 Pressure or stress is a measure of the 
force per unit area. 
Pressure or stress
Force
Area
N/m

(
)
2
 Example 1 
 A young woman of mass 60  kg puts all her weight on to the heel of one shoe which has 
an area of 1  cm 2 . Calculate the pressure exerted by the shoe on the fl oor (assuming the 
acceleration due to gravity to be 9.81  m/s 2 ). 
 
Pressure
Force
Area (N/m )
Pressure
kg
m/s
m






2
2
4
2
60
9 81
1
10
588
.
6
2
kN/m
 
 Example 2 
 A small circus elephant of mass 1 tonne (1000  kg) puts all its weight on to one foot which has 
a surface area of 400  cm 2 . Calculate the pressure exerted by the elephant’s foot on the fl oor, 
assuming the acceleration due to gravity to be 9.81  m/s 2 . 
 
Pressure
Force
Area (N/m )
Pressure
kg
m/s
m





2
2
4
2
1000
9 81
400
10
.
 245 3. kN/m2
 
  These two examples show that the young woman exerts 24 times more pressure on the 
ground than the elephant. This is because her mass exerts a force over a much smaller area 
than the elephant’s foot and is the reason why many wooden dance fl oors are damaged by 
high-heeled shoes. 
  Work done 
   Suppose a broken-down motor car was to be pushed along a road, work 
would be done on the car by applying the force necessary to move it along the 
road. Heavy breathing and perspiration would be evidence of the work done.

Basic Electrical Installation Work
88
 Definition  
 By defi nition, work done is dependent 
upon the force applied times the dis-
tance moved in the direction of the 
force. 
By deﬁ nition Work done is dependent upon the force applied times the 
distance moved in the direction of the force.
 Work done    Force   Distance moved in the direction of the force (J) 
  The SI unit of work done is the newton metre or joule (symbol J). The joule 
is the preferred unit and it commemorates an English physicist, James 
Prescot Joule (1818–1889).
 Example 
 A building hoist lifts ten 50  kg bags of cement through a vertical distance of 30  m to the top of 
a high-rise building. Calculate the work done by the hoist, assuming the acceleration due to 
gravity to be 9.81  m/s 2 . 
  Work done
Force
Distance moved (J)
      but force
Mass
A



 cceleration (N)
Work done
Mass
Acceleration
Distance move




d (J)
    Work done
kg
m/s
m
    Work done





10
50
9 81
30
147
2
.
.15kJ
 Power 
   If one motor car can cover the distance between two points more quickly 
than another car, we say that the faster car is more powerful. It can do a given 
amount of work more quickly. By deﬁ nition, power is the rate of doing work.
 Definition  
 By defi nition, power is the rate of 
doing work. 
Power
Work done
Time taken W

(
)
  The SI unit of power, both electrical and mechanical, is the watt (symbol 
W). This commemorates the name of James Watt (1736–1819), the inventor 
of the steam engine.
 Example 1 
 A building hoist lifts ten 50  kg bags of cement to the top of a 30  m high building. Calculate 
the rating (power) of the motor to perform this task in 60       s if the acceleration due to gravity is 
taken as 9.81  m/s 2 . 
 
Power
Work done
Time taken W
but Work done
Force
Distance m



(
)
oved (J)
and Force
Mass
Acceleration (N)


 
 By substitution, 
 
Power
Mass
Acceleration
Distance moved
Time taken
W
Power




(
)
10
50
9 81
30
60
2452 5
2




kg
m/s
m
s
Power
W
.
.
 
  The rating of the building hoist motor will be 2.45  kW. 

Basic electrotechnical units and theory
89
 Example 2 
 A hydroelectric power station pump motor working continuously during a 7       h period raises 
856  tonnes of water through a vertical distance of 60       m. Determine the rating (power) of the 
motor, assuming the acceleration due to gravity is 9.81  m/s 2 . 
 From Example 1, 
 
Power
Mass
Acceleration
Distance moved
Time taken
W
Power




(
)
856
1000
9 81
60
7
60
60
20 000
2






kg
m/s
m
s
Power
W
.
,
 
  The rating of the pump motor is 20  kW. 
 Example 3 
 An electric hoist motor raises a load of 500  kg at a velocity of 2  m/s. Calculate the rating 
(power) of the motor if the acceleration due to gravity is 9.81       m/s 2 . 
 
Power
Mass
Acceleration
Distance moved
Time taken
W



(
)
 
 
but Velocity
Distance
Time
(m/s)

 
 
 Power
Mass
Acceleration
Velocity
Power
kg
m/s
m/






500
9 81
2
2
.
s
Power
W.
 9810
 
  The rating of the hoist motor is 9.81  kW. 
 Levers and turning force 
   Definition  
 A lever allows a heavy load to be lifted 
or moved by a small eff ort .
 A lever allows a heavy load to be lifted or moved by a small effort. Every 
time we open a door, turn on a tap or tighten a nut with a spanner, we 
exert a lever-action turning force. A lever is any rigid body which pivots 
or rotates about a ﬁ xed axis or fulcrum. The simplest form of lever is the 
crowbar, which is useful because it enables a person to lift a load at one 
end which is greater than the effort applied through his or her arm mus-
cles at the other end. In this way the crowbar is said to provide a  ‘ mechani-
cal advantage ’ . A washbasin tap and a spanner both provide a mechanical 
advantage through the simple lever action. The mechanical advantage of 
a simple lever is dependent upon the length of lever on either side of the 
fulcrum. Applying the principle of turning forces to a lever, we obtain the 
formula:
 Definition  
 A lever is any rigid body which piv-
ots or rotates about a fi xed axis or 
fulcrum. 
 Load force   Distance from fulcrum  
    Effort force   Distance from fulcrum 
  This formula can perhaps better be understood by referring to  Fig. 4.2   . A 
small effort at a long distance from the fulcrum can balance a large load at a 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
90
short distance from the fulcrum. Thus a  ‘ turning force ’ or  ‘ turning moment ’  
depends upon the distance from the fulcrum and the magnitude of the force.
 Example 
 Calculate the eff ort required to raise a load of 500  kg when the eff ort is applied at a distance 
of fi ve times the load distance from the fulcrum (assume the acceleration due to gravity to be 
10  m/s 2 ). 
 Load force    Mass   Acceleration (N) 
 Load force    500  kg   10  m/s 2    5000 N 
 Load force   Distance from fulcrum    Eff ort force   Distance from fulcrum 
 5000  N   1  m    Eff ort force   5 m 
 
∴Effort force
N
m
m
N



5000
1
5
1000
 
  Thus an eff ort force of 1000       N can overcome a load force of 5000       N using the mechanical 
advantage of this simple lever. 
 Simple machines 
   Our physical abilities in the ﬁ eld of lifting and moving heavy objects are 
limited. However, over the centuries we have used our superior intelli-
gence to design tools, mechanisms and machines which have overcome 
this physical inadequacy. This concept is shown in  Fig. 4.3 .
By deﬁ nition, a machine is an assembly of parts, some ﬁ xed, others mov-
able, by which motion and force are transmitted. With the aid of a machine 
we are able to magnify the effort exerted at the input and lift or move large 
loads at the output.
Long distance
Fulcrum
Effort force
Load force
Short distance
 FIGURE 4.2 
 Turning forces of a simple lever. 
 Definition  
 By defi nition, a machine is an assem-
bly of parts, some fi xed, others mov-
able, by which motion and force are 
transmitted. With the aid of a machine 
we are able to magnify the eff ort 
exerted at the input and lift or move 
large loads at the output. 
 Efﬁ ciency of any machine 
   In any machine the power available at the output is less than that which 
is put in because losses occur in the machine. The losses may result from 
friction in the bearings, wind resistance to moving parts, heat, noise or 
vibration.

Basic electrotechnical units and theory
91
The ratio of the output power to the input power is known as the efﬁ ciency
of the machine. The symbol for efﬁ ciency is the Greek letter  ‘ eta ’  ( η ). In 
general,
  Power output
Power input
 Since efﬁ ciency is usually expressed as a percentage we modify the general 
formula as follows. 
 

Power output
Power input
100
 Example 
 A transformer feeds the 9.81  kW motor driving the mechanical hoist of the previous example. 
The input power to the transformer was found to be 10.9       kW. Find the effi  ciency of the 
transformer. 
 







Power output
Power input
kW
kW
100
9 81
10 9
100
90
.
.
%
 
  Thus the transformer is 90% effi  cient. Note that effi  ciency has no units, but is simply expressed 
as a percentage. 
 Electrical machines 
   Electrical machines are energy converters. If the machine input is mechan-
ical energy and the output electrical energy then that machine is a genera-
tor, as shown in  Fig. 4.4(a)   . Alternatively, if the machine input is electrical 
energy and the output mechanical energy then the machine is a motor, as 
shown in  Fig. 4.4(b) . 
   An electrical machine may be used as a motor or a generator, although in 
practice the machine will operate more efﬁ ciently when operated in the 
mode for which it was designed. 
 Simple a.c. generator or alternator 
   If a simple loop of wire is rotated between the poles of a permanent mag-
net, as shown in  Fig. 4.5   , the loop of wire will cut the lines of magnetic ﬂ ux 
Effort
Machine
Load
 FIGURE 4.3 
 Simple machine concept. 
 Definition  
   The ratio of the output power to the 
input power is known as the  effi  ciency  
of the machine. The symbol for effi  -
ciency is the Greek letter  ‘ eta ’  (  η  ). In 
general, 
 
 Power output
Power input  

Basic Electrical Installation Work
92
Cathode
ray
oscilloscope
Rotation
N
S
Carbon brushes
Slip rings
 FIGURE 4.5 
 Simple a.c. generator or alternator. 
between the north and south poles. This ﬂ ux cutting will induce an emf 
in the wire by Faraday’s law which states that  when a conductor cuts or 
is cut by a magnetic ﬁ eld, an emf is induced in that conductor . If the gen-
erated emf is collected by carbon brushes at the slip rings and displayed 
on the screen of a cathode ray oscilloscope, the waveform will be seen to 
be approximately sinusoidal. Alternately changing, ﬁ rst positive and then 
negative, then positive again, giving an alternating output.
Electrical
energy
output
Mechanical
energy
input
Generator
(a)
Electrical
energy
input
Mechanical
energy
output
Motor
(b)
FIGURE 4.4
Electrical machines as energy converters.
 Definition  
 Faraday’s law which states that  when 
a conductor cuts or is cut by a mag-
netic fi eld, an emf is induced in that 
conductor . 
 Simple d.c. generator or dynamo 
   If the slip rings of  Fig. 4.5  are replaced by a single split ring, called a com-
mutator, the generated emf will be seen to be in one direction, as shown 
in  Fig. 4.6   . The action of the commutator is to reverse the generated emf 
every half-cycle, rather like an automatic change-over switch. However, 

Basic electrotechnical units and theory
93
this simple arrangement produces a very bumpy d.c. output. In a practical 
machine, the commutator would contain many segments and many wind-
ings to produce a smoother d.c. output. Similar to the unidirectional bat-
tery supply shown in  Fig. 4.7 . 
 Alternating current theory 
  The supply which we obtain from a car battery is a unidirectional or d.c. sup-
ply, whereas the mains electricity supply is alternating or a.c. (see  Fig. 4.7 ). 
   One of the reasons for using alternating supplies for the electricity mains 
supply is because we can very easily change the voltage levels by using a 
transformer which will only work on an a.c. supply. 
 The generated alternating supply at the power station is transformed up 
to 132,000        V, or more, for efﬁ cient transmission along the National Grid 
conductors. 
   Most electrical equipment makes use of alternating current supplies, and 
for this reason knowledge of alternating waveforms is necessary for all 
practising electricians. 
  When a coil of wire is rotated inside a magnetic ﬁ eld as shown in  Fig. 4.5 , a 
voltage is induced in the coil. The induced voltage follows a mathematical law 
known as the sinusoidal law and, therefore, we can say that a sine wave has 
been generated. Such a waveform has the characteristics displayed in  Fig. 4.8 . 
Cathode
ray
oscilloscope
Rotation
N
S
Carbon brush
Commutator
 FIGURE 4.6 
      Simple d.c. generator or dynamo.    

Basic Electrical Installation Work
94
   In the United Kingdom we generate electricity at a frequency of 50       Hz and 
the time taken to complete each cycle is given by 
T
f
T



1
1
50
0 02

Hz
s
.
   An alternating waveform is constantly changing from zero to a maxi-
mum, ﬁ rst in one direction, then in the opposite direction, and so the 
instantaneous values of the generated voltage are always changing. A use-
ful description of the electrical effects of an a.c. waveform can be given by 
the maximum, average and rms values of the waveform. 
  The maximum or peak value is the greatest instantaneous value reached 
by the generated waveform. Cable and equipment insulation levels must 
be equal to or greater than this value. 
V
V
V
0
0
Battery supply d.c.
Mains supply a.c.
 FIGURE 4.7 
 Unidirectional and alternating supply. 
90
V
Vmax or peak value
V
30
0
0
90	
180	
Period (T )
Time (s)
270	
360	
v instantaneous values
360
330
300
270
240
210
180
150
120
North pole
South pole
Rotating
coil
60

 FIGURE 4.8 
 Characteristics of a sine wave. 

Basic electrotechnical units and theory
95
  The average value is the average over one half-cycle of the instantaneous 
values as they change from zero to a maximum and can be found from the 
following formula applied to the sinusoidal waveform shown in  Fig. 4.9 . 
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
av
max
6






  
1
2
3
4
5
6
0 637
.
   For any sinusoidal waveform the average value is equal to 0.637 of the 
maximum value. 
  The rms value is the square root of the mean of the individual squared val-
ues and is the value of an a.c. voltage which produces the same heating 
effect as a d.c. voltage. The value can be found from the following formula 
applied to the sinusoidal waveform shown in  Fig. 4.9 . 
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
rms
max







1
2
2
2
3
2
4
2
5
2
6
2
6
0 7071
.
   For any sinusoidal waveform the rms value is equal to 0.7071 of the maxi-
mum value.
 Example 
  The sinusoidal waveform applied to a particular circuit has a maximum value of 325.3  V. 
Calculate the average and rms value of the waveform. 
 
Average value 
 V
rms va
av
max
av
V
V
V





0 637
0 637
325 3
207 2
.
.
.
.

lue 
 V
rms
max
rms
V
V
V





0 7071
0 7071
325 3
230
.
.
.
 
  When we say that the main supply to a domestic property is 230  V, we really mean 230  V rms. 
Such a waveform has an average value of about 207.2  V and a maximum value of almost 
325.3  V but because the rms value gives the d.c. equivalent value we almost always give the 
rms value without identifying it as such. 
90
30
180
150
120
60
V
V
V1
V5 V6
V2
V4
V3
 FIGURE 4.9 
 Sinusoidal waveform showing instantaneous values of voltage. 

  When you have completed the questions, check out the answers at the back 
of the book. 
 Note: more than one multiple choice answer may be correct. 
 Check your Understanding  
 1.  The SI unit of mass is the: 
  a.  kilogram or kg  
  b.  pound or lb  
  c.  metre or m  
  d.  millimetre or mm.  
 2.  The SI unit of length is the: 
  a.  kilogram or kg  
  b.  pound or lb  
  c.  metre or m  
  d.  millimetre or mm.  
 3.  The SI unit of time is the: 
  a.  minute or m  
  b.  second or s  
  c.  hour or h  
  d.  day or d.  
 4.  The SI unit of electric current is the: 
  a.  ohm or  Ω  
  b.  volt or V  
  c.  watt or W  
  d.  ampere or A.  
 5.  The SI unit of resistance is the: 
  a.  ohm or  Ω  
  b.  volt or V  
  c.  watt or W  
  d.  ampere or A.  
 6.  The ampere is a measure of: 
  a.  potential difference  
  b.  power  
  c.  force  
  d.   electric current.  

Ch 4
97
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3 
4 
5 
6 
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
 7.  The watt is a measure of: 
 
  a.  potential difference  
 
  b.   power  
 
  c.  force  
 
  d.  electric current.  
 8.  The volt is a measure of: 
 
  a.  potential difference  
 
  b.    power  
 
  c.  force  
 
  d.  electric current.  
 9.  The Newton is a measure of: 
 
  a.  potential difference  
 
  b.   power  
 
  c.  force  
 
  d.  electric current.  
 10.  Which of the following may be deﬁ ned as  ‘ a measure of the force 
  which a body exerts on anything which supports it ’ : 
 
  a.  acceleration  
 
  b.   force  
 
  c.  mass  
 
  d.   weight.  
 11.  Which of the following may be deﬁ ned as  ‘ a measure of the amount
  of material in a substance ’ : 
 
  a.  acceleration  
 
  b.   force  
 
  c.  mass  
 
  d.  weight.  

 12.  Which of the following may be deﬁ ned as  ‘ may cause a stationary 
  object to move or bring a moving body to rest ’ : 
 
  a.  acceleration  
 
  b.   force  
 
  c.  mass  
 
  d.  weight  
 13.  Which of the following may be deﬁ ned as  ‘ the force applied times 
  the distance moved in the direction of the force ’ : 
 
  a.  acceleration  
 
  b.   work done  
 
  c.  power  
 
   d.  velocity  
  14.  Which of the following may be deﬁ ned as  ‘ the rate of doing work ’ : 
 
  a.  acceleration  
 
  b.   work done  
 
  c.  power  
 
  d.  velocity  
 15.  Which of the following may be deﬁ ned as  ‘ the speed in a given
  direction ’ : 
 
  a.  acceleration  
 
  b.   work done  
 
  c.  power  
 
  d.  velocity  
 16.  Brieﬂ y describe what we mean by  ‘ a turning force ’ and give ﬁ ve 
practical examples of this effect. 
 17.  Brieﬂ y deﬁ ne what we mean by a  ‘ simple machine ’ and give ﬁ ve 
examples. 
 18.  Brieﬂ y describe what we mean by  ‘ the efﬁ ciency of a machine ’ . 
 19.  Sketch the construction of a simple alternator and label all the parts. 
 20.  State how an emf is induced in an alternator. Sketch and name the 
shape of the generated emf.  
 21.  Calculate or state the average rms and maximum value of the 
domestic a.c. mains supply and show these values on a sketch of the 
mains supply.  

 Basic scientiﬁ c concepts in 
electrotechnology  
 Ch 5 
99
 Unit 2 – Principles of electrotechnology – Outcome 2 
 Underpinning knowledge: when you have completed this chapter you should be able to: 
●  list the materials used for conductors and insulators 
●  describe the properties of conductor and insulating materials 
●  explain current ﬂ ow in a series and parallel circuit 
●  describe how to connect voltmeters and ammeters 
●  describe the three effects of an electric current 
●  describe the ﬂ ux patterns set up by permanent magnets, conductors and solenoids 
●  describe the construction of a basic transformer 
●  state the use of transformers on the National Grid 
d solenoids
V
U
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply

Basic Electrical Installation Work
100
 Properties of conductors and insulators 
   In  Fig. 4.1  of the last chapter we looked at the atomic structure of materials. 
All materials are made up of atoms and electrons. What makes them differ-
ent materials is the way in which the atoms and electrons are arranged and 
how strongly the electrons are attracted to the atoms. 
 A conductor is a material, usually a metal, in which the electrons are 
loosely bound to the central nucleus. These electrons can easily become 
 ‘ free electrons ’  which allows heat and electricity to pass easily through the 
material.
 Definition  
 A conductor is a material, usually a 
metal, in which the electrons are 
loosely bound to the central nucleus. 
These electrons can easily become 
 ‘ free electrons ’ which allows heat and 
electricity to pass easily through the 
material. 
 An insulator is a material, usually a non-metal, in which the electrons are 
very ﬁ rmly bound to the nucleus and, therefore, will not allow heat or elec-
tricity to pass through it.
 Definition  
 An insulator is a material, usually a 
non metal, in which the electrons are 
very fi rmly bound to the nucleus and, 
therefore, will not allow heat or elec-
tricity to pass through it. 
 Let us now deﬁ ne the terms and properties of some of the materials used 
in the electrotechnical industry. 
Ferrous A word used to describe all metals in which the main constituent 
is iron. The word  ‘ ferrous ’  comes from the Latin word  ferrum meaning iron. 
Ferrous metals have magnetic properties. Cast iron, wrought iron and steel 
are all ferrous metals.
 Definition  
 Ferrous  A word used to describe all 
metals in which the main constituent 
is iron. 
Non-ferrous  Metals which  do not  contain iron are called non-ferrous. They 
are non-magnetic and resist rusting. Copper, aluminium, tin, lead, zinc 
and brass are examples of non-ferrous metals.
 Definition  
 Non-ferrous  Metals which  do not con-
tain iron are called non-ferrous. 
Alloy  An alloy is a mixture of two or more metals. Brass is an alloy of cop-
per and zinc, usually in the ratio 70–30% or 60–40%.
 Definition  
 Alloy  An alloy is a mixture of two or 
more metals. 
Corrosion  The destruction of a metal by chemical action. Most corrosion 
takes place when a metal is in contact with moisture (see also mild steel 
and zinc).
 Definition  
 Corrosion  The destruction of a metal 
by chemical action. 
Thermoplastic polymers  These may be repeatedly warmed and cooled 
without appreciable changes occurring in the properties of the material. 
They are good insulators, but give off toxic fumes when burned. They have 
a ﬂ exible quality when operated up to a maximum temperature of 70°C but 
should not be ﬂ exed when the air temperature is near 0°C, otherwise they 
may crack. Polyvinylchloride (PVC) used for cable insulation is a thermo-
plastic polymer.
 Definition  
 Thermoplastic polymers  These may be 
repeatedly warmed and cooled with-
out appreciable changes occurring in 
the properties of the material. 
 Definition  
 Polyvinylchloride (PVC) used for cable 
insulation is a thermoplastic polymer. 
  Thermosetting polymers  Once heated and formed, products made from 
thermosetting polymers are ﬁ xed rigidly. Plug tops, socket outlets and 
switch plates are made from this material.
 Rubber is a tough elastic substance made from the sap of tropical plants. 
It is a good insulator, but degrades and becomes brittle when exposed to 
sunlight.
Synthetic rubber is manufactured, as opposed to being produced natu-
rally. Synthetic or artiﬁ cial rubber is carefully manufactured to have all the 

Basic scientiﬁ c concepts in electrotechnology
101
 Definition  
 Thermosetting polymers  Once heated 
and formed, products made from 
thermosetting polymers are fi xed 
rigidly. Plug tops, socket outlets and 
switch plates are made from this 
material. 
 Definition  
 Rubber  is a tough elastic substance 
made from the sap of tropical plants. 
good qualities of natural rubber – ﬂ exibility, good insulation and suitability 
for use over a wide range of temperatures.
 Definition  
 Synthetic rubber  is manufactured, as 
opposed to being produced naturally. 
Silicon rubber  Introducing organic compounds into synthetic rubber pro-
duces a good insulating material which is ﬂ exible over a wide range of tem-
peratures and which retains its insulating properties even when burned. 
These properties make it ideal for cables used in ﬁ re alarm installations 
such as FP200 cables.
 Definition  
 Silicon rubber  Introducing organic 
compounds into synthetic rubber 
produces a good insulating material 
such as FP200 cables. 
 Definition  
 Magnesium oxide  The conductors of 
mineral insulated metal sheathed 
(MICC) cables are insulated with com-
pressed magnesium oxide 
 Copper 
   Copper is extracted from an ore which is mined in South Africa, North 
America, Australia and Chile. For electrical purposes it is reﬁ ned to about 
98.8% pure copper, the impurities being extracted from the ore by smelting 
and electrolysis. It is a very good conductor, is non-magnetic and offers con-
siderable resistance to atmospheric corrosion. Copper toughens with work, 
but may be annealed, or softened, by heating to dull red before quenching. 
   Copper forms the largest portion of the alloy brass, and is used in the manu-
facture of electrical cables, domestic heating systems, refrigerator tubes and 
vehicle radiators. An attractive soft reddish brown metal, copper is easily 
worked and is also used to manufacture decorative articles and jewellery.  
 Aluminium 
   Aluminium is a grey-white metal obtained from the mineral bauxite which 
is found in the United States, Germany and the Russian Federation. It 
is a very good conductor, is non-magnetic, offers very good resistance to 
atmospheric corrosion and is notable for its extreme softness and light-
ness. It is used in the manufacture of power cables. The overhead cables 
of the National Grid are made of an aluminium conductor reinforced by
a core of steel. Copper conductors would be too heavy to support them-
selves between the pylons. Lightness and resistance to corrosion make 
aluminium an ideal metal for the manufacture of cooking pots and food 
containers. 
   Aluminium alloys retain the corrosion resistance properties of pure alu-
minium with an increase in strength. The alloys are cast into cylinder 
heads and gearboxes for motorcars, and switch-boxes and luminaires for 
electrical installations. Special processes and ﬂ uxes have now been devel-
oped which allow aluminium to be welded and soldered.
Magnesium oxide  The conductors of mineral insulated metal sheathed 
(MICC) cables are insulated with compressed magnesium oxide, a white 
chalk-like substance which is heat-resistant and a good insulator and lasts 
for many years. The magnesium oxide insulation, copper conductors and 
sheath, often additionally manufactured with various external sheaths to 
provide further protection from corrosion and weather, produce a cable 
designed for long-life and high-temperature installations. However, the 
magnesium oxide is very hygroscopic, which means that it attracts mois-
ture and, therefore, the cable must be terminated with a special moisture-
excluding seal, as shown in Fig. 6.3.

Basic Electrical Installation Work
102
 Try This
Materials 
 List 5  ‘ good insulator ’ materials being used at your place of work. 
 Brass 
   Brass is a non-ferrous alloy of copper and zinc which is easily cast. Because 
it is harder than copper or aluminium it is easily machined. It is a good 
conductor and is highly resistant to corrosion. For these reasons it is often 
used in the electrical and plumbing trades. Taps, valves, pipes, electrical 
terminals, plug top pins and terminal glands for steel wire armour (SWA) 
and MI cables are some of the many applications. 
   Brass is an attractive yellow metal which is also used for decorative house-
hold articles and jewellery. The combined properties of being an attractive 
metal which is highly resistant to corrosion make it a popular metal for 
ships ’ furnishings. 
 Cast steel 
   Cast steel is also called tool steel or high-carbon steel. It is an alloy of iron 
and carbon which is melted in airtight crucibles and then poured into 
moulds to form ingots. These ingots are then rolled or pressed into vari-
ous shapes from which the ﬁ nished products are made. Cast steel can be 
hardened and tempered and is therefore ideal for manufacturing tools. 
Hammer heads, pliers, wire cutters, chisels, ﬁ les and many machine parts 
are also made from cast steel. 
 Mild steel 
   Mild steel is also an alloy of iron and carbon but contains much less car-
bon than cast steel. It can be ﬁ led, drilled or sawn quite easily and may 
be bent when hot or cold, but repeated cold bending may cause it to frac-
ture. In moist conditions corrosion takes place rapidly unless the metal is 
protected. Mild steel is the most widely used metal in the world, having 
considerable strength and rigidity without being brittle. Ships, bridges, 
girders, motorcar bodies, bicycles, nails, screws, conduit, trunking, tray 
and SWA are all made of mild steel.
 Try This
Materials 
 List 5  ‘ good conductor ’ materials being used at your place of work. 
 Zinc 
   Zinc is a non-ferrous metal which is used mainly to protect steel against 
corrosion and in making the alloy brass. Mild steel coated with zinc is 
sometimes called galvanized steel , and this coating considerably improves 

Basic scientiﬁ c concepts in electrotechnology
103
steel’s resistance to corrosion. Conduit, trunking, tray, SWA, outside lumi-
naires and electricity pylons are made of galvanized steel. 
 Resistors in series and parallel 
   In an electrical circuit resistors may be connected in series, in parallel, or 
in various combinations of series and parallel connections. 
 Series-connected resistors 
   In any series circuit a current  I  will ﬂ ow through all parts of the circuit as a 
result of the potential difference supplied by a battery  VT . Therefore, we say 
that in a series circuit the current is common throughout that circuit. 
  When the current ﬂ ows through each resistor in the circuit,  R1 ,  R2  and  R3
for example in  Fig. 5.1 , there will be a voltage drop across that resistor 
whose value will be determined by the values of  I  and  R , since from Ohm’s 
law V    I      R . The sum of the individual voltage drops,  V1 ,  V2 and  V3 for 
example in  Fig. 5.1 , will be equal to the total voltage  VT . 
  We can summarize these statements as follows. For any series circuit,  I is 
common throughout the circuit and 
V
V
V
V
T 


1
2
3  
 (5.1) 
   Let us call the total circuit resistance  RT . From Ohm’s law we know that 
V    I      R and therefore 
Total voltage 
Voltage drop across 
 is 
Volt
T
T
V
I
R
R
V
I
R




1
1
1
age drop across 
 is 
Voltage drop across 
 is 
R
V
I
R
R
V
2
2
2
3
3




I
R3
 (5.2)
   We are looking for an expression for the total resistance in any series circuit 
and, if we substitute equations (5.2) into equation (5.1) we have: 
V
V
V
V
T 


1
2
3
∴I
R
I
R
I
R
I
R







T
1
2
3
R1
V1
I
R2
R3
V2
VT
V3
 FIGURE 5.1 
 A series circuit. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
104
R1
R2
R3
IT
I1
I2
I3
V
 FIGURE 5.2 
 A parallel circuit. 
 Now, since  I  is common to all terms in the equation, we can divide both 
sides of the equation by  I . This will cancel out  I  to leave us with an expres-
sion for the circuit resistance: 
R
R
R
R
T 


1
2
3
Note that the derivation of this formula is given for information only. 
Craft students need only state the expression  RT    R1  R2  R3 for series 
connections.
 Key Fact
Resistors 
   In a series circuit, total resistance 
 R T    R 1    R 2    R 3 ohms. 
 Parallel-connected resistors 
   In any parallel circuit, as shown in  Fig. 5.2   , the same voltage acts across all 
branches of the circuit. The total current will divide when it reaches a resis-
tor junction, part of it ﬂ owing in each resistor. The sum of the individual 
currents,  I1 ,  I2  and  I3  for example in  Fig. 5.2 , will be equal to the total cur-
rent  IT . 
  We can summarize these statements as follows. For any parallel circuit,  V is 
common to all branches of the circuit and 
I
I
I
I
T 


1
2
3  
 (5.3) 
 Let us call the total resistance  RT . 
 From Ohm’s law we know, that I
V
R

 , and therefore 
the total current 
the current through 
 is 
th
T
T
1
1
1
I
V
R
R
I
V
R


e current through 
 is 
the current through 
 is 
2
2
2
3
R
I
V
R
R
I

3
3
 V
R
 
 (5.4) 

Basic scientiﬁ c concepts in electrotechnology
105
  We are looking for an expression for the equivalent resistance  RT  in any  paral-
lel circuit and, if we substitute equations (5.4) into equation (5.3) we have: 
I
I
I
I
T 


1
2
3
∴V
R
V
R
V
R
V
R
T
1
2
3



 Now, since  V  is common to all terms in the equation, we can divide both 
sides by  V , leaving us with an expression for the circuit resistance: 
1
1
1
1
T
1
2
3
R
R
R
R



Note  that the derivation of this formula is given for information only. Craft 
students need only state the expression 1/ RT    1/ R1    1/ R2    1/ R3 for par-
allel connections.
 Key Fact
Resistors 
   In a parallel circuit, total resistance can 
be found from
  
1
1
1
1
T
1
2
3
R
R
R
R



  
 Example 1 
  Three 6  Ω resistors are connected (a) in series (see  Fig. 5.3 ), and (b) in parallel (see  Fig. 5.4 ), 
across a 12  V battery. For each method of connection, fi nd the total resistance and the values 
of all currents and voltages. 
R1  6 Ω
R2  6 Ω
R3  6 Ω
IT
I1
I2
I3
VT  12 V
 FIGURE 5.4 
 Resistors in parallel. 
R1  6 Ω
V1
R2  6 Ω
R3  6 Ω
V2
VT  12 V
V3
 FIGURE 5.3 
 Resistors in series. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
106
 For any series connection 
 
R
R
R
R
 R
T
T
 
 
 
 







1
2
3
6
6
6
18
∴
Ω
Ω
Ω
Ω  
 
Total current
  
I
V
R
T
T
T

 
 
∴IT
 V
 
.
 A


12
18
0 67
Ω
 
 The voltage drop across  R 1 is 
 
V
I
R
V
1
1
1
0 67
4





T
.
 A
6 
 V
∴
Ω
 
 The voltage drop across  R 2 is 
 
V
I
R
V
2
2
2
0 67
4





T
.
 A
6 
 V
∴
Ω
 
  The voltage drop across  R 3 is 
 
V
I
R
V
3
3
3
0 67
4





T
.
 A
6 
 V
∴
Ω
 
 For any parallel connection, 
 
1
1
1
1
6 
1
6 
1
6 
1
1
1
1
6 
3
6 
6 
3
T
1
3
T
T
T
R
R
R
R
R
R
R






   

1
1
2
∴
Ω
Ω
Ω
Ω
Ω
Ω  2 Ω
 
 
Total current
  
I
V
R
T
T
T

 
 
∴IT
12 V
2 
 A


Ω
6
 
   The current fl owing through  R 1 is 
 
I
V
R
I
1
T
1
1
 V
6 
 A



∴
12
2
Ω
 
   The current fl owing through  R 2 is 
 
I
V
R
I
2
2
2



T
12 V
6 
2 A
∴
Ω
 
   The current fl owing through  R 3 is 
 
I
V
R
I
T
3
3
3
12
6
2



∴
 V
 A
Ω
 

Basic scientiﬁ c concepts in electrotechnology
107
 Series and parallel combinations 
 The most complex arrangement of series and parallel resistors can be sim-
pliﬁ ed into a single equivalent resistor by combining the separate rules for 
series and parallel resistors.
 Example 2 
 Resolve the circuit shown in  Fig. 5.5 into a single resistor and calculate the potential diff erence 
across each resistor. 
 By inspection, the circuit contains a parallel group consisting of  R 3 ,  R 4 and  R 5 and a series 
group consisting of  R 1 and  R 2 in series with the equivalent resistor for the parallel branch. 
 Consider the parallel group. We will label this group  R P . Then 
 
1
1
1
1
1
3
1
6
1
3
6
3
5
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
P
4
P
P
P
1
1
2 
 
 
2
1
6    
 6
 
6







  

Ω
Ω
Ω
Ω
Ω
 
6
1 
Ω
Ω

 
  Figure 5.5 may now be represented by the more simple equivalent shown in  Fig. 5.6   . 
VT  10V
R5  6 Ω
R4  3 Ω
R3  2 Ω
R1  3Ω
R2  6 Ω
 FIGURE 5.5 
 A series/parallel circuit. 
V1
V2
V3
VT  10V
R1  3Ω
R2  6 Ω
RP  1Ω
 FIGURE 5.6 
 Equivalent series circuit. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
108
 Since all resistors are now in series, 
 
R
R
R
 R
R
 
  
P
T
T
 
 
 
 







1
2
3
6
1
10
∴
Ω
Ω
Ω
 
  Thus, the circuit may be represented by a single equivalent resistor of value 10        Ω as shown in 
 Fig. 5.7 . The total current fl owing in the circuit may be found by using Ohm’s law: 
 
I
V
R
T
T
T
10 V
10 
 A



Ω
1
 
  The potential diff erences across the individual resistors are 
 
V
I
R
V
I
R
V
I
RP
1
1
2
2
1
3
3
1
6
6
1
1
1















T
T
P
T
 A
 
 V
 A
 
 V
 A
 
Ω
Ω
Ω
 V  
 Since the same voltage acts across all branches of a parallel circuit the same p.d. of 1  V will 
exist across each resistor in the parallel branch  R 3 ,  R 4 and  R 5 . 
 Example 3 
 Determine the total resistance and the current fl owing through each resistor for the circuit 
shown in  Fig. 5.8 . 
VT  10V
IT
RT  10 Ω
 FIGURE 5.7 
 Single equivalent resistor for Fig. 5.5. 
R1  3 Ω
R3  6 Ω
VT  12 V
R2  3 Ω
 FIGURE 5.8 
 A series/parallel circuit for Example 3. 
  By inspection, it can be seen that  R 1 and  R 2 are connected in series while  R 3  is connected in 
parallel across  R 1 and  R 2 . The circuit may be more easily understood if we redraw it as in  Fig. 5.9   . 
 For the series branch, the equivalent resistor can be found from 
 
R
R
R
S
S
R
 
 
 





1
2
3
3
6
∴
Ω
Ω
Ω  
 Figure 5.9  may now be represented by a more simple equivalent circuit, as in  Fig. 5.10 . 

Basic scientiﬁ c concepts in electrotechnology
109
R3  6 Ω
VT  12 V
R1  3 Ω
R2  3 Ω
IS
I3
IT
 FIGURE 5.9 
 Equivalent circuit for Example 2. 
R3  6 Ω
VT  12 V
RS  6 Ω
IS
I3
I T
 FIGURE 5.10 
 Simpliﬁ ed equivalent circuit for Example 2. 
 Since the resistors are now in parallel, the equivalent resistance may be found from 
 
1
1
1
1
6
1
1
1
6
2
6
2
3
R
R
R
R
R
R
T
S
T
T
T
1
1
6 
 
 
6 
 
3 




  


∴
Ω
Ω
Ω
Ω
Ω
Ω
 
  The total current is 
 
I
V
R
T
T
T
V
3 
4 A



12
Ω
 
 Let us call the current fl owing through resistor  R 3  I 3 . 
 
∴I
V
R
3
3
12
2



T
 V
6 
 A
Ω
 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
110
 Let us call the current fl owing through both resistors  R 1 and  R 2 , as shown in  Fig. 5.9 ,  l S . 
 
∴I
V
R
S
T
S
V
 
 A



12
6
2
Ω
 
 Measuring volts and amps 
 The type of instrument to be purchased for general use in the electrotech-
nical industries is a difﬁ cult choice because there are so many different 
types on the market and every manufacturer’s representative is convinced 
that his company’s product is the best. However, most instruments can be 
broadly grouped under two general headings: those having  analogue and 
those with digital displays. 
 Analogue meters or instruments 
Analogue meters have a pointer moving across a calibrated scale. They are 
the only choice when a general trend or variation in value is to be observed. 
Hi-ﬁ  equipment often uses analogue displays to indicate how power lev-
els vary with time, which is more informative than a speciﬁ c value. Red or 
danger zones can be indicated on industrial instruments. The fuel gauge 
on a motor car often indicates full, half full or danger on an analogue dis-
play which is much more informative than an indication of the exact num-
ber of litres of petrol remaining in the tank. 
 FIGURE 5.11 
 Digital multimeter suitable for 
testing electrical and electronic 
circuits. 
Definition
Analogue meters have a pointer mov-
ing across a calibrated scale. 
  These meters are only accurate when used in the calibrated position – usu-
ally horizontally. 
   Most meters using an analogue scale incorporate a mirror to eliminate par-
allax error. The user must look straight at the pointer on the scale when tak-
ing readings and the correct position is indicated when the pointer image 
in the mirror is hidden behind the actual pointer. That is the point at which 
a reading should be taken from the appropriate scale of the instrument. 
 Digital meters or instruments 
Digital meters provide the same functions as analogue meters but they 
display the indicated value using a seven-segment LED to give a numerical 
value of the measurement. Modern digital meters use semiconductor tech-
nology to give the instrument a very high-input impedance, typically about 
10  MΩ and, therefore, they are ideal for testing most electrical or electronic 
circuits. 
Definition
Digital meters provide the same func-
tions as analogue meters but they 
display the indicated value using a 
seven-segment LED to give a numeri-
cal value of the measurement.
  The choice between an analogue and a digital display is a difﬁ cult one 
and must be dictated by speciﬁ c circumstances. However, if you are an 
electrician or service engineer intending to purchase a new instrument, I 
think on balance that a good-quality digital multimeter such as that shown 
in  Fig. 5.11    would be best. Having no moving parts, digital meters tend
to be more rugged and, having a very high-input impedance, they are ide-
ally suited to testing all circuits that an electrician might work on in his 
daily work. 

Basic scientiﬁ c concepts in electrotechnology
111
 The multimeter 
 Multimeters are designed to measure voltage, current or resistance. Before 
taking measurements the appropriate volt, ampere or ohm scale should 
be selected. To avoid damaging the instrument it is good practice ﬁ rst to 
switch to the highest value on a particular scale range. For example, if the 
10  A scale is ﬁ rst selected and a reading of 2.5       A is displayed, we then know 
that a more appropriate scale would be the 3       A or 5       A range. This will give 
a more accurate reading which might be, say, 2.49       A.When the multimeter 
is used as an ammeter to measure current it must be connected in series 
with the test circuit, as shown in  Fig. 5.12(a)   . When used as a voltmeter the 
multimeter must be connected in parallel with the component, as shown 
in  Fig. 5.12(b) .
Supply
(a) Ammeter connection
V A Ω
 FIGURE 5.12 
 Using a multimeter (a) as an ammeter 
and (b) as a voltmeter. 
Supply
(b) Voltmeter connection
V A Ω
 Safety First  
 Voltmeters and Ammeters 
   Electrical test meters are expensive 
and easy to steal. 
 ● 
 protect them by placing in their 
protective case 
 ● 
 Keep them safe, out of sight and 
locked up. 
 When using a commercial multirange meter as an ohmmeter for testing 
electronic components, care must be exercised in identifying the positive 
terminal. The red terminal of the meter, identifying the positive input for 
testing voltage and current, usually becomes the negative terminal when 
the meter is used as an ohmmeter because of the way the internal bat-
tery is connected to the meter movement. Check the meter manufacturers 
handbook before using a multimeter to test electronic components. 
  The three effects of an electric current 
  When an electric current ﬂ ows in a circuit it can have one or more of the 
following three effects:  heating, magnetic or  chemical .
 Definition  
   When an electric current fl ows in a 
circuit it can have one or more of the 
following three eff ects:  heating, mag-
netic or  chemical . 
  HEATING EFFECT 
 The movement of electrons within a conductor, which is the ﬂ ow of an 
electric current, causes an increase in the temperature of the conductor. 
The amount of heat generated by this current ﬂ ow depends upon the type 
and dimensions of the conductor and the quantity of current ﬂ owing. By 
changing these variables, a conductor may be operated hot and used as 
the heating element of a ﬁ re, or be operated cool and used as an electrical 
installation conductor. 
  The heating effect of an electric current is also the principle upon which a 
fuse gives protection to a circuit. The fuse element is made of a metal with 
a low melting point and forms a part of the electrical circuit. If an excessive 
current ﬂ ows, the fuse element overheats and melts, breaking the circuit. 
  MAGNETIC EFFECT 
 Whenever a current ﬂ ows in a conductor a magnetic ﬁ eld is set up around 
the conductor like an extension of the insulation. The magnetic ﬁ eld 
increases with the current and collapses if the current is switched off. 
A conductor carrying current and wound into a solenoid produces a mag-
netic ﬁ eld very similar to a permanent magnet, but has the advantage of 
being switched on and off by any switch which controls the circuit current. 
 The magnetic effect of an electric current is the principle upon which elec-
tric bells, relays, instruments, motors and generators work. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
112
  CHEMICAL EFFECT 
  When an electric current ﬂ ows through a conducting liquid, the liquid is 
separated into its chemical parts. The conductors which make contact with 
the liquid are called the anode and cathode. The liquid itself is called the 
electrolyte, and the process is called  electrolysis . 
   Electrolysis is an industrial process used in the reﬁ ning of metals and elec-
troplating. It was one of the earliest industrial applications of electric cur-
rent. Most of the aluminium produced today is extracted from its ore by 
electrochemical methods. Electroplating serves a double purpose by pro-
tecting a base metal from atmospheric erosion and also giving it a more 
expensive and attractive appearance. Silver and nickel plating has long 
been used to enhance the appearance of cutlery, candlesticks and sporting 
trophies. 
   An anode and cathode of dissimilar metal placed in an electrolyte can 
react chemically and produce an emf. When a load is connected across 
the anode and cathode, a current is drawn from this arrangement, which 
is called a cell. A battery is made up of a number of cells. It has many use-
ful applications in providing portable electrical power, but electrochemical 
action can also be undesirable since it is the basis of electrochemical cor-
rosion which rots our motor cars, industrial containers and bridges. 
 Magnetism 
  The Greeks knew as early as 600  BC  that a certain form of iron ore, now 
known as magnetite or lodestone, had the property of attracting small 
pieces of iron. Later, during the Middle Ages, navigational compasses 
were made using the magnetic properties of lodestone. Small pieces of 
lodestone attached to wooden splints ﬂ oating in a bowl of water always 
came to rest pointing in a north–south direction. The word lodestone is 
derived from an old English word meaning  ‘ the way ’ , and the word mag-
netism is derived from Magnesia, the place where magnetic ore was ﬁ rst 
discovered. 
   Iron, nickel and cobalt are the only elements which are attracted strongly 
by a magnet. These materials are said to be  ferromagnetic . Copper, brass, 
wood, PVC and glass are not attracted by a magnet and are, therefore, 
described as  non-magnetic . 
 Some basic rules of magnetism 
 1.  Lines of magnetic ﬂ ux have no physical existence, but they were 
introduced by Michael Faraday (1791–1867) as a way of explaining 
the magnetic energy existing in space or in a material. They help us 
to visualize and explain the magnetic effects. The symbol used for 
magnetic ﬂ ux is the Greek letter Φ (phi) and the unit of magnetic 
ﬂ ux is the weber (symbol Wb), pronounced  ‘ veber ’ , to commemorate 
the work of the German physicist Wilhelm Weber (1804–1891). 
 2.  Lines of magnetic ﬂ ux always form closed loops. 

Basic scientiﬁ c concepts in electrotechnology
113
 3.  Lines of magnetic ﬂ ux behave like stretched elastic bands, always 
trying to shorten themselves. 
 4.  Lines of magnetic ﬂ ux never cross over each other. 
     5.       Lines of magnetic ﬂ ux travel along a magnetic material and always 
emerge out of the  ‘ north pole ’ end of the magnet. 
     6.       Lines of magnetic ﬂ ux pass through space and non-magnetic 
materials undisturbed. 
     7.       The region of space through which the inﬂ uence of a magnet can 
be detected is called the magnetic ﬁ eld of that magnet. 
Bar magnet
Horse shoe magnet
N
S
N
S
 FIGURE 5.13 
 Magnetic ﬁ elds around a permanent magnet. 
 Definition  
   The region of space through which 
the infl uence of a magnet can be 
detected is called the  magnetic fi eld of 
that magnet .
     8.       The number of lines of magnetic ﬂ ux within a magnetic ﬁ eld is a 
measure of the ﬂ ux density. Strong magnetic ﬁ elds have a high-ﬂ ux 
density. The symbol used for ﬂ ux density is  B , and the unit of ﬂ ux 
density is the tesla (symbol T), to commemorate the work of the 
Croatian-born American physicist Nikola Tesla (1857–1943). 
     9.       The places on a magnetic material where the lines of ﬂ ux are con-
centrated are called the magnetic poles. 
 Definition  
   The places on a magnetic material 
where the lines of fl ux are concen-
trated are called the magnetic poles. 
 10.  Like poles repel; unlike poles attract. These two statements are 
sometimes called the  ‘ ﬁ rst laws of magnetism ’  and are shown in 
 Fig. 5.14 . 
 Definition  
   Like poles repel; unlike poles attract. 
These two statements are sometimes 
called the  ‘ fi rst laws of magnetism ’  and 
are shown in  Fig. 5.14 . 
 Magnetic ﬁ elds 
   If a permanent magnet is placed on a surface and covered by a piece of 
paper, iron ﬁ lings can be shaken on to the paper from a dispenser. Gently 
tapping the paper then causes the ﬁ lings to take up the shape of the mag-
netic ﬁ eld surrounding the permanent magnet. The magnetic ﬁ elds around 
a permanent magnet are shown in  Figs 5.13 and 5.14 . 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
114
 Electromagnetism 
   Electricity and magnetism have been inseparably connected since the 
experiments by Oersted and Faraday in the early nineteenth century. An 
electric current ﬂ owing in a conductor produces a magnetic ﬁ eld  ‘ around ’ 
the conductor which is proportional to the current. Thus a small current 
produces a weak magnetic ﬁ eld, while a large current will produce a strong 
magnetic ﬁ eld. The magnetic ﬁ eld  ‘ spirals ’  around the conductor, as shown 
in  Fig. 5.15    and its direction can be determined by the  ‘ dot ’  or  ‘ cross ’  nota-
tion and the  ‘ screw rule ’ . To do this, we think of the current as being repre-
sented by a dart or arrow inside the conductor. The dot represents current 
coming towards us when we would see the point of the arrow or dart inside 
the conductor. The cross represents current going away from us when we 
would see the ﬂ ights of the dart or arrow. Imagine a corkscrew or screw 
being turned so that it will move in the direction of the current. Therefore, 
if the current was coming out of the paper, as shown in  Fig. 5.15(a) , the 
magnetic ﬁ eld would be spiralling anticlockwise around the conductor. If 
the current was going into the paper, as shown by  Fig. 5.15(b) , the mag-
netic ﬁ eld would spiral clockwise around the conductor. 
N
S
N
S
N
S
S
N
Like poles repel
Unlike poles attract
 FIGURE 5.14 
 The ﬁ rst laws of magnetism. 

Basic scientiﬁ c concepts in electrotechnology
115
 A current ﬂ owing in a  coil  of wire or solenoid establishes a magnetic ﬁ eld 
which is very similar to that of a bar magnet. Winding the coil around a 
soft iron core increases the ﬂ ux density because the lines of magnetic ﬂ ux 
concentrate on the magnetic material. The advantage of the electromagnet 
when compared with the permanent magnet is that the magnetism of the 
electromagnet can be switched on and off by a functional switch control-
ling the coil current. This effect is put to practical use in the electrical relay 
as used in a motor starter or alarm circuit.  Figure 5.16    shows the structure 
and one application of the solenoid. 
 Electrical Transformers 
   A transformer is an electrical machine without moving parts, which is used 
to change the value of an alternating voltage. 
   A transformer will only work on an alternating supply, it will not normally 
work from a D.C. supply such as a battery. 
●      A transformer such as that shown in  Fig. 5.17    consists of two coils 
called the primary and secondary coils or windings, wound on to a 
common core. The iron core of the transformer is not solid but made 
up of very thin sheets called laminations, to improve efﬁ ciency. 
Pivot
Movable
armature
Air gap
Movement
of arm
Simple relay
Lines of magnetic flux
around a solenoid with
a soft iron core
Lines of magnetic flux
around a solenoid with
no core
Lines of magnetic flux
Spring
Solenoid
 FIGURE 5.16 
 The solenoid and one practical application: the relay.    
Conductor
The dot indicates
current flowing
towards our viewing
position
(a)
The cross indicates
current flowing away
from our viewing
position
(b)
Lines of
magnetic flux
FIGURE 5.15
Magnetic ﬁ elds around a current carrying conductor.

Basic Electrical Installation Work
116
●      An alternating voltage applied to the primary winding establishes an 
alternating magnetic ﬂ ux in the core. 
●  The magnetic ﬂ ux in the core causes a voltage to be induced in the 
secondary winding of the transformers .
●  The voltage in both the primary and secondary windings is propor-
tional to the number of turns.
●      This means that if you increase the number of secondary turns you 
will increase the output voltage. This has an application in power 
distribution. 
  ●      Alternatively, reducing the number of secondary turns will reduce the 
output voltage. This is useful for low voltage supplies such as domestic 
bell transformers. Because it has no moving parts, a transformer can 
have a very high efﬁ ciency. Large power transformers, used on electri-
cal distribution systems, can have an efﬁ ciency of better than 90%.  
   Large power transformers need cooling to take the heat generated away 
from the core. This is often achieved by totally immersing the core and 
windings in insulating oil. A sketch of an oil immersed transformer can be 
seen in  Fig. 5.18 . 
  Very small transformers are used in electronic applications. Small trans-
formers are used as isolating transformers in shaver sockets and can also 
be used to supply separated extra low voltage (SELV) sources. Equipment 
supplied from a SELV source may be installed in a bathroom or shower-
room, provided that it is suitably enclosed and protected from the ingress 
of moisture. This includes equipment such as water heaters, pumps for 
showers and whirlpool baths. 
 FIGURE 5.18 
 Typical oil ﬁ lled power transformer. 
VP
VS
IS
IP
Primary
winding of NP turns
Secondary
winding of NS turns
Steel core
Magnetic circuit through core
 FIGURE 5.17 
 A simple transformer. 
 Try This  
 Have you seen any transformers in action? 
   Were they big or small – what were they being used for? 
   Have you been close up to a transmission tower, perhaps when you were walking 
in the countryside? 

Basic scientiﬁ c concepts in electrotechnology
117
Power
station
25kV
Transformer
132kV to
33kV
Transformer
400 kV or
275 kV
to 132 kV
Light industry
11kV
400 V
Local garage
230 V
Shops
230 V
Houses
Underground distribution 400/230 volt
Underground distribution
230 V
Small
offices
Overhead
transmission lines
400 kV, 275 kV or
132 kV
Heavy industry
33 kV
Transformer
33kV to
11 kV
Local
sub-station
11kV to
400V
 FIGURE 5.19 
 Simpliﬁ ed diagram of the distribution of electricity from power station to consumer. 
 Electrical Power on the National Grid
Electricity is generated in large modern Power Stations at 25 kV (25,000 
volts). It is then transformed up to 132 kV or 270 kV for transmission to 
other parts of the country on the National Grid network. This is a network 
of overhead conductors suspended on transmission towers which link 
together the Power Stations and the millions of users of electricity.
Raising the voltage to these very high values reduces the losses on the 
transmission network. 66 kV or 33 kV are used for secondary transmission 
lines and then these high voltages are reduced to 11 kV at local sub-stations 
for distribution to end users such as factories, shops and houses at 400 V 
and 230 V.
  The ease and efﬁ ciency of changing the voltage levels is only possible 
because we generate an a.c. supply. Transformers are then used to change 
the voltage levels to those which are appropriate. Very high voltages for 
transmission, lower voltages for safe end use. This would not be possible if 
a d.c. supply was generated. 
 Figure 5.19 shows a simpliﬁ ed diagram of electricity distribution. 

  When you have completed the questions, check out the answers at the back 
of the book. 
 Note: more than one multiple choice answer may be correct .
 Check Your Understanding  
 1.  Good conductor materials are: 
  a.   copper  
  b.  PVC  
  c.   brass  
  d.   wood.  
 2.  Good insulator materials are: 
  a.   copper  
  b.  PVC  
  c.   brass  
  d.   wood  .
 3.  A good conductor material: 
  a.   has lots of free electrons  
  b.  has no free electrons  
  c.  may be made of copper  
  d.   may be made of plastic.  
 4.  A good insulator material: 
  a.  has lots of free electrons  
  b.  has no free electrons  
  c.  may be made of copper  
  d.   may be made of plastic.  
 5.  In a series circuit 
   a.   the current is  ‘ common ’ to all resistors  
  b.  the voltage is  ‘ common ’ to all resistors  
  c.   R T    R 1    R 2  
  d.  
 
1
1
1
1
2
R
R
R
T


 
.
 6.  In a parallel circuit 
  a.  the current is  ‘ common ’ to all resistors  
  b.  the voltage is  ‘ common ’ to all resistors  
  c.   R T    R 1    R 2  
  d. 
 
1
1
1
1
2
R
R
R
T


 
.

Ch 5
119
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
 7.  The current taken by a 10 Ω resistor when connected to a 230   V supply
 will be: 
   a.  2.3A  
   b.   10A  
   c.  23A  
   d.  230A .
 8.  The resistance of a kettle element which takes 12A from a 230A main
 supply is: 
   a.  2.88  Ω  
   b.   5.00  Ω  
   c.  12.24  Ω  
   d.  19.16  Ω .
 9.  A 12 ohm ﬁ lament lamp was found to be taking a current of 2   A at full
 brilliance. The voltage across the lamp under these conditions is: 
   a.  6  V  
   b.   12   V  
   c.  24   V  
   d.  48   V .
  10.   Current ﬂ owing through a solenoid sets up a magnetic ﬂ ux. If an iron
  core is added to the solenoid while the current is maintained at a 
constant value, the magnetic ﬂ ux will: 
   a.  remain constant  
   b.   totally collapse  
   c.  decrease in strength  
   d.  increase in strength  .
 11.   Resistors of 6   Ω and 3   Ω are connected in series. The combined
 resistance value will be: 
   a.  2.0  Ω  
   b.   3.6  Ω  
   c.  6.3  Ω  
   d.  9.0  Ω .

 12.  Resistors of 6  Ω and 3  Ω are connected in parallel. The combined
 resistance value will be: 
   a.  2.0   Ω  
   b.  3.6   Ω  
   c.  6.3   Ω  
   d.  9.0   Ω .  
 13.  Resistors of 20   Ω , 40  Ω and 60  Ω are connected in series. The total
  resistance value will be: 
   a.  10.9   Ω  
   b.  20.0   Ω  
   c.  60.6   Ω  
   d.  120   Ω .
 14.  Resistors of 20   Ω , 40  Ω and 60  Ω  are connected in parallel. The total
  resistance value will be: 
   a.  10.9   Ω  
   b.  20.0   Ω  
   c.  60.0   Ω  
   d.  120   Ω.  
 15.  Two identical resistors are connected in series across a 24   V battery.
  The voltage drop across each resistor will be: 
   a.  2  V  
   b.  6  V  
   c.  12   V  
   d.  24   V.  
 16.  Two identical resistors are connected in parallel across a 24   V battery.
  The voltage drop across each resistor will be: 
   a.  2  V  
   b.  6  V  
   c.  12   V  
   d.   24   V.  
 17.  Electricity is generated in a modern power station at: 
   a.  230   V  
   b.  400   V  
   c.  25   kV  
   d.  132   kV.  

Ch 5
121
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
 18.   Electricity is distributed on the National Grid at: 
   a.  230   V  
   b.   400   V  
   c.  25   kV  
   d.  132   kV.  
 19.   Describe with the aid of a simple diagram how the atoms and electrons 
behave in a material said to be a good conductor of electricity.  
 20.   Describe, with the aid of a simple diagram, how the atoms and 
electrons behave in a material said to be a good insulator.  
 21.   List ﬁ ve materials which are used as good conductors in the 
electrotechnical industry.  
 22.   List ﬁ ve materials which are used as good insulators in the 
electrotechnical industry.  
 23.   Sketch a simple circuit of two resistors connected in series across a 
battery and explain how the current ﬂ ows in this circuit.  
 24.   Sketch a simple circuit of two resistors connected in parallel across a 
battery and explain how the current ﬂ ows in this circuit.  
 25.   Sketch a simple circuit to show how a voltmeter and ammeter would be 
connected into the circuit to measure total voltage and total current.  
 26.   Describe the advantage of using an a.c. supply for the National Grid 
rather than a d.c. supply.  
 27.   Sketch the construction of a simple transformer and label the primary 
and secondary windings. Why is the metal core of the transformer 
laminated? How do we cool a big power transformer?  
 28.   List ﬁ ve practical applications for a transformer – for example, a shaver 
socket.  
 29.   Describe the three effects of an electric current.  
 30.    Sketch the magnetic ﬂ ux patterns: 
 
  a.   around a simple bar magnet  
 
  b.   a horseshoe magnet  
 
  c.   explain the action and state one application for a solenoid.  

This page intentionally left blank

 Basic electrical circuits
and cables 
 Ch 6 
123
 Unit 2 – Principles of electrotechnology – Outcome 3 
 Underpinning knowledge: when you have completed this chapter you should be able to: 
●  state the component parts of electrical cables 
●  state the component parts of an electrical circuit 
●  determine appropriate wiring systems 
●  identify the requirements of  ‘ protective equipotential bonding ’ 
●  list exposed conductive parts and extraneous conductive parts 
●  list basic principles of  ‘ basic protection,  ‘ fault protection ’ and  ‘ overload protection ’ 
protection’
V
U
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply

Basic Electrical Installation Work
124
 Electrical cables 
   In Chapters 4 and 5 we looked at the science behind conductors and insu-
lators. In this chapter, we will look at a practical application for that sci-
ence, electrical cables. 
   Most cables can be considered to be constructed in three parts: the 
conductor  which must be of a suitable cross-section to carry the load cur-
rent; the  insulation , which has a colour or number code for identiﬁ cation; 
and the outer sheath  which may contain some means of providing protec-
tion from mechanical damage. 
Definition
Cables can be considered to be con-
structed in three parts: the  conductor 
which must be of a suitable cross-
section to carry the load current; 
the  insulation , which has a colour or 
number code for identifi cation; and 
the  outer sheath  which may contain 
some means of providing protection 
from mechanical damage.
  The conductors of a cable are made of either copper or aluminium and may 
be stranded or solid. Solid conductors are only used in ﬁ xed wiring instal-
lations and may be shaped in larger cables. Stranded conductors are more 
ﬂ exible and conductor sizes from 4.0 to 25       mm 2  contain seven strands. 
A 10  mm 2  conductor, for example, has seven 1.35       mm diameter strands 
which collectively make up the 10       mm 2  cross-sectional area of the cable. 
Conductors above 25  mm 2  have more than seven strands, depending upon 
the size of the cable. Flexible cords have multiple strands of very ﬁ ne wire, as 
ﬁ ne as one strand of human hair. This gives the cable its very ﬂ exible quality.  
 New wiring colours 
  Twenty-eight years ago the United Kingdom agreed to adopt the European 
colour code for ﬂ exible cords, that is, brown for live or phase conductor, 
blue for the neutral conductor and green combined with yellow for earth 
conductors. However, no similar harmonization was proposed for non-
ﬂ exible cables used for ﬁ xed wiring. These were to remain as red for live 
or phase conductor, black for the neutral conductor and green combined 
with yellow for earth conductors. 
   On 31 March 2004, the IEE published Amendment No. 2 to BS 7671: 2001 
which speciﬁ ed new cable core colours for all ﬁ xed wiring in UK electrical 
installations. These new core colours will  ‘ harmonize ’  the United Kingdom 
with the practice in mainland Europe. 
 Fixed cable core colours up to 2006 
●  Single-phase supplies red line conductors, black neutral conductors, 
and green combined with yellow for earth conductors. 
  ●  Three-Phase  supplies red, yellow and blue line conductors, black neu-
tral conductors and green combined with yellow for earth conductors. 
 These core colours must not be used after 31 March 2006. 
 New (harmonized) ﬁ xed cable core colours 
●  Single-phase  supplies brown line conductors, blue neutral conduct-
ors and green combined with yellow for earth conductors (just like 
ﬂ exible cords). 

Basic electrical circuits and cables
125
  ●  Three-phase  supplies brown, black and grey line conductors, blue neu-
tral conductors and green combined with yellow for earth conductors.  
 Cable core colours from 31st of March 2004 onwards. 
 Extensions or alterations to existing  single-phase installations do not 
require marking at the interface between the old and new ﬁ xed wiring 
colours. However, a warning notice must be ﬁ xed at the consumer unit or 
distribution fuse board which states:
Caution – this installation has wiring colours to two versions of BS 
7671. Great care should be taken before undertaking extensions, alter-
ations or repair that all conductors are correctly identiﬁ ed.
Sheath
Cable insulation
Stranded
copper conductor
 FIGURE 6.1 
 A twin and earth PVC insulated and sheathed cable.    
 Safety First
PVC cables 
  ●  PVC cables should not be 
installed when the surrounding 
temperature is below 0 ° C. 
 ● 
 The PVC insulation becomes brittle 
at low temperatures and may be 
damaged during installation. 
 ● 
 IEE Regulation 522.1.2. 
 Alterations to  three-phase installations must be marked at the interface L1, 
L2, L3 for the lines and N for the neutral. Both new and old cables must 
be marked. These markings are preferred to coloured tape and a caution 
notice is again required at the distribution board. Appendix 7 of BS 7671: 
2008 deals with harmonized cable core colours. 
 PVC insulated and sheathed cables 
 Domestic and commercial installations use this cable, which may be 
clipped direct to a surface, sunk in plaster or installed in conduit or trunk-
ing. It is the simplest and least expensive cable.  Figure 6.1    shows a sketch 
of a twin and earth cable. 
  The conductors are covered with a colour-coded PVC insulation and then 
contained singly or with others in a PVC outer sheath. 
 PVC/SWA cable 
   PVC insulated steel wire armour cables are used for wiring underground 
between buildings, for main supplies to dwellings, rising sub-mains and 
industrial installations. They are used where some mechanical protection 
of the cable conductors is required. 
  The conductors are covered with colour-coded PVC insulation and then 
contained either singly or with others in a PVC sheath (see  Fig. 6.2   ). Around 
this sheath is placed an armour protection of steel wires twisted along the 
length of the cable, and a ﬁ nal PVC sheath covering the steel wires protects 
them from corrosion. The armour sheath also provides the circuit protective 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
126
conductor (CPC) and the cable is simply terminated using a compression 
gland.  
 MI cable 
   A mineral insulated (MI) cable has a seamless copper sheath which makes 
it waterproof and ﬁ re- and corrosion-resistant. These characteristics often 
make it the only cable choice for hazardous or high-temperature installa-
tions such as oil reﬁ neries and chemical works, boiler houses and furnaces, 
petrol pump and ﬁ re alarm installations. 
  The cable has a small overall diameter when compared to alternative 
cables and may be supplied as bare copper or with a PVC oversheath. It 
is colour-coded orange for general electrical wiring, white for emergency 
lighting or red for ﬁ re alarm wiring. The copper outer sheath provides the 
CPC, and the cable is terminated with a pot and sealed with compound 
and a compression gland (see  Fig. 6.3 ). 
  The copper conductors are embedded in a white powder, magnesium 
oxide, which is non-ageing and non-combustible, but which is hygro-
scopic, which means that it readily absorbs moisture from the surrounding 
Stranded copper
conductors
Inner plastic
sheath
Colour-coded
cable insulation
Galvanized
steel wire
armour
Outer plastic
sheath
 FIGURE 6.2 
 A four-core PVC/SWA cable. 
Conductors
embedded in
magnesium
oxide powder
Gland
body
Cable sheath
also CPC
Gland
nut
Compression
ring
Sealing pot
screwed on to cable sheath
by self-tapping thread
Sealing disc
Conductors
Sleeve
 FIGURE 6.3 
 MI cable with terminating seal and gland. 

Basic electrical circuits and cables
127
air, unless adequately terminated. The termination of an MI cable is a 
complicated process requiring the electrician to demonstrate a high level 
of practical skill and expertise for the termination to be successful. 
 FP 200 cable 
   FP 200 cable is similar in appearance to an MI cable in that it is a circular 
tube, or the shape of a pencil, and is available with a red or white sheath. 
However, it is much simpler to use and terminate than an MI cable. 
  The cable is available with either solid or stranded conductors that are 
insulated with  ‘ insudite ’  a ﬁ re resistant insulation material. The conduct-
ors are then screened, by wrapping an aluminium tape around the insu-
lated conductors, that is, between the insulated conductors and the outer 
sheath. This aluminium tape screen is applied metal side down and in con-
tact with the bare CPC. 
  The sheath is circular and made of a robust thermoplastic low smoke, zero 
halogen material. 
   FP 200 is available in 2, 3, 4, 7, 12 and 19 cores with a conductor size range 
from 1.0 to 4.0       mm. The core colours are: two core, red and black, three 
core, red, yellow and blue and four core, black, red, yellow and blue. 
  The cable is as easy to use as a PVC insulated and sheathed cable. No spe-
cial terminations are required, the cable may be terminated through a 
grommet into a knock out box or terminated through a simple compres-
sion gland. 
  The cable is a ﬁ re resistant cable, primarily intended for use in ﬁ re alarms 
and emergency lighting installations or it may be embedded in plaster. 
 High-voltage power cables 
  The cables used for high-voltage power distribution require termination 
and installation expertise beyond the normal experience of a contracting 
electrician. The regulations covering high-voltage distribution are beyond 
the scope of the IEE regulations for electrical installations. Operating at 
voltages in excess of 33       kV and delivering thousands of kilowatts, these 
cables are either suspended out of reach on pylons or buried in the ground 
in carefully constructed trenches. 
 High-voltage overhead cables 
   Suspended from cable towers or pylons, overhead cables must be light, 
ﬂ exible and strong. 
  The cable is constructed of stranded aluminium conductors formed 
around a core of steel stranded conductors (see  Fig. 6.4   ). The alumin-
ium conductors carry the current and the steel core provides the tensile 
strength required to suspend the cable between pylons. The cable is not 
insulated since it is placed out of reach and insulation would only add to 
the weight of the cable. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
128
 Component parts of an electrical circuit 
   For a piece of electrical equipment to work efﬁ ciently and effectively it must 
be correctly connected to an electrical circuit. So what is an electrical circuit? 
 An electrical circuit has the following ﬁ ve components as shown in  Fig. 6.5 : 
●      a source of electrical energy. This might be a battery giving a d.c. 
(direct current) supply or the mains supply which is a.c. (alternating 
current) 
●      a source of circuit protection. This might be a fuse or circuit breaker 
which will protect the circuit from  ‘ overcurrent ’ 
●      the circuit conductors or cables. These carry voltage and current to 
power the load 
●      a means to control the circuit. This might be a simple on/off switch 
but it might also be a dimmer or a thermostat 
●      and a load. This is something which needs electricity to make it 
work. It might be an electric lamp, an electrical appliance, an elec-
tric motor or an i-pod. 
 Choosing an appropriate wiring system 
   An electrical installation is made up of many different electrical circuits, 
lighting circuits, power circuits, single-phase domestic circuits and three-
phase industrial or commercial circuits. 
  Whatever the type of circuit, the circuit conductors are contained within 
cables or enclosures. 
   Part 5 of the IEE Regulations tells us that electrical equipment and mater-
ials must be chosen so that they are suitable for the installed condi-
tions, taking into account temperature, the presence of water, corrosion, 
mechanical damage, vibration or exposure to solar radiation. Therefore, 
PVC insulated and sheathed cables are suitable for domestic installations 
but for a cable requiring mechanical protection and suitable for burying 
underground, a PVC/SWA cable would be preferable. These two types of 
cable are shown in  Figs 6.1 and 6.2 of this chapter. 
   MI cables are waterproof, heatproof and corrosion resistant with some 
mechanical protection. These qualities often make it the only cable choice 
Steel core
Aluminium conductors
 FIGURE 6.4 
 132  kV overhead cable construction. 

Basic electrical circuits and cables
129
for hazardous or high-temperature installations such as oil reﬁ neries, 
chemical works, boiler houses and petrol pump installations. An MI cable 
with terminating gland and seal is shown in  Fig. 6.3 . 
  We will be looking in detail at all of the different wiring systems and circuits 
later in this book in Chapter 14. 
 Electricity supplies 
 Electricity is generated in modern power stations at 25  kV and fed through 
transformers to the consumer over a complex network of cables known as 
the national grid system. This is a network of cables, mostly at a very high 
voltage, suspended from transmission towers, linking together the 175 
power stations and millions of consumers. There are approximately 5,000 
miles of high-voltage transmission lines in England and Wales, running 
mostly through the countryside. 
   Man-made structures erected in rural areas often give rise to concern, but 
every effort is made to route the overhead lines away from areas where 
they might spoil a ﬁ ne view. There is full consultation with local author-
ities and interested parties as to the route which lines will take. Farmers 
are paid a small fee for having transmission line towers on their land. Over 
the years many different tower designs and colours have been tried, but for 
the conditions in the United Kingdom, galvanized steel lattice towers are 
considered the least conspicuous and most efﬁ cient. 
   For those who consider transmission towers unsightly, the obvious sugges-
tion might be to run all cables underground. In areas of exceptional beauty 
this is done, but underground cables are about 16 times more expensive 
than the equivalent overhead lines. The cost of running the largest lines 
underground is about £3 million per mile compared with about £200,000 
overhead. On long transmission lines the losses can be high, but by raising 
the operating voltage and therefore reducing the current for a given power, 
the I2R  losses are reduced, the cable diameter is reduced and the overall 
Circuit
control
Switch
Load
Earthed metal-
work of load
Neutral
conductor
Protective
conductor
Line
conductor
Circuit
Protection
Fuse or
MCB
a.c. or d.c.
supply
energy
source
 FIGURE 6.5 
 Component parts of an electric circuit. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
130
efﬁ ciency of transmission is increased. In order to standardize equipment, 
standard voltages are used. These are: 
●      400 and 275       kV for the super grid  
●  132  kV for the original grid 
●  66 and 33  kV for secondary transmission 
●  11  kV for high-voltage distribution 
●  400  V for commercial consumer supplies 
●  230  V for domestic consumer supplies. 
   A diagrammatic representation showing the distribution of power from the 
power station to the consumer was given in Chapter 5 in Fig. 5.19. 
   All local distribution in the United Kingdom is by underground cables 
from sub-stations placed close to the load centre and supplied at 11       kV. 
Transformers in these local sub-stations reduce the voltage to 400       V, three-
phase and neutral distributor cables connect this supply to consumers. 
Connecting to one-phase and neutral of a three-phase 400       V supply gives a 
230  V single-phase supply suitable for domestic consumers. 
  When single-phase loads are supplied from a three-phase supply, the load 
should be  ‘ balanced ’  across the phases. That is, the load should be equally 
distributed across the three phases so that each phase carries approxi-
mately the same current. This prevents any one phase being overloaded. 
 Safe electrical installations 
  The provision of a safe electrical system is fundamental to the whole 
concept of using electricity in and around buildings safely. The elec-
trical installation as a whole must be protected against overload and short 
circuit damage and the people using the installation must be protected 
against electric shock. An installation that meets the requirements of the 
IEE Wiring Regulations – Requirements for Electrical Installations, will be 
so protected. The method most universally used in the United Kingdom 
to provide for the safe use of electrical energy is protective equipotential 
bonding coupled with automatic disconnection of the supply by fuses or 
miniature circuit breakers (MCBs). So, let us look at these essential safety 
elements. 
  The consumer’s mains equipment is normally ﬁ xed close to the point at 
which the supply cable enters the building. To meet the requirements of 
the IEE Regulations it must provide: 
●  protection against electric shock (Chapter 41) 
●  protection against overcurrent (Chapter 43) 
●  isolation and switching (Chapter 53) . 
 Protection against electric shock, both  ‘ basic protection ’ and  ‘ fault protec-
tion ’  is provided by insulating and placing live parts out of reach in suitable 

Basic electrical circuits and cables
131
enclosures, earthing and bonding metal work and providing fuses or cir-
cuit breakers so that the supply is automatically disconnected under fault 
conditions. 
 To provide overcurrent protection it is necessary to provide a device which 
will disconnect the supply automatically before the overload current can 
cause a rise in temperature which would damage the installation. A fuse or 
MCB would meet this requirement. 
Definition
To provide overcurrent protection it is 
necessary to provide a device which 
will disconnect the supply automati-
cally before the overload current can 
cause a rise in temperature which 
would damage the installation. A fuse 
or MCB would meet this requirement.
 An isolator is a mechanical device which is operated manually and is 
provided so that the whole of the installation, one circuit or one piece of 
equipment may be cut off from the live supply. In addition, a means of 
switching off for maintenance or emergency switching must be provided. 
A switch may provide the means of isolation, but an isolator differs from a 
switch in that it is intended to be opened when the circuit concerned is not 
carrying current. Its purpose is to ensure the safety of those working on the 
circuit by making dead those parts which are live in normal service. One 
device may provide both isolation and switching provided that the charac-
teristics of the device meet the Regulations for both functions. The switch-
ing of electrically operated equipment in normal service is referred to as 
functional switching.
Definition
An isolator is a mechanical device 
which is operated manually and is 
provided so that the whole of the 
installation, one circuit or one piece 
of equipment may be cut off  from the 
live supply.
 Definition  
The switching of electrically oper-
ated equipment in normal service is 
referred to as  functional switching .
Circuits are controlled by switchgear which is assembled so that the circuit 
may be operated safely under normal conditions, isolated automatically 
under fault conditions, or isolated manually for safe maintenance. These 
requirements are met by good workmanship carried out by competent per-
sons and the installation of approved British Standard materials such as 
switches, isolators, fuses or circuit breakers. (IEE Regulation 131.1.1). The 
equipment belonging to the supply authority is sealed to prevent unauthor-
ized entry, because if connection were made to the supply before the meter, 
the energy used by the consumer would not be recorded on the meter.  Figure 
6.6 shows the connections and equipment at a domestic service position.  
 Protective electrical bonding to earth 
  The purpose of the bonding regulations is to keep all the exposed metal-
work of an installation at the same earth potential as the metalwork of the 
electrical installation, so that no currents can ﬂ ow and cause an electric 
shock. For a current to ﬂ ow there must be a difference of potential between 
two points, but if the points are joined together there can be no potential 
difference. This bonding or linking together of the exposed metal parts of 
an installation is known as  ‘ protective equipotential bonding ’  and gives 
protection against electric shock. 
 Let us now deﬁ ne some of the important new words as they apply to elec-
trical installations. 
Earthing is the connection of the exposed conductive parts of an electrical 
installation to the main protective earthing terminal of the installation.
Definition
Earthing is the connection of the 
exposed conductive parts of an 
electrical installation to the main 
protective earthing terminal of the 
installation. 
Bonding is the linking together of the exposed or extraneous metal parts of 
an electrical installation for the purpose of safety. 
Definition
Bonding is the linking together of the 
exposed or extraneous metal parts of 
an electrical installation for the pur-
pose of safety.

Basic Electrical Installation Work
132
Exposed conductive parts are the metalwork of the electrical installation. 
The conduit, trunking, metal boxes and equipment that make up the elec-
trical installation. 
To final circuits
30 A ring main
15 A water heater
  5 A lighting
Consumer’s equipment
Supply authority
equipment (sealed)
Meter to
register
energy used
by consumer
Service fuse
providing
means of
isolation
and
protection
Sealing
box to
terminate
cable
Service cable
E
Double-pole switch
providing means of
isolation and switching
N
Meter
Main protective earthing
terminal
 FIGURE 6.6 
      Simpliﬁ ed diagram of connections and equipment at a domestic service position.    
Definition
Exposed conductive parts are the met-
alwork of the electrical installation. 
The conduit, trunking, metal boxes 
and equipment that make up the 
electrical installation.
Extraneous conductive parts are the other metal parts which do not form 
a part of the electrical installation. The structural steelwork of the building, 
gas, water and central heating pipes and radiators. 
Definition
Extraneous conductive parts are the 
other metal parts which do not form 
a part of the electrical installation. The 
structural steelwork of the building, 
gas, water and central heating pipes 
and radiators.
   Basic protection is protection against electric shock under fault free con-
ditions and is provided by insulating live parts in accordance with section 
416 of the IEE Regulations. 
   Fault protection is protection against electric shock under single fault con-
ditions and is provided by protective equipotential bonding and automatic 
disconnection of the supply (by a fuse or MCB) in accordance with IEE 
Regulations 411.3 to 6. 
 Protection from electric shock is provided by basic protection and fault 
protection. 
   Protective equipotential bonding is equipotential bonding for the purpose 
of safety.

Basic electrical circuits and cables
133
 Protective equipotential bonding 
  Where earthed electrical equipment may come into contact with the metal-
work of other services, they too must be effectively connected to the main 
protective earthing terminal of the installation (IEE Regulation 411.3.1.2). 
 Other services are described as: 
●  main water pipes 
●  main gas pipes 
●  other service pipes and ducting 
●  central heating and air conditioning systems 
●  exposed metal parts of the building structure 
●  lightning protective conductors 
Protective equipotential bonding should be made to gas and water ser-
vices at their point of entry into the building, as shown in  Fig. 6.7   , using 
insulated bonding conductors of not less than half the cross-section of the 
incoming main earthing conductor. The minimum permitted size is 6       mm 2
but the cross-section need not exceed 25  mm 2  (IEE Regulation 544.1.2). 
The bonding clamp must be ﬁ tted on the consumer’s side of the gas meter 
between the outlet union, before any branch pipework but within 600       mm 
of the meter 544.1.3. 
Safety label
Safety
label
Bonding
clamp
Bonding
clamp
600 mm
max
16mm2
Main protective
earthing
terminal
Meter
10mm2
10 mm2
Water
supply
Gas
supply
 FIGURE 6.7 
 Protective equipotential bonding of gas and water supplies. 
 Try This
Memory Aid 
  Writing out important defi nitions helps you to remember them. 
Definition
Basic protection is protection against 
electric shock under fault free condi-
tions and is provided by insulating 
live parts in accordance with section 
416 of the IEE Regulations.
Definition
Fault protection is protection against 
electric shock under single fault con-
ditions and is provided by protective 
equipotential bonding and automatic 
disconnection of the supply (by a 
fuse or MCB) in accordance with IEE 
Regulations 411.3 to 6.
Definition
Protective equipotential bonding is 
equipotential bonding for the pur-
pose of safety.

Basic Electrical Installation Work
134
 A permanent label must also be ﬁ xed in a visible position at or near the 
point of connection of the bonding conductor with the words  ‘ Safety 
Electrical Connection – Do Not Remove ’  (IEE Regulation 514.13.1). 
Supplementary bonding is described in Chapter 14 of this book. 
 Electrical shock and overload protection 
   Electric shock is normally caused either by touching a conductive part that 
is normally live, or by touching an exposed conductive part made live by 
a fault. The touch voltage curve in  Fig. 6.8    shows that a person in contact 
with 230       V must be released from this danger in 40       ms if harmful effects are 
to be avoided. Similarly, a person in contact with 400       V must be released in 
15  ms to avoid being harmed. 
10
20
30 40 50
80100
Voltage (volts)
230 V 400 V
150 200
300
500
15 ms
40 ms
0.02
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.8
1
2
3
4
6
8
10
20
40
30
Danger zone
Safe zone
Time (seconds)
 FIGURE 6.8 
 Touch voltage curve. 

Basic electrical circuits and cables
135
   In general, protection against touching live parts is achieved by insulat-
ing live parts and called  ‘ basic protection ’ . Protection against touching 
something made live as a result of a fault, and called  ‘ fault protection ’  (IEE 
Regulation 131.2.2) is achieved by protective equipotential bonding and 
automatic disconnection of the supply in the event of a fault occurring. 
Separated extra low-voltage supplies (SELV) provide protection against 
both  ‘ basic ’ and  ‘ fault ’ protection. 
   Part 4 of the IEE Regulations deals with the application of protective meas-
ures for safety and Chapter 53   with the regulations for switching devices or 
switchgear required for protection, isolation and switching of a consumer’s 
installation.
  The consumer’s main switchgear must be readily accessible to the con-
sumer and be able to: 
●  isolate the complete installation from the supply 
●  protect against overcurrent 
●  cut off the current in the event of a serious fault occurring. 
 Protection against overcurrent 
 Excessive current may ﬂ ow in a circuit as a result of an overload or a 
short circuit. An overload or overcurrent is deﬁ ned as a current which 
exceeds the rated value in an otherwise healthy circuit. A short circuit is 
an overcurrent resulting from a fault of negligible impedance between live 
conductors having a difference in potential under normal operating condi-
tions. Overload currents usually occur in a circuit because it is abused by 
the consumer or because it has been badly designed or modiﬁ ed by the 
installer. Short circuits usually occur as a result of an accident which could 
not have been predicted before the event. 
 Key Fact
Fuses 
   How does a fuse work? 
 ● 
 under fault conditions excessive 
current fl ows 
 ● 
 the fuse element gets hot 
 ● 
 the fuse element melts 
 ● 
 disconnecting the circuit it 
protected. 
 Safety First
Bonding 
 ● 
 bonding clamps must be of an 
approved type 
 ● 
 must be fi tted to clean pipework 
 ● 
 must be tight and secure 
 ● 
 must have a visible label 
 ● 
 IEE Regulation 514.13.1. 
Definition
An overload or overcurrent is defi ned 
as a current which exceeds the rated 
value in an otherwise healthy cir-
cuit. A short circuit is an overcurrent 
resulting from a fault of negligible 
impedance.
  An overload may result in currents of two or three times the rated current 
ﬂ owing in the circuit, while short circuit currents may be hundreds of times 
greater than the rated current. In both cases, the basic requirement for pro-
tection is that the circuit should be interrupted before the fault causes a 
temperature rise which might damage the insulation, terminations, joints 
or the surroundings of the conductors. If the device used for overload pro-
tection is also capable of breaking a prospective short circuit current safely, 
then one device may be used to give protection from both faults (Regulation 
432.1). Devices which offer protection from overcurrent are: 
●  semi-enclosed fuses manufactured to BS 3036 
●  cartridge fuses manufactured to BS 1361 and BS 1362 
●  high breaking capacity fuses (HBC fuses) manufactured to BS 88 
●  MCBs manufactured to BS EN 60898. 
  We will look at overcurrent protection, fuses and MCBs in more detail later 
in this book in Chapter 12.

  When you have completed the questions, check out the answers at the back 
of the book. 
 Note: more than one multiple choice answer may be correct. 
 Check your Understanding 
 1.  An electrical cable is made up of three parts which are: 
  a.   conduction, convection and radiation  
  b.  conductor, insulation and outer sheath  
  c.   heating, magnetic and chemical  
  d.  conductors and insulators.  
 2.  An appropriate wiring method for a domestic installation would be a: 
  a.   metal conduit installation  
  b.  trunking and tray installation  
  c.  PVC cables  
  d.   PVC/SWA cables.  
 3.  An appropriate wiring method for an underground feed to a remote 
building would be a: 
  a.  metal conduit installations  
  b.  trunking and tray installation  
  c.  PVC cables  
  d.   PVC/SWA cables.  
 4.  An appropriate wiring method for a high-temperature installation in a 
boiler house is: 
  a.  metal conduit installation  
  b.  trunking and tray installation  
  c.  FP200 cables  
  d.   MI cables.  
 5.   The cables suspended from the transmission towers of the National Grid 
Network are made from: 
  a.   copper and brass  
  b.  copper with PVC insulation  
  c.   aluminium and steel  
  d.  aluminium and porcelain.  
 6.  An appropriate wiring system for a three-phase industrial installation 
would be: 
  a.   PVC cables  
  b.  PVC conduit  
  c.   one which meets the requirements of Part 2 of the IEE Regulations  
  d.   one which meets the requirements of Part 5 of the IEE Regulations.  

Ch 6
137
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
 7.   A current which exceeds the rated value in an otherwise healthy
 
circuit is one deﬁ nition of: 
 
  a.  earthing  
 
  b.   bonding  
 
  c.  overload  
 
  d.  short circuit.  
 8.  An overcurrent resulting from a fault of negligible impedance is one
 
deﬁ nition of: 
 
  a.  earthing  
 
  b.   bonding  
 
  c.  overload  
 
  d.  short circuit.  
  9.   The connection of the exposed conductive parts of an installation to the
 
main protective earthing terminal of the installation is one deﬁ nition of: 
 
  a.  earthing  
 
  b.   protective equipotential bonding  
 
  c.  overload  
 
  d.  short circuit.  
 10.   The linking together of the exposed or extraneous conductive parts of
 
an installation for the purpose of safety is one deﬁ nition of: 
 
  a.  earthing  
 
  b.   protective equipotential bonding  
 
  c.  exposed conductive parts  
 
  d.  extraneous conductive parts.   
 11.   The conduit and trunking parts of the electrical installation are: 
 
  a.  earth conductors  
 
  b.   bonding conductors  
 
  c.  exposed conductive parts  
  
d.  extraneous conductive parts.  
 12.   The gas, water and central heating pipes of the building, not forming a
 
part of the electrical installation are called: 
 
  a.  earthing conductors  
 
  b.   bonding conductors  
 
  c.  exposed conductive parts  
 
  d.  extraneous conductive parts.  

 13.  The protection provided by insulating the live parts of the electrical
 
installation is called: 
 
  a.  overload protection  
  
b.  short circuit protection  
 
  c.   basic protection  
 
  d.  fault protection.  
 14.  The protection provided by protective equipotential bonding and
 
automatic disconnection of the supply is called: 
 
  a.  overload protection  
 
  b.  short circuit protection  
 
  c.   basic protection  
 
  d.  fault protection.  
 15.  Produce a quick coloured sketch of a PVC insulated and sheathed 
 
cable and name the parts.  
 16.  Produce a quick coloured sketch of a PVC/SWA cable and name the 
 
parts.  
 17.  Produce a quick sketch of an electric circuit and name the ﬁ ve 
 
component parts.  
 18.  Give an example of a device or accessory for each component part. 
 
For example, the supply might be from the a.c. mains or a battery.  
 19.  In your own words state the meaning of circuit overload and short 
 
circuit protection. What will provide this type of protection?  
 20.  State the purpose of earthing and earth protection. What do we do to 
 
achieve it and why do we do it?  
 21.  In your own words state the meaning of exposed and extraneous 
 
conductive parts and give examples of each.  
 22.  In your own words state the meaning of earthing and bonding. What 
 
 type of cables and equipment would an electrician use to achieve 
earthing and bonding on an electrical installation.  
  23.  In your own words state what we mean by  ‘ basic protection ’ and how is 
 
it achieved. 
 24.  In your own words state what we mean by  ‘ fault protection ’ and how it 
 
is achieved. 

 Tools and equipment 
used for electrotechnical 
applications 
 Ch 7 
139
 Unit 2 – Principles of electrotechnology – Outcome 4 
 Underpinning knowledge: when you have completed this chapter, you should be able to: 
●  state the application of hand and power tools 
●  state that electrically operated tools must undergo inspection checks 
●  state the need for safe handling and storage of tools and equipment 
●  identify what we mean by  ‘ good housekeeping ’ 
V
U
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply

Basic Electrical Installation Work
140
 Hand tools 
   A craftsman earns his living by hiring out his skills or selling products 
made using his skills and expertise. He shapes his environment, mostly for 
the better, improving the living standards of himself and others. 
  Tools extend the limited physical responses of the human body and there-
fore good quality, sharp tools are important to a craftsman. An electrician 
is no less a craftsman than a wood carver. Both must work with a high 
degree of skill and expertise and both must have sympathy and respect for 
the materials, which they use. Modern electrical installations using new 
materials are lasting longer than 50 years. Therefore they must be properly 
installed. Good design, good workmanship by competent persons and the 
use of proper materials are essential if the installation is to comply with the 
relevant regulations, (IEE Regulation 134.1.1) and reliably and safely meet 
the requirements of the customer for over half a century.
 FIGURE 7.1 
 The tools used for making electrical connections. 
 Safety First
Hand Tools 
 ● 
 keep them clean 
 ● 
 keep them sharp 
 ● 
 keep them safe . 
   An electrician must develop a number of basic craft skills particular to 
his own trade, but he also requires some of the skills used in many other 
trades. An electrician’s tool-kit will reﬂ ect both the speciﬁ c and general 
nature of the work. 
  The basic tools required by an electrician are those used in the stripping 
and connecting of conductors. 
  These are pliers, side cutters, knife and an assortment of screwdrivers, as 
shown in  Fig. 7.1 . 
  The tools required in addition to these basic implements will depend upon 
the type of installation work being undertaken. When wiring new houses 

Tools and equipment used for electrotechnical applications
141
or rewiring old ones, the additional tools required are those usually associ-
ated with a bricklayer and joiner. Examples are shown in  Fig. 7.2 . 
  When working on industrial installations, installing conduit and trunking, 
the additional tools required by an electrician would more normally be 
those associated with a ﬁ tter or sheet-metal fabricator, and examples are 
shown in  Fig. 7.3 . 
  Where special tools are required, for example, those required to terminate 
mineral insulated (MI) cables or the bending and cutting tools for conduit 
 FIGURE 7.2 
 Some additional tools required by an electrician engaged in house wiring. 
 FIGURE 7.3 
 Some additional tools required by an electrician engaged in industrial installations. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
142
and cable trays as shown in  Fig. 7.4   , they will often be provided by an 
employer but most hand tools are provided by the electrician himself. 
   In general, good-quality tools last longer and stay sharper than those of 
inferior quality, but tools are very expensive to buy. A good set of tools can 
be assembled over the training period if the basic tools are bought ﬁ rst and 
the extended tool-kit acquired one tool at a time. 
   Another name for an installation electrician is a  ‘ journeyman ’  electrician 
and, as the name implies, an electrician must be mobile and prepared to 
carry his tools from one job to another. Therefore, a good toolbox is an 
essential early investment, so that the right tools for the job can be easily 
transported. 
  Tools should be cared for and maintained in good condition if they are to 
be used efﬁ ciently and remain serviceable. Screwdrivers should have a ﬂ at 
squared off end and wood chisels should be very sharp. Access to a grind-
stone will help an electrician to maintain his tools in ﬁ rst-class condition. 
Additionally, wood chisels will require sharpening on an oilstone to give 
them a very sharp edge. 
 Electrical power tools 
   Portable electrical tools can reduce much of the hard work for any trades-
man and increase his productivity. Electrical tools should be maintained 
Conduit stocks and dies: two views
MI crimping tool
Cable tray bending
machine
Combined conduit
vice and bending machine
 FIGURE 7.4 
 Some special tools required by an electrician engaged in industrial installations. 

Tools and equipment used for electrotechnical applications
143
in a good condition and be appropriate for the purpose for which they are 
used. Many construction sites now insist on low voltage or battery tools 
being used which can further increase safety without any loss of produc-
tivity. Some useful electrical tools are shown in  Fig. 7.5 . 
   Electric drills are probably used most frequently of all electrical tools. They 
may be used to drill metal or wood. Wire brushes are made which ﬁ t into 
the drill chuck for cleaning the metal. Variable-speed electric drills, which 
incorporate a vibrator, will also drill brick and concrete as easily as wood 
when ﬁ tted with a masonry drill bit. 
   Hammer drills give between two and three thousand impacts per minute 
and are used for drilling concrete walls and ﬂ oors. 
   Cordless electric drills are also available which incorporate a rechargeable 
battery, usually in the handle. They offer the convenience of electric drill-
ing when an electrical supply is not available or if an extension cable is 
impractical.
 FIGURE 7.5 
 Electrical hand tools. 
 Safety First
Power Tools 
   Many construction sites now only 
allow 
 ● 
 Low voltage tools 
 ● 
 PAT tested tools 
 ● 
 battery powered tools.. 
   Angle grinders are useful for cutting chases in brick or concrete. The discs 
are interchangeable. Silicon carbide discs are suitable for cutting slate, 
marble, tiles, brick and concrete, and aluminium oxide discs for cutting 
iron and steel such as conduit and trucking. 
 Jigsaws can be ﬁ tted with wood or metal cutting blades. With a wood cut-
ting blade ﬁ tted they are useful for cutting across ﬂ oorboards and skirting 
boards or any other application where a padsaw would be used. With a 
metal cutting blade ﬁ tted, they may be used to cut trunking. 
  When a lot of trunking work is to be undertaken, an electric nibbler is a 
worthwhile investment. This nibbles out the sheet metal, is easily control-
lable and is one alternative to the jigsaw. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
144
   All tools must be used safely and sensibly. Cutting tools should be sharp-
ened and screwdrivers ground to a sharp square end on a grindstone. 
   It is particularly important to check that the plug top and cables of hand 
held electrically powered tools and extension leads are in good condition. 
Damaged plug tops and cables must be repaired before you use them. 
All electrical power tools of 110  V and 230  V must be inspected and tested 
with a portable appliance tester (PAT) in accordance with the company’s 
procedures, but probably at least once each year. PAT testing tests the qual-
ity of the insulation resistance and the earth continuity. Inspection checks 
the condition of the plug top, fuse and lead. 
  Tools and equipment that are left lying about in the workplace can become 
damaged or stolen and may also be the cause of people slipping, tripping 
or falling. Tidy up regularly and put power tools back in their boxes. You 
personally may have no control over the condition of the workplace in gen-
eral, but keeping your own work area clean and tidy is the mark of a skilled 
and conscientious craftsman.
 Safety First
Site Safety 
   The Health and Safety at Work Act 
makes you responsible for 
 ● 
 following the site safety rules 
 ● 
 demonstrating safe working 
practice 
      ● 
 Wearing or using appropriate PPEc. 
 Safe working practice 
  Every year thousands of people have accidents at their place of work despite 
the legal requirements laid down by the Health and Safety Executive. Many 
people recover quickly but an accident at work can result in permanent 
harm or even death. 
 At the very least, injuries hurt individuals. They may prevent you from 
doing the things you enjoy in your spare-time and they cost a lot of money, 
to you in loss of earnings and to your employer in loss of production and 
possibly damage to equipment. Your place of work may look harmless but 
it can be dangerous. 
 If there are ﬁ ve or more people employed by your company then the 
company must have its own safety policy as described in Chapter 1.
This must spell out the organization and arrangements which have been 
put in place to ensure that you and your workmates are working in a safe 
place. 
  Your employer must also have carried out an assessment on the risks to 
your health and safety in the place where you are working. You should be 
 Try This
Power Tools 
 ● 
 Look at the power tools at work 
 ● 
 do they have a PAT Test label 
 ● 
 Is it  ‘ in date .’ 

Tools and equipment used for electrotechnical applications
145
told about the safety policy and risk assessment, for example, you may 
have been given a relevant leaﬂ et when you started work. We will discuss 
Risk Assessment in some detail in Chapter 8 of this book. 
 You have a responsibility under the Health and Safety at Work Act to: 
●  learn how to work safely and to follow company procedures of work; 
●  obey all safety rules, notices and signs; 
●  not interfere with or misuse anything provided for safety; 
●  report anything that seems damaged, faulty or dangerous; 
●      behave sensibly, not play practical jokes and not distract other 
people at work; 
●  walk sensibly and not run around the workplace; 
●  use the prescribed walkways; 
●      drive only those vehicles for which you have been properly trained 
and passed the necessary test; 
●  not wear jewellery which could become caught in moving parts if 
you are using machinery at work; 
●  always wear appropriate clothing and PPE if necessary. 
 Common causes of accidents at work 
   Slips, trips and falls are still the major causes of accidents at work. To help 
prevent them: 
●  keep work areas clean and tidy; 
●  keep walkways clear; 
●      do not leave objects tools and equipment lying around blocking up 
walkways;
●  clean up spills or wet patches on the ﬂ oor straight away. 
   Manual handling, that is moving objects by hand, may result in strains, 
sprains and trap injury pains. 
 To help prevent them: 
●      use a mechanical aid to move heavy objects, such as a sack truck or 
ﬂ at bed truck 
●  only lift and carry what you can manage easily 
●  wear gloves to avoid rough or sharp edges 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
146
●      use a good manual lifting technique which is discussed in the next 
chapter.    
  When using equipment, machines and some tools, such as angle grinders, 
are difﬁ cult to use. 
 To help prevent injuries: 
●  wear goggles 
●  wear appropriate PPE 
●      make sure tools and equipment are in good condition and carry an 
 ‘ in date ’ PAT test label. 
   Badly stored equipment can become unstable and fall on to someone. To 
prevent this: 
●  stack equipment sensibly and securely 
●  stack heavy objects low down 
●      stack objects so they can be reached without stretching or reaching 
over. 
 Fire safety was discussed earlier in this book in Chapter 1. 
   Electricity and its safe use is what the electrotechnical industry and the 
regulations are all about. 
  To prevent electrical accidents always use the  ‘ safe isolation procedure ’  
before any work begins as described in Chapter 1. 
   Carrying out the bullet pointed activities listed above, which help to pre-
vent the causes of accidents, can all be considered to be  ‘ good housekeep-
ing ’ because they individually contribute to a safer work environment. 
 Personal hygiene 
   In the work environment, dirt, thermal roof insulation and contact with 
chemicals and cleaning ﬂ uids may make you feel ill or cause unpleasant 
skin complaints. Therefore, you should always: 
●  wear appropriate personal protective equipment; 
●      wash your hands after using the toilet, after work and before you eat 
a meal, using soap and water or appropriate cleaners; 
●      dry your hands with the towel or dryer provided; do not use rags or 
your clothes; 
●      use barrier creams or latex gloves when they are provided to protect 
your skin; 

Tools and equipment used for electrotechnical applications
147
●      obtain medical advice about any skin complaint such as rashes, 
blisters or ulcers and tell your supervisor of the problems being 
experienced. 
●  The workplace must be a safe place to work or where particular 
hazards exist, they must be clearly identiﬁ ed and appropriate PPE 
provided. 
  We will look at the hazards associated with working above ground and 
good manual handling techniques in Chapter 8 of this book. 

  When you have completed the questions, check out the answers at the back 
of the book. 
 Note: more than one multiple choice answer may be correct.
 1.  Which hand tools would you use for terminating conductors in a junction 
box? 
  a.   a pair of side cutters or knife  
  b.  a screwdriver  
  c.   a wood chisel and saw  
  d.   a tenon saw.  
 2.  Which hand tools would you use for removing cable insulation? 
  a.   a pair of side cutters or knife  
  b.  a screwdriver  
  c.   a wood chisel and saw.  
  d.  a tenon saw.  
 3.  Which hand tools would you use to cut across a ﬂ oorboard before lifting? 
  a.   a pair or side cutters or knife  
  b.  a screwdriver  
  c.   a wood chisel and saw  
  d.   a tenon saw.  
 4.  Which hand tools would you use to cut and remove a notch in a ﬂ oor 
joist? 
  a.   a pair of side cutters or knife  
  b.  a screwdriver  
  c.   a wood chisel and saw  
  d.   a tenon saw.  
 5.   PAT testing is carried out on: 
  a.   hand tools  
  b.  domestic appliances only  
  c.   work electrical tools  
  d.   electrical equipment e.g. 110   V transformers.  
 6.  When PAT testing a 110   V electric drill we are testing the: 
  a.   efficiency of the drill  
  b.  earth continuity of the drill  
  c.   hammer action of the drill  
  d.  insulation resistance of the drill.  
 Check your Understanding  

Ch 7
149
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
 7.  For each type of tool shown in   Figs 7.1 to 7.5 , name the tool or piece 
of equipment and state one application (what you would use it for) for 
each.  
 8.  Describe  ‘ good practice ’ when handling and storing hand and power 
tools.  
 9.  State ﬁ ve points that a PAT inspection and test checks on each 
appliance.  
 10.   State what you would do with electrical tools on site when you have 
ﬁ nished using them in order to make sure: 
 
  a.  they remain in good condition  
 
  b.   they are available the next time you want to use them.  
 11.   Brieﬂ y describe that we mean by  ‘ good housekeeping ’ on site. 
 12.   State some of the actions that you could take at work that would 
make the work environment safer and that could be considered  ‘ good 
housekeeping ’ . 
 13.   Slips, trips and falls are the most common cause of accidents at work. 
What can you do at work to reduce the possibility of an accident being 
caused by a slip, trip or fall?

This page intentionally left blank


This page intentionally left blank

 Safe systems of working 
 Ch 8 
153
 Unit 3 – Application of health and safety and electrical principles – Outcome 1 
 Underpinning knowledge: when you have completed this chapter you should be able to: 
●  state the health and safety risks, precautions and procedures in the workplace 
●  deﬁ ne hazard and risks 
●  list the ﬁ ve stages of a risk assessment 
●  list the common categories of risk 
●  list the precautions taken to control risks 
●  state the rules for manual handling 
●  state the safety requirements when working at height 
●  list a safe electrical isolation procedure 
●  state why there is the need to leave the workplace clean and tidy 
●  state the procedure for disposing of waste materials 
O
o
1
V
U
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3 
4
5 
6 
To 3 phase supply

Basic Electrical Installation Work
154
 Health and safety risks, precautions and procedures 
   In Chapter 1 of this book, we looked at some of the health and safety rules 
and regulations. In particular, we now know that the Health and Safety 
at Work Act is the most important piece of recent legislation, because it 
places responsibilities for safety at work on both employers and employ-
ees. This responsibility is enforceable by law. We know what the regula-
tions say about the control of substances, which might be hazardous to 
our health at work, because we brieﬂ y looked at the COSHH Regulations 
2002 in Chapter 1. We also know that if there is a risk to health and safety at 
work our employer must provide personal protective equipment (PPE) free 
of charge, for us to use so that we are safe at work. The law is in place, we 
all apply the principles of health and safety at work and we always wear the 
appropriate PPE, so what are the risks? Well, getting injured at work is not 
a pleasant subject to think about but each year about 300 people in Great 
Britain lose their lives at work. In addition, there are about 158,000 non-
fatal injuries reported to the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) each year 
and an estimated 2.2 million people suffer ill health caused by, or made 
worse by, work. It is a mistake to believe that these things only happen 
in dangerous occupations such as deep-sea diving, mining and quarry-
ing, ﬁ shing industry, tunnelling and ﬁ re ﬁ ghting or that it only happens in 
exceptional circumstances such as would never happen in your workplace. 
This is not the case. Some basic thinking and acting beforehand could have 
prevented most of these accident statistics from happening. 
 The most common categories of risk and causes of accidents at work are: 
●  slips, trips and falls 
●  manual handling, that is moving objects by hand 
●  using equipment, machinery or tools 
●  storage of goods and materials which then become unstable 
●  ﬁ re 
●  electricity 
●  mechanical handling. 
 Precautions taken to control risks: 
●  eliminate the cause 
●  substitute a procedure or product with less risk 
●  enclose the dangerous situation 
●  put guards around the hazard 
●  use safe systems of work 
●  supervise, train and give information to staff 
●  if the hazard cannot be removed or minimized then provide PPE. 

Safe systems of working
155
   Let us now look at the application of some of the procedures that make the 
workplace a safer place to work, but ﬁ rst I want to explain what I mean, 
when I use the words hazard and risk. 
 Hazard and risk 
 A hazard is something with the  ‘ potential ’  to cause harm, for example, 
chemicals, electricity or working above ground. 
 A risk is the  ‘ likelihood ’ of harm actually being done.
 Definition  
 A  hazard  is something with the 
 ‘ potential ’  to cause harm, for exam-
ple, chemicals, electricity or working 
above ground. 
 A  risk  is the  ‘ likelihood ’ of harm actu-
ally being done. 
Competent persons are often referred to in the Health and Safety at Work 
Regulations, but who is  ‘ competent ’ ? For the purposes of the Act, a compe-
tent person is anyone who has the necessary technical skills, training and 
expertise to safely carry out the particular activity. Therefore, a competent 
person dealing with a hazardous situation reduces the risk.
 Definition  
  A  competent person  is anyone who 
has the necessary technical skills, 
training and expertise to safely carry 
out the particular activity. 
  Think about your workplace and at each stage of what you do, think about 
what might go wrong. Some simple activities may be hazardous. Here are 
some typical activities where accidents might happen.
 Typical activity 
 Potential hazard 
 Receiving materials 
 Lifting and carrying 
 Stacking and storing 
 Falling materials 
 Movement of people 
 Slips, trips and falls 
 Building maintenance 
 Working at heights or in conﬁ ned spaces 
 Movement of vehicles 
 Collisions 
 Definition  
  Employers of more than fi ve people 
must document the risks at work and 
the process is known as  hazard risk 
assessment . 
 Hazard risk assessment: The procedure 
  The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999 tells us 
that employers must systematically examine the workplace, the work 
activity and the management of safety in the establishment through a pro-
cess of risk assessments. A record of all signiﬁ cant risk assessment ﬁ ndings 
must be kept in a safe place and be made available to an HSE inspector if 
required. Information based on the risk assessment ﬁ ndings must be com-
municated to relevant staff and if changes in work behaviour patterns are 
recommended in the interests of safety, then they must be put in place. 
   So risk assessment must form a part of any employer’s robust policy of 
health and safety. However, an employer only needs to  ‘ formally ’ assess the 
   How high are the risks? Think about what might be the worst result; is it 
a broken ﬁ nger or someone suffering permanent lung damage or being 
killed? How likely is it to happen? How often is that type of work carried out 
and how close do people get to the hazard? How likely is it that something 
will go wrong? 
   How many people might be injured if things go wrong? Might this also 
include people who do not work for your company? 
   Employers of more than ﬁ ve people must document the risks at work and 
the process is known as hazard risk assessment.

Basic Electrical Installation Work
156
signiﬁ cant risks. He is not expected to assess the trivial and minor types of 
household risks. Staff are expected to read and to act upon these formal 
risk assessments, and they are unlikely to do so enthusiastically if the ﬁ le is 
full of trivia. An assessment of risk is nothing more than a careful examina-
tion of what, in your work, could cause harm to people. It is a record that 
shows whether sufﬁ cient precautions have been taken to prevent harm. 
 The HSE recommends ﬁ ve steps to any risk assessment. 
  STEP 1 
   Look at what might reasonably be expected to cause harm. Ignore the triv-
ial and concentrate only on signiﬁ cant hazards that could result in serious 
harm or injury. Manufacturer’s data sheets or instructions can also help 
you spot hazards and put risks in their true perspective. 
  STEP 2 
   Decide who might be harmed and how. Think about people who might not 
be in the workplace all the time – cleaners, visitors, contractors or mainte-
nance personnel. Include members of the public or people who share the 
workplace. Is there a chance that they could be injured by activities taking 
place in the workplace? 
  STEP 3 
   Evaluate what is the risk arising from an identiﬁ ed hazard. Is it adequately 
controlled or should more be done? Even after precautions have been put 
in place, some risk may remain. What you have to decide, for each signiﬁ -
cant hazard, is whether this remaining risk is low, medium or high. First 
of all, ask yourself if you have done all the things that the law says you 
have got to do. For example, there are legal requirements on the preven-
tion of access to dangerous machinery. Then ask yourself whether gener-
ally accepted industry standards are in place, but do not stop there – think 
for yourself, because the law also says that you must do what is reasonably 
practicable to keep the workplace safe. Your real aim is to make all risks 
small by adding precautions, if necessary. 
 If you ﬁ nd that something needs to be done, ask yourself: 
●  Can I get rid of this hazard altogether? 
●  If not, how can I control the risk so that harm is unlikely? 
 Only use PPE when there is nothing else that you can reasonably do.
 Key Fact
Defi nition 
 ● 
 Hazard is something that might 
cause harm 
 ● 
 Risk is the chance that harm will 
be done. 
 If the work that you do varies a lot, or if there is movement between one 
site and another, select those hazards which you can reasonably foresee, 
the ones that apply to most jobs and assess the risks for them. After that, 
if you spot any unusual hazards when you get on site, take what action 
seems necessary. 
  STEP 4 
 Record your ﬁ ndings and say what you are going to do about risks that are 
not adequately controlled. If there are fewer than ﬁ ve employees you do 
not need to write anything down but if there are ﬁ ve or more employees, 

Safe systems of working
157
the signiﬁ cant ﬁ ndings of the risk assessment must be recorded. This 
means writing down the more signiﬁ cant hazards and assessing if they are 
adequately controlled and recording your most important conclusions. 
Most employers have a standard risk assessment form which they use such 
as that shown in  Fig. 8.1    but any format is suitable. The important thing is 
to make a record. 
FLASH-BANG
ELECTRICAL CO.
HAZARD RISK
ASSESSMENT
For
Company name or site:
Address:
Assessment undertaken by:
STEP 5  Assessment review date:
STEP 1    List the hazards here
Signed:
Date:
STEP 2    Decide who might be harmed
Evaluate (what is) the risk – is it 
adequately controlled? State risk
level as low, medium or high
STEP 3
Further action – what else is 
required to control any risk identified
as medium or high?
STEP 4
 FIGURE 8.1 
 Hazard risk assessment standard form. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
158
  There is no need to show how the assessment was made, provided you can 
show that: 
 1.  a proper check was made 
 2.  you asked those who might be affected 
 3.  you dealt with all obvious and signiﬁ cant hazards 
 4.  the precautions are reasonable and the remaining risk is low 
 5.  you informed your employees about your ﬁ ndings. 
   Risk assessments need to be  suitable  and  sufﬁ cient , not perfect. The two 
main points are: 
 1.  Are the precautions reasonable? 
 2.  Is there a record to show that a proper check was made? 
 Definition  
   Risk assessments need to be  suitable 
and  suffi  cient , not perfect. 
   File away the written assessment in a dedicated ﬁ le for future reference or 
use. It can help if an HSE inspector questions the company’s precautions 
or if the company becomes involved in any legal action. It shows that the 
company has done what the law requires. 
  STEP 5 
 Review the assessments from time to time and revise them if necessary. 
 Completing a risk assessment 
  When completing a risk assessment such as that shown in  Fig. 8.1 , do not 
be over complicated. In most ﬁ rms in the commercial, service and light 
industrial sector, the hazards are few and simple. Checking them is com-
mon sense but necessary. 
  STEP 1 
   List only hazards which you could reasonably expect to result in signiﬁ cant 
harm under the conditions prevailing in your workplace. Use the following 
examples as a guide: 
●      Slipping or tripping hazards (e.g. from poorly maintained or partly 
installed ﬂ oors and stairs) 
●  Fire (e.g. from ﬂ ammable materials you might be using, such as 
solvents)
●  Chemicals (e.g. from battery acid) 
●  Moving parts of machinery (e.g. blades) 
●  Rotating parts of hand tools (e.g. drills) 
●  Accidental discharge of cartridge operated tools 
●  High pressure air from airlines (e.g. air powered tools) 
●  Pressure systems (e.g. steam boilers) 
●  Vehicles (e.g. fork lift trucks) 

Safe systems of working
159
●  Electricity (e.g. faulty tools and equipment) 
●  Dust (e.g. from grinding operations or thermal insulation) 
●  Fumes (e.g. from welding) 
●  Manual handling (e.g. lifting, moving or supporting loads) 
●  Noise levels too high (e.g. machinery) 
●  Poor lighting levels (e.g. working in temporary or enclosed spaces) 
●  Low temperatures (e.g. working outdoors or in refrigeration plant) 
●  High temperatures (e.g. working in boiler rooms or furnaces). 
  STEP 2 
   Decide who might be harmed, do not list individuals by name. Just think 
about groups of people doing similar work or who might be affected by 
your work: 
●  Ofﬁ ce staff 
●  Electricians 
●  Maintenance personnel 
●  Other contractors on site 
●  Operators of equipment 
●  Cleaners 
●  Members of the public. 
 Pay particular attention to those who may be more vulnerable, such as: 
●  staff with disabilities 
●  visitors 
●  young or inexperienced staff 
●  people working in isolation or enclosed spaces. 
 Safety First
Safety Procedures 
 ● 
 Hazard risk assessment is  an 
essential part of any health and 
safety management system 
 ● 
 The aim of the planning process is 
to minimize risk 
 ● 
 HSE Publication, HSG (65). 
  STEP 3 
   Calculate what is the risk – is it adequately controlled? Have you already 
taken precautions to protect against the hazards which you have listed in 
Step 1? For example: 
●  have you provided adequate information to staff? 
●  have you provided training or instruction? 
Do the precautions already taken
●  meet the legal standards required? 
●  comply with recognized industrial practice? 
●  represent good practice? 
●  reduce the risk as far as is reasonably practicable? 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
160
   If you can answer  ‘ yes ’  to the above points then the risks are adequately 
controlled, but you need to state the precautions you have put in place. You 
can refer to company procedures, company rules, company practices, etc., 
in giving this information. For example, if we consider there might be a risk 
of electric shock from using electrical power tools, then the risk of a shock 
will be less  if the company policy is to portable appliance test (PAT) all 
power tools each year and to ﬁ t a label to the tool showing that it has been 
tested for electrical safety. If the stated company procedure is to use bat-
tery drills whenever possible, or 110       V drills when this is not possible, and 
to never  use 230  V drills, then this again will reduce the risk. If a policy such 
as this is written down in the company Safety Policy Statement, then you 
can simply refer to the appropriate section of the Safety Policy Statement 
and the level of risk will be low. (Note: PAT testing is described in Advanced 
Electrical Installation Work.) 
  STEP 4 
   Further action – what more could be done to reduce those risks, which 
were found to be inadequately controlled? 
  You will need to give priority to those risks that affect large numbers of peo-
ple or which could result in serious harm. Senior managers should apply 
the principles below when taking action, if possible in the following order: 
 1.  Remove the risk completely 
 2.  Try a less risky option 
    3.     Prevent access to the hazard (e.g. by guarding)  
 4.  Organize work differently in order to reduce exposure to the hazard 
 5.  Issue PPE 
 6.  Provide welfare facilities (e.g. washing facilities for removal of con-
tamination and ﬁ rst aid).    
   Any hazard identiﬁ ed by a risk assessment as  high risk  must be brought 
to the attention of the person responsible for health and safety within the 
company. Ideally, in Step 4 of the risk assessment you should be writing 
 ‘ No further action is required. The risks are under control and identiﬁ ed as 
low risk ’ . 
  The assessor may use as many standard hazard risk assessment forms, such 
as that shown in  Fig. 8.1 , as the assessment requires. Upon completion 
they should be stapled together or placed in a plastic wallet and stored in 
the dedicated ﬁ le. 
  You might like to carry out a risk assessment on a situation you are familiar 
with at work, using the standard form of  Fig. 8.1 , or your employer’s stan-
dard forms. Alternatively, you might like to complete the visual display unit 
(VDU) workstation risk assessment checklist given in the next section. 
  We all use computers, and you might ﬁ nd it interesting to carry out a risk 
assessment of the computer workstation you use most, either at home, 

Safe systems of working
161
work or college, just for fun and to get an idea of how to carry out a risk 
assessment. 
  VDU operation hazards 
  Those who work at supermarket checkouts, assemble equipment or com-
ponents, or work for long periods at a VDU and keyboard can be at risk 
because of the repetitive nature of the work. The hazard associated with 
these activities is a medical condition called  ‘ upper limb disorders ’ . The 
term covers a number of related medical conditions. 
 Health and Safety (Display Screen Equipment)
Regulations 1992 
  To encourage employers to protect the health of their workers and reduce 
the risks associated with VDU work, the HSE have introduced the Health 
and Safety (Display Screen Equipment) Regulations 1992. The regula-
tions came into force on 1 January 1993, and employers who use stan-
dard ofﬁ ce VDUs must show that they have taken steps to comply with the 
regulations. 
   So who is affected by the regulations? The regulations identify employees 
who use VDU equipment as  ‘ users ’ if they: 
●  use a VDU more or less continuously on most days 
●      use a VDU more or less continuously for periods of an hour or more 
each day 
●  need to transfer information quickly to or from the screen 
●      need to apply high levels of attention or concentration to informa-
tion displayed on a screen 
●      are very dependent upon VDUs or have little choice about using 
them. 
   All VDU users must be trained to use the equipment safely and protect 
themselves from upper limb disorders, temporary eyestrain, headaches, 
fatigue and stress. 
 To comply with the regulations an employer must: 
●      train users of VDU equipment and those who will carry out a risk 
assessment
●  carry out a workstation risk assessment 
●  plan changes of activities or breaks for users 
●  provide eye and eyesight testing for users 
●      make sure new workstations comply with the regulations in the 
future 
●  give users information on the above. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
162
 FIGURE 8.2 
 Examples of good posture when using VDU equipment. 
  USER TRAINING 
 Good user training will normally cover the following topics: 
●  the operating hazards and risks as described above 
●      the importance of good posture and changing position as shown in 
 Fig. 8.2 
●  how to adjust furniture to avoid risks 
●      how to organize the workstation to avoid awkward or repeated 
stretching movements 
●  how to avoid reﬂ ections and glare on the monitor screen 
●      how to organize working routines so that there is a change of activity 
or a break 
●  how to adjust and clean the monitor screen 
●  how a user might contribute to a workstation risk assessment 
●  who to contact if problems arise. 
  When carrying out user training, the trainer might want to consider using a 
video, a computer-based training programme, discussions or seminars or 
the HSE employee leaﬂ et  Working with VDUs  which can be obtained from 
the address given in Appendix B. 
  WORKSTATION RISK ASSESSMENT 
   A simple way to carry out a workstation risk assessment is to use a checklist 
such as that shown later in this section. Users can work through the check-
list themselves. They know what the problems at their workstation are and 
whether they are comfortable or not. A trainer/assessor should then check 
the completed checklist and resolve the problems which the user cannot 
solve. For example, users may not know how the adjustment mechanism 
actually operates on their chair – a shorter user may beneﬁ t from a foot-
rest as shown in  Fig. 8.2 , or a document holder may be more convenient 
for word processing users as shown in  Fig. 8.3 . 
  BREAKS 
   Breaking up long spells of display screen work helps to prevent fatigue 
and upper limb problems. Where possible encourage VDU users to carry 

Safe systems of working
163
out other tasks such as taking telephone calls, ﬁ ling and photocopying. 
Otherwise, plan for users to take breaks away from the VDU screen if possible. 
The length of break required is not ﬁ xed by the law; the time will vary depend-
ing upon the work being done. Breaks should be taken before users become 
tired and short frequent breaks are better than longer infrequent ones.  
  EYE AND EYESIGHT TESTING 
  VDU users and those who are to become users of VDU equipment can 
request an eye and eyesight test that is free of charge to them. If the test 
shows that they need glasses speciﬁ cally to carry out their VDU work, then 
their employer must pay for a basic pair of frames and lenses. Users are 
also entitled to further tests at regular intervals but if the user’s normal 
glasses are suitable for VDU work, then the employer is not required to pay 
for them. 
  WORKSTATIONS 
 Make sure that new workstations comply with the regulations when: 
●      major changes to the workstation display screen equipment, furni-
ture or software are made 
●  new users start work or change workstations 
●  workstations are re-sited 
●  the nature of the work changes considerably. 
   Users, trainers and assessors should focus on those aspects which have 
changed. For example: 
●      if the location of the workstation has changed, is the lighting ade-
quate, is lighting or sunlight now reﬂ ecting off the display unit? 
●  different users have different needs – replacing a tall user with a 
short user may mean that a footrest is required 
●      users working from a number of source documents will need more 
desk space than users who are word processing. 
   A risk assessment should always be carried out on a new workstation or 
when a new operator takes over a workstation. Some questions cannot be 
answered until a user has had an opportunity to try the workstation. For 
example, does the user ﬁ nd the layout comfortable to operate, are there 
reﬂ ections on the screen at different times of the day as the sun moves 
around the building? 
 To be comfortable the operator should adjust the chair and equipment so 
that:
●      Arms are horizontal and eyes are roughly at the height of the top of 
the VDU casing. 
●      Hands can rest on the work surface in front of the keyboard with ﬁ n-
gers outstretched over the keys. 
 FIGURE 8.3 
 A document holder typically used by a word 
processing VDU operator. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
164
●  Feet are placed ﬂ at on the ﬂ oor – too much pressure on the backs of 
legs and knees may mean that a footrest is needed. 
●      The small of the back is supported by the chair. The back should be 
held straight with the shoulders relaxed. 
  The arms on the chair or obstructions under the desk must not prevent the 
user from getting close enough to the keyboard comfortably. 
  INFORMATION 
   Good employers, who comply with the Display Screen Equipment 
Regulations, should let their employees know what care has been taken to 
reduce the risk to their health and safety at work. Users should be given 
information on: 
●  the health and safety relating to their particular workstations 
●  the risk assessments carried out and the steps taken to reduce risks 
●      the recommended break times and changes in activity to reduce 
risks 
●  the company procedures for obtaining eye and eyesight tests. 
 This information might be communicated to workers by: 
●  telling staff, for example, as part of an induction programme 
●  circulating a booklet or leaﬂ et to relevant staff 
●  putting the information on a notice board 
●      using a computer-based information system, provided staff are 
trained in their use. 
  VDU workstation risk assessment checklist 
   Using a checklist such as that shown below or the more extensive checklist 
shown in the HSE book  ‘ VDUs, An Easy Guide to the Regulations ’  is one 
way to assess workstation risks. You do not have to, but many employers 
ﬁ nd it a convenient method. 
   Risk factors are grouped under ﬁ ve headings and to each question the user 
should initially give a simple yes/no response. A  ‘ yes ’  response means that 
no further action is necessary but a  ‘ no ’  response will indicate that further 
follow-up action is required to reduce or eliminate risks to a user. 
 1.  Is the display screen image clear?
 
 1.1  Are the characters readable? 
 Y/N 
 
 1.2  Is the image free of ﬂ icker and movement? 
 Y/N 
 
 1.3  Are brightness and contrast adjustable? 
 Y/N 
 
    1.4     Does the screen swivel and tilt?     
  Y/N  
 
 1.5  Is the screen free from glare and reﬂ ections? 
 Y/N 

Safe systems of working
165
 2.  Is the keyboard comfortable?
 
 2.1  Is the keyboard tiltable? 
 Y/N 
 
 2.2  Can you ﬁ nd a comfortable keyboard position? 
 Y/N 
 
 2.3  Is there enough space to rest your hands in front of 
the keyboard? 
 Y/N 
 
 2.4  Are the characters on the keys easily readable? 
 Y/N 
 3.  Does the furniture ﬁ t the work and user?
 
 3.1  Is the work surface large enough? 
 Y/N 
 
 3.2  Is the surface free of reﬂ ections? 
 Y/N 
 
 3.3  Is the chair stable? 
 Y/N 
 
 3.4  Do the adjustment mechanisms work? 
 Y/N 
 
 3.5  Are you comfortable? 
 Y/N 
 4.  Is the surrounding environment risk free?
 
 4.1  Is there enough room to change position and vary
 movement? 
 Y/N 
 
 4.2  Are levels of light, heat and noise comfortable? 
 Y/N 
 
    4.3      Does the air feel comfortable in terms of temperature
and humidity?     
  Y/N       
    5.     Is the software user friendly? 
 
    5.1     Can you comfortably use the software?     
  Y/N  
 
    5.2     Is the software suitable for the work task?     
  Y/N  
 
 5.3  Have you had enough training? 
 Y/N 
   A copy of all risk assessments carried out should be placed in a dedicated 
ﬁ le which can then be held by the trainer/assessor or other responsible 
person.
   A copy of the full checklist can be found in the publication  ‘ VDUs, an Easy 
Guide to the Regulations ’ . Other relevant publications include  ‘ Display 
Screen Equipment Work and Guidance on Regulations L26 ’  and  ‘ Industry 
Advisory (General) leaﬂ et IND(G) 36(L) 1993 Working with VDUs ’ . These 
and other health and safety publications are available from the HSE; the 
address is given in Appendix B. 
 Safe manual handling 
   Definition  
 Manual handling  is lifting, transport-
ing or supporting loads by hand or by 
bodily force. 
Manual handling is lifting, transporting or supporting loads by hand or by 
bodily force. The load might be any heavy object, a printer, a VDU, a box 
of tools or a stepladder. Whatever the heavy object is, it must be moved 
thoughtfully and carefully, using appropriate lifting techniques if personal 
pain and injury are to be avoided.  Many people hurt their back, arms and 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
166
 FIGURE 8.4 
 Correct manual lifting and carrying procedure. 
feet, and over one-third of all 3-day reported injuries submitted to the HSE 
each year are the result of manual handling . 
  When lifting heavy loads, correct lifting procedures must be adopted to 
avoid back injuries.  Figure 8.4    demonstrates the technique. Do not lift 
objects from the ﬂ oor with the back bent and the legs straight as this causes 
excessive stress on the spine. Always lift with the back straight and the legs 
bent so that the powerful leg muscles do the lifting work. Bend at the hips 
and knees to get down to the level of the object being lifted, positioning the 
body as close to the object as possible. Grasp the object ﬁ rmly and, keeping 
the back straight and the head erect, use the leg muscles to raise in a smooth 
movement. Carry the load close to the body. When putting the object down, 
keep the back straight and bend at the hips and knees, reversing the lifting 
procedure. A bad lifting technique will result in sprains, strains and pains. 
There have been too many injuries over the years resulting from bad manual 
handling techniques. The problem has become so serious that the HSE has 
introduced new legislation  under the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974, 
the Manual Handling Operations Regulations 1992. Publications such as 
Getting to Grips with Manual Handling  can be obtained from HSE Books; 
the address and Infoline are given in Appendix B. 
  Where a job involves considerable manual handling, employers must now 
train employees in the correct lifting procedures and provide the appropri-
ate equipment necessary to promote the safe manual handling of loads. 
 Consider some  ‘ good practice ’ when lifting loads. 
●      Do not lift the load manually if it is more appropriate to use a 
mechanical aid. Only lift or carry what you can easily manage. 
●      Always use a trolley, wheelbarrow or truck such as those shown in 
 Fig. 8.5 when these are available. 
●  Plan ahead to avoid unnecessary or repeated movement of loads. 
●      Take account of the centre of gravity of the load when lifting – the 
weight acts through the centre of gravity. 
●  Never leave a suspended load unsupervised. 
●  Always lift and lower loads gently. 
●  Clear obstacles out of the lifting area. 
FRAGILE
 FIGURE 8.5 
 Always use a mechanical aid to transport a load 
when available. 
 Safety First
Lifting 
 ● 
 bend your legs 
 ● 
 keep your back straight 
 ● 
 use the leg muscles to raise the 
weight in a smooth movement 

Safe systems of working
167
●  Use the manual lifting techniques described above and avoid sud-
den or jerky movements. 
●      Use gloves when manual handling to avoid injury from rough or 
sharp edges. 
●      Take special care when moving loads wrapped in grease or 
bubble-wrap. 
  ●  Never move a load over other people or walk under a suspended load.   
 Safe working above ground 
  Working above ground level creates added dangers and slows down the 
work rate of the electrician. New Work at Height Regulations came into 
force on the 6 April 2005. Every precaution should be taken to ensure that 
the working platform is appropriate for the purpose and in good condition. 
  LADDERS 
  The term ladder is generally taken to include step ladders and trestles. The 
use of ladders for working above ground level is only acceptable for access 
and work of short duration (Work at Height Regulations: 2005). 
   It is advisable to inspect the ladder before climbing it. It should be straight 
and ﬁ rm. All rungs and tie rods should be in position and there should be 
no cracks in the stiles. The ladder should not be painted since the paint 
may be hiding defects. 
   Extension ladders should be erected in the closed position and extended 
one section at a time. Each section should overlap by at least the number 
of rungs indicated below: 
●  Ladder up to 4.8  m length – 2 rungs overlap 
●  Ladder up to 6.0  m length – 3 rungs overlap 
●  Ladder over 6.0  m length – 4 rungs overlap. 
  The angle of the ladder to the building should be in the proportion 4 up to 
1 out or 75° as shown in  Fig. 8.6   . The ladder should be lashed at the top and 
bottom when possible to prevent unwanted movement and placed on ﬁ rm 
and level ground. Footing is only considered effective for ladders smaller 
than 6       m and manufactured securing devices should always be considered. 
When ladders provide access to a roof or working platform the ladder must 
extend at least 1.05 m or 5 rungs above the landing place.
 Safety First
Ladders 
 New Working at Height Regulations 
tell us: 
 ● 
 Ladders are only to be used for 
access 
 ●  
 Must only be used for work of 
short duration. 
   Short ladders may be carried by one person resting the ladder on the 
shoulder, but longer ladders should be carried by two people, one at each 
end, to avoid accidents when turning corners. 
   Long ladders or extension ladders should be erected by two people as 
shown in  Fig. 8.7   . One person stands on or  ‘ foots ’  the ladder, while the 
other person lifts and walks under the ladder towards the walls. When the 
ladder is upright it can be positioned in the correct place, at the correct 
angle and secured before being climbed.
1
4
75°
 FIGURE 8.6 
 A correctly erected ladder. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
168
 Safety First
Scaff old 
 ● 
 scaff old or mobile towers are 
always safer than ladders for 
working above ground. 
Start position
Footing
base of
ladder
Lift and walk
towards wall
Continue until
upright
 FIGURE 8.7 
 Correct procedure for erecting long or extension ladder. 
  TRESTLE SCAFFOLD 
    Figure 8.8    shows a trestle scaffold. Two pairs of trestles spanned by scaf-
folding boards provide a simple working platform. The platform must be 
at least two boards or 450       mm wide. At least one-third of the trestle must 
be above the working platform. If the platform is more than 2       m above the 
ground, toeboards and guardrails must be ﬁ tted, and a separate ladder 
provided for access. The boards which form the working platform should 
be of equal length and not overhang the trestles by more than four times 
their own thickness. The maximum span of boards between trestles is: 
●  1.3  m for boards 40  mm thick 
●  2.5  m for boards 50  mm thick. 
 Trestles which are higher than 3.6  m must be tied to the building to give 
them stability. Where anyone can fall more than 4.5       m from the working 
platform, trestles may not be used. 
  MOBILE SCAFFOLD TOWERS 
   Mobile scaffold towers may be constructed of basic scaffold components 
or made from light alloy tube. The tower is built up by slotting the sections 
together until the required height is reached. A scaffold tower is shown in 
 Fig. 8.9 . 
 FIGURE 8.8 
 A trestle scaffold. 

Safe systems of working
169
Guard rail
Close boarded
working platform
Toe board
Locking castors
Diagnal
bracing
 FIGURE 8.9 
 A mobile scaffold tower. 
   If the working platform is above 2       m from the ground it must be closed 
boarded and ﬁ tted with guardrails and toeboards. When the platform 
is being used, all four wheels must be locked. The platform must not be 
moved unless it is clear of tools, equipment and workers and should be 
pushed at the base of the tower and not at the top. 
  The stability of the tower depends upon the ratio of the base width to tower 
height. A ratio of base to height of 1:3 gives good stability. Outriggers can 
be used to increase stability by effectively increasing the base width. If out-
riggers are used then they must be ﬁ tted diagonally across all four corners 
of the tower and not on one side only. The tower must not be built more 
than 12       m high unless it has been specially designed for that purpose. Any 
tower higher than 9       m should be secured to the structure of the building to 
increase stability. 
   Access to the working platform of a scaffold tower should be by a ladder 
securely fastened vertically to the inside of the tower. Ladders must never 
be leaned against a tower since this might push the tower over. 
 Secure electrical isolation 
   Electric shock occurs when a person becomes part of the electrical circuit. 
The level or intensity of the shock will depend upon many factors, such 
as age, ﬁ tness and the circumstances in which the shock is received. The 
lethal level is approximately 50       mA, above which muscles contract, the 
heart ﬂ utters and breathing stops. A shock above the 50       mA level is there-
fore fatal unless the person is quickly separated from the supply. Below 
50  mA only an unpleasant tingling sensation may be experienced or you 
may be thrown across a room or shocked enough to fall from a roof or lad-
der, but the resulting fall may lead to serious injury.
 Safety First
Isolation 
 ●  
 never work  ‘ live ’ .
 ● 
 isolate 
 ● 
 secure the isolation 
 ● 
 prove the supply  ‘ dead ’ before 
starting work. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
170
 To prevent people receiving an electric shock accidentally, all circuits con-
tain protective devices. All exposed metal is earthed; fuses and miniature 
circuit breakers (MCBs) are designed to trip under fault conditions, and 
residual current devices (RCDs) are designed to trip below the fatal level as 
described in Chapter 6. 
   Construction workers and particularly electricians do receive electric 
shocks, usually as a result of carelessness or unforeseen circumstances. 
As an electrician working on electrical equipment you must always make 
sure that the equipment is switched off or electrically isolated before com-
mencing work. Every circuit must be provided with a means of isolation 
(IEE Regulation 132.15). When working on portable equipment or desk 
top units it is often simply a matter of unplugging the equipment from 
the adjacent supply. Larger pieces of equipment and electrical machines 
may require isolating at the local isolator switch before work commences. 
To deter anyone from re-connecting the supply while work is being car-
ried out on equipment, a sign  ‘ Danger – Electrician at Work ’  should be 
displayed on the isolator and the isolation  ‘ secured ’ with a small padlock 
or the fuses removed so that no one can re-connect whilst work is being 
carried out on that piece of equipment. The Electricity at Work Regulations 
1989 are very speciﬁ c at Regulation 12(1) that we must ensure the discon-
nection and separation of electrical equipment from every source of supply 
and that this disconnection and separation is secure. Where a test instru-
ment or voltage indicator is used to prove the supply dead, Regulation 4(3) 
of the Electricity at Work Regulations 1989 recommends that the following 
procedure is adopted.
 Definition  
    Electrical isolation  We must ensure 
the disconnection and separation 
of electrical equipment from every 
source of supply and that this discon-
nection and separation is secure.  
    1.     First connect the test device such as that shown in  Fig. 8.10    to the 
supply which is to be isolated. The test device should indicate main’s 
voltage. 
    2.     Next, isolate the supply and observe that the test device now reads 
zero volts. 
    3.     Then connect the same test device to a known live supply or proving 
unit such as that shown in  Fig. 8.11  to  ‘ prove ’  that the tester is still 
working correctly. 
    4.     Finally secure the isolation and place warning signs; only then 
should work commence. 
  The test device being used by the electrician must incorporate safe test 
leads which comply with the Health and Safety Executive Guidance Note 
38 on electrical test equipment. These leads should incorporate barriers to 
prevent the user touching live terminals when testing and incorporating a 
protective fuse and be well insulated and robust, such as those shown in 
 Fig. 8.12 . 
  To isolate a piece of equipment or individual circuit successfully, compe-
tently, safely and in accordance with all the relevant regulations, we must 
follow a procedure such as that given by the ﬂ ow diagram of  Fig. 8.13   . Start 
at the top and work down the ﬂ ow diagram. 

Safe systems of working
171
 FIGURE 8.10 
 Typical voltage indicator. 
Battery
SWITCH ON
SWITCH OFF
PROOF TESTING
Insert probe ends of testing device into
a.c./d.c. output sockets and while holding
testing device apply a light pressure in
direction of sockets
Withdrawal of testing device instantly de-
energises PU2
With probes of testing device inserted into
sockets APPLY SUFFICIENT PRESSURE
for good electrical contact
CHECK Δ INDICATES AT ALL TIMES
during testing. Replace battery if, in normal
use, it does not illuminate.
Check ALL NEON LAMPS located within
the testing device illuminate for duration of
PROOF TEST
PROVING UNIT PU2
MARTINDALE
TESTING
DEVICES
VI-13700/1
VI-16200
CAUTION
READ INSTRUCTIONS
BEFORE OPERATING
6LF22 9V MN1604


50-500V
AC/DC
MANCHESTER M29 0QA
         TEL: (0942) 873434
ELECTRONICS
LIMITED
 FIGURE 8.11 
 Voltage proving unit. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
172
HBC fuses
and/or current limitation
Robust, flexible well-
insulated leads
Shrouded or firmly
attached connectors
Minimum of
exposed metal
Barrier to prevent
access to live terminals
 FIGURE 8.12 
 Recommended type of test probe and leads. 
  When the heavy outlined amber boxes are reached, pause and ask your-
self whether everything is satisfactory up to this point. If the answer is  ‘ yes ’ , 
move on. If the answer is  ‘ no ’ , go back as indicated by the diagram. 
  LIVE TESTING 
  The Electricity at Work Regulations 1989 at Regulation 4(3) tells us that it is 
preferable that supplies be made dead before work commences. However, 
it does acknowledge that some work, such as fault ﬁ nding and testing, may 
require the electrical equipment to remain energized. Therefore, if the fault 
ﬁ nding and testing can only be successfully carried out live then the per-
son carrying out the fault diagnosis must: 
●      be trained so that they understand the equipment and the potential 
hazards of working live and can, therefore, be deemed  ‘ competent ’  
to carry out that activity 
●  only use approved test equipment 
●      set up appropriate warning notices and barriers so that the work 
activity does not create a situation dangerous to others. 
  While live testing may be required by workers in the electrotechnical industries 
in order to ﬁ nd the fault, live repair work must not be carried out . The indi-
vidual circuit or piece of equipment must ﬁ rst be isolated before work com-
mences in order to comply with the Electricity at Work Regulations 1989.   
 Disposing of waste 
  We have said many times in this book so far, that having a good attitude to 
health and safety, working conscientiously and neatly, keeping passageways 
clear and regularly tidying up the workplace is the sign of a good and com-
petent craftsman. But what do you do with the rubbish that the working

Safe systems of working
173
Select an approved test lamp or
voltage indicating device
Verify that the device is
functioning correctly on a
known supply or proving unit
Satisfactory?
Locate and identify circuit or
equipment to be worked upon
Is the
circuit or equipment
in service?
Identify means of isolation
Ensure isolation of circuit or
equipment by
– switching off
– withdrawing fuses
– locking off isolating switches
or MCBs
Verify that the circuit or
equipment to be worked upon is
dead using a voltage indicating
device testing between
Phase and Earth
Phase and Neutral
Neutral and Earth
Satisfactory?
Recheck that the voltage
indicating device is functioning
correctly on a known supply
or proving unit
Fit warning labels
Satisfactory?
DEAD
Discover why with care
and go through the
procedure again
Replace or repair
and go through
the procedure
again
Begin work
NO
Replace or repair
Establish where and why
it was de-energised
NO
YES
NO
LIVE
YES
YES
 FIGURE 8.13 
 Flowchart for a secure isolation procedure. 
environment produces? Well, all the packaging material for electrical ﬁ t-
tings and accessories usually goes into either your employer’s skip or the 
skip on site designated for that purpose. All the off-cuts of conduit, trunk-
ing and tray also go into the skip. In fact, most of the general site debris 
will probably go into the skip and the waste disposal company will take the 
skip contents to a designated local council land ﬁ ll area for safe disposal. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
174
  The part coils of cable and any other reuseable leftover lengths of conduit, 
trunking or tray will be taken back to your employer’s stores area. Here it 
will be stored for future use and the returned quantities deducted from the 
costs allocated to that job. 
 What goes into the skip for normal disposal into a land ﬁ ll site is usually a 
matter of common sense. However, some substances require special con-
sideration and disposal. We will now look at asbestos and large quantities 
of used ﬂ uorescent tubes. 
   Asbestos is a mineral found in many rock formations. When separated it 
becomes a ﬂ uffy, ﬁ brous material with many uses. It was used extensively 
in the construction industry during the 1960s and 1970s for rooﬁ ng mate-
rial, ceiling and ﬂ oor tiles, ﬁ re resistant board for doors and partitions, for 
thermal insulation and commercial and industrial pipe lagging. 
   In the buildings where it was installed some 40 years ago, when left alone, 
it does not represent a health hazard, but those buildings are increasingly 
becoming in need of renovation and modernization. It is in the dismantling 
and breaking up of these asbestos materials that the health hazard increases. 
Asbestos is a serious health hazard if the dust is inhaled. The tiny asbestos 
particles ﬁ nd their way into delicate lung tissue and remain embedded for 
life, causing constant irritation and eventually, serious lung disease. 
  Working with asbestos materials is not a job for anyone in the electro-
technical industry. If asbestos is present in situations or buildings where 
you are expected to work, it should be removed by a specialist contractor 
before your work commences. Specialist contractors, who will wear fully 
protective suits and use breathing apparatus, are the only people who can 
safely and responsibly carry out the removal of asbestos. They will wrap the 
asbestos in thick plastic bags and store them temporarily in a covered and 
locked skip. This material is then disposed of in a special land ﬁ ll site with 
other toxic industrial waste materials and the site monitored by the local 
authority for the foreseeable future. 
  There is a lot of work for electrical contractors in my part of the country, 
updating and improving the lighting in government buildings and schools. 
This work often involves removing the old ﬂ uorescent ﬁ ttings, hanging on 
chains or ﬁ xed to beams and installing a suspended ceiling and an appro-
priate number of recessed modular ﬂ uorescent ﬁ ttings. So what do we do 
with the old ﬁ ttings? Well, the ﬁ ttings are made of sheet steel, a couple of 
plastic lampholders, a little cable, a starter and ballast. All of these materi-
als can go into the ordinary skip. However, the ﬂ uorescent tubes contain a 
little mercury and ﬂ uorescent powder with toxic elements, which cannot 
be disposed of in the normal land ﬁ ll sites. 
   New Hazardous Waste Regulations were introduced in July 2005 and under 
these Regulations lamps and tubes are classiﬁ ed as hazardous. While each 
lamp contains only a small amount of mercury, vast numbers of lamps and 
tubes are disposed of in the United Kingdom every year resulting in a sig-
niﬁ cant environmental threat. 

Safe systems of working
175
  The environmentally responsible way to dispose of ﬂ uorescent lamps and 
tubes is to recycle them. 
 The process usually goes like this: 
●      your employer arranges for the local electrical wholesaler to deliver a 
plastic used lamp waste container of an appropriate size for the job 
●  expired lamps and tubes are placed whole into the container, which 
often has a grating inside to prevent the tubes breaking when being 
transported 
●      when the container is full of used lamps and tubes, you telephone 
the electrical wholesaler and ask them to pick up the ﬁ lled container 
and deliver it to one of the specialist recycling centres 
●      your electrical company will receive a  ‘ Duty of Care Note ’ and full 
recycling documents which ought to be ﬁ led safely as proof that the 
hazardous waste was recycled safely 
●  the charge is approximately 50p for each 1800  mm tube and this cost 
is passed on to the customer through the ﬁ nal account. 
 Safety First
Waste  
 ● 
 clean up before you leave the job 
 ● 
 put waste in the correct skip 
 ● 
 recycle used lamps and tubes 
 ● 
 get rid of all waste responsibly. 

  When you have completed the questions, check out the answers at the back 
of the book. 
 Note : more than one multiple choice answer may be correct. 
 1.  Two of the most common categories of risk and causes of accidents at 
work are: 
  a.  slips, trips and falls  
  b.  put guards around the hazard  
  c.   manual handling  
  d.  use safe systems of work.  
 2.  Two of the most common precautions taken to control risks are: 
  a.  slips, trips and falls  
  b.  put guards around the hazard  
  c.  manual handling  
  d.  use safe systems of work throuit questions.  
 3.  Something which has the potential to cause harm is one deﬁ nition of: 
  a.  health and safety  
  b.  risk  
  c.  competent person  
  d.  hazard.  
 4.  The chances of harm actually being done is one deﬁ nition of: 
  a.  electricity  
  b.  risk  
  c.  health and safety  
  d.  hazard.  
 5.  A competent person dealing with a hazardous situation: 
  a.  must wear appropriate PPE  
  b.  display a health and safety poster  
  c.  reduces the risk  
  d.  increases the risk.  
 6.  Employers of companies employing more than ﬁ ve people must: 
  a.  become a member of the NICEIC  
  b.  provide PPE if appropriate  
  c.  carry out a hazard risk assessment  
  d.  display a health and safety poster.  
 Check your Understanding  

Ch 8
177
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3 
4
5 
6 
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
  7.  There are ﬁ ve parts to a hazard risk assessment procedure. Identify one
 from the list below: 
 
  a.  wear appropriate PPE  
 
  b.  notify the HSE that you intend to carry out a risk assessment  
 
  c.  list the hazards and who might be harmed  
 
  d.  substitute a procedure with less risk.  
 8.  Lifting, transporting or supporting heavy objects by hand or bodily force
 
is one deﬁ nition of: 
 
  a.  working at height  
 
  b.  a mobile scaffold tower  
 
  c.  a sack truck  
 
  d.   manual handling.  
 9.  When working above ground for long periods of time the most
 
appropriate piece of equipment to use would be: 
 
  a.  a ladder  
 
  b.  a trestle scaffold  
 
  c.  a mobile scaffold tower  
 
  d.  a pair of sky hooks.  
 10.  The most appropriate piece of equipment to use for gaining access to a 
 
permanent scaffold would be: 
 
  a.  a ladder  
 
  b.  a trestle scaffold  
 
  c.  a mobile scaffold tower  
 
  d.  a pair of sky hooks.  
 11.  The Electricity at Work Regulations tell us that  ‘ we must ensure the 
 
 disconnection and separation of electrical equipment from every 
source of supply and the separation must be secure ’ . A procedure to 
comply with this Regulation is called: 
 
  a.  work at height  
 
  b.  a hazard risk assessment  
 
  c.   a safe isolation procedure  
 
  d.  a workstation risk assessment.  

 12.  The Electricity at Work Regulations absolutely forbid the following work
 
activity: 
 
  a.  working at height  
 
  b.  testing live electrical systems  
 
  c.   live repair work on electrical circuits  
 
  d.  working without the appropriate PPE.  
 13.  ‘ Good housekeeping ’ at work is about: 
 
  a.  cleaning up and putting waste in the skip  
 
  b.  working safely  
 
  c.  making the tea and collecting everyone’s lunch  
 
  d.  putting tools and equipment away after use.  
 14.  List ﬁ ve common categories of risk.  
 15.  List ﬁ ve common precautions which might be taken to control risk.  
 16.  Use bullet points to list the main stages involved in lifting a heavy box
from the ﬂ oor, carrying it across a room and placing it on a worktop, 
using a safe manual handling technique. 
 17.  Describe a safe manual handling technique for moving a heavy electric 
motor out of the stores, across a yard and into the back of a van for 
delivery to site. 
 18.  Use bullet points to list a step-by-step safe electrical isolation procedure 
for isolating a circuit in a three-phase distribution fuse board.  
 19.  Use bullet points to list each stage in the erection and securing of a long 
extension ladder. Identify all actions which would make the ladder safe 
to use. 
 20.  Describe how you would use a mobile scaffold tower to re-lamp all the 
light ﬁ ttings in a supermarket. Use bullet points to give a step-by-step 
account of re-lamping the ﬁ rst two ﬁ ttings. 
 21.  What is a proving unit used for? 
 22.  The HSE Guidance Note GS 38 tells us about suitable test probe leads. 
Use a sketch to identify the main recommendations.  

Ch 8
179
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3 
4
5 
6 
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
 23.  State how you would deal with the following materials when you are
 
cleaning up at the end of the job: 
 
  •  pieces of conduit and tray  
 
  •  cardboard packaging material  
 
  •  empty cable rolls  
 
  •  half full cable rolls  
 
  •  bending machines for conduit and tray  
 
  •  your own box of tools  
 
  •  your employer’s power tools  
 
  •  100 old fluorescent light fittings  
 
  •  200 used fluorescent tubes.  

This page intentionally left blank

 Using technical information  
 Ch 9 
181
 Unit 3 – Application of health and safety and electrical principles – Outcome 2 
 Underpinning knowledge: when you have completed this chapter you should be able to: 
●  state methods of distributing technical information 
●  list the types of technical information 
●  state who uses technical information 
●  state types of  ‘ on-site ’ documentation 
●  state how to receive materials on site 
●  state the importance of presenting the  ‘ right image ’ 
O
o
2
V
U
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply

Basic Electrical Installation Work
182
   In Chapter 3 of this book we looked at  sources  of technical information and 
speciﬁ c types  of technical information, such as site plans and layout draw-
ings. We said that: 
 Technical information can be received or distributed by 
●  written reports 
●  conventional scale drawings and information sheets 
●  the Internet and email 
●  CD, DVD or Memory Stick 
●  Facsimile (Fax machine). 
   In this chapter we are going to look at how we use technical information so 
this might be a good time to revise the work done in Chapter 3. 
 Types of technical information 
  Technical information is communicated to electrotechnical personnel in 
lots of different ways. It comes in the form of: 
●  Speciﬁ cations  – these are details of the client’s requirements, usu-
ally drawn up by an architect. For example, the speciﬁ cation may 
give information about the type of wiring system to be employed or 
detail the type of luminaires or other equipment to be used. 
●  Manufacturer’s data  – if certain equipment is speciﬁ ed, let’s say a 
particular type of luminaire or other piece of equipment, then the 
manufacturer’s data sheet will give speciﬁ c instructions for their 
assembly and ﬁ xing requirements. It is always good practice to read 
the data sheet before ﬁ tting the equipment. A copy of the data sheet 
should also be placed in the job ﬁ le for the client to receive when the 
job is completed. 
  ●  Reports and schedules  – a report is the written detail of something that 
has happened or the answer to a particular question asked by another 
professional person or the client. It might be the details of why an 
employee is to be disciplined or a report of some problem on site.  
   If the report is internal to the organization, a handwritten report is accept-
able, but if the ﬁ nal report will go outside the organization, then it must be 
more formal and typed. 
A schedule  gives information about a programme or timetable of work, 
details of when certain events will take place. For example, when the elec-
tricians will start to do the  ‘ ﬁ rst ﬁ x ’  and how many days it will take. A bar 
chart is an easy to understand schedule of work that shows how different 
activities interact on a project.  Figure 9.1    shows a bar chart or schedule of 
work where activity A takes 2 days to complete and activity B starts at the 
same time as activity A but carries on for 8 days etc. 
●  User instructions – give information about the operation of a piece of 
equipment. Manufacturers of equipment provide  ‘ user instructions ’  

Using technical information
183
and a copy should be placed in the job ﬁ le for the client to receive 
when the project is handed over. 
●  Job sheets and Time sheets  – give  ‘ on site ’  information. Job sheets 
give information about what is to be done and are usually issued 
by a manager to an electrician. Time sheets are a record of where 
an individual worker has been spending his time, which job and for 
how long. This information is used to make up individual wages and 
to allocate company costs to a particular job. We will look at these 
again later under the sub-heading  ‘ on-site documentation ’ . 
 Those who need or use technical information 
  Technical information is required by many of the professionals involved in 
any electrotechnical activity, so who are the key people? 
●      The Operative – in our case this will be the skilled electricians actu-
ally on site, doing the job for the electrotechnical company. 
●      The Supervisor – he may have overall responsibility for a number of 
electricians on site and will need the  ‘ big picture ’ . 
  ●      The Contractor – the main contractor takes on the responsibility of the 
whole project for the client. The main contractor may take on a sub-
contractor to carry out some part of the whole project. On a large con-
struction site the electrical contractor is usually the sub-contractor.  
  ●      Site Agent – he will be responsible for the smooth running of the whole 
project and for bringing the contract to a conclusion on schedule and 
within budget. The site agent may be nominated by the architect.  
●      Customer or Client – they also are the people ordering the work to 
be done. They will pay the ﬁ nal bill that pays everyone’s wages. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
Day number
Time
Activity
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
 FIGURE 9.1 
 A simple bar chart or schedule of work. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
184
 On-site documentation 
   A lot of communications between and within larger organizations take 
place by completing standard forms or sending internal memos. Written 
messages have the advantage of being  ‘ auditable ’ . An auditor can follow 
the paperwork trail to see, for example, who was responsible for ordering 
certain materials. 
  When completing standard forms, follow the instructions given and ensure 
that your writing is legible. Do not leave blank spaces on the form, always 
specifying  ‘ not applicable ’ or  ‘ N/A ’ whenever necessary. Sign or give your 
name and the date as asked for on the form. Finally, read through the form 
again to make sure you have answered all the relevant sections correctly. 
   Internal memos are forms of written communication used within an orga-
nization; they are not normally used for communicating with customers or 
suppliers.  Figure 9.2    shows the layout of a typical standard memo form used 
by Dave Twem to notify John Gall that he has ordered the hammer drill. 
   Letters provide a permanent record of communications between organiza-
tions and individuals. They may be handwritten for internal use but for-
mal business letters give a better impression of the organization if they are 
type-written. A letter should be written using simple concise language, and 
the tone of the letter should always be polite even if it is one of complaint. 
Always include the date of the correspondence. The greeting on a formal 
letter should be  ‘ Dear Sir/Madam ’ and concluded with  ‘ Yours faithfully ’ . 
A less formal greeting would be  ‘ Dear Mr Smith ’  and concluded  ‘ Yours sin-
cerely ’ . Your name and status should be typed below your signature. 
 Delivery notes 
  When materials are delivered to site, the person receiving the goods is 
required to sign the driver’s  ‘  delivery note ’ . This record is used to conﬁ rm 
that goods have been delivered by the supplier, who will then send out an 
invoice requesting payment, usually at the end of the month.
FLASH-BANG
ELECTRICAL
internal
MEMO
From
Dave Twem
Power Tool
Thrus  11 Aug. 08
Have today ordered Hammer Drill  from P.S. Electrical – should be
with you end of next week – Hope this is OK.   Dave.
John Gall
Subject
Date
To
Message
 FIGURE 9.2 
 Typical standard memo form. 
 Definition  
 A delivery note is used to confi rm that 
goods have been delivered by the 
supplier, who will then send out an 
invoice requesting payment. 

Using technical information
185
   Definition  
 A  time sheet  is a standard form com-
pleted by each employee to inform 
the employer of the actual time spent 
working on a particular contract or 
site. 
  A time sheet is a standard form completed by each employee to inform the 
employer of the actual time spent working on a particular contract or site. 
This helps the employer to bill the hours of work to an individual job. It is usu-
ally a weekly document and includes the number of hours worked, the name 
of the job and any travelling expenses claimed. Ofﬁ ce personnel require time 
sheets such as that shown in  Fig 9.3 so that wages can be made up.  
 Job sheets 
   Definition  
 A  job sheet  or job card such as that 
shown in  Fig 9.4 carries information 
about a job which needs to be done, 
usually a small job. 
 A  job sheet  or job card such as that shown in Fig 9.4 carries information 
about a job which needs to be done, usually a small job. It gives the name 
and address of the customer, contact telephone numbers, often a job refer-
ence number and a brief description of the work to be carried out. A typi-
cal job sheet work description might be: 
●  Job 1 Upstairs lights not working. 
●  Job 2 Funny ﬁ shy smell from kettle socket in kitchen. 
   An electrician might typically have a  ‘ jobbing day ’ where he picks up a 
number of job sheets from the ofﬁ ce and carries out the work speciﬁ ed. 
   Job 1, for example, might be the result of a blown fuse which is easily recti-
ﬁ ed, but the electrician must search a little further for the fault which caused 
the fuse to blow in the ﬁ rst place. The actual fault might, for example, be a 
decayed ﬂ ex on a pendant drop which has become shorted out, blowing the 
fuse. The pendant drop would be re-ﬂ exed or replaced, along with any others 
in poor condition. The installation would then be tested for correct operation 
and the customer given an account of what has been done to correct the 
fault. General information and assurances about the condition of the instal-
lation as a whole might be requested and given before setting off to job 2. 
  The kettle socket outlet at job 2 is probably getting warm and, therefore, 
giving off that  ‘ ﬁ shy ’  bakelite smell because loose connections are causing 
 The person receiving the goods must carefully check that all the items 
stated on the delivery note have been delivered in good condition. Any 
missing or damaged items must be clearly indicated on the delivery note 
before signing, because, by signing the delivery note the person is saying 
 ‘ yes, these items were delivered to me as my company’s representative on 
that date and in good condition and I am now responsible for these goods ’ . 
Suppliers will replace materials damaged in transit provided that they are 
notiﬁ ed within a set time period, usually 3 days. The person receiving the 
goods should try to quickly determine their condition. Has the packaging 
been damaged, does the container  ‘ sound ’  like it might contain broken 
items? It is best to check at the time of delivery if possible, or as soon as 
possible after delivery and within the notiﬁ able period. Electrical goods 
delivered to site should be handled carefully and stored securely until they 
are installed. Copies of delivery notes are sent to head ofﬁ ce so that pay-
ment can be made for the goods received. 
  Time sheets 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
186
the bakelite socket to burn locally. A visual inspection would conﬁ rm the 
diagnosis. A typical solution would be to replace the socket and repair any 
damage to the conductors inside the socket box. Check the kettle plug top 
for damage and loose connections. Make sure all connections are tight 
FLASH-BANG
ELECTRICAL
Employee’s name (Print)
Week ending
TIME SHEET
Day
Monday
Job number and/or Address
Start
time
Finish
time
Total
hours
Travel
time
Expenses
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Employee’s signature
Date
 FIGURE 9.3 
 Typical time sheet. 

Using technical information
187
before reassuring the customer that all is well; then, off to the next job or 
back to the ofﬁ ce. 
  The time spent on each job and the materials used are sometimes recorded 
on the job sheet, but alternatively a daywork sheet can be used. This 
will depend upon what is normal practice for the particular electrical com-
pany. This information can then be used to  ‘ bill ’  the customer for work 
carried out.  
 Daywork sheets 
JOB SHEET
FLASH-BANG
ELECTRICAL
Customer name
Address of job
Work to be carried out
Contact telephone No.
Job Number
Any special instructions/conditions/materials used
 FIGURE 9.4 
 Typical job sheet. 
 Definition
 Daywork   is one way of recording vari-
ations to a contract. 
Daywork is one way of recording variations to a contract, that is, work 
done which is outside the scope of the original contract. If daywork is to be 
carried out, the site supervisor must ﬁ rst obtain a signature from the cli-
ent’s representative, for example, the architect, to authorize the extra work.
A careful record must then be kept on the daywork sheets of all extra time 
and materials used so that the client can be billed for the extra work. A typ-
ical daywork sheet is shown in  Fig. 9.5 . 
 Reports 
   On large jobs, the foreman or supervisor is often required to keep a report 
of the relevant events which happen on the site – for example, how many 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
188
people from your company are working on site each day, what goods were 
delivered, whether there were any breakages or accidents, and records of 
site meetings attended. Some ﬁ rms have two separate documents, a site 
diary to record daily events and a weekly report which is a summary of the 
week’s events extracted from the site diary. The site diary remains on site 
and the weekly report is sent to head ofﬁ ce to keep managers informed of 
the work’s progress. 
FLASH-BANG
ELECTRICAL
Client name
Job number/ref.
DAYWORK SHEET
Date
Labour
Start time
Finish time
Total hours
Office use
Materials quantity
Description
Office use
Site supervisor or F.B. Electrical Representative responsible for carrying out work
Signature of person approving work and status e.g.
Architect
Client
Q.S.
Main contractor
Clerk of works
Signature
 FIGURE 9.5 
 Typical daywork sheet. 

Using technical information
189
 Personal communications and image 
   Remember that it is the customers who actually pay the wages of every-
one employed in your company. You should always be polite and listen 
carefully to their wishes. They may be elderly or of a different religion or 
cultural background than you. In a domestic situation, the playing of loud 
music on a radio may not be approved of. Treat the property in which you 
are working with the utmost care. When working in houses, shops and 
ofﬁ ces use dust sheets to protect ﬂ oor coverings and furnishings. Clean up 
periodically and make a special effort when the job is completed. 
   Dress appropriately: an unkempt or untidy appearance will encourage the 
customer to think that your work will be of poor quality. 
  The electrical installation in a building is often carried out alongside other 
trades. It makes good sense to help other trades where possible and to 
develop good working relationships with other employees. The customer 
will be most happy if the workers give an impression of working together 
as a team for the successful completion of the project. 
   Finally, remember that the customer will probably see more of the electri-
cian and the electrical trainee than the managing director of your ﬁ rm and, 
therefore, the image presented by you will be assumed to reﬂ ect the policy 
of the company. You are, therefore, your company’s most important repre-
sentative. Always give the impression of being capable and in command 
of the situation, because this gives customers conﬁ dence in the compa-
ny’s ability to meet their needs. However, if a problem does occur which is 
outside your previous experience and you do not feel conﬁ dent to solve it 
successfully, then contact your supervisor for professional help and guid-
ance. It is not unreasonable for a young member of the company’s team 
to seek help and guidance from those employees with more experience. 
This approach would be preferred by most companies rather than having 
to meet the cost of an expensive blunder. 

  When you have completed the questions, check out the answers at the back 
of the book. 
 Note : more than one multiple choice answer may be correct. 
 1.  A standard form completed by every employee to inform the employer of 
the time spent working on a particular site is called: 
  a.   job sheet  
  b.  time sheet  
  c.   delivery note  
  d.  daywork sheet.  
 2.  A record that conﬁ rms that materials ordered have been delivered to site 
is called: 
  a.   job sheet  
  b.  time sheet  
  c.   delivery note  
  d.  daywork sheet.  
 3.  A standard form containing information about work to be done usually 
distributed by a manager to an electrician is called: 
  a.   job sheet  
  b.  time sheet  
  c.   delivery note  
  d.  daywork sheet.  
 4.  A standard form which records changes or extra work on a large project 
is called a: 
  a.   job sheet  
  b.  time sheet  
  c.   delivery note  
  d.  daywork sheet.  
  5.  State three methods of receiving or sending technical information.  
 6.  State four types of technical information and give a brief description of 
each one. 
 7.  State three people who need access to technical information and brieﬂ y 
state why. 
 8.  Use bullet points to describe the process of receiving goods on site on 
behalf of your employer.  
 9.  Brieﬂ y state why we would use a daywork sheet to record additional work 
on a large contract. Why is it important to obtain a signature for this 
work from the client or his representative?  
 Check your Understanding  

Ch 9
191
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
 10.   Brieﬂ y state why time sheets, fully and accurately completed, are
  important to: 
   a.  an employer  
   b.   an employee.  
 11.   State the reasons why you should always present the right image to a 
  client, customer or his representative.  
 12.   Brieﬂ y describe what we mean by a schedule of work. Who would use a
  bar chart or schedule of work in your company and why? 

This page intentionally left blank

Alternating current theory 
and electrical machines
Ch 10
193
Unit 3 – Application of health and safety and electrical principles – Outcome 3
Underpinning knowledge: when you have completed this chapter you should be able to:
● state the effects of resistance, reactance and impedance in an a.c. circuit
● state how power factor correction may be achieved
● describe the concept of self and mutual inductance
● describe the energy stored in a magnetic ﬁ eld and magnetic hysteresis
● state the principle of operation of:
 
 d.c. motors
 
 a.c. motors
 
 transformers  
 
 instrument transformers
 
 ﬂ uorescent luminaires
 
 a simple relay
p0020
p0020
O
o
3
V
U
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply

Baisc Electrical Installation Work
194
Alternating current theory
Commercial quantities of electricity for industry, commerce and domes-
tic use are generated as a.c. in large Power Stations and distributed around 
the United Kingdom on the National Grid to the end user. The d.c. elec-
tricity has many applications where portability or an emergency stand-by 
supply is important but for large quantities of power it has to be an 
a.c. supply because it is so easy to change the voltage levels using a 
transformer.
Rotating a simple loop of wire or coils of wire between the poles of a mag-
net such as that shown simpliﬁ ed in Fig. 10.1 will cut the north south lines 
of magnetic ﬂ ux and induce an a.c. voltage in the loop or coils of wire as 
shown by the display on a cathode ray oscilloscope.
This is an a.c. supply, an alternating current supply. The basic principle of 
the a.c. supply generated in a Power Station is exactly the same as Fig. 10.1 
except that powerful electromagnets are used and the power for rotation 
comes from a steam turbine.
Cathode
ray
oscilloscope
Rotation
N
S
Carbon brushes
Slip rings
FIGURE 10.1
Simple a.c. generator or alternator.
Key Fact
Defi nitions
● Try to remember these a.c. circuit 
defi nitions
● 
Write them down if it helps.
In this section we will ﬁ rst of all consider the theoretical circuits of pure 
resistance, inductance and capacitance acting alone in an a.c. circuit 
before going on to consider the practical circuits of resistance, inductance 
and capacitance acting together. Let us ﬁ rst deﬁ ne some of our terms of 
reference.

Alternating current theory and electrical machines
195
Resistance
In any circuit, resistance is deﬁ ned as opposition to current ﬂ ow. From 
Ohm’s law:
R
V
I

R
R
( )
Ω
Definition
In any circuit, resistance is defi ned as 
opposition to current fl ow.
However, in an a.c. circuit, resistance is only part of the opposition to cur-
rent ﬂ ow. The inductance and capacitance of an a.c. circuit also cause an 
opposition to current ﬂ ow, which we call reactance.
Inductive reactance (XL) is the opposition to an a.c. current in an inductive 
circuit. It causes the current in the circuit to lag behind the applied voltage, 
as shown in Fig. 10.2. It is given by the formula:
X
fL
L
 ( )
 2π
Ω
where
π  3.142 a constant
f  the frequency of the supply
L  the inductance of the circuit or by
X
V
I
L
L
L

R
Pure resistance
(R)
V and I in phase
I lags V by 90°
I leads V by 90°
Pure inductance
(L)
Pure capacitance
(C)
V
V
I
V
V
V
I
I
I
I
L
V
I
C
V
I



V
V
I
I
FIGURE 10.2
Voltage and current relationships in resistive, capacitive and inductive circuits.
Definition
Inductive reactance (XL) is the opposi-
tion to an a.c. current in an inductive 
circuit. It causes the current in the cir-
cuit to lag behind the applied voltage.

Baisc Electrical Installation Work
196
Capacitive reactance (XC) is the opposition to an a.c. current in a capaci-
tive circuit. It causes the current in the circuit to lead ahead of the voltage, 
as shown in Fig. 10.2. It is given by the formula:
X
fC
C
 ( )

1
2π
Ω
where π and f are deﬁ ned as before and C is the capacitance of the circuit. 
It can also be expressed as:
X
V
I
C
C
C

Definition
Capacitive reactance (XC) is the oppo-
sition to an a.c. current in a capacitive 
circuit. It causes the current in the cir-
cuit to lead ahead of the voltage.
Example
Calculate the reactance of a 150 μF capacitor and a 0.05 H inductor if they were separately 
connected to the 50 Hz mains supply.
For capacitive reactance:
  
2
C
X
fC

1
π
where f  50 Hz and C  150 μF  150  106 F.
∴XC
6
1
2
3.142
50Hz
150
10
F
21.2







Ω
For inductive reactance:
X
fL
L  2π
where f  50 Hz and L  0.05 H.
∴
Ω
XL
2
3.142
50Hz
0.05H
15.7





Impedance
The total opposition to current ﬂ ow in an a.c. circuit is called impedance
and given the symbol Z. Thus impedance is the combined opposition to 
current ﬂ ow of the resistance, inductive reactance and capacitive reactance 
of the circuit and can be calculated from the formula:
Z
R
X


2
2  ( )
Ω
or
Z
V
I

T
T
Definition
The total opposition to current fl ow in 
an a.c. circuit is called impedance and 
given the symbol Z.

Alternating current theory and electrical machines
197
Example 1
Calculate the impedance when a 5Ω resistor is connected in series with a 12Ω inductive 
reactance.
Z
R
X
Z
Z
Z
Z








2
L
2
2
 ( )
5
12
25
144
169
13
2 Ω
∴
Ω
Example 2
Calculate the impedance when a 48 Ω resistor is connected in series with a 55 Ω capacitive 
reactance.
Z
R
X
Z
Z
Z
Z








2
C
2
2
2
 ( )
55
2304
3025
5329
73
Ω
Ω
∴
48
Resistance, inductance and capacitance in an a.c. circuit
When a resistor only is connected to an a.c. circuit the current and voltage 
waveforms remain together, starting and ﬁ nishing at the same time. We say 
that the waveforms are in phase.
When a pure inductor is connected to an a.c. circuit the current lags behind 
the voltage waveform by an angle of 90°. We say that the current lags
the voltage by 90°. When a pure capacitor is connected to an a.c. circuit the 
current leads the voltage by an angle of 90°. These various effects can be 
observed on an oscilloscope, but the circuit diagram, waveform diagram 
and phasor diagram for each circuit are shown in Fig. 10.2.
PHASOR DIAGRAMS
Phasor diagrams and a.c. circuits are an inseparable combination. Phasor 
diagrams allow us to produce a model or picture of the circuit under consid-
eration which helps us to understand the circuit. A phasor is a straight line, 
having deﬁ nite length and direction, which represents to scale the magni-
tude and direction of a quantity such as a current, voltage or impedance.
Definition
A phasor is a straight line, having defi -
nite length and direction, which rep-
resents to scale the magnitude and 
direction of a quantity such as a cur-
rent, voltage or impedance.
To ﬁ nd the combined effect of two quantities we combine their phasors by 
adding the beginning of the second phasor to the end of the ﬁ rst. The com-
bined effect of the two quantities is shown by the resultant phasor, which 
is measured from the original zero position to the end of the last phasor.

Baisc Electrical Installation Work
198
FIGURE 10.4
Phase relationship of a.c. waveform: (a) V and I in phase, phase angle φ  0° and power 
factor  cos φ  1; (b) V and I displaced by 45°, φ  45° and p.f.  0.707; and (c) V and I
displaced by 90°, φ  90° and p.f.  0.
V
I
(a)
V
I
(b)
V
I
(c)
Example
Find by phasor addition the combined eff ect of currents A and B acting in a circuit. Current 
A has a value of 4 A, and current B a value of 3 A, leading A by 90°.We usually assume phasors 
to rotate anticlockwise and so the complete diagram will be as shown in Fig. 10.3. Choose a 
scale of, for example, 1 A  1 cm and draw the phasors to scale, that is A  4 cm and B  3 cm, 
leading A by 90°.
The magnitude of the resultant phasor can be measured from the phasor diagram and is 
found to be 5 A acting at a phase angle φ of about 37° leading A. We therefore say that the 
combined eff ect of currents A and B is a current of 5 A at an angle of 37° leading A.
PHASE ANGLE φ
In an a.c. circuit containing resistance only, such as a heating circuit, the 
voltage and current are in phase, which means that they reach their peak 
and zero values together, as shown in Fig. 10.4(a).
In an a.c. circuit containing inductance, such as a motor or discharge light-
ing circuit, the current often reaches its maximum value after the volt-
age, which means that the current and voltage are out of phase with each 
other, as shown in Fig. 10.4(b). The phase difference, measured in degrees 
between the current and voltage, is called the phase angle of the circuit, 
and is denoted by the symbol φ, the lower-case Greek letter phi.
When circuits contain two or more separate elements, such as RL, RC or 
RLC, the phase angle between the total voltage and total current will be 
neither 0° nor 90° but will be determined by the relative values of resistance 
and reactance in the circuit. In Fig. 10.5 the phase angle between applied 
voltage and current is some angle φ.
Alternating current series circuits
In a circuit containing a resistor and inductor connected in series as shown 
in Fig. 10.5, the current I will ﬂ ow through the resistor and the induc-
tor causing the voltage VR to be dropped across the resistor and VL to be 
dropped across the inductor. The sum of these voltages will be equal to the 
total voltage VT but because this is an a.c. circuit the voltages must be added 
by phasor addition. The result is shown in Fig. 10.5, where VR is drawn to 

Phasor B
Phasor A
4 units
5 units
3 units
Resultant phasor
FIGURE 10.3
The phasor addition of currents A and B.

Alternating current theory and electrical machines
199
scale and in phase with the current and VL is drawn to scale and leading the 
current by 90°. The phasor addition of these two voltages gives us the mag-
nitude and direction of VT, which leads the current by some angle φ.
In a circuit containing a resistor and capacitor connected in series as 
shown in Fig. 10.6, the current I will ﬂ ow through the resistor and capaci-
tor causing voltage drops VR and VC. The voltage VR will be in phase with 
the current and VC will lag the current by 90°. The phasor addition of these 
voltages is equal to the total voltage VT which, as can be seen in Fig. 10.6, is 
lagging the current by some angle φ.
The impedance triangle
We have now established the general shape of the phasor diagram for a 
series a.c. circuit. Figures 10.5 and 10.6 show the voltage phasors, but we 
know that VR  IR, VL  IXL, VC  IXC and VT  IZ, and therefore the pha-
sor diagrams (a) and (b) of Fig. 10.7 must be equal. From Fig. 10.7(b), by 
the theorem of Pythagoras, we have:
(
)
(
)
(
)
IZ
IR
IX
2
2
2


I Z
I R
I X
2
2
2
2
2
2


If we now divide throughout by I2 we have:
Z
R
X
Z
R
X
2
2
2
2
2
or




Ω
The phasor diagram can be simpliﬁ ed to the impedance triangle given in 
Fig. 10.7(c).
L
VL
VR
R
I
VT
I
VL
VT
VR

FIGURE 10.5
A series RL circuit and phasor diagram.
C
VC
VR
R
I
I
VT
VC
VT
VR

FIGURE 10.6
A series RC circuit and phasor diagram.

Baisc Electrical Installation Work
200
Example 1
A coil of 0.15 H is connected in series with a 50  Ω resistor across a 100 V 50 Hz supply. Calculate 
(a) the reactance of the coil, (b) the impedance of the circuit and (c) the current.
For (a):
X
fL
X
L
L
2
 ( )
2
3.142
50 Hz
0.15 H
47.1






π
∴
Ω
Ω
For (b):
Z
R
X
Z





2
2
2
2
 ( )
(50
)
(47.1
)
68.69
Ω
∴
Ω
Ω
Ω
For (c):
I
V
Z
I
V



 (A)
100
68.69
1.46A
∴
Ω
Example 2
A 60 μF capacitor is connected in series with a 100 Ω resistor across a 230 V 50 Hz supply. 
Calculate (a) the reactance of the capacitor, (b) the impedance of the circuit and (c) the 
current.
VL
VC
VT
VR
IR
R
VR
IR
VT
IZ
Z
IXC
R
IZ
IXL
XL
Z
XC


(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
For an inductive circuit
For a capacitive circuit






FIGURE 10.7
Phasor diagram and impedance triangle.

Alternating current theory and electrical machines
201
For (a):
X
fC
X
C
C
6
1
2
 ( )
1
2
50Hz
60
10
F
53.05







π
Ω
∴
π
Ω
For (b):
Z
R
X
Z





2
2
2
2
 ( )
(100
)
(53.05
)
113.2
Ω
∴
Ω
Ω
Ω
For (c):
I
V
Z
I



 
 (A)
230 V
113.2
2.03A
∴
Ω
Power and power factor
Power factor (p.f.) is deﬁ ned as the cosine of the phase angle between the 
current and voltage:
p.f.
cos  

φ
Definition
Power factor (p.f.) is defi ned as the 
cosine of the phase angle between 
the current and voltage.
If the current lags the voltage as shown in Fig. 10.5, we say that the p.f. is 
lagging, and if the current leads the voltage as shown in Fig. 10.6, the p.f. is 
said to be leading. From the trigonometry of the impedance triangle shown 
in Fig. 10.7, p.f. is also equal to:
p.f.
cos
R
T



φ
R
Z
V
V
The electrical power in a circuit is the product of the instantaneous values of 
the voltage and current. Figure 10.8 shows the voltage and current waveform 
for a pure inductor and pure capacitor. The power waveform is obtained from 
the product of V and I at every instant in the cycle. It can be seen that the 
power waveform reverses every quarter cycle, indicating that energy is alter-
nately being fed into and taken out of the inductor and capacitor. When con-
sidered over one complete cycle, the positive and negative portions are equal, 
showing that the average power consumed by a pure inductor or capacitor is 
zero. This shows that inductors and capacitors store energy during one part of 
the voltage cycle and feed it back into the supply later in the cycle. Inductors 
store energy as a magnetic ﬁ eld and capacitors as an electric ﬁ eld.
In an electric circuit more power is taken from the supply than is fed back 
into it, since some power is dissipated by the resistance of the circuit, and 
therefore:
P
I R

2  (W )
In any d.c. circuit the power consumed is given by the product of the volt-
age and current, because in a d.c. circuit voltage and current are in phase. 
Power
Power
I
I
V
V
Pure inductor
Pure capacitor
FIGURE 10.8
Waveform for the a.c. power in purely inductive 
and purely capacitive circuits.

Baisc Electrical Installation Work
202
In an a.c. circuit the power consumed is given by the product of the cur-
rent and that part of the voltage which is in phase with the current. The
in-phase component of the voltage is given by V cos φ, and so power can 
also be given by the equation:
P
VI

 cos (W)
φ 
Example 1
A coil has a resistance of 30 Ω and a reactance of 40 Ω when connected to a 250 V supply. 
Calculate (a) the impedance, (b) the current, (c) the p.f., and (d) the power.
For (a):
Z
R
X
Z





2
2
2
2
 ( )
(30
)
(40
)
50
Ω
∴
Ω
Ω
Ω
For (b):
I
V
Z
I



 (A)
250 V
50
5 A
∴
Ω
For (c):
p.f.
cos 
p.f.
30 
50 
 0.6 lagging




φ
R
Z
∴
Ω
Ω
For (d):
P
VI
P





 cos  (W)
250 V
5 A
0.6
750 W
φ
∴
Example 2
A capacitor of reactance 12 Ω is connected in series with a 9 Ω resistor across a 150 V supply. 
Calculate (a) the impedance of the circuit, (b) the current, (c) the p.f., and (d) the power.
For (a):
Z
R
X
Z





2
2
2
2
 ( )
(9
)
(12
)
15
Ω
∴
Ω
Ω
Ω
For (b):
I
V
Z
I



 (A)
150 V
15
10A
∴
Ω
For (c):
p.f.
cos 
p.f.
9
15
 0.6 leading




φ
R
Z
∴
Ω
Ω

Alternating current theory and electrical machines
203
For (d):
P
VI
P





 cos  (W)
150 V
10 A
0.6
900 W
φ
∴
The power factor of most industrial loads is lagging because the machines 
and discharge lighting used in industry are mostly inductive. This causes 
an additional magnetizing current to be drawn from the supply, which 
does not produce power, but does need to be supplied, making supply 
cables larger.
Example 3
A 230 V supply feeds three 1.84 kW loads with power factors of 1, 0.8 and 0.4. Calculate the 
current at each power factor.
The current is given by:
I
P
V

 cos φ
where P  1.84  kW  1840 W and V  230 V. If the p.f. is 1, then:
I 
 
1840
230
1
8
W
V
A
For a p.f. of 0.8:
I 


1840
230
W
V
0.8
10A
For a p.f. of 0.4:
I 


1840
230
0 4
20
W
V
A
.
It can be seen from these calculations that a 1.84 kW load supplied at a power factor of 0.4 
would require a 20 A cable, while the same load at unity power factor could be supplied with 
an 8 A cable. There may also be the problem of higher voltage drops in the supply cables. As a 
result, the supply companies encourage installation engineers to improve their power factor 
to a value close to 1 and sometimes charge penalties if the power factor falls below 0.8.
POWER FACTOR CORRECTION
Most installations have a low or bad power factor because of the inductive 
nature of the load. A capacitor has the opposite effect of an inductor, and 
so it seems reasonable to add a capacitor to a load which is known to have 
a lower or bad power factor, for example, a motor.
Figure 10.9(a) shows an industrial load with a low power factor. If a capaci-
tor is connected in parallel with the load, the capacitor current IC leads 
the applied voltage by 90°. When this capacitor current is added to the 
load current as shown in Fig 10.9(b) the resultant load current has a much 
improved power factor. However, using a slightly bigger capacitor, the load 
current can be pushed up until it is ‘in phase’ with the voltage as can be 
seen in Fig. 10.9(c).

Baisc Electrical Installation Work
204
Capacitors may be connected across the main busbars of industrial loads 
in order to provide power factor improvement, but smaller capacitors may 
also be connected across an individual piece of equipment, as is the case 
for ﬂ uorescent light ﬁ ttings.
Electrical machines
All electrical machines operate on the principles of magnetism. The basic 
rules of magnetism were laid down in Chapter 5 of this book. Here we will 
look at some of the laws of magnetism as they apply to electrical machines, 
such as generators, motors and transformers.
A current carrying conductor maintains a magnetic ﬁ eld around the 
conductor which is proportional to the current ﬂ owing. When this mag-
netic ﬁ eld interacts with another magnetic ﬁ eld, forces are exerted which 
describe the basic principles of electric motors.
Michael Faraday demonstrated on 29 August 1831 that electricity could 
be produced by magnetism. He stated that ‘when a conductor cuts or is 
cut by a magnetic ﬁ eld an emf is induced in that conductor. The amount 
of induced emf is proportional to the rate or speed at which the magnetic 
ﬁ eld cuts the conductor’. This basic principle laid down the laws of present-
day electricity generation where a strong magnetic ﬁ eld is rotated inside a 
coil of wire to generate electricity.
Self and mutual inductance
If a coil of wire is wound on to an iron core as shown in Fig. 10.10, a mag-
netic ﬁ eld will become established in the core when a current ﬂ ows in the 
coil due to the switch being closed.
FIGURE 10.9
Power factor improvement using capacitors.
(a)
I Load
V
1
Ic
I Load
V
(b)
2
Ic
V
(c)
I Load ‘in phase’

Alternating current theory and electrical machines
205
When the switch is opened the current stops ﬂ owing and, therefore, the 
magnetic ﬂ ux collapses. The collapsing magnetic ﬂ ux induces an emf into 
the coil and this voltage appears across the switch contacts. The effect is 
known as self-inductance, or just inductance, and is one property of any 
coil. The unit of inductance is the henry (symbol H), to commemorate the 
work of the American physicist Joseph Henry (1797–1878), and a circuit is 
said to possess an inductance of 1 henry when an emf of 1 volt is induced 
in the circuit by a current changing at the rate of 1 ampere per second.
Fluorescent light ﬁ ttings contain a choke or inductive coil in series with the 
tube and starter lamp. The starter lamp switches on and off very quickly, 
causing rapid current changes which induce a large voltage across the tube 
electrodes sufﬁ cient to strike an arc in the tube.
When two separate coils are placed close together, as they are in a transformer, 
a current in one coil produces a magnetic ﬂ ux which links with the second 
coil. This induces a voltage in the second coil and is the basic principle of 
the transformer action which is described later in this chapter. The two coils 
in this case are said to possess mutual inductance, as shown by Fig. 10.11. 
Iron core
Lines of
magnetic flux
FIGURE 10.10
An inductive coil or choke.
FIGURE 10.11
Mutual inductance between two coils.

Baisc Electrical Installation Work
206
FIGURE 10.12
Magnetic hysteresis loops: (a) electromagnetic material and (b) permanent magnetic material.
B
H
(a)
B
H
(b)
Magnetic saturation
Definition
Magnetic hysteresis loops describe 
the way in which diff erent materials 
respond to being magnetized.
Materials from which permanent magnets are made should display a wide 
hysteresis loop, as shown by loop (b) in Fig. 10.12.
The core of an electromagnet is required to magnetize easily, and to lose its 
magnetism equally easily when switched off. Suitable materials will, there-
fore, display a narrow hysteresis loop, as shown by loop (a) in Fig. 10.12.
When an iron core is subjected to alternating magnetization, as in a trans-
former, the energy loss occurs at every cycle and so constitutes a continu-
ous power loss, and, therefore, for applications such as transformers, a 
material with a narrow hysteresis loop is required.
A mutual inductance of 1 henry exists between two coils when a uniformly 
varying current of 1 ampere per second in one coil produces an emf of 1 volt 
in the other coil.
Definition
A mutual inductance of 1 henry exists 
between two coils when a uniformly 
varying current of 1 ampere per sec-
ond in one coil produces an emf of 1 
volt in the other coil.
The emf induced in a coil such as that shown on the right-hand side in Fig. 
10.11 is dependent upon the rate of change of magnetic ﬂ ux and the num-
ber of turns on the coil.
Energy stored in a magnetic ﬁ eld
When we open the switch of an inductive circuit such as an electric motor 
or ﬂ uorescent light circuit the magnetic ﬂ ux collapses and produces an 
arc across the switch contacts. The arc is produced by the stored magnetic 
energy being discharged across the switch contacts.
Magnetic hysteresis
There are many different types of magnetic material and they all respond 
differently to being magnetized. Some materials magnetize easily, and 
some are difﬁ cult to magnetize. Some materials retain their magnetism, 
while others lose it. The result will look like the graphs shown in Fig. 10.12 
and are called hysteresis loops.
Magnetic hysteresis loops describe the way in which different materials 
respond to being magnetized.

Alternating current theory and electrical machines
207
Direct current motors
All electric motors work on the principle that when a current carrying con-
ductor is placed in a magnetic ﬁ eld it will experience a force. An electric 
motor uses this magnetic force to turn the shaft of the electric motor. Let 
us try to understand this action. If a current carrying conductor is placed 
into the ﬁ eld of a permanent magnet as shown in Fig. 10.13(c) a force F will 
be exerted on the conductor to push it out of the magnetic ﬁ eld.
To understand the force, let us consider each magnetic ﬁ eld acting alone. 
Figure 10.13(a) shows the magnetic ﬁ eld due to the current carrying con-
ductor only. Figure 10.13(b) shows the magnetic ﬁ eld due to the perma-
nent magnet in which is placed the conductor carrying no current. Figure 
10.13(c) shows the effect of the combined magnetic ﬁ elds which are dis-
torted and, because lines of magnetic ﬂ ux never cross, but behave like 
stretched elastic bands, always trying to ﬁ nd the shorter distance between 
a north and south pole, the force F is exerted on the conductor, pushing it 
out of the permanent magnetic ﬁ eld.
This is the basic motor principle, and the force F is dependent upon the 
strength of the magnetic ﬁ eld B, the magnitude of the current ﬂ owing in 
the conductor I and the length of conductor within the magnetic ﬁ eld l.
The following equation expresses this relationship:
F
BlI

 (N)
where B is in tesla, l is in metres, I is in amperes and F is in newtons.
Example
A coil which is made up of a conductor some 15 m in length, lies at right angles to a magnetic 
fi eld of strength 5 T. Calculate the force on the conductor when 15 A fl ows in the coil.
F
BlI

 (N)
F 



5
15
15
1125
T
m
A
N
Practical d.c. motors
Practical motors are constructed as shown in Fig. 10.14. All d.c. motors 
contain a ﬁ eld winding wound on pole pieces attached to a steel yoke. The 
armature winding rotates between the poles and is connected to the com-
mutator. Contact with the external circuit is made through carbon brushes 
rubbing on the commutator segments. Direct current motors are classiﬁ ed 
by the way in which the ﬁ eld and armature windings are connected, which 
may be in series or in parallel.
SERIES MOTOR
The ﬁ eld and armature windings are connected in series and consequently 
share the same current. The series motor has the characteristics of a high 
starting torque but a speed which varies with load. Figure 10.15 shows 
FIGURE 10.13
Force on a conductor in a magnetic ﬁ eld.
(a)
S
N
(b)
(c)
Force F
S
N

Baisc Electrical Installation Work
208
Pole
pieces
Field
winding
Field
supply
Armature
(laminated)
Carbon
brushes
Conductors
in slots
Commutator
N
N
S
S
Steel
yoke


FIGURE 10.14
Showing d.c. machine construction.
Supply
Field
Load
Speed
Armature
FIGURE 10.15
Series motor connections and characteristics.
series motor connections and characteristics. For this reason the motor 
is only suitable for direct coupling to a load, except in very small motors, 
such as vacuum cleaners and hand drills, and is ideally suited for applica-
tions where the machine must start on load, such as electric trains, cranes 
and hoists.
Reversal of rotation may be achieved by reversing the connections of either 
the ﬁ eld or armature windings but not both. This characteristic means 
that the machine will run on both a.c. or d.c. and is, therefore, sometimes 
referred to as a ‘universal’ motor.
Three-phase a.c. motors
If a three-phase supply is connected to three separate windings equally 
distributed around the stationary part or stator of an electrical machine, an 
alternating current circulates in the coils and establishes a magnetic ﬂ ux. 
The magnetic ﬁ eld established by the three-phase currents travels around 
the stator, establishing a rotating magnetic ﬂ ux, creating magnetic forces 
on the rotor which turns the shaft on the motor.
Three-phase induction motor
When a three-phase supply is connected to insulated coils set into slots in 
the inner surface of the stator or stationary part of an induction motor as 

Alternating current theory and electrical machines
209
shown in Fig. 10.16(a), a rotating magnetic ﬂ ux is produced. The rotating 
magnetic ﬂ ux cuts the conductors of the rotor and induces an emf in the 
rotor conductors by Faraday’s law, which states that when a conductor cuts 
or is cut by a magnetic ﬁ eld, an emf is induced in that conductor, the mag-
nitude of which is proportional to the rate at which the conductor cuts or 
is cut by the magnetic ﬂ ux. This induced emf causes rotor currents to ﬂ ow 
and establish a magnetic ﬂ ux which reacts with the stator ﬂ ux and causes 
a force to be exerted on the rotor conductors, turning the rotor as shown in 
Fig. 10.16(b).
The turning force or torque experienced by the rotor is produced by induc-
ing an emf into the rotor conductors due to the relative motion between 
the conductors and the rotating ﬁ eld. The torque produces rotation in the 
same direction as the rotating magnetic ﬁ eld.
Rotor construction
There are two types of induction motor rotor – the wound rotor and the 
cage rotor. The cage rotor consists of a laminated cylinder of silicon steel 
with copper or aluminium bars slotted in holes around the circumference 
and short circuited at each end of the cylinder as shown in Fig. 10.17. In 
small motors the rotor is cast in aluminium. Better starting and quieter 
running are achieved if the bars are slightly skewed. This type of rotor is 
extremely robust and since there are no external connections there is no 
need for slip rings or brushes. A machine ﬁ tted with a cage rotor does suf-
fer from a low starting torque and the machine must be chosen which has 
a higher starting torque than the load, as shown by curve (b) in Fig. 10.18. 
A machine with the characteristic shown by curve (a) in Fig. 10.18 would 
not start since the load torque is greater than the machine starting torque. 
FIGURE 10.16
Segment taken out of an induction motor to show turning force: (a) construction of an induction motor 
and (b) production of torque by magnetic ﬁ elds.
Stator
F
Rotor
(a)
Stator
F
Rotor
(b)

Baisc Electrical Installation Work
210
Arrangement of conductor bars in a cage rotor
Skewed rotor conductors
Shorting ring
FIGURE 10.17
Construction of a cage rotor.
Torque
Speed
(a)
(c)
(b)
Load
torque
line
FIGURE 10.18
Various speed–torque characteristics for an induction motor.
Alternatively the load may be connected after the motor has been run up 
to full speed.
The wound rotor consists of a laminated cylinder of silicon steel with cop-
per coils embedded in slots around the circumference. The windings may 
be connected in star or delta and the end connections brought out to slip 
rings mounted on the shaft. Connection by carbon brushes can then be 
made to an external resistance to improve starting.
The cage induction motor has a small starting torque and should be used 
with light loads or started with the load disconnected. The speed is almost 
constant. Its applications are for constant speed machines such as fans 
and pumps. Reversal of rotation is achieved by reversing any two of the 
stator winding connections.
Single-phase a.c. motors
A single-phase a.c. supply produces a pulsating magnetic ﬁ eld, not the 
rotating magnetic ﬁ eld produced by a three-phase supply. All a.c. motors 

Alternating current theory and electrical machines
211
require a rotating ﬁ eld to start. Therefore, single-phase a.c. motors have 
two windings which are electrically separated by about 90°. The two wind-
ings are known as the start and run windings. The magnetic ﬁ elds pro-
duced by currents ﬂ owing through these out-of-phase windings create the 
rotating ﬁ eld and turning force required to start the motor. Once rotation 
is established, the pulsating ﬁ eld in the run winding is sufﬁ cient to main-
tain rotation and the start winding is disconnected by a centrifugal switch 
which operates when the motor has reached about 80% of the full load 
speed.
A cage rotor is used on single-phase a.c. motors, the turning force being 
produced in the way described previously for three-phase induction 
motors and shown in Fig. 10.16. Because both windings carry currents 
which are out of phase with each other, the motor is known as a ‘split-
phase’ motor. The phase displacement between the currents in the wind-
ings is achieved in one of two ways:
● by connecting a capacitor in series with the start winding, as shown 
in Fig. 10.19(a), which gives a 90° phase difference between the cur-
rents in the start and run windings;
● by designing the start winding to have a high resistance and the run 
winding a high inductance, once again creating a 90° phase shift 
between the currents in each winding, as shown in Fig. 10.19(b).
When the motor is ﬁ rst switched on, the centrifugal switch is closed and 
the magnetic ﬁ elds from the two coils produce the turning force required 
to run the rotor up to full speed. When the motor reaches about 80% of full 
speed, the centrifugal switch clicks open and the machine continues to run 
on the magnetic ﬂ ux created by the run winding only.
Split-phase motors are constant speed machines with a low starting torque 
and are used on light loads such as fans, pumps, refrigerators and washing 
machines. Reversal of rotation may be achieved by reversing the connec-
tions to the start or run windings, but not both.
FIGURE 10.19
Circuit diagram of: (a) capacitor split-phase motors and (b) resistance split-phase motors.
a.c. supply
Centrifugal switch
Rotor
Start
winding
Run winding
(a)
a.c. supply
Centrifugal switch
Rotor
Start
winding
Run winding
(b)

Baisc Electrical Installation Work
212
a.c. supply
Stator
winding
Laminated stator
Fixing holes
Cage rotor
Copper
shading rings
FIGURE 10.20
Shaded pole motor.
Shaded pole motors
The shaded pole motor is a simple, robust single-phase motor, which 
is suitable for very small machines with a rating of less than about 50 W. 
Figure 10.20 shows a shaded pole motor. It has a cage rotor and the moving 
ﬁ eld is produced by enclosing one side of each stator pole in a solid copper 
or brass ring, called a shading ring, which displaces the magnetic ﬁ eld and 
creates an artiﬁ cial phase shift.
Shaded pole motors are constant speed machines with a very low starting 
torque and are used on very light loads such as oven fans, record turntable 
motors and electric fan heaters. Reversal of rotation is theoretically possible
by moving the shading rings to the opposite side of the stator pole face. 
However, in practice this is often not a simple process, but the motors are 
symmetrical and it is sometimes easier to reverse the rotor by removing the 
ﬁ xing bolts and reversing the whole motor.
There are more motors operating from single-phase supplies than all other 
types of motor added together. Most of them operate as very small motors 
in domestic and business machines where single-phase supplies are most 
common.
Transformers
A transformer is an electrical machine which is used to change the value 
of an alternating voltage. They vary in size from miniature units used in 
electronics to huge power transformers used in power stations. A trans-
former will only work when an alternating voltage is connected. It will not 
normally work from a d.c. supply such as a battery.
Definition
A transformer is an electrical machine 
which is used to change the value of 
an alternating voltage.
A transformer, as shown in Fig. 10.21, consists of two coils, called the pri-
mary and secondary coils, or windings, which are insulated from each 
other and wound on to the same steel or iron core.
An alternating voltage applied to the primary winding produces an alter-
nating current, which sets up an alternating magnetic ﬂ ux throughout 
the core. This magnetic ﬂ ux induces an emf in the secondary winding, as 

Alternating current theory and electrical machines
213
described by Faraday’s law, which says that when a conductor is cut by a 
magnetic ﬁ eld, an emf is induced in that conductor. Since both windings 
are linked by the same magnetic ﬂ ux, the induced emf per turn will be the 
same for both windings. Therefore, the emf in both windings is propor-
tional to the number of turns. In symbols:
V
N
V
N
p
p
s
s

Where Vp  the primary voltage
Vs  the secondary voltage
Np  the number of primary turns
Ns  the number of secondary turns
Moving the terms around, we have a general expression for a transformer:
V
V
N
N
p
s
p
s

Vp
Vs
Is
Ip
Primary
winding of Np turns
Secondary
winding of Ns turns
Steel core
Magnetic circuit through core
FIGURE 10.21
A simple transformer.
Try This
Maths
Using the general equation for a transformer given above, follow this maths 
carefully, step by step, in the following example.
Example
A 230 V to 12 V emergency lighting transformer is constructed with 800 primary turns. 
Calculate the number of secondary turns required. Collecting the information given in the 
question into a usable form, we have:
V
V
N
p
s
p
 V
 V



230
12
800

Baisc Electrical Installation Work
214
Secondary coil
500 turns
Ns  500
Vp  230V supply
Vs  115 V output
Primary coil
1000 turns
Np  1000
L
o
a
d
Magnetic flux
2:1 turns ratio
FIGURE 10.22
A step down transformer.
From the general equation:
V
V
N
N
p
s
p
s

the equation for the secondary turn is:
N
N V
V
N
V
V
s
p s
p
s




∴
800
12
230
42 turns
42 turns are required on the secondary winding of this transformer to give a secondary 
voltage of 12 V.
Types of transformer
Step down Transformers are used to reduce the output voltage, often for 
safety reasons. Figure 10.22 shows a step down transformer where the pri-
mary winding has twice as many turns as the secondary winding. The turns 
ratio is 2:1 and, therefore, the secondary voltage is halved.
Step up Transformers are used to increase the output voltage. The elec-
tricity generated in a power station is stepped up for distribution on the 
National Grid Network. Figure 10.23 shows a step up transformer where the 
primary winding has only half the number of turns as the secondary wind-
ing. The turns ratio is 1:2 and, therefore, the secondary voltage is doubled.
Definition
Step down Transformers are used to 
reduce the output voltage, often for 
safety reasons.
Step up Transformers are used to 
increase the output voltage. The elec-
tricity generated in a power station 
is stepped up for distribution on the 
National Grid Network.
Instrument Transformers are used in industry and commerce so that large 
currents and voltage can be measured by small electrical instruments.
A Current Transformer (or CT) has the large load currents connected to 
the primary winding of the transformer and the ammeter connected to the 
secondary winding. The ammeter is calibrated to take account of the turns 
ratio of the transformer, so that the ammeter displays the actual current 
being taken by the load when the ammeter is actually only taking a small 
proportion of the load current.
Key Fact
Transformers
● 
Transformers are very effi  cient 
(more than 80%) because they do 
not have any moving parts.

Alternating current theory and electrical machines
215
A Voltage Transformer (or VT) has the main supply voltage connected to the 
primary winding of the transformer and the voltmeter connected to the sec-
ondary winding. The voltmeter is calibrated to take account of the turns ratio 
of the transformer, so that the voltmeter displays the actual supply voltage.
Separated Extra-low Voltage (SELV) Transformers If the primary winding 
and the secondary winding of a double wound transformer have a sepa-
rate connection to earth, then the output of the transformer is effectively 
isolated from the input since the only connection between the primary 
and secondary windings is the magnetic ﬂ ux in the transformer core. Such 
a transformer would give a very safe electrical supply which might be suit-
able for bathroom equipment such as shaver sockets and construction site 
110 V tools, providing that all other considerations are satisﬁ ed, such as 
water ingress, humidity, IP protection and robust construction.
Fluorescent luminaires
A luminaire is equipment which supports an electric lamp and distributes 
or ﬁ lters the light created by the lamp. It is essentially the ‘light ﬁ tting’.
A lamp is a device for converting electrical energy into light energy. There 
are many types of lamps. General lighting service (GLS) lamps and tung-
sten halogen lamps use a very hot wire ﬁ lament to create the light and so 
they also become very hot in use. Fluorescent tubes operate on the ‘dis-
charge’ principle; that is, the excitation of a gas within a glass tube. They 
are cooler in operation and very efﬁ cient in converting electricity into light. 
They form the basic principle of most energy efﬁ cient lamps.
Primary coil
500 turns
Np  500
Magnetic flux
1:2
Turns ratio
Vp  230V supply
Vs  460 V output
Secondary coil
1000 turns
Ns  1000
L
o
a
d
FIGURE 10.23
A step up transformer
Definition
A luminaire is equipment which sup-
ports an electric lamp and distributes 
or fi lters the light created by the lamp.
A lamp is a device for converting elec-
trical energy into light energy.
Fluorescent lamps are linear arc tubes, internally coated with a ﬂ uorescent 
powder, containing a little low pressure mercury vapour and argon gas. The 
lamp construction is shown in Fig. 10.24.
Passing a current through the electrodes of the tube produces a cloud 
of electrons that ionize the mercury vapour and the argon in the tube, 
Key Fact
Energy effi  ciency
● 
fl uorescent lamps and CFLs 
(compact fl uorescent lamps) are 
energy effi  cient lamps
● 
they give more light out for every 
electrical, watt input.

Baisc Electrical Installation Work
216
The arc radiates much more UV than visible light:
almost all the visible light from a fluorescent tube
comes from the phosphors
Glass, internally coated
with fluorescent phosphor,
cut away to reveal cathode
Bi-pin cap
Tube filled with argon
and mercury vapour
Cathode coated with
electron emitting material
and fitted with
cathode shield
FIGURE 10.24
Fluorescent lamp construction.
producing invisible ultraviolet light and some blue light. The ﬂ uorescent 
powder on the inside of the glass tube is very sensitive to ultraviolet rays 
and converts this radiation into visible light.
Fluorescent luminaires require a simple electrical circuit to initiate 
the ionization of the gas in the tube and a device to control the current 
once the arc is struck and the lamp is illuminated. Such a circuit is shown 
in Fig. 10.25.
A typical application for a ﬂ uorescent luminaire is in suspended ceiling 
lighting modules used in many commercial buildings.
The electrical relay
A relay is an electromagnetic switch operated by a solenoid. We looked at 
the action of a solenoid in Chapter 5 at Fig. 5.16. The solenoid in a relay 
operates a number of switch contacts as it moves under the electromagnetic 
Starter switch
Lamp
Choke
L
N
p.f.
correction
capacitor
FIGURE 10.25
Fluorescent lamp circuit arrangement.
Definition
A relay is an electromagnetic switch 
operated by a solenoid.

Alternating current theory and electrical machines
217
forces. Relays can be used to switch circuits on or off at a distance remotely. 
The energizing circuit, the solenoid, is completely separate to the switch 
contacts and, therefore, the relay can switch high voltage, high power cir-
cuits, from a low voltage switching circuit. This gives the relay many appli-
cations in motor control circuits, electronics and instrumentation systems. 
Figure 10.26 shows a simple relay.
Normally open
switch connection
Normally closed
switch connection
Solenoid coil
Common switch
connection
NO
NC
C
FIGURE 10.26
A simple relay.

1. The opposition to current ﬂ ow in an a.c. resistive circuit is called:
a. resistance
b. inductance
c. reactance
d. impedance.
2. The opposition to current ﬂ ow in an a.c. capacitive or inductive current is 
called:
a. resistance
b. inductance
c. reactance
d. impedance.
3. The total opposition to current ﬂ ow in any a.c. circuit is called:
a. resistance
b. inductance
c. reactance
d. impedance.
4. A straight line having deﬁ nite length and direction that represents to scale 
a quantity such as current voltage or impedance is called:
a. a series a.c. circuit
b. capacitive reactance
c. a phasor, as in diagram
d. the impedance triangle.
5. An a.c. series circuit has an inductive reactance of 4 Ω and a resistance 
of 3 Ω. The impedance of this circuit will be:
a. 5 Ω
b. 7 Ω
c. 12 Ω
d. 25 Ω.
6. An a.c. series circuit has a capacitive reactance of 12 Ω and a resistance 
of 9 Ω. The impedance of this current will be:
a. 3 Ω
b. 15 Ω
c. 20 Ω
d. 108 Ω.
Check Your Understanding
When you have completed the questions, check out the answers at the back 
of the book.
Note: more than one multiple choice answer may be correct.

Ch 10
219
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
 7. The inductive reactance of a 100 mH coil when connected to a 50 Hz
  supply will be:
 a. 5 Ω
 b. 20 Ω
 c. 31.42 Ω
 d. 31.42 kΩ.
 8. The capacitive reactance of a 100 F capacitor when connected to a
  50 Hz supply will be:
 a. 5 Ω
 b. 20 Ω
 c. 31.8 Ω
 d. 31.8 kΩ.
 9. A circuit with bad power factor causes:
 a. fall in the supply voltage
 b. an increase in the supply voltage
 c. more current to be taken from the supply
 d. less current to be taken from the supply.
10. One application for a series d.c. motor is:
 a. an electric train
 b. a microwave oven
 c. a central heating pump
 d. an electric drill.
11. One application for an a.c. induction motor is:
 a. an electric train
 b. a microwave oven
 c. a central heating pump
 d. an electric drill.
12. One application for a shaded pole a.c. motor is:
 a. an electric train
 b. a microwave oven
 c. a central heating pump
 d. an electric drill.

13. A step down transformer has 1000 turns on the primary winding and
   500 turns on the secondary winding. If the input voltage was 230 V 
the output voltage will be:
 a. 2 V
 b. 115 V
 c. 200 V
 d. 460 V.
14. An electromagnetic switch operated by a solenoid is one deﬁ nition of:
 a. a transformer
 b. an a.c. motor
 c. an relay
 d. an inductive coil.
15. Use a sketch with notes of explanation to describe ‘good’ and ‘bad’
  power factor.
16. State how power factor correction is achieved on:
 a. a fluorescent light fitting
 b. an electric motor.
17. Use a sketch to help you describe the meaning of the words:
 a. inductance
 b. mutual inductance.
18. Use a sketch with notes of explanation to describe how a force is 
applied to a conductor in a magnetic circuit and how this principle is 
applied to an electric motor.
19. Use a sketch with notes of explanation to show how a turning force is 
applied to the rotor and therefore, the drive shaft, of an electric motor.
20. Sketch the magnetic hysteresis loop of a magnetic material suitable for:
 a. a permanent magnet
 b. a transformer.
21. Give three applications for each of the following types of motor:
 a. a d.c. series motors
 b. an a.c. induction motor
 c. an a.c. split-phase motor
 d. an a.c. shaded pole motor.

 Polyphase or three-phase 
electrical systems  
 Ch 11 
221
 Unit 3 – Application of health and safety and electrical principles – Outcome 4 
 Underpinning knowledge: when you have completed this chapter you should be able to: 
●  state the meaning of a polyphase system 
●  describe the production or generation of electricity by a polyphase system 
●  describe the transmission of electricity 
●  describe the distribution of electricity 
●  state the reasons for  ‘ balancing ’ single-phase loads on a three-phase system 
●  distinguish between voltages and currents in a star and delta connected three-phase system 
O
o
4
t
three-phase sy
V
U
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
tem
tem
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply

Basic Electrical Installation Work
222
 Generation, transmission and distribution of 
electricity 
 Generation 
   Figure 4.5 of Chapter 4 shows a simple a.c. generator or alternator produc-
ing an a.c. waveform. We generate electricity in large modern power sta-
tions using the same basic principle of operation. However, in place of a 
single loop of wire, the power station alternator has a three-phase wind-
ing and powerful electromagnets. The generated voltage is three identical 
sinusoidal waveforms each separated by 120° as shown in  Fig. 11.1.    The 
prime mover is not, of course, a simple crank handle, but a steam turbine. 
Hot water is heated until it becomes superheated steam, which drives the 
vanes of a steam turbine which is connected to the alternator. The heat 
required to produce the steam may come from burning coal or oil or from 
a nuclear reactor. Whatever the primary source of energy is, it is only being 
used to drive a turbine which is connected to an alternator, to generate 
electricity.
North pole
South pole
Grey
Black
Brown phase
Rotating
coil
120°
120°
120°
Brown
Voltage
Time
Black
Grey
Brown
Black
 FIGURE 11.1 
 Generation of a three-phase voltage. 
 Key Fact
Information 
   The individual conductors on the 
National Grid Network are only about 
2.5  cm in diameter because they oper-
ate of very high voltage. 
  Transmission 
   Electricity is generated in the power station alternator at 25       kV. This electri-
cal energy is fed into a transformer to be stepped up to a very high voltage 
for transmission on the National Grid Network at 400  kV, 275  kV or 132  kV. 
These very high voltages are necessary because, for a given power, the 
current is greatly reduced, which means smaller grid conductors and the 
transmission losses are reduced. 
  The National Grid Network consists of over 5,000 miles of overhead alu-
minium conductors suspended from steel pylons which link together all the 
power stations. Environmentalists say that these steel towers are ugly, but 
this method is about 16 times cheaper than the equivalent underground 
cable at these high voltages.  Figure 11.2    shows a transmission line steel 
pylon. 

Polyphase or three-phase electrical systems
223
   Electricity is taken from the National Grid by appropriately located sub-
stations which eventually transform the voltage down to 11       kV at a local 
sub-station. At the local sub-station the neutral conductor is formed for 
single-phase domestic supplies and three-phase supplies to shops, ofﬁ ces 
and garages. These supplies are usually underground radial supplies from 
the local sub-station, but in rural areas we still see transformers and over-
head lines suspended on wooden poles.        Figures 11.3 and 11.4      give an over-
view of the system from power station to consumer. 
Generation at
25kV
Transmission
on Supergrid
at
400 and
275kV
Distribution
around
area companies at
132 kV
Primary distribution
to local substations
supplying industrial
and commercial
consumers at
11 kV
Generation
and
transmission
of electricity
Distribution
of
electricity
 Transformer
Small industrial
and domestic
consumers at
400 V/230 V
 FIGURE 11.3 
 Generation, transmission and distribution of electrical energy. 
 FIGURE 11.2 
 Transmission line steel pylon. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
224
 Distribution to the consumer 
  The electricity leaves the local sub-station and arrives at the consumer’s 
main’s intake position. The ﬁ nal connections are usually by simple under-
ground radial feeders at 400  V/230   V. Underground cable distribution is 
preferred within a city, town or village because people ﬁ nd the overhead 
distribution, which we see in rural and remote areas, unsightly. Also, at 
these lower distribution voltages, the cost of underground cables is not 
prohibitive. The 400  V/230  V is derived from the 11  kV/400  V sub-station 
transformer by connecting the secondary winding in star as shown in  Fig. 
11.5   . The star point is earthed to an earth electrode sunk into the ground 
below the sub-station and from this point is taken the fourth conductor, 
and the neutral. Loads connected between phases are fed at 400        V and 
those fed between one phase and neutral at 230       V. A three-phase 400        V 
supply is used for supplying small industrial and commercial loads such as 
garages, schools and blocks of ﬂ ats. A single-phase 230   V supply is usually 
provided for individual domestic consumers. 
Power
station
25kV
Transformer
132kV to
33kV
Transformer
400 kV or
275 kV
to 132 kV
Light industry
11kV
400 V
Local garage
230 V
Shops
230 V
Houses
Underground distribution 400/230 volt
Underground distribution
230 V
Small
offices
Overhead
transmission lines
400 kV, 275 kV or
132 kV
Heavy industry
33 kV
Transformer
33kV to
11 kV
Local
sub-station
11kV to
400V
 FIGURE 11.4 
 Simpliﬁ ed diagram of the distribution of electricity from power station to consumer. 

Polyphase or three-phase electrical systems
225
   At the main’s intake position, the supplier will provide a sealed HBC fuse 
and a sealed energy meter to measure the consumer’s electricity consump-
tion. It is after this point that we reach the consumer’s installation. 
 Balancing single-phase loads 
   A three-phase load such as a motor has equally balanced phases since the 
resistance of each phase winding will be the same. Therefore, the current 
taken by each phase will be equal. When connecting single-phase loads to 
a three-phase supply, care should be taken to distribute the single-phase 
loads equally across the three phases so that each phase carries approxi-
mately the same current. Equally distributing the single-phase loads across 
the three-phase supply is known as  ‘ balancing ’  the load. A lighting load of 
18 luminaires would be  ‘ balanced ’  if six luminaires were connected to each 
of the three phases. 
 Star and delta connections 
  The three-phase windings of an a.c. generator may be star connected or 
delta connected as shown in  Fig. 11.6   . The important relationship between 
phase and line currents and voltages is also shown. The square root of 3 
( 3) is simply a constant for three-phase circuits, and has a value of 1.732. 
The delta connection is used for electrical power transmission because 
only three conductors are required. Delta connection is also used to 
400 V
Three-phase
and neutral load
Brown phase
Black phase
Grey phase
Blue neutral
Substation transformer
11kV/400V
11kV
400 V
400 V
Three-phase
load
230 V
Single-
phase
load
230 V
Single-
phase
load
230 V
Single-
phase
load
400 V
Single-
phase
load
 FIGURE 11.5 
 Three-phase four-wire distribution. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
226
connect the windings of most three-phase motors because the phase 
windings are perfectly balanced and, therefore, do not require a neutral 
connection.
   Making a star connection at the local sub-station has the advantage that 
two voltages become available – a line voltage of 400       V between any two 
phases, and a phase voltage of 230       V between line and neutral which is 
connected to the star point. 
   In any star-connected system currents ﬂ ow along the lines ( IL ), through the 
load and return by the neutral conductor connected to the star point. In a 
balanced  three-phase system all currents have the same value and when 
they are added up by phasor addition, we ﬁ nd the resultant current is 
zero. Therefore, no current ﬂ ows in the neutral and the star point is at zero 
volts. The star point of the distribution transformer is earthed because 
earth is also at zero potential. A star-connected system is also called a 
three-phase four-wire system and allows us to connect single-phase loads 
to a three-phase system. 
 Three-phase power 
  We know from our single-phase alternating current theory in Chapter 10 
that power can be found from the following formula: 
Power
 cos  (W)
 VI
φ
   In any balanced three-phase system, the total power is equal to three times 
the power in any one-phase. 
∴Total three-phase power
 cos  (W)
P P
 3V I
φ
 
 (11.1) 
IL
IL
IL
VL
VL
IP
IL
IL
IL
IP
VP
IP
IP
IP
IP
N
VP
VL  3  VP 
Star
IL  IP
connection:
Delta
IL  3  IP
VL  VP  
connection:
 FIGURE 11.6 
 Star and delta connections. 

Polyphase or three-phase electrical systems
227
 Now for a star connection, 
V
V
I
I
P
L
L
P
and


3
 
 (11.2) 
 Substituting Equation (11.2) into Equation (11.1), we have: 
Total three-phase power
 
 cos  (W)
L
L

3 V L
φ
 Now consider a delta connection: 
V
V
I
I
P
L
P
L
and


3  
 (11.3) 
   Substituting Equation (11.3) into Equation (11.1) we have, for any balanced 
three-phase load, 
Total three-phase power
 
 cos  (W)
L
L

3 V L
φ
 so, a general Equation for three-phase power is: 
Power =
 
 cos
L L
3 V I
φ
 Example 1 
 A balanced star-connected three-phase load of 10  Ω per phase is supplied from a 400  V, 50  Hz 
mains supply at unity power factor. Calculate (a) the phase voltage, (b) the line current and (c) 
the total power consumed. 
 For a star connection, 
 V
V
I
I
L
P
L
P
 
and


3
 
 For (a), 
 
V
V
V
P
L
P
 
(V)
V
V



3
400
1 732
230 9
.
.
 
 For (b), 
 
I
I
V
R
I
I
L
P
P
P
L
P
 (A)
V
A





230 9
10
23 09
.
.
Ω
 
 For (c), 
 
Power
 
  cos  (W)
Power
V
A
kW
L
L




 
3
1 732
400
23 09
1
16
V I
φ
∴
.
.
 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
228
 Example 2 
 A 20  kW, 400  V balanced delta-connected load has a power factor of 0.8. Calculate (a) the line 
current and (b) the phase current. 
  We have that: 
 Three-phase power
 
  cos  (W)
L
L

3 V I
φ
 
 For (a), 
 
I
V
I
I
L
L
L
L
Power
 
 cos
 (A)
W
V
(A)





3
20 000
1 732
400
0 8
36 08
φ
∴
,
.
.
.
 
 For delta connection, 
l
l
L
P 
(A)

3
  Thus, for (b), 
 
I
I
I
P
L
P
/
(A)
A
A



3
36 08
1 732
20 83
∴
.
.
.
 
 Example 3 
  Three identical loads each having a resistance of 30     Ω and inductive reactance of 40  Ω are 
connected fi rst in star and then in delta to a 400-V three-phase supply. Calculate the phase 
currents and line currents for each connection. 
 For each load, 
 
Z
R
X
Z
Z






2
2
2
2
30
40
2500
50
L  ( )
Ω
∴
Ω  
 For star connection, 
 
V
V
I
I
V
V
V
I
V
Z
I
L
P
L
P
P
L
P
P
P
P
P
 
and
 
V
V
V
(A)






3
3
400
1 732
230 9
( )
.
.
∴
∴



230 9
50
4 62
.
.
V
A
P
L
Ω
I
I
 

Polyphase or three-phase electrical systems
229
 therefore phase and line currents are both equal to 4.62  A. 
 For delta connection, 
 
V
V
I
I
V
V
I
V
Z
I
I
I
L
P
L
P
L
P
P
P
P
L
P
and
 
V
 (A)
V
A
  








3
400
400
50
8
3
/
∴
Ω
(A)
A
A
L
∴I 


1 732
8
13 86
.
.
 

  When you have completed the questions, check out the answers at the back 
of the book. 
 Note: more than one multiple choice answer may be correct. 
 Check your Understanding 
 1.  Electricity is generated in large commercial power stations at: 
  a.   230   V  
  b.  400   V  
  c.   25   kV  
  d.   132   kV.  
 2.  Transmission of electricity on the National Grid network takes place at: 
  a.   230   V  
  b.  400   V  
  c.   25   kV  
  d.   132   kV.  
 3.  Electricity is transmitted at very high voltages because for a given
power the: 
  a.   current is reduced  
  b.  current is increased  
  c.   losses are reduced  
  d.   losses are increased.  
 4.  Electricity is distributed from the local sub-stations by underground 
cables at: 
  a.   230   V  
  b.  400   V  
  c.   25   kV  
  d.   132   kV.  
 5.  A load connected to the three phases of a star-connected three-phase 
four-wire supply system from the local sub-station would have a 
voltage of: 
  a.   230   V  
  b.  400   V  
  c.   25   kV  
  d.   132   kV.  

Ch 11
231
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
 6.   A load connected to phase and neutral of a star-connected three-
   phase four-wire supply system from the local sub-station would have 
a voltage of: 
 
  a.  230   V  
 
  b.   400   V  
  
c.  25  kV  
  
d.   132  kV.  
 7.  The phase voltage of a star connected load is 100   V. The line voltage 
  will be: 
 
  a.  57.73  V  
 
  b.   100   V  
 
  c.  173.2  V  
 
  d.  230  V.  
 8.  The phase voltage of a delta connected load is 100   V. The line voltage
  will be: 
 
  a.  57.73   V  
 
  b.   100  V  
 
  c.  173.2  V  
 
  d.   230  V.  
 9.  The phase current of a star connected load is 100   A. The line current 
  will be: 
 
  a.  57.73  A  
 
  b.   100  A  
 
  c.  173.2  A  
 
  d.  230  A.  
 10.   The phase current of a delta connected load is 100   A. The line current
  will be: 
 
  a.  57.73  A  
 
  b.   100  A  
 
  c.  173.2  A  
 
  d.  230  A.  

 11.  State the meaning of a  ‘ polyphase supply system ’ . 
 12.  State the standard voltages used for generation, transmission and 
distribution in the United Kingdom.  
 13.  Environmentalists often say that steel transmission towers are a 
 ‘ blot on the landscape ’ . Why do we continue to use steel towers for 
transmission on the National Grid network?  
 14.  Why is the distribution from local sub-stations to end users, for the 
most part, by underground cables in the United Kingdom?  
 15.  State the reasons for balancing single-phase loads across a three-
phase supply. 
 16.  Brieﬂ y describe how and why we generate a three-phase supply 
compared to a single-phase supply.  
 17.  What are the advantages of connecting a three-phase supply: 
 
  a.  in delta  
 
  b.   in star  .

 Overcurrent, short circuit and 
earth fault protection  
 Ch 12 
233
 Unit 3 – Application of health and safety and electrical principles – Outcome 5 
 Underpinning knowledge: when you have completed this chapter you should be able to: 
●  state the need for protective devices 
●  list the factors on which the selection of a protective device depends 
●  list the essential requirements for a device designed to protect against overcurrent 
●  state the action of a fuse under fault conditions 
●  state the need for  ‘ discrimination ’ when a number of protective devices are ﬁ tted 
●  identify exposed and extraneous parts of a building 
●  state the path taken by an earth fault current 
●  state the need for RCDs and RCBOs 
●  state the meaning of  ‘ Basic ’ and  ‘ Fault ’ protection 
O
o
5
vercurre
are ﬁ tted
vercurreent
e
vercurre
v
ov
V
U
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply

Basic Electrical Installation Work
234
 Protecting electrical equipment, circuits and people 
  We know from the earlier chapters in this book that using electricity is one 
of the causes of accidents in the workplace. Using electricity is a hazard 
because it has the  ‘ potential ’  and the possibility to cause harm. Therefore, 
the provision of protective devices in an electrical installation is fundamen-
tal to the whole concept of the safe use of electricity in buildings. The elec-
trical installation as a whole must be protected against overload or short 
circuit and the people using the building must be protected against the risk 
of shock, ﬁ re or other risks arising from their own misuse of the installation 
or from a fault. The installation and maintenance of adequate and appro-
priate protective measures is a vital part of the safe use of electrical energy. 
I want to look at protection against an electric shock by both basic and fault 
protection, at protection by equipotential bonding and automatic discon-
nection of the supply, and protection against excess current. 
 Let us ﬁ rst deﬁ ne some of the words we will be using. Chapter 54 of the IEE 
Regulations describes the earthing arrangements for an electrical installa-
tion. It gives the following deﬁ nitions: 
Earth – the conductive mass of the earth. Whose electrical potential is 
taken as zero. 
Earthing – the act of connecting the exposed conductive parts of an instal-
lation to the main protective earthing terminal of the installation. 
Bonding conductor – a protective conductor providing equipotential 
bonding.
Bonding – the linking together of the exposed or extraneous metal parts of 
an electrical installation. 
Circuit protective conductor (CPC) – a protective conductor connecting 
exposed conductive parts of equipment to the main earthing terminal. 
This is the green and yellow insulated conductor in twin and earth cable. 
Exposed conductive parts – the metalwork of an electrical appliance or 
the trunking and conduit of an electrical system which can be touched 
because they are not normally live, but which may become live under fault 
conditions. 
Extraneous conductive parts – the structural steelwork of a building and 
other service pipes such as gas, water, radiators and sinks. They do not 
form a part of the electrical installation but may introduce a potential, gen-
erally earth potential, to the electrical installation. 
Shock protection – protection from electric shock is provided by basic pro-
tection and fault protection.
Basic protection – is provided by the insulation of live parts in accordance 
with Section 416 of the IEE Regulations. 
Fault protection – is provided by protective equipotential bonding and 
automatic disconnection of the supply (by a fuse or miniature circuit 
breaker, MCB) in accordance with IEE Regulations 411.3 to 6. 
 Definitions  
 Earth – the conductive mass of the 
earth. Whose electrical potential is 
taken as zero. 
 Earthing – the act of connecting the 
exposed conductive parts of an instal-
lation to the main protective earthing 
terminal of the installation. 
 Bonding conductor  – a protective 
conductor providing equipotential 
bonding. 
 Bonding  – the linking together of the 
exposed or extraneous metal parts of 
an electrical installation. 
 Circuit protective conductor (CPC)  – a 
protective 
conductor 
connecting 
exposed conductive parts of equip-
ment to the main earthing terminal. 
 Exposed conductive parts  – the met-
alwork of an electrical appliance or 
the trunking and conduit of an elec-
trical system which can be touched 
because they are not normally live, 
but which may become live under 
fault conditions. 
 Extraneous conductive parts  – the 
structural steelwork of a building and 
other service pipes such as gas, water, 
radiators and sinks. 
 Shock protection  – protection from 
electric shock is provided by basic 
protection and fault protection. 
 Basic protection  – is provided by the 
insulation of live parts in accord-
ance with Section 416 of the IEE 
Regulations. 
 Fault protection  – is provided by pro-
tective equipotential bonding and 
automatic disconnection of the sup-
ply (by a fuse or miniature circuit 
breaker, MCB) in accordance with IEE 
Regulations 411.3 to 6. 

Overcurrent, short circuit and earth fault protection
235
Protective equipotential bonding – this is equipotential bonding for the 
purpose of safety as shown in Fig. 6.7 of this book.
 Try This  
 Defi nitions 
 ● 
 to help you to remember these defi nitions 
 
 try writing them out in your own words 
 ● 
 just identify the essential words. 
 Basic protection and fault protection 
  The human body’s movements are controlled by the nervous system. Very 
tiny electrical signals travel between the central nervous system and the 
muscles, stimulating operation of the muscles, which enable us to walk, 
talk and run and remember that the heart is also a muscle. 
 If the body becomes part of a more powerful external circuit, such as the 
electrical mains, and current ﬂ ows through it, the body’s normal electrical 
operations are disrupted. The shock current causes unnatural operation 
of the muscles and the result may be that the person is unable to release 
the live conductor causing the shock, or the person may be thrown across 
the room. The current which ﬂ ows through the body is determined by the 
resistance of the human body and the surface resistance of the skin on the 
hands and feet. 
  This leads to the consideration of exceptional precautions where people 
with wet skin or wet surfaces are involved, and the need for special consid-
eration in bathroom installations. 
  Two types of contact will result in a person receiving an electric shock. 
Direct contact with live parts which involves touching a terminal or line 
conductor that is actually live. The Regulations call this basic protection. 
Indirect contact results from contact with an exposed conductive part such 
as the metal structure of a piece of equipment that has become live as a 
result of a fault. The Regulations call this fault protection. 
   In installations operating at normal mains voltage, the primary method of 
protection against direct contact is by insulation. All live parts are enclosed 
in insulating material such as rubber or plastic, which prevents contact 
with those parts. The insulating material must, of course, be suitable for 
the circumstances in which they will be used and the stresses to which 
they will be subjected. The IEE Regulations call this basic protection (IEE 
Regulation 131.2.1). 
   Other methods of basic protection include the provision of barriers or 
enclosures which can only be opened by the use of a tool, or when the sup-
ply is ﬁ rst disconnected. Protection can also be provided by ﬁ xed obstacles 
such as a guardrail around an open switchboard or by placing live parts out 
of reach as with overhead lines. 
Definition
 Protective equipotential bonding – this 
is equipotential bonding for the pur-
pose of safety as shown in Fig. 6.7 of 
this book. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
236
 Fault protection 
   Protection against indirect contact, called fault protection (IEE Regulation 
131.2.2) is achieved by connecting exposed conductive parts of equipment 
to the main protective earthing terminal. 
   In Chapter 13 of the IEE Regulations we are told that where the metalwork 
of electrical equipment may become charged with electricity in such a 
manner as to cause danger, that metalwork will be connected with earth 
so as to discharge the electrical energy without danger. The application 
of protective equipotential bonding is one of the important principles for 
safety. 
 There are ﬁ ve methods of protection against contact with metalwork which 
has become unintentionally live, that is, indirect contact with exposed con-
ductive parts recognized by the IEE Regulations. These are: 
 1.  protective equipotential bonding coupled with automatic discon-
nection of the supply, 
 2.  the use of Class II (double insulated) equipment, 
 3.  the provision of a non-conducting location, 
 4.  the use of earth free equipotential bonding, 
 5.  electrical separation. 
   Methods 3 and 4 are limited to special situations under the effective super-
vision of trained personnel. 
   Method 5, electrical separation, is little used but does ﬁ nd an application 
in the domestic electric shaver supply unit which incorporates an isolating 
transformer. 
   Method 2, the use of Class II insulated equipment is limited to single 
pieces of equipment such as tools used on construction sites, because it 
relies upon effective supervision to ensure that no metallic equipment or 
extraneous earthed metalwork enters the area of the installation. 
  The method which is most universally used in the United Kingdom is, 
therefore, Method 1 – protective equipotential bonding coupled with auto-
matic disconnection of the supply. 
  This method relies upon all exposed metalwork being electrically con-
nected together to an effective earth connection. Not only must all the 
metalwork associated with the electrical installation be so connected, 
that is conduits, trunking, metal switches and the metalwork of electri-
cal appliances, but Regulation 411.3.1.2 tells us to connect the extrane-
ous metalwork of water service pipes, gas and other service pipes and 
ducting, central heating and air conditioning systems, exposed metallic 
structural parts of the building and lightning protective systems to the pro-
tective earthing terminal. In this way the possibility of a voltage appear-
ing between two exposed metal parts is removed. Protective equipotential 
bonding is shown in Fig. 6.7 in Chapter 6. 

Overcurrent, short circuit and earth fault protection
237
  The second element of this protection method is the provision of a means 
of automatic disconnection of the supply in the event of a fault occurring 
that causes the exposed metalwork to become live. 
   IEE Regulation 411.3.2 tells us that for ﬁ nal circuits not exceeding 32  A the 
maximum disconnection time shall not exceed 0.4  s. 
  The achievement of these disconnection times is dependent upon the 
type of protective device used, fuse or circuit breaker, the circuit conduc-
tors to the fault and the provision of adequate protective equipotential 
bonding. The resistance, or we call it the impedance, of the earth fault loop 
must be less than the values given in Appendix 2 of the  On Site Guide and 
Tables 41.2 to 41.4 of the IEE Regulations. ( Table 12.2  later in this chapter 
shows the maximum value of the earth fault loop impedance for circuits 
protected by MCBs to BS EN 60898.) We will look at this again later in this 
chapter under the heading  ‘ Earth Fault Loop Impedance  ZS ’ . Chapter 54 
of the IEE Regulations gives details of the earthing arrangements to be 
incorporated in the supply system to meet these Regulations and these are 
described in Chapter 14 of this book, under the heading  ‘ Electricity supply 
systems ’ . 
 Residual current protection 
  The IEE Regulations recognize the particular problems created when elec-
trical equipment such as lawnmowers, hedge-trimmers, drills and lights 
are used outside buildings. In these circumstances the availability of an 
adequate earth return path is a matter of chance. The Regulations, there-
fore, require that any socket outlet with a rated current not exceeding 20       A, 
for use by ordinary people and intended for general use shall have the 
additional protection of a residual current device (RCD) which has a rated 
operating current of not more than 30 milliamperes (mA) (IEE Regulation 
411.3.3).
 Try This  
 Defi nitions 
 ● 
 What do the Regulations mean by   ‘ ordinary people ’ ? 
 ● 
 Look back at the defi nitions in Chapter 2 and write it in the margin here. 
   An RCD is a type of circuit breaker that continuously compares the current 
in the line and neutral conductors of the circuit. The currents in a healthy 
circuit will be equal, but in a circuit that develops a fault, some current will 
ﬂ ow to earth and the line and neutral currents will no longer balance. The 
RCD detects the imbalance and disconnects the circuit.  Figure 12.8  later in 
this chapter shows an RCD’s construction. 
 Isolation and switching 
   Part 4 of the IEE Regulations deals with the application of protective mea-
sures for safety and Chapter 53 with the regulations for switching devices 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
238
or switchgear required for protection, isolation and switching of a consum-
er’s installation. 
  The consumer’s main switchgear must be readily accessible to the con-
sumer and be able to: 
●  isolate the complete installation from the supply, 
●  protect against overcurrent, 
●  cut off the current in the event of a serious fault occurring. 
  The Regulations identify four separate types of switching: switching for iso-
lation, switching for mechanical maintenance, emergency switching and 
functional switching. 
Isolation is deﬁ ned as cutting off the electrical supply to a circuit or item 
of equipment in order to ensure the safety of those working on the equip-
ment by making dead those parts which are live in normal service.
 Definition  
 Isolation  is defi ned as cutting off  the 
electrical supply to a circuit or item 
of equipment in order to ensure the 
safety of those working on the equip-
ment by making dead those parts 
which are live in normal service. 
The purpose  of isolation switching is to enable electrical work to be car-
ried out safely on an isolated circuit or piece of equipment.  Isolation is 
intended for use by electrically skilled or supervised persons. 
   An isolator is a mechanical device which is operated manually and used to 
open or close a circuit off load. An isolator switch must be provided close to 
the supply point so that all equipment can be made safe for maintenance. 
Isolators for motor circuits must isolate the motor and the control equip-
ment, and isolators for discharge lighting luminaires must be an integral 
part of the luminaire so that it is isolated when the cover is removed or be 
provided with effective local isolation (Regulation 537.2.1.6). Devices which 
are suitable for isolation are isolation switches, fuse links, circuit breakers, 
plugs and socket outlets. They must isolate all live supply conductors and 
provision must be made to secure the isolation (IEE Regulation 537.2.2.4). 
   Isolation at the consumer’s service position can be achieved by a double 
pole switch which opens or closes all conductors simultaneously. On three-
phase supplies the switch need only break the live conductors with a solid 
link in the neutral, provided that the neutral link cannot be removed before 
opening the switch. 
The switching for mechanical maintenance requirements is similar to 
those for isolation except that the control switch must be capable of switch-
ing the full load current of the circuit or piece of equipment.
 Definition  
 The switching for mechanical mainte-
nance  requirements is similar to those 
for isolation except that the control 
switch must be capable of switching 
the full load current of the circuit or 
piece of equipment. 
  The purpose of switching for mechanical maintenance is to enable non-
electrical work to be carried out safely on the switched circuit or equipment. 
Mechanical maintenance  switching is intended for use by skilled but non-
electrical persons. Switches for mechanical maintenance must be manu-
ally operated, not have exposed live parts when the appliance is opened, 
must be connected in the main electrical circuit and have a reliable on/off 
indication or visible contact gap (Regulations 537.3.2.2). Devices which are 
suitable for switching off for mechanical maintenance are switches, circuit 
breakers, plug and socket outlets. 

Overcurrent, short circuit and earth fault protection
239
Emergency switching involves the rapid disconnection of the electrical 
supply by a single action to remove or prevent danger.
 Definition  
 Emergency switching  involves the 
rapid disconnection of the electrical 
supply by a single action to remove 
or prevent danger. 
The purpose of emergency switching is to cut off the electrical energy  rap-
idly to remove an unexpected hazard. 
Emergency switching is for use by anyone. The device used for emergency 
switching must be immediately accessible and identiﬁ able, and be capable 
of cutting off the full load current.
   Electrical machines must be provided with a means of emergency switch-
ing, and a person operating an electrically driven machine must have 
access to an emergency switch so that the machine can be stopped in an 
emergency. The remote stop/start arrangement could meet this require-
ment for an electrically driven machine (Regulations 537.4.2.2). Devices 
which are suitable for emergency switching are switches, circuit break-
ers and contactors. Where contactors are operated by remote control they 
should open  when the coil is de-energized, that is, fail safe. Push-buttons 
used for emergency switching must be coloured red and latch in the stop 
or off position. They should be installed where danger may arise and be 
clearly identiﬁ ed as emergency switches. Plugs and socket outlets cannot 
be considered appropriate for emergency disconnection of supplies. 
Functional switching involves the switching on or off, or varying the sup-
ply, of electrically operated equipment in normal service.
 Definition  
 Functional switching  
involves 
the 
switching on or off , or varying the 
supply, of electrically operated equip-
ment in normal service. 
The purpose  of functional switching is to provide control of electrical cir-
cuits and equipment in normal service. 
  Functional switching is for the user of the electrical installation or equipment. 
The device must be capable of interrupting the total steady current of the cir-
cuit or appliance. When the device controls a discharge lighting circuit it must 
have a current rating capable of switching an inductive load. The Regulations 
acknowledge the growth in the number of electronic dimmer switches being 
used for the control and functional switching of lighting circuits. The func-
tional switch must be capable of performing the most demanding duty it may 
be called upon to perform (IEE Regulations 537.5.2.1 and 2).
 Safety First  
 Isolation 
 Isolation and switching for protection 
is an important safety measure in the 
electrotechnical industry .
 Overcurrent protection 
  The consumer’s mains equipment must provide protection against overcur-
rent, that is a current exceeding the rated value (Regulation 430.3). Fuses 
provide overcurrent protection when situated in the live conductors; they 
must not be connected in the neutral conductor. Circuit breakers may be 
used in place of fuses, in which case the circuit breaker may also provide the 
means of isolation, although a further means of isolation is usually provided 
so that maintenance can be carried out on the circuit breakers themselves. 
  When selecting a protective device we must give consideration to the fol-
lowing factors: 
●  the prospective fault current, 
●  the circuit load characteristics, 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
240
●  the current carrying capacity of the cable, 
●  the disconnection time requirements for the circuit. 
  The essential requirements for a device designed to protect against over-
current are: 
●  it must operate automatically under fault conditions, 
●  have a current rating matched to the circuit design current, 
●  have a disconnection time which is within the design parameters, 
●  have an adequate fault breaking capacity, 
●  be suitably located and identiﬁ ed. 
 We will look at these requirements below. 
   An overcurrent may be an overload current, or a short-circuit current. An
overload current can be deﬁ ned as a current which exceeds the rated value 
in an otherwise healthy circuit. Overload currents usually occur because the 
circuit is abused or because it has been badly designed or modiﬁ ed. A short 
circuit is an overcurrent resulting from a fault of negligible impedance con-
nected between conductors. Short circuits usually occur as a result of an 
accident which could not have been predicted before the event.
 Definitions  
 An  overload current  can be defi ned 
as a current which exceeds the rated 
value in an otherwise healthy circuit. 
 A  short circuit  is an overcurrent result-
ing from a fault of negligible imped-
ance connected between conductors. 
   An overload may result in currents of two or three times the rated current 
ﬂ owing in the circuit. Short-circuit currents may be hundreds of times 
greater than the rated current. In both cases the basic requirements for 
protection are that the fault currents should be interrupted quickly and the 
circuit isolated safely before the fault current causes a temperature rise or 
mechanical effects which might damage the insulation, connections, joints 
and terminations of the circuit conductors or their surroundings (IEE 
Regulation 130.3). 
  The selected protective device should have a current rating which is not 
less than the full load current of the circuit but which does not exceed the 
cable current rating. The cable is then fully protected against both overload 
and short-circuit faults (Regulation 435.1). Devices which provide overcur-
rent protection are: 
●      High breaking capacity (HBC) fuses to BS 88-6. These are for indus-
trial applications having a maximum fault capacity of 80  kA. 
  ●      Cartridge fuses to BS 1361. These are used for a.c. circuits on industrial 
and domestic installations having a fault capacity of about 30  kA.  
●      Cartridge fuses to BS 1362. These are used in 13  A plug tops and have 
a maximum fault capacity of about 6  kA. 
●      Semi-enclosed fuses to BS 3036. These were previously called re-
wirable fuses and are used mainly on domestic installations having a 
maximum fault capacity of about 4  kA. 
●      MCBs to BS EN 60898. These are miniature circuit breakers (MCBs) 
which may be used as an alternative to fuses for some installations. 

Overcurrent, short circuit and earth fault protection
241
The British Standard includes ratings up to 100       A and maximum fault 
capacities of 9  kA. They are graded according to their instantaneous 
tripping currents – that is, the current at which they will trip within 
100  ms. This is less than the time taken to blink an eye. 
By deﬁ nition a fuse is the weakest link in the circuit. Under fault conditions 
it will melt when an overcurrent ﬂ ows, protecting the circuit conductors 
from damage. 
 Definition  
 By defi nition a  fuse  is the weakest link 
in the circuit. Under fault conditions it 
will melt when an overcurrent fl ows, 
protecting the circuit conductors 
from damage. 
 Semi-enclosed fuses (BS 3036) 
  The semi-enclosed fuse consists of a fuse wire, called the fuse element, 
secured between two screw terminals in a fuse carrier. The fuse element is 
connected in series with the load and the thickness of the element is sufﬁ -
cient to carry the normal rated circuit current. When a fault occurs an over-
current ﬂ ows and the fuse element becomes hot and melts or  ‘ blows ’ . 
  This type of fuse is illustrated in  Fig. 12.1   . The fuse element should consist 
of a single strand of plan or tinned copper wire having a diameter appro-
priate to the current rating of the fuse.  This type of fuse was very popular in 
domestic installations, but less so these days because of their disadvantages.
  ADVANTAGE OF SEMI-ENCLOSED FUSES 
●      They are very cheap compared with other protective devices both to 
install and to replace. 
●  There are no mechanical moving parts. 
●  It is easy to identify a  ‘ blown ’ fuse. 
  DISADVANTAGES OF SEMI-ENCLOSED FUSES 
●      The fuse element may be replaced with wire of the wrong size either 
deliberately or by accident. 
●      The fuse element weakens with age due to oxidization, which may 
result in a failure under normal operating conditions. 
  ●      The circuit cannot be restored quickly since the fuse element requires 
screw ﬁ xing.  
●      They have low breaking capacity since, in the event of a severe fault, 
the fault current may vaporize the fuse element and continue to ﬂ ow 
in the form of an arc across the fuse terminals. 
●      They are not guaranteed to operate until up to twice the rated cur-
rent is ﬂ owing. 
●      There is a danger from scattering hot metal if the fuse carrier is 
inserted into the base when the circuit is faulty. 
 Cartridge fuses (BS 1361) 
  The cartridge fuse breaks a faulty circuit in the same way as a semi-
enclosed fuse, but its construction eliminates some of the disadvantages 
experienced with an open-fuse element. The fuse element is encased in a 
glass or ceramic tube and secured to end-caps which are ﬁ rmly attached 
Screws
securing
fuse element
Fuse
carrier
Fuse
element
 FIGURE 12.1 
 A semi-enclosed fuse. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
242
to the body of the fuse so that they do not blow off when the fuse oper-
ates. Cartridge fuse construction is illustrated in  Fig. 12.2   . With larger size 
cartridge fuses, lugs or tags are sometimes brazed on the end-caps to ﬁ x 
the fuse cartridge mechanically to the carrier. They may also be ﬁ lled with 
quartz sand to absorb and extinguish the energy of the arc when the car-
tridge is brought into operation. 
  ADVANTAGES OF CARTRIDGE FUSES 
●  They have no mechanical moving parts. 
●  The declared rating is accurate. 
●  The element does not weaken with age. 
●      They have small physical size and no external arcing which permits 
their use in plug tops and small fuse carriers. 
●      Their operation is more rapid than semi-enclosed fuses. Operating 
time is inversely proportional to the fault current, so the bigger the 
fault current the quicker the fuse operates. 
●  They are easy to replace. 
  DISADVANTAGES OF CARTRIDGE FUSES 
●      They are more expensive to replace than fuse elements that can be 
re-wired. 
●  They can be replaced with an incorrect cartridge. 
●      The cartridge may be shorted out by wire or silver foil in extreme 
cases of bad practice. 
●  It is not possible to see if the fuse element is broken. 
 Miniature circuit breakers (BS EN 60898) 
  The disadvantage of all fuses is that when they have operated they must be 
replaced. An MCB overcomes this problem since it is an automatic switch 
which opens in the event of an excessive current ﬂ owing in the circuit and 
can be closed when the circuit returns to normal. 
   An MCB of the type shown in  Fig. 12.3    incorporates a thermal and mag-
netic tripping device. The load current ﬂ ows through the thermal and the 
Fuse element
Glass or ceramic body
End-cap
 FIGURE 12.2 
 Cartridge fuse. 

Overcurrent, short circuit and earth fault protection
243
electromagnetic devices in normal operation but under overcurrent condi-
tions they activate and trip the MCB. 
  The circuit can be restored when the fault is removed by pressing the ON 
toggle. This latches the various mechanisms within the MCB and  ‘ makes ’ 
the switch contact. The toggle switch can also be used to disconnect the 
circuit for maintenance or isolation or to test the MCB for satisfactory 
operation. 
  ADVANTAGES OF MCBs 
●  They have factory set operating characteristics. 
●      Tripping characteristics and therefore circuit protection is set by the 
installer.  
●  The circuit protection is difﬁ cult to interfere with. 
●  The circuit is provided with discrimination. 
●  A faulty circuit may be quickly identiﬁ ed. 
●  A faulty circuit may be easily and quickly restored. 
●  The supply may be safely restored by an unskilled operator. 
  DISADVANTAGES OF MCBs 
●      They are relatively expensive but look at the advantages to see why 
they are so popular these days. 
●      They contain mechanical moving parts and therefore require regular 
testing to ensure satisfactory operation under fault conditions. 
  CHARACTERISTICS OF MCBs 
MCB Type B to BS EN 60898  will trip instantly at between three and ﬁ ve 
times its rated current and is also suitable for domestic and commercial 
installations. 
 FIGURE 12.3 
 MCBs – B Breaker, ﬁ ts Wylex Standard consumer unit (Courtesy of Wylex). 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
244
MCB Type C to BS EN 60898  will trip instantly at between ﬁ ve and ten times 
its rated current. It is more suitable for highly inductive commercial and 
industrial loads. 
MCB Type D to BS EN 69898  will trip instantly at between 10 and 25 times 
its rated current. It is suitable for welding and X-ray machines where large 
inrush currents may occur. 
 Installing overcurrent protective devices 
  The general principle to be followed is that a protective device must be 
placed at a point where a reduction occurs in the current carrying capac-
ity of the circuit conductors (IEE Regulations 433.2 and 434.2). A reduction 
may occur because of a change in the size or type of conductor or because 
of a change in the method of installation or a change in the environmental 
conditions. The only exceptions to this rule are where an overload protec-
tive device opening a circuit might cause a greater danger than the over-
load itself – for example, a circuit feeding an overhead electromagnet in a 
scrapyard. 
 Fault protection 
  The overcurrent protection device protecting circuits not exceeding 32       A 
shall have a disconnection time not exceeding 0.4       s (IEE Regulations 
411.3.2.2).
  The IEE Regulations permit us to assume that where an overload protec-
tive device is also intended to provide short-circuit protection, and has a 
rated breaking capacity greater than the prospective short-circuit current 
at the point of its installation, the conductors on the load side of the pro-
tective device are considered to be adequately protected against short-cir-
cuit currents without further proof. This is because the cable rating and the 
overload rating of the device are compatible. However, if this condition is 
not met or if there is some doubt, it must be veriﬁ ed that fault currents will 
be interrupted quickly before they can cause a dangerously high tempera-
ture rise in the circuit conductors. Regulation 434.5.2 provides an equation
for calculating the maximum operating time of the protective device to 
prevent the permitted conductor temperature rise being exceeded as 
follows: 
t
k S
I

2
2
2
 (s)
 where 
t    duration time in seconds 
S    cross-sectional area of conductor in square millimetres 
I    short-circuit rms current in amperes 
k         a constant dependent upon the conductor metal and type of insula-
tion (see Table 43  A of the IEE Regulations).

Overcurrent, short circuit and earth fault protection
245
 Example 
 A 10  mm PVC sheathed mineral insulated (MI) copper cable is short circuited when 
connected to a 400  V supply. The impedance of the short-circuit path is 0.1  Ω . Calculate the 
maximum permissible disconnection time and show that a 50       A Type B MCB to BS EN 60898 
will meet this requirement. 
 
I
V
Z
I




 (A)
 V
0.1 
 A
 Fault current
 A
400
4000
4000
Ω
 
∴
 
 For PVC Sheathed MI copper cables, Table 43.1 gives a value for  k of 115. So, 
 
t
k S
I
t






2
2
2
2
2
2
3
115
10
4000
82 66
10
 (s)
mm
A
s
∴
.
 
  The maximum time that a 4000  A fault current can be applied to this 10  mm 2 cable without 
dangerously raising the conductor temperature is 82.66  ms. Therefore, the protective device 
must disconnect the supply to the cable in less than 82.66  ms under short-circuit conditions. 
Manufacturers ’ information and Appendix 3 of the IEE Regulations give the operating times of 
protective devices at various short-circuit currents in the form of graphs. Let us come back to 
this problem in a few moments. 
  Time/current characteristics of protective devices 
   Disconnection times for various overcurrent devices are given in the form 
of a logarithmic graph. This means that each successive graduation of the 
axis represents a 10 times change over the previous graduation. 
  These logarithmic scales are shown in the graphs of  Figs 12.4    and  12.5   . 
From  Fig. 12.4  it can be seen that the particular protective device repre-
sented by this characteristic will take 8       s to disconnect a fault current of 
50  A and 0.08  s to clear a fault current of 1000  A. 
   Let us now go back to the problem and see if the Type B MCB will discon-
nect the supply in less than 82.66  ms. 
10,000.0
1000.0
100.0
10.0
8.0s
1.0
0.1
0.08s
0.011
10
100
1000 10,000
100,000
50A
Fault current (rmsA)
Time (s)
Time
 FIGURE 12.4 
 Time/current characteristic of an overcurrent protective device. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
246
    Figure 12.5(a)  shows the time/current characteristics for a Type B MCB to 
BS EN 60898. This graph shows that a fault current of 4000       A will trip the 
protective device in 20  ms. Since this is quicker than 82.66  ms, the 50  A Type 
B MCB is suitable and will clear the fault current before the temperature of 
the cable is raised to a dangerous level. 
   Appendix 3 of the IEE Regulations gives the time/current characteristics 
and speciﬁ c values of prospective short-circuit current for a number of 
protective devices. 
  These indicate the value of fault current which will cause the protective 
device to operate in the times indicated by IEE Regulation 411. 
   Figures 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 in Appendix 3 of the IEE Regulations deal with fuses 
and Figs 3.4, 3.5 and 3.6 with MCBs. 
   It can be seen that the prospective fault current required to trip an MCB in 
the required time is a multiple of the current rating of the device. The mul-
tiple depends upon the characteristics of the particular devices. Thus: 
●  Type B MCB to BS EN 60898 has a multiple of 5 
●  Type C MCB to BS EN 60898 has a multiple of 10 
●  Type D MCB to BS EN 60898 has a multiple of 20. 
 Example 
 A 6  A Type B MCB to BS EN 60898 which is used to protect a domestic lighting circuit will trip 
within 0.4  s when 6  A times a multiple of 5, that is 30  A, fl ows under fault conditions. 
   Therefore if the earth fault loop impedance is low enough to allow at least 30       A to fl ow in the 
circuit under fault conditions, the protective device will operate within the time required by 
Regulation 411. 
  The characteristics shown in Appendix 3 of the IEE Regulations give the specifi c values of 
prospective short-circuit current for all standard sizes of protective device. 
 FIGURE 12.5 
 Time/current characteristics of (a) a Type B MCB to BS EN 60898 and (b) semi-enclosed fuse to
BS 3036. 
1
10
0.01
0.1
1.0
10.0
Time (s)
6A
10A
16A
20A
32A
50A
100.0
1000.0
10,000.0
20ms
100
1000
4000
Prospective current (rmsA)
(a)
10,000
100,000
5 A
15 A
30 A
60 A
(b)
1
10
0.01
0.1
1.0
10.0
Time (s)
100.0
1000.0
10,000.0
100
1000
Prospective current (rms A)
10,000
100,000
200
0.4

Overcurrent, short circuit and earth fault protection
247
 Effective discrimination of protective devices 
   In the event of a fault occurring on an electrical installation only the pro-
tective device nearest to the fault should operate, leaving other healthy cir-
cuits unaffected. A circuit designed in this way would be considered to have 
effective discrimination. Effective discrimination can be achieved by graded 
protection since the speed of operation of the protective device increases as 
the rating decreases. This can be seen in  Fig. 12.5(b) . A fault current of 200       A 
will cause a 15  A semi-enclosed fuse to operate in about 0.1  s, a 30  A semi-
enclosed fuse in about 0.4  s and a 60  A semi-enclosed fuse in about 5.0  s. If 
a circuit is arranged as shown in  Fig. 12.6    and a fault occurs on the appli-
ance, effective discrimination will be achieved because the 15       A fuse will 
operate more quickly than the other protective devices if they were all semi-
enclosed types fuses with the characteristics shown in  Fig. 12.5(b) . 
   Security of supply, and therefore effective discrimination, is an important 
consideration for an electrical designer and is also a requirement of the IEE 
Regulations.  
 Earth fault loop impedance  Z S 
   In order that an overcurrent protective device can operate successfully, 
meeting the required disconnection times, of Regulations 411.3.2.2, that 
is, ﬁ nal circuits not exceeding 32       A shall have a disconnection time not 
exceeding 0.4       s. To achieve this, the earth fault loop impedance value mea-
sured in ohms must be less than those values given in Appendix 2 of the  On 
Site Guide  and Tables 41.2 and 41.3 of the IEE Regulations. The value of the 
earth fault loop impedance may be veriﬁ ed by means of an earth fault loop 
impedance test as described in Chapter 14 of this book. The formula is: 
Z
Z
R
R
S
E
(
) ( )



1
2
Ω
 Here  ZE  is the impedance of the supply side of the earth fault loop. The 
actual value will depend upon many factors: the type of supply, the ground 
conditions, the distance from the transformer, etc. The value can be 
obtained from the area electricity companies, but typical values are 0.35  Ω
for TN-C-S (protective multiple earthing, PME) supplies and 0.8         Ω for
100 A
30 A
30 A
30 A
15 A
Main
protection
fuse
Distribution
fuseboard
fuse
Local
protection
Faulty
appliance
 FIGURE 12.6 
 Effective discrimination achieved by graded protection. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
248
TN-S (cable sheath earth) supplies. Also in the above formula,  R1  is the 
resistance of the line conductor and  R2  is the resistance of the earth 
conductor. The complete earth fault loop path is shown in  Fig. 12.7 . 
 Values of  R1    R2  have been calculated for copper and aluminium conduc-
tors and are given in Table 9  A of the  On Site Guide as shown in  Table 12.1 
of this book.
 Example 
 A 20  A radial socket outlet circuit is wired in 2.5  mm 2 PVC cable incorporating a 1.5  mm 2 CPC. 
The cable length is 30       m installed in an ambient temperature of 20°C and the consumer’s 
protection is by 20  A MCB Type B to BS EN 60898. The earth fault loop impedance of the 
supply is 0.5 Ω  . Calculate the total earth fault loop impedance  Z S , and establish that the value 
is less than the maximum value permissible for this type of circuit. 
  We have: 
 
Z
Z
R
R
Z
S
E
E
(
) ( )
(value given in the question)




1
2
0 5
Ω
 
. Ω
 
 From the value given in Table 9A of the  On Site Guide and reproduced in  Table 12.1 a 
2.5  mm phase conductor with a 1.5  mm protective conductor has an ( R 1    R 2 ) value of 
19.51    10   3  Ω /m. 
For 30 m cable  (
)
/m
m
R
R
1
2
3
19 51
10
30
0 585






.
.
Ω
Ω  
 However, under fault conditions, the temperature and therefore the cable resistance will 
increase. To take account of this, we must multiply the value of cable resistance by the factor 
Supply
company’s
installation
Consumer’s
installation
Line
conductor
R1
R2
Load
Consumer’s
isolation and
protection
equipment
Supply company’s
metering and
protection equipment
on consumer’s premises
Protective
conductor
Neutral
conductor
Fault
Secondary
winding
of supply
transformer
ZE
 FIGURE 12.7 
 Earth fault loop path for a TN-S system. 

Overcurrent, short circuit and earth fault protection
249
 Table 12.1  Table 9A of the IEE  On Site Guide: Value of Resistance/Metre 
for Copper and Aluminium Conductors and of  R 1    R 2 per Metre at 20°C in 
Milliohms/Metre  
 Cross-sectional area (mm 2 ) 
 Resistance/metre or ( R 1    R 2 )/
metre (m Ω /m) 
 Phase 
conductor 
 Protective 
conductor 
 Copper 
 Aluminium 
 1 
 – 
 18.10 
 1 
 1 
 36.20 
 1.5 
 – 
 12.10 
 1.5 
 1 
 30.20 
 1.5 
 1.5 
 24.20 
 2.5 
 – 
 7.41 
 2.5 
 1 
 25.51 
 2.5 
 1.5 
 19.51 
 2.5 
 2.5 
 14.82 
 4 
 – 
  4.61 
 4 
 1.5 
 16.71 
 4 
 2.5 
 12.02 
 4 
 4 
  9.22 
 6 
 – 
  3.08 
 6 
 2.5 
 10.49 
 6 
 4 
  7.69 
 6 
 6 
  6.16 
 10 
 – 
 1.83 
 10 
 4 
  6.44 
 10 
 6 
  4.91 
 10 
 10 
  3.66 
 16 
 – 
  1.15 
 1.91 
 16 
 6 s
  4.23 
 – 
 16 
 10 
  2.98 
 – 
 16 
 16 
  2.30 
 3.82 
 25 
 – 
  0.727 
 1.20 
 25 
 10 
  2.557 
 – 
 25 
 16 
  1.877 
 – 
 25 
 25 
  1.454 
 2.40 
 35 
 – 
  0.524 
 0.87 
 35 
 16 
  1.674 
 2.78 
 35 
 25 
  1.251 
 2.07 
 35 
 35 
  1.048 
 1.74 
 50 
 – 
  0.387 
 0.64 
 50 
 25 
  1.114 
 1.84 
 50 
 35 
  0.911 
 1.51 
 50 
 50 
  0.774 
 1.28 
 Reproduced from the IEE  On Site Guide by kind permission of the Institution of Electrical 
Engineers.  
given in Table 9C of the  On Site Guide . In this case the factor is 1.20 and therefore the cable 
resistance under fault conditions will be: 
 0 585
1 20
0 702
.
.
.
Ω
Ω


 
  The total earth fault loop impedance is therefore: 
 ZS 


0 5
0 702
1 202
.
.
.
Ω
Ω
Ω  

Basic Electrical Installation Work
250
  The maximum permitted value given in Table 2A of the  On Site Guide for a 20  A MCB 
protecting a socket outlet is 2.3  Ω  as shown by  Table 12.2   . The circuit earth fault loop 
impedance is less than this value and therefore the protective device will operate within the 
required disconnection time of 0.4  s. 
 Protective conductor size 
  The CPC forms an integral part of the total earth fault loop impedance, so it 
is necessary to check that the cross-section of this conductor is adequate. If 
the cross-section of the CPC complies with Table 54.7 of the IEE Regulations, 
there is no need to carry out further checks. Where line and protective con-
ductors are made from the same material, Table 54.7 tells us that: 
●  for line conductors equal to or less than 16  mm 2 , the protective con-
ductor should equal the line conductor; 
●  for line conductors greater than 16  mm 2 but less than 35  mm 2 ,
the protective conductor should have a cross-sectional area of 
16  mm 2 ; 
●  for line conductors greater than 35  mm 2 , the protective conductor 
should be half the size of the line conductor. 
   However, where the conductor cross-section does not comply with this 
table, then the formula given in Regulation 543.1.3 must be used: 
S
I t
k

2
2
(mm )
 where 
S    cross-sectional area in mm 2
I    value of maximum fault current in amperes 
t    operating time of the protective device 
k         a factor for the particular protective conductor (see Tables 54.2 to 54.4 
of the IEE Regulations).
 Example 1 
 A 230   V ring main circuit of socket outlets is wired in 2.5  mm single PVC copper cables in a 
plastic conduit with a separate 1.5  mm CPC. An earth fault loop impedance test identifi es  Z s 
 Table 12.2  Maximum Earth Fault Loop Impedance  Z s MCB Type B Maximum Measured Earth Fault 
Loop Impedance ( Ω ) When Overcurrent Protective Device is MCB Type B to BS EN 60898  
 MCB rating (A) 
 6 
 10 
 16 
 20 
 25 
 32 
 40 
 50 
 For 0.4    s disconnection  Z S ( Ω ) 
 7.67 
  4.6 
  2.87 
  2.3 
  1.84 
  1.44 
  1.15 
  0.92 

Overcurrent, short circuit and earth fault protection
251
as 1.15  Ω . Verify that the 1.5  mm CPC meets the requirements of Regulation 543.1.3 when the 
protective device is a 30  A semi-enclosed fuse. 
 
I
V
Z



Maximum fault current
(A)
 A
s
∴230
1 15
200
.
 
 t    Maximum operating time of the protective device for a circuit not exceeding 32  A is 0.4  s 
from Regulation 411.3.2.2. From  Fig. 12.5(b) you can see that the time taken to clear a fault of 
200  A is about 0.4  s. 
 k    115 (from Table 54.3). 
 
S
I t
k
S




2
2
2
2
200
0 4
115
1 10
(mm )
(
 A)
 s
 mm
.
.
 
 A 1.5  mm 2  CPC is acceptable since this is the nearest standard-size conductor above the 
minimum cross-sectional area of 1.10  mm 2 found by calculation. 
 Example 2 
 A TN supply feeds a domestic immersion heater wired in 2.5  mm 2 PVC insulated copper cable 
and incorporates a 1.5   mm 2  CPC. The circuit is correctly protected with a 15       A semi-enclosed 
fuse to BS 3036. Establish by calculation that the CPC is of an adequate size to meet the 
requirements of Regulation 543.1.3. The characteristics of the protective device are given in IEE 
Regulation Table 3.2A. 
 For fi nal circuits less than 32  A the maximum operating time of the protective device is 0.4  s. 
From Table 3.2A it can be seen that a current of about 90  A will trip the 15  A fuse in 0.4  s. The 
small insert Table on the top right of Table 3.2 A of the IEE Regulations gives the value of the 
prospective fault current required to operate the device within the various disconnection 
times given. 
 So, in this case the table states that 90  A will trip a 15  A semi-enclosed fuse in 0.4  s. 
 
∴I
t
k
S
I t
k




90
0 4
115
54 3
2
2
A
s
 (from Table 
)
(mm ) (from Regul
.
.
ation 543.1.3)
(
A)
s
mm
S 


90
0 4
115
0 49
2
2
.
.
 
  The CPC of the cable is greater than 0.49       mm 2 and is therefore suitable. If the protective 
conductor is a separate conductor, that is, it does not form part of a cable as in this example 
and is not enclosed in a wiring system as in Example 1, the cross-section of the protective 
conductor must be not less than 2.5  mm 2  where mechanical protection is provided
or 4.0 mm 2 where mechanical protection is  not provided in order to comply with Regulation 
544.2.3. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
252
 Additional protection: RCDs 
  When it is required to provide the very best protection from electric shock 
and ﬁ re risk, earth fault protection devices are incorporated in the instal-
lation. The object of the Regulations concerning these devices, 411.3.2.1 
to 411.3.2.6, is to remove an earth fault current very quickly, less than 0.4       s 
for all ﬁ nal circuits not exceeding 32       A and limit the voltage which might 
appear on any exposed metal parts under fault conditions to not more 
than 50       V. They will continue to provide adequate protection throughout 
the life of the installation even if the earthing conditions deteriorate. This is 
in direct contrast to the protection provided by overcurrent devices, which 
require a low resistance earth loop impedance path. 
  The Regulations recognize RCDs as  ‘ additional protection ’  in the event of 
failure of the provision for basic protection, fault protection or carelessness 
by the users of the installation (IEE Regulation 415.1.1). 
 The basic circuit for a single-phase RCD is shown in  Fig. 12.8 . The load cur-
rent is fed through two equal and opposing coils wound on to a common 
transformer core. The phase and neutral currents in a healthy circuit pro-
duce equal and opposing ﬂ uxes in the transformer core, which induces no 
voltage in the tripping coil. However, if more current ﬂ ows in the line con-
ductor than in the neutral conductor as a result of a fault between live and 
earth, an out-of-balance ﬂ ux will result in an emf being induced in the trip 
coil which will open the double pole switch and isolate the load. Modern 
RCDs have tripping sensitivities between 10 and 30       mA, and therefore a 
faulty circuit can be isolated before the lower lethal limit to human beings 
(about 50  mA) is reached. 
   Consumer units can now be supplied which incorporate an RCD, split 
boards, where half of the ﬁ nal circuits are RCD protected so that any 
equipment supplied by the consumer unit to socket outlet circuits or out 
of doors circuits which are outside the zone created by the protective equi-
potential bonding, such as a garage or greenhouse, can have the special 
protection required by IEE Regulations 411.3.3 and 415.1.1. 
RCBOs  (residual current circuit breaker with overload protection) com-
bines RCD protection and MCB protection into one unit. 
N
N
E
Casing
Supply Trip
coil
L
L
Test button
Load
 FIGURE 12.8 
 Construction of a RCD. 

Overcurrent, short circuit and earth fault protection
253
   In a split board consumer unit, about half of the total number of ﬁ nal cir-
cuits are protected by the RCD. A fault on any one ﬁ nal circuit will trip out 
all of the RCD protected circuits which may cause inconvenience. 
  The RCBO gives the combined protection of an MCB plus RCD for each 
ﬁ nal circuit so protected and in the event of a fault occurring only the 
faulty circuit is interrupted. 
   Finally, it should perhaps be said that a foolproof method of giving protec-
tion to people or animals who simultaneously touch both live and neutral 
has yet to be devised. The ultimate safety of an installation depends upon 
the skill and experience of the electrical contractor and the good sense of 
the user. 

  When you have completed the questions, check out the answers at the back 
of the book. 
 Note : more than one multiple choice answer may be correct. 
 1.  ‘ The conductive mass of the earth ’ is one deﬁ nition of: 
  a.   earth  
  b.  earthing  
  c.   bonding conductor  
  d.   circuit protective conductor.  
 2.  A protective conductor connecting exposed conductive parts of 
equipment to the main earthing terminal is one deﬁ nition of: 
  a.  earth  
  b.  earthing  
  c.   bonding conductor  
  d.   circuit protective conductor.  
 3.  A protective conductor connecting exposed and extraneous parts 
together is one deﬁ nition of: 
  a.  earth  
  b.  earthing  
  c.   bonding conductor  
  d.   circuit protective conductor.  
 4.  The act of connecting the exposed conductive parts of the installation to 
the main earthing terminal is called: 
  a.  earth  
  b.  earthing  
  c.   bonding conductor  
  d.   circuit protective conductor.   
 5.  The act of linking together the exposed and extraneous metal parts is 
called: 
  a.  earthing  
  b.  bonding  
  c.   basic protection  
  d.   fault protection.  
 Check your Understanding 

Ch 12
255
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
 6.   The protection provided by insulating live parts is called: 
 
  a.  extraneous conductive parts  
 
  b.   basic protection  
 
  c.  exposed conductive parts  
 
  d.  fault protection.  
 7.  The metalwork of the electrical installation is called: 
 
  a.  extraneous conductive parts  
 
  b.   basic protection  
 
  c.  exposed conductive parts  
 
  d.  fault protection.  
  8.  The metalwork of the building and other service pipes is called: 
 
  a.  extraneous conductive parts  
 
  b.   basic protection  
 
  c.  exposed conductive parts  
 
  d.  fault protection.  
 9.  The protection provided by equipotential bonding and automatic
  disconnection of the supply is called: 
 
  a.  extraneous conductive parts  
 
  b.   basic protection  
 
  c.  exposed conductive parts  
 
  d.  fault protection.  
 10.    Cutting off the electrical supply in order to ensure the safety of those
  working on the equipment is one deﬁ nition of: 
 
  a.  basic protection  
 
  b.   fault protection  
 
  c.  equipotential bonding  
 
  d.  isolation switching.  

 11.  A current which exceeds the rated current in an otherwise healthy
  circuit is one deﬁ nition of: 
 
  a.  fault protection  
 
  b.   an overcurrent  
 
  c.  an overload current  
 
  d.  a short-circuit current.  
 12.  The weakest link in the circuit designed to melt when an overcurrent
  ﬂ ows is one deﬁ nition of: 
 
  a.  fault protection  
 
  b.   a circuit protective conductor  
 
  c.  a fuse  
 
  d.  a consumer unit.  
 13.  According to IEE Regulation 411.3.2.2 all ﬁ nal circuits not exceeding
   32  A in a building supplied with a 230   V TN supply shall have a 
maximum disconnection time not exceeding: 
 
  a.  0.2   s  
 
  b.   0.4   s  
 
  c.  5.0   s  
 
  d.  unlimited.  
 14.  To ensure the effective operation of the overcurrent protective devices,
  the earth fault loop path must have: 
 
  a.  a 230   V supply  
 
   b.   a very low resistance  
 
  c.  fuses or MCBs in the live conductor  
 
  d.  a very high resistance.  
 15.  Brieﬂ y explain why an electrical installation needs protective devices.  
 16.  List the four factors on which the selection of a protective device 
depends.  
 17.  List the ﬁ ve essential requirements for a device designed to protect 
against overcurrent.  
 18.  Brieﬂ y describe the action of a fuse under fault conditions.  
 19.  State the meaning of  ‘ discrimination ’ as applied to circuit protective 
devices. 

Ch 12
257
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
 20.   Use a sketch to show how  ‘ discrimination ’ can be applied to a piece of 
equipment connected to a ﬁ nal circuit.  
 21.   List typical  ‘ exposed parts ’ of an installation.  
 22.   List typical  ‘ extraneous parts ’ of a building. 
 23.   Use a sketch to show the path taken by an earth fault current.  
 24.   Use bullet points and a simple sketch to brieﬂ y describe the operation 
of an RCD. 
 25.   State the need for RCDs in an electrical installation. 
 
  a.  supplying socket outlets with a rated current not exceeding 20   A 
and  
 
  b.   for use by mobile equipment out of doors as required by IEE 
Regulation 411.3.3.  
 26.   Brieﬂ y describe an application for RCBOs.  
 27.   State the meaning of fault protection.  
 28.   State the meaning of basic protection. 

This page intentionally left blank


This page intentionally left blank

 Statutory regulations and 
codes of practice 
 Ch 13 
261
 Unit 4 – Installation (buildings and structures) – Outcome 1 
 Underpinning knowledge: when you have completed this chapter you should be able to: 
●    list the statutory regulations and codes of practice which impact upon all aspects of electrotechnical 
systems
●  deﬁ ne the meaning of  ‘ duty holder ’ 
●  deﬁ ne  ‘ absolute ’ and  ‘ reasonably practicable ’ qualifying terms 
●  state the meaning of a BS EN number 
●  identify Index of Protection codes 
●      identify how the Regulations and Codes of Practice impact upon hazardous installations and lightning
protection systems 
s o
r
chn
stalla
ghtni
V
U
W
6
ectroo
6
f elect
f
ectr
6icic
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3 
4
5 
6 
To 3 phase supply
gh
gh
a
laa

Basic Electrical Installation Work
262
 Regulations and responsibilities 
   Electricity generation as we know it today began when Michael Faraday 
conducted the famous ring experiment in 1831. This experiment, together 
with many other experiments of the time, made it possible for Lord Kelvin 
and Sebastian de Ferranti to patent in 1882 the designs for an electrical 
machine called the Ferranti–Thompson dynamo, which enabled the gen-
eration of electricity on a commercial scale. 
   In 1887 the London Electric Supply Corporation was formed with Ferranti 
as chief engineer. This was one of many privately owned electricity gen-
erating stations supplying the electrical needs of the United Kingdom. As 
the demand for electricity grew, more privately owned generating stations 
were built until eventually the government realized that electricity was a 
national asset which would beneﬁ t from nationalization. 
   In 1926 the Electricity Supply Act placed the responsibility for generation 
in the hands of the Central Electricity Board. In England and Wales, the 
Central Electricity Generating Board (CEGB) had the responsibility for the 
generation and transmission of electricity on the Supergrid. In Scotland, 
generation was the joint responsibility of the North of Scotland Hydro-
Electricity Board and the South of Scotland Electricity Board. In Northern 
Ireland electricity generation was the responsibility of the Northern Ireland 
Electricity Service. 
   In 1988 Cecil Parkinson, the Secretary of State for Energy in the 
Conservative government, proposed the denationalization of the electric-
ity supply industry; this became law in March 1991, thereby returning the 
responsibility for generation, transmission and distribution to the private 
sector. It was anticipated that this action, together with new legislation 
over the security of supplies, would lead to a guaranteed quality of provi-
sion, with increased competition leading eventually to cheaper electricity. 
   During the period of development of the electricity services, particularly 
in the early days, poor design and installation led to many buildings being 
damaged by ﬁ re and the electrocution of human beings and livestock. It 
was the insurance companies which originally drew up a set of rules and 
guidelines of good practice in the interest of reducing the number of 
claims made upon them. The ﬁ rst rules were made by the American Board 
of Fire Underwriters and were quickly followed by the Phoenix Rules of 
1882. In the same year the ﬁ rst edition of the Rules and Regulations for the 
Prevention of Fire Risk arising from Electrical Lighting was issued by the 
Institution of Electrical Engineers. 
  The current edition of these regulations is called the Requirements for 
Electrical Installations, IEE Wiring Regulations (BS 7671: 2008), and since 
June 2008 we have been using the 17th edition. All the rules have been 
revised, updated and amended at regular intervals to take account of mod-
ern developments, and the 17th edition brought the UK Regulations into 
harmony with those of the rest of Europe. The electrotechnical industry is 
now controlled by many rules, regulations and standards. 

Statutory regulations and codes of practice
263
 In Chapter 1 of this book we looked at a number of Statutory and Non-
Statutory Regulations as they apply to the electrotechnical industry. In this 
section we will look at our responsibilities in our working environment. 
 The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 
 The Health and Safety at Work Act provides a legal framework for stimu-
lating and encouraging high standards of health and safety for everyone 
at work and the public at large from risks arising from work activities. The 
Act was a result of recommendations made by a Royal Commission in 1970 
which looked at the health and safety of employees at work, and concluded 
that the main cause of accidents was apathy on the part of employer and 
employee. The new Act places the responsibility for safety at work on both 
the employer and the employee. 
  The employer has a duty to care for the health and safety of employees 
(Section 2 of the Act). To do this he must ensure that: 
●  the working conditions and standard of hygiene are appropriate; 
●  the plant, tools and equipment are properly maintained; 
●      the necessary safety equipment – such as personal protective equip-
ment, dust and fume extractors and machine guards – is available 
and properly used; 
●  the workers are trained to use equipment and plant safely. 
   Employees have a duty to care for their own health and safety and that of 
others who may be affected by their actions (Section 7 of the Act). To do 
this they must: 
●      take reasonable care to avoid injury to themselves or others as a 
result of their work activity; 
●      co-operate with their employer, helping him or her to comply with 
the requirements of the Act; 
●      not interfere with or misuse anything provided to protect their 
health and safety. 
   Failure to comply with the Health and Safety at Work Act is a criminal 
offence and any infringement of the law can result in heavy ﬁ nes, a prison 
sentence or both. 
 Enforcement 
   Laws and rules must be enforced if they are to be effective. The system of 
control under the Health and Safety at Work Act comes from the Health 
and Safety Executive (HSE) which is charged with enforcing the law. The 
HSE is divided into a number of specialist inspectorates or sections which 
operate from local ofﬁ ces throughout the United Kingdom. From the local 
ofﬁ ces the inspectors visit individual places of work. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
264
  The HSE inspectors have been given wide-ranging powers to assist them in 
the enforcement of the law. They can: 
 1.  enter premises unannounced and carry out investigations, take 
measurements or photographs; 
 2.  take statements from individuals; 
 3.  check the records and documents required by legislation; 
    4.     give information and advice to an employee or employer about 
safety in the workplace; 
 5.  demand the dismantling or destruction of any equipment, material 
or substance likely to cause immediate serious injury; 
    6.     issue an improvement notice which will require an employer to put 
right, within a speciﬁ ed period of time, a minor infringement of the 
legislation;
    7.     issue a prohibition notice which will require an employer to stop 
immediately any activity likely to result in serious injury, and which 
will be enforced until the situation is corrected; 
 8.  prosecute all persons who fail to comply with their safety duties, 
including employers, employees, designers, manufacturers, suppli-
ers and the self-employed. 
 Safety documentation 
   Under the Health and Safety at Work Act, the employer is responsible for 
ensuring that adequate instruction and information is given to employ-
ees to make them safety-conscious. Part 1, Section 3 of the Act instructs all 
employers to prepare a written health and safety policy statement and to 
bring this to the notice of all employees. 
  To promote adequate health and safety measures, the employer must con-
sult with the employees ’  safety representatives. All actions of the safety 
representatives should be documented and recorded as evidence that the 
company takes seriously its health and safety policy. 
  The Act provides for criminal proceedings to be taken against those who 
do not satisfy the requirements of the Regulations. 
   Under the general protective umbrella of the Health and Safety at Work Act, 
other pieces of legislation also affect those working in the electrotechnical 
industry. 
 The Electricity at Work Regulations 1989 (EWR) 
  This legislation came into force in 1990 and replaced earlier regula-
tions such as the Electricity (Factories Act) Special Regulations 1944. 
The Regulations are made under the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974, 
and enforced by the Health and Safety Executive. The purpose of the 

Statutory regulations and codes of practice
265
Regulations is to  ‘ require precautions to be taken against the risk of death 
or personal injury from electricity in work activities ’ . 
   Section 4 of the EWR tells us that  ‘ all systems must be constructed so as to 
prevent danger  … , and be properly maintained. …  Every work activity shall 
be carried out in a manner which does not give rise to danger. …  In the case 
of work of an electrical nature, it is preferable that the conductors be made 
dead before work commences ’ . 
  The EWR do not tell us speciﬁ cally how to carry out our work activities and 
ensure compliance, but if proceedings were brought against an individual 
for breaking the EWR, the only acceptable defence would be  ‘ to prove that 
all reasonable steps were taken and all diligence exercised to avoid the 
offence ’ (Regulation 29). 
   An electrical contractor could reasonably be expected to have  ‘ exercised 
all diligence ’  if the installation was wired according to the IEE Wiring 
Regulations (see below) and this is conﬁ rmed in the 17th edition of 
Regulations 114. 
 Duty of care 
  The Health and Safety at Work Act and the Electricity at Work Regulations 
make numerous references to employer and employees having a  ‘ duty of 
care ’  for the health and safety of others in the work environment. In this 
context the Electricity at Work Regulations refer to a person as a  ‘duty
holder ’ . This phrase recognizes the level of responsibility which electri-
cians are expected to take on as a part of their job in order to control elec-
trical safety in the work environment.
 Definitions  
  ‘ Duty holder ’ , this phrase recognizes the 
level of responsibility which electri-
cians are expected to take on as a part 
of their job in order to control electri-
cal safety in the work environment. 
   Everyone has a duty of care, but not 
everyone is a duty holder. 
  The person who exercises  ‘ control 
over the whole systems, equipment 
and conductors ’  and is the Electrical 
Company’s representative on-site is a 
duty holder. 
  ‘ Reasonably practicable ’  or  ‘ absolute ’ , if 
the requirement of the regulation is 
absolute, then that regulation must 
be met regardless of cost or any other 
consideration. If the regulation is to 
be met  ‘ so far as is reasonably practi-
cable ’ , then risks, cost, time, trouble 
and diffi  culty can be considered. 
   Everyone has a duty of care, but not everyone is a duty holder. The 
Regulations recognize the amount of control that an individual might 
exercise over the whole electrical installation. The person who exercises 
 ‘ control over the whole systems, equipment and conductors ’  and is the 
Electrical Company’s representative on-site, is the  duty holder . He might 
be a supervisor or manager, but he will have a duty of care on behalf of 
his employer for the electrical, health, safety and environmental issues on 
that site. 
   Duties referred to in the Regulations may have the qualifying terms  ‘ rea-
sonably practicable’ or  ‘ absolute ’ . If the requirement of the regulation is 
absolute, then that regulation must be met regardless of cost or any other 
consideration. If the regulation is to be met  ‘ so far as is reasonably practi-
cable ’ , then risks, cost, time, trouble and difﬁ culty can be considered. 
   Often there is a cost effective way to reduce a particular risk and prevent 
an accident occurring. For example, placing a ﬁ re-guard in front of the ﬁ re 
at home when there are young children in the family is a reasonably practi-
cable way of reducing the risk of a child being burned. 
   If a regulation is not qualiﬁ ed with  ‘ so far as is reasonably practicable ’ , then 
it must be assumed that the regulation is absolute. In the context of the 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
266
 The IEE Wiring Regulations 17th edition (BS 7671: 
2008) 
  The Institution of Electrical Engineers Requirements for Electrical 
Installations (the IEE Regulations) are non-statutory regulations. They 
relate principally to the design, selection, erection, inspection and testing 
of electrical installations, whether permanent or temporary, in and about 
buildings generally and to agricultural and horticultural premises, con-
struction sites and caravans and their sites. Paragraph 7 of the introduction 
to the EWR says:  ‘ the IEE Wiring Regulations is a code of practice which is 
widely recognized and accepted in the United Kingdom and compliance 
with them is likely to achieve compliance with all relevant aspects of the 
Electricity At Work Regulations ’ . BS 7671: 2008 says, the IEE Regulations 
are non-statutory. However, they may be used in a Court of Law to claim 
compliance with a statutory requirement (IEE Regulation 114). The IEE 
Wiring Regulations only apply to installations operating at a voltage up to 
1000  V a.c. 
 That is electrical installations in: 
●  domestic dwellings 
●  commercial buildings 
●  industrial situations 
●  agricultural and horticultural situations 
●  caravans and caravan parks 
●  construction sites and other temporary situations. 
  They do not apply to electrical installations in mines and quarries where spe-
cial regulations apply because of the adverse conditions experienced there. 
  The current edition of the IEE Wiring Regulations is the 17th edition which 
became law in 2008. The main reason for incorporating the IEE Wiring 
Regulations into British Standard BS 7671 was to create harmonization 
with European Standards. 
 Speciﬁ c sections within the IEE Regulations have an impact on all aspects 
of electrical safety in buildings, for example: 
●  selection and erection of equipment – Part 5 
●  isolation and switching – Chapter 53 
●  inspection and testing – Part 6 
●  protection against ﬁ re and thermal effects – Chapter 42 
 Safety First
Duty Holder 
 ● 
 This person has the responsibility 
to control electrical safety in the 
work environment. 
Electricity at Work Regulations, where the risk is very often death by elec-
trocution, the level of duty to prevent danger more often approaches that 
of an absolute duty of care.

Statutory regulations and codes of practice
267
●  protection against electric shock – Chapter 41 
●  protection against overcurrent – Chapter 43 
●  special installations or locations – Part 7. 
  To assist electricians in their understanding of the Regulations a number 
of guidance notes have been published. The guidance notes, to which I 
will frequently make reference in this book, are those contained in the  On 
Site Guide . Seven other guidance note booklets are also currently available. 
These are: 
●  Selection and Erection
●  Isolation and Switching
●  Inspection and Testing
●  Protection against Fire
●  Protection against Electric Shock
●  Protection against Overcurrent
●  Special Locations
●  Earthing and Bonding
 The IEE  On Site Guide  is prepared by the Institution of Electrical Engineers 
to simplify some aspects of the IEE Regulations BS 7671: 2008. 
  The Guide is intended to be used by skilled persons (electricians) carrying 
out limited applications of BS 7671 in: 
 (a)   domestic installations generally, including off-peak supplies and 
supplies to associated garages, outbuildings and the like; 
    (b)       industrial and commercial single- and three-phase installa-
tions where the local distribution fuse boards or consumer unit is 
located at or near the supplier’s cut-out. 
  These guidance notes are intended to be read in conjunction with the 
Regulations. 
  The IEE Wiring Regulations are the electrician’s bible and provide an 
authoritative framework for all the work activities which we undertake as 
electricians. 
 British and European Standards 
   Goods manufactured to the exacting speciﬁ cations laid down by the British 
Standards Institution (BSI) are suitable for the purpose for which they were 
made. There seems to be a British Standard for practically everything made 
today, and compliance with the relevant British Standard is, in most cases, 
voluntary. However, when specifying or installing equipment, the electrical 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
268
 FIGURE 13.2 
 European Commission safety mark. 
designer or contractor needs to be sure that the materials are suitable for 
their purpose and offer a degree of safety, and should only use equipment 
which carries the appropriate British Standards number. 
   British Standard numbers begin as BS followed by a number and a date of 
issue, for example: BS 7671: 2008 is the latest IEE Wiring Regulations pub-
lished in the year 2008. 
   Some British Standard numbers are written as BS EN followed by a num-
ber. This means that the British Standard is in harmony or agreement with 
the European Standards. These standards apply to all countries in the EEC, 
for example: BS EN 60898: 1991 is the British and European Standard for 
miniature and moulded case circuit breakers which were issued in 1991.
A
P
P
R
O
V
E
D
T
O
B
R
I
T
I
S
H
S
T
A
N
D
A
R
D
BSI kite mark
BSI safety mark
 FIGURE 13.1 
 BSI kite and safety marks. 
 Key Fact
IEE Regulations 
 ● 
 They are the UK National Standard 
for electrical work. 
 ● 
 Comply with the IEE Regulations 
and you will also comply with 
statutory regulations and the law 
(IEE Regulation 114). 
 The BSI has created two important marks of safety, the BSI kite mark and 
the BSI safety mark, which are shown in  Fig. 13.1 . 
  The BSI kite mark is an assurance that the product carrying the label has 
been produced under a system of supervision, control and testing, and can 
only be used by manufacturers who have been granted a licence under the 
scheme. It does not necessarily cover safety unless the appropriate British 
Standard speciﬁ es a safety requirement. 
 The BSI safety mark is a guarantee of the product’s electrical, mechanical 
and thermal safety. It does not guarantee the product’s performance. 
  The CE mark ( Fig. 13.2   ) is not a quality mark, but an indication given by the 
manufacturer or importer that the product or system meets the legal safety 
requirements of the European Commission and can therefore be presumed 
safe to use. The mark is applied by the manufacturer after carrying out the 
appropriate tests to ensure compliance with the relevant safety standards. 
The CE mark gives the manufacturer the right to sell the product in all the 
countries of the European Economic Area. All electrical products used by 
electrical contractors after 1 January 1997 must bear the CE mark. 
 Index of Protection (IP) BS EN 60529 
   IEE Regulation 612.4.5 tells us that where barriers and enclosures have 
been installed to prevent direct contact with live parts, they must afford a 
degree of protection not less than IP2X and IP4X, but what does this mean? 
  The Index of Protection is a code which gives us a means of specifying the 
suitability of equipment for the environmental conditions in which it will 
be used. The tests to be carried out for the various degrees of protection 
are given in the British and European Standard BS EN 60529. 
  The code is written as IP (Index of Protection) followed by two numbers 
XX. The ﬁ rst number gives the degree of protection against the penetration 
of solid objects into the enclosure. The second number gives the degree of 
protection against water penetration. For example, a piece of equipment 
classiﬁ ed as IP45 will have barriers installed which prevent a 1-mm diam-
eter rigid steel bar from making contact with live parts and be protected 
against the ingress of water from jets of water applied from any direction. 

Statutory regulations and codes of practice
269
Where a degree of protection is not speciﬁ ed, the number is replaced by 
an  ‘ X ’  which simply means that the degree of protection is not speciﬁ ed 
although some protection may be afforded. The  ‘ X ’  is used instead of  ‘ 0 ’  
since  ‘ 0 ’  would indicate that no protection was given. The index of protec-
tion codes is shown in  Fig. 13.3 . 
First number
(DEGREE OF PROTECTION AGAINST
SOLID OBJECT PENETRATION)
Second number
(DEGREE OF PROTECTION AGAINST
WATER PENETRATION)
Non-protected.
Non-protected.
Protected against a
solid object greater
than 50mm, such as
a hand.
Protected against
water dripping
vertically, such as
condensation.
Protected against
dripping water when
tilted up to 15°.
Protected against
water spraying at an
angle of up to 60°.
Protected against
water splashing from
any direction.
Protected against
jets of water from
any direction.
Protected against
heavy seas or powerful
jets of water. Prevents
ingress sufficient to
cause harm.
Protected against
harmful ingress of
water when immersed
to a depth of between
150mm and 1m.
Protected against
submersion. Suitable
for continuous
immersion in water.
Protected against a
solid object greater
than 12mm, such as
a finger.
Protected against a
solid object greater
than 2.5mm, such as
a tool or wire.
Protected against a
solid object greater
than 1.0mm, such as
thin wire or strips.
Dust protected.
Prevents ingress of
dust sufficient to
cause harm.
Dust tight.
No dust ingress.
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1 METRE
2.5mm
 FIGURE 13.3 
 Index of protection codes. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
270
 Hazardous area installations 
  The British Standards concerned with hazardous areas were ﬁ rst published 
in the 1920s and were concerned with the connection of electrical apparatus 
in the mining industry. Since those early days many national and inter-
national standards, as well as codes of practice, have been published to 
inform the manufacture, installation and maintenance of electrical equip-
ment in all hazardous areas. 
  The relevant British Standards for Electrical Apparatus for Potentially 
Explosive Atmospheres are BS 5345, BS EN 60079 and BS EN 50014: 1998. 
 They deﬁ ne a hazardous area as  ‘ any place in which an explosive atmo-
sphere may occur in such quantity as to require special precautions to pro-
tect the safety of workers ’ . Clearly these regulations affect the petroleum 
industry, but they also apply to petrol ﬁ lling stations.
 Definition  
  They defi ne a hazardous area as  ‘ any 
place in which an explosive atmos-
phere may occur in such quantity as 
to require special precautions to pro-
tect the safety of workers ’ . 
 Most ﬂ ammable liquids only form an explosive mixture between certain 
concentration limits. Above and below this level of concentration the mix 
will not explode. The lowest temperature at which sufﬁ cient vapour is 
given off from a ﬂ ammable substance to form an explosive gas–air mixture 
is called the ﬂ ashpoint . A liquid which is safe at normal temperatures will 
require special consideration if heated to ﬂ ashpoint. An area in which an 
explosive gas–air mixture is present is called a  hazardous area , as deﬁ ned 
by the British Standards, and any electrical apparatus or equipment within 
a hazardous area must be classiﬁ ed as ﬂ ameproof.
 Definitions  
   The lowest temperature at which 
suffi  cient vapour is given off  from 
a fl ammable substance to form an 
explosive gas–air mixture is called the 
 fl ashpoint . 
   An area in which an explosive gas–air 
mixture is present is called a  hazard-
ous area , as defi ned by the British 
Standards, and any electrical appara-
tus or equipment within a hazardous 
area must be classifi ed as fl ameproof. 
   Flameproof electrical equipment is constructed so that it can withstand 
an internal explosion of the gas for which it is certiﬁ ed, and prevent any 
spark or ﬂ ame resulting from that explosion leaking out and igniting
the surrounding atmosphere. This is achieved by manufacturing ﬂ ame-
proof equipment to a robust standard of construction. All access and
connection points have wide machined ﬂ anges which damp the ﬂ ame in 
its passage across the ﬂ ange. Flanged surfaces are ﬁ rmly bolted together 
with many recessed bolts, as shown in  Fig. 13.4   . Wiring systems within 
 FIGURE 13.4 
 Flameproof ﬁ ttings: (a) ﬂ ameproof distribution board; (b) ﬂ ameproof rectangular junction box; (c) 
double-pole switch; (d) ﬂ ameproof inspection bend. 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

Statutory regulations and codes of practice
271
a hazardous area must be to ﬂ ameproof ﬁ ttings using an appropriate 
method, such as: 
●      PVC cables encased in solid drawn heavy-gauge screwed steel con-
duit terminated at approved enclosures having wide ﬂ anges and 
bolted covers. 
●      Mineral insulated cables terminated into accessories with approved 
ﬂ ameproof glands. These have a longer gland thread than normal 
MICC glands of the type shown in Fig. 6.3 in Chapter 6 of this book. 
Where the cable is laid underground, it must be protected by a PVC 
sheath and laid at a depth of not less than 500  mm. 
●      PVC armoured cables terminated into accessories with approved 
ﬂ ameproof glands or any other wiring system which is approved 
by the British Standard. All certiﬁ ed ﬂ ameproof enclosures will be 
marked Ex, indicating that they are suitable for potentially explosive 
situations, or EEx, where equipment is certiﬁ ed to the harmonized 
European Standard. All the equipment used in a ﬂ ameproof instal-
lation must carry the appropriate markings, as shown in  Fig. 13.5   , if 
the integrity of the wiring system is to be maintained. 
   Flammable and explosive installations are to be found in the petroleum 
and chemical industries, which are classiﬁ ed as group II industries. Mining 
is classiﬁ ed as group I and receives special consideration from the Mining 
Regulations because of the extreme hazards of working underground. Petrol 
ﬁ lling pumps must be wired and controlled by ﬂ ameproof equipment 
to meet the requirements of the Petroleum Regulation Act 1928 and 1936 
and any local licensing laws concerning the keeping and dispensing of 
petroleum spirit. 
 Hazardous area classiﬁ cation 
  The British Standard divides the risk associated with inﬂ ammable gases 
and vapours into three classes or zones. 
●  Zone 0 is the most hazardous, and is deﬁ ned as a zone or area in 
which an explosive gas–air mixture is  continuously present  or pres-
ent for long periods. ( ‘ Long periods ’  is usually taken to mean that the 
gas–air mixture will be present for longer than 1000  h per year.) 
X
 FIGURE 13.5 
 Flameproof equipment markings. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
272
●      Zone 1 is an area in which an explosive gas–air mixture is  likely to 
occur  in normal operation. (This is usually taken to mean that the 
gas–air mixture will be present for up to 1000  h per year.) 
●      Zone 2 is an area in which an explosive gas–air mixture is  not likely
to occur in normal operation and if it does occur it will exist for a 
very short time. (This is usually taken to mean that the gas–air mix-
ture will be present for less than 10  h per year.) 
   If an area is not classiﬁ ed as zone 0, 1 or 2, then it is deemed to be non-
hazardous, so that normal industrial electrical equipment may be used. 
  The electrical equipment used in zone 2 will contain a minimum amount of 
protection. For example, normal sockets and switches cannot be installed in 
a zone 2 area, but oil-ﬁ lled radiators may be installed if they are directly con-
nected and controlled from outside the area. Electrical equipment in this 
area should be marked Ex ‘ o ’ for oil-immersed or Ex ‘ p ’ for powder-ﬁ lled. 
   In Zone 1 all electrical equipment must be ﬂ ameproof, as shown in  Fig. 
13.4 , and marked Ex ‘ d ’ to indicate a ﬂ ameproof enclosure. 
   Ordinary electrical equipment cannot be installed in Zone 0, even when it 
is ﬂ ameproof protected. However, many chemical and oil-processing plants 
are entirely dependent upon instrumentation and data transmission for 
their safe operation. Therefore, very low-power instrumentation and data-
transmission circuits can be used in special circumstances, but the equip-
ment must be intrinsically safe , and used in conjunction with a  ‘ safety 
barrier ’  installed outside the hazardous area. Intrinsically safe equipment 
must be marked Ex ‘ ia ’ or Ex ’ s ’ , specially certiﬁ ed for use in zone 0.  
 Intrinsic safety 
 By deﬁ nition, an intrinsically safe circuit is one in which no spark or ther-
mal effect is capable of causing ignition of a given explosive atmosphere. 
The intrinsic safety of the equipment in a hazardous area is assured by 
incorporating a Zener diode safety barrier into the control circuit such 
as that shown in  Fig. 13.6   . In normal operation, the voltage across a 
Fuse
R1
R2
Z1
Z2
To hazardous area
Supply
in
safe area
 FIGURE 13.6 
 Zener safety barrier. 
 Definition  
 An intrinsically safe circuit is one in 
which no spark or thermal eff ect is 
capable of causing ignition of a given 
explosive atmosphere. 

Statutory regulations and codes of practice
273
   An intrinsically safe system, suitable for use in Zone 0, is one in which 
all  the equipment, apparatus and interconnecting wires and circuits are 
intrinsically safe. 
 Lightning protection systems (BS EN 62305: 2008) 
   Many buildings of historical interest or tall buildings such as churches are 
ﬁ tted with a lightning protection system to protect the building and those 
who use it from the harmful effects of a lightning strike upon the building. 
  The average lightning discharge current is in the order of 20,000       A and it is 
this discharge of energy through a structure that causes the damage. 
   Lighting protective systems offer the lightning strike an alternative low 
resistance path to the general mass of earth. Such systems have three main 
parts 
●  an air terminal, a sharp copper spike; 
●  a system of down conductors made of robust copper strip; 
●      an earth termination, providing a solid and reliable connection with 
the general mass of earth so that the energy can be harmlessly dis-
persed into the ground. 
  The building receives a zone of protection from a lightning strike in the 
shape of a cone, starting at the highest point of the air terminal of the light-
ning protective system as shown in  Fig. 13.7 . 
 FIGURE 13.7 
 The zone of protection for a structure is given by a cone with its apex at the highest point of the air 
termination. 
Zener diode is too low for it to conduct, but if a fault occurs, the voltage 
across  Z1  and  Z2  will rise, switching them on and blowing the protective 
fuse.  Z2  is included in the circuit as a  ‘ back-up ’  in case the ﬁ rst Zener diode 
fails.

Basic Electrical Installation Work
274
   Lightning protective systems are discussed in detail in Advanced Electrical 
Installation Work under the sub-heading  ‘ Protection of structures against 
lightning ’ . 
  The IEE Regulations make speciﬁ c reference to many British Standard 
speciﬁ cations and British Standard codes of practice in the 17th edition of 
the Regulations. 
  The Electricity Supply Regulations forbid electricity supply authorities 
to connect electric lines and apparatus to the supply system unless their 
insulation is capable of withstanding the tests prescribed by the appropri-
ate British Standards. 
 It is clearly in the interests of the electrical contractor to be aware of, 
and to comply with, any regulations which are relevant to the particular 
installation. IEE Regulation 134.1.1 states that good workmanship by com-
petent persons and the use of proper materials are essential for compli-
ance with the Regulations. 
   In order to try to ensure that all electrical installation work is carried out 
to a minimum standard, the National Inspection Council for Electrical 
Installation Contracting (NICEIC) was established in 1956. NICEIC is sup-
ported by all sections of the electrical industry and its aims are to provide 
consumers with protection against faulty, unsafe or otherwise defective 
electrical installations. It maintains an approved roll of members who 
regularly have their premises, equipment and installations inspected by 
NICEIC engineers. Through this inspectorate the council is able to ensure 
a minimum standard of workmanship among its members. Electricians 
employed by an NICEIC-approved contractor are also, by association with 
their employer, accepted as being competent to carry out electrical instal-
lation work to an approved standard.
 Safety First 
Site Safety 
 ● 
 the Health and Safety at Work Act; 
 ● 
 makes you responsible for 
demonstrating; 
 ● 
 safe working practices; 
 ● 
 following site safety rules; 
 ● 
 wearing appropriate PPE. 
 Safe working environment 
   In Chapter 1, we looked at some of the laws and regulations that affect our 
working environment. We looked at Safety Signs and PPE and how to rec-
ognize and use different types of ﬁ re extinguishers. The structure of com-
panies within the electrotechnical industry and the ways in which they 
communicate information by drawings, symbols and standard forms was 
also discussed in Chapter 9. 
  We began to look at safe electrical isolation procedures in Chapter 1 and 
then discussed this topic further in Chapter 8, together with safe manual 
handling techniques and safe procedures for working above ground. 
 In Chapter 8, under the heading  ‘ Risks ’ ,  ‘ Precautions and procedures ’ , we 
looked at the common causes of accidents at work and how to control the 
risks associated with various hazards. 
   If your career in the electrotechnical industry is to be a long, happy and 
safe one, you must always behave responsibly and sensibly in order to 
maintain a safe working environment. Before starting work, make a safety 

Statutory regulations and codes of practice
275
assessment. What is going to be hazardous, will you require PPE, do you 
need any special access equipment. Carry out safe isolation procedures 
before beginning any work. You do not necessarily have to do these things 
formally, such as carrying out a risk assessment as described in Chapter 
8, but just get into the habit of always working safely and being aware of 
the potential hazards around you when you are working. Finally, when the 
job is ﬁ nished, clean up and dispose of all waste material responsibly as 
described in Chapter 8 under the heading  ‘ Disposing of waste ’ . 

  When you have completed these questions, check out the answers at the 
back of the book. 
 Note: more than one multiple choice answer may be correct. 
 1.  Identify the Statutory Regulations from the following list: 
  a.  Health and Safety at Work Act 1974  
  b.  the BSI Kite Safety Mark  
  c.   the Electricity at Work Regulations 1989  
  d.   the IEE Regulations BS 7671: 2008.  
 2.  Identify the Non-Statutory Regulations from the following list which impact 
upon electrotechnical systems: 
  a.  Health and Safety at Work Act 1974  
  b.  Electricity at Work Regulations 1989  
  c.   the IEE Regulations BS 7671: 2008  
  d.  the BSI Kite Safety Mark.  
 3.  Identify the types of electrical installations to which the IEE Regulations 
apply from the list below: 
  a.  domestic homes  
  b.  construction sites  
  c.  mines and quarries  
  d.  caravan parks.  
 4.  ‘ Any place in which an explosive gas–air mixture is present ’ is one 
deﬁ nition of: 
  a.  Index of protection  
  b.  Flash point  
  c.  Intrinsically safe  
  d.  Hazardous area.  
 5.  ‘ The lowest temperature at which sufﬁ cient vapour is given off from a 
ﬂ ammable substance to form an explosive gas ’ is one deﬁ nition of: 
  a.  Index of protection  
  b.  Flash point  
  c.  Intrinsically safe  
   d.  Hazardous area.  
 Check your Understanding 

Ch 13
277
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1 
2
C3 
4 
5 
6 
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
 6.  A circuit in which no spark or thermal effect is capable of causing
  ignition of a given explosive atmosphere ’ us called: 
  a.  Index of protection  
  b.  Flash point  
  c.    Intrinsically safe  
  d.   Hazardous area.  
 7.  The person who is the company representative responsible for
  electrical safety in the work environment is called the: 
   a.  Supervisor  
   b.  Duty of care  
   c.  Duty holder  
   d.  Competent person.  
 8.  Everyone in the workplace has this responsibility for safety: 
   a.  First aid  
   b.  Slips, trips and falls  
   c.  Maintenance of tools and equipment  
   d.  Duty of care.  
 9.  If an Electricity at Work Regulation must be met regardless of cost we
  say it is: 
   a.  Important  
   b.  Practically impossible  
   c.  Reasonably practicable  
   d.  Absolute.  
 10.  If an Electricity at Work Regulation is to be met  but time, trouble and
  difﬁ culty can be taken into account we say it is: 
   a.  Important  
   b.  Practically impossible  
   c.  Reasonably practicable  
   d.  Absolute.  

 11.  List at least two Statutory Regulations which have an impact upon all 
electrotechnical activities and state your reasons why.  
 12.  List at least one code of practice which has an impact upon all 
electrotechnical activities and state the reason why.  
 13.  List seven sections within the IEE Regulations which have an impact 
upon electrical safety in buildings. 
 14.  List six types of building or situation to which the IEE Regulations 
alone will apply. 
 15.  List two types of installation or situation to which the IEE Regulations 
 alone will  not apply because the installation or situation is considered 
to be too dangerous. 
 16.  BS EN 60702: 2002 is the British Standard number for MICC cables 
and glands. What do these letters and numbers mean? 
 17.  A piece of electrical equipment is classiﬁ ed as having IP 24 protection. 
What does this mean?  
 18.  Describe the type of equipment and cable that would be suitable for 
wiring a petrol pump on a garage forecourt. 
 19.  Brieﬂ y describe (a) how a lightning protective system gives protection 
to a building and its occupants and (b) state the three main parts of 
such a system.  
 20.  Brieﬂ y describe how you would protect a tall thin construction, like a 
church spire, from a lightning strike.  

 Electrical installations and 
wiring systems  
 Ch 14 
279
 Unit 4 – Installation (Buildings and Structures) – Outcomes 2–4 
 Underpinning knowledge: when you have completed this chapter you should be able to: 
●  state the supply system earthing arrangements 
●  state the different types of electrical installation, components and functions 
●  state the different types of wiring enclosure and the factors that determine the choice of wiring system 
●  state the special arrangements required for: 
 
–  locations containing a bath or shower 
 
 –  construction and demolition sites 
 
 – agricultural and horticultural premises 
 
 – caravans and camping parks 
●  state the devices for ﬁ xing equipment to surfaces 
●  carry out calculations to determine cable size 
●  state the requirements for testing electrical installations 
of
o
ng
n
m
w
sy
w
ne the c
y
V
U
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
i
L1
L2
L3
C1
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply

Basic Electrical Installation Work
280
 Before beginning this ﬁ nal chapter on electrical installation wiring sys-
tems, the City and Guilds syllabus tells us to revise some of the work done 
in previous units because they are relevant to installing electrical equip-
ment and systems in buildings. I will tell you where to ﬁ nd the appropriate 
revision material in this book. 
●  Revision material 1
 Identify the sources of technical information. 
 This can be found in Chapter 3. 
●  Revision material 2
 Using technical information. 
 This can be found in Chapter 9. 
  These are two very small chapters and you should refresh your memory of 
these topics. This will probably be a good homework project before you start 
this ﬁ nal chapter of the Level 2 Certiﬁ cate in Electrotechnical Technology, 
looking at the different types of electrical installations and wiring systems. 
 Electricity supply systems 
  The British government agreed on 1 January 1995 that the electricity sup-
plies in the United Kingdom would be harmonized with those of the rest of 
Europe. Thus the voltages used previously in low-voltage supply systems 
of 415 and 240  V have become 400  V for three-phase supplies and 230  V for 
single-phase supplies. The Electricity Supply Regulations 1988 have also 
been amended to permit a range of variation from the new declared nomi-
nal voltage. From January 1995 the permitted tolerance is the nominal volt-
age  10% or   6%. Previously it was   6%. This gives a voltage range of 216 
to 253       V for a nominal voltage of 230       V and 376 to 440       V for a nominal volt-
age of 400  V (IEE Regulation Appendix 2 para 14). 
   It is further proposed that the tolerance levels will be adjusted to   10% 
of the declared nominal voltage. All European Union countries will adjust 
their voltages to comply with a nominal voltage of 230       V single phase and 
400  V three phase. 
  The supply to a domestic, commercial or small industrial consumer’s 
installation is usually protected at the incoming service cable position with 
a 100       A high breaking capacity (HBC) fuse. The maximum, that is, worst 
case value of external earth fault loop impedance outside of the consum-
er’s domestic installation is: 
 0.8  Ω for cable sheath earth supplies (TN-S system) 
 0.35  Ω for protective multiple earthing (PME) supplies (TN-C-S system) 
 21.0  Ω  excluding the consumer’s earth electrode for no earth supplies (TT 
system). 
  The maximum, that is, worst case value of prospective short-circuit current 
is 16  kA at the supply terminals (Ref. On Site Guide and Part P Chapter 3). 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
281
   Other items of equipment at this position are the energy meter and the 
consumer’s distribution unit, providing the protection for the ﬁ nal circuits 
and the earthing arrangements for the installation. 
An efﬁ cient and effective earthing system is essential to allow protective 
devices to operate . The limiting values of earth fault loop impedance are 
given in Tables 41.2 to 41.4 of the IEE Regulations, and Chapter 54 and Wiring 
Systems of Part 2 gives details of the earthing arrangements to be incor-
porated in the supply system to meet the requirements of the Regulations. 
Five systems are described in the deﬁ nitions but only the TN-S, TN-C-S 
and TT systems are suitable for public supplies. 
   A system consists of an electrical installation connected to a supply. 
Systems are classiﬁ ed by a capital letter designation. 
   THE SUPPLY EARTHING 
  The supply earthing arrangements are indicated by the ﬁ rst letter, where 
T means one or more points of the supply are directly connected to earth 
and I means the supply is not earthed or one point is earthed through a 
fault-limiting impedance. 
   THE INSTALLATION EARTHING 
  The installation earthing arrangements are indicated by the second let-
ter, where T means the exposed conductive parts are connected directly to 
earth and N means the exposed conductive parts are connected directly to 
the earthed point of the source of the electrical supply. 
  THE EARTHED SUPPLY CONDUCTOR 
  The earthed supply conductor arrangements are indicated by the third 
letter, where S means a separate neutral and protective conductor and C 
means that the neutral and protective conductors are combined in a single 
conductor. 
  CABLE SHEATH EARTH SUPPLY (TN-S SYSTEM) 
  This is one of the most common types of supply system to be found in the 
United Kingdom where the electricity companies ’  supply is provided by 
underground cables. The neutral and protective conductor are separate 
throughout the system. The protective earth conductor (PE) is the metal 
sheath and armour of the underground cable, and this is connected to the 
consumer’s main earthing terminal. All extraneous conductive parts of the 
installation, gas pipes, water pipes and any lightning protective system are 
connected to the protective conductor via the main earthing terminal of 
the installation. The arrangement is shown in  Fig. 14.1    and Fig. 2.3 of the 
IEE Regulations. 
  PROTECTIVE MULTIPLE EARTHING SUPPLIES (TN-C-S SYSTEM) 
  This type of underground supply is becoming increasingly popular to sup-
ply new installations in the United Kingdom. It is more commonly referred 
to as protective multiple earthing (PME). The supply cable uses a combined 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
282
protective earth and neutral conductor (PEN conductor). At the supply 
intake point a consumer’s main earthing terminal is formed by connecting 
the earthing terminal to the neutral conductor. All extraneous conductive 
parts of the installation, gas pipes, water pipes and any lightning protec-
tive system are then connected to the main earthing terminals. Thus phase 
to earth faults are effectively converted into phase to neutral faults. The 
arrangement is shown in  Fig. 14.2 and Fig. 2.4 of the IEE Regulations. 
  NO EARTH PROVIDED SUPPLIES (TT SYSTEM) 
  This is the type of supply more often found when the installation is fed 
from overhead cables. The supply authorities do not provide an earth ter-
minal and the installation’s circuit protective conductors (CPCs) must be 
connected to earth via an earth electrode provided by the consumer. An 
effective earth connection is sometimes difﬁ cult to obtain and in most 
cases a residual current device (RCD) is provided when this type of supply 
is used. The arrangement is shown in  Fig. 14.3 . 
            Figures 14.1, 14.2 and 14.3  show the layout of a typical domestic service 
position for these three supply systems. There are two other systems of 
supply, the TN-C and IT systems but they do not comply with the supply 
Main switch
Main protective
earthing
terminal
16mm2
L N N L
Label – Safety electrical
connection (do not remove)
Protective equipotential
bonding conductors
Label – Safety
electrical connection
(do not remove)
10 mm2
100A
10 mm2
Water
service
pipe
Electricity supply
Gas
service
pipe
Gas meter
Metal gas
pipe
Lights, cooker
water heating
CPC
Socket
outlets
25mm2 tails
kwh
30 mA
RCD
16 mm2
 FIGURE 14.1 
 Cable Sheath Earth Supplies (TN-S system): showing earthing and bonding arrangements. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
283
regulations and therefore cannot be used for public supplies. Their use is 
restricted to private generating plants. For this reason I shall not include 
them here but they can be seen in Part 2 of the IEE Regulations. 
 Wiring and lighting circuits 
  Table 1A in Appendix 1 of the  On Site Guide  deals with the assumed current 
demand of points, and states that for lighting outlets we should assume a 
current equivalent to a minimum of 100       W per lampholder. This means that 
for a domestic lighting circuit rated at 5  A, a maximum of 11 lighting outlets 
could be connected to each circuit. In practice, it is usual to divide the ﬁ xed 
lighting outlets into a convenient number of circuits of seven or eight out-
lets each. In this way the whole installation is not plunged into darkness if 
one lighting circuit fuses and complies with Regulation 314.1 which tells us 
to  ‘ divide into circuits to minimize inconvenience and avoid danger ’ . 
   Lighting circuits are usually wired in 1.0 or 1.5       mm cable using either a 
loop-in or joint-box method of installation. The loop-in method is uni-
versally employed with conduit installations or when access from above 
Main switch
Main protective
earthing
terminal
L N N L
Label – Safety electrical
connection (do not remove)
Label – Safety
electrical connection
(do not remove)
10 mm2
100A
10 mm2
Water
service
pipe
Electricity supply
Gas
service
pipe
Gas meter
Metal gas
pipe
Lights, cooker
water heating
CPC
Socket
outlets
25mm2 tails
kwh
30 mA
RCD
16 mm2
Protective equipotential
bonding conductors
 FIGURE 14.2 
 Protective Multiple Earthing Supply (TN-C-S system): showing earthing and bonding arrangements 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
284
or below is prohibited after installation, as is the case with some indus-
trial installations or blocks of ﬂ ats. In this method the only joints are at the 
switches or lighting points, the live conductors being looped from switch 
to switch and the neutrals from one lighting point to another. 
  The use of junction boxes with ﬁ xed brass terminals is the method often 
adopted in domestic installations, since the joint boxes can be made acces-
sible but are out of site in the loft area and under ﬂ oorboards. However, 
every connection must remain accessible for inspection, testing and main-
tenance (Regulation 526.3). 
  The live conductors must be broken at the switch position in order to 
comply with the polarity regulations 612.7. A ceiling rose may only be 
connected to installations operating at 250       V maximum and must only 
accommodate one ﬂ exible cord unless it is specially designed to take more 
than one (Regulations 559.6.1.2 and 559.6.1.3). Lampholders suspended 
from ﬂ exible cords must be capable of suspending the mass of the lumi-
naire ﬁ xed to the lampholder (Regulation 559.6.1.5). 
100 mA RCD
Consumer unit with 
insulated enclosure
Main protective
earthing
terminal
Electricity
supply
(usually
overhead)
L N N L
Label – Safety electrical connection
(do not remove)
Label – Safety
electrical connection
(do not remove)
10mm2
100A
10mm2
Water
service
pipe
Earth rod
Gas
service
pipe
Gas meter
Metal
gas
pipe
Lights, cooker
water heating
CPC
Socket
outlets
25mm2 tails
30 mA
RCD
16mm2
kwh
Protective equipotential
bonding conductors
 FIGURE 14.3 
 No Supply Earth Provided (TT systems): showing earthing and bonding arrangements 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
285
  The method of ﬁ xing must be capable of carrying a mass of not less than 
5  kg. Suspended ceilings are considered to be  ‘ stable ’ or ﬁ rmly ﬁ xed and 
may, therefore, support luminaires. 
 A luminaire, that is, a light ﬁ tting or small spot light must be ﬁ xed at an 
adequate distance from combustible material, or as recommended by the 
manufacturer, or be enclosed in non-ﬂ ammable material (Regulations 
422.3.1, 422.3.8, 422.4.4 and 559.5.1).
 Safety First  
 Fire 
 ● 
 Mini-spots get hot in use 
 ● 
 Cutting a hole in a ceiling may 
compromise the fi re integrity of 
the room 
 ● 
 Fix spots away from combustible 
material 
 ● 
 Follow manufacturers’ fi tting 
instructions  
 ● 
 Consider installing fi re hoods. 
  The type of circuit used will depend upon the installation conditions and 
the customer’s requirements. One light controlled by one switch is called 
one-way switch control (see  Fig. 14.4   ). A room with two access doors might 
beneﬁ t from a two-way switch control (see  Fig. 14.5   ) so that the lights 
Blue
Blue
Junction box
Two-way switches
C
Brown
Brown
Brown
Brown
Black
Grey
Grey
Black
Neutral
CPC
Line
Lamp
 FIGURE 14.5 
 Wiring diagram of two-way switch control. 
Blue
Blue
Blue
Brown
C
Brown
Brown
Brown sleeve
One-way switch
Junction box
Lamp
Neutral
CPC
Line
 FIGURE 14.4 
 Wiring diagram of one-way switch control. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
286
may be switched on or off at either position. A long staircase with more 
than two switches controlling the same lights would require intermediate 
switching (see  Fig. 14.6 ). 
  One-way, two-way or intermediate switches can be obtained as plate 
switches for wall mounting or ceiling mounted cord switches. Cord 
switches can provide a convenient method of control in bedrooms or bath-
rooms and for independently controlling an ofﬁ ce luminaire. 
  To convert an existing one-way switch control into a two-way switch con-
trol, a three-core and earth cable is run from the existing switch position 
to the proposed second switch position. The existing one-way switch is 
replaced by a two-way switch and connected as shown in  Fig. 14.7 . 
Blue
Blue
Blue
Blue
Junction box
Two-way
switches  A and C
Intermediate
switch  B
C
Brown
Brown
Brown
Brown
Brown
Brown
Black
Grey
Grey
Black
Neutral
CPC
Line
Lamp
A
B
C
 FIGURE 14.6 
 Wiring diagram of intermediate switch control. 
Blue
Blue
Blue
Junction box
Brown
Brown
Brown
Brown sleeve
Brown
Black
Grey
Neutral
CPC
Line
Lamp
C
C
Two-way
switches
 FIGURE 14.7 
 Wiring diagram of one-way converted to two-way switch control. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
287
 Building regulations for switches and sockets 
   Socket outlets must be mounted at a height above the ﬂ oor or work surface 
so as to minimize the risk of mechanical damage (IEE Regulation 553.1.6). 
   Part M of the Building Regulations requires switches and socket outlets in 
dwellings to be installed so that all persons, including those whose reach 
is limited, can easily reach them. The recommendation is that they should 
be installed in habitable rooms at a height of between 450 and 1200  mm 
from the ﬁ nished ﬂ oor level. This is shown in  Fig. 14.8   . The guidance given 
applies to all new dwellings but not to rewires. However, these recom-
mendations will undoubtedly  ‘ inﬂ uence ’  decisions taken when rewiring 
dwellings. 
 Building regulations for energy-efﬁ cient lighting 
   Part P of the Building Regulations relates to Electrical Safety in Dwellings. 
All new installations must comply with the Part P Regulations and any 
other relevant parts of the Building Regulations. Approved document L1, 
Conservation of Fuel and Power is relevant to us as electricians because it 
says that reasonable provision shall be made to provide lighting systems 
with energy-efﬁ cient lamps and sufﬁ cient controls so that electrical energy 
can be used efﬁ ciently. Part L describes two methods of compliance with 
these Regulations for both internal and external lighting. It says: 
●      A reasonable number of internal lighting points should be wired that 
will only take energy-efﬁ cient lamps such as ﬂ uorescent tubes and 
compact ﬂ uorescent lamps, CFLs. 
●  External lighting ﬁ xed to the building, including lighting in porches 
but not lighting in garages or carports, should provide reasonable 
provision for energy-efﬁ cient lamps such as ﬂ uorescent tubes and 
CFLs. These lamps should automatically extinguish in daylight and 
when not required at night, by being controlled by Passive infra-red 
(PIR) detectors. 
  The traditional light bulb, called a GLS (general lighting service) lamp is 
hopelessly bad in energy efﬁ ciency terms, producing only 14 lumens of 
light output for every electrical watt input. Fluorescent tubes and CFLs 
Maximum
Minimum
Maximum
Minimum
1200
450
450
1200
Skirting
Telephone
socket
Light switch
Door bell
Door entry
  phone
TV aerial
socket
Double
sockets
 FIGURE 14.8 
 Fixing positions of switches and socket outlets. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
288
produce more than 40 lumens of light output for every watt input. The 
Government calculates that if every British household was to replace three 
60 or 100       W light bulbs with CFLs, the energy saving would be greater than 
the power used by the entire street lighting network. 
   Mr. Hilary Benn, the Environment Secretary, has announced that the tradi-
tional GLS light bulbs of 150, 100, 60 and 40       W will begin to be phased out 
by 2010. Thus, households will have to use more energy-efﬁ cient lamps in 
the future. 
 Let us now look at four different types of lamp. 
 GLS lamps 
   GLS lamps produce light as a result of the heating effect of an electrical 
current. Most of the electricity goes to producing heat and a little to pro-
ducing light. A ﬁ ne tungsten wire is ﬁ rst coiled and coiled again to form 
the incandescent ﬁ lament of the GLS lamp. The coiled coil arrangement 
reduces ﬁ lament cooling and increases the light output by allowing the ﬁ l-
ament to operate at a higher temperature. The light output covers the vis-
ible spectrum, giving a warm white to yellow light with a colour rendering 
quality classiﬁ ed as fairly good. The efﬁ cacy of the GLS lamp is 14 lumens 
per watt over its intended lifespan of 1000  h. 
 The ﬁ lament lamp in its simplest form is a purely functional light source 
which is unchallenged on the domestic market despite the manufacture of 
more efﬁ cient lamps. One factor which may have contributed to its popular-
ity is that lamp designers have been able to modify the glass envelope of the 
lamp to give a very pleasing decorative appearance, as shown by  Fig. 14.9   . 
 FIGURE 14.9 
 Some decorative GLS lamp shapes. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
289
  Tungsten Halogen Dichroic Reﬂ ector Miniature Spot Lamps
 Tungsten Halogen Dichroic Reﬂ ector Miniature Spot Lamps  such as the 
one shown in  Fig. 14.10    are extremely popular in the lighting schemes of 
the new millennium. Their small size and bright white illumination makes 
them very popular in both commercial and domestic installations. They are 
available as a 12  V bi-pin package in 20, 35 and 50  W and as a 230  V bayonet 
type cap (called a GU10 or GZ10 cap) in 20, 35 and 50       W. At 20 lumens of 
light output over its intended lifespan of 2000       h they are more energy efﬁ -
cient than GLS lamps. However, only lamps offering more than 40 lumens 
of light output are considered energy efﬁ cient by the Government’s criteria.  
 Discharge lamps 
   Discharge lamps do not produce light by means of an incandescent ﬁ lament 
but by the excitation of a gas or metallic vapour contained within a glass 
envelope. A voltage applied to two terminals or electrodes sealed into the end 
of a glass tube containing a gas or metallic vapour will excite the contents and 
produce light directly. Fluorescent tubes and CFLs operate on this principle. 
  FLUORESCENT TUBE 
 A ﬂ uorescent lamp is a linear arc tube, internally coated with a ﬂ uorescent 
powder, containing a low-pressure mercury vapour discharge. The lamp 
construction is shown in Fig. 10.23 and the control circuit in Fig 10.24.
 FIGURE 14.10 
 Tungsten Halogen Dichroic Reﬂ ector Lamp. 
 Definition  
 A fl uorescent lamp is a linear arc tube, 
internally coated with a fl uorescent 
powder, containing a low-pressure 
mercury vapour discharge. 
  COMPACT FLUORESCENT LAMPS 
CFLs are miniature ﬂ uorescent lamps designed to replace ordinary GLS 
lamps. They are available in a variety of shapes and sizes so that they can 
be ﬁ tted into existing light ﬁ ttings.  Figure 14.11    shows three typical shapes. 
The  ‘ stick ’  type give most of their light output radially while the ﬂ at  ‘ double 
D ’ type give most of their light output above and below.
 Definition  
 CFLs are miniature fl uorescent lamps 
designed to replace ordinary GLS 
lamps. 
 Energy-efﬁ cient lamps use electricity much more efﬁ ciently than an equiv-
alent GLS lamp. For example, a 20       W energy-efﬁ cient lamp will give the 
same light output as a 100  W GLS lamp. An 11  W energy-efﬁ cient lamp is 
 FIGURE 14.11 
 Energy-efﬁ cient lamps. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
290
equivalent to a 60  W GLS lamp. Energy-efﬁ cient lamps also have a lifespan 
of about eight times longer than a GLS lamp and so, they do use energy 
very efﬁ ciently. 
 However, energy-efﬁ cient lamps are expensive to purchase and they do 
take a few minutes to attain full brilliance after switching on. They cannot 
always be controlled by a dimmer switch and are unsuitable for incor-
porating in an automatic presence detector because they are usually not 
switched on long enough to be worthwhile, but energy-efﬁ cient lamps 
are excellent for outside security lighting which is left on for several hours 
each night. 
 The electrical contractor, in discussion with a customer, must balance the 
advantages and disadvantages of energy-efﬁ cient lamps compared to other 
sources of illumination for each individual installation.
 Radial circuits 
   In a radial circuit each socket outlet is fed from the previous one. Live is 
connected to live, neutral to neutral and earth to earth at each socket outlet. 
The fuse and cable sizes are given in Appendix 15 of the  IEE Regulations but 
circuits may also be expressed with a block diagram, as shown in  Fig. 14.12   . 
The number of permitted socket outlets is unlimited but each radial circuit 
must not exceed the ﬂ oor area stated and the known or estimated load. 
  Where two or more circuits are installed in the same premises, the socket 
outlets and permanently connected equipment should be reasonably 
shared out among the circuits, so that the total load is balanced. 
  When designing ring or radial circuits special consideration should be 
given to the loading in kitchens which may require separate circuits. This 
 
 Key Fact  
 Lighting 
 ● 
 Fluorescent tubes and CFLs  are 
 energy-effi  cient lamps. 
  Wiring and socket outlet circuits 
  Where portable equipment is to be used it should be connected by a plug 
top to a conveniently accessible socket outlet, taking into account the 
length of the ﬂ exible cord normally ﬁ tted to portable equipment (IEE 
Regulation 553.1.7). The length of ﬂ exible cord is usually no longer than 
2       m and so, pressing the plug top into a socket outlet connects the appli-
ance to the source of supply. Socket outlets therefore provide an easy 
and convenient method of connecting portable electrical appliances to a 
source of supply.
 
 Definition  
 Socket outlets therefore provide an 
easy and convenient method of con-
necting portable electrical appliances 
to a source of supply. 
   Socket outlets can be obtained in 15, 13, 5 and 2       A ratings (see IEE Table 
55.1), but the 13       A ﬂ at pin shuttered type complying with BS 1363 is the 
most popular for domestic installations in the United Kingdom. Each 13       A 
plug top contains a cartridge fuse to give maximum potential protection to 
the ﬂ exible cord and the appliances which it serves. 
   Socket outlets may be wired on a ring or radial circuit and in order that 
every appliance can be fed from an adjacent and convenient socket outlet, 
the number of sockets is unlimited provided that the ﬂ oor area covered by 
the circuit does not exceed that given in Appendix 15 of the  IEE Regulations.
 Key Fact  
 Socket outlets 
 ● 
 additional 30  mA RCD protection 
is required for socket outlet circuits 
 ● 
 if used by ordinary people 
 ● 
 and intended for general use 
 ● 
 IEE Regulations 411.3.1 and 
415.1.1. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
291
Maximum floor area 75 m2
Maximum floor area 50 m2
2.5 mm2 PVC cable
4 mm2 PVC cable
etc.
etc.
Fuse or MCB
Fuse or MCB
30 or 32 A
20 A
30mA
30mA
RCD
RCD
 FIGURE 14.12 
 Block diagram of radial circuits. 
30
or
32 A
30 mA
Fuse
or
MCB
RCD
Maximum floor area 100 m2
2.5 mm2 PVC cable
 FIGURE 14.13 
 Block diagram of ring circuits. 
is because the maximum demand of current-using equipment in kitchens 
may exceed the rating of the circuit cable and protection devices. 
   Ring and radial circuits may be used for domestic or other premises where 
the maximum demand of the current-using equipment is estimated not to 
exceed the rating of the protective devices for the chosen circuit. 
 Ring circuits 
   Ring circuits are very similar to radial circuits in that each socket outlet is 
fed from the previous one, but in ring circuits the last socket is wired back 
to the source of supply. Each ring ﬁ nal circuit conductor must be looped 
into every socket outlet or joint box which forms the ring and must be elec-
trically continuous throughout its length. The number of permitted socket 
outlets is unlimited but each ring circuit must not cover more than 100       m 2
of ﬂ oor area. 
  The circuit details are given in Appendix 15 of the  IEE Regulations but may 
also be expressed by the block diagram given in  Fig. 14.13 . 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
292
  SPURS TO RING CIRCUITS 
 A spur is deﬁ ned in Part 2 of the Regulations as a branch cable from a ring 
ﬁ nal circuit. 
  NON-FUSED SPURS 
  The total number of non-fused spurs must not exceed the total number 
of socket outlets and pieces of stationary equipment connected directly 
in the circuit. The cable used for non-fused spurs must not be less than 
that of the ring circuit. The requirements concerning spurs are given in 
Appendix 15 of the  IEE Regulations  but the various circuit arrangements 
may be expressed by the block diagrams of  Fig. 14.14 . 
 A non-fused spur may only feed one single or one twin socket outlet. 
 Non-fused spurs may be connected into the ring circuit at the terminals of 
socket outlets or at joint boxes or at the origin of the circuit. 
  FUSED SPURS 
  The total number of fused spurs is unlimited. A fused spur is connected to 
the circuit through a fused connection unit, the rating of which should be 
suitable for the conductor forming the spur but should not exceed 13       A. The 
requirements for fused spurs are also given in Appendix 15 but the various 
circuit arrangements may be expressed by the block diagrams of  Fig. 14.15 . 
  The general arrangement shown in  Fig. 14.16    shows 11 socket outlets con-
nected to the ring, three non-fused spur connections and two fused spur 
connections. 
Part of 
ring circuit
Part of 
ring circuit
Part of 
ring circuit
30mA
RCD
 FIGURE 14.14 
 Connection of non-fused spurs. 
To ring main
To ring main
To ring main
To ring main
Permanently
connected
equipment
Permanently
connected
equipment
Fuse connecting unit and separate switch
Fuse connecting unit incorporating switch
Fuse connecting unit (13A max) and locally controlled equipment
Permanently
connected
equipment
Circuit breaker not exceeding 16A
Clock
Fan
 FIGURE 14.15 
 Connection of fused spurs. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
293
 Socket outlet numbers 
  The Regulations allow us to install an unlimited number of socket outlets, 
the restriction being that each circuit must not exceed a given ﬂ oor area as 
shown in  Figs. 14.12 and 14.13 . 
  These days most households have lots of domestic appliances and electronic 
equipment, so how many sockets should be installed? Ultimately this is a 
matter for the customer and the electrical designer but most consumer orga-
nizations, the house builders NHBC and the Royal Society for the Prevention 
of Accidents (ROSPA) make the following general recommendations: 
●      The hard wiring for a single socket outlet is the same as the hard wir-
ing for a double socket outlet. So, always install a double switched 
socket outlet unless there is a reason not to. 
●      Kitchens will require between six and ten double sockets, ﬁ tted both 
above and below the work surface for speciﬁ c appliances.  
●  Utility room – two double sockets. 
●      Sitting rooms will require between six and ten double sockets with 
one double socket situated next to any telephone outlet to power 
telecommunication equipment and two double sockets adjacent to 
the TV aerial outlet for TV, video and DVD supplies. 
●  Double bedrooms – four to six double sockets. 
●  Single bedrooms – four to six double sockets. 
●      Hallways – two double sockets with one situated next to any tele-
phone outlet. 
●  Home Ofﬁ ce – six double sockets. 
●  Garage – two double sockets. 
Fused
spur
Fixed
appliance
Fixed
appliance
Non-fused spur
Non-fused spur
Non-fused spur
Switched fused spur
 FIGURE 14.16 
 Typical ring circuit with spurs. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
294
    Try This  
 Sockets 
 ● 
 How many sockets are there in your home? 
 ● 
 How many sockets have you installed at work on a new build house? 
 ● 
 How does your experience relate to the numbers recommended here? 
 Additional protection for socket outlets 
   Additional protection by 30       mA RCD is required in addition to overcurrent 
protection for all socket outlet circuits to be used by ordinary persons and 
intended for general use. 
  This additional protection is provided in case basic protection or fault 
protection fails or if the user of the installation is careless (IEE Regulation 
415.1.1).
 An ordinary person is one who is neither an electrically skilled or 
instructed person.
 Definition  
 An ordinary person is one who is nei-
ther an electrically skilled or instructed 
person. 
  Water heating circuits 
   A small, single-point over-sink type water heater may be considered as a 
permanently connected appliance and so may be connected to a ring cir-
cuit through a fused connection unit. A water heater of the immersion 
type is usually rated at a maximum of 3       kW, and could be considered as 
a permanently connected appliance, fed from a fused connection unit. 
However, many immersion heating systems are connected into storage 
vessels of about 150 litres in domestic installations, and the  On Site Guide
states that immersion heaters ﬁ tted to vessels in excess of 15 litres should 
be supplied by their own circuit. 
  Therefore, immersion heaters must be wired on a separate radial circuit 
when they are connected to water vessels which hold more than 15 litres 
.  Figure. 14.17    shows the wiring arrangements for an immersion heater. 
Every switch must be a double-pole (DP) switch and out of reach of any-
one using a ﬁ xed bath or shower when the immersion heater is ﬁ tted to a 
vessel in a bathroom. 
   Supplementary equipotential bonding to pipework  will only be required
as an addition to fault protection (IEE Regulation 415.2) if the immersion 
heater vessel is in a bathroom that  does not have : 
  (i)  all circuits protected by a 30  mA RCD  and
 (ii)    protective equipotential bonding (IEE Regulation 701.415.2) as 
shown in Fig. 6.7. 
    Try This  
 Defi nition 
 ● 
 Write in the margin a defi nition of a  ‘ skilled ’ person. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
295
   See the section on supplementary equipotential bonding later in this chap-
ter and  Fig. 14.64 . 
 Electric space heating circuits 
   Electrical heating systems can be broadly divided into two categories: 
unrestricted local heating and off-peak heating. 
   Unrestricted local heating may be provided by portable electric radiators 
which plug into the socket outlets of the installation. Fixed heaters that 
are wall mounted or inset must be connected through a fused connection 
and incorporate a local switch, either on the heater itself or as a part of the 
fuse connecting unit, as shown in  Fig. 14.15 . Heating appliances where the 
heating element can be touched must have a DP switch which disconnects 
all conductors. This requirement includes radiators which have an element 
inside a silica-glass sheath. 
   Off-peak heating systems may provide central heating from storage radia-
tors, ducted warm air or underﬂ oor heating elements. All three systems use 
the thermal storage principle, whereby a large mass of heat-retaining mate-
rial is heated during the off-peak period and allowed to emit the stored heat 
throughout the day. The ﬁ nal circuits of all off-peak heating installations must 
be fed from a separate supply controlled by an electricity board time clock. 
  When calculating the size of cable required to supply a single-storage 
radiator, it is good practice to assume a current demand equal to 3.4       kW at 
each point. This will allow the radiator to be changed at a future time with 
the minimum disturbance to the installation. Each radiator must have a 
20       A DP means of isolation adjacent to the heater and the ﬁ nal connection 
should be via a ﬂ ex outlet. See  Fig. 14.18 for wiring arrangements. 
   Ducted warm air systems have a centrally sited thermal storage heater with 
a high storage capacity. The unit is charged during the off-peak period, and 
a fan drives the stored heat in the form of warm air through large air ducts 
to outlet grilles in the various rooms. The wiring arrangements for this type 
of heating are shown in  Fig. 14.19 . 
DP switch for
functional switching
DP switch for local
isolation during maintenance
Heat resistant
flexible cord
Supplementary
bonding
Water vessel
15 A switch fuse
or 15 A fuse in
consumer’s unit
 FIGURE 14.17 
 Immersion heater wiring. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
296
  The single-storage heater is heated by an electric element embedded in 
bricks and rated between 6 and 15       kW depending upon its thermal capac-
ity. A radiator of this capacity must be supplied on its own circuit, in cable 
capable of carrying the maximum current demand and protected by a fuse 
or miniature circuit breaker (MCB) of 30, 45 or 60       A as appropriate. At the 
heater position, a DP switch must be installed to terminate the ﬁ xed heater 
wiring. The ﬂ exible cables used for the ﬁ nal connection to the heaters must 
be of the heat-resistant type. 
   Floor warming installations use the thermal storage properties of concrete. 
Special cables are embedded in the concrete ﬂ oor screed during construc-
tion. When current is passed through the cables they become heated, 
the concrete absorbs this heat and radiates it into the room. The wiring 
arrangements are shown in  Fig. 14.20   . Once heated, the concrete will give 
off heat for a long time after the supply is switched off and is, therefore, 
suitable for connection to an off-peak supply. 
 Underﬂ oor heating cables installed in bathrooms or shower rooms must 
incorporate an earthed metallic sheath or be covered by an earthed 
Storage
heater
Storage
heater
Storage
heater
15A fuse in consumer’s
unit connected to off-peak
2.5 mm cable
20 A DP switch
30A fuse in consumer’s
unit connected to off-peak
4.0 mm cable
4.0 mm cable
 FIGURE 14.18 
 Possible wiring arrangements for storage heaters. 
Main control and
means of protection
connected to off-peak
Suitable PVC-insulated
copper cable, 4, 6, or 10 mm
30, 45 or 60 A
DP switch providing
means of isolation
Ducting to
various rooms
High-resistant cable
Outlet grilles
High-capacity
thermal
storage
heater
 FIGURE 14.19 
 Ducted warm air heating system. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
297
metallic grid connected to the protective conductor of the supply circuit 
(Regulation 701.753). 
 Cooker circuit 
   A cooker with a rating above 3       kW must be supplied on its own circuit but 
since it is unlikely that in normal use every heating element will be switched 
on at the same time, a diversity factor may be applied in calculating the 
cable size, as detailed in the  On Site Guide.
   Consider, as an example, a cooker with the following elements fed from a 
cooker control unit incorporating a 13  A socket: 
4
2
8000
1
2
2000
1
2


 



 kW fast boiling rings
W
 kW grill
 W
 kW ooven
 W
Total loading
 000 W


2000
12
 When connected to 230   V 
Current rating
A


12000
230
52 17
.
 Applying the diversity factor of Table 1A 
Total current rating
A
First 10 amperes
A
 of 


52 17
10
30
42 1
.
%
. 77
12 65
5
10
12 65
A
A
Socket outlet
A
Assessed current demand




.
.


5
27 65
.
A
A
30A
Cables embedded
in concrete
floor
20A
A  Thermostat incorporating DP switch fed by 2.5 mm PVC/copper
B  DP switch fuse fed by 4.0 mm PVC/copper
C  Thermostat fed by 2.5 mm PVC/copper
Lounge
Hall
Bedroom
B
B
C
C
 FIGURE 14.20 
 Floor warming installations. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
298
  Therefore, a cable capable of carrying 27.65       A may be used safely rather 
than a 52.17  A cable. 
   A cooking appliance must be controlled by a switch separate from the 
cooker but in a readily accessible position. Where two cooking appliances 
are installed in one room, such as split-level cookers, one switch may be 
used to control both appliances provided that neither appliance is more 
than 2  m from the switch ( On Site Guide , Appendix 8). 
 Conductor size calculations 
 The size of a cable to be used for an installation depends upon: 
●      the current rating of the cable under deﬁ ned installation conditions 
and  
●      the maximum permitted drop in voltage as deﬁ ned by Regulation 
525. 
 The factors which inﬂ uence the current rating are: 
 1.  Design current : cable must carry the full load current. 
 2.  Type of cable : PVC, MICC, copper conductors or aluminium 
conductors. 
 3.  Installed conditions : clipped to a surface or installed with other 
cables in a trunking. 
 4.  Surrounding temperature : cable resistance increases as temperature 
increases and insulation may melt if the temperature is too high. 
 5.  Type of protection : for how long will the cable have to carry a fault 
current? 
   Regulation 525 states that the drop in voltage from the supply terminals to 
the ﬁ xed current-using equipment must not exceed 3% for lighting circuits 
and 5% for other uses of the mains voltage. That is a maximum of 6.9       V for 
lighting and 11.5  V for other uses on a 230  V installation. The volt drop for a 
particular cable may be found from: 
VD 


Factor
Design current
Length of run
  The factor is given in the tables of Appendix 4 of the IEE Regulations and 
Appendix 6 of the  On Site Guide. They are also given in  Table 14.3 . 
 The cable rating, denoted  It , may be determined as follows: 
It
Current rating of protective device
Any applicable corre

ction factors

Electrical installations and wiring systems
299
  The cable rating must be chosen to comply with Regulation 433.1. The cor-
rection factors which may need applying are given below as: 
  Ca       the ambient or surrounding temperature correction factor, which is 
given in Tables 4B1 and 4B2 of Appendix 4 of the IEE Regulations. They 
are also shown in  Table 14.1 . 
  Cg       the grouping correction factor given in Tables 4C1 to 4C5 of the IEE 
Regulations and Table 6C of the  On Site Guide . 
  Cc       the 0.725 correction factor to be applied when semi-enclosed fuses pro-
tect the circuit as described in item 5.1.1 of the preface to Appendix 4 of 
the IEE Regulations. 
  Ci       the correction factor to be used when cables are enclosed in thermal 
insulation. Regulation 523.6.6 gives us three possible correction values: 
●      Where one side of the cable is in contact with thermal insulation 
we must read the current rating from the column in the table which 
relates to reference method A (see  Table 14.2 ). 
●  Where the cable is  totally  surrounded over a length greater than 
0.5  m we must apply a factor of 0.5. 
●  Where the cable is  totally surrounded over a short length, the appro-
priate factor given in Table 52.2 of the IEE Regulations or Table 6B of 
the On Site Guide should be applied. 
Note : A cable should preferably  not be installed in thermal insulations. 
   Having calculated the cable rating,  It  the smallest cable should be chosen 
from the appropriate table which will carry that current. This cable must 
also meet the voltage drop Regulation 525 and this should be calculated 
as described earlier. When the calculated value is less than 3% for lighting 
and 5% for other uses of the mains voltage the cable may be considered 
suitable. If the calculated value is greater than this value, the next larger 
cable size must be tested until  a cable is found which meets both the cur-
rent rating and voltage drop criteria.
 Table 14.1    Ambient Temperature Correction Factors. Adapted from the IEE  On Site Guide by Kind 
Permission of the Institution of Electrical Engineers  
 Table 4B1 of IEE Regulations 
 Correction factors for ambient temperature where protection is against short-circuit and overload 
 Type of
insulation 
 Operating 
temperature 
 Ambient temperature (°C) 
   25 
   30 
   35 
   40 
   45 
   50 
   55 
   60 
 65 
 Thermoplastic 
(general 
purpose PVC) 
 70°C 
 1.03 
 1.0 
 0.94 
 0.87 
 0.79 
 0.71 
 0.61 
 0.50 
 NA 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
300
 Example 
 A house extension has a total load of 6  kW installed some 18  m away from the mains 
consumer unit for lighting. A PVC insulated and sheathed twin and earth cable will provide a 
sub-main to this load and be clipped to the side of the ceiling joists over much of its length 
in a roof space which is anticipated to reach 35°C in the summer and where insulation is 
installed up to the top of the joists. Calculate the minimum cable size if the circuit is to be 
protected by a type B MCB to BS EN 60878. Assume a TN-S supply, that is, a supply having a 
separate neutral and protective conductor throughout. 
 Let us solve this question using only the tables given in the  On Site Guide . The tables in the 
Regulations will give the same values, but this will simplify the problem because we can. Refer 
to  Tables 14.1, 14.2 and 14.3 which give the relevant On Site Guide Tables. 
Design current, 
Power
Volts
 W
V
 A
bI 


6000
230
26 09
.
 
 Table 14.2    Current Carrying Capacity of Cables. Adapted from the IEE On Site Guide by Kind Permission of the 
Institution of Electrical Engineers  
 Multicore cables having thermoplastic (PVC) or thermosetting insulation, non-armoured, (COPPER CONDUCTORS) 
 Table 4D1A of IEE Regulations 
 Ambient temperature: 30°C. Conductor operating temperature: 70°C 
 Current-carrying capacity (Amperes): BS 6004, BS 7629 
 Conductor 
cross-
sectional 
area 
 Reference Method A 
(enclosed in conduit in an 
insulated wall, etc.) 
 Reference Method B 
(enclosed in conduit on 
a wall or ceiling, or in 
trunking) 
 Reference Method C 
(clipped direct) 
 Reference Method F (on 
a perforated cable tray) 
or (free air) 
 Two cables 
single-
phase a.c. 
or d.c. 
 Three or 
four cables 
three-
phase a.c. 
 One two-
core cable, 
single-
phase a.c. 
or d.c. 
 One three-
core cable 
or one four-
core cable, 
three-phase 
a.c. 
 One 
two-core 
cable, 
single-
phase a.c. 
or d.c. 
 One three-
core cable 
or one 
four-core 
cable, 
three-
phase a.c. 
 One 
two-core 
cable, 
single-
phase a.c. 
or d.c. 
 One three-
core cable 
or one 
four-core 
cable, 
three-
phase a.c. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 9 
 mm 2 
 A 
 A 
 A 
 A 
 A 
 A 
 A 
 A 
 1 
  11 
  10 
  13 
  11.5 
  15.5 
  13.5 
  17 
  14.5 
 1.5 
  14.5 
  13 
  16.5 
  15 
  20 
  17.5 
  22 
  18.5 
 2.5 
  20 
  17.5 
  23 
  20 
  27 
  24 
  30 
  25 
 4 
  26 
  23 
  30 
  27 
  37 
  32 
  40 
  34 
 6 
  34 
  29 
  38 
  34 
  47 
  41 
  51 
  43 
 10 
  46 
  39 
  52 
  46 
  65 
  57 
  70 
  60 
 16 
 61 
  52 
  69 
  62 
  87 
  76 
  94 
  80 
 25 
 80 
  68 
  90 
  80 
 114 
  96 
 119 
 101 
 35 
 99 
  83 
 111 
  99 
 141 
 119 
 148 
 126 
  50 
 119 
  99 
 133 
 118 
 182 
 144 
 180 
 153 
 70 
 151 
 125 
 168 
 149 
 234 
 184 
 232 
 196 
 95 
 182 
 150 
 201 
 179 
 284 
 223 
 282 
 238 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
301
 Nominal current setting of the protection for this load  I n    32  A. 
   The cable rating,  I t  is given by: 
I
I
t
n
Current rating of protective device ( )
The product of 

the correction factors
 the correction factors to be included in this calculation are: 
  Ca   ambient temperature; from the table shown in  Table 14.1 the correction factor for
35°C is 0.94. 
 Cg  grouping factors need not be applied. 
 Cc  since protection is by MCB no factor need be applied.  
 Ci  thermal insulation demands that we assume installed method A (see  Table 14.2) . 
  The design current is 26.09  A and we will therefore choose a 32  A MCB for the nominal current 
setting of the protective device,  I n . 
Cable rating, 
34.04 A
tI 

32
0 94
.
 From column 2 of the table shown in  Table 14.2 , a 10  mm cable, having a rating of 46  A, is 
required to carry this current. 
 Table 14.3    Voltage Drop in Cables Factor. Adapted from the IEE  On site 
Guide by Kind Permission of the Institution of Electrical Engineers  
 Table 4D1B of IEE Regulations 
 Voltage drop (per ampere per metre)  
  Conductor operat-
ing temperature: 
70°C 
 Conductor 
cross-sectional 
area (mm 2 ) 
 Two-core 
cable, d.c. 
(mV/A/m) 
 Two-core cable, 
single-phase a.c. 
(mV/A/m) 
 Three- or four-core 
cable, three-phase 
(mV/A/m) 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 44 
 44 
 38 
 1.5 
 29 
 29 
 25 
 2.5 
 18 
 18 
 15 
 4 
 11 
 11 
  9.5 
 6 
  7.3 
  7.3 
  6.4 
 10 
  4.4 
  4.4 
  3.8 
 16 
  2.8 
  2.8 
  2.4 
 
 
 r 
 r 
 25 
 1.75 
 1.80 
 1.50 
 35 
 1.25 
 1.30 
 1.10 
 50 
 0.93 
 0.95 
 0.81 
 70 
 0.63 
 0.65 
 0.56 
 95 
 0.46 
 0.49 
 0.42 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
302
  Now test for volt drop: from the table shown in  Table 14.3 the volt drop per ampere per metre 
for a 10  mm cable is 4.4  mV. So the volt drop for this cable length and load is equal to: 
4 4
10
26 09
18
2 06
3
.
.
.




 V/Am
 A
 m
 V
 Since this is less than the maximum permissible value for a lighting circuit of 6.9   V, a 10  mm 
cable satisfi es the current and drop in voltage requirements when the circuit is protected by 
an MCB. This cable is run in a loft that gets hot in summer and has thermal insulation
touching one side of the cable. We must, therefore, use installed reference method A of 
Table 4.2. If we were able to route the cable under the fl oor, clipped direct or in conduit or 
trunking on a wall, we may be able to use a 6       mm cable for this load. You can see how the 
current carrying capacity of a cable varies with the installed method by looking at Table 4.2. 
Compare the values in column 2 with those in column 6. When the cable is clipped
direct on to a wall or surface the current rating is higher because the cable is cooler. If the 
alternative route was longer, you would need to test for volt drop before choosing the 
cable. These are some of the decisions which the electrical contractor must make when 
designing an installation which meets the requirements of the customer and the IEE 
Regulations. 
 If you are unsure of the standard fuse and MCB rating of protective devices, you can refer to 
Fig. 3.4 Appendix 3 of the IEE Regulations. 
 Table 14.4    Cable Size for Standard Domestic Circuits  
 Type of ﬁ nal circuit 
 Cable size 
(twin and 
earth) 
 MCB 
rating, 
Type B (A) 
 Maximum ﬂ oor 
area covered 
by circuit (m 2 ) 
 Maximum 
length of 
cable run (m) 
 Fixed lighting 
  1.0 
  6 
 – 
 40 
 Fixed lighting 
  1.5 
  6 
 – 
 60 
 Immersion heater 
  2.5 
 16 
 – 
 30 
 Storage radiator 
  2.5 
 16 
 – 
 30 
 Cooker (oven only) 
  2.5 
 16 
 – 
 30 
 13   A socket outlets (Radial circuit) 
  2.5 
 20 
 50 
 30 
 13  A socket outlets (Ring circuit) 
  2.5 
 32 
 100 
 90 
 13  A socket outlets (Ring circuit) 
  4.0 
 32 
  75 
 35 
 Cooker (oven and hob) 
  6.0 
 32 
 – 
 40 
 Shower (up to 7.5    kw) 
  6.0 
 32 
 – 
 40 
 Shower (up to 9.6    kw) 
 10 
 40 
 – 
 40 
 
 Key Facts  
 Volt drop 
   Maximum permissible volt drop on 
230  V supplies: 
 ● 
 3% for lighting    6.9  V 
 ● 
 5% for other uses    11.5  V 
 IEE Regulation 525 and Appendix 12. 
 Cable size for standard domestic circuits 
   Appendix 4 of the IEE Regulations (BS: 7671) and Appendix 6 of the IEE  On 
Site Guide  contain tables for determining the current carrying capacities of 
conductors which we looked at in the last section. However, for standard 
domestic circuits,  Table 14.4 gives a guide to cable size. 
   In this table, I am assuming a standard 230       V domestic installation, hav-
ing a sheathed earth or PME supply terminated in a 100       A HBC fuse at the 
mains position. Final circuits are fed from a consumer unit, having Type B, 
MCB protection and wired in PVC insulated and sheathed cables with cop-
per conductors having a grey thermoplastic PVC outer sheath or a white 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
303
thermosetting cable with LSF (low smoke and fume properties). I am also 
assuming that the surrounding temperature throughout the length of the 
circuit does not exceed 30°C and the cables are run singly and clipped to 
a surface. 
 Wiring systems and enclosures 
 The ﬁ nal choice of a wiring system must rest with those designing the 
installation and those ordering the work, but whatever system is employed, 
good workmanship by competent persons and the use of proper materials 
is essential for compliance with the Regulations (IEE Regulation 134.1.1). 
The necessary skills can be acquired by an electrical trainee who has the 
correct attitude and dedication to his craft. 
 PVC insulated and sheathed cable installations 
   PVC insulated and sheathed wiring systems are used extensively for light-
ing and socket installations in domestic dwellings. Mechanical damage to 
the cable caused by impact, abrasion, penetration, compression or ten-
sion must be minimized during installation (Regulation 522.6.1). The 
cables are generally ﬁ xed using plastic clips incorporating a masonry nail, 
which means the cables can be ﬁ xed to wood, plaster or brick with almost 
equal ease. Cables should be run horizontally or vertically, not diagonally, 
down a wall. All kinks should be removed so that the cable is run straight 
and neatly between clips ﬁ xed at equal distances providing adequate sup-
port for the cable so that it does not become damaged by its own weight 
(Regulation 522.8.4 and Table 4A of the  On Site Guide ). Table 4A of the IEE 
On Site Guide  is shown in  Table 14.5   . Where cables are bent, the radius 
of the bend should not cause the conductors to be damaged (Regulation 
522.8.3 and Table 4E of the  On Site Guide ). 
  Terminations or joints in the cable may be made in ceiling roses, junction 
boxes, or behind sockets or switches, provided that they are enclosed in a 
non-ignitable material, are properly insulated and are mechanically and 
electrically secure (IEE Regulation 526). All joints must be accessible for 
inspection testing and maintenance when the installation is completed 
(IEE Regulation 526.3). 
  Where PVC insulated and sheathed cables are concealed in walls, ﬂ oors or 
partitions, they must be provided with a box incorporating an earth termi-
nal at each outlet position. PVC cables do not react chemically with plaster, 
as do some cables, and consequently PVC cables may be buried under plas-
ter. Further protection by channel or conduit is only necessary if mechani-
cal protection from nails or screws is required or to protect them from the 
plasterer’s trowel. However, Regulation 522.6.6 now tells us that where 
PVC cables are to be embedded in a wall or partition at a depth of less 
than 50       mm they should be run along one of the permitted routes shown 
in  Fig. 14.22   .  Figure 14.21    shows a typical PVC installation. To identify 
the most probable cable routes, Regulation 522.6.6 tells us that outside a 
zone formed by a 150       mm border all around a wall edge, cables can only be 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
304
run horizontally or vertically to a point or accessory unless they are con-
tained in a substantial earthed enclosure, such as a conduit, which can 
withstand nail penetration, as shown in  Fig. 14.22 . 
  Where the accessory or cable is ﬁ xed to a wall which is less than 100       mm 
thick, protection must also be extended to the reverse side of the wall if a 
position can be determined. 
  Where none of this protection can be complied with and the installation 
is to be used by ordinary people, then the cable must be given additional 
protection with a 30  mA RCD (IEE Regulation 522.6.7). 
  Where cables pass through walls, ﬂ oors and ceilings the hole should be 
made good with incombustible material such as mortar or plaster to pre-
vent the spread of ﬁ re (Regulations 527.1.2 and 527.2.1). Cables passing 
through metal boxes should be bushed with a rubber grommet to prevent 
abrasion of the cable. Holes drilled in ﬂ oor joists through which cables are 
run should be 50       mm below the top or 50       mm above the bottom of the joist 
to prevent damage to the cable by nail penetration (Regulation 522.6.5), 
as shown in  Fig. 14.23   . PVC cables should not be installed when the
surrounding temperature is below 0°C or when the cable temperature 
 Table 14.5    Spacing of Cable Supports. Adapted from the IEE  On Site Guide by Kind Permission of the Institution of 
Electrical Engineers  
 Spacings of supports for cables in accessible positions 
 Overall 
diameter of 
cable * (mm) 
 Maximum spacings of clips 
 Non-armoured thermosetting, thermoplastic or lead 
sheathed cables 
 Armoured cables 
 Mineral insulated copper 
sheathed or aluminium 
sheathed cables 
 Generally 
 In caravans 
 
 
 
 
 Horizontal ** 
(mm) 
 Vertical ** 
(mm) 
 Horizontal ** 
(mm) 
 Vertical ** 
(mm) 
 Horizontal ** 
(mm) 
 Vertical ** 
(mm) 
 Horizontal ** 
(mm) 
 Vertical **  
(mm) 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 9 
 Not 
exceeding 9 
 250 
 400 
 
 
 – 
 – 
 600 
  800 
 Exceeding 
9 and not 
exceeding 15 
 300 
 400 
 250 (for all 
sizes) 
 400 (for 
all sizes) 
 350 
 450 
  900 
 1200 
 Exceeding 
15 and not 
exceeding 20 
 350 
 450 
 
 
 400 
 550 
 1500 
 2000 
 Exceeding 
20 and not 
exceeding 40 
 400 
 550 
 
 
 450 
 600 
 – 
 – 
 Note : For the spacing of supports for cables having an overall diameter exceeding 40    mm, and for single-core cables having conductors of 
cross-sectional area 300    mm 2 and larger, the manufacturer’s recommendations should be observed.  
 * For ﬂ at cables taken as the dimension of the major axis.  
 ** The spacings stated for horizontal runs may be applied also to runs at an angle of more than 30 from the vertical. For runs at an angle of 
30° or less from the vertical, the vertical spacings are applicable.  

Electrical installations and wiring systems
305
Trap provides inspection
access under floorboards
to joint box
Floorboards
Cables passing through
holes drilled in joists
Plaster finish to wall
Metal switch box
PVC cable run down wall and
buried in plaster, covered with
channel if mechanical protection
is required
Plasterboard
finish to ceiling
Wall
 FIGURE 14.21 
 A concealed PVC sheathed wiring system. 
Protection is required unless cable
depth is greater than 50 mm
No protection
required
150mm
150 mm
Wall
Wall
Wall
No protection
required
Accessory
boxes
 FIGURE 14.22 
 Permitted cable routes. 
1. Maximum diameter of hole should be 0.25 
 
joist depth.
2. Holes on centre line in a zone between 0.25
and 0.4  span.
3. Maximum depth of notch should be 0.125 
 
joist depth.
4. Notches on top in a zone between 0.1 and
 
0.25  span.
5. Holes in the same joist should be at least
3 diameters apart.
Floor
joists
Steel
conduit
Greater than
50mm
Insulated
and
sheathed
cable
Notes:
 FIGURE 14.23 
 Correct installation of cables in ﬂ oor joists. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
306
has been below 0°C for the previous 24  h because the insulation becomes 
brittle at low temperatures and may be damaged during installation.
Through
box
‘T’ or three-way
box
Saddle
Space bar
saddle
Distance
saddle
Pipe hook, or
crampet not
used for
surface work
Back outlet
box
Terminal
box
 FIGURE 14.24 
 Conduit ﬁ ttings and saddles. 
 Try This  
 Defi nitions 
 In the margin write down a short defi nition of a  ‘ competent person ’ . 
 Conduit installations 
 A conduit is a tube, channel or pipe in which insulated conductors are 
contained. The conduit, in effect, replaces the PVC outer sheath of a cable, 
providing mechanical protection for the insulated conductors. A conduit 
installation can be rewired easily or altered at any time, and this ﬂ exibility, 
coupled with mechanical protection, makes conduit installations popular 
for commercial and industrial applications. There are three types of con-
duit used in electrical installation work: steel, PVC and ﬂ exible.
 Definition  
 A conduit is a tube, channel or pipe 
in which insulated conductors are 
contained. 
  STEEL CONDUIT 
 Steel conduits are made to a speciﬁ cation deﬁ ned by BS 4568 and are 
either heavy gauge welded or solid drawn. Heavy gauge is made from a 
sheet of steel welded along the seam to form a tube and is used for most 
electrical installation work. Solid drawn conduit is a seamless tube which is 
much more expensive and only used for special gas-tight, explosion-proof 
or ﬂ ameproof installations. 
 Conduit is supplied in 3.75  m lengths and typical sizes are 16, 20, 25 and 
32  mm. Conduit tubing and ﬁ ttings are supplied in a black enamel ﬁ nish 
for internal use or hot galvanized ﬁ nish for use on external or damp instal-
lations. A wide range of ﬁ ttings is available and the conduit is ﬁ xed using 
saddles or pipe hooks, as shown in  Fig. 14.24 . 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
307
   Metal conduits are threaded with stocks and dies and bent using spe-
cial bending machines. The metal conduit is also utilized as the CPC 
and, therefore, all connections must be screwed up tightly and all burrs 
removed so that cables will not be damaged as they are drawn into the 
conduit. Metal conduits containing a.c. circuits must contain phase and 
neutral conductors in the same conduit to prevent eddy currents ﬂ ow-
ing, which would result in the metal conduit becoming hot (Regulations 
521.5.2, 522.8.1 and 522.8.11). 
  PVC CONDUIT 
  PVC conduit used on typical electrical installations is heavy gauge standard 
impact tube manufactured to BS 4607. The conduit size and range of ﬁ t-
tings are the same as those available for metal conduit. PVC conduit is most 
often joined by placing the end of the conduit into the appropriate ﬁ tting 
and ﬁ xing with a PVC solvent adhesive. PVC conduit can be bent by hand 
using a bending spring of the same diameter as the inside of the conduit. 
The spring is pushed into the conduit to the point of the intended bend and 
the conduit then bent over the knee. The spring ensures that the conduit 
keeps its circular shape. In cold weather, a little warmth applied to the point 
of the intended bend often helps to achieve a more successful bend. 
  The advantages of a PVC conduit system are that it may be installed much 
more quickly than steel conduit and is non-corrosive, but it does not have 
the mechanical strength of steel conduit. Since PVC conduit is an insula-
tor it cannot be used as the CPC and a separate earth conductor must be 
run to every outlet. It is not suitable for installations subjected to tempera-
tures below 25°C or above 60°C. Where luminaires are suspended from PVC 
conduit boxes, precautions must be taken to ensure that the lamp does not 
raise the box temperature or that the mass of the luminaire supported by 
each box does not exceed the maximum recommended by the manufac-
turer (IEE Regulations 522.1 and 522.2). PVC conduit also expands much 
more than metal conduit and so long runs require an expansion coupling 
to allow for conduit movement and help to prevent distortion during tem-
perature changes. 
   All conduit installations must be erected ﬁ rst before any wiring is installed 
(IEE Regulation 522.8.2). The radius of all bends in conduit must not cause 
the cables to suffer damage, and therefore the minimum radius of bends 
given in Table 4E of the  On Site Guide  applies (IEE Regulation 522.8.3). All 
conduits should terminate in a box or ﬁ tting and meet the boxes or ﬁ ttings 
at right angles, as shown in  Fig. 14.25   . Any unused conduit-box entries 
should be blanked off and all boxes covered with a box lid, ﬁ tting or acces-
sory to provide complete enclosure of the conduit system. Conduit runs 
should be separate from other services, unless intentionally bonded, to 
prevent arcing occurring from a faulty circuit within the conduit, which 
might cause the pipe of another service to become punctured. 
  When drawing cables into conduit they must ﬁ rst be  run off  the cable 
drum. That is, the drum must be rotated as shown in  Fig. 14.26    and not 
allowed to  spiral off , which will cause the cable to twist. 
Spacer bar saddle
Wall
Conduit set out
to enter box at
right angles
Coupling
Male bush
Metal box
Fixing surface
Conduit
Flange
coupling
Lead
washer
Male
bush
 FIGURE 14.25 
 Terminating conduits. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
308
   Cables should be fed into the conduit in a manner which prevents any 
cable crossing over and becoming twisted inside the conduit. The cable 
insulation must not be damaged on the metal edges of the draw-in box. 
Cables can be pulled in on a draw wire if the run is a long one. The draw 
wire itself may be drawn in on a ﬁ sh tape, which is a thin spring steel or 
plastic tape. 
   A limit must be placed on the number of bends between boxes in a con-
duit run and the number of cables which may be drawn into a conduit to 
prevent the cables being strained during wiring. Appendix 5 of the  On Site 
Guide gives a guide to the cable capacities of conduits and trunking. 
  FLEXIBLE CONDUIT 
Flexible conduit manufactured to BS 731-1: 1993 is made of interlinked 
metal spirals often covered with a PVC sleeving. The tubing must not be 
relied upon to provide a continuous earth path and, consequently, a sepa-
rate CPC must be run either inside or outside the ﬂ exible tube (Regulation 
543.2.1).
 Definition  
 Flexible conduit manufactured to BS 
731-1:1993 is made of interlinked 
metal spirals often covered with a PVC 
sleeving. 
   Flexible conduit is used for the ﬁ nal connection to motors so that the 
vibrations of the motor are not transmitted throughout the electrical 
installation and to allow for modiﬁ cations to be made to the ﬁ nal motor 
position and drive belt adjustments. 
  CONDUIT CAPACITIES 
Single-PVC insulated conductors are usually drawn into the installed con-
duit to complete the installation. Having decided upon the type, size and 
number of cables required for a ﬁ nal circuit, it is then necessary to select 
the appropriate size of conduit to accommodate those cables.
Cables run off will not twist,
a short length of conduit can
be used as an axle for
the cable drum
Cables allowed to
spiral off a drum
will become twisted
 FIGURE 14.26 
 Running off cable from a drum. 
 Definition  
 Single-PVC insulated conductors are 
usually drawn into the installed con-
duit to complete the installation. 
  The tables in Appendix 5 of the  On Site Guide describe a  ‘ factor system ’ 
for determining the size of conduit required to enclose a number of con-
ductors. The tables are shown in  Tables 14.6 and 14.7 . The method is as 
follows: 
●      Identify the cable factor for the particular size of conductor, see 
 Table 14.6 .  
●      Multiply the cable factor by the number of conductors, to give the 
sum of the cable factors. 
●      Identify the appropriate part of the conduit factor table given by the 
length of run and number of bends, see  Table 14.7 . 
●      The correct size of conduit to accommodate the cables is that con-
duit which has a factor equal to or greater than the sum of the cable 
factors. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
309
 Table 14.6    Conduit Cable Factors. Adapted  from the 
IEE  On Site Guide by Kind Permission of the Institution of 
Electrical Engineers  
 Cable factors for use in conduit in long straight runs over 3    m, 
or runs of any length incorporating bends 
 Type of conductor 
 Conductor cross-
sectional area (mm 2 ) 
 Cable factor 
 Solid or stranded 
  1 
  16 
 1.5 
  22 
 2.5 
  30 
  4 
  43 
  6 
  58 
 10 
 105 
 16 
 145 
 25 
 217 
 The inner radius of a conduit bend should be not less than 2.5 times 
the outside diameter of the conduit.  
 Example 1 
 Six 2.5  mm 2 PVC insulated cables are to be run in a conduit containing two bends between 
boxes 10  m apart. Determine the minimum size of conduit to contain these cables. 
 From  Table 14.6 : 
The factor for one 
 mm  cable
The sum of the cable fa
2 5
30
2
.

ctors 


6
30
180
   From  Table 14.7 , a 25       mm conduit, 10       m long and containing two bends, has a factor of 260. A 
20  mm conduit containing two bends only has a factor of 141 which is less than 180, the sum 
of the cable factors and, therefore, 25  mm conduit is the minimum size to contain these cables. 
 Example 2 
  Ten 1.0  mm 2 PVC insulated cables are to be drawn into a plastic conduit which is 6  m long 
between boxes and contains one bend. A 4.0  mm PVC insulated CPC is also included. 
Determine the minimum size of conduit to contain these conductors. 
 From  Table 14.6 : 
The factor for one 
 mm cable
The factor for one 
 m
1 0
16
4 0
.
.

m cable
The sum of the cable factors
(
)
)



 

43
10
16
1
43
203
(
   From  Table 14.7 , a 20       mm conduit, 6       m long and containing one bend, has a factor of 233. A 
16  mm conduit containing one bend only has a factor of 143 which is less than 203, the sum of 
the cable factors and, therefore, 20       mm conduit is the minimum size to contain these cables.  

 Table 14.7    Conduit Cable Factors. Adapted  from the IEE  On Site Guide by Kind Permission of the Institution of Electrical Engineers 
 Cable factors for runs incorporating bends and long straight runs 
 Length 
of run 
(m) 
 Conduit diameter (mm) 
 16 
 20 
 25 
 32 
 16 
 20 
 25 
 32 
 16 
 20 
 25 
 32 
 16 
 20 
 25 
 32 
 
 Straight 
 One bend 
 Two bends 
 Three bends 
 1 
 Covered by 
 188 
 303 
 543 
 947 
 177 
 286 
 514 
 900 
 158 
 256 
 463 
 818 
 
 1.5 
 
 
 
 
 182 
 294 
 528 
 923 
 167 
 270 
 487 
 857 
 143 
 233 
 422 
 750 
 
 2 
 Tables  
 
 
 177 
 286 
 514 
 900 
 158 
 256 
 463 
 818 
 130 
 213 
 388 
 692 
 
 2.5 
 
 
 
 
 171 
 278 
 500 
 878 
 150 
 244 
 442 
 783 
 120 
 196 
 358 
 643 
 
 3 
 A and B 
 167 
 270 
 487 
 857 
 143 
 233 
 422 
 750 
 111 
 182 
 333 
 600 
 3.5 
 179 
 290 
 521 
 911 
 162 
 263 
 475 
 837 
 136 
 222 
 404 
 720 
 103 
 169 
 311 
 563 
 4 
 177 
 286 
 514 
 900 
 158 
 256 
 463 
 818 
 130 
 213 
 388 
 692 
  97 
 159 
 292 
 529 
 4.5 
 174 
 282 
 507 
 889 
 154 
 250 
 452 
 800 
 125 
 204 
 373 
 667 
  91 
 149 
 275 
 500 
 5 
 171 
 278 
 500 
 878 
 150 
 244 
 442 
 783 
 120 
 196 
 358 
 643 
  86 
 141 
 260 
 474 
 6 
 167 
 270 
 487 
 857 
 143 
 233 
 422 
 750 
 111 
 182 
 333 
 600  
 
 
 
 7 
 162 
 263 
 475 
 837 
 136 
 222 
 404 
 720 
 103 
 169 
 311 
 563  
 
 
 
 8 
 158 
 256 
 463 
 818 
 130 
 213 
 388 
 692 
  97 
 159 
 292 
 529  
 
 
 
 9 
 154 
 250 
 452 
 800 
 125 
 204 
 373 
 667 
  91 
 149 
 275 
 500  
 
 
 
 10 
 150 
 244 
 442 
 783 
 120 
 196 
 358 
 643 
  86 
 141 
 260 
 474  
 
 
 
 Additional factors: For 38  mm diameter use   1.4    (32    mm factor)  
         For 50    mm diameter use   2.6    (32   mm factor)  
         For 63    mm diameter use   4.2    (32   mm factor)  
310

Electrical installations and wiring systems
311
  Trunking installations 
 A trunking is an enclosure provided for the protection of cables which is 
normally square or rectangular in cross-section, having one removable 
side. Trunking may be thought of as a more accessible conduit system and 
for industrial and commercial installations it is replacing the larger con-
duit sizes. A trunking system can have great ﬂ exibility when used in con-
junction with conduit; the trunking forms the background or framework 
for the installation, with conduits running from the trunking to the point 
controlling the current-using apparatus. When an alteration or extension 
is required it is easy to drill a hole in the side of the trunking and run a con-
duit to the new point. The new wiring can then be drawn through the new 
conduit and the existing trunking to the supply point.
 Definition  
 A trunking is an enclosure provided 
for the protection of cables which 
is normally square or rectangular in 
cross-section, having one removable 
side. Trunking may be thought of as a 
more accessible conduit system. 
 Trunking is supplied in 3  m lengths and various cross-sections measured 
in millimetres from 50    50 up to 300    150. Most trunking is available in 
either steel or plastic. 
  METALLIC TRUNKING 
Metallic trunking is formed from mild steel sheet, coated with grey or 
silver enamel paint for internal use or a hot-dipped galvanized coating 
where damp conditions might be encountered and made to a speciﬁ ca-
tion deﬁ ned by BS EN 500 85. A wide range of accessories is available, such 
as 45° bends, 90° bends, tee and four-way junctions, for speedy on-site 
assembly. Alternatively, bends may be fabricated in lengths of trunking, as 
shown in  Fig. 14.27 . This may be necessary or more convenient if a bend 
or set is non-standard, but it does take more time to fabricate bends than 
merely to bolt on standard accessories.
Standard accessory
90° bend
Fabricated 90°
bend
Copper earth
strip
Fishplate
 FIGURE 14.27 
 Alternative trunking bends. 
 Definition  
 Metallic trunking is formed from mild 
steel sheet, coated with grey or sil-
ver enamel paint for internal use or 
a hot-dipped galvanized coating 
where damp conditions might be 
encountered. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
312
  When fabricating bends the trunking should be supported with wooden 
blocks for sawing and ﬁ ling, in order to prevent the sheet-steel vibrating or 
becoming deformed. Fish plates must be made and riveted or bolted to the 
trunking to form a solid and secure bend. When manufactured bends are 
used, the continuity of the earth path must be ensured across the joint by 
making all ﬁ xing screw connections very tight, or ﬁ tting a separate copper 
strap between the trunking and the standard bend. If an earth continuity 
test on the trunking is found to be unsatisfactory, an insulated CPC must 
be installed inside the trunking. The size of the protective conductor will 
be determined by the largest cable contained in the trunking, as described 
by Table 54.7 of the IEE Regulations. If the circuit conductors are less than 
16  mm 2 , then a 16  mm 2 CPC will be required. 
  NON-METALLIC TRUNKING 
  Trunking and trunking accessories are also available in high-impact PVC. 
The accessories are usually secured to the lengths of trunking with a PVC 
solvent adhesive. PVC trunking, like PVC conduit, is easy to install and is 
non-corrosive. A separate CPC will need to be installed and non-metal-
lic trunking may require more frequent ﬁ xings because it is less rigid than 
metallic trunking. All trunking ﬁ xings should use round-headed screws 
to prevent damage to cables since the thin sheet construction makes it 
impossible to countersink screw heads. 
  MINI-TRUNKING 
Mini-trunking is very small PVC trunking, ideal for surface wiring in 
domestic and commercial installations such as ofﬁ ces. The trunking has a 
cross-section of 16    16  mm, 25    16  mm, 38    16  mm or 38    25  mm and 
is ideal for switch drops or for housing auxiliary circuits such as telephone 
or audio equipment wiring. The modern square look in switches and sock-
ets is complemented by the mini-trunking which is very easy to install (see 
 Fig. 14.28 ).
Mini-trunking
Switch
Socket outlet
Skirting trunking
 FIGURE 14.28 
 Typical installation of skirting trunking and mini-trunking. 
 Definition  
 Mini-trunking is very small PVC trunk-
ing, ideal for surface wiring in domes-
tic and commercial installations such 
as offi  ces. 
 Definition  
 Skirting trunking is a trunking manu-
factured from PVC or steel and in the 
shape of a skirting board is frequently 
used in commercial buildings such as 
hospitals, laboratories and offi  ces. 
  SKIRTING TRUNKING 
Skirting trunking is a trunking manufactured from PVC or steel and in the 
shape of a skirting board is frequently used in commercial buildings such 
as hospitals, laboratories and ofﬁ ces. The trunking is ﬁ tted around the 
walls of a room at either the skirting board level or at the working surface 
level and contains the wiring for socket outlets and telephone points which 
are mounted on the lid, as shown in  Fig. 14.28 .

Electrical installations and wiring systems
313
  Where any trunking passes through walls, partitions, ceilings or ﬂ oors, 
short lengths of lid should be ﬁ tted so that the remainder of the lid may 
be removed later without difﬁ culty. Any damage to the structure of the 
buildings must be made good with mortar, plaster or concrete in order to 
prevent the spread of ﬁ re. Fire barriers must be ﬁ tted inside the trunking 
every 5  m, or at every ﬂ oor level or room dividing wall, if this is a shorter 
distance, as shown in  Fig. 14.29 (a). 
  Where trunking is installed vertically, the installed conductors must be 
supported so that the maximum unsupported length of non-sheathed 
cable does not exceed 5       m.  Figure 14.29 (b) shows cables woven through 
insulated pin supports, which is one method of supporting vertical cables. 
   PVC insulated cables are usually drawn into an erected conduit installa-
tion or laid into an erected trunking installation. Table 5D of the  On Site 
Guide  only gives factors for conduits up to 32       mm in diameter, which 
would indicate that conduits larger than this are not in frequent or com-
mon use. Where a cable enclosure greater than 32       mm is required because 
of the number or size of the conductors, it is generally more economical 
and convenient to use trunking. 
  TRUNKING CAPACITIES 
 The ratio of the space occupied by all the cables in a conduit or trunking to 
the whole space enclosed by the conduit or trunking is known as the space
factor. Where sizes and types of cable and trunking are not covered by the 
 FIGURE 14.29 
 Installation of trunking: (a) ﬁ re barriers in trunking and (b) cable supports in vertical trunking. 
(a)
Room-
dividing
wall
Fire barriers
Trunking
Building structure made
good after installation
Cables
(b)
 Definition  
  The ratio of the space occupied by 
all the cables in a conduit or trunking 
to the whole space enclosed by the 
conduit or trunking is known as the 
 space factor. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
314
tables in the On Site Guide  a space factor of 45% must not be exceeded. 
This means that the cables must not ﬁ ll more than 45% of the space 
enclosed by the trunking. The tables take this factor into account.
 To calculate the size of trunking required to enclose a number of cables: 
●      Identify the cable factor for the particular size of conductor, see 
 Table 14.8 .  
●      Multiply the cable factor by the number of conductors to give the 
sum of the cable factors. 
●  Consider the factors for trunking and shown in  Table 14.9 . The cor-
rect size of trunking to accommodate the cables is that trunking 
which has a factor equal to or greater than the sum of the cable 
factors. 
 Example 
 Calculate the minimum size of trunking required to accommodate the following single-core 
PVC cables: 
 20    1.5  mm  solid conductors 
 20    2.5  mm  solid conductors 
 21    4.0  mm  stranded conductors 
 16    6.0  mm  stranded conductors 
 From  Table 14.8 , the cable factors are: 
 
for 1.5  mm solid cable  –  8.0 
 
for 2.5  mm solid cable  –  11.9 
 for 4.0  mm stranded cable  –  16.6 
 for 6.0  mm stranded cable  –  21.2 
  The sum of the cable terms is: 
 (20    8.0)    (20    11.9)    (21    16.6)    (16    21.2)    1085.8. From  table 14.9 , 75    38  mm 
trunking has a factor of 1146 and, therefore, the minimum size of trunking to accommodate 
these cables is 75    38  mm, although a larger size, say 75    50  mm would be equally 
acceptable if this was more readily available as a standard stock item. 
 Segregation of circuits 
  Where an installation comprises a mixture of low-voltage and very low-
voltage circuits such as mains lighting and power, ﬁ re alarm and tele-
communication circuits, they must be separated or  segregated  to prevent 
electrical contact (IEE Regulation 528.1). 
 For the purpose of these regulations various circuits are identiﬁ ed by one 
of two bands as follows: 
  Band I     telephone, radio, bell, call and intruder alarm circuits, emergency 
circuits for ﬁ re alarm and emergency lighting. 
 Band II  mains voltage circuits. 
 
 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
315
 Table 14.9    Trunking Cable Factors. Adapted from the IEE  On Site Guide by 
Kind Permission of the Institution of Electrical Engineers  
 Factors for trunking 
 Dimensions of trunking 
(mm     mm) 
 Factor 
 Dimensions of trunking 
(mm    mm) 
 Factor 
 50    38 
  767 
 200     100 
  8572 
 50    50 
 1037 
 200     150 
 13001 
 75    25 
  738 
 200    200 
 17429 
 75    38 
 1146 
 225     38 
  3474 
 75    50 
 1555 
 225     50 
  4671 
 75    75 
 2371 
 225     75 
  7167 
 100     25 
  993 
 225     100 
  9662 
 100    38 
 1542 
 225     150 
 14652 
 100    50 
 2091 
 225     200 
 19643 
 100    75 
 3189 
 225     225 
 22138 
 100    100 
 4252 
 300     38 
  4648 
 150    38 
 2999 
 300     50 
  6251 
 150    50 
 3091 
 300     75 
  9590 
 150    75 
 4743 
 300     100 
 12929 
  150    100 
 6394 
 300     150 
 19607 
 150    150 
 9697 
 300     200 
 26285 
 200    38 
 3082 
 300     225 
 29624 
 200    50 
 4145 
 300     300 
 39428 
 200    75 
 6359 
 
 
 Space factor – 45% with trunking thickness taken into account.  
 Table 14.8    Trunking Cable Factors. Adapted  from the IEE  On Site Guide 
by Kind Permission of the Institution of Electrical Engineers  
 Cable factors for trunking 
 Type of 
conductor 
 Conductor cross-
sectional area 
(mm 2 ) 
 PVC BS 6004 
Cable factor 
 Thermosetting 
BS 7211 Cable 
factor 
 Solid 
  1.5 
  8.0 
  8.6 
  2.5 
 11.9 
 11.9 
 Stranded 
  1.5 
  8.6 
  9.6 
 2.5 
 12.6 
 13.9 
 4 
 16.6 
 18.1 
 6 
 21.2 
 22.9 
 10 
 35.3 
 36.3 
 16 
 47.8 
 50.3 
 25 
 73.9 
 75.4 
 Notes : These factors are for metal trunking and may be optimistic for plastic trunking 
where the cross-sectional area available may be signiﬁ cantly reduced from the nominal by 
the thickness of the wall material.  
The provision of spare space is advisable; however, any circuits added at a later date 
must take into account grouping. Appendix 4, BS 7671.  

Basic Electrical Installation Work
316
  When Band I circuits are insulated to the same voltage as Band II circuits, 
they may be drawn into the same compartment. 
  When trunking contains rigidly ﬁ xed metal barriers along its length, the 
same trunking may be used to enclose cables of the separate Bands without 
further precautions, provided that each band is separated by a barrier, as 
shown in  Fig. 14.30 . 
   Multi-compartment PVC trunking cannot provide band segregations since 
there is no metal screen between the Bands. This can only be provided in 
PVC trunking if screened cables are drawn into the trunking. 
 Cable tray installations 
Cable tray is a sheet-steel channel with multiple holes. The most common 
ﬁ nish is hot-dipped galvanized but PVC-coated tray is also available. It is 
used extensively on large industrial and commercial installations for sup-
porting MI and SWA cables which are laid on the cable tray and secured 
with cable ties through the tray holes.
Trunking
lid
Band II
cables
Band I
cables
Band I
cables
 FIGURE 14.30 
 Segregation of cables in trunking. 
 Definition  
 Cable tray is a sheet-steel channel with 
multiple holes. The most common fi n-
ish is hot-dipped galvanized but PVC-
coated tray is also available. It is used 
extensively on large industrial and 
commercial installations for support-
ing MI and SWA cables which are laid 
on the cable tray and secured with 
cable ties through the tray holes. 
   Cable tray should be adequately supported during installation by brackets 
which are appropriate for the particular installation. The tray should be 
bolted to the brackets with round-headed bolts and nuts, with the round 
head inside the tray so that cables drawn along the tray are not damaged. 
  The tray is supplied in standard widths from 50 to 900       mm, and a wide 
range of bends, tees and reducers is available.  Figure 14.31    shows a factory 
made 90° bend at B. The tray can also be bent using a cable tray bending 
machine to create bends such as that shown at A in  Fig. 14.31 . The installed 
tray should be securely bolted with round-headed bolts where lengths or 
accessories are attached, so that there is a continuous earth path which 
may be bonded to an electrical earth. The whole tray should provide a ﬁ rm 
support for the cables and therefore the tray ﬁ xings must be capable of 
supporting the weight of both the tray and cables. 
 PVC/SWA cable installations 
Steel wire armoured PVC insulated cables are now extensively used on 
industrial installations and often laid on cable tray. This type of installation 
has the advantage of ﬂ exibility, allowing modiﬁ cations to be made speedily 
as the need arises. The cable has a steel wire armouring giving mechanical 
 Definition  
 Steel wire armoured PVC insulated 
cables are now extensively used on 
industrial installations and often laid 
on cable tray. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
317
   It should be remembered that when several cables are grouped together 
the current rating will be reduced according to the correction factors given 
in Appendix 4 (Table 4C1) of the IEE Regulations .
 The cable is easy to handle during installation, is pliable and may be bent 
to a radius of eight times the cable diameter. The PVC insulation would be 
damaged if installed in ambient temperatures over 70°C or below 0°C, but 
once installed the cable can operate at low temperatures. 
  The cable is terminated with a simple gland which compresses a compres-
sion ring on to the steel wire armouring to provide the earth continuity 
between the switchgear and the cable. 
 MI Cable installations 
 Mineral insulated cables are available for general wiring as: 
●      light-duty MI cables for voltages up to 600       V and sizes from 1.0 to 
10  mm 2 , 
●      heavy-duty MI cables for voltages up to 1000       V and sizes from 1.0 to 
150  mm 2 . 
 Figure 6.3 (p. 126) shows an MI cable and termination. 
  The cables are available with bare sheaths or with a PVC oversheath. The 
cable sheath provides sufﬁ cient mechanical protection for all but the most 
severe situations, where it may be necessary to ﬁ t a steel sheath or conduit 
over the cable to give extra protection, particularly near ﬂ oor level in some 
industrial situations. 
Site-made
bends
A
Factory-made
90° bend
B
 FIGURE 14.31 
 Cable tray with bends. 
protection and permitting it to be laid directly in the ground or in ducts, or 
it may be ﬁ xed directly or laid on a cable tray. Figure 6.2 shows a PVC/SWA 
cable.

Basic Electrical Installation Work
318
  The cable may be laid directly in the ground, in ducts, on cable tray or 
clipped directly to a structure. It is not affected by water, oil or the cutting 
ﬂ uids used in engineering and can withstand very high temperature or 
even ﬁ re. The cable diameter is small in relation to its current carrying 
capacity and it should last indeﬁ nitely if correctly installed because it is 
made from inorganic materials. These characteristics make the cable ideal 
for Band I emergency circuits, boiler-houses, furnaces, petrol stations and 
chemical plant installations. 
  The cable is supplied in coils and should be run off during installation and 
not spiralled off, as described in  Fig. 14.26  for conduit. The cable can be 
work hardened if over-handled or over-manipulated. This makes the cop-
per outer sheath stiff and may result in fracture. The outer sheath of the 
cable must not be penetrated, otherwise moisture will enter the magne-
sium oxide insulation and lower its resistance. To reduce the risk of dam-
age to the outer sheath during installation, cables should be straightened 
and formed by hammering with a hide hammer or a block of wood and a 
steel hammer. When bending MI cables the radius of the bend should not 
cause the cable to become damaged and clips should provide adequate 
support (Regulation 522.8.5), see  Table 14.5 . 
  The cable must be prepared for termination by removing the outer copper 
sheath to reveal the copper conductors. This can be achieved by using a 
rotary stripper tool or, if only a few cables are to be terminated, the outer 
sheath can be removed with side cutters, peeling off the cable in a simi-
lar way to peeling the skin from a piece of fruit with a knife. When enough 
conductor has been revealed, the outer sheath must be cut off square to 
facilitate the ﬁ tting of the sealing pot, and this can be done with a ringing 
tool. All excess magnesium oxide powder must be wiped from the conduc-
tors with a clean cloth. This is to prevent moisture from penetrating the 
seal by capillary action. 
   Cable ends must be terminated with a special seal to prevent the entry 
of moisture. Figure 6.3 shows a brass screw-on seal and gland assembly, 
which allows termination of the MI cables to standard switchgear and con-
duit ﬁ ttings. The sealing pot is ﬁ lled with a sealing compound, which is 
pressed in from one side only to prevent air pockets forming, and the pot 
closed by crimping home the sealing disc with an MI crimping tool such as 
that shown in Fig 7.4. Such an assembly is suitable for working tempera-
tures up to 105°C. Other compounds or powdered glass can increase the 
working temperature up to 250°C. 
  The conductors are not identiﬁ ed during the manufacturing process and 
so it is necessary to identify them after the ends have been sealed. A simple 
continuity or polarity test, as described later in this chapter, can identify 
the conductors which are then sleeved or identiﬁ ed with coloured markers. 
   Connection of MI cables can be made directly to motors, but to absorb the 
vibrations a 360° loop should be made in the cable just before the termina-
tion. If excessive vibration is to be expected the MI cable should be termi-
nated in a conduit through box and the ﬁ nal connection made by ﬂ exible 
conduit.

Electrical installations and wiring systems
319
   Copper MI cables may develop a green incrustation or patina on the sur-
face, even when exposed to normal atmospheres. This is not harmful and 
should not be removed. However, if the cable is exposed to an environment 
which might encourage corrosion, an MI cable with an overall PVC sheath 
should be used. 
 Support and ﬁ xing methods for electrical  equipment 
   Individual conductors may be installed in trunking or conduit and individual 
cables may be clipped directly to a surface or laid on a tray using the wiring 
system which is most appropriate for the particular installation. The installa-
tion method chosen will depend upon the contract speciﬁ cation, the fabric of 
the building and the type of installation – domestic, commercial or industrial. 
   It is important that the wiring systems and ﬁ xing methods are appropri-
ate for the particular type of installation and compatible with the struc-
tural materials used in the building construction. The electrical installation 
must be compatible with the installed conditions, must not damage the 
fabric of the building or weaken load-bearing girders or joists. 
 The installation designer must ask himself the following questions: 
●  Does this wiring system meet the contract speciﬁ cation? 
●  Is the wiring system compatible with this particular installation? 
●      Do I need to consider any special regulations such as those required 
by agricultural and horticultural installations, swimming pools or 
ﬂ ameproof installations? 
●      Will this type of electrical installation be aesthetically acceptable 
and compatible with the other structural materials? 
 The installation electrician must ask himself the following questions: 
●      Am I using materials and equipment which meet the relevant British 
Standards and the contract speciﬁ cation? 
●  Am I using an appropriate ﬁ xing method for this wiring system or 
piece of equipment? 
●  Will the structural material carry the extra load that my conduits and 
cables will place upon it? 
  ●  Will my ﬁ xings and ﬁ ttings weaken the existing fabric of the building?  
  ●  Will the electrical installation interfere with other supplies and services? 
●      Will all terminations and joints be accessible upon completion of the 
erection period? (IEE Regulations 513.1 and 526.3.) 
●  Will the materials being used for the electrical installation be com-
patible with the intended use of the building? 
●  Am I working safely and efﬁ ciently and in accordance with the IEE 
Regulations (BS 7671)? 
   A domestic installation usually calls for a PVC insulated and sheathed wiring 
system. These cables are generally ﬁ xed using plastic clips incorporating a 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
320
masonry nail which means that the cables can be ﬁ xed to wood, plaster or 
brick with almost equal ease. 
   Cables must be run straight and neatly between clips ﬁ xed at equal distances 
and providing adequate support for the cable so that it does not become 
damaged by its own weight (IEE Regulation 522.8.4) and shown in  Table 14.5 . 
   A commercial or industrial installation might call for a conduit or trunking 
wiring system. A conduit is a tube, channel or pipe in which insulated con-
ductors are contained. The conduit, in effect, replaces the PVC outer sheath of 
a cable, providing mechanical protection for the insulated conductors. A con-
duit installation can be rewired easily or altered at any time and this ﬂ exibil-
ity, coupled with mechanical protection, makes conduit installations popular 
for commercial and industrial applications. Steel conduits and trunking are, 
however, much heavier than single cables and, therefore, need substantial 
and ﬁ rm ﬁ xings and supports. A wide range of support brackets is available 
for ﬁ xing conduit, trunking and tray installations to the fabric of a commer-
cial or industrial installation. Some of these are shown in  Fig. 14.32 . 
  When a heavier or more robust ﬁ xing is required to support cabling or 
equipment a nut and bolt or screw ﬁ xing is called for. Wood screws may be 
screwed directly into wood but when ﬁ xing to stone, brick or concrete it is 
ﬁ rst necessary to drill a hole in the masonry material which is then plugged 
with a material (usually plastic) to which a screw can be secured. 
   For the most robust ﬁ xing to masonry materials an expansion bolt such as 
that made by Rawlbolt should be used. 
 For lightweight ﬁ xings to hollow partitions or plasterboard a spring toggle 
can be used. Plasterboard cannot support a screw ﬁ xing directly into itself 
but the spring toggle spreads the load over a larger area, making the ﬁ xing 
suitable for light loads. 
 Let us look in a little more detail at individual joining, support and ﬁ xing 
methods.  
 FIGURE 14.32 
 Same manufactured girder supports for electrical equipment. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
321
 Joining materials 
   Plastic can be joined with an appropriate solvent. Metals may be welded, 
brazed or soldered, but the most popular method of on-site joining of met-
als on electrical installations is by nuts and bolts or rivets. 
   A nut and bolt joint may be considered a temporary fastening since 
the parts can easily be separated if required by unscrewing the nut and 
removing the bolt. A rivet is a permanent fastening since the parts riveted 
together cannot be easily separated. 
  Two pieces of metal joined by a bolt and nut and by a machine screw and 
nut are shown in  Fig. 14.33   . The nut is tightened to secure the joint. When 
joining trunking or cable trays, a round head machine screw should be 
used with the head inside to reduce the risk of damage to cables being 
drawn into the trunking or tray. 
  Thin sheet material such as trunking is often joined using a pop riveter. 
Special rivets are used with a hand tool, as shown in  Fig. 14.34   . Where pos-
sible, the parts to be riveted should be clamped and drilled together with 
a clearance hole for the rivet. The stem of the rivet is pushed into the nose 
bush of the riveter until the alloy sleeve of the rivet is ﬂ ush with the nose 
bush (a). The rivet is then placed in the hole and the handles squeezed 
together (b). The alloy sleeve is compressed and the rivet stem will break 
off when the rivet is set and the joint complete (c). To release the broken-
off stem piece, the nose bush is turned upwards and the handles opened 
sharply. The stem will fall out and is discarded (d). 
Bolt and nut
Machine screw and nut
 FIGURE 14.33 
 Joining of metals. 
(c)
(d)
 FIGURE 14.34 
 Metal joining with pop rivets. 
(a)
(b)

Basic Electrical Installation Work
322
Masonry
nail
PVC clip
PVC insulated and
sheathed cable
 FIGURE 14.36 
 PVC insulated and sheathed cable clip. 
 Bracket supports 
   Conduit and trunking may be ﬁ xed directly to a surface such as a brick wall 
or concrete ceiling, but where cable runs are across girders or other steel 
framework, spring steel clips may be used but support brackets or clips 
often require manufacturing. 
  The brackets are usually made from ﬂ at iron, which is painted after manu-
facturing to prevent corrosion. They may be made on-site by the electri-
cian or, if many brackets are required, the electrical contractor may make 
a working sketch with dimensions and have the items manufactured by a 
blacksmith or metal fabricator. 
  The type of bracket required will be determined by the installation, but 
 Fig. 14.35 gives some examples of brackets which may be modiﬁ ed to suit 
particular circumstances. 
  FIXING METHODS 
   PVC insulated and sheathed wiring systems are usually ﬁ xed with PVC clips 
in order to comply with IEE Regulation 522.8.3 and 4 and shown in  Table 
14.5 . The clips are supplied in various sizes to hold the cable ﬁ rmly, and 
the ﬁ xing nail is a hardened masonry nail.  Figure 14.36    shows a cable clip 
of this type. The use of a masonry nail means that ﬁ xings to wood, plaster, 
brick or stone can be made with equal ease. 
Girder bracket
made from steel
rod supporting a
conduit
Angle
iron
truss
20 mm conduit
‘J’
bolt
Conduit fixed
to angle iron truss
with flat iron and ‘J’ bolt
Angle
iron
truss
Trunking fixed to
angle iron truss
by a variation of
flat iron and ‘J’ bolt
Girder bracket
made from flat
iron supporting
a trunking
 FIGURE 14.35 
 Bracket supports for conduits and trunking. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
323
  When heavier cables, trunking, conduit or luminaires have to be ﬁ xed a 
screw ﬁ xing is often needed. Wood screws may be screwed directly into 
wood but when ﬁ xing to brick, stone, plaster or concrete it is necessary to 
drill a hole in the masonry material, which is then plugged with a material 
to which the screw can be secured. 
  PLASTIC PLUGS 
 A  plastic plug is made of a hollow plastic tube split up to half its length to 
allow for expansion. Each size of plastic plug is colour coded to match a 
wood screw size.
 Definition  
 A plastic plug is made of a hollow 
plastic tube split up to half its length 
to allow for expansion. Each size of 
plastic plug is colour coded to match 
a wood screw size. 
   A hole is drilled into the masonry, using a masonry drill of the same diam-
eter, to the length of the plastic plug (see  Fig. 14.37 ). The plastic plug is 
inserted into the hole and tapped home until it is level with the surface of 
the masonry. Finally, the ﬁ xing screw is driven into the plastic plug until it 
becomes tight and the ﬁ xture is secure. 
  EXPANSION BOLTS 
 The most well known  expansion bolt  is made by Rawlbolt and consists of 
a split iron shell held together at one end by a steel ferrule and a spring 
wire clip at the other end. Tightening the bolt draws up an expanding bolt 
inside the split iron shell, forcing the iron to expand and grip the masonry. 
Rawlbolts are for heavy-duty masonry ﬁ xings (see  Fig. 14.38 ).
Drill hole in masonry
Insert plug
Drive home screw
Fixture
 FIGURE 14.37 
 Screw ﬁ xing to plastic plug. 
 Definition  
   The most well known expansion bolt 
is made by Rawlbolt and consists of 
a split iron shell held together at one 
end by a steel ferrule and a spring 
wire clip at the other end. Tightening 
the bolt draws up an expanding bolt 
inside the split iron shell, forcing the 
iron to expand and grip the masonry. 
Rawlbolts are for heavy-duty masonry 
fi xings. 
Drill hole in
masonry
Tighten bolt
until fixture is
secure
Fixture
Insert shell and
ferrule in hole
and attach fixture
with bolt
Fixture
Shell
Ferrule
Expanding nut
 FIGURE 14.38 
 Expansion bolt ﬁ xing. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
324
   A hole is drilled in the masonry to take the iron shell and ferrule. The iron 
shell is inserted with the spring wire clip end ﬁ rst so that the ferrule is at 
the outer surface. The bolt is passed through the ﬁ xture, located in the 
expanding nut and tightened until the ﬁ xing becomes secure. 
  SPRING TOGGLE BOLTS 
 A  spring toggle bolt  provides one method of ﬁ xing to hollow partition 
walls which are usually faced with plasterboard and a plaster skimming. 
Plasterboard and plaster wall or ceiling surfaces are not strong enough 
to support a load ﬁ xed directly into the plasterboard, but the spring 
toggle spreads the load over a larger area, making the ﬁ xing suitable for 
light loads (see  Fig. 14.39 ).
Pass compressed
toggle wings through
plasterboard
Tighten bolt
until fixture
is secure
 FIGURE 14.39 
 Spring toggle bolt ﬁ xing. 
 Definition  
 A spring toggle bolt provides one 
method of fi xing to hollow partition 
walls which are usually faced with 
plasterboard and a plaster skimming. 
   A hole is drilled through the plasterboard and into the cavity. The toggle 
bolt is passed through the ﬁ xture and the toggle wings screwed into the 
bolt. The toggle wings are compressed and passed through the hole in 
the plasterboard and into the cavity where they spring apart and rest on 
the cavity side of the plasterboard. The bolt is tightened until the ﬁ xing 
becomes ﬁ rm. The bolt of the spring toggle cannot be removed after ﬁ xing 
without the loss of the toggle wings. If it becomes necessary to remove and 
reﬁ x the ﬁ xture a new toggle bolt will have to be used. 
 Special installations or locations 
  All electrical installations and installed equipment must be safe to use and 
free from the dangers of electric shock, but some installations or locations 
require special consideration because of the inherent dangers of the installed 
conditions. The danger may arise because of the corrosive or explosive 
nature of the atmosphere, because the installation must be used in damp or 
low-temperature conditions or because there is a need to provide additional 
mechanical protection for the electrical system Part 7 of the IEE Regulations 
deals with these special installations or locations. In this section we will con-
sider some of the installations which require special consideration.  
 Temporary construction site installations 
  Temporary electrical supplies provided on construction sites can save many 
man hours of labour by providing the energy required for ﬁ xed and portable 
tools and lighting which speeds up the completion of a project. However, 
construction sites are dangerous places and the temporary electrical supply 
which is installed to assist the construction process must comply with all 
of the relevant wiring regulations for permanent installations (Regulation 
110.1). All equipment must be of a robust construction in order to fulﬁ l 
the on-site electrical requirements while being exposed to rough handling, 
vehicular nudging, the wind, rain and sun. All equipment socket outlets, 
plugs and couplers must be of the industrial type to BS EN 60439 and BS EN 
60309 and speciﬁ ed by Regulation 704.511.1 as shown in  Fig. 14.40   . 
  Where an electrician is not permanently on site, MCBs are preferred so that 
overcurrent protection devices can be safely reset by an unskilled person. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
325
The British Standards Code of Practice 1017,  The Distribution of Electricity 
on Construction and Building Sites , advises that protection against earth 
faults may be obtained by ﬁ rst providing a low impedance path, so that 
overcurrent devices can operate quickly as described in Chapter 12, and 
secondly by ﬁ tting an RCD in addition to the overcurrent protection device 
(IEE Regulation 704.410.3.10). The 17th edition of the IEE Regulations 
considers construction sites very special locations, devoting the whole of 
Section 704 to their requirements. A construction site installation should 
be tested and inspected in accordance with Part 6 of the Wiring Regulations 
every 3 months throughout the construction period. 
  The source of supply for the temporary installation may be from a petrol 
or diesel generating set or from the local supply company. When the local 
electricity company provides the supply, the incoming cable must be ter-
minated in a waterproof and locked enclosure to prevent unauthorized 
access and provide metering arrangements. 
   IEE Regulations 704.313, 704.410.3.10 and 411.8 tells us that reduced low 
voltage is strongly  preferred  for portable hand lamps and tools used on 
construction and demolition sites. 
  The distribution of electrical supplies on a construction site would typi-
cally be as follows: 
●      400        V three phase for supplies to major items of plant having a rating 
above 3.75       kW such as cranes and lifts. These supplies must be wired 
in armoured cables. 
●  230   V single phase for supplies to items of equipment which are 
robustly installed such as ﬂ oodlighting towers, small hoists and site 
ofﬁ ces. These supplies must be wired in armoured cable unless run 
inside the site ofﬁ ces. 
●  110  V single phase for supplies to all mobile hand tools and all 
mobile lighting equipment. The supply is usually provided by a 
reduced voltage distribution unit which incorporates splashproof 
sockets fed from a centre-tapped 110   V transformer. This arrange-
ment limits the voltage to earth to 55       V, which is recognized as safe 
 FIGURE 14.40 
 110 V distribution unit and cable connector, suitable for construction site electrical supplies: 
(a) reduced-voltage distribution unit incorporating industrial sockets to BS EN 60309 and (b) industrial 
plug and connector. 
(a)
(b)
 Safety First  
 Construction sites 
 ● 
 low voltage or 
 ● 
 battery tools must be used. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
326
in most locations. A 110  V distribution unit is shown in  Fig. 14.40 . 
Edison screw lamps are used for 110       V lighting supplies so that they 
are not interchangeable with 230  V site ofﬁ ce lamps. 
  There are occasions when even a 110       V supply from a centre-tapped trans-
former is too high, for example, supplies to inspection lamps for use inside 
damp or conﬁ ned places. In these circumstances a safety extra-low voltage 
(SELV) supply would be required. 
   Industrial plugs have a keyway which prevents a tool from one voltage 
being connected to the socket outlet of a different voltage. They are also 
colour coded for easy identiﬁ cation as follows: 
 400  V – red 
 230   V – blue 
 110   V – yellow 
 50  V – white 
 25   V – violet. 
 Agricultural and horticultural installations 
   Especially adverse installation conditions are to be encountered on agri-
cultural and horticultural installations because of the presence of live-
stock, vermin, dampness, corrosive substances and mechanical damage. 
The 17th edition of the IEE Wiring Regulations considers these installations 
very special locations and has devoted the whole of Section 705 to their 
requirements. In situations accessible to livestock the electrical equipment 
should be of a type which is appropriate for the external inﬂ uences likely to 
occur, and should have at least protection IP44, that is, protection against 
solid objects and water splashing from any direction (Regulation 705.512.2, 
see also Fig. 13.3). 
   In buildings intended for livestock, all ﬁ xed wiring systems must be inac-
cessible to the livestock and cables liable to be attacked by vermin must be 
suitably protected (IEE Regulation 705.513.2). 
   PVC cables enclosed in heavy-duty PVC conduit are suitable for installa-
tions in most agricultural buildings. All exposed and extraneous metal-
work must be provided with supplementary equipotential bonding in 
areas where livestock is kept (Regulation 705.415.2.1). In many situations, 
waterproof socket outlets to BS 196 must be installed. All socket outlet cir-
cuits must be protected by an RCD complying with the appropriate British 
Standard and the operating current must not exceed 30  mA. 
   Cables buried on agricultural or horticultural land should be buried at a 
depth not less than 600  mm, or 1000  mm where the ground may be culti-
vated, and the cable must have an armour sheath and be further protected 
by cable tiles. Overhead cables must be insulated and installed so that they 
are clear of farm machinery or placed at a minimum height of 6       m to com-
ply with Regulation 705.522. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
327
   Horses and cattle have a very low body resistance, which makes them sus-
ceptible to an electric shock at voltages lower than 25       V rms. The sensitivity 
of farm animals to electric shock means that they can be contained by an 
electric fence. An animal touching the fence receives a short pulse of elec-
tricity which passes through the animal to the general mass of earth and 
back to an earth electrode sunk near the controller, as shown in  Fig. 14.41   . 
The pulses are generated by a capacitor–resistor circuit inside the control-
ler which may be mains or battery operated (capacitor–resistor circuits 
are discussed in  Advanced Electrical Installation Work ). There must be no 
risk to any human coming into contact with the controller, which should 
be manufactured to BS 2632. The output voltage of the controller must not 
exceed 10  kV and the energy must not be greater than 5  J. The duration of 
the pulse must not be greater than 1.5       ms and the pulse must never have a 
frequency greater than one pulse per second. This shock level is very simi-
lar to that which can be experienced by touching a spark plug lead on a 
motor car. The energy levels are very low at 5       J. There are 3.6 million joules 
of energy in 1  kWh. 
   Earth electrodes connected to the earth terminal of an electric fence con-
troller must be separate from the earthing system of any other circuit and 
should be situated outside the resistance area of any electrode used for 
protective earthing. The electric fence controller and the fence wire must 
be installed so that they do not come into contact with any power, tele-
phone or radio systems, including poles. Agricultural and horticultural 
installations should be tested and inspected in accordance with Part 6 of 
the Wiring Regulations every 3 years.
Controller
Cow
Fence
wire must
not be
barbed
Earth
electrode
Path
of current
Pasture
land
 FIGURE 14.41 
 Farm animal control by electric fence. 
 Safety First  
 Electric shock 
   Animals 
and 
humans 
must 
be 
protected against electric shock. 
 Caravans and caravan sites 
  The electrical installations on caravan sites, and within caravans, must 
comply in all respects with the wiring regulations for buildings. All the dan-
gers which exist in buildings are present in and around caravans, including 
the added dangers associated with repeated connection and disconnec-
tion of the supply and the ﬂ exing of the caravan installation in a moving 
vehicle. The 17th edition of the Regulations has devoted Section 721 to the 
electrical installation in caravans and motor caravans and Section 708 to 
caravan parks. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
328
 Touring caravans must be supplied from a 16  A industrial type socket out-
let adjacent to the caravan park pitch, similar to that shown in  Fig. 14.40 . 
Each socket outlet must be provided with individual overcurrent protec-
tion and an individual residual current circuit breaker with a rated tripping 
current of 30       mA (IEE Regulations 708.553.1.12 and 708.553.1.13). The dis-
tance between the caravan connector and the site socket outlet must be 
not more than 20       m (Regulation 708.512.3). These requirements are shown 
in  Fig. 14.42   . 
  The supply cables must be installed outside the pitch area and be buried at 
a depth of at least 0.6  m (IEE Regulation 708.521.1.1).
Supply
cable
Isolator
Main
distribution unit
RCD
MCB
Caravan
pitch socket
 FIGURE 14.42 
 Electrical supplies to caravans. 
 Key Facts  
 Caravans 
 ● 
 every caravan pitch must have at 
least one 16  A industrial socket 
 ● 
 each socket must have RCD and 
overcurrent protection
 ●  
IEE Regulations 708.553. 
  The caravan or motor caravan must be provided with a mains isolating 
switch and an RCD to break all live conductors (Regulations 721.411). An 
adjacent notice detailing how to connect and disconnect the supply safely 
must also be provided, as shown in Regulation 721.514. Electrical equip-
ment must not be installed in fuel storage compartments (Regulation 
721.528.3.5). Caravans ﬂ ex when being towed, and therefore the installa-
tion must be wired in ﬂ exible or stranded conductors of at least 1.5       mm 
cross-section. The conductors must be supported on horizontal runs at 
least every 25       cm and the metalwork of the caravan and chassis must be 
bonded with 4.0  mm 2 cable. 
  The wiring of the extra low-voltage battery supply must be run in such 
a way that it does not come into contact with the 230       V wiring system 
(Regulation 721.528.1). 
  The caravan should be connected to the pitch socket outlet by means of a 
ﬂ exible cable, not longer than 25  m, and having a minimum cross-sectional 
area of 2.5  mm 2 or as detailed in Table 721. 
 Because of the mobile nature of caravans it is recommended that the 
electrical installation be tested and inspected at intervals considered 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
329
appropriate, between 1 and 3 years but not exceeding 3 years (Regulation 
721.514.1).
 Static electricity 
Static electricity  is a voltage charge which builds up to many thousands of 
volts between two surfaces when they rub together. A dangerous situation 
occurs when the static charge has built up to a potential capable of striking 
an arc through the airgap separating the two surfaces.
 Definition  
 Static electricity is a voltage charge 
which builds up to many thousands 
of volts between two surfaces when 
they rub together. 
   Static charges build up in a thunderstorm. A lightning strike is the dis-
charge of the thunder cloud, which might have built up to a voltage of 
100       MV, to the general mass of earth which is at zero volts. Lightning dis-
charge currents are of the order of 20       kA, hence the need for lightning con-
ductors on vulnerable buildings in order to discharge the energy safely. We 
looked at Lighting Protection Systems in Chapter 13. 
   Static charge builds up between any two insulating surfaces or between an 
insulating surface and a conducting surface, but it is not apparent between 
two conducting surfaces. 
   A motor car moving through the air builds up a static charge which some-
times gives the occupants a minor shock as they step out and touch the 
door handle. 
   A nylon overall and nylon bed sheets build up static charge which is the 
cause of the  ‘ crackle ’  when you shake them. Many ﬂ ammable liquids have 
the same properties as insulators, and therefore liquids, gases, powders 
and paints moving through pipes build up a static charge. 
   Petrol pumps, operating theatre oxygen masks and car spray booths are 
particularly at risk because a spark in these situations may ignite the ﬂ am-
mable liquid, powder or gas. 
   So how do we protect ourselves against the risks associated with static 
electrical charges? I said earlier that a build-up of static charge is not 
apparent between two conducting surfaces, and this gives a clue to the 
solution. Bonding surfaces together with equipotential bonding conduc-
tors prevents a build-up of static electricity between the surfaces. If we use 
large-diameter pipes, we reduce the ﬂ ow rates of liquids and powders and, 
therefore, we reduce the build-up of static charge. Hospitals use cotton 
sheets and uniforms, and use bonding extensively in operating theatres. 
Rubber, which contains a proportion of graphite, is used to manufacture 
antistatic trolley wheels and surgeons ’  boots. Rubber constructed in this 
manner enables any build-up of static charge to  ‘ leak ’  away. Increasing 
humidity also reduces static charge because the water droplets carry away 
the static charge, thus removing the hazard. 
 Computer supplies 
   Every modern ofﬁ ce now contains computers, and many systems are linked 
together or networked. Most computer systems are sensitive to variations 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
330
or distortions in the mains supply and many computers incorporate ﬁ lters 
which produce  high protective conductor currents of around 2 or 3  mA. This 
is clearly not a fault current, but is typical of the current which ﬂ ows in the 
CPC of IT equipment under normal operating conditions. IEE Regulation 
543.7.1 and 4 deals with the earthing requirements for the installation of 
equipment having high protective conductor currents. IEE Guidance Note 
7 recommends that IT equipment should be connected to double sockets 
as shown in  Fig. 14.43   . 
 Clean supplies 
 Supplies to computer circuits must be  ‘ clean ’ and  ‘ secure ’ . Mainframe com-
puters and computer networks are sensitive to mains distortion or interfer-
ence, which is referred to as  ‘ noise ’ . Noise is mostly caused by switching an 
inductive circuit which causes a transient spike, or by brush gear making 
contact with the commutator segments of an electric motor. These distor-
tions in the mains supply can cause computers to  ‘ crash ’  or provoke errors 
and are shown in  Fig. 14.44 . 
  To avoid this, a  ‘ clean ’  supply is required for the computer network.
This can be provided by taking the ring or radial circuits for the computer 
supplies from a point as close as possible to the intake position of the 
electrical supply to the building. A clean earth can also be taken from this 
point, which is usually one core of the cable and not the armour of an SWA 
cable, and distributed around the ﬁ nal wiring circuit. Alternatively, the 
computer supply can be cleaned by means of a ﬁ lter such as that shown in 
 Fig. 14.45. 
 Secure supplies 
  The mains electrical supply in the United Kingdom is extremely reliable 
and secure. However, the loss of supply to a mainframe computer or com-
puter network for even a second can cause the system to  ‘ crash ’ , and hours 
or even days of work can be lost. 
   One solution to this problem is to protect  ‘ precious ’  software systems 
with an uninterruptible power supply (UPS). A UPS is essentially a battery 
supply electronically modiﬁ ed to provide a clean and secure a.c. supply. 
Double socket outlets must have two
terminals for protective conductors. One
terminal to be used for each protective
conductor, of a minimum size of 1.5 mm2
Separate
connections
Distribution
fuse board
PE
Ring final circuit supplying
twin socket outlets
(total protective conductor
current exceeding 10 mA).
 FIGURE 14.43 
 Recommended method of connecting IT equipment to socket outlets. 
Clean supply
Spikes, caused by an over voltage
transient surging through the mains
‘Noise’: unwanted electrical signals picked
up by power lines or supply cords
 FIGURE 14.44 
 Distortions in the a.c. mains supply. 
C
R
R100 Ω
C0.1μF
 FIGURE 14.45 
 A simple noise suppressor. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
331
The UPS is plugged into the mains supply and the computer systems are 
plugged into the UPS.
 Definition  
 An UPS is essentially a battery supply 
electronically modifi ed to provide a 
clean and secure a.c. supply. The UPS 
is plugged into the mains supply and 
the computer systems are plugged 
into the UPS. 
 An UPS to protect a small network of, say, six PCs is physically about the 
size of one PC hard drive and is usually placed under or at the side of an 
operator’s desk. 
   It is best to dedicate a ring or radial circuit to the UPS and either to con-
nect the computer equipment permanently or to use non-standard outlets 
to discourage the unauthorized use and overloading of these special sup-
plies by, for example, kettles or the cleaner’s vaccum. 
   Finally, remember that most premises these days contain some computer 
equipment and systems. Electricians intending to isolate supplies for testing 
or modiﬁ cation should ﬁ rst check and then check again before they ﬁ nally 
isolate the supply in order to avoid loss or damage to computer systems.  
 Optical ﬁ bre cables 
  The introduction of ﬁ bre-optic cable systems and digital transmissions will 
undoubtedly affect future cabling arrangements and the work of the elec-
trician. Networks based on the digital technology currently being used so 
successfully by the telecommunications industry are very likely to become 
the long-term standard for computer systems. Fibre-optic systems dramat-
ically reduce the number of cables required for control and communica-
tions systems, and this will in turn reduce the physical room required for 
these systems. Fibre-optic cables are also immune to electrical noise when 
run parallel to mains cables and, therefore, the present rules of segrega-
tion and screening may change in the future. There is no spark risk if the 
cable is accidentally cut and, therefore, such circuits are intrinsically safe. 
Intrinsic safety is described in Chapter 13 under the heading Hazardous 
Area Installations. 
Optical ﬁ bre cables  are communication cables made from optical-quality 
plastic, the same material from which spectacle lenses are manufactured. 
The energy is transferred down the cable as digital pulses of laser light as 
against current ﬂ owing down a copper conductor in electrical installation 
terms. The light pulses stay within the ﬁ bre-optic cable because of a sci-
entiﬁ c principle known as  ‘ total internal refraction ’  which means that the 
laser light bounces down the cable and when it strikes the outer wall it is 
always deﬂ ected inwards and, therefore, does not escape out of the cable, 
as shown in  Fig. 14.46 .
Laser light pulses
Optical fibre cable
 FIGURE 14.46 
 Digital pulses of laser light down an optical ﬁ bre cable. 
 Definition  
 Optical fi bre cables are communica-
tion cables made from optical-quality 
plastic, the same material from which 
spectacle lenses are manufactured. 
The energy is transferred down the 
cable as digital pulses of laser light as 
against current fl owing down a cop-
per conductor in electrical installation 
terms. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
332
  The cables are very small because the optical quality of the conductor is 
very high and signals can be transmitted over great distances. They are 
cheap to produce and lightweight because these new cables are made from 
high-quality plastic and not high-quality copper. Single-sheathed cables 
are often called  ‘ simplex ’  cables and twin sheathed cables  ‘ duplex ’ , that is, 
two simplex cables together in one sheath. Multi-core cables are available 
containing up to 24 single ﬁ bres. 
   Fibre-optic cables look like steel wire armour cables (but of course are 
lighter) and should be installed in the same way and given the same level 
of protection as SWA cables. Avoid tight-radius bends if possible and kinks 
at all costs. Cables are terminated in special joint boxes which ensure 
cable ends are cleanly cut and butted together to ensure the continuity of 
the light pulses. Fibre-optic cables are Band I circuits when used for data 
transmission and must therefore be segregated from other mains cables to 
satisfy the IEE Regulations. 
  The testing of ﬁ bre-optic cables requires that special instruments be used 
to measure the light attenuation (i.e. light loss) down the cable. Finally, 
when working with ﬁ bre-optic cables, electricians should avoid direct eye 
contact with the low-energy laser light transmitted down the conductors. 
 Fire alarm circuits (BS 5839 and BS EN 54-2: 1998) 
  Through one or more of the various statutory Acts, all public buildings are 
required to provide an effective means of giving a warning of ﬁ re so that 
life and property may be protected. An effective system is one which gives 
a warning of ﬁ re while sufﬁ cient time remains for the ﬁ re to be put out and 
any occupants to leave the building. 
Fire alarm circuits  are wired as either normally open or normally closed. 
In a  normally open circuit , the alarm call points are connected in parallel 
with each other so that when any alarm point is initiated the circuit is com-
pleted and the sounder gives a warning of ﬁ re. The arrangement is shown 
in  Fig. 14.47   . It is essential for some parts of the wiring system to continue 
Alarm
sounders –
bells or sirens
Alarm
call
points
Master
control
unit
Secure
supply
 FIGURE 14.47 
 A simple normally open ﬁ re alarm circuit. 
 Definition  
 Fire alarm circuits are wired as either 
normally open or normally closed. In 
a  normally open circuit , the alarm call 
points are connected in parallel with 
each other so that when any alarm 
point is initiated the circuit is com-
pleted and the sounder gives a warn-
ing of fi re. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
333
operating even when attacked by ﬁ re. For this reason the master control 
and sounders should be wired in MI or FP200 cable. The alarm call points 
of a normally open system must also be wired in MI or FP200 cable, unless 
a monitored system is used. In its simplest form this system requires a 
high-value resistor to be connected across the call-point contacts, which 
permits a small current to circulate and operate an indicator, declaring 
the circuit healthy. With a monitored system, PVC insulated cables may be 
used to wire the alarm call points.
 In a  normally closed circuit , the alarm call points are connected in series 
to normally closed contacts as shown in  Fig. 14.48   . When the alarm is initi-
ated, or if a break occurs in the wiring, the alarm is activated. The sounders 
and master control unit must be wired in MI or FP200 cable, but the call 
points may be wired in PVC insulated cable since this circuit will always 
 ‘ fail safe ’ .
 Definition  
 In a  normally closed circuit , the alarm 
call points are connected in series to 
normally closed contacts as shown in 
 Fig. 14.48 . When the alarm is initiated, 
or if a break occurs in the wiring, the 
alarm is activated. 
 Alarm call points 
Manually operated alarm call points should be provided in all parts of a 
building where people may be present, and should be located so that no 
one need walk for more than 30       m from any position within the prem-
ises in order to give an alarm. A breakglass manual call point is shown in 
 Fig. 14.49   . They should be located on exit routes and, in particular, on the 
ﬂ oor landings of staircases and exits to the street. They should be ﬁ xed at 
a height of 1.4  m above the ﬂ oor at easily accessible, well illuminated and 
conspicuous positions.
Alarm
sounders
Alarm call points
Master
control
unit
Secure
supply
 FIGURE 14.48 
 A simple normally closed ﬁ re alarm circuit. 
 FIGURE 14.49 
 Breakglass manual call point. 
 Automatic detection of ﬁ re is possible with heat and smoke detectors. 
These are usually installed on the ceilings and at the top of stair wells of 
buildings because heat and smoke rise. Smoke detectors tend to give a 
faster response than heat detectors, but whether manual or automatic call 
points are used, should be determined by their suitability for the particu-
lar installation. They should be able to discriminate between a ﬁ re and the 
normal environment in which they are to be installed. 
 Definition  
 Manually operated alarm call points 
should be provided in all parts of 
a building where people may be 
present, and should be located so that 
no one need walk for more than 30       m 
from any position within the premises 
in order to give an alarm. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
334
 Sounders 
  The positions and numbers of sounders should be such that the alarm can 
be distinctly heard above the background noise in every part of the prem-
ises. The sounders should produce a minimum of 65  dB, or 5  dB above 
any ambient sound which might persist, for more than 30       s. If the sound-
ers are to arouse sleeping persons then the minimum sound level should 
be increased to 75       dB at the bedhead. Bells, hooters or sirens may be used 
but in any one installation they must all be of the same type. Examples of 
sounders are shown in  Fig. 14.50 . Normal speech is about 5  dB.
 FIGURE 14.50 
 Typical ﬁ re alarm sounders. 
 Definition  
  The positions and numbers of sound-
ers should be such that the alarm can 
be distinctly heard above the back-
ground noise in every part of the 
premises. 
 Fire alarm design considerations 
 Since all ﬁ re alarm installations must comply with the relevant statutory 
regulations, good practice recommends that contact be made with the 
local ﬁ re prevention ofﬁ cer at the design stage in order to identify any par-
ticular local regulations and obtain the necessary certiﬁ cation. 
   Larger buildings must be divided into zones so that the location of the ﬁ re 
can be quickly identiﬁ ed by the emergency services. The zones can be indi-
cated on an indicator board situated in, for example, a supervisor’s ofﬁ ce 
or the main reception area. 
 In selecting the zones, the following rules must be considered: 
 1.  Each zone should not have a ﬂ oor area in excess of 2000  m 2 . 
 2.  Each zone should be conﬁ ned to one storey, except where the total 
ﬂ oor area of the building does not exceed 300  m 2 . 
 3.  Staircases and very small buildings should be treated as one zone. 
  4.  Each zone should be a single ﬁ re compartment. This means that the 
walls, ceilings and ﬂ oors are capable of containing the smoke and ﬁ re. 
 At least one ﬁ re alarm sounder will be required in each zone, but all sound-
ers in the building must operate when the alarm is activated. 
  The main sounders may be silenced by an authorized person, once the 
general public have been evacuated from the building, but the current 
must be diverted to a supervisory buzzer which cannot be silenced until 
the system has been restored to its normal operational state. 
 A ﬁ re alarm installation may be linked to the local ﬁ re brigade’s control 
room by the telecommunication network, if the permission of the ﬁ re 
authority and local telecommunication ofﬁ ce is obtained. 
  The electricity supply to the ﬁ re alarm installation must be secure in the 
most serious conditions. In practice the most reliable supply is the mains 
supply, backed up by a  ‘ standby ’  battery supply in case of mains failure. 
The supply should be exclusive to the ﬁ re alarm installation, fed from a 
separate switch fuse, painted red and labelled,  ‘ Fire Alarm – Do Not Switch 
Off ’ . Standby battery supplies should be capable of maintaining the system 
in full normal operation for at least 24       h and, at the end of that time, be 
capable of sounding the alarm for at least 30  min. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
335
   Fire alarm circuits are Band I circuits and consequently cables forming 
part of a ﬁ re alarm installation must be physically segregated from all Band 
II circuits unless they are insulated for the highest voltage (IEE Regulations 
528.1 and 560.7.1). 
 Intruder alarms 
 The installation of security alarm systems in the United Kingdom is already 
a multi-million-pound business and yet it is also a relatively new industry. 
As society becomes increasingly aware of crime prevention, it is evident 
that the market for security systems will expand. 
   Not all homes are equally at risk, but all homes have something of value to 
a thief. Properties in cities are at highest risk, followed by homes in towns 
and villages, and at least risk are homes in rural areas. A nearby motorway 
junction can, however, greatly increase the risk factor. Flats and maison-
ettes are the most vulnerable, with other types of property at roughly equal 
risk. Most intruders are young, ﬁ t and foolhardy opportunists. They ide-
ally want to get in and away quickly but, if they can work unseen, they may 
take a lot of trouble to gain access to a property by, for example, removing 
the glass from a window. 
   Most intruders are looking for portable and easily saleable items such as 
video recorders, television sets, home computers, jewellery, cameras, 
silverware, money, cheque books or credit cards. The Home Ofﬁ ce has 
stated that only 7% of homes are sufﬁ ciently protected against intruders, 
although 75% of householders believe they are secure. Taking the simplest 
precautions will reduce the risk, while installing a security system can 
greatly reduce the risk of a successful burglary. 
 Security lighting 
Security lighting is the ﬁ rst line of defence in the ﬁ ght against crime. 
 ‘ Bad men all hate the light and avoid it, for fear their practices should be 
shown up ’  (John 3:20). A recent study carried out by Middlesex University 
has shown that in two London boroughs the crime ﬁ gures were reduced 
by improving the lighting levels. Police forces agree that homes and public 
buildings which are externally well illuminated are a much less attractive 
target for the thief.
 Definition  
 Security lighting is the fi rst line of 
defence in the fi ght against crime. 
   Security lighting installed on the outside of the home may be activated by 
external detectors. These detectors sense the presence of a person outside 
the protected property and additional lighting is switched on. This will 
deter most potential intruders while also acting as courtesy lighting for vis-
itors ( Fig. 14.51 ). 
 Passive infra-red detectors 
Passive infra-red (PIR) detector units allow a householder to switch on 
lighting units automatically whenever the area covered is approached by 
a moving body whose thermal radiation differs from the background. This 
type of detector is ideal for driveways or dark areas around the protected 
 FIGURE 14.51 
 Security lighting reduces crime. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
336
property. It also saves energy because the lamps are only switched on when 
someone approaches the protected area. The major contribution to secu-
rity lighting comes from the  ‘ unexpected ’  high-level illumination of an area 
when an intruder least expects it. This surprise factor often encourages the 
potential intruder to  ‘ try next door ’ .
 FIGURE 14.52 
 PIR detector and ﬁ eld of detection. 
 FIGURE 14.53 
 A typical PIR detector. 
 Definition  
 PIR detector units allow a householder 
to switch on lighting units automati-
cally whenever the area covered is 
approached by a moving body whose 
thermal radiation diff ers from the 
background. 
   PIR detectors are designed to sense heat changes in the ﬁ eld of view dic-
tated by the lens system. The ﬁ eld of view can be as wide as 180°, as shown 
by the diagram in  Fig. 14.52   . Many of the  ‘ better ’  detectors use a split lens 
system so that a number of beams have to be broken before the detector 
switches on the security lighting. This capability overcomes the problem of 
false alarms, and a typical PIR is shown in  Fig. 14.53 . 
   PIR detectors are often used to switch tungsten halogen ﬂ oodlights because, 
of all available luminaires, tungsten halogen offers instant high-level illumi-
nation. Light ﬁ ttings must be installed out of reach of an intruder in order 
to prevent sabotage of the security lighting system.  
 Intruder alarm systems 
   Alarm systems are now increasingly considered to be an essential feature 
of home security for all types of homes and not just property in high-risk 
areas. An intruder alarm system serves as a deterrent to a potential thief 
and often reduces home insurance premiums. In the event of a burglary 
they alert the occupants, neighbours and ofﬁ cials to a possible criminal 
act and generate fear and uncertainty in the mind of the intruder which 
encourages a more rapid departure. Intruder alarm systems can be broadly 
divided into three categories – those which give perimeter protection, 
space protection or trap protection. A system can comprise one or a mix-
ture of all three categories.
 Definition  
 An 
intruder alarm system 
serves 
as a deterrent to a potential thief 
and often reduces home insurance 
premiums. 
 A perimeter protection system places alarm sensors on all external doors 
and windows so that an intruder can be detected as he or she attempts 
to gain access to the protected property. This involves ﬁ tting proximity 
switches to all external doors and windows.
 Definition  
 A perimeter protection system places 
alarm sensors on all external doors 
and windows so that an intruder can 
be detected as he or she attempts to 
gain access to the protected property. 
 A movement or heat detector placed in a room will detect the presence of 
anyone entering or leaving that room. PIR detectors and ultrasonic detectors 
 Definition  
 A movement or heat detector placed 
in a room will detect the presence of 
anyone entering or leaving that room. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
337
  PROXIMITY SWITCHES 
  These are designed for the discreet protection of doors and windows. They 
are made from moulded plastic and are about the size of a chewing-gum 
packet, as shown in  Fig. 14.54   . One moulding contains a reed switch, the 
other a magnet, and when they are placed close together the magnet main-
tains the contacts of the reed switch in either an open or closed position. 
Opening the door or window separates the two mouldings and the switch 
is activated, triggering the alarm. 
  PIR DETECTORS 
  These are activated by a moving body which is warmer than the surround-
ings. The PIR shown in  Fig. 14.55    has a range of 12       m and a detection zone 
of 110  ° when mounted between 1.8 and 2  m high. 
 Intruder alarm sounders 
   Alarm sounders give an audible warning of a possible criminal act. Bells or 
sirens enclosed in a waterproof enclosure, such as shown in  Fig. 14.56   , are 
suitable. It is usual to connect two sounders on an intruder alarm installa-
tion, one inside to make the intruder apprehensive and anxious, hopefully 
encouraging a rapid departure from the premises, and one outside. The 
outside sounder should be displayed prominently since the installation of 
give space protection. Space protection does have the disadvantage of 
being triggered by domestic pets but it is simpler and, therefore, cheaper 
to install. Perimeter protection involves a much more extensive and, there-
fore, expensive installation, but is easier to live with.
Trap protection  places alarm sensors on internal doors and pressure pad 
switches under carpets on through routes between, for example, the main 
living area and the master bedroom. If an intruder gains access to one 
room he cannot move from it without triggering the alarm.
 FIGURE 14.54 
 Proximity switches for perimeter protection. 
 FIGURE 14.55 
 PIR intruder alarm detector. 
 Definition  
 Trap protection places alarm sensors 
on internal doors and pressure pad 
switches under carpets on through 
routes between, for example, the 
main living area and the master 
bedroom. 
 FIGURE 14.56 
 Intruder alarm sounder. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
338
an alarm system is thought to deter the casual intruder and a ringing alarm 
encourages neighbours and ofﬁ cials to investigate a possible criminal act. 
  CONTROL PANEL 
  The control panel, such as that shown in  Fig. 14.57   , is at the centre of the 
intruder alarm system. All external sensors and warning devices radi-
ate from the control panel. The system is switched on or off at the control 
panel using a switch or coded buttons. To avoid triggering the alarm as you 
enter or leave the premises, there are exit and entry delay times to allow 
movement between the control panel and the door. 
  SUPPLY 
  The supply to the intruder alarm system must be secure and this is usually 
achieved by an a.c. mains supply and battery back-up. Nickel–cadmium 
rechargeable cells are usually mounted in the sounder housing box. 
 Design considerations 
   It is estimated that there is now a 5% chance of being burgled, but the 
installation of a security system does deter a potential intruder. Every 
home in Britain will almost certainly contain electrical goods, money or 
valuables of value to an intruder. Installing an intruder alarm system tells 
the potential intruder that you intend to make his job difﬁ cult, which in 
most cases encourages him to look for easier pickings. 
  The type and extent of the intruder alarm installation, and therefore the cost, 
will depend upon many factors including the type and position of the build-
ing, the contents of the building, the insurance risk involved and the peace 
of mind offered by an alarm system to the owner or occupier of the building. 
  The designer must ensure that an intruder cannot sabotage the alarm 
system by cutting the wires or pulling the alarm box from the wall. Most 
systems will trigger if the wires are cut and sounders should be mounted in 
any easy-to-see but difﬁ cult-to-reach position. 
   Intruder alarm circuits are Band I circuits and should, therefore, be segre-
gated from mains supply cables which are designated as Band II circuits or 
insulated to the highest voltage present if run in a common enclosure with 
Band II cables (IEE Regulation 528.1). 
 Closed circuit television 
   Closed circuit television (CCTV) is now an integral part of many security 
systems. CCTV systems range from a single monitor with just one camera 
dedicated to monitoring perhaps a hotel car park, through to systems with 
many internal and external cameras connected to several locations for 
monitoring perhaps a shopping precinct. 
   CCTV cameras are also required to operate in total darkness when ﬂ ood-
lighting is impractical. This is possible by using infra-red lighting which 
renders the scene under observation visible to the camera while to the 
human eye it appears to be in total darkness. 
 FIGURE 14.57 
 Intruder alarm control panel with remote keypad. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
339
 Cameras may be ﬁ xed or movable under remote control, such as those 
used for motorway trafﬁ c monitoring. Typically an external camera would 
be enclosed in a weatherproof housing such as those shown in  Fig. 14.58   . 
Using remote control, the camera can be panned, tilted or focused and 
have its viewing screen washed and wiped. 
   Pictures from several cameras can be multiplexed on to a single co-axial 
video cable, together with all the signals required for the remote control of 
the camera. 
   A permanent record of the CCTV pictures can be stored and replayed by 
incorporating a video tape recorder into the system as is the practice in 
most banks and building societies. 
   Security cameras should be robustly ﬁ xed and cable runs designed so that 
they cannot be sabotaged by a potential intruder. 
 Emergency lighting (BS 5266 and BS EN 1838) 
   Emergency lighting should be planned, installed and maintained to the 
highest standards of reliability and integrity, so that it will operate satisfac-
torily when called into action, no matter how infrequently this may be. 
   Emergency lighting is not required in private homes because the occupants 
are familiar with their surroundings, but in public buildings people are in 
unfamiliar surroundings. In an emergency people do not always act rationally, 
but well illuminated and easily identiﬁ ed exit routes can help to reduce panic.
 FIGURE 14.58 
 CCTV camera. 
 Definition  
 Emergency lighting is not required 
in private homes because the occu-
pants are familiar with their surround-
ings, but in public buildings people 
are in unfamiliar surroundings. In an 
emergency people do not always act 
rationally, but well illuminated and 
easily identifi ed exit routes can help 
to reduce panic. 
Emergency lighting is provided for two reasons; to illuminate escape 
routes, called  ‘ escape ’  lighting; and to enable a process or activity to con-
tinue after a normal lights failure, called  ‘ standby ’ lighting.
 Definition  
   Emergency lighting is provided for 
two reasons; to illuminate escape 
routes, called  ‘ escape ’  lighting; and to 
enable a process or activity to con-
tinue after a normal lights failure, 
called  ‘ standby ’ lighting. 
   Escape lighting is usually required by local and national statutory authori-
ties under legislative powers. The escape lighting scheme should be 
planned so that identiﬁ able features and obstructions are visible in the 
lower levels of illumination which may prevail during an emergency. Exit 
routes should be clearly indicated by signs and illuminated to a uniform 
level, avoiding bright and dark areas. 
Standby lighting  is required in hospital operating theatres and in indus-
try, where an operation or process once started must continue, even if the 
mains lighting fails. Standby lighting may also be required for security rea-
sons. The cash points in public buildings may need to be illuminated at all 
times to discourage acts of theft occurring during a mains lighting failure. 
 Emergency supplies 
   Since an emergency occurring in a building may cause the mains supply 
to fail, the emergency lighting should be supplied from a source which 
is independent from the main supply. In most premises the alternative 
power supply would be from batteries, but generators may also be used. 
Generators can have a large capacity and duration, but a major disadvan-
tage is the delay of time while the generator runs up to speed and takes 
over the load. In some premises a delay of more than 5       s is considered 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
340
unacceptable, and in these cases a battery supply is required to supply the 
load until the generator can take over. 
  The emergency lighting supply must have an adequate capacity and rating 
for the speciﬁ ed duration of time (IEE Regulation 313.2). BS 5266 and BS EN 
1838 states that after a battery is discharged by being called into operation 
for its speciﬁ ed duration of time, it should be capable of once again operat-
ing for the speciﬁ ed duration of time following a recharge period of not lon-
ger than 24       h. The duration of time for which the emergency lighting should 
operate will be speciﬁ ed by a statutory authority but is normally 1–3       h. The 
British Standard states that escape lighting should operate for a minimum 
of 1 hour. Standby lighting operation time will depend upon ﬁ nancial con-
siderations and the importance of continuing the process or activity. 
  There are two possible modes of operation for emergency lighting installa-
tions: maintained and non-maintained. 
  MAINTAINED EMERGENCY LIGHTING 
   In a maintained system the emergency lamps are continuously lit using 
the normal supply when this is available, and change over to an alternative 
supply when the mains supply fails. The advantage of this system is that 
the lamps are continuously proven healthy and any failure is immediately 
obvious. It is a wise precaution to ﬁ t a supervisory buzzer in the emergency 
supply to prevent accidental discharge of the batteries, since it is not oth-
erwise obvious which supply is being used.
 Definition  
   In a maintained system the emergency 
lamps are continuously lit using the 
normal supply when this is available, 
and change over to an alternative 
supply when the mains supply fails. 
 Maintained emergency lighting is normally installed in theatres, cinemas, 
discotheques and places of entertainment where the normal lighting may 
be dimmed or extinguished while the building is occupied. The emergency 
supply for this type of installation is often supplied from a central battery, 
the emergency lamps being wired in parallel from the low-voltage supply 
as shown in  Fig. 14.59   . Escape sign lighting units used in commercial facili-
ties should be wired in the maintained mode. 
Transformer
Supply
Rectifier
Emergency
lamps
Emergency
supply
Supervisory
bell
Normally open
relay
 FIGURE 14.59 
 Maintained emergency lighting. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
341
  NON-MAINTAINED EMERGENCY LIGHTING 
  In a non-maintained system the emergency lamps are only illuminated if 
the normal mains supply fails. Failure of the main supply de-energizes a sole-
noid and a relay connects the emergency lamps to a battery supply, which is 
maintained in a state of readiness by a trickle charge from the normal mains 
supply. When the normal supply is restored, the relay solenoid is energized, 
breaking the relay contacts, which disconnects the emergency lamps, and the 
charger recharges the battery.  Figure 14.60 illustrates this arrangement.
 
Transformer
Supply
Normally
open relay
Rectifier
Emergency
supply
Emergency
lamp
 FIGURE 14.60 
 Non-maintained emergency lighting. 
 Definition  
 In a non-maintained system the emer-
gency lamps are only illuminated if 
the normal mains supply fails. 
  The disadvantage with this type of installation is that broken lamps are not 
detected until they are called into operation in an emergency, unless reg-
ularly maintained. The emergency supply is usually provided by a battery 
contained within the luminaire, together with the charger and relay, mak-
ing the unit self-contained. Self-contained units are cheaper and easier 
to install than a central battery system, but the central battery can have a 
greater capacity and duration, and permit a range of emergency lighting 
luminaires to be installed. 
 Maintenance 
  The contractor installing the emergency lighting should provide a test facil-
ity which is simple to operate and secure against unauthorized interfer-
ence. The emergency lighting installation must be segregated completely 
from any other wiring, so that a fault on the main electrical installation 
cannot damage the emergency lighting installation (IEE Regulation 528.1). 
 Figure 14.30 shows a trunking which provides for segregation of circuits. 
  The batteries used for the emergency supply should be suitable for this pur-
pose. Motor vehicle batteries are not suitable for emergency lighting appli-
cations, except in the starter system of motor-driven generators. The fuel 
supply to a motor-driven generator should be checked. The battery room of 
a central battery system must be well ventilated and, in the case of a motor-
driven generator, adequately heated to ensure rapid starting in cold weather. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
342
  The British Standard recommends that the full load should be carried by 
the emergency supply for at least 1h in every 6 months. After testing, the 
emergency system must be carefully restored to its normal operative state. 
A record should be kept of each item of equipment and the date of each 
test by a qualiﬁ ed or responsible person. It may be necessary to produce 
the record as evidence of satisfactory compliance with statutory legislation 
to a duly authorized person. 
   Self-contained units are suitable for small installations of up to about 12 
units. The batteries contained within these units should be replaced about 
every 5 years, or as recommended by the manufacturer. 
 Primary cells 
 A primary cell cannot be recharged. Once the active chemicals are 
exhausted, the cell must be discarded.
 Definition  
 A primary cell cannot be recharged. 
Once 
the 
active 
chemicals 
are 
exhausted, the cell must be discarded.    Primary cells, in the form of Leclanche cells, are used extensively as por-
table power sources for radios and torches and have an emf of 1.5       V. Larger 
voltages are achieved by connecting cells in series. Thus, a 6       V supply can 
be provided by connecting four cells in series. 
   Mercury primary cells have an emf of 1.35       V, and can have a very large 
capacity in a small physical size. They have a long shelf life and leakproof 
construction, and are used in watches and hearing aids. 
 Secondary cells 
 A secondary cell has the advantage of being rechargeable. If the cell is 
connected to a suitable electrical supply, electrical energy is stored on the 
plates of the cell as chemical energy. When the cell is connected to a load, 
the chemical energy is converted to electrical energy.
 Definition  
 A secondary cell has the advantage of 
being rechargeable. If the cell is con-
nected to a suitable electrical sup-
ply, electrical energy is stored on the 
plates of the cell as chemical energy. 
   A lead-acid cell is a secondary cell. Each cell delivers about 2       V, and when 
six cells are connected in series a 12       V battery is formed of the type used on 
motor vehicles.  Figure 14.61 shows the construction of a lead-acid battery. 
Negative
connecting bar
Positive
connecting bar
All plates
deeply
ribbed
Negative plate
Separator
Positive plate
 FIGURE 14.61 
 The construction of a lead-acid battery. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
343
   A lead-acid battery is constructed of lead plates which are deeply ribbed 
to give maximum surface area for a given weight of plate. The plates are 
assembled in groups, with insulating separators between them. The sepa-
rators are made of a porous insulating material, such as wood or ebonite, 
and the whole assembly is immersed in a dilute sulphuric acid solution in 
a plastic container. 
 Battery rating 
  The capacity of a cell to store charge is a measure of the total quantity of 
electricity which it can cause to be displaced around a circuit after being 
fully charged. It is stated in ampere hours, abbreviation Ah, and calculated 
at the 10 h rate which is the steady load current which would completely 
discharge the battery in 10       h. Therefore, a 50 Ah battery will provide a 
steady current of 5       A for 10       h.  
 Maintenance of lead-acid batteries 
●      The plates of the battery must always be covered by the dilute sulph-
uric acid. If the level falls, it must be topped up with distilled water. 
●      Battery connections must always be tight and should be covered 
with a thin coat of petroleum jelly. 
●  The speciﬁ c gravity or relative density of the battery gives the best 
indication of its state of charge. A discharged cell will have a speciﬁ c 
gravity of 1.150, which will rise to 1.280 when fully charged. The spe-
ciﬁ c gravity of a cell can be tested with a hydrometer. 
●      To maintain a battery in good condition it should be regularly 
trickle charged. A rapid charge or discharge encourages the plates to 
buckle, and may cause permanent damage. 
●      The room used to charge a battery must be well ventilated because 
the charged cell gives off hydrogen and oxygen, which are explosive 
in the correct proportions (IEE Regulation 560.6.3). 
  Telephone socket outlets 
  The installation of telecommunications equipment could, for many years, 
only be undertaken by British Telecom engineers, but today an electrical 
contractor may now supply and install telecommunications equipment. 
   On new premises the electrical contractor may install sockets and the asso-
ciated wiring to the point of intended line entry, but the connection of the 
incoming line to the installed master socket must only be made by the tele-
phone company’s engineer. 
   On existing installations, additional secondary sockets may be installed to 
provide an extended plug-in facility as shown in  Fig. 14.62   . Any number of 
secondary sockets may be connected in parallel, but the number of tele-
phones which may be connected at any one time is restricted. 
   Each telephone or extension bell is marked with a ringing equivalence 
number (REN) on the underside. Each exchange line has a maximum 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
344
capacity of REN 4 and therefore, the total REN values of all the connected 
telephones must not exceed four if they are to work correctly. 
   An extension bell may be connected to the installation by connecting the 
two bell wires to terminals 3 and 5 of a telephone socket. The extension bell 
must be of the high impedance type having an REN rating. All equipment 
connected to a BT exchange line must display the green circle of approval. 
  The multi-core cable used for wiring extension socket outlets should 
be of a type intended for use with telephone circuits, which will nor-
mally be between 0.4 and 0.68       mm in cross-section. Telephone cable 
conductors are identiﬁ ed in  Table 14.10    and the individual terminals in 
 Table 14.11   . The conductors should be connected as shown in  Fig. 14.62 . 
Incoming
exchange
line
To next
secondary
socket
Master socket outlet
Secondary socket outlet
Secondary socket outlet
1 G–W
G–W
G–W
G–W
G–W
B–W
B–W
B–W
B–W
B–W
W–B
W–G
O–W
O–W
O–W
O–W
O–W
W–O
W–O
W–O
W–B
W–B
W–B
W–B
W–G
W–G
W–G
W–G
2
4
5
6
3
1
2
4
5
6
3
1
2
4
5
6
3
Multicore cable
 FIGURE 14.62 
 Telephone circuit outlet connection diagram.    
 Table 14.10    Telephone Cable Identiﬁ cation  
 Code 
 Base colour 
 Stripe 
 G–W 
 Green 
 White 
 B–W 
 Blue 
 White 
 O–W 
 Orange 
 White 
 W–O 
 White 
 Orange 
 W–B 
 White 
 Blue 
 W–G 
 White 
 Green 
 
 Table 14.11    Telephone Socket Terminal Identiﬁ cation. Terminals 1 and 
6 are Frequently Unused, and Therefore Four-Core Cable May Normally Be 
Installed. Terminal 4, on the Incoming Exchange Line, Is Only Used on a PBX 
Line for Earth Recall  
 Socket terminal 
 Circuit 
 1 
 Spare 
 2 
 Speech circuit 
 3 
 Bell circuit 
 4 
 Earth recall 
 5 
 Speech circuit 
 6 
 Spare 
 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
345
Telecommunications cables are Band I circuits and must be segregated 
from Band II circuits containing mains cables (IEE Regulations 528.1). 
 Bathroom installations 
 Rooms containing a ﬁ xed bath tub or shower basin are considered an area 
of increased shock risk and, therefore, additional regulations are speciﬁ ed 
in Section 701 of the IEE Regulations. This is to reduce the risk of electric 
shock to people in circumstances where body resistance is lowered because 
of contact with water. The regulations can be summarized as follows: 
●      Socket outlets must not be installed and no provision is made for 
connection of portable appliances unless the socket outlet can be 
ﬁ xed 3 metres horizontally beyond the zone 1 boundary within the 
bath or shower room (IEE Regulation 701.512.4). 
●      Only shaver sockets which comply with BS EN 60742, that is, those 
which contain an isolating transformer, may be installed in zone 
2 or outside the zones in the bath or shower room (IEE Regulation 
701.512.4).
●      All circuits in a bath or shower room, that is both power and lighting, 
must be additionally protected by an RCD having a rated maximum 
operating current of 30       mA (IEE Regulation 701.411.3.3).  
●      There are restrictions as to where appliances, switchgear and wiring 
accessories may be installed. See Zones for bath and shower rooms 
below. 
  ●  Local supplementary equipotential bonding (IEE Regulation 701.415.2) 
must be provided to all gas, water and central heating pipes in addition, 
to metallic baths,  unless the following two requirements are both met : 
 
 (i)  all bathroom circuits, both lighting and power, are protected by 
a 30  mA RCD and 
 
    (ii)  the bath or shower is located in a building with protective 
equipotential bonding in place as described in Fig. 6.7 (IEE 
Regulation 411.3.1.2). 
Note : Local supplementary equipotential bonding may be an additional 
requirement of the  ‘ Local Authority ’  regulations in, for example, licensed 
premises, student accommodation and rented property. 
 Zones for bath and shower rooms 
   Locations that contain a bath or shower are divided in zones or separate 
areas as shown in  Fig. 14.63 . 
  Zone 0 –  the bath tub or shower basin itself, which can contain water and 
is, therefore, the most dangerous zone 
 Zone 1 – the next most dangerous zone in which people stand in water 
  Zone 2 –  the next most dangerous zone in which people might be in con-
tact with water 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
346
  Outside Zones –  people are least likely to be in contact with water but are 
still in a potentially dangerous environment and the gen-
eral Regulations of BS 7671 apply. 
 
 ●  spaces under the bath which are accessible  ‘ only with the use of a 
tool ’ are outside the zones 
 
 ●  spaces under the bath which are accessible  ‘ without the use of a 
tool ’ are zone 1. 
 Electrical equipment and accessories are restricted within the zones. 
 Zone 0 – being the most potentially dangerous zone for all practical pur-
poses, no electrical equipment can be installed in this zone. However, the 
Regulations permit that where SELV ﬁ xed equipment with a rated voltage 
not exceeding 12       V a.c. cannot be located elsewhere, it may be installed in 
this zone (IEE Regulation 701.55). The electrical equipment must have at 
least IP  7, protection against total immersion in water (IEE Regulation 
701.512.2).
  Zone 1 – water heaters, showers and shower pumps and SELV ﬁ xed equip-
ment may be installed in zone 1. The electrical equipment must have 
60 cm
60 cm
60 cm
Outside
zones
2
2
2
2
Zone 1
Zone 1
Zone 0
Zone 0
2.25 m
60 cm
 FIGURE 14.63 
 Bathroom Zone Dimensions. (Any window recess is zone 2.) 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
347
at least IPX4 protection against water splashing from any direction. If the 
electrical equipment may be exposed to water jets from, for example, com-
mercial cleaning equipment, then the electrical equipment must have IPX5 
protection. (The Index of Protection codes were discussed in Chapter 13 
and shown at Fig. 13.3.) 
  Zone 2 – luminaries and fans, and equipment from zone 1 plus shaver 
units to BS EN 60742 may be installed in zone 2. The electrical equipment 
must be suitable for installation in that zone according to the manufactur-
er’s instructions and have at least IPX4 protection against splashing or IPX5 
protection if commercial cleaning is anticipated. 
  Outside Zones – appliances are allowed plus accessories except socket out-
lets unless the location containing the bath or shower is very big and the 
socket outlet can be installed at least 3 m horizontally beyond the zone 1 
boundary (IEE Regulation 701.512.3) and has additional RCD protection 
(IEE Regulation 701.411.3.3). 
 If underﬂ oor heating is installed in these areas it must have an overall 
earthed metallic grid or the heating cable must have an earthed metal-
lic sheath, which is connected to the protective conductor of the supply 
circuit (IEE Regulation 701.753). 
 Supplementary equipotential bonding 
   Modern plumbing methods make considerable use of non-metals (PTFE 
tape on joints, for example). Therefore, the metalwork of water and gas 
installations cannot be relied upon to be continuous throughout. 
  The IEE Regulations describe the need to consider additional protection 
by supplementary equipotential bonding in situations where there is a 
high risk of electric shock (e.g. in kitchens and bathrooms) (IEE Regulation 
415.2).
   In kitchens, supplementary bonding of hot and cold taps, sink tops and 
exposed water and gas pipes is only required if an earth continuity test 
proves that they are not already effectively and reliably connected to the 
protective equipotential bonding, having negligible impedance, by the 
soldered pipe ﬁ ttings of the installation. If the test proves unsatisfactory, 
the metalwork must be bonded using a single-core copper conductor with 
PVC green/yellow insulation, which will normally be 4  mm 2 for domestic 
installations but must comply with Regulation 543.1.1. 
   In rooms containing a ﬁ xed bath or shower, supplementary equipotential 
bonding conductors must  be installed to reduce to a minimum the risk of 
an electric shock unless the following  two conditions are met: 
 (i)  all bathroom circuits are protected by a fuse or MCB plus a 30  mA 
RCD and 
    (ii)      the bathroom is located in a building with a protective equipoten-
tial bonding system in place (IEE Regulation 701.415.2). Such a sys-
tem is shown in Fig. 6.7. 
 Key Fact  
 Bathrooms 
   All bathroom circuits must have 
additional RCD protection both power 
and lighting. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
348
   Bonding conductors in domestic premises will normally be of 4       mm 2 cop-
per with PVC insulation to comply with Regulation 543.1.1 and must be 
connected between all exposed metalwork (e.g. between metal baths, bath 
and sink taps, shower ﬁ ttings, metal waste pipes and radiators, as shown in 
 Fig. 14.64 .
Pipe
brackets
Light pull switch
Supplementary bonding conductor
Water-pipe
 FIGURE 14.64 
 Supplementary bonding in bathrooms to metal pipework. 
  The bonding connection must be made to a cleaned pipe, using a suitable 
bonding clip. Fixed at or near the connection must be a permanent label 
saying  ‘ Safety electrical connection – do not remove ’  (Regulation 514.3) as 
shown in  Fig. 14.65 . 
SAFETY ELECTRICAL
CONNECTION
DO NOT REMOVE
Safety label
Earth clamp
 FIGURE 14.65 
 Typical earth bonding clamp. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
349
 Inspection and testing techniques 
 The testing of an installation implies the use of instruments to obtain 
readings. However, a test is unlikely to identify a cracked socket outlet, a 
chipped or loose switch plate, a missing conduit-box lid or saddle, so it is 
also necessary to make a visual inspection of the installation.
 Definition  
  The testing of an installation implies 
the use of instruments to obtain 
readings. However, a test is unlikely 
to identify a cracked socket outlet, 
a chipped or loose switch plate, a 
missing conduit-box lid or saddle, so 
it is also necessary to make a visual 
inspection of the installation. 
   All new installations must be inspected and tested during erection and 
upon completion before being put into service. All existing installations
should be periodically inspected and tested to ensure that they are safe 
and meet the regulations (IEE Regulations 610 to 634).
 Definition  
 All existing installations should be 
periodically inspected and tested to 
ensure that they are safe and meet 
the regulations of the IEE (Regulations 
610 to 634). 
  The method used to test an installation may inject a current into the sys-
tem. This current must not cause danger to any person or equipment in 
contact with the installation, even if the circuit being tested is faulty. The 
test procedures must be followed carefully and in the correct sequence, as 
indicated by Regulation 612.1. This ensures that the protective conductors 
are correctly connected and secure before the circuit is energized. 
  Visual inspection 
  The installation must be visually inspected before testing begins. The 
aim of the visual inspection is to conﬁ rm that all equipment and acces-
sories are undamaged and comply with the relevant British and European 
Standards, and also that the installation has been securely and correctly 
erected. Regulation 611.3 gives a checklist for the initial visual inspection 
of an installation, including:
 Definition  
   The installation must be visually 
inspected before testing begins. The 
aim of the visual inspection is to con-
fi rm that all equipment and accesso-
ries are undamaged and comply with 
the relevant British and European 
Standards, and also that the installa-
tion has been securely and correctly 
erected. 
●  connection of conductors 
●  identiﬁ cation of conductors 
●  routing of cables in safe zones 
●  selection of conductors for current carrying capacity and volt drop 
●      connection of single-pole devices for protection or switching in 
phase conductors only 
●      correct connection of socket outlets, lampholders, accessories and 
equipment
●  presence of ﬁ re barriers, suitable seals and protection against ther-
mal effects 
●  methods of  ‘ basic protection ’ against electric shock, including the 
insulation of live parts and placement of live parts out of reach by 
ﬁ tting appropriate barriers and enclosures 
●  methods of  ‘ fault protection ’ against electric shock including the 
presence of earthing conductors for both protective bonding and 
supplementary bonding. 
●  prevention of detrimental inﬂ uences (e.g. corrosion) 
●  presence of appropriate devices for isolation and switching 
●  presence of undervoltage protection devices 
 Key Fact  
 Testing 
 ●  
 All new installations must be 
inspected and tested during 
erection and upon completion 
 ● 
 All existing installations must be 
inspected and tested periodically 
 ● 
 IEE Regulations 610 to 634. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
350
●  choice and setting of protective devices 
●  labelling of circuits, fuses, switches and terminals 
●      selection of equipment and protective measures appropriate to 
external inﬂ uences 
●  adequate access to switchgear and equipment 
●  presence of danger notices and other warning notices 
●  presence of diagrams, instruction and similar information 
●  appropriate erection method. 
 Safety First  
 Working live 
 ● 
N ever work  ‘ live ’ 
 ● 
 Some  ‘ live testing ’ is allowed by 
competent persons 
 ● 
 Otherwise, isolate and secure the 
isolation 
 ● 
 Prove the supply  ‘ dead ’ before 
starting work. 
  The checklist is a guide, it is not exhaustive or detailed, and should be used 
to identify relevant items for inspection, which can then be expanded 
upon. For example, the ﬁ rst item on the checklist, connection of conduc-
tors, might be further expanded to include the following: 
●  Are connections secure? 
●  Are connections correct? (conductor identiﬁ cation) 
●      Is the cable adequately supported so that no strain is placed on the 
connections?
●  Does the outer sheath enter the accessory? 
●  Is the insulation undamaged? 
●  Does the insulation proceed up to but not  into the connection? 
 This is repeated for each appropriate item on the checklist. 
  Those tests which are relevant to the installation must then be carried out 
in the sequence given in Regulation 612.1 and the  On Site Guide  for rea-
sons of safety and accuracy. These tests are as follows: 
Before the supply is connected
 1.  Test for continuity of protective conductors, including protective 
equipotential and supplementary bonding. 
 2.  Test the continuity of all ring ﬁ nal circuit conductors. 
 3.  Test for insulation resistance. 
 4.  Test for polarity using the continuity method. 
 5.  Test the earth electrode resistance. 
With the supply connected
 6.  Recheck polarity using a voltmeter or approved test lamp. 
    7.     Test the earth fault loop impedance.  
    8.     Carry out functional testing (e.g. operation of RCDs).    
   If any test fails to comply with the Regulations, then  all  the preceding tests 
must be repeated after the fault has been rectiﬁ ed. This is because the ear-
lier test results may have been inﬂ uenced by the fault (Regulation 612.1). 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
351
  There is an increased use of electronic devices in electrical installation 
work, for example, in dimmer switches and ignitor circuits of discharge 
lamps. These devices should temporarily be disconnected so that they are 
not damaged by the test voltage of, for example, the insulation resistance 
test (Regulation 612.3). 
 Approved test instruments 
 The test instruments and test leads used by the electrician for testing an 
electrical installation must meet all the requirements of the relevant regu-
lations. The Health and Safety Executive has published Guidance Notes GS 
38 for test equipment used by electricians. The IEE Regulations (BS 7671) 
also specify the test voltage or current required to carry out particular tests 
satisfactorily. All test equipment must be chosen in accordance with the 
relevant parts of BS EN 61557. All testing must, therefore, be carried out 
using an  ‘ approved ’  test instrument if the test results are to be valid. The 
test instrument must also carry a calibration certiﬁ cate, otherwise the 
recorded results may be void.  Calibration certiﬁ cates usually last for a year. 
Test instruments must, therefore, be tested and recalibrated each year by an 
approved supplier . This will maintain the accuracy of the instrument to an 
acceptable level, usually within 2% of the true value.
 Definition  
  The test instruments and test leads 
used by the electrician for testing 
an electrical installation must meet 
all the requirements of the relevant 
regulations. 
   Modern digital test instruments are reasonably robust, but to maintain 
them in good working order they must be treated with care. An approved 
test instrument costs equally as much as a good-quality camera; it should, 
therefore, receive the same care and consideration. Let us look at the 
requirements of four often used test meters. 
  CONTINUITY TESTER 
  To measure accurately the resistance of the conductors in an electrical 
installation we must use an instrument which is capable of producing an 
open circuit voltage of between 4 and 24       V a.c. or d.c., and deliver a short-
circuit current of not less than 200  mA (Regulation 612.2.1). The functions 
of continuity testing and insulation resistance testing are usually com-
bined in one test instrument. 
  INSULATION RESISTANCE TESTER 
  The test instrument must be capable of detecting insulation leakage 
between live conductors and between live conductors and earth. To do this 
and comply with Regulation 612.3 the test instrument must be capable of 
producing a test voltage of 250  V, 500  V or 1000  V and deliver an output cur-
rent of not less than 1  mA at its normal voltage. 
  EARTH FAULT LOOP IMPEDANCE TESTER 
  The test instrument must be capable of delivering fault currents as high as 
25       A for up to 40       ms using the supply voltage. During the test, the instru-
ment does an Ohm’s law calculation and displays the test result as a resist-
ance reading. 
 Definition  
   All testing must, therefore, be carried 
out using an  ‘ approved ’ test instru-
ment if the test results are to be valid. 
The test instrument must also carry a 
calibration certifi cate, otherwise the 
recorded results may be void. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
352
  RCD TESTER 
  Where circuits are protected by an RCD we must carry out a test to ensure 
that the device will operate very quickly under fault conditions and within 
the time limits set by the IEE Regulations. The instrument must, therefore, 
simulate a fault and measure the time taken for the RCD to operate. The 
instrument is, therefore, calibrated to give a reading measured in millisec-
onds to an in-service accuracy of 10%. 
   If you purchase good-quality  ‘ approved ’  test instruments and leads from 
specialist manufacturers they will meet all the Regulations and Standards 
and therefore give valid test results. However, to carry out all the tests 
required by the IEE Regulations will require a number of test instruments 
and this will represent a major capital investment in the region of £1000. 
 Let us now consider the individual tests. 
 1 Testing the continuity of protective conductors (612.2) 
  The object of the test is to ensure that the CPC is correctly connected, is 
electrically sound and has a total resistance which is low enough to per-
mit the overcurrent protective device to operate within the disconnection 
time requirements of Regulation 411.4.6, should an earth fault occur. Every 
protective conductor must be separately tested from the consumer’s main 
protective earthing terminal to verify that it is electrically sound and cor-
rectly connected, including the protective equipotential bonding conduc-
tors and supplementary bonding conductors. 
   A d.c. test using an ohmmeter continuity tester is suitable where the protec-
tive conductors are of copper or aluminium up to 35       mm 2 . The test is made 
with the supply disconnected, measuring from the consumer’s main pro-
tective earthing terminal to the far end of each CPC, as shown in  Fig. 14.66   . 
Lights
Switches
Sockets
Extraneous
metal
Tester
Long test lead
Consumer’s
unit
 FIGURE 14.66 
 Testing continuity of protective conductors. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
353
The resistance of the long test lead is subtracted from these readings to 
give the resistance value of the CPC. The result is recorded on an installa-
tion schedule such as that given in Appendix 6 of the IEE Regulations. 
  A satisfactory test result for the bonding conductors will be in the order of 
0.05 Ω or less (IEE Guidance Note 3).
  Where steel conduit or trunking forms the protective conductor, the stan-
dard test described above may be used, but additionally the enclosure must 
be visually checked along its length to verify the integrity of all the joints. 
   If the inspecting engineer has grounds to question the soundness and 
quality of these joints then the phase–earth loop impedance test described 
later in this chapter should be carried out. 
   If, after carrying out this further test, the inspecting engineer still questions 
the quality and soundness of the protective conductor formed by the metallic 
conduit or trunking then a further test can be done using an a.c. voltage not 
greater than 50       V at the frequency of the installation and a current approach-
ing 1.5 times the design current of the circuit, but not greater than 25  A. 
  This test can be done using a low-voltage transformer and suitably con-
nected ammeters and voltmeters, but a number of commercial instruments 
are available such as the Clare tester, which give a direct reading in ohms. 
   Because fault currents will ﬂ ow around the earth fault loop path, the 
measured resistance values must be low enough to allow the overcurrent 
protective device to operate quickly. For a satisfactory test result, the resist-
ance of the protective conductor should be consistent with those values 
calculated for a line conductor of similar length and cross-sectional area. 
Values of resistance per metre for copper and aluminium conductors are 
shown in Table 12.1. The resistances of some other metallic containers are 
given in  Table 14.12   .
 Example 
  The CPC for a ring fi nal circuit is formed by a 1.5  mm 2 copper conductor of 50  m approximate 
length. Determine a satisfactory continuity test value for the CPC using the value given in 
Table 9A of the  On Site Guide . From Table 9A (shown in Table 12.1 of Chapter 12). 
Resistance/metre for a
 mm  Copper conductor
m /m
Th
1 5
12 10
2
.
.

Ω
erefore,
the resistance of 
 mm
50
50
12 10
10
0 605
3





.
.
Ω
 Table 14.12    Resistance Values of Some Metallic Containers  
 Metallic sheath 
 Size (mm) 
 Resistance at 20°C (m Ω /m) 
 Conduit 
 20 
 1.25 
 25 
 1.14 
 32 
 0.85 
 Trunking 
 50     50 
 0.949 
 75    75 
 0.526 
 100     100 
 0.337 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
354
  The protective conductor resistance values calculated by this method can only be an 
approximation since the length of the CPC can only be estimated. Therefore, in this case, a 
satisfactory test result would be obtained if the resistance of the protective conductor was 
about 0.6  Ω . A more precise result is indicated by the earth fault loop impedance test which is 
carried out later in the sequence of tests. 
 2 Testing for continuity of ring ﬁ nal circuit conductors
612.2.2 
  The object of the test is to ensure that all ring circuit cables are continu-
ous around the ring, that is, that there are no breaks and no interconnec-
tions in the ring and that all connections are electrically and mechanically 
sound. This test also veriﬁ es the polarity of each socket outlet. 
  The test is made with the supply disconnected, using an ohmmeter as 
follows: 
   Disconnect and separate the conductors of both legs of the ring at the 
main fuse. There are three steps to this test. 
Step 1
   Measure the resistance of the phase conductors (L 1  and L 2 ), the neutral 
conductors (N 1  and N 2 ) and the protective conductors (E 1 and E 2 ) at the 
mains position as shown in  Fig. 14.67   . End-to-end live and neutral con-
ductor readings should be approximately the same (i.e. within 0.05       Ω) if the 
ring is continuous. The protective conductor reading will be 1.67 times as 
great as these readings if 2.5/1.5       mm cable is used. Record the results on a 
table such as that shown in  Table 14.13 . 
Step 2
  The live and neutral conductors should now be temporarily joined together as 
shown in  Fig. 14.68   . An ohmmeter reading should then be taken between live 
and neutral at  every  socket outlet on the ring circuit. The readings obtained 
should be substantially the same, provided that there are no breaks or mul-
tiple loops in the ring. Each reading should have a value of approximately
 
 
 Table 14.13    Table Which May Be Used to Record the Readings Taken 
When Carrying Out the Continuity of Ring Final Circuit Conductors Tests 
According to IEE Regulation 612.2.2  
 Test 
 Ohmmeter 
connected to 
 Ohmmeter readings 
 This gives a value 
for 
 Step 1 
 L 1 and L 2 
 r 1 
 N 1 and N 2 
 
 
 E 1 and E 2 
 r 2 
 Step 2 
 Live and neutral 
at each socket 
 
 
 Step 3 
 Live and earth at 
each socket 
 R 1     R 2 
 As a check ( R 1    R 2 ) value should equal 
  r 1    r 2 /4 
 
L1
E1
N1
L2
E2
N2
Ohm-
meter
L2
L1
N2
N1
E2
E1
Ohm-
meter
 FIGURE 14.67 
 Step 1 test: measuring the resistance of phase, 
neutral and protective conductors. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
355
half the live and neutral ohmmeter readings measured in step 1 of this test. 
Sockets connected as a spur will have a slightly higher value of resistance 
because they are fed by only one cable, while each socket on the ring is fed by 
two cables. Record the results on a table such as that shown in  Table 14.13 . 
Step 3
  Where the CPC is wired as a ring, for example where twin and earth cables 
or plastic conduit is used to wire the ring, temporarily join the live and 
CPCs together as shown in  Fig. 14.69   . An ohmmeter reading should then be 
taken between live and earth at  every  socket outlet on the ring. The read-
ings obtained should be substantially the same provided that there are no 
breaks or multiple loops in the ring. This value is equal to  R1  R2  for the 
circuit. Record the results on an installation schedule such as that given in 
Appendix 6 of the IEE Regulations or a table such as that shown in  Table 
14.13 . The step 3 value of  R1  R2  should be equal to ( r1  r2 )/4, where  r1
and r2 are the ohmmeter readings from step 1 of this test (see  Table 14.13 ). 
 3 Testing insulation resistance (612.3) 
  The object of the test is to verify that the quality of the insulation is sat-
isfactory and has not deteriorated or short circuited. The test should be 
made at the consumer’s unit with the mains switch off, all fuses in place 
and all switches closed. Neon lamps, capacitors and electronic circuits 
L1
E1
N1
L2
E2
N2
L2
L1
N2
N1
E2
E1
Ohm-
meter
 FIGURE 14.68 
 Step 2 test: connection of mains conductors and 
test circuit conditions. 
L1
E1
N1
L2
E2
N2
L2
L1
N2
N1
E2
E1
Ohm-
meter
 FIGURE 14.69 
 Step 3 test: connection of mains conductors and 
test circuit conditions. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
356
should be disconnected, since they will respectively glow, charge up or be 
damaged by the test. 
 There are two tests to be carried out using an insulation resistance tester 
which must have a test voltage of 500       V d.c. for 230       V and 400       V installa-
tions. These are line and neutral conductors to earth and between line 
conductors. The procedures are: 
Phase and neutral conductors to earth
 1.  Remove all lamps. 
 2.  Close all switches and circuit breakers. 
 3.  Disconnect appliances. 
 4.  Test separately between the line conductor and earth,  and between 
the neutral conductor and earth, for  every  distribution circuit at the 
consumer’s unit as shown in  Fig. 14.70   (a). Record the results on a 
schedule of test results such as that given in Appendix 6 of the IEE 
Regulations. 
Between line conductors
 1.  Remove all lamps. 
 2.  Close all switches and circuit breakers. 
 3.  Disconnect appliances. 
  4.  Test between line and neutral conductors of  every distribution circuit 
at the consumer’s unit as shown in  Fig. 14.70 (b) and record the result.  
  The insulation resistance readings for each test must be not less than 
1.0  M Ω for a satisfactory result (IEE Regulation 612.3.2). 
  Where the circuit includes electronic equipment which might be damaged 
by the insulation resistance test, a measurement between all live conduc-
tors (i.e. live and neutral conductors connected together) and the earthing 
arrangements may be made. The insulation resistance of these tests should 
be not less than 1.0  M Ω (IEE Regulation 612.3.3). 
 Although an insulation resistance reading of 1.0  M Ω  complies with the 
Regulations, the IEE Guidance Notes tell us that much higher values than 
this can be expected and that a reading of less than 2       M Ω  might indicate a 
latent but not yet visible fault in the installation. In these cases each circuit 
should be separately tested to obtain a reading greater than 2  M Ω . 
 4 Testing polarity (612.6) 
  The object of this test is to verify that all fuses, circuit breakers and switches 
are connected in the line or live conductor only, and that all socket outlets 
are correctly wired and Edison screw-type lampholders have the centre 
contact connected to the live conductor. It is important to make a polarity 
test on the installation since a visual inspection will only indicate conduc-
tor identiﬁ cation. 
To final circuits
L
N
Tester
(a)
 FIGURE 14.70 
      Insulation resistance test.      
To final circuits
L
N
Tester
(b)

Electrical installations and wiring systems
357
  The test is done with the supply disconnected using an ohmmeter or con-
tinuity tester as follows: 
 1.  Switch off the supply at the main switch. 
    2.     Remove all lamps and appliances.  
 3.  Fix a temporary link  between the line and earth connections on the 
consumer’s side of the main switch. 
 4.  Test between the  ‘ common ’ terminal and earth at each switch 
position.
    5.     Test between the centre pin of any Edison screw lampholders and 
any convenient earth connection. 
    6.     Test between the live pin (i.e. the pin to the right of earth) and earth 
at each socket outlet as shown in  Fig. 14.71 . 
   For a satisfactory test result the ohmmeter or continuity meter should read 
very close to zero for each test. 
Remove the test link  and record the results on a schedule of test results such 
as that given in Appendix 6 of the IEE Regulations. 
 5 Testing earth electrode resistance (612.7) 
   Low-voltage supplies having earthing arrangements which are indepen-
dent of the supply cable are classiﬁ ed as TT systems. For this type of sup-
ply it is necessary to sink an earth electrode into the general mass of earth, 
which then forms a part of the earth return in conjunction with an RCD. 
Lights
Switches
Sockets
Link
L
N
Tester
C
C
C
 FIGURE 14.71 
 Polarity test. 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
358
To verify the resistance of an electrode used in this way, the following test 
method may be applied: 
 1.  Disconnect the installation protective equipotential bonding from 
the earth electrode to ensure that the test current passes only 
through the earth electrode. 
 2.  Switch off the consumer’s unit to isolate the installation. 
    3.     Using a line earth loop impedance tester, test between the incoming 
line conductor and the earth electrode. 
 4.  Reconnect the protective bonding conductors when the test is 
completed.    
   Record the result on a schedule of test results such as that given in 
Appendix 6 of the IEE Regulations. 
  The IEE Guidance Note 3 tells us that an acceptable value for the measure-
ment of the earth electrode resistance will be about 200  Ω or less. 
 Providing the ﬁ rst ﬁ ve tests were satisfactory, the supply may now be 
switched on and the ﬁ nal tests completed with the supply connected. 
 6 Testing polarity: Supply connected 
   Using an approved voltmeter or test lamp and probes which comply with 
the HSE Guidance Note GS38, again carry out a polarity test to verify that 
all fuses, circuit breakers and switches are connected in the live conductor. 
Test from the common terminal of switches to earth, the live pin of each 
socket outlet to earth and the centre pin of any Edison screw lampholders 
to earth. In each case the voltmeter or test lamp should indicate the supply 
voltage for a satisfactory result. 
 7 Testing earth fault loop impedance (supply connected) 
(612.9) 
  The object of this test is to verify that the impedance of the whole earth 
fault current loop line to earth is low enough to allow the overcurrent pro-
tective device to operate within the disconnection time requirements of 
Regulations 411.3.2.2 and 411.4.6 and 7, should a fault occur. 
  The whole earth fault current loop examined by this test is comprised of all 
the installation protective conductors, the protective earthing terminal and 
protective conductors, the earthed neutral point and the secondary wind-
ing of the supply transformer and the line conductor from the transformer 
to the point of the fault in the installation. 
 The test will, in most cases, be done with a purpose-made line earth loop 
impedance tester which circulates a current in excess of 10       A around the 
loop for a very short time, so reducing the danger of a faulty circuit. The 
test is made with the supply switched on, and carried out from the furthest 
point of every ﬁ nal circuit, including lighting, socket outlets and any ﬁ xed 
appliances. Record the results on a schedule of test results. 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
359
   Purpose-built testers give a readout in ohms and a satisfactory result is 
obtained when the loop impedance does not exceed the appropriate val-
ues given in Tables 41.2 and 41.3 of the IEE Regulations, see also Table 12.2. 
in Chapter 12. 
 8 Additional Protection: testing of RCD: Supply connected 
(612.13) 
  The object of the test is to verify the effectiveness of the RCD, that it is oper-
ating with the correct sensitivity and proving the integrity of the electrical 
and mechanical elements. The test must simulate an appropriate fault con-
dition and be independent of any test facility incorporated in the device. 
 When carrying out the test, all loads normally supplied through the device 
are disconnected. 
  The testing of a ring circuit protected by a general-purpose RCD to BS EN 
61008 in a split-board consumer unit is carried out as follows: 
    1.     Using the standard lead supplied with the test instrument, disconnect 
all other loads and plug in the test lead to the socket at the centre of 
the ring (i.e. the socket at the furthest point from the source of supply).  
 2.  Set the test instrument to the tripping current of the device and at a 
phase angle of 0°. 
    3.     Press the test button – the RCD should trip and disconnect the sup-
ply within 200  ms. 
    4.     Change the phase angle from 0° to 180° and press the test button 
once again. The RCD should again trip within 200       ms. Record the 
highest value of these two results on a schedule of test results such 
as that given in Appendix 6 of the IEE Regulations. 
    5.     Now set the test instrument to 50% of the rated tripping current of 
the RCD and press the test button. The RCD should  not trip within 2  s. 
This test is testing the RCD for inconvenience  or nuisance tripping.  
    6.     Finally, the effective operation of the test button incorporated within 
the RCD should be tested to prove the integrity of the mechanical 
elements in the tripping device. This test should be repeated every 3 
months. 
 If the RCD fails any of the above tests it should be changed for a new one. 
  Where the RCD has a rated tripping current not exceeding 30       mA and 
has been installed to reduce the risk associated with  ‘ basic ’  and or  ‘ fault ’  
protection as indicated in Regulation 411.1, a residual current of 150       mA 
should cause the circuit breaker to open within 40  ms. 
 Certiﬁ cation and reporting 
   Following the inspection and testing of an installation, a certiﬁ cate should 
be given by the electrical contractor or responsible person to the person 
ordering the work (Chapters 62 and 63 of the IEE Regulations). 

Basic Electrical Installation Work
360
 The certiﬁ cate should be based upon the model form set out in Appendix 
6 of the IEE Regulations. It should include the test values which verify that 
the installation complies with the regulations for electrical installations at 
the time of testing. 
 An  ‘ Electrical Installation certiﬁ cate ’  should be used for the initial certiﬁ -
cation of a new electrical installation or for an alteration or addition to an 
existing installation. 
   All installations should be tested and inspected periodically and a  ‘ periodic 
inspection ’ certiﬁ cate issued. Suggested frequency of periodic inspections 
are given below: 
●  domestic installations  –  10 years 
●  commercial installations  –  5 years 
●  industrial installations  –  3 years 
●  agricultural installations  –  3 years 
●  caravan installations  –  3 years 
●  caravan site installations  –  1 year 
●  temporary installations on construction sites  –  3 months 
   See Table 3.2 of IEE Guidance Note 3 for a full list of the maximum period 
between inspections for all types of installation. 
 Construction site safety 
   In this chapter we have looked at many different types of electrical instal-
lations and wiring systems. Most of this type of work is carried out along-
side other trades as a part of the construction process.     Electricians have an 
important part to play in any construction project. However, a construc-
tion site has the potential to be hazardous because of the temporary and 
changing nature of the building environment. We have looked at the com-
mon causes of accidents at work and how to control the risks associated 
with various hazards in earlier chapters of this book. To make your work 
environment safe always :
●  behave responsibly and sensibly 
●  assess the hazards before starting work 
●      wear appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) and take all 
necessary precautions 
●  keep you work area clean and tidy and use barriers to isolate poten-
tial hazards 
●  carry out a safe isolation procedure and prove the supply  ‘ dead ’ before 
beginning work on  ‘ live ’  circuits or equipment. While some  ‘ live test-
ing ’ is permitted by  ‘ competent ’ persons,  ‘ live working ’ is not per-
missible under the Electricity at Work Regulations. Secure electrical 

Electrical installations and wiring systems
361
isolation is discussed in Chapter 8 and a voltage indicator, which is 
suitable for proving the supply  ‘ dead ’ , is shown at Fig. 8.10. 
●  when the job is ﬁ nished, have a good clean up and dispose of all 
waste materials responsibly. What goes into the skip for normal 
disposal is usually a matter of common sense, but under the new 
Hazardous Waste Regulations ﬂ uorescent tubes and lamps are clas-
siﬁ ed as hazardous and the responsible way to dispose of these is 
to recycle them. In Chapter 8 under the sub-heading  ‘ Disposing of 
Waste ’ we discussed this topic in detail. 
 Key Facts  
 Waste 
 ● 
 clean up before you leave the job 
 ● 
 put waste material in the correct 
skip 
 ● 
 recycle used tubes and lamps 
 ● 
 get rid of waste responsibly. 

  When you have completed these questions, check out the answers at the 
back of the book. 
 Note : more than one multiple choice answer may be correct. 
 Check your Understanding 
 1.  An electricity supply which uses the cable sheath to provide an earth is 
called a: 
  a.   PME supply  
  b.  TN-S system  
  c.  TN-C-S system  
  d.  TT system.  
 2.  An electricity supply in which the protective and neutral functions are 
combined is called: 
  a.  PME system  
  b.  TN-S system  
  c.  TN-C-S system  
  d.  TT system.  
 3.  An electricity supply in which the earthing arrangements must be 
provided by the consumer is called a: 
  a.  PME system  
  b.  TN-S system  
  c.  TN-C-S system  
  d.  TT system.  
 4.  The main lighting circuit in a room having only one entrance would 
probably be: 
  a.  pull switch control  
  b.  intermediate switch control  
  c.   one-way switch control  
  d.   two-way switch control.  
  5.  The main lighting circuit in a room having two entrances would 
probably be: 
  a.   pull switch control  
  b.  intermediate switch control  
  c.   one-way switch control  
  d.   two-way switch control.  
  6.  The main lighting in a long corridor with many switches would
probably be: 
  a.  pull switch control  
  b.  intermediate switch control  
  c.   one-way switch control  
  d.   two-way switch control.  

Ch 14
363
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
 7.   Identify the energy-efﬁ cient lamps on the following list: 
   a.  GLS lamp  
   b.   CFLs  
   c.  fluorescent tubes  
   d.  mini-spots.  
 8.  A PVC insulated and sheathed wiring system would be suitable for the 
  following type of installation: 
   a.  commercial  
   b.   domestic  
   c.  horticultural  
   d.  industrial.  
 9.  A PVC conduit installation would be suitable for the following type of
  installation: 
   a.  commercial  
   b.   domestic  
   c.  horticultural  
   d.  industrial.  
 10.   A steel conduit installation would be suitable for the following type of
  installation: 
   a.  commercial  
   b.   domestic  
   c.  horticultural  
   d.  industrial.  
  11.   A steel trunking installation would be suitable for the following type of
  installation: 
   a.  commercial  
   b.   domestic  
   c.  horticultural  
   d.  industrial.  
 12.   Which of the following ﬁ xing methods would be suitable for holding a
  lightweight load on a plasterboard partition: 
   a.  cable clip  
   b.   Rawlbolt  
   c.  screw fixing to plastic plug  
   d.  spring toggle.  

 13.  Which of the following ﬁ xing methods would be suitable for holding a
  medium weight load on to a brick wall: 
   a.   cable clip  
   b.  Rawlbolt  
   c.  screw fixing to plastic plug  
   d.  spring toggle.  
 14.  Which of the following ﬁ xing methods would be suitable for holding a
   PVC insulated and sheathed cable on to a wood surface such as a 
ceiling joist: 
   a.   cable clip  
   b.  Rawlbolt  
   c.  screw fixing to plastic plug  
   d.  spring toggle.  
 15.  Which of the following ﬁ xing methods would be suitable for securing a
  heavy electric motor to a concrete bed: 
   a.   cable clip  
   b.  Rawlbolt  
   c.  screw fixing to plastic plug  
   d.  spring toggle.  
 16.  Electrical supplies on construction sites for portable tools should 
  be at: 
   a.  25   V  
   b.  110   V  
   c.  230    V  
   d.  400   V.  
 17.  Electric supplies on construction sites for major items such as cranes
  should be at: 
   a.  25   V  
   b.  110   V  
   c.  230   V  
   d.  400   V.  
 18.  Electrical supplies on construction sites for site ofﬁ ces should be at: 
   a.  25   V  
   b.  110   V  
   c.  230   V  
   d.  400   V.  

Ch 14
365
U
V
W
6
6
6
2
2
2
C1
L1
L2
L3
C1
2
C3
4
5
6
To 3 phase supply
To 3 phase motor
 19.   Every caravan pitch must have at least one 16   A socket outlet for
  connection to a caravan. The socket outlet must be: 
   a.  of the industrial type  
   b.   protected from overcurrent  
   c.  protected additionally by an RCD  
   d.  buried at a depth of 600   mm  .
 20.   All ﬁ nal circuits to a bathroom, both power and lighting, must have: 
   a.  overcurrent protection  
   b.   RCD protection  
   c.  IPX7 protection  
   d.  Zone 1 protection . 
 21.   Identify from the list below the test which is used to verify that all fuses,
  circuit breakers and switches are connected in the line conductor: 
   a.  continuity test  
   b.   earth fault loop impedance  
   c.  functional test  
   d.  polarity test .
 22.   The Electricity at Work Regulations state that: 
   a.  everyone may work  ‘ live ’  
   b.   no one may work  ‘ live ’  
   c.   only competent people may work  ‘ live ’  
   d.  only instructed and skilled people may work  ‘ live ’.  
 23.   Use a sketch with notes of explanation to show the earthing and 
protective bonding arrangements at the mains intake position of a 
230    V cable sheath supply.  
 24.   Use a sketch with notes of explanation to show the earthing and 
protective bonding arrangements at the mains intake position of a 
230    V TT system. 
 25.   State the advantages of a conduit trunking and tray cable enclosure 
system for a commercial installation such as a shopping centre.  
 26.   Compare PVC/SWA cables with MI cables and give their advantages, 
disadvantages and typical applications.  
 27.   Use a sketch with notes of explanation to show how mini-trunking and 
skirting trunking could be used to contain all the electrical supplies in a 
school’s computing classroom.  

 28.  Explain the meaning of  ‘ segregation ’ of circuits.  
 29.  Use a sketch with notes of explanation to show how trunking and 
tray may be suspended from the girders of a building structure by 
appropriate brackets.  
 30.  State ﬁ ve regulations which are speciﬁ cally relevant to special 
installations or locations on agricultural premises.  
 31.  State ﬁ ve regulations which are speciﬁ cally relevant to special 
installations or locations on horticultural premises.  
 32.  State ﬁ ve regulations which are speciﬁ cally relevant to special 
installations or locations on caravan parks and caravans.  
 33.  Use a sketch to show how the computer power supplies of question 27 
above should be connected.  
 34.  Very brieﬂ y state the meaning of:  
  
●  noise  
  
●  clean supplies and  
  
●  secure supplies 
  
●  with regard to computer power supplies.  
 38.  In ﬁ ve brief statements summarize the main requirements of 
emergency lighting.  
 39.  In ﬁ ve brief statements summarize the main requirements of bathroom 
electrical installations.  
 40.  Use bullet points to state why the IEE Regulations require all new 
installations to be both inspected and tested.  
 41.  Use bullet points to describe a safe isolation procedure.  
 42.  Who can carry out live testing? 
  Why is live working not allowed?  
 43.  Why do we carry out a continuity of protective conductors test? 
  State the values of a satisfactory test result.  
 44.  Why do we carry out an insulation resistance test? 
  State the values of a satisfactory test result.  
 45.  Why do we carry out a polarity test? 
  State the values or indications of a satisfactory result.  

 Answers to Check 
your understanding  
 
  Chapter 1 
 1.  d 
 2.  a 
 3.  a, b 
 4.  b, c 
  5.  d 
 6.  d 
 7.  d 
 8.  c 
 9.  a, b 
 10.  b, c, d 
 11.  a, b 
 12.  c, d 
 13.  b, c, d 
 14.  c, d 
 15.  c 
 16.  A 
 
 
17 to 25 – answers in text of Chapter 1.
 Chapter 2 
 1.  d 
 2.  a 
 3.  c 
  4.  b 
  5.  c 
  6.  d 
  7.  b 
  8.  a 
  9.  b 
 10.  c 
 11.  a 
 12.  d 
 13.  d 
 14.  a, b, c 
15 to 24 – answers in text of Chapter 2.
 Chapter 3 
 1.  c 
 2.  d 
 3.  b 
 4.  c 
 5.  d 
 6.  b 
7 to 12 – answers in text of Chapter 3.
367

Answers to Check your understanding
368
 Chapter 4 
 1.  a 
 2.  c 
 3.  b 
  4.  d 
 5.  a 
 6.  d 
7.  b 
 8.  a 
 9.  c 
 10.  d 
 11.  c 
 12.  b 
 13.  b 
 14.  c 
 15.  d 
16 to 21 – answers in text of Chapter 4.
 Chapter 5 
 1.  a, c 
  2.  b, d 
  3.  a, c 
  4.  b, d 
  5.  a, c 
  6.  b, d 
  7.  c 
 8.  d 
 9.  c 
 10.  d 
 11.  d 
 12.  a 
 13.  d 
 14.  a 
 15.  c 
 16.  d 
 17.  c 
 18.  d 
19 to 30 – answers in text of Chapter 5.
 Chapter 6 
 1.  b 
 2.  c 
 3.  d 
 4.  c, d 
  5.  c 
 6.  d 
 7.  c 
 8.  d 
 9.  a 
 10.  b 
 11.  c 
 12.  d 
 13.  c 
 14.  d 
15 to 24 – answers in text of Chapter 6.
 Chapter 7 
 1.  a, b 
 2.  a 
 3.  d 
 4.  c 
 5.  c, d 
 6.  b, d 
7 to 13 – answers in text of Chapter 7.
 Chapter 8 
 1.  a, c 
  2.  b, d 
  3.  d 
 4.  b 
 5.  c 
 6.  b, c, d 
 7.  c 
 8.  d 
 9.  c 
 10.  a 
 11.  c 
 12.  c 
 13.  a, b, d 
 
 
14 to 23 – answers in text of Chapter 8.

Answers to Check your understanding
369
 Chapter 9 
 1.  b 
 2.  c 
 3.  a 
 4.  d 
 
 
5 to 12 – answers in text of Chapter 9.
 Chapter 10 
  1.  a 
  2.  c 
  3.  d 
  4.  c 
  5.  a 
  6.  b 
  7.  c 
  8.  c 
  9.  c 
 10.  a, d 
 11.  c 
 12.  b 
 13.  b 
 14.  c 
15 to 21 – answers in text of Chapter 10.
 Chapter 11 
 1.  c 
 2.  d 
 3.  a, c 
 4.  a, b 
 5.  b 
 6.  a 
 7.  c 
 8.  b 
 9.  b 
 10.  c 
 
 
11 to 17 – answers in text of Chapter 11.
 Chapter 12 
 1.  a 
 2.  d 
 3.  c 
 4.  b 
 5.  b 
 6.  b 
 7.  c 
 8.  a 
 9.  d 
 10.  d 
 11.  c 
 12.  c 
 13.  b 
 14.  b 
15 to 28 – answers in text of Chapter 12
 Chapter 13 
  1.  a, c 
 2.  c 
 3.  a, b, d 
  4.  d 
 5.  b 
 6.  c 
  7.  c 
 8.  d 
 9.  d 
 10.  c 
 
 
11 to 20 – answers in text of Chapter 13.

Answers to Check your understanding
370
 Chapter 14 
  1.  b 
  2.  a, c 
  3.  d 
  4.  c 
  5.  d 
  6.  b 
  7.  b, c 
  8.  b 
  9.  c 
 10.  a, d 
 11.  a, d 
 12.  d 
 13.  c 
 14.  a 
 15.  b 
 16.  b 
 17.  d 
 18.  c 
 19.  a, b, c 
 20.  a, b 
 21.  d 
 22.  b 
 
 
23 to 45 – answers in text of Chapter 14.

 Appendix A: 
Abbreviations, symbols 
and codes 
371
 
Abbreviations used in electronics for 
multiples and submultiples
 T 
 Tera 
 10 12 
 G 
 Giga 
 10 9 
 M 
 mega or meg 
 10 6 
 K 
 Kilo 
 10 3 
 D 
 Deci 
 10   1 
 C 
 Centi 
 10   2 
 M 
 Milli 
 10   3 
 M 
 Micro 
 10   6 
 N 
 Nano 
 10   9 
 P 
 Pico 
 10   12 
Terms and symbols used in electronics
 Term 
 Symbol 
 Approximately equal to 
   
 Proportional to 
   
 Inﬁ nity 
   
 Sum of 
  Σ 
 Greater than 
   
 Less than 
   
 Much greater than 
  ≫ 
 Much less than 
  ≪ 
 Base of natural logarithms 
 e 
 Common logarithms of x 
 log x 
 Temperature 
  θ 
 Time constant 
  T 
 Efﬁ ciency 
  η 
 Per unit 
 p.u. 

This page intentionally left blank

HSE Books, Information Leaﬂ ets and Guides may be obtained from 
 HSE Books, P.O. Box 1999, Sudbury, Suffolk CO10 6FS 
HSE Infoline – Telephone No. 01541 545500 or write to 
 HSE Information Centre, Broad Lane, Shefﬁ eld  S3 7HO 
HSE home page on the World Wide Web 
 http:/www.open.gov.uk/hse/hsehome.htm 
The Health and Safety Poster (Figure 1.2) and other HSE publications are 
available from  www.hsebooks.com 
Environmental Health Department of the Local Authority
 Look in the local telephone directory under the name of the authority 
373
 Appendix B: 
Health and Safety 
Executive (HSE) 
publications and 
Information 

 HSE AREA OFFICES 
 01 
 South West
 
 Inter City House, Mitchell Lane, Victoria Street, Bristol BS1 6AN 
 
  Telephone: 01171 290681     
 02 
 South
 
 Priestley House, Priestley Road, 
 
  Basingstoke RG24 9NW Telephone: 01256 473181     
 03 
 South East
 
  3 East Grinstead House, London Road, 
 
  East Grinstead, West Sussex RH19 1RR 
 
  Telephone: 01342 326922     
 05 
 London North
 
 Maritime House, 1 Linton Road, Barking, 
 
 Essex IG11 8HF Telephone: 0208 594 5522 
 06 
 London South
 
 1 Long Lane, London SE1 4PG 
 
  Telephone: 0207 407 8911     
 07 
 East Anglia
 
 39 Baddow Road, Chelmsford, Essex CM2 OHL 
 
  Telephone: 0207 407 8911     
 08 
 Northern Home Counties
 
 14 Cardiff Road, Luton, Beds LU1 1PP 
 
  Telephone: 01 582 34121     
 09 
 East Midlands
 
 Belgrave House, 1 Greyfriars, Northampton NN1 2BS  
 
  Telephone: 01604 21233       
 10 
 West Midlands
 
 McLaren Building, 2 Masshouse Circus, Queensway 
 
  Birmingham B4 7NP  
 
  Telephone: 0121 200 2299     
 11 
 Wales
 
 Brunel House, Nizalan Road, Cardiff CF2 1SH 
 
  Telephone: 02920 473777     
 12 
 Marches
 
 The Marches House, Midway, Newcastle-under-Lyme, 
 
  Staffs ST5 1DT Telephone: 01782 717181     
 13 
 North Midlands
 
 Brikbeck House, Trinity Square, Nottingham NG1 4AU 
 
  Telephone: 0115 470712     
 14 
 South Yorkshire
 
 Sovereign House, 40 Silver Street, Shefﬁ eld S1 2ES 
 
  Telephone: 0114 739081     
 15 
 West and North Yorkshire
 
 8 St Paul’s Street, Leeds LS1 2LE 
 
  Telephone: 0113 446191     
 16 
 Greater Manchester
 
 Quay House, Quay Street, Manchester M3 3JB 
 
  Telephone: 0161 831 7111     
 17 
 Merseyside
 
 The Triad, Stanley Road, Bootle L20 3PG 
 
  Telephone: 01229 922 7211     
 18 
 North West
 
 Victoria House, Ormskirk Road, Preston PR1 1HH 
 
  Telephone: 01772 59321     
 19 
 North East
 
  Arden House, Regent Centre, Gosforth, Newcastle upon Tyne NE3 3JN  
 
  Telephone: 0191 284 8448     
 20 
 Scotland East
 
 Belford House, 59 Belford Road, Edinburgh EH4 3UE 
 
  Telephone: 0181 225 1313     
 21 
 Scotland West
 
 314 St Vincent Street, Glasgow G3 8XG 
 
  Telephone: 0141 204 2646                   
20
21
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
09
08
07
02
03
05
06
01
Appendix B
374

 Glossary of terms
 Acceleration
 Acceleration is the rate of change in velocity with time.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Acceleration
Velocity
Time
(m/s )


2
 Accident
 An accident may be deﬁ ned as an uncontrolled event causing injury or 
damage to an individual or property. 
Alarm call points   
Manually operated alarm call points should be provided in all parts of a 
building where people may be present, and should be located so that no 
one need to walk for more than 30       m from any position within the prem-
ises in order to give an alarm. 
Alloy
 An alloy is a mixture of two or more metals. 
Appointed person
  An appointed person is someone who is nominated to take charge when 
someone is injured or becomes ill, including calling an ambulance if 
required. The appointed person will also look after the ﬁ rst aid equipment, 
including re-stocking the ﬁ rst aid box. 
Approved test instruments
  The test instruments and test leads used by the electrician for testing an 
electrical installation must meet all the requirements of the relevant regu-
lations. All testing must, therefore, be carried out using an  ‘ approved ’  test 
instrument if the test results are to be valid. The test instrument must also 
carry a calibration certiﬁ cate, otherwise the recorded results may be void. 
 Basic protection   
Basic protection is provided by the insulation of live parts in accordance 
with Section 416 of the IEE Regulations. 
Bonding conductor 
A protective conductor providing equipotential bonding. 
Bonding
  The linking together of the exposed or extraneous metal parts of an electri-
cal installation. 
Cable tray 
Cable tray is a sheet-steel channel with multiple holes. The most common 
ﬁ nish is hot-dipped galvanized but PVC-coated tray is also available. It is 
used extensively on large industrial and commercial installations for sup-
porting MI and SWA cables which are laid on the cable tray and secured 
with cable ties through the tray holes. 
Capacitive reactance
 Capacitive reactance ( XC ) is the opposition to an a.c. current in a capacitive 
circuit. It causes the current in the circuit to lead ahead of the voltage. 
375

Glossary of terms
376
Centrifugal force
 Centrifugal force is the force acting away from the centre, the opposite to 
centripetal force. 
Centripetal force
  Centripetal force is the force acting towards the centre when a mass 
attached to a string is rotated in a circular path. 
 Circuit protective conductor (CPC)
  A protective conductor connecting exposed conductive parts of equipment 
to the main earthing terminal. 
Cohesive or adhesive force 
Cohesive or adhesive force is the force required to hold things together. 
Compact fl uorescent lamps (CFLs)   
CFLs are miniature ﬂ uorescent lamps designed to replace ordinary GLS 
lamps.  
Competent person
  A competent person is anyone who has the necessary technical skills, 
training and expertise to safely carry out the particular activity. 
Compressive force
 Compressive force is the force pushing things together. 
Conductor   
A conductor is a material, usually a metal, in which the electrons are loosely 
bound to the central nucleus. These electrons can easily become  ‘ free elec-
trons ’ which allows heat and electricity to pass easily through the material .  
Conduit   
A conduit is a tube, channel or pipe in which insulated conductors are 
contained.
Corrosion 
The destruction of a metal by chemical action. 
 Delivery notes   
Delivery note is used to conﬁ rm that goods have been delivered by the 
supplier, who will then send out an invoice requesting payment. 
Duty holder   
Duty holder, this phrase recognizes the level of responsibility which electri-
cians are expected to take on as a part of their job in order to control elec-
trical safety in the work environment. Everyone has a duty of care, but not 
everyone is a duty holder. The person who exercises  ‘ control over the whole 
systems, equipment and conductors ’  and is the Electrical Company’s rep-
resentative on-site is a duty holder. 
Earth  
The conductive mass of the earth. Whose electrical potential is taken as zero.  
Earthing   
The act of connecting the exposed conductive parts of an installation to 
the main protective earthing terminal of the installation. 
 Effi  ciency of any machine   
The ratio of the output power to the input power is known as the  efﬁ ciency of 
the machine. The symbol for efﬁ ciency is the Greek letter  ‘ eta ’ ( η ). In general,
 
  
 
 
  
  Power output
Power input
 Electric current   
The drift of electrons within a conductor is known as an electric current, 
measured in amperes and given the symbol  I . 
 Electric shock  
Electric shock occurs when a person becomes part of the electrical circuit. 
Electrical force
 Electrical force is the force created by an electrical ﬁ eld. 
Electrotechnical industry   
The electrotechnical industry is made up of a variety of individual compa-
nies, all providing a service within their own specialism to a customer, cli-
ent or user. 

Glossary of terms
377
Emergency lighting   
Emergency lighting is not required in private homes because the occu-
pants are familiar with their surroundings, but in public buildings people 
are in unfamiliar surroundings. In an emergency people do not always act 
rationally, but well-illuminated and easily identiﬁ ed exit routes can help to 
reduce panic. 
Emergency switching   
Emergency switching involves the rapid disconnection of the electrical 
supply by a single action to remove or prevent danger. 
 Escape/standby lighting  
Emergency lighting is provided for two reasons; to illuminate escape 
routes, called  ‘ escape ’  lighting; and to enable a process or activity to con-
tinue after a normal lights failure, called  ‘ standby ’ lighting. 
Expansion bolts   
The most well-known expansion bolt is made by Rawlbolt and consists of 
a split iron shell held together at one end by a steel ferrule and a spring 
wire clip at the other end. Tightening the bolt draws up an expanding bolt 
inside the split iron shell, forcing the iron to expand and grip the masonry. 
Rawlbolts are for heavy-duty masonry ﬁ xings. 
Exposed conductive parts
  The metalwork of an electrical appliance or the trunking and conduit of an 
electrical system which can be touched because they are not normally live, 
but which may become live under fault conditions. 
Extraneous conductive parts
  The structural steelwork of a building and other service pipes such as gas, 
water, radiators and sinks. 
 Faraday’s law
  Faraday’s law which states that  when a conductor cuts or is cut by a mag-
netic ﬁ eld, an emf is induced in that conductor . 
 Fault protection
  Fault protection is provided by protective equipotential bonding and auto-
matic disconnection of the supply (by a fuse or miniature circuit breaker, 
MCB) in accordance with IEE Regulations 411.3 to 6. 
 Ferrous  
A word used to describe all metals in which the main constituent is iron. 
 Fire alarm circuits
  Fire alarm circuits are wired as either normally open or normally closed. In 
a normally open circuit , the alarm call points are connected in parallel with 
each other so that when any alarm point is initiated the circuit is completed 
and the sounder gives a warning of ﬁ re. In a  normally closed circuit , the alarm 
call points are connected in series to normally closed contacts. When the 
alarm is initiated, or if a break occurs in the wiring, the alarm is activated.  
Fire
  Fire is a chemical reaction which will continue if fuel, oxygen and heat are 
present.  
First aid   
First aid is the initial assistance or treatment given to a casualty for any 
injury or sudden illness before the arrival of an ambulance, doctor or other 
medically qualiﬁ ed person.  
 First aider
 A ﬁ rst aider is someone who has undergone a training course to administer 
ﬁ rst aid at work and holds a current ﬁ rst aid certiﬁ cate. 
Flashpoint   
The lowest temperature at which sufﬁ cient vapour is given off from a 
ﬂ ammable substance to form an explosive gas–air mixture is called the 
ﬂ ashpoint.  

Glossary of terms
378
Flexible conduit
  Flexible conduit manufactured to BS 731-1: 1993 is made of interlinked 
metal spirals often covered with a PVC sleeving. 
Fluorescent lamp 
A ﬂ uorescent lamp is a linear arc tube, internally coated with a ﬂ uorescent 
powder, containing a low-pressure mercury vapour discharge. 
Force 
The presence of a force can only be detected by its effect on a body. A force 
may cause a stationary object to move or bring a moving body to rest. 
Friction force  
Friction force is the force which resists or prevents the movement of two 
surfaces in contact. 
 Functional switching
  Functional switching involves the switching on or off, or varying the sup-
ply, of electrically operated equipment in normal service. 
 Fuse
  A fuse is the weakest link in the circuit. Under fault conditions it will melt 
when an overcurrent ﬂ ows, protecting the circuit conductors from damage.  
  Gravitational force  
Gravitational force is the force acting towards the centre of the earth due to 
the effect of gravity. 
 Hazard risk assessment  
Employers of more than ﬁ ve people must document the risks at work and 
the process is known as hazard risk assessment. 
 Hazard
  A hazard is something with the  ‘ potential ’  to cause harm, for example, 
chemicals, electricity or working above ground. 
Hazardous area  
An area in which an explosive gas–air mixture is present is called a  hazard-
ous area , and any electrical apparatus or equipment within a hazardous 
area must be classiﬁ ed as ﬂ ameproof to protect the safety of workers ’ . 
 Heating, magnetic or chemical
  The three effects of an electric current: When an electric current ﬂ ows in a 
circuit it can have one or more of the following three effects:  heating, mag-
netic or  chemical . 
 Impedance
  The total opposition to current ﬂ ow in an a.c. circuit is called impedance 
and given the symbol Z . 
 Inductive reactance  
Inductive reactance ( XL ) is the opposition to an a.c. current in an inductive 
circuit. It causes the current in the circuit to lag behind the applied voltage. 
Inertial force
  Inertial force is the force required to get things moving, to change direction 
or stop. 
 Inspection and testing techniques
  The testing of an installation implies the use of instruments to obtain 
readings. However, a test is unlikely to identify a cracked socket outlet, a 
chipped or loose switch plate, a missing conduit-box lid or saddle, so it is 
also necessary to make a visual inspection of the installation. All existing 
installations should be periodically inspected and tested to ensure that 
they are safe and meet the regulations of the IEE (Regulations 610 to 634). 
 Instructed person
  An instructed person is a person adequately advised or supervised by skilled 
persons to be able to avoid the dangers which electricity may create.  
Insulator
  An insulator is a material, usually a non-metal, in which the electrons 
are very ﬁ rmly bound to the nucleus and, therefore, will not allow heat or 

Glossary of terms
379
electricity to pass through it. Good insulating materials are PVC, rubber, 
glass and wood . 
  Intrinsically safe circuit
  An intrinsically safe circuit is one in which no spark or thermal effect is 
capable of causing ignition of a given explosive atmosphere. 
 Intruder alarm systems
  An intruder alarm system serves as a deterrent to a potential thief and 
often reduces home insurance premiums. 
 Isolation
 Isolation is deﬁ ned as cutting off the electrical supply to a circuit or item 
of equipment in order to ensure the safety of those working on the equip-
ment by making dead those parts which are live in normal service. 
Job sheets 
A job sheet or job card carries information about a job which needs to be 
done, usually a small job. 
Lamp
 A lamp is a device for converting electrical energy into light energy. 
Lever   
A lever is any rigid body which pivots or rotates about a ﬁ xed axis or ful-
crum. Load force   Distance from fulcrum    Effort force    Distance from 
fulcrum 
Levers and turning force 
A lever allows a heavy load to be lifted or moved by a small effort. 
Luminaire
  A luminaire is equipment which supports an electric lamp and distributes 
or ﬁ lters the light created by the lamp. 
Magnesium oxide   
The conductors of mineral insulated metal sheathed (MICC) cables are 
insulated with compressed magnesium oxide 
Magnetic fi eld   
The region of space through which the inﬂ uence of a magnet can be 
detected is called the magnetic ﬁ eld of that magnet. 
 Magnetic force
 Magnetic force is the force created by a magnetic ﬁ eld.  
Magnetic hysteresis   
Magnetic hysteresis loops describe the way in which different materials 
respond to being magnetized. 
Magnetic poles
  The places on a magnetic material where the lines of ﬂ ux are concentrated 
are called the magnetic poles. 
Maintained emergency lighting
  In a maintained system the emergency lamps are continuously lit using 
the normal supply when this is available, and change over to an alternative 
supply when the mains supply fails. 
Manual handling   
Manual handling is lifting, transporting or supporting loads by hand or by 
bodily force. 
Mass  
Mass is a measure of the amount of material in a substance, such as metal, 
plastic, wood, brick or tissue, which is collectively known as a body. The 
mass of a body remains constant and can easily be found by comparing it 
on a set of balance scales with a set of standard masses. The SI unit of mass 
is the kilogram (kg). 
Mechanics   
Mechanics is the scientiﬁ c study of  ‘ machines ’ , where a machine is 
deﬁ ned as a device which transmits motion or force from one place to 
another. 

Glossary of terms
380
Metallic trunking
  Metallic trunking is formed from mild steel sheet, coated with grey or sil-
ver enamel paint for internal use or a hot-dipped galvanized coating where 
damp conditions might be encountered. 
Mini-trunking  
Mini-trunking is very small PVC trunking, ideal for surface wiring in 
domestic and commercial installations such as ofﬁ ces. 
Movement or heat detector
  A movement or heat detector placed in a room will detect the presence of 
anyone entering or leaving that room. 
Mutual inductance   
A mutual inductance of 1 henry exists between two coils when a uniformly 
varying current of 1 ampere per second in one coil produces an emf of 1 
volt in the other coil. 
Non-ferrous 
Metals which  do not  contain iron are called non-ferrous. They are non-
magnetic and resist rusting. Copper, aluminium, tin, lead, zinc and brass 
are examples of non-ferrous metals. 
   Non-maintained emergency lighting    
In a non-maintained system the emergency lamps are only illuminated if 
the normal mains supply fails. 
 Non-statutory regulations and codes    Non-statutory regulations and codes of practice interpret the statutory
of practice 
regulations telling us how we can comply with the law. 
 Ohm’s law   
Ohm’s law says that the current passing through a conductor under con-
stant temperature conditions is proportional to the potential difference 
across the conductor. 
Optical fi bre cables 
Optical ﬁ bre cables are communication cables made from optical-quality 
plastic, the same material from which spectacle lenses are manufactured. 
The energy is transferred down the cable as digital pulses of laser light as 
against current ﬂ owing down a copper conductor in electrical installation 
terms.  
 Ordinary person
  An ordinary person is a person who is neither a skilled person nor an 
instructed person. 
Overload current
 An overload current can be deﬁ ned as a current which exceeds the rated 
value in an otherwise healthy circuit. 
Passive infra-red (PIR) detectors
  PIR detector units allow a householder to switch on lighting units automat-
ically whenever the area covered is approached by a moving body whose 
thermal radiation differs from the background. 
 People
  People may be described as an ordinary person, a skilled person, an 
instructed person or a competent person.  
 Perimeter protection system
  A perimeter protection system places alarm sensors on all external doors 
and windows so that an intruder can be detected as he or she attempts to 
gain access to the protected property. 
Person   
A person can be described as ordinary, competent, instructed or skilled 
depending upon that person’s skill or ability. 

Glossary of terms
381
 Personal protective equipment  
PPE is deﬁ ned as all equipment designed to be worn, or held, to protect 
(PPE)
against a risk to health and safety. 
 Phasor  
A phasor is a straight line, having deﬁ nite length and direction, which rep-
resents to scale the magnitude and direction of a quantity such as a cur-
rent, voltage or impedance. 
 Plastic plugs  
A plastic plug is made of a hollow plastic tube split up to half its length to 
allow for expansion. Each size of plastic plug is colour-coded to match a 
wood screw size. 
 Polyvinylchloride (PVC)
 PVC used for cable insulation is a thermoplastic polymer. 
 Potential diff erence
  The potential difference (p.d.) is the change in energy levels measured 
across the load terminals. This is also called the volt drop or terminal volt-
age, since emf and p.d. are both measured in volts. 
 Power factor  
Power factor (p.f.) is deﬁ ned as the cosine of the phase angle between the 
current and voltage. 
 Power 
Power is the rate of doing work.
 
  
 
             
Power
Work done
Time taken W

(
)
Pressure or stress
 Pressure or stress is a measure of the force per unit area. 
 
  
 
 
Pressure or stress
Force
Area N/m

(
)
2
 Primary cell
  A primary cell cannot be recharged. Once the active chemicals are 
exhausted, the cell must be discarded. 
 Protective equipotential bonding
 This is equipotential bonding for the purpose of safety. 
 PVC/SWA cable installations
  Steel wire armoured PVC insulated cables are now extensively used on 
industrial installations and often laid on cable tray. 
 Reasonably practicable or absolute   
If the requirement of the regulation is absolute, then that regulation must 
be met regardless of cost or any other consideration. If the regulation is to 
be met  ‘ so far as is reasonably practicable ’ , then risks, cost, time, trouble 
and difﬁ culty can be considered. 
Relay
 A relay is an electromagnetic switch operated by a solenoid. 
Resistance 
In any circuit, resistance is deﬁ ned as opposition to current ﬂ ow.  
Resistivity
  The resistivity (symbol  ρ  – the Greek letter  ‘ rho ’ ) of a material is deﬁ ned as 
the resistance of a sample of unit length and unit cross-section. 
Risk assessments 
Risk assessments need to be  suitable and  sufﬁ cient , not perfect. 
Risk 
A risk is the  ‘ likelihood ’ of harm actually being done. 
Rubber
 Rubber is a tough elastic substance made from the sap of tropical plants. 

Glossary of terms
382
Safety fi rst – isolation
  We must ensure the disconnection and separation of electrical equipment 
from every source of supply and that this disconnection and separation is 
secure. 
Secondary cells   
A secondary cell has the advantage of being rechargeable. If the cell is con-
nected to a suitable electrical supply, electrical energy is stored on the 
plates of the cell as chemical energy. 
Secure supplies
  A UPS (uninterruptible power supply) is essentially a battery supply elec-
tronically modiﬁ ed to provide a clean and secure a.c. supply. The UPS is 
plugged into the mains supply and the computer systems are plugged into 
the UPS. 
Security lighting 
Security lighting is the ﬁ rst line of defence in the ﬁ ght against crime. 
Shearing force 
Shearing force is the force which moves one face of a material over another.  
Shock protection
 Protection from electric shock is provided by basic protection and fault 
protection. 
Short circuit
  A short circuit is an overcurrent resulting from a fault of negligible imped-
ance connected between conductors. 
 SI units
 SI units are based upon a small number of fundamental units from which 
all other units may be derived. 
Silicon rubber
  Introducing organic compounds into synthetic rubber produces a good 
insulating material such as FP200 cables. 
Simple machines
 A machine is an assembly of parts, some ﬁ xed, others movable, by which 
motion and force are transmitted. With the aid of a machine we are able to 
magnify the effort exerted at the input and lift or move large loads at the 
output.
Single PVC insulated conductors  
Single PVC insulated conductors are usually drawn into the installed con-
duit to complete the installation. 
Skilled person
  A skilled person is a person with technical knowledge or sufﬁ cient experi-
ence to be able to avoid the dangers which electricity may create. 
Skirting trunking
  Skirting trunking is a trunking manufactured from PVC or steel and in the 
shape of a skirting board which is frequently used in commercial buildings 
such as hospitals, laboratories and ofﬁ ces. 
Socket outlets
  Socket outlets provide an easy and convenient method of connecting por-
table electrical appliances to a source of supply. 
Sounders   
The positions and numbers of sounders should be such that the alarm can be 
distinctly heard above the background noise in every part of the premises.  
Space factor
  The ratio of the space occupied by all the cables in a conduit or trunking to 
the whole space enclosed by the conduit or trunking is known as the  space
factor.
 Speed
 Speed is concerned with distance travelled and time taken. 

Glossary of terms
383
Spring toggle bolts
  A spring toggle bolt provides one method of ﬁ xing to hollow partition walls 
which are usually faced with plasterboard and a plaster skimming. 
Static electricity
  Static electricity is a voltage charge which builds up to many thousands of 
volts between two surfaces when they rub together. 
Statutory Regulation
  Statutory Regulations have been passed by Parliament and have, therefore, 
become laws. 
   Step down transformers    
Step down transformers are used to reduce the output voltage, often for 
safety reasons. 
Step up transformers
  Step up transformers are used to increase the output voltage. The elec-
tricity generated in a power station is stepped up for distribution on the 
National Grid network. 
Switching for mechanical
The switching for mechanical maintenance requirements is similar to those
maintenance
for isolation except that the control switch must be capable of switching 
the full load current of the circuit or piece of equipment. 
Synthetic rubber   
Synthetic rubber is manufactured, as opposed to being produced naturally.  
Tensile force 
Tensile force is the force pulling things apart. 
 Thermoplastic polymers   
These may be repeatedly warmed and cooled without appreciable changes 
occurring in the properties of the material. 
Thermosetting polymers   
Once heated and formed, products made from thermosetting polymers are 
ﬁ xed rigidly. Plug tops, socket outlets and switch plates are made from this 
material. 
 Time sheets   
A time sheet is a standard form completed by each employee to inform the 
employer of the actual time spent working on a particular contract or site. 
Transformer   
A transformer is an electrical machine which is used to change the value of 
an alternating voltage. 
Trap protection
  Trap protection places alarm sensors on internal doors and pressure pad 
switches under carpets on through routes between, for example, the main 
living area and the master bedroom. 
Trunking
  A trunking is an enclosure provided for the protection of cables which is 
normally square or rectangular in cross-section, having one removable 
side. Trunking may be thought of as a more accessible conduit system. 
Velocity
In everyday conversation we often use the word velocity to mean the same 
as speed, and indeed the units are the same. However, for scientiﬁ c pur-
poses this is not acceptable since velocity is also concerned with direction. 
 Visual inspection
  The installation must be visually inspected before testing begins. The 
aim of the visual inspection is to conﬁ rm that all equipment and acces-
sories are undamaged and comply with the relevant British and European 
Standards, and also that the installation has been securely and correctly 
erected.  

Glossary of terms
384
Weight   
Weight is a measure of the force which a body exerts on anything which 
supports it. Normally it exerts this force because it is being attracted 
towards the earth by the force of gravity. 
Work done
  Work done is dependent upon the force applied times the distance moved 
in the direction of the force. Work done        Force    Distance moved in the 
direction of the force (J). The SI unit of work done is the newton metre or 
joule (symbol J). 

 Index  
385
 A.C. theory  93 ,  194 
 Absolute duty of care  265 
 Acceleration  85 
 Accident reports  34 
 Accidents at work  24 ,  145 
 Advisory signs  23 
 Agricultural installations  326 
 Alarm call points  333 
 Alternator  91 
 Amicus Trades Union  56 
 Analogue meters/ instruments  110 
 Appointed person  32 
 As-ﬁ tted drawings  65 
 Atoms and electrons  81 
 Balancing A.C. Loads  225 
 Bar chart  182 
 Basic protection  132 ,  234 
 Bathroom installations  345 
 Battery power tools  143 
 Block diagrams  68 
 Bonding  131 ,  282 ,  347 
 Bracket supports  322 
 Break Glass call point  333 
 British and European Standards  267 
 BSI Kite Mark  268 
 BSI Safety Mark  268 
 Building Regulations – Part P  287 
 Cable size calculations  298 
 Cable tray  316 
 Cables  124 
 Cage rotor  209 
 Capacitive reactance  195 
 Caravan/site installations  327 
 Cartridge fuses  241 
 CCTV  338 
 CENELEC European Standards  15 
 Certiﬁ cation and reporting  359 
 CFL’s  215 ,  289 
 Choosing wiring systems  128 
 Circuit breakers  242 
 Circuit diagrams  68 
 Circuit theory  81 
 Clean supplies  330 
 Communications  64 
 Competent person  53 
 Component parts of electric circuits  
128 
 Computer supplies  329 
 Conductors (properties)  100 
 Conduit capacities  308 
 Conduit installations  306 
 Connecting IT equipment  330 
 Construction Health, Safety and Welfare 
Regulations  11 
 Construction site installations  324 ,
  360 
 Continuity ring ﬁ nal circuits  354 
 Continuity testing  352 
 Cooker circuits  297 
 COSHH Control of substances 
Hazardous to Health  10 
 Current of Electricity  82 
 Current transformer  214 
 D.C. machines  207 
 Daywork sheets  187 
 Delivery Notes  184 
 Designing electrical installations  52 
 Detail drawings  67 
 Digital meters/instruments  110 
 Disconnection times of Protective 
Devices  245 
 Discrimination of Protective Devices 
 247 
 Display Screen Equipment 
Regulations  161 
 Disposing of waste  172 
 Distribution of electricity  224 
 Drawing symbols  66 
 Duty holder  265 
 Duty of Care  265 
 Dynamo  91 
 EARTH fault loop  248 
 Earth electrode testing  357 
 Earth fault loop impedance  247 
 Earth fault loop impedance testing 
 358 

Index
386
 Earthing  131 ,  281 
 ECA (Electrical Contractors 
Association)  55 
 Efﬁ ciency  91 
 Electric shock  29 ,  134 
 Electrical Installation Design  52 
 Electrical installation symbols  66 
 Electrical isolation  27 ,  169 
 Electrical machines  91 ,  204 
 Electrical team  48 
 Electrical Wiring Regulations  15 
 Electricity at Work Regulations  9 ,  264 
 Electricity Safety, Quality  &  Continuity 
Regulations  6 
 Electricity supplies  129 ,  222 ,  280 
 Electricity transmission and 
distribution  222 
 Electromagnetic switch  216 
 Electromagnetism  114 
 Electrons and atoms  81 
 Electrotechnical Industry  50 
 Electrotechnical organisations  42 
 Electrotechnical services  44 ,  51 
 Emergency lighting  339 
 Emergency supplies  339 
 Employee responsibilities  263 
 Employer responsibilities  263 
 Employment rights  18 
 Energy efﬁ cient lamps  215 ,  289 
 Enforcement of Laws  263 
 Escape lighting  339 
 Expansion bolts  323 
 Exposed conductive parts  132 
 Extraneous conductive parts  132 
 Faraday’s Law  92 
 Farm installations  326 
 Fault protection  132 ,  234 ,  244 
 Fibre optic cables  331 
 Fire alarm circuits  332 
 Fire alarm design  334 
 Fire alarm sounders  334 
 Fire barriers  313 
 Fire categories  26 
 Fire control  25 
 Fire extinguishers  27 
 First aid  17 ,  18 ,  31 
 First aider  32 
 Fixing electrical equipment  319 
 Fixing methods  322 
 Flameproof installations  270 
 Flexible conduit  308 
 Floor warming  296 
 Fluorescent lamps  216 ,  289 
 Force  86 
 FP 200 cable  127 
 Freehand sketches  69 
 Fuses  135 ,  241 
 Generation of Electricity  117 ,  129 
 Generator       91   
 GLS lamps  288 
 Guidance Notes (to IEE Regulations)  16 
 Halogen lamps  289 
 Hand tools  140 
 Harmonised cable colours  124 
 Harmonised electricity supplies  8 
 Hazard and risk assessment  155 
 Hazardous area installations  270 
 Hazardous substances  10 
 Hazardous Waste Regulations  174 
 Health and Safety at Work Act  4 
 Health and Safety Display Screen 
Regulations  161 
 Health and Safety Law  8 
 Health and Safety Policy Statement  7 
 Health and Safety responsibilities  16 
 Health and Safety Risks and 
Precautions  154 
 High voltage cables  117 ,  127 
 Horticultural installations  326 
 HSE (Health and Safety Executive)       5   
 HSE enforcerment  264 
 IEC International Standards  15 
 IEE (Institution of Electrical 
Engineers)  55 
 IEE Wiring Regulations  15 ,  266 
 IET (Institution of Engineering and 
Technology)  55 
 Immersion heater circuits  294 
 Impedance  196 
 Impedance triangle  199 
 Index of Protection (IP) codes  268 
 Inductance  205 
 Induction motor  208 
 Inductive reactance  195 
 Inspection and testing  349 
 Installing cables  303 
 Instructed person  53 
 Instrument transformers  214 
 Instruments for testing  351 
 Insulation resistance test  351 ,  355 
 Insulators (properties)  100 
 Intrinsic safety  272 
 Intruder alarms  335 
 Isolation of supplies 169.  238 
 Job sheets  183 
 Joining materials  321 
 Ladders  167 
 Layout drawings  65 
 Lead acid batteries  343 
 Legal contracts  54 
 Lever  89 
 Lighting circuits  283 
 Lightning protection  273 
 Live testing  172 
 Location drawings  67 
 Luminaire  285 

Index
387
 M I cable  126 
 M I cables  126 ,  317 
 Machines  90 
 Magnetic ﬁ elds  113 
 Magnetic hysteresis  206 
 Magnetism  112 
 Management of Health and Safety at 
Work Regulations  9 
 Mandatory signs  23 
 Manual handling  145 ,  165 
 Martindale voltage indicator  28 
 Mass  85 
 MCB’s (miniature circuit breakers)  135 , 
 241 
 Measuring volts and amps  110 
 Mechanics and machines  84 
 MICEIC (National Inspection 
Council)  56 
 Mobile scaffold towers  168 
 Multimeters  111 
 Mutual inductance  205 
 National Grid  117 ,  223 
 New wiring colours  124 
 Non-statutory Regulations  14 
 Normally closed circuits  332 
 Normally open circuits  332 
 Off-peak heating  295 
 Ohm’s Law  82 
 On Site Guide (to the IEE 
Regulations)  16 
 On-site documentation  184 
 Optical ﬁ bre cables  331 
 Ordinary person  53 
 Overcurrent - protection against       135  , 
 239 ,  244 
 Overload currents  135 ,  239 
 Parallel connected resistors  104 
 Part P Regulations  287 
 Passive infra-red detectors  335 
 PAT testing  144 
 Personal communications  189 
 Personal hygiene  146 
 Personal image  189 
 Phase angle  198 
 Phasor diagram  197 
 PIR detectors  335 ,  337 
 Plastic plugs  323 
 PME supplies  281 
 Polarity testing  356 ,  358 
 Positional reference system  71 
 Potential Difference (PD)  82 
 Power  88 ,  201 
 Power circuits  290 
 Power factor  201 
 Power factor correction  203 
 Power tools  144 
 PPE Regulations  12 
 Pressure or stress  87 
 Primary cells  342 
 Prohibition signs  22 
 Properties (of conductors and 
insulators)  100 
 Protecting circuits and people  234 
 Protection against overcurrent  135 
 Protection from electric shock  132 
 Protective equipotential bonding  133 , 
 235 ,  347 
 Proximity switches  337 
 PVC cables  125 
 PVC/SWA cable  126 ,  316 
 Radial circuits  290 
 Rawlbolt  323 
 RCD protection  237 ,  252 
 RCD testing  359 
 Reactance  195 
 Reasonably practicable duty of care 
 265 
 Relay  216 
 Resistance  82 ,  84 ,  195 
 Resistivity  83 
 Resistors in series/parallel  103 
 Ring circuits  290 
 Risk assessment  10 ,  155 
 rms value  95 
 Roles and responsibilities of workers 
 45 
 S.I. Units  80 
 Safe condition signs  23 
 Safe electrical systems  130 
 Safe manual handling  165 
 Safe working above ground  167 
 Safety documentation  264 
 Safety signs  12 ,  22 
 Scaffold towers  168 
 Schedule  182 
 Schematic diagrams  68 
 Secondary cells  342 
 Secure supplies  330 
 Secure/safe electrical isolation  27 , 169 
 Security lighting  335 
 Segregation of circuits  314 
 Self inductance  205 
 SELV transformer  215 
 Series connected resistors  104 
 Series motor  207 
 Shaded pole motor  212 
 Short circuit currents  135 
 Short circuit protection  240 
 Single phase a.c. motor  210 
 Sinusoidal waveform  94 
 Site plan  65 
 Site safety  274 
 Skilled person  53 
 Slips, trips and falls  145 
 Socket outlet circuits  290 
 Sockets  294 
 Space heating circuits  295 

Index
388
 Speciﬁ cations  182 
 Speed  85 
 Split phase a.c. motor  211 
 Spring toggle bolt  324 
 Spur sockets  292 
 Standby lighting  339 
 Star Delta connections  225 
 Static electricity  329 
 Statutory Regulations  4 
 Steel conduit  306 
 Stress or pressure  87 
 Supplementary equipotential 
bonding  347 
 Supply systems  280 
 Support and ﬁ xing methods  319 
 SWA cables  125 
 Switching for safety  238 
 Technical information sources  64 ,  182 
 Telephone communications  72 
 Telephone sockets  344 
 Temporary installations  324 
 Test instruments  351 
 Testing electrical installations  349 ,  352 
 Three effects of an electric current  111 
 Three phase motor  208 
 Three phase power  226 
 Time-sheets  183 
 TN-C-S systems  281 
 TN-S systems  281 
 Toggle bolts  324 
 Touch voltage curve  134 
 Trade unions  56 
 Transformers  115 ,  212 
 Trunking capactities  313 
 Trunking installations  311 
 TT systems  281 
 Tungsten halogen lamps  289 
 Turning force  89 
 Underﬂ oor heating  296 ,  347 
 Units  80 
 UPS secure supplies  331 
 VDU operation hazards  161 
 Velocity  85 
 Visual inspection  349 
 Volt drop cable calculations  299 
 Voltage  82 
 Voltage indicator  28 
 Voltage transformer  215 
 Warning signs  23 
 Waste disposal  172 
 Weight  85 
 Wiring colours  124 
 Wiring diagrams  68 ,  286 
 Wiring enclosures  303 
 Wiring Regulations  15 
 Wiring systems  128 
 Work equipment Regulations  11 
 Workers roles and responsibilities  45 
 Working above ground  167 
 Working  ‘ live ’  28 ,  172 
 Zones in bathrooms  345 

