
Becoming ­Human


Becoming ­Human
A  T H E O R Y  O F  O N T O G E N Y
h
Michael Tomasello
The Belknap Press of 
Harvard University Press
Cambridge, Mas­sa­chu­setts
London, ­England
2019

Copyright © 2019 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of Amer­i­ca
First printing
Art: Yellow Journey (oil on canvas) © Charlie Millar, courtesy of Bridgeman Fine Art
Design: Tim Jones
9780674988637 (EPUB)
9780674988644 (MOBI)
9780674988651 (PDF)
The Library of Congress has cataloged the printed edition as follows:
Names: Tomasello, Michael, author.
Title: Becoming ­human : a theory of ontogeny / Michael Tomasello.
Description: Cambridge, Mas­sa­chu­setts : The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2019. | 
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2018014212 | ISBN 9780674980853 (hardcover : alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Developmental psy­chol­ogy. | Ontogeny. | Socialization. | 
  Evolutionary psy­chol­ogy. | Be­hav­ior evolution.
Classification: LCC BF713 .T655 2019 | DDC 155—­dc23
LC rec­ord available at https://­lccn​.­loc​.­gov/2018014212

For the Leipzig Team


Contents
Preface	
ix
	
I	 Background
Chapter 1.  In Search of  ­Human Uniqueness	
3
Chapter 2.  Evolutionary Foundations	
10
­Human Evolution 11 
Human Ontogeny 22
Explanation in Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 32
	
II	 The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
Chapter 3.  Social Cognition	
45
From Apes: Imagining What ­Others Perceive 46
Joint Attention 53
The Coordination of Perspectives 64
Becoming “Objective” 82
Chapter 4.  Communication	
91
From Apes: Intentional Communication 93
Cooperative Communication 98
Conventional Communication 112
Becoming Symbolic 127
Chapter 5.  Cultural Learning	
134
From Apes: Social Learning 135
Imitation and Conformity 141
Instructed Learning 147
Becoming Knowledgeable 155
Chapter 6.  Cooperative Thinking	
161
From Apes: Individual Thinking 162
Collaborative Reasoning 166
Coordinated Decision-­Making 174
Becoming Reasonable 183

viii	
Contents
	
III	 The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
Chapter 7.  Collaboration	
191
From Apes: Acting in Parallel with ­Others 193
Dual-­Level Collaboration 195
Joint Commitment 204
Becoming Second-­Personal 211
Chapter 8.  Prosociality	
219
From Apes: Basic Sympathy 220
Smithian Helping and Sharing 225
Fairness 232
Becoming Cooperative 242
Chapter 9.  Social Norms	
249
From Apes: Group Life 251
Social Norms 254
Justice 262
Becoming Group-­Minded 269
Chapter 10.  Moral Identity	
275
From Apes: Social Evaluation 276
Self-­Presentation and Self-­Conscious Emotions 278
Moral Justification and Identity 285
Becoming Responsible 291
	
IV	 Conclusion
Chapter 11.  A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
297
Global Theories of ­Human Ontogeny 298
Shared Intentionality Theory 304
Prob­lems and Prospects 334
Chapter 12.  The Power of  Shared Agency	
340
References	
345
Index	
373

Preface
In this book I propose a theoretical framework for organ­izing and ex­
plaining the research that my colleagues and I did from 1998 to 2017 in 
the Department of Developmental and Comparative Psy­chol­ogy of the 
Max Planck Institute of Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, Germany. 
It is presented as a more or less coherent story, but the story line was not 
­there from the beginning. It emerged only through the work. The theo­
retical framework owes much to my colleagues, although, ­needless to say, 
they do not all agree with all of it.
My main acknowl­edgment is thus to the Leipzig team as a ­whole for 
their exceptional work and dedication to the scientific enterprise. Many 
of their studies are cited ­here. Of my numerous colleagues over the years, 
I would like to single out my se­nior partners who ­were ­there for the du­
ration. Elena Lieven was my one age-­mate throughout, serving as a con­
stant reminder that nothing says ­human uniqueness like language (and 
often serving as my social conscience as well). Josep Call was the ape 
­house, from designing its testing rooms to designing brilliant experiments, 
and the ape work simply could not have been done without him. Malinda 
Carpenter was my main partner in crime when we first began thinking 
at our almost daily lunches for several years about ­human uniqueness in 
terms of shared intentionality (although we still disagree about some 
points). Crucial to the enterprise as well ­were Katharina Haberl, who cre­
ated and supervised our incomparable child laboratory, and Henriette 
Zeidler, who was the orga­nizational hub through whom, and ­because of 
whom, every­thing worked.
I also would like to express my deepest gratitude to the Max Planck 
Society, without doubt the best scientific organ­ization in the world, and 
to my colleagues in the other four departments of the Max Planck Insti­
tute for Evolutionary Anthropology, without doubt the best institute of 
its kind in the world. The working atmosphere for ­those nineteen years 
was, in a word, inspirational. It was a privilege to work in the society and 
at the institute.

x	
Preface
In terms of this book in par­tic­u­lar, I would like to thank first and fore­
most my wife, Rita Svetlova, for providing numerous helpful comments 
on many ideas and phrasings in vari­ous parts of the book. In addition, I 
thank Jan Engelmann, who read the entire manuscript and gave helpful 
feedback, particularly on the second chapter. And fi­nally, I thank Andrew 
Kinney at Harvard University Press as well as HUP’s three anonymous 
reviewers for helpful feedback on the penultimate draft.
Note that many of the studies cited in this book have videos 
of the ­children or the apes performing in (usually) one condi­
tion in the task. They can be viewed by scientists and educators 
(for scientific and educational purposes) at:
http://www.becoming-human.org/
Username: developmental
Password: psychology

Becoming ­Human


I
Background
h
It is the epige­ne­tic rules, the hereditary regularities of 
­mental development, that . . . connect the genes to 
culture. . . . ​The search for ­human nature can be viewed 
as the archaeology of the epige­ne­tic rules.
E. O. Wilson, Consilience (1998)


W ​1 ​w
In Search of ­Human Uniqueness
In his 1871 book The Descent of  Man Charles Darwin proposed, in effect, 
that ­humans ­were just another branch on the evolutionary tree. Victorian 
En­glanders, many with significant scientific training, ­were incredulous. 
­Humans’ closest living relatives, the ­great apes, still lived in forests and 
jungles “red in tooth and claw,” but ­humans lived in a world of telescopes 
and steam engines, symphony orchestras and the British Parliament, and 
morning prayer followed by after­noon tea. It was a puzzle, to say the least, 
how just another branch on the evolutionary tree could live a life so utterly 
dif­fer­ent from that of other animals.
­Today this puzzle is essentially solved. At some point in ­human history 
a new evolutionary pro­cess arose. A telltale sign of this new pro­cess is that 
not all ­humans live amid telescopes, symphony orchestras, and the British 
Parliament but instead live among their own distinctive artifacts, symbols, 
and institutions. And ­because ­children, what­ever their ge­ne­tics, adopt the 
par­tic­u­lar artifacts, symbols, and institutions into which they are born, it 
is clear that this societal variation cannot be coming from the genes but 
rather is socially created. The full puzzle is thus that ­humans are not only 
a species of unpre­ce­dented cognitive and social achievements but also, at 
the same time, one that displays a novel kind of socially created, group-­
level diversity.
The solution to the puzzle—­the new evolutionary process—is of course 
­human culture. But the traditional notion of culture as something apart 
from biology and evolution ­will not do. ­Human culture is the form of 
social organ­ization that arose in the ­human lineage in response to specific 
adaptive challenges. Its most distinctive characteristic is its high degree 
(and new forms) of cooperation. Synchronically, the members of a cul­
tural group coordinate with one another in the context of self-­created 

4	
Background
cooperative structures such as conventions (including linguistic conven­
tions), norms, and institutions, and they relate to one another based on 
cooperative motives such as trust, commitment, and fairness. Call this the 
coordinative dimension of culture. Diachronically, the members of a cul­
tural group pass along skills and knowledge to succeeding generations via 
cooperative pro­cesses of cultural learning, such as active instruction and 
conformist learning, resulting in a kind of “ratchet effect” in which cul­
tural practices and products (including conventions, norms, and institu­
tions) evolve, perhaps “improve,” over historical time. Call this the trans­
mitive dimension of culture. The outcome is that virtually all of ­humans’ 
most remarkable achievements—­from steam engines to higher mathe­
matics—­are based on the unique ways in which individuals are able to 
coordinate with one another cooperatively, both in the moment and over 
cultural-­historical time.
But this explanation of ­human uniqueness in terms of cultural pro­
cesses creates another puzzle, and this one is not yet solved. In this case 
the focus is not on the level of the species and its achievements, but rather 
on the level of the individual and its psy­chol­ogy: how do ­human individ­
uals come to the species-­unique cognitive and social abilities necessary 
for participating in cultural coordination and transmission? To answer this 
question the obvious first step is to establish exactly how ­human psy­
chol­ogy differs from that of other primates—­precisely how ­humans as 
individuals are unique. The difficulty is that over the past few de­cades em­
pirical research has established that ­humans’ nearest living relatives, the 
­great apes, possess cognitive and social skills highly similar to ­those of 
­humans, including many that are seemingly relevant to cultural pro­cesses. 
For example, ­there is recent research demonstrating that at least some 
­great apes (1) make and use tools, (2) communicate intentionally (or even 
“linguistically”), (3) have a kind of “theory of mind,” (4) acquire some be­
hav­iors via social learning (leading to “culture”), (5) hunt together in 
groups, (6) have “friends” with whom they preferentially groom and form 
alliances, (7) actively help ­others, and (8) evaluate and reciprocate one 
another’s social actions.
But do apes do ­these ­things in the same way as ­humans? To make this 
determination in par­tic­u­lar cases we must look beneath the sweeping 
claims that both apes and ­humans “have x” or “do y,” even though such 
claims may be true on a general level. To penetrate beneath such gener­
alities, we need to make more fine-­grained comparisons by performing 

	
In Search of  ­Human Uniqueness	
5
comparative experiments in which ­humans and ­great apes (especially 
chimpanzees and bonobos, as ­humans’ nearest living relatives) are ob­
served in as-­similar-­as-­possible circumstances. Such controlled experi­
mental comparisons make it pos­si­ble to detect subtle differences of be­
hav­ior and, ideally, the cognitive and motivational pro­cesses under­lying 
them. In this way we seek to identify the differences on the individual psy­
chological level that ultimately lead to ­humans’ unique forms of cultural 
coordination and transmission (and so to telescopes and parliaments).
Given a description of the key differences between ­humans and their 
nearest ­great ape relatives, the next task is to explain ­those differences. In 
an evolutionary framework, the axiomatic explanation is, of course, 
natu­ral se­lection: the ­human individuals alive ­today have been naturally 
selected to meet certain species-­unique ecological or socioecological chal­
lenges. For example, one proposal is that ­humans evolved many of their 
unique cognitive and social capacities in response to ecological challenges 
that first forced them to collaborate with one another in acquiring food, 
and then ­later prompted them to form larger cultural groups to defend 
their resources from other groups (Tomasello 2014, 2016). ­Under ­these 
conditions, individuals who could best cooperate with ­others—­individuals 
who ­were both capable and motivated to put their heads together with 
­others to collaborate or form a culture—­were at an adaptive advantage 
and so proliferated.
But natu­ral se­lection creates nothing. Natu­ral se­lection is only a sieve 
that sorts, ­after the fact, ­viable from nonviable organisms. Evolutionary 
novelties originate not from natu­ral se­lection but rather from the other 
main dimension of the evolutionary pro­cess: inherited variation. Classi­
cally, inherited variation in evolution emanates from ge­ne­tic mutation or 
recombination, which produce, via ontoge­ne­tic pro­cesses, novel traits. But 
recent advances in evolutionary developmental biology (so-­called Evo-­
Devo) suggest that the constructive role of ­these ontoge­ne­tic pro­cesses 
has not been fully recognized. Not only do new traits always come into 
existence via ontoge­ne­tic processes—­which direct and constrain ge­ne­tic 
expression—­but by far the most frequent source of new traits is changes 
in the timing and manner in which already existing genes are expressed 
and transact with the environment. Thus, even relatively modest changes 
in the way that regulatory genes orchestrate ontoge­ne­tic timing and plas­
ticity can have enormous and cascading phenotypic effects—­not encoded 
directly in the genes—as developing systems interact with one another and 

6	
Background
with the environment in unexpected ways. The implication is that if we 
wish to explain how uniquely ­human psy­chol­ogy is created, we must focus 
our attention on ontogeny, and especially on how ­great ape ontogeny in 
general has been transformed into ­human ontogeny in par­tic­u­lar.
And that is my goal ­here. I wish to describe and explain the ontogeny 
of uniquely ­human psy­chol­ogy, using as a starting point ­great ape on­
togeny. ­Great apes engage in basic pro­cesses of perception, memory, and 
categorization, as well as more complex pro­cesses of intentional commu­
nication, prosocial be­hav­ior, and social learning. From this starting point, 
we may then attempt to identify the unique aspects of ­human psy­chol­ogy 
as they emerge ontoge­ne­tically over the first years of life. A natu­ral end 
point for this investigation is ­children of six to seven years of age. In the 
eyes of many cultural institutions and traditions, across many centuries 
and socie­ties, ­children’s sixth or seventh birthday heralds their entry into 
the “age of reason.” In British common law, this is the first age at which a 
child may commit a crime. In the Catholic Church, this is the age at which 
a child may first take communion. In cultures requiring formal education, 
this is the age at which a child is ready for serious instruction in literacy 
and numeracy. And in traditional socie­ties, this is the age at which a child 
is first given impor­tant in­de­pen­dent tasks such as tending a flock, gath­
ering firewood, or delivering a message (Rogoff et al. 1975). Overall, 
­children of this age have become, from a cognitive point of view, mostly 
reasonable—­beings with whom one may reason, and expect a reasonable 
response in return—­and they have become, from a social point of view, 
mostly responsible—­beings whom one may hold accountable, and expect 
to hold themselves accountable, for their beliefs and actions. The result is 
nascent “persons,” who have taken a ­giant first step ­toward internalizing 
the culture’s norms of rationality and morality, making them for the first 
time capable of and indeed responsible for normatively self-­regulating 
their own beliefs and actions.
Our working hypothesis to explain the ontogeny of uniquely ­human 
psy­chol­ogy is Vygotskian: uniquely ­human forms of cognition and soci­
ality emerge in ­human ontogeny through, and only through, species-­
unique forms of sociocultural activity. But the theory we develop updates 
and modifies Vygotsky—it is Neo-­Vygotskian—in placing ­human socio­
cultural activity within the framework of modern evolutionary theory. 
This means that we begin by seeking to identify the ways in which 
­humans are biologically prepared for engaging in their unique forms of 

	
In Search of  ­Human Uniqueness	
7
sociocultural activity; indeed, we may argue that it is precisely this bio­
logical preparation—in the form of maturationally expressed capacities—­
that makes uniquely ­human sociocultural activities and experiences pos­
si­ble in the first place. This does not contradict Vygotsky’s argument for 
the key role of sociocultural context in ­human psychological development. 
Modern evolutionary theory emphasizes that organisms inherit their en­
vironments as much as they inherit their genes: a fish inherits not only 
fins but also ­water. ­Human ­children inherit a sociocultural context replete 
with cultural artifacts, symbols, and institutions, and their unique matu­
rational capacities would be inert without a sociocultural context within 
which to develop (Richerson and Boyd 2005). Normal ­human ontogeny 
thus requires both the maturation of species-­unique cognitive and social 
capacities and also individual experience in such ­things as collaborative 
and communicative interactions with ­others, structured by cultural arti­
facts such as linguistic conventions and social norms.
The account of ­human evolution on which we rely is that of Toma­
sello et al. (2012; see also Tomasello 2014, 2016), which focused on the 
evolution of ­human cooperation and how it enables species-­unique 
pro­cesses of cultural coordination and transmission. For precision, the ac­
count borrows theoretical tools from philosophical accounts of shared 
intentionality (Bratman 1992, 2014; Searle 1995, 2010; Gilbert 1989, 2014). 
In this view, ­humans’ abilities to cooperate with one another take unique 
forms ­because individuals are able to create with one another a shared 
agent “we,” operating with shared intentions, shared knowledge, and 
shared sociomoral values. The claim is that ­these abilities emerged first 
in ­human evolution between collaborative partners operating dyadically 
in acts of joint intentionality, and then ­later among individuals as mem­
bers of a cultural group in acts of collective intentionality. In contrast 
to Vygotsky’s almost exclusive focus on the transmitive dimension of 
culture—­how the culture’s practices with symbols and other artifacts are 
passed along across generations and thereby restructure ­human psy­
chological functioning—we ­focus more on the coordinative dimension of 
culture: how ­humans, including ­children, collaborate and communicate in 
the moment (how they co-­operate) as they engage with ­others in socio­
cultural activities. Indeed, the argument ­will be that it is the coordinative 
dimension of uniquely ­human cognition and sociality—­including its moti­
vational aspects and the new social relationships that ­these engender—­
that makes pos­si­ble the cooperative cultural practices of teaching and 

8	
Background
conformist learning, which play the key roles in uniquely ­human cultural 
transmission.
In the context of this evolutionary account, our ontoge­ne­tic account 
invokes three sets of pro­cesses that together construct par­tic­u­lar devel­
opmental pathways. The first are pro­cesses of maturation as more or less 
direct reflections of ­humans’ evolutionary history. Our specific proposal 
is that the ontogeny of ­human cognitive and social uniqueness is struc­
tured by the maturation of ­children’s capacities for shared intentionality. 
Mirroring the phyloge­ne­tic sequence, this maturational pro­cess unfolds 
in two basic steps: first is the emergence of joint intentionality at around 
nine months of age, and second is the emergence of collective intention­
ality at around three years of age. ­These two transitions affect ­children’s 
cognitive and social psy­chol­ogy across the board, albeit with dif­fer­ent par­
ticulars for dif­fer­ent developmental pathways.
The second set of pro­cesses is ­children’s individual experiences, espe­
cially their sociocultural experiences. Uniquely ­human cognitive and so­
cial ontogeny depends crucially on transactions between the individual 
and a rich cultural ecol­ogy, which is both necessary for normal ­human 
development and also responsible for many cultural and individual varia­
tions. (A child maturing by itself on a desert island would not end up in 
adulthood as anything vaguely resembling a culturally competent 
“person.”) Once again, age three is a crucial transition point. For most of 
­human evolutionary history, this is the age of weaning, when ­children 
start taking their first in­de­pen­dent baby steps into the wider world. It is 
thus at this age that they begin having in­de­pen­dent and meaningful in­
teractions with peers, inaugurating what some scholars have dubbed “the 
two social worlds of childhood”: (1) interactions with knowledgeable and 
authoritative adults, who provide key experiences relevant to the trans­
mitive dimension of culture; and (2) interactions with coequal peers, who 
constitute especially challenging partners for social and ­mental coordina­
tion in collaboration and communication, thus providing key experiences 
relevant to the coordinative dimension of culture. The claim is thus that 
­children before the age of three are mainly adapted for eliciting care and 
attention from adults, whereas ­after age three they are prepared for both 
culturally learning from adult pedagogy as such and developing new skills 
through coordinative interactions with peers.
The third set of pro­cesses are ­humans’ vari­ous forms of executive self-­
regulation. The proposal, following Vygotsky (1930 / 1978), is that many 

	
In Search of  ­Human Uniqueness	
9
aspects of ­human cognitive and social uniqueness result from the special 
ways in which ­children attempt to executively self-­regulate their thoughts 
and actions not just individually, as do many primates, but also socially 
through their constant monitoring of the perspectives and evaluations 
of social partners on the self. Again age three is key. Before age three, 
­children’s executive regulation is mostly individual, as other primates’, al­
though it often works on uniquely ­human cognitive and social content. 
­After age three, ­children begin to socially self-­monitor their communica­
tive attempts to see if they are comprehensible and rational to ­others, and 
they begin to socially self-­monitor the impression they are making on 
­others so as to maintain their cooperative identity in the group. In addi­
tion, from age three ­children also collaboratively self-­regulate their coop­
erative interactions with ­others. Thus, they make joint commitments with 
­others in which “we” make sure that “you” and “I” each behave ourselves, 
as well as (implicit) collective commitments to the group’s social norms 
to which “we” make sure that both self and ­others conform. By engaging 
in such social and cultural self-­regulation from three to six years of age, 
young ­children come to create the many and vari­ous kinds of self-­
reflective, normatively structured, and reason-­based forms of thought 
and action that make them for the first time reasonable and responsible 
persons.
My attempt in what follows is to use this neo-­Vygotskian framework 
to explain the origin and development of ­children’s species-­unique forms 
of psychological functioning during the first six years of life. I do this sep­
arately for each of the eight ontoge­ne­tic pathways—­four cognitive and 
four sociomoral—­that most clearly distinguish ­humans from their nearest 
­great ape relatives (as determined by comparative experiments). The 
overall aim is thus a complete and coherent account of the pro­cess of be­
coming ­human—­uniquely ­human.

W ​2 ​w
Evolutionary Foundations
The most basic cognitive and social pro­cesses that can be observed in de­
veloping ­children ­today all have evolutionary histories. Understanding 
­these histories is impor­tant ­because it tells us what ­these psychological 
pro­cesses are, in the sense of what they are “designed” to do (Tooby and 
Cosmides 2005).*
In general, ­great apes have evolved cognitive and social skills for ­doing 
such individual ­things as foraging for food and competing with group­
mates for dominance status. ­Humans in addition have evolved a suite of 
species-­unique cognitive and social skills for coordinating with ­others in 
vari­ous novel forms of cooperative interaction. ­These uniquely ­human 
adaptations for cooperation evolved in two key steps (Tomasello et al. 
2012). The first step comprised adaptations enabling early ­human individ­
uals to cooperate with one another dyadically in obligate collaborative 
foraging (with partner choice); ­these are the skills and motivations of joint 
intentionality. The second step comprised adaptations enabling modern 
­human individuals to cooperate with one another in the larger collabora­
tive enterprise known as culture; ­these are the skills and motivations of 
collective intentionality. ­These two steps constitute the evolutionary foun­
dations of uniquely ­human cognitive and social ontogeny.
The emergence of early ­humans’ collaborative and cultural ways of 
life also instigated impor­tant changes in the general course and context 
*  ​“If creatures from outer space came across a complex ­human artifact such as a traffic light, idling, 
they could dissect it and analyze its structure forever and not understand why it behaves in the way 
that it does. The wires and lights by themselves could never reveal (not even with the help of an fMRI) 
why the red light on one side activates only when the green light on the other side activates. To under­
stand ­these actions we must first understand traffic, and how the traffic light was designed to solve the 
specific prob­lems created by traffic” (Tomasello 2014, 151).

	
Evolutionary Foundations	
11
of ­human ontogeny. Of special importance, as ­humans became ever more 
cooperative they began investing more time and resources into the devel­
opment of their ­children, and this effort included adults other than the 
­mother (in the so-­called cooperative breeding pattern). Adults provisioning 
­children with food and information well into adolescence slowed down 
ontogeny, freeing up time and resources that enabled ­children to appro­
priate more efficiently the massive amounts of cultural information re­
quired to become proficient in the ways of the group.
In this chapter, then, we set the stage for the specific ontoge­ne­tic anal­
yses in the main body of the book. We do this, first, by explicating the 
evolutionary foundations of uniquely ­human psy­chol­ogy, and, second, by 
specifying how this uniquely ­human psy­chol­ogy led to several novel fea­
tures of ­human ontogeny as a ­whole. We conclude with some method­
ological considerations that, in the chapters that follow, ­will structure how 
we go about describing and explaining uniquely ­human ontoge­ne­tic 
pathways.
­Human Evolution
Our story begins with ­humans’ last common ancestor (LCA) with other 
apes, about 6 million years ago. By all accounts this LCA was much more 
similar to con­temporary chimpanzees and bonobos than to con­temporary 
­humans, so we use modern-­day chimpanzees and bonobos as models for 
its psy­chol­ogy. From ­there we posit two new “environments of evolu­
tionary adaptedness” that selected for ­humans’ ultra-­cooperativeness: 
one focused on face-­to-­face collaboration in early ­humans from around 
400,000 years ago, and the other focused on culture in modern ­humans 
from around 100,000 years ago. Con­temporary ­human psychological on­
togeny comprises adaptations shared with the LCA as well as uniquely 
­human adaptations grounded in ­these two subsequent evolutionary 
periods.
­Great Ape Individual Intentionality
Obviously, we have no direct evidence for the nature of the LCA’s psy­
chol­ogy. But we know quite a bit about the psy­chol­ogy of chimpanzees 
and bonobos, as models. ­Because our goals ­here are general, our account 
of their cognition and sociality is general as well. For more detailed 

12	
Background
accounts with fuller citations of the relevant research, see Tomasello and 
Call (1997), Call and Tomasello (2008), and Tomasello (2014, 2016). In ad­
dition, in the eight chapters that follow this one we discuss in detail many 
studies in which chimpanzees and / or bonobos are directly compared 
with ­human ­children.
Cognition  ​Chimpanzees and bonobos spend the better part of their day 
foraging for food. In this context, they have evolved cognitive skills for 
understanding the workings of the physical world (Tomasello and Call 
1997). They understand (1) space, for finding food; (2) object categories, 
for identifying food; and (3) quantities, for maximizing food intake. In 
other words, chimpanzees and bonobos possess the same “core knowl­
edge” of the physical world that ­human infants begin to display early in 
ontogeny (Spelke 2009). In addition, in procuring and extracting food—­
especially when tools are involved—­these apes make causal inferences in 
ways that can only be called thinking. For example, if an ape sees a cog­
nitive prob­lem in one location, then goes to a dif­fer­ent location to examine 
a row of tools, she can, just by looking, choose the tool that fits the prob­
lem’s causal structure (though the prob­lem is out of sight at the moment). 
The ape can do this ­because she has the ability to cognitively represent 
the prob­lem and mentally simulate using the available tools within that 
represented prob­lem. In all, based on studies of modern-­day ­great apes, 
we may say that the LCA had very sophisticated skills of cognition and 
thinking about the physical world.
A somewhat similar story may be told about social cognition. ­Great 
apes, and therefore the LCA, possess and possessed an understanding of 
­others as intentional agents. It is likely that apes’ understanding of inten­
tional agency also evolved in the context of foraging—­that is, competi­
tive foraging—­because identifying ­others’ goals and perceptions is crucial 
for predicting their be­hav­ior when in competition with them. For example, 
if a subordinate chimpanzee sees two pieces of food and sees a dominant 
chimpanzee looking in the direction of one of them, she ­will then choose 
to pursue the piece that the dominant cannot see. She does this based on 
an understanding that the dominant has the goal of food and that he can 
pursue that goal only if he can perceive it. Thus, based on studies with 
­great apes we may hypothesize that the LCA had an understanding of 
­others as intentional agents (another piece of core knowledge) and that 
they used this understanding in ­mental simulations to predict what ­others 

	
Evolutionary Foundations	
13
would do in vari­ous novel competitive situations. Based on other studies 
with apes, we may infer that the LCA’s skills of communication and so­
cial learning ­were likewise sophisticated ­because they too ­were underlain 
by the basic social-­cognitive skill of understanding ­others as intentional 
agents.
Overall, in comparing the cognitive skills of chimpanzees and bonobos 
to ­those of ­human ­children, I have characterized our nearest ­great ape 
relatives as operating with skills of individual intentionality (Tomasello 
2014). They possess complex skills of cognition and social cognition for 
understanding, predicting, and manipulating their physical and social 
worlds. What they do not possess is humanlike skills of shared intention­
ality, such as the ability to participate in the thinking of ­others through 
joint attention, conventional communication, and pedagogy. Chimpan­
zees and bonobos—­and thus the LCA—­are and ­were very clever, but 
mainly or only as individuals.
Sociality  ​Like most primates, the LCA had more or less long-­lasting so­
cial relationships with selected groupmates. In addition to kinship, their 
relationships ­were based mainly on (1) competition and dominance, and 
(2) cooperation and “friendship.” Like many mammals, they combined 
­these two types of relationships as they cooperated with a partner to fight 
for dominance with a competitor. To cultivate good partners for ­these 
­conflicts, they did vari­ous ­things to make friends (such as grooming 
and sharing food). They also helped one another do such ­things as re­
trieving an object or obtaining food when they themselves ­were not 
competing for it. In general, the LCAs very likely had a special sympathy 
for kin and friends—­especially ­those who supported them in competitive 
interactions—­and thus cooperated with them in vari­ous ways. Their co­
operation was grounded in competition.
The one apparent exception is no exception at all. Chimpanzees (and 
perhaps bonobos) hunt in small groups for monkeys and other small mam­
mals, and so presumably did the LCA. In terms of coordination, in some 
cases the hunt resembles a kind of helter-­skelter chase; but in other cases 
individuals surround a small prey in order to capture it. Based on experi­
mental studies, we may infer that it is a kind of individualistic coordina­
tion in that each hunter is attempting to capture the monkey for itself 
(­because the captor gets the most meat) and they take account of the ac­
tions and intentions of ­others in order to do so. The participants are not 

14	
Background
working together so much as they are using one another as “social tools” 
to maximize their own gains. This is also evident in the fact that the captor 
­will steal away with the carcass whenever he can. But typically he cannot, 
so all the participants (and many bystanders) get at least some of the meat 
by begging and harassing the captor. We may thus infer that the LCA had 
some basic skills of collaboration, but ­these did not include working to­
gether ­toward a shared goal or voluntarily sharing the spoils at the end.
Overall, as paradoxical as it may sound, our best guess is that LCA in­
dividuals had rich social lives with long-­lasting relationships, but—as com­
pared with ­humans—­their sociality was still somewhat individualistic. 
When hunting, they could not put their heads together with ­others to 
form the shared goal of working together, and they had no tendency to 
share resources fairly among all relevant parties. Chimpanzees and 
bonobos, and so the LCA, are and ­were very social, but only in a kind of 
instrumental way.
Executive Regulation  ​In both the physical and social domains, individuals 
of the LCA also likely had the ability to self-­monitor their own actions 
and thinking. Thus, based on studies with ­great apes, we may infer that 
they could make decisions based on an assessment of what they did and 
did not know; for example, if they ­were uncertain about the location of 
something (or ­whether they could win a fight), they could opt out and 
pursue another goal rather than risk high-­cost failure. This suggests that 
when they ­were thinking about a prob­lem they in some sense knew what 
they ­were ­doing.
Furthermore, one large-­scale study of chimpanzees (and orangutans) 
suggested that if the occasion called for it the LCA could self-­regulate its 
be­hav­ior in vari­ous adaptive ways. For example, it could (1) delay in taking 
a smaller reward now so as to get a larger reward ­later, (2) inhibit a previ­
ously successful response in ­favor of a new one demanded by a changed 
situation, and (3) make itself do something unpleasant for a desired re­
ward at the end (Herrmann et al. 2015). In short, LCAs had a variety of 
skills of cognitive self-­monitoring and motivational self-­regulation. What 
they did not do, that even ­human ­children do, is to monitor their actions 
and thinking based on the perspectives and evaluations of ­others in their 
social group.

	
Evolutionary Foundations	
15
Early ­Human Collaboration and Joint Intentionality
­Humans diverged from other ­great apes around 6 million years ago. For 
the next 4 million years they ­were basically bipedal apes with ape-­sized 
brains. Then, around 2 million years ago, ­there emerged the genus Homo, 
with larger brains and new skills in making stone tools. Soon ­after, a global 
cooling and drying period led to a radiation of terrestrial monkeys (for 
example, baboons), who outcompeted Homo for many resources. New op­
tions ­were needed. A transitional option was scavenging carcasses killed 
by other animals, but then some early ­humans (the best guess is Homo hei­
delbergensis some 400,000  years ago) began obtaining the majority of 
their food through more active collaboration; indeed, the collaboration 
became obligate. This meant that individuals ­were interdependent with 
one another in much more urgent ways than before.
An essential part of the pro­cess of obligate collaborative foraging was 
partner choice. Individuals who ­were cognitively or other­wise incompe­
tent at collaboration—­for example, ­those incapable of forming a joint goal 
with ­others—­were not chosen repeatedly as partners, and this meant no 
food. Likewise, individuals who ­were socially or morally uncooperative 
in their collaborative interactions with ­others—­for example, ­those who 
tried to hog all the spoils—­were also avoided as regular partners and so 
­were doomed. The upshot was that ­there was strong and active social se­
lection (West-­Eberhard 1979) for cooperatively competent and moti­
vated individuals.
The radically new psychological pro­cess that emerged at this time was 
what we may call joint intentionality based on joint agency. A joint agent 
comprises two individuals who have a joint goal, structured by joint at­
tention, each of whom has at the same time her own individual role and 
perspective. This may be called the dual-­level structure: simultaneous 
sharedness and individuality. The partners in joint agency relate to one 
another dyadically, second-­personally, in face-­to-­face interaction; over time 
they create with one another shared experiences, the common ground on 
which their collaborative efforts may rely. The creation of a joint agent—­
while each partner maintains her own individual role and perspective at 
the same time—­created a completely new ­human psy­chol­ogy, spawning 
new forms of both cognition and sociality.
Cognition  ​It is pos­si­ble to characterize what happened with ­these early 
­humans as just the emergence of some new skills, and that is certainly 

16	
Background
true. But ­these ­were not just any skills. ­These ­were skills that created a 
new kind of agent, one in which two distinct individuals, in a sense, per­
ceived and understood the world together while still not losing their own 
individual perspectives. This created for early ­humans what we may call 
perspectival cognitive repre­sen­ta­tions. Whereas ­great apes could abstract 
common features across exemplars and form an abstract repre­sen­ta­tion 
of a set of entities, early ­humans could not only do this but also see the 
same entity from dif­fer­ent perspectives, ­under dif­fer­ent descriptions (for 
example, as stick and as tool), both at the same time. This form of cogni­
tive repre­sen­ta­tion is responsible for much of the remarkable flexibility 
and power of ­human conceptual activity.
A joint intentional activity constituted a shared conceptual world, en­
compassing the partners’ distinct perspectives, and it created the pragmatic 
infrastructure upon which early ­humans’ new skills of cooperative com­
munication could be built (Tomasello 2008). ­These skills ­were initially 
manifest in the new and uniquely ­human gestures of pointing and panto­
miming, used by partners to coordinate their individual roles and perspec­
tives ­toward a collaborative end. ­These gestures relied on some new 
forms of cognitive inferencing. Thus, for example, one individual might 
point for another to a dead branch in a tree. With no common ground, 
such a gesture would be meaningless. But if they ­were hunting together 
for antelope, and from previous experience together they had common 
ground in knowing that the recipient needed a spear but had broken his 
yesterday (and that this dead branch was of the appropriate size and struc­
ture), then the ­simple pointing gesture might communicate something 
like “­There’s a potential new spear for you.” It would communicate this, 
that is, if the recipient could engage in an evolutionarily new form of in­
ference: a socially recursive inference. Specifically, following the pointing 
gesture to the stick, the recipient had to ask himself why the communi­
cator intended that he attend to that stick (whereupon his consultation of 
their common ground would provide the answer). Being able to recur­
sively embed one intentional or ­mental state (attend) inside another (intend) 
was another new ability with enormous cognitive consequences.
Early ­humans’ new skills of cooperative communication thus enabled 
not only new forms of social coordination but also new forms of thinking, 
especially the ability to coordinate dif­fer­ent perspectives in vari­ous ways, 
including recursively with a partner. Socially recursive inferences—in 
which the individual conceptually embeds one intentional or ­mental state 

	
Evolutionary Foundations	
17
within another—­enable individuals in addition to reflect on their own 
­mental states: to think about their own thinking. The cognitive outcome 
of early ­humans’ adaptations for obligate collaborative foraging was skills 
of joint intentionality: skills for putting one’s head together with a partner 
to form a joint goal with joint attention, creating the possibility of thinking 
about ­things in terms of perspectival cognitive repre­sen­ta­tions and socially 
recursive inferences.
Sociality  ​Early ­human individuals who ­were socially selected for collab­
orative foraging related to ­others in some new ways. Most impor­tant, they 
had strong cooperative motives, both to work together with ­others ­toward 
cooperative goals and to feel sympathy for and to help ­others who ­were, 
or might be, their partners. If an individual depended on a partner for 
­foraging success, then it made good evolutionary sense to help him when­
ever necessary to make sure he was in good shape for ­future outings.
Moreover, early ­human individuals who ­were socially selected for col­
laborative foraging also developed a new kind of cooperative rationality 
that led them to treat ­others as equally deserving partners—­that is, not 
just with a sense of sympathy but also with a sense of fairness. Partners 
understood that ­either of them could, in princi­ple, play ­either role in a 
collaboration and that both of them ­were necessary for joint success. 
Moreover, as two individuals collaborated repeatedly with one another 
in a par­tic­u­lar foraging context, they developed a common-­ground un­
derstanding of the way that each role needed to be played for joint success, 
what we may call role-­specific ideals (for example, in hunting antelopes 
the chaser must do x, and the spearer must do y). ­These ideals ­were im­
partial in the sense that they specified what ­either of us must do to fulfill 
the role “properly,” in a way that ensured our joint success. All of ­these 
­things together led to a collaborative attitude: ­because we both are needed 
for success, and we are interchangeable in our roles (each of which have 
mutually known and impartial standards of per­for­mance), we are equally 
deserving of the spoils. This is in contrast to cheats or ­free riders, who 
are not deserving of the spoils.
In choosing a partner for a collaborative effort, early ­human individ­
uals wanted to choose someone who would live up to role-­specific ideals 
and who would divide the spoils fairly. To reduce the risk inherent in 
partner choice, individuals who ­were about to become partners could use 
their newfound skills of cooperative communication to make a joint 

18	
Background
commitment, pledging to one another to live up to their role ideals, in­
cluding a fair division of the spoils. As part of this joint commitment, the 
would-be partners also could pledge, implicitly, that whichever of them 
might renege on the commitment would be deserving of censure; so the 
deviant, if she wanted to stay in good cooperative standing, would actu­
ally join with the partner in condemning herself (internalized into a sense 
of guilt), in a kind of we > me morality.
Thus, the social outcome of early ­humans’ adaptations for obligate col­
laborative foraging was a second-­personal morality: the tendency to re­
late to ­others, face to face, with a heightened sense of sympathy for (po­
tential) partners and a sense of fairness based on a genuine assessment of 
both self and other as equally deserving partners in the collaborative en­
terprise (self–­other equivalence).
Executive Regulation  ​Based on studies comparing apes and ­human ­children, 
we may infer that early ­humans not only engaged in individual self-­
regulation (as did the LCA), but also a kind of social self-­regulation. 
Cognitively they ­were able to executively regulate their own thinking by 
anticipating how ­others would understand and evaluate this thinking—­
typically as it was expressed in some overt act of cooperative communi­
cation. This constitutes a kind of social self-­monitoring of their individual 
thinking (to ­later become self-­regulation via norms of rationality). So­
cially, especially in the context of partner choice, they could simulate 
how ­others ­were evaluating their cooperativeness, and they cared about 
this enormously (to become, ­later and in combination with their we > me 
morality, self-­regulation via norms of morality).
Modern ­Human Culture and Collective Intentionality
The small-­scale collaborative foraging characteristic of early ­humans was 
eventually destabilized by two demographic ­factors that ushered in 
modern ­humans (Homo sapiens sapiens) some 150,000 years ago. First was 
competition with other ­human groups. Competition with other groups 
meant that a loosely structured population of collaborators had to turn 
into a more tightly knit social group to protect its way of life from invaders. 
The result was the sense that our entire social group was one big collab­
orative activity aimed at group success. Second was increasing population 
size. As ­human populations grew, they tended to split into smaller groups, 
leading to so-­called tribal organ­ization in which a number of dif­fer­ent 

	
Evolutionary Foundations	
19
social groups ­were still a single super-­group or “culture.” This meant 
that recognizing ­others from one’s cultural group became essential; in the 
context of sometimes hostile group competition, one also needed to be 
recognized by ­others in one’s group oneself. Such recognition in both 
directions was impor­tant ­because only members of one’s cultural group 
could be counted on to share one’s skills and values and so be good and 
trustworthy collaborative partners, including for group defense. The de­
pendence of individuals on the group thus led to a sense of group iden­
tity and loyalty, and a failure to display this group identity and loyalty 
could be lethal.
Con­temporary ­humans have many diverse ways of marking group 
identity, but the original ways ­were mainly behavioral: ­people who talk 
like me, prepare food like me, and other­wise share my cultural practices 
are likely members of my cultural group. And so emerged modern 
­humans’ tendency ­toward active conformity to the group and its conven­
tional cultural practices. Teaching one’s ­children to do ­things in the con­
ventional way thus became mandatory for their survival. Teaching and 
conformity generated cumulative cultural evolution characterized by the 
“ratchet effect”—­and thus cultural organ­ization in the form of the group’s 
specific set of conventions, norms, and institutions. Individuals ­were born 
into ­these supraindividual social structures and had no choice but to con­
form to them. The key characteristic of individuals adapted for cultural 
life was thus a kind of group-­mindedness, both in taking the perspective 
of the group cognitively and in caring about the group’s welfare.
Cognition  ​The cognitive skills needed for functioning in a cultural group 
­were not just skills of joint intentionality but skills of collective intention­
ality. Individuals had not just personal common ground with other indi­
viduals but also cultural common ground—­even with individuals they had 
never before met—­because they knew together that they had all had many 
of the same experiences as a result of growing up in the same cultural 
group. The individual also had to take the perspective of the group in 
many situations, especially with re­spect to the culture’s conventions, 
norms, and institutions. ­There ­were right and wrong ways to perform the 
roles in them: this is the way we do ­things. This new kind of perspective 
was thus a kind of “objective” perspective, in­de­pen­dent of any individual. 
Institutions further fortified this sense of objectivity ­because essential parts 
of the cultural world ­were institutional realities such as chiefs, marriages, 

20	
Background
and shells-­as-­money, which ­were in actuality regular ­people and ­things that 
attained a new status—­with new deontic powers—­because and only 
­because every­one recognized in their cultural common ground that they 
did in fact have this status.
In many ways the most impor­tant conventions in a cultural group are 
its linguistic conventions used to coordinate social activities. In addition, 
language is key to the way that ­humans think in many dif­fer­ent ways, per­
haps especially in the way that it conventionalizes perspectives (for ex­
ample, dog versus pet) and enables individuals to jointly attend to one an­
other’s ideas as they exchange them via their shared linguistic 
conventions. Language additionally contributes to the sense of an objec­
tive perspective on ­things, as it enables one to express generic propositions 
about the world in general. Thus, to teach their ­children, modern ­human 
individuals began using generic forms of language in which it is not just 
that a par­tic­u­lar leopard is dangerous, but “Leopards are dangerous” rep­
resents an objective fact about the world. The teacher is not communi­
cating her personal opinion to the child but rather representing the cul­
ture’s objective view of ­things.
Moreover, modern ­humans used their linguistic skills to argue with one 
another cooperatively about some belief or action. In ­doing so, they pro­
vided reasons for why ­others should agree with them (for example, we 
should go this way, not that way, ­because ­there are antelope tracks down 
this path, not that path). The individuals who could participate meaning­
fully in this pro­cess ­were ­those who behaved cooperatively by subordi­
nating themselves to “good” reasons: my personal preference does not 
­matter, but I ­will agree and go along with what­ever decision is supported 
by the most and best reasons, using criteria on which we all agree. By en­
gaging in this pro­cess individuals’ thinking became or­ga­nized in a much 
wider and more reason-­based “web of beliefs,” structured by the group’s 
normative standards of rationality.
Sociality  ​Living in a modern ­human cultural group meant, above every­
thing ­else, conforming. One had to conform to coordinate with ­others in 
conventional cultural practices, to advertise one’s identity with the cul­
tural group’s way of ­doing ­things, and to be in line with the group’s 
­social norms. Some social norms ­were only about conformity and group 
identity, but ­others touched on ­humans’ senses of sympathy and fairness 
(inherited from early ­humans), and ­these became moral norms. And so 

	
Evolutionary Foundations	
21
just as conventional norms codified the right and wrong way of ­doing 
­things in instrumental activities, moral norms codified the right and wrong 
way of treating other ­people morally. ­Because the collective intentionality 
and cultural common ground of modern ­humans created a kind of “ob­
jective” perspective on ­things, modern ­human morality came to be char­
acterized as objective right and wrong.
Of course one could act against moral norms. But when called to task 
by other group members, the options ­were limited: one could ignore their 
criticism and censure, and so place oneself outside the norms and values 
shared by the cultural group (perhaps leading to exclusion from the 
group), or one could accept it as legitimate and deserved. And indeed 
modern ­humans did think of the cultural norms into which they ­were 
born as a legitimate means by which “we” regulate “us,” and it was part 
of their group identity to think in this way. This meant that when one de­
viated from the group’s social norms, it was impor­tant to justify this de­
viation to ­others in terms of the shared values of the group (for example, 
I neglected my duties ­because I needed to save a child in trou­ble). In this 
way, modern ­humans internalized not only moral actions but moral jus­
tifications, and so created a reason-­based moral identity within the moral 
community.
Executive Regulation  ​And so modern ­humans self-­regulated their thoughts 
and actions not just based on what they ­imagined other individuals to be 
thinking about them, as did early ­humans, but also based on the normative 
standards of the group. They began self-­regulating their thoughts via 
the group’s publicly accepted norms of rationality, and their actions via 
the group’s publicly accepted norms of morality: they observed not just 
social self-­regulation but normative self-­governance. They asked them­
selves, What ­ought I to think? And what ­ought I to do?
Summary and Implications for Ontogeny
Figure 2.1 pres­ents a schematic summary of the three steps in ­human evo­
lution just explicated. Our ontoge­ne­tic hypothesis is that ­these three sets 
of adaptations—­great ape individual intentionality, early ­human joint in­
tentionality, and modern ­human collective intentionality—­form the mat­
urational bases for ­human psychological development, the latter two ac­
counting for its species-­unique aspects. Our working hypothesis is that the 
skills and motivations of joint intentionality (for example, joint attention 

22	
Background
and dual-­level collaboration) first emerge at around nine months of age. 
Then, ­after additional maturation and experience, the skills and motiva­
tions of collective intentionality (such as an understanding of conventions 
and an impartial sense of fairness) begin to emerge at around three years 
of age. We expect to see something like this developmental sequence in 
each of the ontoge­ne­tic pathways we examine.
­Human Ontogeny
Ontogeny constructs individuals. It does this by constructing a complex 
and interrelated set of ontoge­ne­tic pathways. Indeed, in modern evolu­
tionary developmental biology (Evo-­Devo), the target of natu­ral se­lection 
is not adult “traits,” as in classical accounts, but rather ontoge­ne­tic path­
ways. That is, ­there is natu­ral se­lection not just for adult end points but 
also for the construction pro­cess that brings them into existence (Gould 
1977; West-­Eberhard 2003). Over evolutionary time, an ontoge­ne­tic 
pathway may change in content (for example, the presence or absence of 
some psychological competency), in timing (when the competency first 
emerges and how long it takes to develop), and in plasticity (the degree 
to which the competency is open or closed to environmental influences). 
The result is that dif­fer­ent species, living in dif­fer­ent ecological conditions, 
Sociality
Cognition
Individual Intentionality
- abstract reps.
- simple inferences
Prosociality
- helping
- sharing
Joint Intentionality
- perspectival reps.
- recursive inferences
Second-Personal Morality
- joint commitment
- fairness
Group-Minded Morality
- social norms
- responsibility
Collective Intentionality
- “objective” reps.
- reasonableness
Last Common
Ancestor
Early
Humans
Modern
Humans
Self-Regulation
  social self-regulation
  normative self-governance
  personal self-regulation
Figure 2.1 ​General summary of the evolutionary roots of uniquely ­human cog­
nition and sociality. Abbreviation: reps. = cognitive repre­sen­ta­tions.

	
Evolutionary Foundations	
23
evolve dif­fer­ent patterns of ontoge­ne­tic construction (that is, life history 
strategies).
Most species have at least some so-­called ontoge­ne­tic adaptations—­
every­thing from tadpole fins to ­human infants’ rooting reflex during 
nursing—­that are adaptive only at a par­tic­u­lar developmental period and 
then dis­appear. Deferred adaptations, by contrast, are ­those that are impor­
tant for the success of reproducing adults, with their emergence during 
childhood being a ­simple consequence of the time needed for creating the 
mature form. Crucially, the evolutionary requirement in all cases is that 
the organism as a ­whole must be ­viable at each and ­every ontoge­ne­tic step 
or it ­will not survive to reproduce. An evolutionarily informed approach 
to ontogeny—­a life history approach—­must therefore specify the ecolog­
ical challenges and resulting adaptations for the organism at each devel­
opmental period on its own terms.
A given pathway develops ­under the developmental constraints created 
by many ­others: none can occur before its component parts are ready, and 
none can be too disruptive to the ­others or to the overall pro­cess. On the 
other hand, interactions among developmental pathways—as one or the 
other of them changes—­can be the source of major and unexpected evolu­
tionary novelties. For example, imagine an evolutionary time at which only 
adult ­humans could run bipedally (adapted, say, for chasing game). In ­later 
generations, ­those individuals who by chance began ­running earlier in on­
togeny had vari­ous advantages relative to ­others (for example, in escaping 
predators), resulting in a species-­wide tendency for ­children also to be ca­
pable of ­running. Such changes in timing can have momentous effects on 
phenotypes by creating novel interactions among pathways, with cascading 
effects as ontogeny proceeds. For instance, one can imagine that ­children 
being able to run at younger ages might have the side effect that adults would 
now give them more freedom earlier, which might then affect the nature of 
their interactions with peers. The key point is that ­these side effects on adult 
and peer interactions ­were not a part of the original pro­cess of natu­ral se­
lection for ­children who run; they ­were only “emergent” phenotypic out­
comes, which then became subject, as every­thing ­else, to natu­ral se­lection.
This Evo-­Devo perspective on ontogeny is thus an epige­ne­tic perspec­
tive: focused not on genes but on gene expression as it manifests in ontoge­
ne­tic pro­cesses transacting with environments and with one another to 
create phenotypes. When the focus is on be­hav­ior and psy­chol­ogy, this 

24	
Background
way of looking at ­things is often referred to as developmental systems 
theory (for example, Gottlieb 1997). When the focus is on ­human be­hav­ior 
and psy­chol­ogy in par­tic­u­lar, it is often referred to as evolutionary devel­
opmental psy­chol­ogy (for example, Bjorklund 2015; Barrett 2015). This 
epige­ne­tic approach to ­human psychological development contrasts 
sharply with many so-­called nativist approaches, which invoke evolution 
simply to claim “It’s innate!” and be done with it (what I have previously 
called “simplistic nativism”; Tomasello 1999). A more thoroughgoing evo­
lutionary approach to ­human psychological development ­will describe 
and explain the dynamic pro­cesses that construct par­tic­u­lar ontoge­ne­tic 
pathways.
The ­Human Ontoge­ne­tic Niche
The individuals of all ­great ape species go through relatively protracted 
ontogenies, spending a large portion of their lives in immature form. This 
long period of immaturity is dangerous for the fledgling ­because it de­
pends on ­others for food and protection from predation. Providing all this 
care is also costly and risky for adult caregivers in a variety of ways. The 
large costs and risks of this “extended immaturity” life history pattern—­for 
both offspring and caregivers—­suggest that it must have at least some 
adaptive advantages. Most basically, a long period of immaturity means 
that many cognitive and social competencies, and their associated skills 
of learning, ­will develop gradually as the organism interacts with its en­
vironment. This extra time, as it ­were, gives the individual the opportu­
nity to construct its own flexible and cognitively controlled ways of dealing 
with its own individual adaptive challenges (Bruner 1972).
The ­human version of this extended immaturity life history pattern has 
some special characteristics adapted to ­humans’ ultra-­cooperative lifeways. 
Most importantly, ­human ontogeny unfolds within a highly cooperative 
social group (a culture), whose members collaborate and help one another 
in myriad ways, including in raising the young. In this cooperative ontoge­
ne­tic niche, ­children depend on many more adults in many more ways 
and for a much longer period of time than do other apes.
The most basic way is in obtaining food. ­Great ape ­mothers wean their 
youngsters at around four to five years of age, and from then on they are 
on their own in obtaining food. ­Great ape ­mothers allow their offspring 
to scavenge the detritus of their feeding be­hav­ior—­the peels, husks, and 
shells—­but they do not actively provision them (see Ueno and Matsuzawa 

	
Evolutionary Foundations	
25
2004, for an experimental demonstration). In sharp contrast, ­after ­human 
­children wean at around three years of age, they are provisioned with food 
by ­mothers and other adults ­until well into adolescence. In a study of 
hunter-­gatherers, Hill et al. (2009) found that ­children typically do not pro­
vide their own food at a level sufficient for survival ­until mid-­adolescence. 
This same pattern would seem to hold, perhaps even more strongly, for 
the ­children in modern industrialized socie­ties.
In a similar fashion, ­great ape youngsters are pretty much on their own 
for gathering information about the world around them. They may learn 
­things from ­others, but adults do not actively provision them with needed 
information via teaching or instruction (Thornton and Raihani 2008). 
Once again in sharp contrast, ­human ­children gain much information 
from intentional adult instruction, and this is true in socie­ties of all types, 
including in hunter-­gatherer groups where adults instruct ­children in less 
verbal ways (Kruger and Tomasello 1986; Hewlett and Roulette 2016). 
­Indeed, for ­human ­children to acquire the local cultural skills on which 
their survival depends—­and to develop normally in all kinds of other ways 
cognitively and socially—­adult instruction is absolutely essential.
All this cooperative provisioning of food and information is done not 
just by ­mothers but by a plethora of other adults. For all four nonhuman 
ape species, basically 100 ­percent of the care of offspring is provided by 
the ­mother, and youngsters stay in close proximity to their ­mothers for 
some time, typically in bodily contact. In sharp contrast, ­human adults 
form pair bonds, so ­children are raised in nuclear families with childcare 
also provided by other relatives and friends. The outcome is that in ­human 
socie­ties of all kinds, from hunter-­gatherer groups to modern industrial­
ized nations, ­after early infancy only about 50 ­percent of the care of off­
spring is provided by ­mothers, with the other half provided by ­fathers, 
grand­mothers, and friends (Hrdy 2006). This pattern of so-­called coop­
erative breeding enables ­mothers to forage and engage in a variety of 
other tasks without distraction, and so to have offspring at more closely 
spaced intervals than other apes. Another impor­tant outcome of this pat­
tern of cooperative childcare—­which ­will figure prominently in our ac­
count of infancy—is that securing care and attention from an array of dif­
fer­ent adults pres­ents unique cognitive and social challenges for the 
infants themselves, perhaps contributing to the development of some of 
their precocious social and cognitive abilities (Hrdy 2016; Hawkes 
2014).

26	
Background
The main point is that this especially cooperative ontoge­ne­tic niche 
makes pos­si­ble an especially protracted ontogeny. Adults provisioning 
youngsters with food and information ­frees them from the costs and risks 
of sustaining themselves energetically and informationally so that they 
may take their time developing their cognitive and social skills. The most 
concrete way to see the overall pattern is to look at brain growth over age 
in ­humans and chimpanzees. The adult ­human brain is roughly three 
times larger than that of other apes. But even if this enormous size 
­difference at maturity ­were neutralized, the relative rates at which 
chimpanzee and ­human brains reach their respective adult sizes are very 
dif­fer­ent. As can be seen in Figure 2.2, already at birth the brains of chim­
panzees are about half of their adult size; they reach 90 ­percent of their 
adult size by two years of age. In stark contrast, the brains of ­humans are 
only 20 ­percent of their adult size at birth and do not reach 90 ­percent of 
their adult size ­until eight years of age.
The fact that the ­human brain is three times larger than that of chim­
panzees suggests more complex cognitive functioning in adulthood, and 
its much slower rate of development suggests that ­human ­children need 
more time to learn and develop their skills in their especially complex 
cultural environments. Thus, despite some variability in par­tic­u­lar devel­
opmental pathways, a common pattern for ­humans is the early emer­
gence of basic skills followed by a long period of development to get to 
0
25
50
75
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Figure  2.2 ​Percentage of adult brain size as a function of age (in years) in 
­humans and chimpanzees (based on data from Coqueugniot et al. 2004).

	
Evolutionary Foundations	
27
the final, highly complex adult end point—as we ­shall soon see in much 
detail.
­Human Psychological Life History
It is widely accepted among virtually all students of ­human evolution that 
this pattern of a relatively slow ontogeny, including slow brain growth, is 
at least partly an adaptation to ­humans’ cultural way of life, in which de­
veloping ­children have much to learn and many skills to develop before 
they can become competent members of their cultural group. And ­these 
competencies are not just cultural fads and fashions; early ­human indi­
viduals could not have survived for long on their own without mastering 
a variety of culturally transmitted subsistence practices and social con­
ventions, including the appropriate use of basic artifacts and symbols. This 
might lead us to expect that ­human ­children should have early emerging 
skills for becoming competent members of a cultural group.
Evidence for this proposal is provided by Herrmann et al. (2007). They 
administered a comprehensive battery of cognitive tests to large numbers 
of chimpanzees (n = 106), orangutans (n = 32), and two-­and-­a-­half-­year-­old 
­human ­children (n = 105). The test battery consisted of sixteen dif­fer­ent 
nonverbal tasks assessing all kinds of cognitive abilities involving both 
physical and social prob­lems relevant to primates in their natu­ral environ­
ments. The tests relating to the physical world consisted of prob­lems 
concerning space, quantities, and tools and causality. The tests relating to 
the social world consisted of prob­lems requiring the subjects to imitate 
another’s solution to a prob­lem, communicate nonverbally with ­others, 
and read the intentions of ­others from their be­hav­ior. If the difference be­
tween ­human and ape cognition is a difference in something like “gen­
eral intelligence,” then the ­children should have differed from the apes uni­
formly across all the dif­fer­ent tasks. But this was not the case. The finding 
was that the ­children and apes had similar cognitive skills for dealing with 
the physical world; however, the ­children—­old enough to use some lan­
guage but still years away from reading, counting, or ­going to school—­
already had more sophisticated cognitive skills than ­either ape species for 
dealing with the social world (see Figure 2.3).
When the correlational structure of individual differences in ­these cog­
nitive tasks is examined, neither the ­children nor the chimpanzees re­
vealed a ­factor of general intelligence (Herrmann et al. 2010). What both 
species had was a similar ­factor centered on spatial cognition (likely to be 

28	
Background
mammalian-­wide). The main difference between species was that for the 
chimpanzees ­there was only one additional ­factor comprising vari­ous 
physical and social-­cognitive tasks, whereas the ­children showed distinct, 
separate ­factors for physical cognition and social cognition. This species-­
unique social ­factor—in combination with ­children’s greater social-­
cognitive skills on this test battery—­suggests that early in ontogeny 
­humans already employ unique adaptations for social cognition, which 
enable them to master, in a way that other apes cannot, the cultural skills 
of communication, cooperation, and social learning. What Herrmann 
et al. called the cultural intelligence hypothesis is that ­these unique, early 
developing social-­cognitive skills empower ­human ­children to culturally 
learn from ­others in ways that “bootstrap” their understanding of the 
physical world through language, instruction, and other cultural and 
­educational interactions so that as adults they ­will have especially sophis­
ticated cognitive skills across the board.
A key point for current purposes is that ­humans’ specialized social-­
cognitive skills are not ­things added onto the end of ontogeny in adulthood, 
but rather they emerge relatively early—­sometime before two-­and-­a-­half 
years of age, at the least. So all other aspects of ­human cognitive and social 
development are built on this unique foundation, leading to unique 
outcomes. A dramatic demonstration of this proposal comes from the 
most comprehensive study to date of ­great ape cognitive ontogeny. Wobber 
Physical domain
Human
Human
Chimpanzee
Orangutan
Chimpanzee
Orangutan
A
Proportion of correct responses
1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
0.20
0.00
Social domain
B
Proportion of correct responses
1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
0.20
0.00
Figure 2.3 ​Results of tests of cognitive abilities in ­human ­children, chimpan­
zees, and orangutans illustrating their differing rates of development (overall 
results from Herrmann et al. 2007).

	
Evolutionary Foundations	
29
et al. (2013) administered the same basic test battery as Herrmann et al. 
(2007) to completely new groups of ­human ­children (n = 48), chimpanzees, 
and bonobos at two, three, and four years of age (some data ­were collected 
longitudinally, and some ­were collected cross-­sectionally). Figure 2.4 
shows the overall pattern of results (combining the two species of non­
human ­great ape into Pan; n = 44).
Social cognition
Human
Pan infants
Proportion correct, social cognition
2 years
3 years
4 years
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
A
Physical  cognition
Proportion correct, physical cognition
2 years
3 years
4 years
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
B
Figure  2.4 ​Social (A) and physical (B) cognitive development of ­human 
­children compared with chimpanzees and bonobos (Pan group) at two, three, 
and four years of age (overall results from Wobber et al. 2013). Asterisks indi­
cate a statistically significant species difference.

30	
Background
The first ­thing to note is that the results at age two-­and-­a-­half replicate—­
with new samples of comparably aged apes and ­children—­the most 
basic finding of Herrmann et al.: ­children and the two species of Pan are 
indistinguishable in their skills with space, quantities, and causality (phys­
ical cognition), but the ­children are already advanced in their skills with 
imitation, communication, and intention reading (social cognition). The 
pattern ­after that earliest age provides strong support for the cultural in­
telligence hypothesis. In the period from two to three years of age, 
­children’s skills of social cognition continue to increase in a dramatic 
fashion whereas ­those of apes do not develop further at all. ­Children’s 
social-­cognitive skills go from being roughly 65 ­percent higher than ­those 
of Pan at age 2 to being 130 ­percent higher at age three, to being more 
than 200 ­percent higher at age four (Figure 2.4A). Consistent with the idea 
that ­these rapidly developing social skills are leading the way to ­human 
adults’ overall more sophisticated cognitive skills, in the physical domain 
­children go from being indistinguishable from apes at age two to having 
significantly better skills at ages three and four (by approximately 
25 ­percent and 60 ­percent, respectively; Figure 2.4B). Interestingly, this pat­
tern of behavioral findings parallels rather closely the patterns of brain 
growth depicted in Figure 2.2: chimpanzees’ skills in both social and phys­
ical cognition are basically mature already at two years of age (by which 
point their brains are 90 ­percent of adult size), whereas young ­children’s 
skills in ­these domains increase significantly from ages two to four as their 
brains go from roughly 50 ­percent to 75 ­percent of adult size.
Young ­children’s remarkable skills in social cognition, as compared with 
­those of other apes, are almost certainly adaptations for life in a coopera­
tive cultural group—­a life in which individuals must coordinate, commu­
nicate, and learn from one another in myriad ways. But one might ask, 
Why do ­these special skills emerge so early in ontogeny, even before 
weaning? In the context of her theory of ­human cooperative breeding and 
childcare, Hrdy (2009, 2016) proposed that ­human infants’ remarkable 
skills of communication, social cognition, and social learning—­shared 
­intentionality—­are ontoge­ne­tic adaptations for the infancy period itself, 
in the context of a childcare regime in which ­mothers have more babies at 
more closely spaced intervals, and infants have multiple caregivers. Far 
more than other primates, ­human infants must compete with siblings and 
other ­children for the attention and care of not only their ­mother but also 
less familiar caregivers. In such a context, infant strategies to promote 

	
Evolutionary Foundations	
31
mother–­infant attachment as characteristic of all primates (for example, 
crying when in need) are no longer sufficient. Instead, according to Hawkes 
(2014), in this context the infants who do best are ­those who can discern the 
thoughts and moods of caregivers and solicit help and care from them via 
vari­ous kinds of interaction and communication. Tomasello and Gonzalez-
Cabrera (2017) offer a modified version of this hypothesis, emphasizing that 
such ­things as infants’ emotion sharing, attention sharing (aka joint atten­
tion), and attitude sharing in cooperative communication with adults all 
tend to align the psychological states of infant and adult; many studies in 
social psy­chol­ogy show that aligning psychological states—­and even be­
hav­ior in imitation—­promotes social bonding (for example, Wolf et al. 
2016). Social bonding via the sharing of emotions, attention, actions, and 
attitudes is an evolutionarily novel phenomenon: individuals feel closer to 
­others as they share experiences with them. This is foundational to virtu­
ally all forms of uniquely ­human cooperation and shared intentionality.
­After infancy, early childhood (from three to six years of age) inaugu­
rates what has been called “the two social worlds of childhood.” The first 
world is that of adults, especially with regard to issues of cultural trans­
mission. Thus, although adults in some cultures attempt to teach ­children 
from early in ontogeny, it is not ­until around three years of age that 
­children begin to understand adult pedagogy as, essentially, the “objec­
tive” voice of the culture informing them of how “we” do ­things (see 
Chapter 5). The second world is that of peers, especially with regard to 
issues of social and cultural coordination. Again, young ­children ­will in­
teract with peers from well before three years of age, but infants’ and tod­
dlers’ interactions with peers are so thin they are often described as “par­
allel play” (and their conversations are mostly talking at, not with, one 
another; see Chapter 4). But ­after age three, young ­children begin to in­
teract with peers in ways that evidence a growing competence at social 
and ­mental coordination, including an understanding of the culture’s con­
ventions and norms, and a growing re­spect for peers as coequal collab­
orative and communicative partners. The slow pace of ­human ontogeny 
gives young ­children sufficient time to master both ­these social worlds.
The developmental capstone of the current account is ­children at six 
or seven years of age. As noted above, across all of the world’s cultures, 
­children of this age are seen as having reached a new level of functioning 
that enables them for the first time to perform ­simple but impor­tant cul­
tural tasks in­de­pen­dently and reliably (Rogoff et al. 1975). To an impor­tant 

32	
Background
extent, adults begin to see ­children of six or seven years as mostly reason­
able: thinking and acting in ways that they are capable of justifying to 
­others in the culture based on reasons and values we all share. And they 
have become, from a social point of view, mostly responsible: recognizing 
that ­others in the culture depend on them to act in accordance with ­these 
shared reasons and values—­and ­doing so. ­Children of this age have thus 
become, at least to some degree, beings who can normatively self-­regulate 
by asking themselves, What ­ought I to think? And what ­ought I to do? 
They are now ready to begin mastering in earnest the many adult-­like 
skills, practices, and knowledge necessary to become fully fledged mem­
bers of their cultural group.
Explanation in Developmental Psy­chol­ogy
Our overall goal is to provide a scientific explanation for the main ontoge­
ne­tic pathways constituting uniquely ­human psy­chol­ogy. This goal 
places us squarely in the field of developmental psy­chol­ogy. Explanation 
in developmental psy­chol­ogy classically comprises two steps: (1) an age-­
anchored description of some developmental pathway and (2) identifica­
tion of the ­factors that affect that pathway’s trajectory at vari­ous steps 
along the way, especially in terms of the pro­cesses of maturation, experi­
ence, and executive self-­regulation.
Description does not mean naïve observation. Much of the research 
in developmental psy­chol­ogy consists of experiments designed to reveal 
what ­children are ­really ­doing when their naturally occurring be­hav­ior 
could be interpreted in multiple ways. When they use a word do they un­
derstand it as a social convention used only by in-­group members? When 
they divide ­things equally between ­people are they ­doing so with a sense 
of fairness? Describing a developmental pathway means establishing its 
nature, including its under­lying cognitive and socioemotional pro­cesses, 
at each of its steps.
Identifying the ­factors that affect a developmental pathway calls on cor­
relational research, cross-­cultural research, research with special popula­
tions, and experiments. In our analyses ­here, we begin with the develop­
mental pathways already in motion, as it ­were: we start with the ontogeny 
of ­great ape psy­chol­ogy, which has its own trajectory. For current pur­
poses, that existing ­great ape trajectory is a given, which we do not at­

	
Evolutionary Foundations	
33
tempt to explain. What we attempt to explain is how ­humans have devi­
ated from that relatively ancient trajectory.
Maturation and Experience
­There is no doubt that maturation—as the direct expression of ­human 
evolution by means of natu­ral se­lection—­plays a key role in structuring 
­human ontogeny, including its unique aspects. However, in complex 
­human competencies, maturation never supplies anything like a finished 
product, as it can do (to a first approximation) in very basic behavioral 
skills such as breathing and swallowing. In all of the cases that concern 
us ­here, then, what matures is a capacity, a readiness to go forward ­under 
certain conditions. Actually ­going forward requires exercising that capacity 
and experiencing the results.
Given that the ontogeny of complex ­human competencies is almost 
never due to maturation alone, we ­will speak ­here of the “maturational 
component” of a developmental pathway—­that is, ­those aspects of 
a pathway that have been naturally selected at the level of the species as a 
­whole (typically with some plasticity). Importantly, even the aspects of a 
pathway that are invariant across individuals may still involve much 
learning if the opportunities for such learning are invariantly available to 
all individuals. A good example, on the level of sensory-­motor develop­
ment, is walking. The ­human body has evolved in myriad unique ways 
for walking bipedally, from the structure of the skeleton, to the structure 
of the limb muscles, to specialized feet, to specialized mechanisms of bal­
ance, and on and on. And all typically developing ­children in all cultures 
begin walking within a quite predictable developmental period between 
about nine and eigh­teen months of age. Clearly, the developmental course 
of walking has a large maturational component. But at the same time, 
­children learn to walk, and they do so with the support of such generic 
­things as gravity that are invariantly available in all normal ­human envi­
ronments. Biological adaptations arise in response to environmental chal­
lenges, and the developing organism’s ­actual interactions with ­those 
environmental challenges are often a crucial part of their ontogeny.
The nature of ­children’s experience depends on their cognitive and so­
cial abilities at a par­tic­u­lar developmental level. A ­great ape, no ­matter its 
developmental level or experiences, cannot learn about scoring a goal in 
soccer ­because it does not have the capacity to understand the rules that 
constitute the game. It has no ability to understand culturally constituted 

34	
Background
realities that depend on conventional agreements. ­Children can only 
­understand scoring a goal in soccer (beyond the spatial event of a ball 
entering a net) when they have the skills for understanding rule games, 
which depend on cognitive skills of collective intentionality that only de­
velop ­after age three. One may attempt to teach a two-­year-­old the 
rules of soccer and what constitutes a goal, but they ­will not learn 
­because they are not maturationally ready to have the requisite experi­
ences. On the other hand, two-­year-­olds can learn many ­things from 
their joint attentional and collaborative interactions with ­others—in 
ways that ­great apes cannot—­because they have capacities for engaging 
with ­others in ­those ways. We thus advocate a “transactional” causality: 
maturational capacities create the possibility of new kinds of experiences 
and learning, and then ­those learning experiences are the proximate 
­causes of development.
In contrast to such maturationally structured learning, ­there are, of 
course, many ­human skills and much ­human knowledge for which the 
individual cannot be biologically prepared in any direct way ­because they 
vary across ­human socie­ties—­such ­things as riding a bicycle, making a 
bow and arrow, or reading a book. Learning such culturally specific skills 
depends on a social environment full of other individuals who engage in 
and even teach the par­tic­u­lar cultural practice. We could thus call this 
­culturally structured experience. Of course, it also depends on evolved 
skills of cultural learning that are universal in the species. Indeed, our 
focus ­here is not on culturally specific skills but rather on the ontogeny 
of ­children’s general skills and motivations of shared intentionality, in­
cluding cultural learning, that make the acquisition of culturally specific 
skills pos­si­ble at all.
Following Vygotsky (1930 / 1978), our basic distinction ­will be between 
skills that develop “naturally” through maturationally structured indi­
vidual learning, and ­those that develop “culturally” via imitative learning 
from ­others in the culture or via adult instruction. It is also pos­si­ble for 
­children to develop new skills in a pro­cess of social co-­construction, in 
which, for example, they learn to view a situation from multiple perspec­
tives si­mul­ta­neously by assimilating the differing perspectives of peer part­
ners. The result is a typology of four types of learning and experience 
that play key roles—at dif­fer­ent ages in diverse domains—in ­human cog­
nitive and social ontogeny: (1) individual learning, (2) observational learning 

	
Evolutionary Foundations	
35
(imitation and so forth), (3) pedagogical or instructed learning, and (4) social 
co-­construction (prototypically in peer collaboration).
Who young ­children are learning from often ­matters as well. Infants 
and toddlers before the traditional weaning age (up to three years old) have 
their most meaningful social interactions and experiences with adults. 
Adults not only nurture and protect them, but they also engage with them 
in uniquely ­human forms of social interaction such as joint attention, co­
operative communication, and social imitation. This suggests the possi­
bility, as noted previously, that ­human infants’ early emerging skills of 
joint intentionality evolved to elicit care and attention from parents and 
other adults by forming meaningful social relationships with them. In con­
trast, infants and toddlers do not have an abundance of meaningful so­
cial interactions with peers. Of course, they sometimes interact with other 
infants and toddlers, but their respective actions are often described as 
“parallel”; they almost never engage with one another in uniquely ­human 
forms of social interaction such as joint attention, cooperative commu­
nication, and social imitation.
Also as noted previously, beginning at around three years of age, young 
­children enter into what has been called the two social worlds of child­
hood: adults versus peers. On the one hand, ­children of this age interact 
with knowledgeable and authoritative adults, who typically tell them what 
to do and teach them ­things, and they typically conform and learn ­because 
adults are respected authorities. On the other hand, ­children of this age in­
teract with peers, who are no more knowledgeable or power­ful than they 
are, which engenders perspective-­taking, dialogic thinking, and reciprocity. 
Of course, ­there are exceptions to this pattern, when young ­children en­
gage coordinatively with adults in some situations—­perhaps especially in 
Western, middle-­class cultures where it is normal for adults to play with 
their ­children as if they ­were peers. Also young ­children sometimes are in­
structed in ­things by more expert peers. But still ­there is a huge difference 
in the nature and the effects of ­these two dif­fer­ent types of social interac­
tion, rooted in the ­simple fact that adults are adults, and peers are peers.
Our causal model is thus, to repeat, “transactional.” Maturational 
capacities are inert ­until they are used in transactions with an environ­
ment. It is what ­children experience and learn during ­these maturationally 
structured transactions—­and, in many cases, how they learn and who 
they learn from—­that actually propels ­human ontogeny forward.

36	
Background
Executive Regulation
Although dif­fer­ent in kind from maturation and experience, the third 
causal ­factor in ­human psychological development is ­children’s budding 
abilities of executive self-­regulation. In many modern theories, what we are 
calling executive self-­regulation—­including every­thing from executive 
function to emotion regulation—is often considered as a separate com­
petency or skill, and in many cases that is appropriate. Thus, ­there is a 
­great deal of research showing how young ­children self-­regulate their own 
actions and cognition through inhibition, attention switching, risk-­
conscious decision making, effortful control, and delay of gratification 
(for reviews, see Carlson et al. 2013, on executive function; and Eisenberg 
et al. 2006, on emotion regulation).
But a number of classic theorists have also invoked executive self-­
regulation (in one form or another) in a much broader context, as a 
causal ­factor in ­human ontogeny separate from both maturation and 
learning. For example, Piaget (1977) explained many of ­humans’ devel­
opmental achievements by what he termed equilibration, a set of self-­
regulatory pro­cesses that he thought applied widely in the biological 
world. Most importantly, equilibration regulated ­human ­children ­toward 
coherence and consistency in their cognitive functioning, often precipi­
tating cognitive development without any direct external stimulus. For ex­
ample, if a child was initially confused by hearing the same creature 
called a dog and an animal, further experiences might then induce the 
­understanding of the hierarchical relation between ­these two words. But 
then if the child heard other such pairs, the result might be a reor­ga­ni­za­
tion in her linguistic concepts across the board, that is, a hierarchical organ­
ization across all words. In such cases neither maturation nor experience 
can provide a complete explanation—­although both are involved—­but 
rather, we must invoke a pro­cess of cognitive reor­ga­ni­za­tion that goes be­
yond ­either of ­these. Cognitive reorganizations of this type presumably 
require an executive level at which the specific items or components from 
the perception-­action-­cognition level are assembled and coordinated. 
Karmiloff-­Smith (1992) articulated a very detailed account of such pro­
cesses, what she called repre­sen­ta­tional redescription, referring again to 
­children’s attempts to find coherence and consistency in understanding 
how ­things work by redescribing them on ever more abstract executive 
levels.

	
Evolutionary Foundations	
37
We are concerned ­here with two basic types of uniquely ­human ex­
ecutive self-­regulation. The first is executive self-­regulation when the con­
tent is uniquely ­human forms of cognition or sociality, what we may call 
the individual self-­regulation of  unique content. For example, when ­children 
are confronted with conflicting perspectives on the “same” ­thing—­a 
prob­lem not faced by other primates ­because they do not understand such 
dif­fer­ent perspectives—­the solution to this disequilibrium is a reconcep­
tualization that coordinates ­these perspectives. So, for example, the solu­
tion to the apparent prob­lem that the same creature is called dog and an­
imal is the construction of a hierarchical relationship between the two. 
Another example would be when the child ­faces conflicting desires or 
values, such as in a situation in which the considerations of sympathy for 
a friend and selfishness pull in dif­fer­ent directions. In this case, a pos­si­ble 
resolution is constructing some notion of fairness to all concerned. Im­
portantly, in all such cases we ­will talk not about learning but about con­
struction, ­because development occurs as already existing psychological 
ele­ments are reor­ga­nized.
The second type of uniquely ­human executive regulation is what we 
may call social self-­regulation. In this case, the individual appropriates the 
perspectives or values of ­others to use as a standard in the self-­regulatory 
pro­cess. ­Here it is not just the content being regulated that is social, but 
the executive pro­cess itself that is social. Social self-­regulation takes sev­
eral dif­fer­ent forms. For the moment, we can point to a few examples that 
illustrate the basics. First, when young ­children are faced with the pros­
pect of ­doing something ­either cooperative or uncooperative, they behave 
differently if they are being watched by a peer—­for example, they share 
more and steal less—­whereas chimpanzees do not care (Engelmann et al. 
2012, 2016a). Presumably, ­children are imagining or simulating the value 
judgment that the peer ­will make and executively self-­regulating their be­
hav­ior accordingly (so-­called impression management). Second, some­
times young ­children executively self-­regulate their communicative acts 
by carefully choosing a formulation that facilitates listener comprehen­
sion. Presumably in this case they are imagining or simulating the listener 
attempting to comprehend their communicative act, and they are ad­
justing their formulation accordingly (see Tomasello 2008, for a review). 
Third, the prototypical Vygotskian example is that of an adult verbally in­
structing or guiding the child in solving a prob­lem. Eventually the child 

38	
Background
internalizes this instruction to voluntarily direct her own attention and 
action strategically (for example, Vygotsky 1930; Winsler 2009).
The general pro­cess is thus that the young child imagines how some 
social interactant is comprehending or evaluating her, and then she uses 
this to socially self-­regulate. Scaling up the sociality involved, ­children from 
about three years of age (but, ­needless to say, not apes) socially self-­regulate 
on the basis of cultural structures—­such as, prototypically, conventional 
and moral norms—­that are based in cognitive pro­cesses of collective in­
tentionality, what we may call normative self-­governance. This pro­cess op­
erates in much the same way as social self-­regulation in a dyadic context, 
but the social other in this case is more generalized and authoritative. 
Thus, from sometime during the late preschool period, young ­children 
self-­regulate both their thinking and actions not just by how efficacious 
they ­will be in the current context (as do apes), and not just by how they 
­will affect a par­tic­u­lar person’s thoughts or evaluations (as do younger 
­children), but also by the perspective of how ­these ­will fit with the nor­
mative expectations of the social group. This pro­cess essentially consti­
tutes the construction of a normative point of view as a self-­regulating 
mechanism, arguably the capstone of the ontogeny of uniquely ­human 
cognition (normative rationality) and sociality (normative morality). And, 
again, engaging in social self-­regulation or normative self-­governance can 
lead to developmental change without any additional inputs from ­either 
maturation or learning.
All ­these kinds of executive self-­regulation—­individual self-­regulation 
(of uniquely ­human pro­cesses), social self-­regulation, and normative self-­
governance—­play impor­tant roles in leading ­children to reconfigure 
­things in ways that resolve conflicts between perspectives or values. By 
internalizing social experiences structured by shared intentionality and 
using them to executively self-­regulate their own thoughts and actions, 
young ­children, by the time they are six years of age, ­will have taken a 
first big step on the road to becoming normatively reasonable and respon­
sible members of their cultural group.
Methods
We ­will be attempting in what follows to describe and explain develop­
mental pathways. Obviously, before charting a developmental pathway 
one must decide what constitutes that pathway. This can be done in dif­
fer­ent ways depending on one’s purposes, including the degree of detail 

	
Evolutionary Foundations	
39
needed. In general, a developmental pathway may be defined or charac­
terized by the end point one wishes to explain. If one wishes to explain 
walking, then the pathway includes all of the relevant skills and compe­
tencies leading to that end point. However, if one wishes to explain 
­running, then walking is only one step along the way. In most cases, a de­
velopmental pathway, as defined by a par­tic­u­lar end point, ­will comprise 
a number of other, perhaps smaller pathways with their own develop­
mental histories.
In deciding how to describe and explain a developmental pathway we 
must make some methodological choices. Most basically, an evolutionary 
perspective on ­human ontogeny leads to a focus on action as the primary 
level of analy­sis. Natu­ral se­lection can operate directly only on the way 
organisms interact with the environment overtly. The ability to perceive 
something, or feel something, or think something can only be “seen” by 
natu­ral se­lection if it influences the way the organism acts, in which case 
­these internal pro­cesses become, indirectly, targets of natu­ral se­lection. 
This is not to say that the under­lying psychological pro­cesses are somehow 
unimportant or problematic; to the contrary, they structure every­thing. 
But in an ontoge­ne­tic analy­sis, we must view perceptual, cognitive, and 
emotional pro­cesses in their context as components in a developing 
pathway whose evolutionary telos is adaptive action.
To identify the under­lying psychological pro­cesses involved, experi­
mental methods are needed. In the con­temporary field of developmental 
psy­chol­ogy, ­there are three main sets of methods (leaving aside the neu­
roscientific methods, as they are mainly correlational and concerned with 
a dif­fer­ent level of analy­sis). The first is vari­ous kinds of looking mea­sures, 
which are used most prominently in studies with infants, whose skills of 
adaptive action are limited. Studies using ­these methods have uncovered 
a host of surprising competencies in infants, which have transformed the 
way that developmentalists view the earliest phases of ­human ontogeny. 
But in most cases the competencies revealed are perceptual competencies 
and represent only a first step ­toward a fully developed system of adap­
tive action. The second set of methods, at the other end of the continuum, 
involve language-­based interviews, used mostly with ­children from about 
four to five years of age, as younger ­children are notoriously poor at ex­
pressing their knowledge and competencies in language. Third, in con­
trast to both of ­those approaches, our focus ­here is on methods that target 
­children’s skills of decision making and adaptive action: how ­children 

40	
Background
interact with and adapt to vari­ous behavioral contingencies and prob­
lems. This focus is appropriate ­because most of the developing pathways 
with which we are concerned unfold during the period of one to five 
years of age, when ­children have some significant behavioral compe­
tencies but ­little ability to reflect on them linguistically. For each of the 
developmental pathways whose course we chart, we ­will look briefly at 
any perceptual or motivational competencies that emerge early in the 
pathway and serve as precursors, but we ­will not consider our job com­
plete ­until we have charted the way the child uses ­these competencies in 
facing behavioral challenges.
In the next two parts of the book, we describe and explain how 
­human ­children become reason-­based rational and moral creatures over 
ontoge­ne­tic time in par­tic­u­lar domains. In Part II the four chapters 
focus on uniquely ­human cognition, and in Part III the four chapters 
focus on uniquely ­human sociality. The basic procedure for each of the 
chapters is as follows.
	
•	We begin by recounting what is known about ­great apes in 
this domain, and in par­tic­u­lar anything known about ­great 
ape ontogeny.
	
•	We then describe and explain the species-­typical ontoge­ne­tic 
pathway for ­humans (based mainly on behavioral experi­
ments). In most cases this comprises two interrelated and 
ordered pathways reflecting, in turn, the capacities of joint 
intentionality (evolved for early ­human collaborative for­
aging) and collective intentionality (evolved for modern 
­human cultural life). For example, the pathway for uniquely 
­human cultural learning has a first phase of imitative learning 
followed by a second phase of instructed (pedagogical) 
learning. The explanation is in terms of what we know about 
the key ­factors affecting the course of the pathway, as estab­
lished by developmental studies of biological syndromes 
(especially autism), individual differences, and cultural 
differences.
	
•	Fi­nally, we spell out how developments in this domain con­
tribute to the overall structure and ontogeny of ­children’s 
reason-­based rationality and morality.

	
Evolutionary Foundations	
41
To help us to describe a par­tic­u­lar developmental pathway and to iden­
tify the ­factors that affect its course, we ­will use what we may call devel­
opmental diagrams. The function of ­these diagrams is to graphically de­
pict a par­tic­u­lar developmental pathway across age, including the most 
impor­tant component pro­cesses and causal ­factors involved. As a playful 
example (intended only as an illustration of the method), in Figure 2.5 
we depict the ontoge­ne­tic pathway for learning to dance the tango.
Such developmental diagrams comprise four essential components. 
First, our starting point is ­great ape ontogeny (in the tube occupied by an 
infant and juvenile chimpanzee at ­either end). The key competencies ­here 
are knuckle-­walking, which emerges in apes at one year, and active par­
ticipation in group travel, which emerges between two and three years. 
Second, the focus of our explanatory attention is the ­middle row of rect­
angular boxes, flanked by an infant and young child at ­either end. ­These 
depict a path from crawling to walking to taking a walk together to tango 
dancing, at the ages indicated. Third, in the top lines above the ­great ape 
tube are uniquely ­human maturational capacities of (1) joint intention­
ality (­here: the cognitive capacity for forming a joint goal) and (2) collec­
tive intentionality (­here: the executive capacity to normatively self-­regulate 
or, in this case, to “follow the rules”) that mature at, respectively, about 
nine months and three years. (Included in this example only are also 
uniquely ­human capacities for bipedality.) Fourth, the shading around each 
box depicts something of the nature of the experiences needed for the 
individual to bring together ­these dif­fer­ent sources into the designated 
2 year
3 years
0
5 years
4 years
1 year
bipedal skeleton,
muscles, balance, etc.
Joint
Collective
Cog: joint goal
S-R: normative
Instructed Learning
CRAWLING
WALKING
TAKING A
WALK
TOGETHER
TANGO
DANCING
knuckle-walking
group travel
Figure 2.5 ​Illustration of a developmental diagram: the ontoge­ne­tic pathway 
for learning to dance the tango. Abbreviations: Cog = cognitive capacity; 
S-R = executive self-­regulation.

42	
Background
developmental outcome, with darker shading indicating that more of 
par­tic­u­lar kinds of experience are needed. In addition, the skills listed 
below the boxes indicate experiential inputs from other skills with their 
own complex developmental histories—in this case, the ability to learn 
from instruction. So, in this example, walking requires experience of a very 
generic kind, whereas tango dancing requires specific instruction. (In 
each of the par­tic­u­lar accounts that follow, the relevant experiences ­will 
be specified more precisely, of course.)
The animating image is thus ­great ape ontogeny moving forward; then, 
as uniquely ­human capacities of shared intentionality mature, they en­
able new forms of sociocultural experience, which transform ­great ape 
psy­chol­ogy into ­human psy­chol­ogy over developmental time. In general, 
my explanation for the developmental emergence of the ability labeled 
by a par­tic­u­lar box in a par­tic­u­lar diagram always includes (1) ­great ape 
ontogeny (in the tube) as the foundation; (2) preceding abilities (to the 
left), with an arrow to the box as precursors; (3) maturational capacities 
(above the tube), with arrows to the box as enabling ­causes (including ex­
ecutive regulation); and (4) relevant experiences (shading around the 
box) as proximate ­causes. Thus, “taking a walk together” emerges from 
individual walking and ape group travel, as the capacity for forming a joint 
goal with a partner matures and enables new kinds of coordinative social 
experiences with ­others. We ­will be using such developmental diagrams 
as a way of summarizing both the trajectory of the developmental 
pathway and the ­factors that affect it for each of the pathways in each of 
the eight chapters that follow.

II
The Ontogeny of 
Uniquely ­Human Cognition
h
In the pro­cess of development the child not only masters 
the items of cultural experience but the habits and forms 
of cultural be­hav­ior, the cultural methods of reasoning.
Lev Vygotsky
“The Prob­lem of the Cultural Development of the Child” (1929)
­Human cognition is unique in multifarious ways. But at the root of all of 
­these, we would argue, are the ontoge­ne­tic pro­cesses by which young 
­children come to put their heads together with ­others in acts of shared 
intentionality. Although ­great apes’ “core knowledge” of the spatial-­
temporal-­causal-­quantitative structure of the physical world and their 
basic understanding of agency and social interaction are foundational for 
uniquely ­human cognition, they are not sufficient. We need, in addition, 
cognitive pro­cesses evolved for social and ­mental coordination with 
­social partners.
The issue is not just “mind-­reading”—­apes turn out to be pretty good 
at that. But they do it mostly in competition. Social and ­mental coordina­
tion with ­others for purposes of cooperation is something dif­fer­ent. In 
mind-­reading aimed at competition, I do not want you to know what I am 
thinking. In ­mental coordination aimed at cooperation, I do. Many of 
­humans’ everyday acts are thus designed to actually help ­others read 
their minds. And so an ele­ment of recursion enters the picture as I intend 
that you know what I think.

44	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
Adaptations for ­mental coordination with ­others restructure ­human 
cognition in a variety of ways over developmental time. First, from around 
nine months of age, infants engage with ­others in acts of joint attention, 
which creates the possibility of conceptualizing entities and situations 
simultaneously from differing perspectives; then, ­later, they can even view 
­things from an “objective” perspective. From early on as well, infants com­
municate with ­others referentially, inviting them to jointly attend to some­
thing, and this requires recursive inferences about ­mental states embedded 
in ­mental states; ­later they communicate with shared linguistic conven­
tions. Again, from early on infants imitatively learn ­things through ­others’ 
perspectives, and ­later they come to understand pedagogy as an attempt 
by a representative of the cultural group to convey objective cultural 
knowledge. Fi­nally, by the time they reach school age, ­children are capable 
of using all ­these skills of social cognition, referential communication, and 
cultural learning to engage intersubjectively with a peer in the kind of 
cooperative thinking and reasoning that are the source of all kinds of novel 
cultural achievements.
­These are the social-­cognitive skills of shared intentionality that enable 
­humans, but not other ­great apes, to work together to create such ­things 
as steam engines, poetry, and governmental institutions. But ­these skills 
do not come into being full-­blown. They come into being in individuals 
through a developmental pro­cess, extended over time, in which matura­
tion, experience, and executive self-­regulation all play constitutive roles.

W ​3 ​w
Social Cognition
Mature ­human thinking is structured by the basic distinction, recognized 
since the ancient Greeks, between subjective and objective (or appearance 
and real­ity, belief and truth, opinion and fact). The distinction derives from 
the insight that a single individual’s subjective perspective on a situation 
at any given moment may or may not match with the objective situation 
as it exists in­de­pen­dent of this or any other par­tic­u­lar perspective.
­Great apes and other animal species do not bifurcate experience in this 
way. They take the world as it appears to them, without contrasting it to 
anything ­else (objective or other­wise). They are also able to imagine what 
another individual is experiencing or has experienced, but they do not con­
trast this with what they or anyone ­else is experiencing or has experi­
enced ­either, much less with an objective perspective. Their understanding 
of the world and their understanding of ­others’ experiencing of the world 
are simply not integrated in a way that leads to the distinction between 
subjective and objective.
­Great apes do not distinguish subjective and objective, in my view, 
­because this is not an insight that individuals can come to on their own. 
An individual cannot come to it ­either by inventing a clever theory or by 
simulating another’s experience, and they cannot come to it by comparing 
their past to their current experience. To understand the distinction be­
tween subjective and objective, an individual must triangulate (to use 
the term of Davidson 2001) on a shared situation with another individual 
at the same moment: we both see X, but you see it this way, and I see it 
that way. That is, the participants must come to understand that the two 
of us are sharing attention to one and the same ­thing, but at the same 
time we each have our own perspective on it. This is the basic cognitive 

46	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
organ­ization of the so-­called dual-­level structure of shared intentionality 
(Tomasello 2014).
­Human infants begin engaging ­others in this dual-­level manner from 
around nine months of age. They are able to do this ­because they have 
inherited this way of engaging ­others from their early human forebears, 
for whom it enabled novel and unique forms of social and ­mental coordi­
nation. Initially, infants engage with adults in joint attention, within which 
they learn about their individual perspectives. In communicating, child 
and adult attempt to align their perspectives, and ­later in ontogeny to ex­
change and coordinate perspectives in conversation about a common 
topic. It is through the exchange of perspectives in linguistically mediated 
discourse—in which partners jointly attend to one another’s thinking—­
that ­children are forced to coordinate discrepant perspectives (which they 
do through the use of their developing skills of executive regulation). 
During the period from three to six years, using their emerging skills 
of collective intentionality, ­children construct from this admixture of 
sharedness and individuality an “objective” world in­de­pen­dent of their 
own or anyone ­else’s way of construing it, but about which, nonetheless, 
individuals may have vari­ous subjective perspectives, attitudes, and 
beliefs, ­including false beliefs.
In this chapter we focus on the ontogeny of uniquely ­human social cog­
nition. We begin with the ontogeny of ­great ape social cognition, espe­
cially their ability to imagine (nonperspectivally) what ­others perceive and 
know. We then look in turn at young ­children’s skills of joint attention 
and at their ability to coordinate multiple perspectives on the same entity. 
­These unique skills set the stage for three-­ to four-­year-­old ­children’s 
ability to coordinate conflicting perspectives on the executive level—­for 
example, two contrasting beliefs or an object’s appearance as compared 
with real­ity—­and thereby to construct new understandings of the world.
From Apes: Imagining What ­Others Perceive
For all our analyses of uniquely ­human ontoge­ne­tic pathways, we begin 
with ­great apes. In the current case of social cognition, the analy­sis 
­focuses on multiple skills—­namely, following gaze direction, imagining 
what another sees or hears or infers, and imagining what another knows 
or believes.

	
Social Cognition	
47
­Great Ape Social Cognition
From the point of view of social cognition, gaze following is a fairly low-­
level pro­cess. But ­there are some differences between the way that ­great 
apes and ­human infants follow the gaze direction of ­others that might be 
related to, or even fundamental to, more complex pro­cesses of social cog­
nition. The main issue is developmental timing. In the simplest gaze-­
following tasks, when the looker and the target are in the same visual field 
(and so peripheral vision may come into play), two studies have found 
gaze following in seventeen-­month-­old human-­raised chimpanzees (Oka­
moto et al. 2004; Tomasello and Carpenter 2005a). Gaze following to 
more distant targets comes only several years ­later, however:
	
•	In a test in which a ­human looked up to the sky, three chim­
panzees below three years of age did not systematically 
follow the looker’s gaze direction whereas five individuals 
older than three years of age did (Tomasello et al. 2001).
	
•	In a longitudinal study, chimpanzees and bonobos first began 
following the gaze direction of ­humans between two and 
three years of age (Wobber et al. 2013).
	
•	In an experiment, chimpanzees ­under four years of age con­
tinued following the gaze direction of a demonstrator who 
continually looked at nothing whereas older individuals soon 
quit (Tomasello et al. 2001).
	
•	In another experiment, chimpanzees over five years of age, 
but not younger, performed “double looks” as they checked 
back with a demonstrator who was looking at nothing to see 
­whether they got it right (Bräuer et al. 2005).
	
•	In two final experiments, chimpanzees over four years of age 
(younger juveniles ­were not tested) locomoted to follow a 
­human’s gaze direction to a location ­behind a barrier (Toma­
sello et al. 1999), and they could tell when a barrier blocked a 
looker’s visual access to a target (Okamoto-­Barth et al. 2007).
­These are all much older ages than ­human infants in the same tasks, as 
we ­shall soon see (see also Lucca et al. 2017).
Beyond ­simple gaze following, a number of studies have attempted to 
assess ­whether chimpanzees can imagine the ­actual content of what 
­others see. In a series of studies, Hare et al. (2000; see also Bräuer et al. 

48	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
2007) had a dominant and subordinate chimpanzee compete for food in 
novel situations in which one piece of food was out in the open and one 
piece of food was on the subordinate’s side of a barrier where only she 
could see it. When their door was opened (slightly before the domi­
nant’s), the subordinates chose to pursue the food on their side of the 
barrier only; they knew that the dominant could not see this food 
(whereas he could see the food out in the open). In an impor­tant varia­
tion, Hare et al. (2001) hid only one piece of food on the subordinate’s 
side of one of two barriers (see also Kaminski et al. 2008; Karg et al. 
2015b). The trick was that in some cases the dominant witnessed the 
hiding pro­cess but in other cases he did not. The result was that subordi­
nate chimpanzees avoided ­going for food that a dominant could not see 
now but might have seen hidden some moments before; they knew that 
he knew where the hidden food was located. And they assigned this 
knowledge to this par­tic­u­lar individual: if, ­after one dominant had seen 
the hiding pro­cess, he was switched for another, the subordinate subjects 
knew that the new individual had not seen the hiding pro­cess and so did 
not know where the food was. ­Great apes can imagine the ­actual content 
of what ­others perceive and know.
In addition, ­great apes sometimes attempt to actually manipulate what 
­others see. Hare et al. (2006) and Melis et al. (2006a) had chimpanzees 
compete with a ­human (sitting in a booth) for two pieces of food. In some 
conditions, the ­human could see the ape equally well if it approached 
­either piece of food (one on each side of the booth). In ­these cases, the 
ape had no preference for ­either piece. But in the key condition, a barrier 
was in place so that the apes could approach one piece of food without 
being seen. And this is exactly what they did. They even did this in a varia­
tion in which the choice confronting them was to reach for food from 
­behind a barrier (such that the ­human could not see their body) but ­either 
through a clear tunnel (where the ­human could potentially see their 
reaching arm) or an opaque tunnel. They ­imagined what the ­human could 
see of their reaching arm. In a follow-up study, ­these same individuals pref­
erentially chose to pursue food that they could approach silently—so 
that a distracted ­human competitor could not hear them—as opposed to 
food that involved making noise en route. This generalization to a com­
pletely dif­fer­ent perceptual modality—­audition versus vision—­speaks to 
the power and flexibility of the cognitive skills involved. In still another 
impressive skill of social cognition, in a find-­the-­food game, chimpanzees 

	
Social Cognition	
49
knew that their competitor would choose a board that was lying slanted 
on a ­table (as if some food ­were under­neath) rather than a flat board 
(­under which ­there could be nothing); they knew what kind of inference 
he would make from the perceptual situation (Schmelz et al. 2011). ­Great 
apes’ skills of social cognition are extremely flexible.
A final step in the pro­cess is the understanding of false beliefs. In five 
dif­fer­ent studies modeled on classic tasks passed by four-­ to five-­year-­old 
­children, ­great apes have failed (see Tomasello 2014, for a review). But 
recently ­great apes have performed well in two dif­fer­ent false-­belief tasks 
passed by ­human infants at around eigh­teen to twenty-­four months of 
age. In an anticipatory looking task modeled on that of Southgate et al. 
(2007), Krupenye et al. (2016) had ­great apes watch an actor observe some­
thing being hidden; then, ­after the actor had left the scene, it was moved. 
When the actor returned, ­great apes looked first and most often to the 
location where the actor was likely to search (where he observed it 
being hidden), even though the object was no longer ­there. ­Great apes 
also passed another infant false-­belief test based on the helping task of 
Buttelmann et al. (2009, 2017).
We return to this issue in more detail ­later, but for now we simply state 
our view that in ­these ape studies—as well as the corresponding infant 
studies—­individuals are anticipating what ­others ­will do based on what 
­those ­others see or have seen, and the individual’s own knowledge of the 
situation is not salient to them in any way (much less any objective situa­
tion). We would thus assimilate ­these studies to ­those showing that ­great 
apes know what ­others know, with the fact that the ape herself knows 
something dif­fer­ent being basically irrelevant. One could call this an “im­
plicit” understanding of false belief in the sense that apes can predict what 
another ­will do based on what it has seen, even if this differs from what 
they themselves see or have seen (as their own experience is irrelevant to 
their prediction of the other’s actions).
Taken together, ­these vari­ous studies show that chimpanzees know that 
­others see ­things, hear ­things, know ­things, and make inferences about 
­things. Beyond the studies of gaze following, ­these more demanding 
studies clearly demonstrate that chimpanzees can imagine the ­actual psy­
chological content of what ­others are seeing, hearing, knowing, and in­
ferring, and what this means for their impending actions. ­These more de­
manding studies ­were carried out mostly with adult apes, almost none 
below four years of age.

50	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
­Human ­Children
­Human infants begin following the gaze direction of ­others to close-in 
targets, within peripheral vision, at around six months of age (for example, 
D’Entremont et al. 1997). Following gaze direction to more distant tar­
gets emerges at closer to twelve to thirteen months of age (for example, 
Carpenter et al. 1998b), and this includes when the gazer looks up to the 
ceiling, as in many of the ape studies (Tomasello et al. 2007a). When an 
adult looks ­behind a barrier, infants as young as twelve months of age ­will 
locomote some distance so that they can get the right ­angle to look ­behind 
it too (Moll and Tomasello 2004), and fourteen-­month-­olds know when 
a demonstrator’s gaze is blocked by an opaque barrier (Caron et al. 2002). 
In all of ­these ways, the gaze following of ­human infants is similar to that 
of ­great apes, but it appears much earlier in ­human than in ape ontogeny. 
If we compare infants and apes in each of the experimental paradigms in 
which they have both been tested, the ages for infants are in all cases at 
least one year earlier than ­those of chimpanzees, and in many cases more 
like two years (see Figure 3.1).
A second impor­tant difference is that many studies have found a sur­
prising insensitivity of chimpanzees to the eyes specifically. For example, 
Kaminski et al. (2004) found that chimpanzees and bonobos ­were sensi­
tive to ­whether a ­human was looking at them but only based on the 
­human’s face direction; they ­were insensitive to ­whether the eyes ­were 
open. In a direct comparison of species, Tomasello et al. (2007b) tested 
0
1
2
3
x - gaze follow [no eyes]
? - barriers/line of sight
gaze follow 
[eyes]
4
 ? - imagine 
see/hear/know
barriers/line of sight
imagine
see/hear/know
x - follow in percept. field
follow in percept. ﬁeld
Figure 3.1 ​Approximate age (in years) of emergence of vari­ous gaze-­following 
skills and imagining what ­others perceive and know for chimpanzee and 
­human (italics) infants. Question marks indicate that younger individuals have 
not been tested, and an X indicates clear negative findings at younger ages. 
Abbreviation: percept. = perceptual.

	
Social Cognition	
51
chimpanzees, bonobos, and gorillas (all over four years of age) and ­human 
infants of twelve and eigh­teen months of age. In a 2 × 2 design, they varied 
­whether or not the ­human looker turned his head to the ceiling and 
­whether or not his eyes ­were open. The apes followed head direction (for 
example, they looked to the ceiling when the adult turned his head up, 
even if his eyes ­were closed), but the infants followed eye direction spe­
cifically (for example, they looked to the ceiling when the adult looked 
up with his eyes only, head oriented straight ahead). Given that of all 200+ 
species of nonhuman primates only ­humans have highly vis­i­ble white 
sclera that basically advertise the direction of their eye gaze to ­others 
­(Kobayashi and Koshima 1997), one hypothesis is that ­human gaze fol­
lowing of the eyes specifically evolved in a cooperative social context in 
which ­others did not tend to exploit it. Infants’ use of the eyes in gaze 
following may be one result of this adaptation. Ontoge­ne­tically, Brooks 
and Meltzoff (2005) showed that nine-­month-­old infants behave like 
apes—­following head direction—­whereas ten-month-olds follow eye di­
rection specifically.
As for infants’ understanding of seeing, classic studies using vari­ous 
methods, including verbal methods, usually find competence at around 
two-­and-­a-­half years of age (for example, Masangkay et al. 1974; Mc­
Guigan and Doherty 2002). ­These classic studies establish that young 
­children can imagine what another person sees even when they them­
selves do not see it—­for example, what another person sees on the op­
posite side of a piece of paper. Moll and Tomasello (2006) reported an 
experiment finding a slightly younger age for emergence of this ability. 
The study is of special interest in the current context ­because it was 
modeled on the food competition experiments with ­great apes by Hare 
et al. (2000). But pi­lot studies showed that the toddlers did not ­really 
take to competition; they needed a cooperative paradigm. Thus, an adult 
came into the room with a basket searching for her lost toy. The child 
sat across from her and could see two toys, one out in the open and one 
on her side of a barrier. The adult looked in the direction of each toy 
(that is, for the one ­behind the barrier she looked at the barrier) and then 
repeated that she needed her toy. Obviously, she could not be talking 
about the toy out in the open that she had seen or ­else she would just 
take it. Twenty-­four-­month-­olds, but not eighteen-­month-­olds, handed 
her the toy from their side of the barrier, the one she could not see.

52	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
Also similar to chimpanzees but in a cooperative rather than competi­
tive context, Moll et al. (2014) found that twenty-­four-­month-­old infants 
also distinguished ­whether an adult had or had not heard two par­tic­u­lar 
sounds previously (­because she was ­either inside or outside the room 
when the sound occurred), even though they themselves had heard both 
sounds equally. And fi­nally, as discussed earlier, ­human infants also per­
form well in so-­called implicit false belief tasks using vari­ous looking 
methodologies (for example, Southgate et al. 2007): they can predict what 
another ­will do based on what that other has seen in the immediate past. 
We ­will argue below that this represents simply an understanding of what 
­others see and know—­since they are not attending to what they them­
selves see and know at all—­and this understanding is transformed by 
emerging skills of shared intentionality. It is transformed into an under­
standing that an actor may have a perspective that can be directly com­
pared to my own, and in some cases found to be discrepant both with my 
perspective and with the objective situation (Tomasello, in press).
­These studies thus demonstrate that, beyond gaze following, ­human 
toddlers can imagine what ­others see, hear, and know—in the sense of 
imagining the content of what ­others see, hear, and know, especially in 
cooperative contexts—by at least twenty-­four months of age. Unfortu­
nately, not all the comparable studies with ­great apes ­were developmental 
(hence the question mark in Figure 3.1), but the youn­gest age at which 
apes have demonstrated similar competence—in competitive contexts—
is two years ­later at around four years of age.
Individual and Cultural Variation
The fact that infants in their first two years of life are following the gaze 
direction of ­others and understanding the nonperspectival intentional 
states of ­others (seeing, hearing, knowing) in the same basic way as other 
­great apes suggests that maturation is playing a strong role in this devel­
opmental pathway. This does not mean that no learning is involved; a child 
raised in complete social isolation presumably would not on its second 
birthday display the skills of a typically developing child. What this means 
is that ­children do not need to be taught ­these skills by anyone in their 
culture (­because no one teaches the apes); ­these skills emerge naturally, 
assuming a typically developing child growing up in a species-­typical 
­social environment. ­Children with autism have the basics of ­these skills 
as well (Carpenter et al. 2001), although ­there may be some abnormalities 

	
Social Cognition	
53
in the uniquely ­human aspects such as in their attention to and use of the 
eyes and the age at which gaze following emerges (for example, Dawson 
et al. 1998; Mundy 2003).
In general, ­there is ­little individual or cultural variability in the devel­
opment of skills of gaze following. In the longitudinal study of Carpenter 
et al. (1998b), twenty-­one out of twenty-­four infants passed a relatively 
stringent task of following the gaze direction of an adult to a distal target 
in a fairly narrow win­dow between ten and thirteen months of age. And 
in a cross-­cultural study, Callaghan et al. (2011) found that ­human infants 
growing up in three very dif­fer­ent cultural contexts (two small-­scale and 
nonliterate) began following the gaze direction of ­others at around the 
same age, including in a task in which they had to follow the adult’s gaze 
to a location ­behind a barrier. ­There is thus no evidence of significant in­
dividual or cultural variability in normal ­children’s tracking of ­others’ 
gaze. In terms of the other skills investigated ­here (understanding what 
­others see, hear, and know), ­little is known about cross-­cultural variability. 
Individual variability within Western industrialized cultures has been 
found, of course, but it is never especially ­great (a modest variance in most 
studies).
As noted, it is likely that ­there has been a shift of ontoge­ne­tic timing 
from apes to ­humans in all ­these skills. Although the data are not 
100 ­percent systematic, it is likely that ­human infants are following the 
gaze direction of ­others and imagining what ­others perceive and know 
at least one or two years earlier than other apes (the data are much more 
solid for gaze following). Moreover, they are able to use the eyes of ­others 
in ways that other apes are not, which is also suggestive of at least some 
change of pro­cess. One speculation is that ­these changes of pro­cess are 
somehow connected with young ­children’s developing skills of joint in­
tentionality. Thus, the earlier onset of gaze following and infants’ special 
attention to the eyes could represent changes in psychological pro­cess as 
infants begin to engage with ­others in acts of joint attention.
Joint Attention
Both ­great apes and ­human infants follow the gaze direction of ­others and 
imagine what ­others see, hear, and know. But at the same time ­human 
infants are developing ­these skills they are also developing intersubjective 

54	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
skills of joint attention, which typically emerge as a part of the so-­called 
nine-­month revolution. To understand the emergence of joint attention, 
however, we must begin before the nine-­month revolution in early 
­infancy. Even young infants engage with ­others in species-­unique ways 
based on a kind of emotion sharing.
Emotion Sharing in Protoconversations
Infant ­great apes, like all mammals, form an early and strong attachment 
to their ­mothers. ­Great ape ­mothers are likewise attached, and they 
­protect and care for their infants. But in the context of cooperative child­
care, ­human infants developed other ways of soliciting attention and care 
from the many adults who cared for them: they socially bonded with 
them by aligning and sharing positive emotions. ­Humans have some 
impor­tant species-­unique positive emotions and corresponding ways of 
expressing them—­specifically, the positive social emotions expressed in 
social smiling and laughter, which tend to increase social bonds between 
individuals. Infants express ­these emotions as they interact with adults, 
even from a distance, whereas other ­great apes do not smile or laugh as 
they interact with ­others at all (that is, ­great apes do something similar to 
­human smiling and laughing, but only when they are physically tickled 
in playful activities).
Trevarthen (1979) observed young infants interacting with their 
­mothers, and noted two basic facts about the way ­these emotions are ex­
pressed. First, ­there was a kind of turn taking in the participants’ emo­
tional expressions ­toward one another: the ­mother would smile and laugh 
at the infant, at which time the infant was passive; then the ­mother would 
stop, and the infant would start smiling and laughing at her. This exchange 
could go on back and forth for some time. Second, looking at infants in 
similar situations, Stern (1985) observed across turns a kind of “emotional 
attunement” in which infants and ­mothers would mirror one another’s 
emotional intensity and valence, though sometimes using dif­fer­ent means. 
Thus, the ­mother might express a positive emotion in her vocalization, 
and the infant might respond by smiling. ­Because ­these kinds of interac­
tions are broadly communicative and reciprocal in their turn-­taking struc­
ture, Trevarthen and ­others have called them protoconversations.
The importance of this special kind of emotional engagement for in­
fants is clear if one abruptly terminates a protoconversation in medias res. 
Studies employing what has been called the “still face” paradigm have 

	
Social Cognition	
55
shown that if an adult suddenly pres­ents an emotionless face in the ­middle 
of a protoconversation, infants begin to show vari­ous signs of upset—­
looking away, gnawing at their hands, and so forth (Tronick 1989). In ad­
dition, if the timing of the interaction is perturbed, infants become upset 
as well. Thus, Murray and Trevarthen (1985; see also Rochat et al. 1998) 
had ­mothers and infants interact with one another via a closed-­circuit tele­
vi­sion connection. For some infants they delayed the visual feedback 
from the ­mother. This asynchronous timing disturbed infants as well. The 
point is that infants have expectations about how protoconversations 
should go; when ­either the content or timing is perturbed, they are 
perturbed.
­Great ape infants and their ­mothers do not engage in protoconver­
sations. When chimpanzee infants who have been raised by ­humans in­
teract with ­humans, they do look at their ­faces in in­ter­est­ing ways, and 
they make vari­ous kinds of facial expressions (Bard 2012; see also To­
monaga et al. 2004). But since apes do not smile or laugh like ­human in­
fants, their emotional engagement with the ­human differs significantly 
from that which occurs in ­human mother–­infant protoconversations. 
The social interactions of ­great ape infants with their ­mothers may thus 
be a general starting point, but the first hint of uniquely ­human shared 
intentionality is seen in the unique ways in which young ­human infants 
share and align their emotions with caregivers, creating a unique form 
of social engagement.
As noted in Chapter 2, Hrdy (2016) stressed that, in the context of 
­humans’ unique forms of cooperative childcare (that is, unique among 
­great apes), ­human babies are physically separated from their ­mothers 
(­because they are with nonparent adults) much more often than occurs 
among other apes. Plausibly, this might set the context for them to de­
velop especially power­ful skills to connect psychologically with their 
­mothers and other adults from a distance, for example, with overt emo­
tional expressions such as smiling and laughing. We may thus think of 
­human infants’ unique emotional profile for sharing and aligning their 
emotions with caregivers as the under­lying emotional substrate for shared 
intentionality.
The Emergence of Joint Attention
At around nine months of age, ­human infants undergo something of a 
revolution in social cognition. Before this age they can engage with objects 

56	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
directly, such as by grasping and manipulating them. They also can en­
gage with other ­people directly, such as by exchanging emotions with 
them in protoconversations. But nine-­month-old infants for the first time 
begin to engage with ­people and objects together triadically—­they begin 
“triangulating” with ­others on the entities and situations around them. 
In the hypothesis of Tomasello et al. (2005), what we have ­here is the 
coming together of two development pathways. First is infants’ species-­
unique forms of emotion sharing in protoconversations, which begin in 
early infancy. Then, second, at around nine months of age infants begin 
to understand ­others as intentional agents who have goals and perceptions 
­toward the world (as do other ­great apes, albeit with other apes this un­
derstanding comes at a somewhat ­later age). The emergence of joint at­
tention may thus be seen as the coming together of a general ­great ape 
developmental pathway of individual intentionality and a uniquely ­human 
developmental pathway for sharing psychological states with ­others. This 
synergy represents nothing less than the birth of shared intentionality.
Joint attention has mostly been studied as joint visual attention. Beyond 
following the gaze direction of ­others to external targets at around nine 
months of age, infants begin alternating their attention between the 
person and the object, often expressing some kind of emotion to the adult 
about what they are both (presumably) attending to. Although the infant 
and adult have been sharing emotions face to face for some time already, 
this new be­hav­ior engages them in sharing emotions with ­others about 
the world around them. Importantly, in classic accounts of joint attention 
(for example, Bruner 1983; Tomasello 1995) the engagement ­here is not 
only triadic—­the infant and adult are sharing attention to an external en­
tity or situation—­but, in addition, it has a kind of recursive social struc­
ture. The infant is attending not only to the adult’s attention to the ob­
ject, but also to the adult’s attention to her attention to the object, and to 
the adult’s attention to her attention to the adult’s attention to the object, 
and so on. It is not that the infant engages in this kind of recursive 
thinking explic­itly, but that the under­lying structure of joint attention 
means that they both know together that they both are attending to the 
same ­thing. They are sharing experience.
Importantly, the emergence of joint attention in infants emerges on a 
very predictable timetable: within a few weeks of their nine-­month 
birthday (Carpenter et al. 1998b). ­Because this new skill also manifests 
­itself in a variety of other triadic interactions that emerge in fairly close 

	
Social Cognition	
57
synchrony, this emergence has sometimes been called the nine-­month rev­
olution (Tomasello 1995, 1999). Thus, as we ­shall see in more detail in 
Chapter 4, at around this age infants’ dyadically structured protoconver­
sations now give rise to triadically structured forms of referential com­
munication, such as showing and offering objects or pointing to them 
simply to share attention and interest in them. As we ­shall see in more 
detail in Chapter 5, infants’ already existing skills of mimicking adult body 
movements now give rise to the triadic imitation of ­others’ actions on ex­
ternal objects. And as we ­shall see in more detail in Chapter 6, their dy­
adic engagements with ­others give rise, ­later in development, to real dia­
logue in which child and adult focus together on a joint topic or prob­lem. 
In all ­these cases, infants constantly monitor the adult and her attention 
as they ­either attempt to direct her attention communicatively, reproduce 
her actions imitatively, or work together cognitively.
Chimpanzees and other ­great apes follow the gaze direction of ­others 
to external targets, as documented previously, but ­there is no evidence that 
they engage with ­others triadically ­toward external objects. They can of 
course look back and forth from a person to an object, but ­there is no evi­
dence that they engage with the person in a manner enabling us to call it 
triadic or joint attending. Three studies have specifically looked for joint 
attention in chimpanzees. First, Carpenter et al. (1995) looked at six chim­
panzees interacting dyadically with a ­human. Although ­there was some 
looking back and forth between objects and the ­human, ­these ­were 
“checking looks” in which the chimpanzee was merely checking to see 
that the ­human was still ­there, not attempting to share attention with her. 
And ­there ­were no ape attempts to initiate joint attention. Second, 
­Tomasello and Carpenter (2005a) had a ­human adult engage with three 
young human-­raised chimpanzees around objects. Again ­there was some 
visual checking back with the ­human, but the apes did not engage in the 
kind of active monitoring of the other that ­human infants do, and they 
did not engage with the other about the object in any way emotionally. 
And again ­there ­were no active attempts from chimpanzees to establish 
joint attention communicatively. Third, Tomonaga et al. (2004) also at­
tempted repeatedly to engage several young chimpanzees in triadic ac­
tivities around toys, but to no avail. They also gave the chimpanzee in­
fants and their ­mothers opportunities to share interest and attention to 
objects between themselves, again to no avail. They observed no attempts 
on the part of the young chimpanzees to actively solicit joint attention 

58	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
from their partner via such acts as showing or offering or pointing to 
objects.
The pro­gress of joint attention during ­human infants’ second year 
of life is fairly well documented. Bakeman and Adamson (1984) looked 
longitudinally at the way in which infants and their ­mothers engaged in 
joint attentional interactions from six to eigh­teen months of age. They 
categorized dif­fer­ent types of joint visual attention, with the most 
sophisticated—­that is, the one that most clearly involved ­mothers and in­
fants sharing interest and attention to ­things—­being called coordinated 
joint attention. The overall percentage of time spent in coordinated joint 
attention was fairly low—­such “quality time” requires effort on both their 
parts—­but it increased steadily over the months, especially from twelve 
to fifteen months of age. Interestingly, Bakeman and Adamson also looked 
at infant peers interacting together. They found ­little coordinated joint en­
gagement between them. This finding is consistent with the proposal 
that at this early developmental period joint attention is a mode of inter­
action that adapts infants especially for interactions with their adult 
caregivers.
Carpenter et al. (1998b) replicated and extended ­these basic results. One 
in­ter­est­ing new result was that coordinated joint attention began to level 
off at around fourteen months of age. In two follow-up sessions with this 
same sample of infants, at eigh­teen and twenty-­four months, this leveling 
off was further confirmed. The authors took this to indicate that joint 
­visual attention is necessary early in development for infants to share psy­
chological states with ­others, but during the course of the second year of 
life linguistic communication takes over much of that function. For ex­
ample, whereas a thirteen-­month-­old might coordinate visual attention 
with her ­mother and an object, perhaps even holding out and showing 
the object to her, several months ­later she might simply name the object 
for her ­mother while maintaining her visual attention on the object.
Joint attentional interactions are obviously related to such ­things as 
gaze following, on the one hand, and cooperative communication, on the 
other. Interestingly, Carpenter et al. (1998b) found in their longitudinal 
sample a fairly stable and robust developmental sequence: most infants 
engaged first in acts of sharing attention with ­others to nearby objects, 
and then ­later in attempts to follow the gaze direction of ­others to dis­
tant objects, and then ­later still in active attempts to direct the attention 
of ­others to outside objects communicatively. This ordering suggests that 

	
Social Cognition	
59
one-­year-­olds’ following into the visual attention of ­others—­because it has 
been preceded by acts of coordinated joint attention—­does indeed involve 
sharing attention once the target is located, and that directing the atten­
tion of ­others is an invitation to joint attention. Our hypothesis is that 
emerging capacities for joint intentionality transform dyadic be­hav­iors 
that would be performed by ­great apes into triadic acts of joint attention 
constituted by a dual-­level structure of sharedness (joint attention) and 
individuality (perspective).
Common Ground and Cultural Common Ground
When infants share attention with an adult they pay special attention to 
what he is experiencing. Thus, Moll and Tomasello (2007b; see also Moll 
et al. 2007) had fourteen-­month-­old infants observe an adult (from afar) 
manipulating an object. ­Later infants did not recognize that he was fa­
miliar with that object (they thought it was new for him). But if infants 
interacted with an adult and an object triadically in joint attention, then 
­later they did know that it was familiar to him. It seems that when an in­
fant and an adult jointly attend to a situation they register and recall that 
both of them experienced it. And it also creates for them a shared experi­
ence, which they can draw on ­later as their personal common ground.
From almost as soon as they begin to engage in joint attention, ­human 
infants begin to create personal common ground with par­tic­u­lar ­others. 
For example, in a study of twelve-­ and eighteen-­month-­olds, Tomasello 
and Haberl (2003) had an adult approach a row of four objects, look gen­
erally at the row (not individual objects), and exclaim excitedly, “Wow! 
Cool! Look at that! Can you give it to me?” The trick was that the infant 
and that adult had previously shared attention to three of the objects, and 
so their existence and characteristics ­were part of their common ground, 
but they had never before shared attention to the fourth object. (The in­
fant had actually shared attention to this fourth object with another adult, 
so all four objects ­were equally familiar to the infant.) ­Because it would 
be bizarre for this adult to express excitement about one of the previously 
shared objects, which ­were old news for them, she was presumably ex­
cited about the new object that they had not experienced together previ­
ously. And indeed infants of both ages made the inference that the adult 
was excited about the object that they had not shared before which thus 
was not part of their common ground. One might object that the infants 
in this study ­were simply tracking what the adult had experienced as an 

60	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
individual, not what “we” have experienced together. But Moll et al. (2008) 
specifically compared two conditions in which the adult was equally fa­
miliar with an object, but in one case the infant and adult had shared at­
tention to it whereas in the other the adult had interacted with it alone 
(while the child observed from afar). When the adult (looking ambigu­
ously at all objects) then acted as if he recognized one of the objects and 
asked for it, fourteen-­month-­old infants assumed the request was directed 
at the one that “we” had shared.
In a related study, Liebal et al. (2009) had fourteen-­ and eighteen-­month- 
old infants and an adult tidy up together by picking up toys and putting 
them in a basket. At one point the adult stopped and pointed to a target 
toy, which the infant then tidied up into the basket. However, when the 
infant and adult ­were cleaning up in exactly this same way, and a second 
adult who had not shared this context entered the room and pointed 
­toward the target toy in exactly the same way, infants did not put the toy 
away into the basket; they mostly just handed it to him, presumably 
­because the second adult had not shared the cleaning-up game with them 
as common ground. Infants’ interpretations thus did not depend on their 
own current egocentric activities and interests, which ­were the same in 
both cases, but rather on their shared experience with each of the pointing 
adults. In a follow-up study, Liebal et al. (2009) actually found that eighteen-­
month-­olds interpreted the exact same pointing gesture to the exact 
same object differently if it was produced by dif­fer­ent adults with whom 
they had dif­fer­ent common ground; that is, for an adult with whom they 
had previously assembled a puzzle, they took the object to the puzzle, 
whereas for an adult with whom they had previously tidied up toys, they 
put it in the basket. Infants just ­after their first birthdays ­were able to keep 
track of what they had and had not shared—­what was in their personal 
common ground—­with specific other individuals.
As documented in Chapter 2, ­great apes form social relationships with 
other individuals, and this certainly involves learning and remembering 
­things about their interactions with ­these specific individuals. But ­there 
is no evidence that this is anything other than individual learning. That is 
to say, although each of them may remember the same ­things about their 
past interactions, they do not share the knowledge that they both re­
member them. In the only experiment testing for something in this di­
rection, Tomasello and Carpenter (2005a) reproduced something like the 
previous Tomasello and Haberl experiment. Specifically, a ­human shared 

	
Social Cognition	
61
an experience with each of three human-­raised apes about the contents 
of a bucket, then ­later looked in the bucket with surprise and excitement. 
This should have cued the apes that something additional or dif­fer­ent was 
now in the bucket—­because the ­human would not be expressing excite­
ment if it was the same ­thing “we” had shared before—­but it did not (as 
it did in ­human infants). It is pos­si­ble that the difficulty for the apes was 
something ­else having to do with the communicative act—we cannot tell 
from this single result—­but in any case, ­there is no experimental evidence 
that apes create common ground with ­others.
In addition to their forming personal common ground with other 
individuals, at around three years of age ­children come to understand 
the cultural common ground they share with all ­others in their cultural 
group, even if they did not experience anything together with ­those in­
dividuals directly. Thus, any two adult Americans meeting on the street 
can assume as part of their cultural common ground every­thing from 
the Humpty Dumpty nursery rhyme to the current president. At around 
three years of age, as their skills of collective intentionality are ma­
turing, ­children begin to tune into cultural common ground. Liebal 
et  al. (2013) had three-­ and five-­year-­old ­children meet a novel adult 
(clearly from their group). This in-­group stranger then asked them sin­
cerely, “Who is that?” while they looked together in the direction of a 
Santa Claus toy and a toy that the child had just made before the adult 
entered. ­Children answered by naming the newly created toy, showing 
an understanding that no one in the culture, not even someone they 
have never before met, needs to ask who Santa Claus is. (In a second 
condition, if the stranger seemed to recognize one of the two toys, the 
­children picked Santa Claus.) ­Children in this same age range also ex­
pect that in-­group strangers ­will know the conventional name of an ob­
ject, but not a novel, arbitrary fact about that same object (Diesendruck 
et al. 2010). Cultural common ground of this type is indeed almost defi­
nitional of culture, as a culture is constituted by ­those practices, norms, 
and institutions that we all know that we all know together collectively. 
An impor­tant consequence of ­children’s participation in cultural 
common ground is thus the ability to take a fully agent-­independent 
perspective on ­things: an “objective” perspective. This “objective” view 
is bolstered in impor­tant ways by language and pedagogy, as we ­shall 
see in the next two chapters, and it represents the first emergence of 
­children’s skills not just of joint intentionality but also of the collective 

62	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
intentionality associated with group-­minded social conventions and 
norms.
Joint attention and common ground, both personal and cultural, con­
stitute the necessary intersubjective infrastructure for many other uniquely 
­human activities. Joint attention enables individuals to coordinate their 
ongoing collaborative activities; personal common ground enables effec­
tive and efficient communication; and cultural common ground is the 
basis for conventional cultural practices based on collective intentionality. 
­These intersubjective engagements also set the stage, as we ­will soon see, 
for young ­children’s attempts to coordinate with the perspective of ­others 
in vari­ous ways.
Individual and Cultural Variation
All available evidence suggests that all ­human infants are capable of 
some sort of emotion sharing and protoconversation (with smiling and 
laughing). The general finding is that, although adults interact with in­
fants in dif­fer­ent ways across dif­fer­ent cultures, the infants themselves end 
up with similar skills. For example, LeVine et al. (1994) report that Gussi 
­mothers in eastern Africa engage in mutual eye gaze with their infants 
less than one-­third as much as Western middle-­class ­mothers. Gaskins 
(2006) reports that Yucatec Mayan ­mothers make and maintain eye con­
tact with their infants hardly at all. And in the most detailed study to date, 
Demuth (2009) compared ­mother–­infant communication in a Western 
middle-­class culture with that in a more traditional, rural culture in 
western Africa (the Nso), and found that the Western ­mothers tended to 
treat their infants as equal communicative partners, whereas the Nso 
­mothers treated their infants “as novices who need to learn compliance 
and subordination” (169). Nevertheless, despite ­these cultural differences 
in adult be­hav­ior, as far as we know infants’ skills in protoconversation 
are similar in all cultures.
In terms of joint attention, many anthropologists report that adults 
from many small-­scale cultures engage very ­little with infants in joint at­
tentional interactions. Thus, Gaskins (1999) reports that whereas Yucatec 
Mayan twelve-­month-­olds spend as much time in object manipulation as 
do Western, middle-­class infants of the same age, the Mayan infants al­
most always do this in solitary mode, whereas the Western middle-­class 
infants often do it in social interaction with adults. Gaskins (2006) also 
notes that in many traditional cultures parents almost never play with 

	
Social Cognition	
63
young infants around objects (she cites the Kaluli, the Somoans, the Gussi, 
and the Mayans) mainly ­because adults have ­little ­free time to engage in 
this kind of “nonproductive” play; in addition, adult play with ­children is 
inappropriate ­because ­children are expected to adapt to the adult world, 
not vice versa. Most often, parents simply give the infant an object or place 
it in front of the infant and then go about their business. Nevertheless, 
despite ­these cultural differences in adult be­hav­ior, as far as we know, in­
fants’ skills in joint attention are similar in all cultures. Indeed, in the 
only experimental test to date, Callaghan et al. (2011) found that eleven-­
month-­old infants in three very dif­fer­ent cultures (middle-­class Canadian, 
rural nonliterate Peruvian, rural nonliterate Indian) all engaged similarly 
in joint attention with a novel adult.
­These cross-­cultural data thus document differences in adult be­hav­ior 
but overall similarity in infant outcomes, implying a fairly strong matura­
tional component in the ontogeny of ­children’s earliest skills of joint at­
tention. Additional evidence comes from the biological syndrome of au­
tism spectrum disorder. ­Children on the autism spectrum are often not 
diagnosed ­until they are somewhat older, when their deficits in commu­
nication and language are especially salient, so ­there are no studies of 
protoconversation per se. But Hobson (2002) has found that in general 
­children with autism are not as motivated or capable of engaging with 
­others emotionally as are typically developing ­children. In addition, other 
research has documented early and serious deficits in autists’ skills and 
motivations for joint attention. Mundy and Newell (2007) and Rogers and 
Pennington (1991) have provided theoretical accounts of autism focused 
specifically on deficits in joint attention. They find that young ­children 
with autism engage in less coordinated joint attention with adults, and 
they are less likely to initiate bouts of joint attention communicatively. 
The overall proposal of ­these researchers is that deficits in skills and mo­
tivations for joint attention—­for sharing emotions and experiences with 
­others—is precisely what ­children with autism lack, and this accounts for 
their ­great difficulties across a wide array of social be­hav­iors from gaze 
following to linguistic communication.
It is also worth recalling that in samples of ­children with similar social 
experience—­for example, from middle-­class Western families—­individual 
variability in age of emergence is typically quite small (Carpenter et al. 
1998b). Nevertheless, as we ­shall see in the next two chapters, individual 
differences in the amount and style of joint attentional interactions that 

64	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
­children have with adults has significant consequences for their language 
development and cultural learning. This means that even though ­there 
is a strong maturational component in the development of ­children’s 
earliest skills and motivations for joint attention—­all typically developing 
­children in all typical ­human environments receive sufficient amounts of 
the right kinds of social experience for normal ontogeny—­there is also 
significant developmental plasticity as well, due in part to individual 
­children’s dif­fer­ent social experiences.
The Coordination of Perspectives
A key claim in the current account is that ­children’s skills of perspective-­
taking originate in social interactions structured by joint attention. With 
joint attention we may say that we are attending to the same ­thing, only 
differently; we are triangulating on it, each with our own viewing ­angle. 
Without joint attention, ­there is no common object on which the two of 
us may have dif­fer­ent viewing ­angles, and so no sense of perspective. A 
shared focus of attention thus creates the possibility of multiple perspec­
tives on the same ­thing (Moll and Tomasello 2007a).
As we conceptualize it ­here, then, perspective-­taking requires that a 
subject imagine more than one way of perceiving or understanding a 
given entity or situation; ­there can be no such ­thing as a single perspec­
tive on something without at least the possibility of other perspectives on 
it. What we have called “imagining what another sees and knows” does 
not involve dif­fer­ent perspectives in this same way; the subject is imag­
ining the other’s experience, but her own experience is not part of her 
­mental pro­cessing. This is what we meant in saying that in the ape food 
competition experiments the ­mental states that participants ­were tracking 
­were nonperspectival; the apes ­were tracking what their competitor di­
rectly perceived, with their own perception of the situation not an object 
of attention at all (the participant is seeing “through” his perceptual ex­
perience, not examining it or comparing it to something ­else). When the 
participant is imagining the competitor seeing something (or not), he is 
simply tracking her perceptual experience—­full stop—­irrespective of what 
he himself is or is not experiencing. Without an awareness of multiple 
potential ways of seeing the situation, an individual cannot be said to be 
taking perspectives at all.

	
Social Cognition	
65
Mature ­humans may of course attend by themselves to an entity or 
situation from multiple perspectives si­mul­ta­neously, outside of any social 
interaction. But this is a developmental achievement, not its starting point. 
Infants begin by not being able to take perspectives at all outside of ­social 
interaction with ­others. They become capable of such perspective-­taking 
through attempts at social, especially communicative, coordination with 
­others with whom they are interacting. A child growing up in social iso­
lation would not end up entertaining multiple perspectives on a situation 
at all ­because she never experienced the necessary joint attentional inter­
actions with ­others.
­There are three types of joint attentional interaction—­all involving 
communication—­that lead infants and young ­children to take the perspec­
tive of an interactive partner: (1) attempts at aligning perspectives, as in­
fants engage with ­others in their earliest communicative (mostly gestural) 
interactions; (2) exchanging perspectives, as toddlers become capable of 
multiturn conversations in a conventional language focused on a common 
topic; and (3) coordinating the conflicting perspectives that arise in con­
versation (via some kind of executive regulation) as they begin to under­
stand, at around three years of age, that ­there is an “objective” perspec­
tive with which ­others may conflict.
Aligning Perspectives
Joint attention is a back-­and-­forth negotiation in which two partners in 
an interaction not only have shared goals and interests but each has her 
own individual goals and interests as well. So partners must keep reestab­
lishing or maintaining their joint attention as they move along. The joint 
attention is defined, in most cases, by what we are ­doing together: we are 
eating lunch, we are walking to the park, we are putting on your shoes, 
and so forth. Individual agents pay attention to ­things relevant to their 
individual goals, so partners in a joint agency pay joint attention to ­things 
relevant to their joint goals. The pro­cess is thus one of individuals con­
stantly attempting to align their goals and attention.
The aligning of attention may happen as one individual simply follows 
into the attention of the other, and then they somehow acknowledge that 
they are now in joint attention (for example, by a mutual look). But often 
one individual actively attempts to align attention with the other via co­
operative communication. In the prototypical situation with infant and 
adult, one of the partners offers an object to the other, or shows an object 

66	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
to the other, or points to some in­ter­est­ing event, or even uses a ­simple 
piece of language. The pro­cess is one in which the communicator has a 
goal that the recipient attend to what he, the communicator, is already 
attending to; his (referential) goal is thus the aligning of their attention in 
joint attention (Tomasello 1998, 2008). The recipient, if she accedes, goes 
from her own individual attention on something to jointly attending with 
her partner. The interpersonal negotiation ­here is thus each partner’s 
sequential shifting from individual to joint attention, as ­either commu­
nicator or recipient.
I am not claiming that the joint attentional and communicative 
­interactions of fourteen-­ and eighteen-­month-­old infants with adults are 
instances of full-­blown perspective-­taking, as this term is normally used. 
But unlike simply imagining what another person is seeing, with no at­
tention at all to one’s own seeing, negotiating joint attention brings into 
focus the relationship between the content of my partner’s attention and 
my own. We are not now aligned, but at least one of us wants us to be; 
to know that we are now aligned, ­there must be at least some imagining 
of the content of both perspectives—my partner’s and my own—­and 
their relationship. This requires an executive level of functioning in 
which the two perspectives may be compared in the same repre­sen­ta­
tional format to see ­whether ­there is alignment or not.
Exchanging Perspectives
Conventional linguistic communication is perspectival all the way down. 
Words embody perspectives on ­things. This animal in front of me may 
be a dog, an animal, a pet, or pest, depending on how I choose to construe 
it for my listener in the current context. This action in front of me may 
be ­running, fleeting, chasing, or hunting, again depending on how I choose 
to construe it in the communicative context. Grammatical constructions 
are also perspectival. I can say about a single event using the same basic 
words that John kicked the ball, The ball was kicked by John, The ball was kicked, 
It was John that kicked the ball, It was the ball that John kicked, What John kicked 
was the ball, What got kicked was the ball, and so forth. Basically, to com­
municate effectively using language, one must choose a perspective on the 
referential scene—at several dif­fer­ent levels of analy­sis—­tailored to the 
knowledge and expectations of the communicative partner.
But beyond just the choice of words and constructions, ­people often 
engage in conversations. A conversation involves multiple linguistic turns 

	
Social Cognition	
67
between partners over time, all relevant in some way to a common topic: 
the topic-­comment structure of conversational interaction. Conversations 
may thus be seen as a kind of “joint attention to ­mental content” 
(O’Madagain and Tomasello, forthcoming). That is, you make an utter­
ance expressing some kind of ­mental content—­“The cat is on the 
mat”—­and I respond with an utterance on the same topic: “It’s an Abys­
sinian.” You may then respond with a disagreement: “No, it’s a Siamese.” 
We are jointly attending to a topic (the cat), and we are expressing atti­
tudes or perspectives on that topic. Engaging in conversation in this way 
may be thought of as exchanging perspectives.
Young ­children’s earliest language is or­ga­nized mainly at the level of 
the individual utterance. ­There are some brief exchanges, such as ques­
tion and answer, and some consecutive utterances about the same ref­
erent. But if we define conversation more rigorously as partners taking 
turns making their own individual comments about a mutually under­
stood topic, then young ­children only begin the pro­cess at about two-­
and-­a-­half years of age, a year ­after they have begun naming ­things and 
saying ­simple sentences (Mannle et al. 1992). And this enables the first 
joint attention to ­mental contents: the child says, “That bird has a 
worm in his mouth,” and the ­mother says, “No, it’s a stick,” and so on 
across turns. ­Mother and child are jointly attending to the child’s pro­
posal about the bird and its actions, and they are expressing dif­fer­ent 
perspectives or attitudes ­toward it. The exchange of perspectives in lin­
guistic discourse—­the partners jointly attend to the ­mental content of 
both the linguistically expressed topic and each other’s comments—is 
necessary, we would argue, for the child to distinguish between the 
situation as it is objectively and the situation as each of them believes 
it to be.
Coordinating Conflicting Perspectives
In many conversations the topic is something ­simple like the ­thing in front 
of us. This topic is often characterized by a linguistic expression that per­
spectivizes it in some way—­for example, as “my pet” or as “a strange-­
looking cat”—­which then determines the relevance of any reply. In this 
sense all conversations in which the topic has been linguistically expressed 
involve “joint attention to ­mental content”: a shared focus on a ­mental 
construal of something, about which we express dif­fer­ent perspectives or 
attitudes.

68	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
But in some of young ­children’s conversations the topic is a proposi­
tion. It is some kind of statement such as That cat is sick, to which the reply 
may be No, it’s not or ­You’re wrong or ­You’re joking, to which the counter-­
reply may be No, ­really. The point is that ­there is a linguistically expressed 
statement of fact and then some kind of conflicting attitudes (or perspec­
tives) that are linguistically expressed about it. Normally ­there is pressure 
in such conversations for the conflict to be resolved in some way. Situa­
tions like ­these are what Perner and colleagues (for example, 2003) call 
“perspective prob­lems” ­because the topic of conversation is linguistically 
expressed ­mental perspectives about an objective fact that appear to be 
incompatible. In ­children’s natu­ral conversations, we first see an under­
standing of such conflicting ­mental perspectives at around three to three-­
and-­a-­half years of age (Bartsch and Wellman 1995).
In general, to resolve the conflict in such cases ­children must coordi­
nate multiple, si­mul­ta­neously pres­ent perspectives, presumably through 
some type of executive regulation. Perhaps one of us is wrong; or per­
haps we are talking about dif­fer­ent cats. Crucially, in perspective prob­lems 
of this type ­there always lurks in the background an “objective” perspec­
tive that must be coordinated with the partners’ differing perspectives as 
well: the fact of the ­matter about ­whether the cat is sick is in­de­pen­dent 
of what anyone believes to be the case, which determines who is correct. 
Coordinating ­these three perspectives—­yours, mine, and the “objective” 
perspective—is made pos­si­ble by the recognition, for example, that some 
perspectives are illusions, or that some are incorrect, or that the two of 
them may not be incompatible ­after all. This manner of functioning is 
crucial to ­children’s mastery of propositional attitude constructions of the 
type “I think the cat is sick,” “I hope the cat is not sick,” or “He believes 
the cat is sick” (also called sentential complement constructions). In ­these 
constructions, the speaker formulates a proposition but embeds it within 
a propositional attitude such as “I think . . .” Diessel and Tomasello (2001) 
found that although two-­ and three-­year-­olds use such constructions, they 
mostly use them in formulaic ways that do not require a conceptualiza­
tion of ­mental states or perspectives (for example, “I think it’s raining” 
just means, for them, “Maybe it’s raining”). It is more like four to five years 
of age before ­children understand the coordination of perspectives 
involved—­that is, the cat is “objectively” sick or not, and this is in­de­pen­
dent of the attitude about this fact that the speaker expresses.

	
Social Cognition	
69
Many dif­fer­ent experimental tasks given to ­children by developmental 
psychologists document the fact that coordinating conflicting perspectives 
in some rational way creates ­great difficulties for young ­children ­until they 
are four or five years of age. Classic social-­cognitive tasks of this type in­
clude most prominently visual perspective-­taking, appearance-­reality, false 
belief, and vari­ous tasks of linguistic aspectuality (for example, dual 
naming, class inclusion). Recent research has shown in each of ­these tasks 
that three-­year-­olds, or even two-­year-­olds in some cases, can take dif­fer­ent 
perspectives on ­things on dif­fer­ent occasions. But when ­these dif­fer­ent per­
spectives are about the same situation at the same time—­and they con­
flict with re­spect to the objective situation—­two-­ and three-­year-­olds 
strug­gle. When two-­year-­olds and apes perform well in the anticipatory 
looking version of a false-­belief task, they are only attempting to discern 
how the agent ­will behave given what it has experienced in the past. Their 
own point of view on the situation is not salient or relevant, so ­there is 
no conflict needing to be resolved. But for four-­ and five-­year-­olds ­there 
is a conflict, and resolving it requires them to construct, over time, vari­ous 
concepts that depend in one way or another on the distinction between 
the subjective situation (appearance, opinion, belief ) and the objective 
situation (real­ity, fact, truth).
Visual Perspective-­Taking  ​The classic task of visual perspective-­taking is 
Piaget’s famous three-­mountains task, but it turns out that this is an es­
pecially difficult task for many reasons (especially as the child is not com­
municatively engaged with the person whose perspective she is supposed 
to take; Moll and Kadipasaoglu 2013). Almost as famous is the turtle task, 
in which the child and adult view a picture of a turtle from opposite sides 
of a ­table, and the child is asked, in vari­ous ways, how the turtle appears 
to each of them (for example, right-­side-up or upside-­down). This task 
forces the child to compare how she sees the turtle to how the adult sees 
it at the same time; apparently, ­until ­children are four to five years of age 
they see a conflict in saying that the turtle is right-­side-up and, at the same 
time, upside-­down (for example, Flavell et al. 1981).
A pair of recent studies have helped to identify what makes this seem­
ingly ­simple task so difficult for preschool ­children. Moll and Meltzoff 
(2011) gave ­children, around their third birthday, experience with a color 
filter that changed the apparent color of the ­things ­behind it when they 

70	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
looked through it. ­Children ­were then presented with two identical blue 
objects. The trick was that one of the objects was viewed by an adult on 
the other side of a ­table through a yellow filter so that it appeared green. 
Then the adult, looking straight ahead, then requested ­either “the blue 
one” or “the green one.” Even though the objects appeared identical to 
the child, they chose the correct one for the adult in both cases. In a second 
study, ­children of the same age showed that they understood on which 
side of the yellow filter they had to place a blue object for the adult to see 
it as green, even though it still appeared blue from their viewing ­angle. 
This study thus clearly shows that ­children can understand how something 
appears to another person even though it does not appear that way to 
them—­classic level 2 perspective-­taking—by the time of their third 
birthday.
In a follow-up study, Moll et al. (2013) argued that whereas ­these pre­
vious studies clearly showed that ­children can understand how something 
appears to another person even when it does not appear that way to them­
selves, ­there is still another dimension to the pro­cess. In the Moll and 
Meltzoff study, ­children could simply look at the two objects to see which 
one of them appeared green to the other person without ­really taking 
their own perspective into account. Moll et al. (2013) therefore modified 
the task so that ­children had to identify (­either verbally or by pointing to 
a color sample) the color of the same object from both their own perspec­
tive and the perspective of a person sitting on the other side of a color 
filter, at more or less the same time. (They ­were asked, “How does it ap­
pear to you? And to me?”) In this case, three-­year-­olds ­were often “pulled 
to the real”—­they said the object appeared blue to the adult. Only the four-­
and-­a-­half-­year-­olds understood that the exact same object that appeared 
blue to them also appeared green to the adult across the ­table.
Although ­there is nothing inconsistent about an object appearing blue 
to me and green to you if color filters are involved, it is likely that three-­
year-­olds think of color as an objective attribute—­something cannot be 
si­mul­ta­neously green (all over) and also blue (all over). Thus, given that 
three-­year-­olds are quite good at imagining what ­others see simpliciter, it 
is likely that their emerging sense of an “objective” perspective—­what 
color the ­thing ­really is—­and their ability to coordinate two perspectives 
si­mul­ta­neously end up interfering with their ability to take into account 
the visual perspective of the other person when they must explic­itly com­
pare it with their own.

	
Social Cognition	
71
Appearance-­Reality  ​The classic appearance-­reality task involves ­children 
understanding that an object that appears to be one ­thing is ­really an­
other—­for example, an object that looks like a rock is ­really a sponge (for 
example, Flavell et al. 1981). Again, ­children strug­gle with this task ­until 
they are four to five years of age.
Krachun et al. (2009; see also Karg et al. 2014) administered a nonverbal 
appearance-­reality task both to chimpanzees and to four-­and-­a-­half-­
year-­old ­human ­children. In vari­ous conditions, the subjects saw a larger 
and a smaller grape go ­behind ­either a magnifying lens or a minimizing 
lens that made them appear ­either larger or smaller than they ­really ­were. 
Some chimpanzees and most ­children ­were nevertheless able to track the 
larger grape. But this is not surprising ­because once they saw the real size 
of the grape they could simply discount the distortion when they saw the 
grape pass ­behind the lens—­they could track the object. Being aware of 
this issue, in a control condition Krachun et al. had the subjects watch one 
grape being placed ­behind a magnifying lens and another being placed 
­behind a minimizing lens, with one lens stacked on top of the other ver­
tically. An occluder was then raised, and the two grapes (still ­behind their 
lenses) ­were moved to left and right positions. In this condition the sub­
ject could not actually track through space the physical objects involved. 
Nevertheless, most ­children and a few chimpanzees ­were successful. How­
ever, what they likely did was to encode before the occluder was raised 
that the large one now looked smaller; then, at the moment of choice they 
selected the one that looked smaller, a kind of simulated tracking. Thus, 
­there is no good evidence to date that apes understand that an object or 
situation may appear one way but, at the same time, ­really be some other 
way. Apes merely zero in on real­ity as best as they can in the situation, 
with no pro­cessing of alternative perspectives.
Moll and Tomasello (2012) modified the classic appearance-­reality task. 
In a first study they presented three-­year-­olds with a nondeceptive and a 
deceptive object: a bar of choco­late and an eraser that looked like a bar 
of choco­late. The child was asked to point to the “real” bar of choco­late 
or “the one that only looks like” a bar of choco­late. The ­children ­were 
mostly successful in identifying both objects correctly. However, in a 
second study ­children of this same age ­were presented with a single am­
biguous object and asked to point to one of two exemplars—an eraser or 
a bar of choco­late—­when asked what this single object “only looks like” 
and what it “­really is.” The ­children ­were not able to answer this pair of 

72	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
questions about a single object correctly—­even though when asked ­these 
same questions about two dif­fer­ent objects they could.
Moll and Tomasello interpreted this finding in the same way as their 
finding about visual perspective-­taking: in the first task, ­children only 
needed to conceptualize an object in one way at a time (for example, as 
choco­late or eraser); in the second task, they needed to conceptualize it 
in two dif­fer­ent ways si­mul­ta­neously, and ­these ­were ways that seemed 
to conflict. As in the visual perspective-­taking task, it is likely that the 
three-­year-­olds had trou­ble ­because they ­were invoking an “objective” per­
spective such that the object cannot be two ­things at the same time. 
Older ­children resolve this conflict by constructing a new understanding 
of the situation that accommodates the dif­fer­ent perspectives involved. 
­There is no conflict: objects can appear as one ­thing but function as 
another.
False Belief  ​Another prob­lem of this same general type confronts ­children 
in the false-­belief task. In the classic version, an adult sees an object placed 
in a cabinet and then leaves the room, at which point the object is moved 
to the refrigerator. When asked where the adult ­will search for the ob­
ject, three-­year-­olds tend to say the refrigerator (where it ­really is) whereas 
four-­year-­olds tend to say the cabinet (where the adult saw it and so be­
lieves it to be) (see Wellman et al. 2001, for a review).
The false-­belief task has been given to ­great apes in a number of dif­
fer­ent paradigms. We have already reviewed evidence that they, like 
­human infants, look in anticipation ­toward the location at which an 
agent imagines an object to be, not where they themselves know it to 
be (Krupenye et al. 2016). But apes consistently fail false-­belief tasks 
that require them to make a behavioral decision. For example, they do 
not behave differently with a competitor who does not know where a 
contested piece of food is located (he is ignorant) from one who be­
lieves it is somewhere where it is not (he has a false belief ) (Hare et al. 
2001; Kaminski et al. 2008; Karg et al. 2015a; for a review, see Tomasello 
and Moll 2013). One possibility is that the apes do not discriminate ig­
norance from false belief in ­these studies ­because they do not under­
stand the basic notion of an objective situation that opposes dif­fer­ent 
subjective perspectives (which may conflict with each other or with the 
objective situation). To repeat from earlier: apes simply track the 
knowledge states of the other—­full stop.

	
Social Cognition	
73
Something similar might be said about ­human infants in looking time 
studies of false belief (for example, Onishi and Baillargeon 2005; South­
gate et al. 2007): they track the knowledge states of the actor but do not 
compare them to their own knowledge states or to the objective situation. 
Buttelmann et al. (2009; see also Buttelmann et al. 2014) tested infants’ 
understanding of false belief in a more action-­based paradigm. Eighteen-­
month-­olds watched while an adult placed a favorite toy into a box. The 
adult then left the room (in the false-­belief condition), and the child and 
a research assistant moved the toy to a dif­fer­ent box. The adult then re­
turned to room, approached the box in which he had placed the toy, and 
tried to open it. The research assistant told the child to “help him.” The 
­children did not try to help the adult open the box he was struggling with; 
rather, the ­children retrieved the toy from the other box—­they presum­
ably thought that the adult wanted the toy but believed it was still in the 
first box. In a control condition in which the adult stayed in the room and 
watched the toy’s transfer, the ­children did not fetch the toy but rather 
tried to help the adult open the difficult box. Once again, in this case we 
might argue that although the infants are tracking knowledge states in im­
pressive ways ­there are no conflicting perspectives to be coordinated. 
The infant in this study is not trying to determine the adult’s belief but 
rather his goal—­she is asking herself, “What is he trying to do?” and is 
answering it differently, depending on the knowledge state of the adult. 
The infant has no need to compare or coordinate perspectives.
The classic tasks of false belief could, in princi­ple, be solved by a sim­
ilar method of focusing only on the agent and what she has and has not 
experienced (and how this might affect her be­hav­ior). But this would not 
explain why three-­year-­olds systematically fail the classic tasks by consis­
tently choosing the location where the object ­really is. If they ­were just 
tracking the actor’s knowledge states, like infants, they should pass. Our 
hypothesis is that this ­mistake actually represents conceptual pro­gress in 
that it emanates from an emerging conceptualization of an objective per­
spective on the situation—­how it ­really is, in­de­pen­dent of any individu­
al’s subjective perspective. As this understanding is just emerging, three-­
year-­olds apply it too widely, assuming that ­people guide their search for 
­things by an objective perspective (that is, ­there is a “pull of the real”; see 
Perner and Roessler 2012). This assumption makes sense ­because ­children 
are frequently exposed to situations in which an adult knows something 
that they have not seen her learn; for example, their ­mother often knows 

74	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
what happened at a friend’s ­house even though she was not ­there. Three-­
year-­olds’ confusion is only exacerbated by the fact that they have a coop­
erative bias that may lead them to take the experimenter’s question about 
where the agent ­will look as a question about where he should look 
(Helming et al. 2014). Eventually, four-­year-­olds come to see the conflict 
(she believes it’s ­here when it’s ­really ­there), so to be successful they have 
to coordinate ­these perspectives.
Development is thus, in a sense, U-­shaped: infants succeed based on 
tracking the experience of ­others. Three-­year-­olds fail as they begin to be 
able to take an objective perspective on ­things, which leads them to de­
fault to this objective perspective. Four-­year-­olds succeed as they learn to 
coordinate subjective and objective perspectives. In the next subsection 
we ­will propose an explanation for this developmental trajectory that 
­focuses on ­children’s linguistic discourse with ­others, especially perspective-­
shifting discourse about truth-­bearing propositions. We should also note 
that Rubio-­Fernandez and Geurts (2013) report an experiment that makes 
coordinating with an “objective” perspective easier, and they find suc­
cessful per­for­mance in an explicit false-­belief task at around three years 
of age (see also Carpenter et al. 2002).
We do not have absolutely convincing evidence for this view, but one 
implication is that a child who fully understands beliefs and false beliefs 
should know that where her evidence is extremely strong (even in the 
false-­belief task when she sees the object being moved to a new location), 
in princi­ple she herself could be wrong. Infants (and apes) do not know 
that they themselves could be wrong; if they think something is ­here but 
it turns out to be ­there, they just update their thinking and move on. 
Three-­year-­olds also do not know they can be wrong, as they are so fo­
cused on the very power­ful “objective” perspective. But four-­ and five-­
year-­olds know that they themselves, as well as the duped protagonist, 
could be wrong.
In a recent study, O’Madagain, Helming, and Tomasello (forthcoming) 
found that four-­ and five-­year-­old ­children, but not younger, double-­check 
when challenged to make sure that a previous judgment they made is in­
deed correct. This means that four-­ and five-­year-­olds, unlike apes and 
infants, can potentially see a conflict of three perspectives—­the two “sub­
jective” perspectives in play (theirs and that of the actor) and how each 
of them might match to an “objective” perspective—­and attempt in 
vari­ous ways to coordinate them. One impor­tant fact is at least consis­

	
Social Cognition	
75
tent with this view: ­children’s per­for­mance in vari­ous tasks involving per­
spective prob­lems is highly correlated, suggesting a common under­lying 
psychological pro­cess that presumably involves the coordination of per­
spectives. Another impor­tant fact consistent with this view is that ­children’s 
skills of executive function—­which enable them to attend to multiple 
­things si­mul­ta­neously and to coordinate them in rational ways—­are highly 
correlated with their ability to solve vari­ous perspective prob­lems, in­
cluding the false-­belief task.
The “objective” perspective that plays such an impor­tant role in this 
analy­sis is not often explic­itly singled out for attention in theoretical anal­
yses of false-­belief understanding. But it is precisely this perspective that 
makes it pos­si­ble that ­either or both of the participants in the experiment 
could be wrong. The child’s belief in the situation—­that the object has 
moved to a new location in the refrigerator—is implicitly equated with 
the objective situation (­because she has such good evidence). But, in fact, 
to ­really understand beliefs and false beliefs, the child must understand 
that what­ever belief she or the adult has, backed by what­ever evidence, 
can always be incorrect. Without an objective standard, we can have all 
kinds of mind-­reading, but not an understanding of false beliefs.
Aspectuality in Language  ​A final task of the same general type is the dual-­
naming task (Doherty and Perner 1998). ­Children before the age of four 
or five years again have trou­ble reconciling the fact that the same object 
may be called horse or pony or in another case horse or animal (a version 
of the classic class-­inclusion task). Again, in point of fact ­there is no con­
flict ­here once one learns how linguistic labels work; one may call some­
thing an animal or a ­horse or a pony or a filly or a nag or a nuisance, all 
depending on how one wants to perspectivize the entity or situation for 
one’s communicative partner. In linguistic philosophy, it is said that the 
same object is being seen or construed ­under dif­fer­ent descriptions or dif­
fer­ent aspects. But young ­children may not initially understand the situa­
tion exactly like this, and may assume that an object’s label is an inherent 
property such that ­there is only one objectively correct label (at one time; 
see Markman 1989), which creates the conflict.
Recently, Rakoczy et al. (2014; see also Perner et al. 2011; Oktay-­Gür 
et al. 2018) tested young ­children for their understanding of aspectuality. 
They first saw a trick object in one state and assumed it was a toy carrot 
and then ­later saw it in another state and assumed it was a toy rabbit. It 

76	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
was only by four to five years of age that ­children understood that an ob­
ject they knew ­under two dif­fer­ent descriptions—­carrot and rabbit—­
could ­really be the same objective ­thing. So, again, we may posit that the 
younger ­children somehow thought that once something was ­under one 
description which defined what it was, it could not si­mul­ta­neously be 
something ­else. Importantly, Rakoczy et al. also found that ­children’s 
ability to perform well in this dual-­identity task correlated quite highly 
with their per­for­mance on a false-­belief task designed to be similar in its 
task structure and demands. This finding provides further support for the 
idea that many of the classic social-­cognitive tasks—­all of ­those described 
­here, for example—­involve a coordinating of perspectives, and that 
­children below four or five years of age have difficulty if the coordination 
involves si­mul­ta­neously two or more perspectives that conflict, based on 
a further coordination with an “objective” perspective.
Summary  ​Whether in everyday discourse or in psychological experiments, 
young ­children are motivated to resolve conflicting perspectives. Even 
two-­year-­olds are motivated to correct someone who calls an animal by 
the wrong name. But the perspective prob­lems in the classic tests of pre­
school social cognition pres­ent conflicting perspectives on propositions 
with truth conditions: the toy is ­either in ­here or in ­there; this is ­really an 
x or a y. That is, ­these tests involve in addition to individual perspectives 
an “objective” perspective that must be figured into any resolution of the 
conflict. That is done in dif­fer­ent ways in the dif­fer­ent tasks. For example, 
­children see an object that appears from dif­fer­ent directions as ­either green 
or blue (all over), and this seems, on the surface, to not be pos­si­ble. The 
solution is simply to recognize that the objective situation may si­mul­ta­
neously appear in dif­fer­ent ways from dif­fer­ent viewing ­angles. Similarly, 
an object may appear to be of one type but, from a dif­fer­ent perspective 
(with dif­fer­ent perceptual information), turn out to be something ­else in 
terms of what it actually does or is designed to do. The solution again is 
to recognize that ­there are two pos­si­ble perspectives on the same ­thing—
in this case, one of which accords with an “objective” perspective and one 
of which does not. In false-­belief tasks, it is clearly the case that the toy 
cannot be in two locations at once—­which would be the case if both pro­
tagonists had an “objective” perspective—so one of them simply has a 
false perspective (belief ) on the situation. And fi­nally, although young 
preschoolers may find it natu­ral to think of objects’ labels as an objective 

	
Social Cognition	
77
property, this leads them to a non-­adult-­like reluctance to label the same 
object with dif­fer­ent words. An understanding of the perspectival / aspec­
tual nature of linguistic conventions resolves the prob­lem. Resolution in 
all of ­these cases requires a flexible coordination of all the perspectives 
involved, including an “objective” perspective with which all ­others must 
somehow be compatible.
Constructing an “objective” perspective is only pos­si­ble at the second 
step of shared intentionality: collective intentionality. Whereas infants and 
toddlers aligning perspectives with ­others or even exchanging perspectives 
with ­others may involve some coordination of individual perspectives, 
­there is not, in addition, an objective perspective that needs to be coordi­
nated with ­these. I have previously argued that an objective perspective 
derives from the attempt of individuals who understand perspectives to 
construct a kind of perspectiveless perspective (the “view from nowhere,” 
in the terminology of Nagel 1986), as paradoxical as that may seem 
­(Tomasello 2014). This requires “collectivizing” many—­potentially an 
infinity—of perspectives and positing a kind of invariant objectivity that 
grounds them all. So the claim ­here is that only ­after three years of age 
do ­children begin to construct an objective perspective; this initially cre­
ates difficulties for them by putting two or more perspectives into con­
flict, but ultimately it facilitates solutions to perspective prob­lems. It does 
­these ­things ­because the executive level of cognitive functioning abhors 
a conflict; to resolve it ­children are led to construct an understanding of 
the subjective–­objective distinction.
We ­will see in subsequent chapters covering other developmental path­
ways that three years of age is indeed a kind of watershed in young 
­children’s cognitive and social functioning. This is the age at which they 
begin to transition from understanding and engaging with other individ­
uals to understanding and engaging with vari­ous kinds of group-­minded 
phenomena.
Individual and Cultural Variation
Perspective-­taking in all of its vari­ous forms has at least some maturational 
component. First, ­children with the biological deficit of autism strug­gle 
mightily with tasks of false belief and other perspective prob­lems. Some 
researchers even posit that the inability to understand false beliefs—as in­
dicative of a repre­sen­ta­tional theory of mind—is the key deficit in au­
tism (for example, Baron-­Cohen 1997). Second, the age at which ­children 

78	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
master the false-­belief task across a wide range of cultural contexts—­from 
hunter-­gatherer to industrialized and highly educated—is very similar (for 
example, Avis and Harris 1991; Callaghan et al. 2005; Wellman et al. 2008). 
And third, typically developing ­children in Western, middle-­class culture 
all begin to understand false beliefs within a fairly narrow age range be­
tween four and five years of age (Wellman et al. 2001).
However, ­there is one dimension of social experience that has been 
found to have a significant effect on the age at which ­children come to 
understand false beliefs, and that is linguistic communication. A number 
of studies have found correlations in ­children’s skills with language and 
false-­belief understanding (for a review, see Milligan et al. 2007). This re­
lationship does not lead to cross-­cultural differences ­because ­children 
growing up in virtually all cultural contexts get enough of the right kind 
of linguistic interaction for normal development, so individual variation 
in normal contexts is limited. But ­children who experience drastic reduc­
tions in their linguistic experience are a dif­fer­ent story. Peterson and Siegal 
(1995; see also Woolfe et al. 2002) report that ­children growing up deaf 
(and with varying degrees of experience with a conventional sign lan­
guage) are significantly delayed in their understanding of false beliefs. 
Moreover, ­there is a correlation such that the more linguistic experience 
they have, the better their skills with false beliefs. Even more striking, 
Pyers and Senghas (2009) report the extreme case of deaf ­children who 
grow up with ­little or no experience with a conventional sign language 
who fail nonlinguistically administered false-­belief tasks even as adults. 
­These aty­pi­cal cases support the view that the normal developmental 
pathway for coming to false-­belief understanding—­and this may apply to 
the other tasks involving conflicts of perspectives as well—­requires an en­
vironment in which ­children experience linguistic communication.
­There is no consensus as to which aspects of linguistic communication 
are key. I have stressed the exchange of (sometimes conflicting) perspec­
tives that occurs in everyday discourse as it is structured by joint atten­
tion to ­mental content. This view is strongly supported by the training 
study of Lohmann and Tomasello (2003; see also Hale and Tager-­Flusberg 
2003). They gave three-­year-­old ­children who had failed a false-­belief task 
three sessions of training then readministered a similar but dif­fer­ent false-­
belief task. ­There ­were four training conditions. In one (the No Lan­
guage control), ­children ­were given experience with deceptive objects that 
led them, and the experimenter, to have a false belief about the identity 

	
Social Cognition	
79
of the objects (for example, an apparent choco­late bar that turned out ­later 
to be an eraser). In this condition, ­there was no relevant language ( just 
­things like, “Oh, look!), and the ­children did not pro­gress in their false-­
belief understanding. But in three other conditions they did pro­gress. In 
the first of ­these, ­children had the same experience with deceptive objects, 
but the experimenter and the child engaged in discourse about the expe­
rience as it unfolded (notably, without the use of any ­mental state lan­
guage). For example, initially the experimenter asked the child to say 
what the object was; then the experimenter presented new information 
and asked the child to say what the object was; then the experimenter 
asked the child to say what she had believed the object was at the begin­
ning. This was called perspective-­shifting discourse, and it was designed 
to highlight for the child linguistically dif­fer­ent perspectives on—or beliefs 
about—­one and the same object. In a second successful condition, 
­children ­were not given a deceptive experience but only extra training in 
propositional attitude constructions of the type: “He knows that it’s an 
eraser.” Building on the work of de Villiers (for example, de Villiers and 
Pyers 2002), Tomasello and Rakoczy (2003) argue that such sentences en­
code a kind of potential perspective-­shifting within a single sentence: the 
clause he knows signals dif­fer­ent pos­si­ble perspectives or beliefs about the 
fact that the object is an eraser. Fi­nally, the third successful condition pro­
duced even greater pro­gress than the other two successful conditions, 
and that is ­because it was a combination of the two: ­children ­were given 
experience with deceptive objects while engaging in discourse containing 
propositional attitude constructions about this experience.
This study demonstrates that perspective-­shifting discourse—­especially 
when it contains propositional attitude constructions coordinating a sub­
jective attitude with a potential objective fact—is sufficient to produce, in 
a relatively short period of time, false-­belief understanding in ­children 
who other­wise would not attain it (as they did not in the No Language 
control condition). Why does discourse of precisely this type lead three-­
year-­olds to an understanding of false beliefs? ­Children have nonlinguistic 
experience all day ­every day in which they believe something to be the 
case that turns out not to be, or in which they see a person making a 
­mistake that she would never make if she understood the true situation. 
Why is this not enough? Following O’Madagain and Tomasello (forth­
coming), my view is that discourse around a common topic creates ex­
actly the kind of dual-­level structure that makes the notion of dif­fer­ent 

80	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
perspectives on a common focus of attention pos­si­ble in the first place—­but 
now on a new level. With language, we overtly specify conversational 
topics, and we may then express dif­fer­ent perspectives or attitudes about 
­those topics’ ­mental contents. We now have joint attention to, and dif­
fer­ent perspectives ­toward, ­mental content. When the topic is a truth-­
bearing proposition, dif­fer­ent discourse perspectives on that ­mental con­
tent can actually conflict in the sense that both cannot correspond in a 
straightforward way to the objective situation. I believe that this kind of 
discourse leads ­children to construct a distinction between subjective (ap­
pearance, opinion, belief) and objective (real­ity, fact, truth). And it may 
be that such discourse is especially effective when it occurs between or 
among peers, although this has never been experimentally tested. Sugges­
tive evidence comes from the fact that ­children with siblings pass false-­
belief tasks reliably earlier than do ­children without siblings (Ruffman 
et al. 1998).
The other variable consistently found to correlate with false-­belief un­
derstanding is executive function. In many dif­fer­ent studies, young 
­children’s ability to coordinate perspectives and inhibit perspectives—as 
mea­sured by vari­ous tasks of executive function—­correlate quite highly 
with tasks of false belief and other perspective coordination prob­lems (for 
example, Carlson and Moses 2001). When executive resources are experi­
mentally “depleted,” per­for­mance in false-­belief tasks suffers (Powell 
and Carey 2017), suggesting not just a correlational but a causal link. Co­
ordinating dif­fer­ent perspectives on one and the same situation requires 
power­ful capacities of executive regulation presumably ­because two per­
spectives, and perhaps an objective perspective as well, must be directly 
compared in a common repre­sen­ta­tional format (and any conflicts 
resolved).
As in the case of language, ­there is no consensus about precisely 
which skills of executive function are involved in the development of 
false-­belief understanding. However, three dif­fer­ent studies suggest that 
it is not just skills of inhibitory control at work (for example, the child 
coming to inhibit the pull of the real), but rather skills for coordinating 
perspectives or ­mental states. First, in the meta-­analysis of Devine and 
Hughes (2014), the strongest correlation with false-­belief understanding 
across many studies did not come from any mea­sure of delay of gratifi­
cation (inhibition only) but rather from the Dimension Change Card 

	
Social Cognition	
81
Sort (DCCS) task, which mea­sures something more like coordination of 
perspectives (often characterized as “cognitive flexibility”). Second, Diaz 
and Farrar (2017) found basically the same ­thing, with the DCCS task in 
their longitudinal study, showing a stronger correlation with ­later false-­
belief understanding than other (inhibitory control) mea­sures of execu­
tive function. Fi­nally, and even more specifically, Fizke et al. (2014) ad­
ministered several mea­sures of executive function and several mea­sures 
of ­mental state understanding to four-­year-­olds. They found that “rela­
tions [between executive function and false-­belief understanding] are 
strongest in such tasks where the ascriber herself is one of the two 
agents, that is has a belief or desire herself that stands in contrast to that 
to be ascribed to someone ­else. All in all, ­these findings suggest that ex­
ecutive function figures . . . ​in coordinating ­others’ and one’s own con­
flicting perspectives” (315). It is perhaps relevant in this same vein that 
one recent study found that executive function does not correlate with 
per­for­mance in infant false-­belief tasks (perhaps ­because they do not in­
volve any coordinations), but it does correlate with classic false-­belief 
tasks (Grosse Wiesmann et al. 2017).
Overall, the understanding of perspectives and beliefs is a develop­
mental achievement requiring the species-­typical ontogeny of basic skills 
of joint intentionality such as joint attention and, ­after age three, skills of 
collective intentionality for taking an objective view of ­things. An inte­
gral part of this ontoge­ne­tic pro­cess is some specific social-­interactional 
processes—­those that occur in perspective-­shifting discourse with ­others, 
involving participants engaging in joint attention to ­mental contents. In 
normal ­human environments across cultures, all typically developing 
­children get enough of the right kinds of experience so that cross-­cultural 
variations are typically small. The clash of perspectives in such discourse 
serves as the raw material, as it ­were, to pro­cesses of executive self-­
regulation. ­These executive pro­cesses naturally work to resolve clashes 
of perspective in the raw experiential material by constructing—in the 
single repre­sen­ta­tional format of the executive level—­new forms of un­
derstanding in order to make initially puzzling phenomena comprehen­
sible: an object can appear differently to dif­fer­ent individuals; an object 
can appear to be one ­thing but ­really be another; ­people can believe 
something that is not the case; and one item of experience may have 
many labels.

82	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
Becoming “Objective”
A chimpanzee sees a monkey escaping, and he knows that his conspecific 
sitting next to him sees the monkey escaping also. The conspecific knows 
the same of his partner. They both are attending to the monkey escaping, 
and each knows that the other is too. But they are not jointly attending to 
it; they are not attending to it together as a “we.” Two ­humans in that 
same situation could, if so motivated, attend to the monkey escaping 
­together in joint attention. This creates between the two of them a kind 
of shared world, within which they each distinguish their two perspec­
tives. They each also understand that both of their perspectives—­that is, 
their beliefs—on the situation could potentially contrast with an objective 
(perspectiveless) view of it. Welcome to ­human real­ity.
Theoretical Explanations
The existing range of theoretical explanations for the ontogeny of ­humans’ 
unique skills of social cognition is very broad. Dif­fer­ent accounts focus 
on dif­fer­ent explanatory ­factors—­invoking every­thing from innate mod­
ules to explicit instruction from the culture—­and sometimes focus on dif­
fer­ent segments of the total development pathway as I have described 
it ­here.
Focusing on the finding that ­children with autism perform poorly on 
tasks of false-­belief understanding, theorists such as Leslie (1994) have hy­
pothesized the existence of an innate “theory of mind” module. Based 
on similar findings concerning ­children with autism and deficits in joint 
attention, Baron-­Cohen (1995) has proposed as additional innate modules 
a shared-­attention mechanism and an eye-­detection device. Innate 
modules are supposed to unfold relatively in­de­pen­dent of specific experi­
ences, and they are not supposed to interact in meaningful ways with 
one another or with other domains of psychological development. Em­
pirically, the prob­lem is that much evidence suggests that joint attention 
and “theory of mind” are neither innate, in the sense intended, nor totally 
modular. The main prob­lem with innateness is the finding that ­children 
with impoverished linguistic experience are severely delayed in false-­belief 
understanding, to the point that ­those with extreme impoverishment 
never acquire such understanding at all. The claim that experience is not a 
necessary ­factor in the development of false-­belief understanding is 

	
Social Cognition	
83
therefore clearly false. It is not that the ontogeny of false-­belief under­
standing does not have a strong maturational component; it clearly does. 
But a strong maturational component does not mean an innate module 
impervious to experience.
The case for joint attention as innate or maturational is much stronger, 
as befits a skill that emerges so early in ontogeny. Indeed, ­there are no sys­
tematic studies documenting significant individual or cultural differences 
in skills of joint attention (that is, not just differences in frequency, but 
qualitative differences), despite wide variation in ­children’s social experi­
ences. But in this case the question is about modularity. In general, the 
criteria for establishing what is a module are far from rigorous, and they 
differ significantly among investigators, with no widely accepted proce­
dures for resolving the differences (for a proposal for replacing modules 
with something more evolutionarily appropriate, see Barrett 2015). In ad­
dition, in a recent study, Sodian et al. (2016) found significant correlations 
between the joint attentional skills of twelve-­month-­old infants and their 
subsequent skills of false-­belief understanding some three years ­later (in­
de­pen­dent of any mediating influence of language). This study not only 
provides support for a coherent developmental pathway from joint atten­
tion to the coordination of perspectives, it also undermines any strong 
modularity account (see also Nelson et al. 2008). With re­spect to false-­
belief understanding in par­tic­u­lar, one could still maintain a “two-­systems” 
view (for example, Apperly and Butterfill 2009), but I would maintain that 
what turns infants’ submentalizing into four-­year-­olds’ mentalizing is pre­
cisely joint attention and the coordination of perspectives, which provide 
a plausible explanation for ­children’s per­for­mance in a number of other 
tasks as well.
On the opposite end of the theoretical continuum are approaches em­
phasizing the role of culture and socialization in the ontogeny of joint 
attention and false-­belief understanding (and related competencies). With 
re­spect to joint attention, theorists such as Bruner (1983) and Kaye (1982) 
have posited that treating infants as intentional agents and competent 
communicative partners is critical to the development of joint attention. 
Somewhat similarly, theorists such as Gergely and Watson (1996) and 
Rochat (2001) have posited that within social interactions it is critical for 
the infant’s social-­cognitive development that the adult “mirror” many of 
the infant’s be­hav­iors back to her in face-­to-­face interactions to provide 

84	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
feedback on their similarity as intentional agents but their difference as 
individuals. The prob­lem is that ­there are no data supporting any of 
­these ideas. As I have already noted, ­there are no systematic studies docu­
menting significant individual or cultural differences in skills of joint at­
tention (that is, not just differences in frequency of participation, but 
qualitative differences), despite the wide variation in ­children’s social ex­
periences. It is pos­si­ble that ­these kinds of learning experiences facilitate 
the pro­cess in some way or to some degree, but the cross-­cultural data in 
par­tic­u­lar suggest that they are not a necessary component in the normal 
developmental pathway.
With re­spect to false belief, cultural anthropologists for some time 
have insisted that not all cultures view the workings of the ­human mind 
in similar ways (for example, Shweder 1991). That may well be true of 
adults, as each culture may develop its own folk theory for explaining 
all kinds of complex adult be­hav­iors. But the data we have discussed 
on the similarities of false-­belief understanding of young ­children from 
dif­fer­ent cultures—­from Western industrialized countries to hunter-­
gatherer groups—­suggest that adult differences are an overlay on the 
universal childhood pro­cess. Nevertheless, Heyes and Frith (2014) have 
recently proposed that young ­children do not develop a “theory of mind” 
spontaneously, on the basis of their own experience, but rather it must 
be taught to them by adults. Indeed, ­these authors push an analogy be­
tween learning to read books and learning to read minds, that both are 
cultural skills that need to be culturally inculcated. Much of the evidence 
they cite in support of this view has to do with the role of language in 
the development of false-­belief understanding, but experience with lin­
guistic communication is not the same ­thing as cultural instruction. 
What the data support is the hypothesis that ­children construct under­
standings of ­mental states from their linguistic interactions with ­others, 
not that they are explic­itly taught about ­mental states via language, the 
way they are taught to read. ­There is basically no empirical support for 
the idea that young ­children can only develop an understanding of false 
belief and the coordination of perspectives if they are taught this by adults.
In between ­these two extremes of innate modules and adult instruc­
tion are theories that stress individual learning and cognitive construction. 
With re­spect to false belief, the most well-­known account is the so-­called 
theory theory (for example, Gopnik and Wellman 2012). Although ­there 
is explicit acknowl­edgment of a maturational component (expressed as a 

	
Social Cognition	
85
“starting state nativism” in Gopnik and Meltzoff 1997), the focus is on pro­
cesses of hypothesis testing and learning. Through the use of something 
like Bayesian learning algorithms, ­children come to propose, as does a sci­
entist proposing a theory, hy­po­thet­i­cal constructs (for example, beliefs 
and false beliefs) to explain their observations. The theory theory is in 
princi­ple applicable to all domains of cognitive development, including 
an understanding of causal relations in the physical world, with ­children 
forming dif­fer­ent theories to explain dif­fer­ent sets of phenomena. The 
prob­lem with this approach, in the current view, is that it is insufficiently 
social. In effect, in this approach young ­children are operating in the 
manner we have hypothesized for ­great apes: they treat inanimate objects 
and social partners all in the same way, as data for their theory construc­
tion using Bayesian algorithms (albeit in domain-­specific ways). This way 
of viewing ­things could account for the ability to imagine what ­others 
perceive and know, in the manner of ­great apes and ­human infants; how­
ever, without some account of shared intentionality and joint attention, 
­there is no notion of perspective. And without perspective, I would argue, 
­there is no raw material for the coordination of perspectives in coming 
to understand such ­things as false beliefs and the appearance-­reality dis­
tinction. Adding in pro­cesses of simulation helps (for example, Harris 
2005; Tomasello 1999), but again my view is that a focus solely on the in­
dividual child is not sufficient.
Shared intentionality theory occupies the same ­middle ground as 
does the theory theory and simulation theory, but the pro­cess is not con­
ceptualized as individual learning and cognitive construction but rather 
as social co-­construction within the context of ­children’s shared inten­
tionality interactions with ­others (including linguistic communication). 
To specify and concretize our account, I offer the developmental dia­
gram in Figure 3.2. Our starting point is ­great ape social-­cognitive on­
togeny (in the “tube” occupied by an infant and juvenile chimpanzee at 
­either end). The key competencies are gaze following and imagining 
what ­others perceive / know / infer, which first emerge in ­great ape on­
togeny between three and four years of age (and which have migrated in 
­human ontogeny to an earlier age—­see the dotted arrow). But none of 
­these individual abilities is sufficient for uniquely ­human social cognition; 
the creation of shared worlds with individual perspectives requires that 
skills for reading other minds be transformed by the uniquely ­human 
skills of shared intentionality.

86	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
The focus of our explanatory attention is the ­middle row of rectan­
gular boxes in Figure 3.2, flanked by an infant and young child at ­either 
end. The explanatory strategy is to invoke basic pro­cesses of shared in­
tentionality (depicted in the top two lines above the ­great ape tube) as 
the ultimate source of ­human uniqueness. I conceptualize ­these ontoge­
ne­tically as capacities that enter into ­great ape developmental pathways 
at the time points indicated (nine months for joint intentionality, and 
three years for collective intentionality) and, by fundamentally changing 
the kinds of social experiences individuals may have, transform it.
The first step (first box) is infants’ emotion sharing in protoconversa­
tions at around two months of age, which evolved as a new way for in­
fants to affiliate and bond with the many adults serving as their caregivers. 
It is unlikely that learning and experience play significant roles in the early 
ontogeny of this evolutionarily new form of social engagement (hence 
no surrounding shaded box); infants smile and laugh with their caregivers 
naturally, thus strengthening their social bonding without so much 
learning. ­Because infant apes also have affiliative emotions and direct emo­
tional expressions ­toward their caregivers—­just not ­these uniquely 
­human ones—­ontogeny in this case is aptly characterized as a transfor­
mation of the basic ­great ape pattern.
Joint attention emerges at around nine to twelve months of age (second 
box) as infants exercise in their social interaction with ­others their newly 
matured capacity for triadic engagement with an adult around an external 
entity (­here labeled as “dual-­level,” indicating the overall cognitive struc­
Mot: affiliate
Joint Intentionality
Collective Intentionality
Cog: dual-level
S-R: coordination
Cog: objectivity
S-R: normative
EMOTION
SHARING
Coop./Ling. Comm.
Conv. Comm.
5 years
4 years
3 years
2 years
1 year
0
JOINT
ATTENTION
ALIGN/EXCHANGE
PERSPECTIVES
JOINT ATT. TO
MENTAL CONTENT
COORDINATING
PERSPECTIVES
• gaze follow
• imagine mental states
• attachment
Figure  3.2 ​The ontoge­ne­tic emergence of young ­children’s uniquely ­human 
skills of social cognition. Abbreviations: ATT = attention; Cog = cognition; 
Coop. / Ling. Comm. = cooperative / linguistic communication; Conv. Comm. = 
conventional communication; Mot = motivation; S-­R = executive self-­regulation.

	
Social Cognition	
87
turing of joint intentionality as comprising si­mul­ta­neously shared atten­
tion and individual perspectives). ­There is no question that the ­great apes’ 
ability to imagine what ­others perceive and know nonperspectivally is 
foundational ­here, and indeed I have argued that in implicit tests of false 
belief ­human infants display this ­great ape ability already in the second 
year of life. But infants’ already existing motivation to share emotions with 
­others, along with the maturation of the dual-­level structure, transforms 
the apes’ basically individualistic social cognition into socially shared cog­
nition. The foundation of the nine-­month revolution is that infants be­
come able to form with ­others a joint agent, comprising two partners who 
act and experience ­things together as a “we.” The lightly shaded box 
around “joint attention” depicts my contention that this skill would not 
emerge without social interaction with ­others, although it does not re­
quire adult socialization or instruction and the requisite social interactions 
are invariably pres­ent in basically all ­human cultures.
The next steps in our account require a child with some reasonable 
competence in cooperative and linguistic communication (hence the 
“Cooperative / Linguistic Communication” and “Conventional Communi­
cation” skills listed below the boxes, depicting other emerging skills with 
their own developmental histories). The key skill is conversation in which 
the child and an adult jointly attend to a common topic of discourse, with 
each then making comments about that topic, expressing their own per­
spective on it. First I depict simply exchanging perspectives (third box, re­
quiring a coordination of perspectives, back and forth); “joint attention to 
­mental content” (fourth box) follows, as child and adult focus on the prop­
ositional content of what each of them is saying, each recognizing the 
two distinct perspectives involved. I do not propose in ­these ­later cases 
any additional maturational capacities. ­Children’s skills of joint attention 
and linguistic communication are sufficient, given the way that ­human 
social interaction works in general, for them to begin jointly attending to 
­mental content and seeking to resolve discrepancies. The child on a desert 
island would have no such clashes, and so no need to resolve anything, 
which suggests that the pro­cess is one of social co-­construction.
Of special importance in such discourse interactions are disagreements 
over the truth-­value of propositions ­because in this case ­there is an incom­
patibility of perspectives that would seem, on the surface, to preclude 
any ­simple and straightforward solution. What is required is that the child 
construct some new conceptualizations that resolve the incompatibility. 

88	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
In the most impor­tant cases, a key ele­ment in that resolution is a maturing 
of the capacity of collective intentionality, leading the child to conceptu­
alize the objective situation as distinct from any one person’s perspective 
on it. Indeed, I have argued that the maturation of this conceptualization 
is initially misleading to three-­year-­olds; they default to the view that 
­others directly perceive the objective situation, or that an objective entity 
or event cannot have two dif­fer­ent labels, or that an entity is objectively 
­either one ­thing or another. But then, by activating pro­cesses of execu­
tive (normative) self-­regulation in which she can compare dif­fer­ent per­
spectives or construals of something in one cognitive workspace, in one 
repre­sen­ta­tional format, the child constructs a solution: only one person 
is correct about the objective situation, or language actually allows dif­
fer­ent labels for the same objective situation, or an object can si­mul­ta­
neously appear like one ­thing but function like another (fifth box). The 
dark surround in this case indicates that the child herself constructs the 
outcome from her vari­ous social interactive experiences, on the executive 
level.
In terms of the respective roles of maturation and experience in all 
of this, the clear pattern is, not surprisingly, that the earlier skills and 
motivations of joint intentionality are more maturational and less 
plastic, whereas the ­later skills and motivations of collective intention­
ality can only come into being in individuals who have certain kinds 
of social and communicative interactions with ­others. But even in this 
latter case, we are not talking about adult instruction or socialization; 
rather, ­children construct, or co-­construct, from their sociocultural ex­
periences, and the general nature of ­these constructions is set by the 
developmental level of the ­children’s skills and motivations of shared 
intentionality.
One in­ter­est­ing way of looking at the maturational component is from 
the point of view of the biological deficits characteristic of ­children with 
autism spectrum disorder. ­Children with this disorder seem to have the 
general capacity to imagine what ­others perceive and know (Carpenter 
et al. 2001), but they display one or another form of aty­pi­cal development 
along the uniquely ­human pathway structured by shared intentionality, 
with severity varying widely across the spectrum. One hypothesis is that 
this variation depends mainly on age of onset of the disorder, as an indi­
cator of the skill that is impaired. Thus, high-­functioning autistic ­children 
(the ones tested in experiments) may have a ­later onset of the disorder 

	
Social Cognition	
89
and so have deficits mainly in coordinating perspectives and understanding 
false beliefs. In more severe cases it may be that the key deficit is in some­
thing earlier and more basic, such as in the joint attentional skills that 
create the possibility of perspectives and beliefs in the first place. And it is 
even pos­si­ble that deficits in emotion sharing during early infancy produce 
­children at the most severe end of the spectrum, who have trou­ble relating 
to ­others at all.
The other set of explanatory ­factors—­after maturation and experi­
ence—is pro­cesses of executive self-­regulation. As we discussed earlier, 
many studies have found that ­children’s skills of executive function un­
derlie their skills in false-­belief and similar tasks. Perspectives need to be 
coordinated—­and new ones constructed—in a common repre­sen­ta­tional 
format on the executive level. Although this interpretation is most plau­
sible for ­these ­later tasks involving perspective prob­lems, I would also 
argue that it is characteristic of ­children’s earlier aligning of perspectives 
in cooperative communication. Thus, as I have claimed previously, the 
one-­year-­old child’s new skills of joint attention enable her to view the 
social interaction in which she is engaged from a bird’s-­eye view, with both 
her own and her partner’s perspective in a single repre­sen­ta­tional format, 
which enables the aligning of ­those perspectives. The coordination of per­
spectives involves focusing on some, inhibiting ­others, and sometimes 
constructing new conceptual perspectives in what we called in Chapter 2 
“the individual self-­regulation of unique content.” Importantly, this co­
ordination is a strategic pro­cess involving not just attention and inhibi­
tion but also the strategic evaluation of dif­fer­ent possibilities (Lee and 
Carlson 2015).
This account of the early ontogeny of ­human social cognition is thus 
not nativistic—­although it invokes the maturation of uniquely ­human ca­
pacities as an integral part of the process—­but neither does it imagine 
that ­children learn ­these basic capacities from adult instruction. The ac­
count is rather constructivist, requiring both the maturation of uniquely 
­human capacities and the unique kinds of experience that ­these new ca­
pacities make pos­si­ble. Required as well is an executive level in which 
vari­ous subjective perspectives may be coordinated with each other and 
with an objective perspective and new concepts constructed. The current 
account is also not a “dual systems” view (so-­called modularity lite), but 
rather one of genuine developmental change or transformation (see Ra­
koczy 2015).

90	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
Cognitive Implications
And so we have the most basic structural framework of uniquely ­human 
cognition: socially shared realities and the ability to flexibly manipulate and 
coordinate dif­fer­ent perspectives on aspects of ­those shared realities (­mental 
coordination). This structural framework fundamentally transforms 
­great ape cognition by turning straightforward cognitive repre­sen­ta­tions 
into perspectival cognitive repre­sen­ta­tions. Moreover, this framework 
fundamentally transforms ­great ape thinking by enabling ­humans to co­
ordinate ­these dif­fer­ent perspectival repre­sen­ta­tions, first in social / com­
municative interactions with ­others, then within their own internalized 
thinking pro­cesses (Tomasello 2014). This creates the possibility of new 
kinds of concepts—­including ­those that depend on an objective perspec­
tive—­for understanding not only such social ­things as false beliefs and 
linguistic aspectuality, but also such nonsocial ­things as the relations be­
tween dif­fer­ent concepts in a hierarchy (as we ­shall see in Chapter 6).
I have stressed that the construction of this conceptual framework by 
individual ­children occurs within their shared intentionality interactions 
with ­others (experiences that other species are not capable of having). The 
medium through which this most often happens is cooperative, including 
linguistic, communication. Cooperative and linguistic communication are 
thus of crucial importance in ­children’s developing skills for jointly at­
tending with ­others to external situations and to one another’s ideas—­and 
for mentally coordinating within ­those shared realities. But cooperative 
and linguistic communication are in­ter­est­ing and impor­tant in their own 
right as well.

W ​4 ​w
Communication
Joint attention and perspective-­taking are so critical to ­human coopera­
tion and social interaction that the species has evolved new forms of com­
munication built out of them. Although many primates make inferences 
about what caused an individual to vocalize or act in a certain way (so-­
called functional reference), ­humans intentionally refer one another’s at­
tention to outside entities and situations—­thereby establishing joint at­
tention to them—­with the goal of triggering par­tic­u­lar inferences. The 
intentional-­inferential structure of ­human communication gives rise to a 
number of especially power­ful types of ­mental coordination and 
perspective-­taking (Sperber and Wilson 1986; Tomasello 2008).
In ontogeny, the pro­cess begins early as part of the nine-­month revo­
lution. With basic skills of joint attention already in place, at around eleven 
or twelve months infants begin to produce the pointing gesture with the 
immediate goal of establishing joint attention to some referential situa­
tion. But simply following the direction of a pointing fin­ger cannot de­
termine the intended referent. A child pointing in the direction of a dog, 
for example, might be intending to direct attention to the dog’s digging 
activity, or to the dog’s unusual fur, or to the ­simple fact of the dog’s pres­
ence. Determining which it is requires a pool of common ground be­
tween the pointing infant and her recipient, including shared assumptions 
about why she wants to establish joint attention in the first place. Thus, 
if the infant and I are searching together for the dog’s bone, I might inter­
pret her pointing gesture based on our common ground understanding 
that dogs often dig for bones, resulting in something like “perhaps the 
bone is ­there, where he is digging.” Within the space of our common 
ground, I make a recursive inference about what she intends for me to 
think. The pragmatic infrastructure of this species-­unique form of gestural 

92	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
communication is thus none other than the skills and motivations of 
joint intentionality: joint attention, common ground, cooperative motives, 
recursive inferences. Iconic gesturing or pantomime—­for example, 
miming a dog chewing a bone—­evokes the intended referent symbolically 
while still depending on the same joint intentionality infrastructure.
At some point in evolution, ­human communities began to convention­
alize the ­whole pro­cess. That is to say, they created par­tic­u­lar gestures 
and sounds that every­one in the community used in the same way when 
they wanted to establish joint attention to par­tic­u­lar referents, even in their 
absence. ­These conventions worked ­because, and only ­because, every­one 
shared in cultural common ground how they ­were conventionally used by 
every­one. In ontogeny, ­children do not need to conventionalize commu­
nicative symbols ­because the conventions already exist around them; they 
simply need to conform. But conforming to the use of a communicative 
convention is far from straightforward ­because communicative conven­
tions embody perspectives on ­things: for example, the exact same entity 
is a ball, a toy, or a gift from Papa. In addition, grammatical constructions 
are conventional schemas whose major function is to symbolize events 
from a par­tic­u­lar perspective: for example, The apple was eaten encodes 
the event from the perspective of the apple, whereas The girl ate the apple 
encodes the event from the perspective of the girl. The perspectival na­
ture of linguistic symbols and constructions—as opposed to the ­simple 
abstract repre­sen­ta­tions of apes—­endows the language learner’s thinking 
with extraordinary flexibility and power. In addition, the use of linguistic 
skills of ­these types in discourse with ­others—­involving all kinds of mis­
understandings and perspectival mismatches—­facilitates or even enables 
young ­children’s remarkable abilities to coordinate perspectives as they 
executively self-­regulate their discourse interactions with ­others.
Obviously, ­great apes do not communicate with one another using a 
conventional language. When ­humans attempt to teach them one—in the 
form of a manual or graphic sign language—­the result is a socially thin 
version of the real ­thing. This is no surprise ­because, in fact, ­great apes 
do not even point for one another referentially or gesture for one another 
iconically in their natu­ral communication. When they are interacting with 
­humans, ­great apes can learn to use something resembling a pointing 
­gesture, but again the result is a socially thin version of the real ­thing. 
The reason ­great apes do not naturally communicate referentially or 
conventionally—­and thus why their human-­taught skills are socially 

	
Communication	
93
thin—is that they do not possess the shared intentionality infrastructure 
on which ­human gestural and linguistic communication is built.
In this chapter, then, we attempt to describe and explain the ontogeny 
of the quin­tes­sen­tial skill of ­human uniqueness: linguistic communication. 
But to explain the ontogeny of linguistic communication we must first 
explain uniquely ­human cooperative communication, as manifest in the 
earlier emerging gestures of pointing and pantomiming (which them­
selves depend on skills and motivations for joint attention). But before 
this, as always, we begin with ­great apes to see what they can tell us 
about evolutionary foundations.
From Apes: Intentional Communication
Biologists consider all kinds of ­things to be communication, from the 
bright coloration of birds to the large antlers of deer, requiring only that 
someone can gain some information from them. But if we focus on 
the communicator and its psy­chol­ogy, the birds and deer are not using 
their coloration or horns actively to attain goals. They do not direct ­these 
signals to individuals, they do not adjust ­these signals for dif­fer­ent cir­
cumstances, and they do not modify ­these signals if they fail. Indeed, in­
tentional communication with ­these characteristics is exceedingly rare in 
the animal kingdom. The majority of nonhuman primate communica­
tion is thus not intentional at all, and this includes almost all vocal signals, 
which are mostly inflexible and stereotypic.
­Great apes distinguish themselves from other mammals and primates 
in using their gestural communication flexibly and intentionally. We know 
this ­because, unlike vocalizations, (1) ­there are many and large individual 
differences in the gestural repertoires of dif­fer­ent individuals of the same 
species; (2) individuals use the same gesture flexibly for dif­fer­ent commu­
nicative ends, and also dif­fer­ent gestures for the same communicative 
end; (3) individuals typically produce a gesture only when the recipient is 
appropriately attentive, and afterward often monitor the recipient’s reac­
tion and wait for a response; and (4) individuals sometimes use sequences 
or combinations of multiple gestures when the other does not react ap­
propriately (see Tomasello et al. 1985, 1989, 1994, 1997; Call and Toma­
sello 2007). And so, although primate vocal communication obviously 
shares with ­human linguistic communication the vocal-­auditory channel, 

94	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
­great ape gestural communication shares with ­human linguistic commu­
nication foundational aspects of its manner of functioning—­the inten­
tional and flexible use of learned communicative signals.
­Great Ape Gestural Communication
­Great apes employ two basic types of intentional gestures: intention-­
movements and attention-­getters. Intention-­movement gestures are so­
cial actions that have been ritualized ontoge­ne­tically. Ontoge­ne­tically rit­
ualized intention-­movements are such ­things as arm-­raise to initiate play 
and touch-­back (by infants to moms) to request being carried. Intention-­
movement signals are basically abbreviations of full-­fledged social actions, 
and they are almost always dyadic in the sense that the communicator is 
attempting to influence the be­hav­ior of the recipient directly in the in­
teraction (not refer to some third entity).
For ­those intention-­movement gestures that are learned, the learning 
pro­cess, using arm-­raise to illustrate, goes something like this.
	
1.	Initially one youngster approaches another with rough-­and-­
tumble play in mind, raises his arm in preparation to play-
­hit the other, and then actually hits and jumps on to begin 
playing.
	
2.	Over repeated instances, the recipient learns to anticipate 
this sequence on the basis of the initial arm-­raise alone, and 
so begins to play upon perceiving this initial step.
	
3.	The communicator learns to anticipate this anticipation, 
and so raises his arm, monitors the recipient, and waits for 
her to react—­expecting this arm-­raise to initiate the play.
This pro­cess yields an ontoge­ne­tically ritualized gesture, arm-­raise, that 
the communicator produces intentionally to initiate play. She then moni­
tors the response of the recipient, trying something ­else if the desired re­
sponse is not forthcoming. The touch-­back gesture is learned in a similar 
way, as the infant initially grabs the ­mother’s back and pulls it down phys­
ically so as to climb on; this is then ritualized into a light touch of mom’s 
back, waiting for her to lower it in response (for a detailed longitudinal 
analy­sis of this be­hav­ior in infant bonobos, see Halina et al. 2013). With 
intention-­movements, the meaning of the gesture derives directly from 
the original social action.

	
Communication	
95
The other kind of ape gesture is attention-­getters, which may be unique 
to primates or even ­great apes. Attention-­getters are such ­things as a 
ground-­slap, poke-­at, and throw-­stuff, which serve to attract the attention 
of the recipient to the slapping, poking, or throwing communicator—­
again mostly in dyadic fashion without external referents. But they op­
erate somewhat differently from intention-­movements. What happens in 
the prototypical case is that the youngster is in a play mood—­which is ap­
parent from her mood-­induced “play face and posture” display—­and the 
attention-­getter serves to draw attention to the display. Another example 
is when male chimpanzees who are in the mood for sex engage in leaf-­
clipping be­hav­ior, which makes a sharp, loud noise that attracts the atten­
tion of females to their erect penis. Importantly, in both of ­these cases 
the “meaning” or function of the communicative act as a ­whole resides 
not in the attention-­getting gesture but in the involuntary display, which 
the individual knows the recipient must see in order to react appropriately. 
Evidence for this interpretation is that on some occasions apes ­will actu­
ally hide a display from ­others, such as covering up a facial fear-­grimace 
display with their hands.
­Great apes do not use a pointing gesture with one another; it is not a 
part of their natu­ral communicative repertoire. Interestingly, however, 
apes who grow up around ­humans can learn to command ­others by 
“pointing” using their ­whole hand, mostly to ­things they want to have or 
locations they want to access (Leavens and Hopkins 1998). One inter­
pretation of this be­hav­ior is that it is a kind of ritualized reaching that 
­humans (but not other apes) respond to (as if it ­were efforts at real 
reaching) by retrieving objects for them. Thus, for example, van der 
Goot et al. (2014) presented chimpanzees with a desirable object next to 
a ­human but some distance away. Chimpanzees basically never pointed 
to the desired object; instead they locomoted over to it and then reached 
ritualistically through the mesh for it (that is, “pointed” for the ­human). 
­Human infants in this same situation mostly just pointed from a distance. 
In another recent study, Halina et al. (in press) had a ­human respond 
to apes’ pointing to food ­either by looking at it but not giving it (un­
willing condition) or by looking in a wrong direction (misunderstanding 
condition). Apes did not respond differently in the two dif­fer­ent condi­
tions, as ­human infants do (Grosse et al. 2010a), suggesting that their 
pointing is not so much about directing the attention of ­others as it is 
about getting what they want. A reasonable interpretation, therefore, is 

96	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
that apes’ pointing comprises commands to ­humans via ritualized 
reaching.
To summarize, from a psychological point of view, Figure 4.1 depicts 
the intentional structure of apes’ two types of gesture. In all cases, the 
gesturing ape wants the recipient to do something, and this is effected 
­either directly by an intention-­movement or indirectly by an attention-­
getter in which the gesturing ape wants the recipient to see something 
(and then, as a result, to do something). As we ­shall see, ­these two types 
of gesture form the evolutionary basis for ­human ­children’s pantomiming 
and pointing, respectively.
­Human ­Children
Soon ­after the ­middle of the first year, before the nine-­month revolution, 
infants often produce ritualized body movements that are similar to ­great 
apes’ intention-­movement gestures. For example, having tried to climb up 
an adult and having been picked up as a result, ­later they might raise their 
arms ­toward the adult (and perhaps whine) as a request to be picked up. 
Such gestures are like ­great ape intention-­movements in that they are ex­
clusively (1) imperative or directive, not informative, in intent, and (2) 
aimed at regulating the dyadic interaction between the gesturer and an­
other person, not at directing the other’s attention to some third, external 
entity or situation referentially.
Infants also at this age do something similar to ­great apes’ attention-­
getters by making movements or sounds that draw attention to themselves 
You SEE Z
=>
You DO X
=>
attention-
getter
You DO X
=>
intention-
movement
Figure 4.1 ​Intentionality under­lying the two main types of ­great ape gesture 
(from Tomasello 2008).

	
Communication	
97
in acts of what Bates (1976) calls “showing off.” And analogous to apes’ 
ritualized reaching cum pointing, infants at around nine or ten months of 
age begin producing a “whole-­hand pointing” gesture. Similar to apes, 
infants perform a kind of ritualized reaching, in which they expect an 
adult to retrieve an object for them. Liszkowski and Tomasello (2011) 
found that infants did a fair amount of such ritualized whole-­hand pointing 
in some contexts, always for imperative purposes. Interestingly, this be­
hav­ior did not correlate with infants’ comprehension of an adult’s index-­
finger pointing (whereas infants’ own index-­finger pointing did so). In a 
similar vein, Cameron-­Faulkner et al. (2015) reported that infants’ index-­
finger pointing was not predicted by their earlier ritualized reaching but 
rather by their earlier attempts to offer or show objects to adults coop­
eratively. ­These findings suggest that whole-­hand pointing and index-­
finger pointing are distinct acts; it is pos­si­ble that the former represents a 
legacy from apes whereas the latter emanates from the nine-­month revo­
lution and skills of joint intentionality. Indeed, this ­will be the hypothesis 
in the next section.
In general, ­human infants’ ritualized gestures emerge at more or less 
the same developmental period as ­great apes’ ritualized gestures 
(Figure 4.2). The assumption in both cases is that the par­tic­u­lar gestures 
that apes and infants ritualize derive from par­tic­u­lar social interactions, 
0
6
12
18
bonobo
chimpanzee
gorilla
orangutan
infant
ritualizations
infant
point
Figure 4.2 ​Approximate age (in months) of emergence of ritualized gestures 
for infants of ­humans (italics) and four species of ­great apes. ­There are no sys­
tematic differences between intention-­movements and attention-­getters. The 
age of emergence of ­human infant pointing is indicated for comparison. Ape 
data are based on compilation from Tomasello et  al. (1994) and Schneider 
et al. (2012); child approximations are from Bates (1976).

98	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
which include reaching and attempts to attract the attention of ­others to 
the self. So what infants are inheriting phyloge­ne­tically is a capacity for 
ritualizing social be­hav­iors, although of course each ritualization is indi­
vidually learned.
Cooperative Communication
Some months ­after they start producing ritualized gestures, in conjunc­
tion with the nine-­month joint intentional revolution, infants begin pro­
ducing some new and species-­unique forms of gestural communication. 
The two main types of infant gesture are (1) pointing, in which the infant 
invites another person to jointly attend with her to some external situa­
tion by protruding her fin­ger in a direction, and (2) pantomiming (or iconic 
gesture), in which the infant invites another person to join her in imag­
ining a situation by representing it in her own action. Pointing is similar 
to ­great ape attention-­getters in that the communicator is attempting to 
manipulate the recipient’s attention. Iconic gestures are similar to ­great 
ape intention-­movements in that the communicator is attempting to com­
municate by performing, in stylized form, an action. But infants’ pointing 
and pantomiming are used referentially; that is, they are not just to de­
mand action or draw attention to the self but to direct attention (that is, 
to share attention) to external entities or situations. And the under­lying 
motive is not just to demand something but also, just as often, to inform 
­others of ­things helpfully or to share information and attitudes with ­others 
as a way of expanding common ground.
Pointing
Beginning at around their first birthdays, ­human infants use index-­finger 
pointing for three basic communicative motives, all cooperative: to re­
quest help from the recipient (requestive), to offer helpful information to 
the recipient (informative), and to express an attitude, such as excite­
ment, that they hope the recipient ­will share (expressive). ­These social 
motives predate the emergence of pointing—­requesting help by crying, 
sharing emotions in protoconversations, and physically helping 
(emerging contemporaneously)—­and are clearly apparent in the con­
trasting vocal intonations that typically accompany the pointing act: the 
requestive motive is accompanied by crying or whining; the expressive 

	
Communication	
99
motive is accompanied by expressions of excitement and joy; and the in­
formative motive typically is accompanied by no overt emotional expres­
sion at all. Figure 4.3 depicts ­these originating social motives and also the 
fact that the emergence of joint intentionality at nine months of age pro­
vides the cognitive and motivational infrastructure necessary for infants 
to begin using pointing communicatively to effect ­these preexisting so­
cial ends.
Expressive Pointing  ​Beginning with the classic research of Werner and Ka­
plan (1963) and continuing with the first modern researchers of ­children’s 
early gestures such as Bates (1976) and Bruner (1974), every­one has rec­
ognized that ­human infants often point simply to share interest and at­
tention to some exciting situation, and no one has seriously posited such 
a communicative motive for any other primate. For example, if an infant 
and his ­mother encounter an in­ter­est­ing animal across the park, from 
around twelve months of age the infant ­will typically point excitedly 
­toward it, looking to the ­mother to share his excitement—­the basic pro­
cess of emotion sharing, extended referentially. Importantly, he ­will also 
Point to Request Help - Imperative
Demand Action 
[crying] 
Share Emotions 
[protoconversation] 
Point to Share Attitudes - Expressive
Point to Offer Help - Informative
0
3
6
Age in Months
Skill
Level
9
12
Offer Help 
Emergence of Joint Intentionality
Figure 4.3 ​A developmental depiction of how three fundamental social mo­
tives become transformed by shared intentionality into the three main types of 
infant pointing, all referential (from Tomasello 2008).

100	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
point in this same manner if an object he has already sharing his atten­
tion to with an adult begins to do something new and in­ter­est­ing. The 
referent of a pointing gesture is thus not an object but a ­whole situation: 
the fact that an in­ter­est­ing animal has just appeared or the puppet we are 
looking at is now dancing. (Situations are precursors of propositions; see 
Tomasello 2014.)
Liszkowski et al. (2004) attempted to identify experimentally exactly 
what motivates the infant to use an expressive pointing gesture. They had 
an infant watch some dolls; then suddenly one of the dolls would begin 
to dance in an animated manner. An adult sat facing the infant with his 
back to the dolls so that he could not see them without turning around. 
What was experimentally manipulated was the adult’s reaction to the in­
fant’s pointing gesture. (1) When the adult did nothing, the infants soon 
quit pointing. (2) When the adult reciprocated the infant’s emotion but 
never turned around to look at the dolls (testing the hypothesis that the 
infant simply wanted the adult to show some emotion), the infants kept 
pointing insistently to try to get the adult to look. (3) When the adult 
turned around and looked but expressed no emotion (testing the hypo­
thesis that infants simply wanted the adult to look), the infants repeated 
their pointing gesture for a while but soon became discouraged. (4) When 
the adult reacted to the infant’s pointing gesture by turning around to 
look at the dolls and then looking back at the infant to express positive 
emotion and excitement (the key condition: reflecting what adults natu­
rally do most often in the real world), the infants ceased pointing ­because 
their goal of sharing interest and attention with the adult had been suc­
cessfully accomplished. Infants’ expressive pointing is designed to share 
emotions and attitudes with an adult about some external situation.
From an adult point of view, we may think about what infants are ­doing 
­here as a kind of gossiping (Dunbar 1996). When adults gossip their main 
goal is simply to share information and attitudes with another person so 
as to build their common ground, both conceptually and emotionally. If 
I excitedly inform you that I got a new job, I expect you to be excited about 
it as well; if you look sad, I ­will not know how to react. Thus, Liszkowski 
et al. (2007) followed up on their (2004) study by having the adult follow 
the infant’s pointing gesture at the dolls and then ­either match the infant’s 
emotional expression (by showing excitement) or not match it (by showing 
a lack of interest). The infants ­were clearly more satisfied with the com­
municative exchange when the adult matched their emotional expression. 

	
Communication	
101
The development ­here may be seen as ­going from protoconversations, in 
which infant and adult share positive emotions directly face to face, to 
something resembling a real conversation in which they share interest and 
attention about some external situation or topic.
Requestive Pointing  ​Great apes’ and other animals’ communicative acts are 
aimed almost exclusively at getting ­others to do what they want them to. 
Many ­human speech acts are also aimed at this imperative goal, but it can 
be achieved in two dif­fer­ent ways (actually two ends of a continuum). On 
the one hand, an individual can command another, perhaps even backed 
by a threat, to do something. On the other hand, an individual can po­
litely, even indirectly, request that another—if it is not too much trou­ble—­
help her with something. Such requests for help are pos­si­ble ­because 
both interactants assume that the other is a cooperative being who wants 
to help. Indeed, the majority of such requests are actually, if taken liter­
ally, ­simple statements of the requester’s internal state or even of some 
state of the world, and it is left up to the requestee what to do about it. 
For example, I can ask for the win­dow to be opened by saying “I’d like 
the win­dow open” (articulating my need or desire), “Could you open the 
win­dow?” (asking about your ability to help), or “That win­dow is closed” 
(making a statement about the world). Only a fundamentally cooperative 
person would take the hint and respond to ­these indirect requests by ac­
tually helping.
­Human infants get adults to attend to their needs by crying. At the be­
ginning, crying is not an intentional act, but it soon becomes one by 
being ritualized into whining. As noted earlier, whole-­hand pointing with 
whining is a way that infants, even before their first birthdays, command 
adults to get a specific object for them. But not long ­after the nine-­month 
revolution infants begin not just commanding adults but making coop­
erative requests, informing them of their needs and trusting them to react 
appropriately. Two recent studies with one-­year-­old infants illustrate this.
First, Grosse et al. (2010a) set up situations in which eighteen-­month-­old 
infants requested that an adult fetch them an object, typically by pointing 
at it and whining. The study employed a 2 × 2 design. In some cases the 
adult understood the request correctly, but in other cases she did not. In 
some cases the adult fulfilled the child’s request faithfully, but in other 
cases she did not. The result was that even ­these mostly prelinguistic 
infants ­were not focused on commanding adult be­hav­ior but rather on 

102	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
communicating their desire to the adult, knowing that it was up to the 
adult ­whether or not she would comply. Thus, if the adult misunder­
stood their request but (miraculously) fetched the appropriate object 
anyway (in response to the child pointing and whining at the cow, the 
adult said, “Oh, you want the ­horse? Sorry, I can only give you the cow”), 
the infants’ nevertheless repeated or attempted to repair their request so 
that the adult would know what they had intended. In contrast, if the 
adult understood the request correctly, infants did not repeat or repair it, 
even if the adult refused to give them the desired object (in response to 
the child pointing and whining at the cow, the adult said, “Oh, you want 
the cow? Sorry, I can only give you the ­horse”). The point is that the goal 
of the ­children’s requestive gesture was to make sure that the adult knew 
what they intended; they knew that afterward it was up to the adult 
­whether or not she deci­ded to comply.
Second, in a study of infants’ comprehension of requests, Grosse et al. 
(2010b) had an adult request that infants (twenty-­one months of age) fetch 
them a battery that would allow them to turn on a flashlight. The trick 
was that ­there was one battery right in front of the adult, within his reach, 
and another on a ­table some meters away. With no other cues available, 
­children automatically understood the request to be for the faraway bat­
tery, presumably ­because a cooperative person would never request that 
someone do something that he could more easily do for himself. Note 
that if the child understood this simply as a command to do something, 
with no assumptions about cooperativeness, then ­either battery could be 
the target of the adult’s request. In a variation, Grosse et al. repeated the 
experiment but in this case the adult had her hands full carry­ing heavy 
objects. In this case it made sense to request help fetching an object even 
if it was close by; indeed, in this case infants ­were just as likely to fetch 
one battery as the other. The point is that infants understand requests as 
reflecting the basic logic not of command and threat, but of cooperation 
and helping. And they can use this same logic to make even “larger” infer­
ences: when eighteen-­month-­olds run out of blocks and then see an adult 
holding up a key for them ostensively, they infer that this key may be used 
to open the door of the cabinet containing more blocks (Schulze and To­
masello 2015) ­because they trust that the adult is attempting to help them.
Informative Pointing  ​Humans also point to situations for ­others altruisti­
cally, simply to supply them with helpful information. For example, Lisz­

	
Communication	
103
kowski et al. (2006) placed twelve-­month-­olds in vari­ous situations in 
which they observed an adult misplace an object or lose track of it in some 
way and then start searching. In ­these situations infants pointed to the 
sought-­for object (more often than to distractor objects that ­were mis­
placed in the same way but ­were not needed by the adult); in so ­doing, 
they showed no signs of wanting the object for themselves (no whining, 
reaching, or so forth). The infants simply wanted to help the adult by in­
forming her of the location of the sought-­for object. Liszkowski et al. 
(2008) did something similar but in this case the sought-­for object was con­
trasted with another whose location the adult knew (both objects had 
fallen onto the floor on ­either side of the adult, one while the adult was 
looking and one while she was not). This variation shows that the infants 
understood that the adult was ignorant of the location of one of the 
objects, so the function of their informing gesture was to help her not with 
something she knew but with something she did not know. Chimpanzees 
and other apes do not point for ­humans with this same informative mo­
tive. Indeed, Bullinger et al. (2011c) attempted to elicit pointing from 
chimpanzees in vari­ous situations, and found that they pointed only to 
request something for themselves, not to help the ­human get something 
for herself (as ­human infants did).
The importance of the informative motive in infant communication 
cannot be overemphasized. Not only does it highlight the cooperative na­
ture of the communicative act, but it also highlights the inferences that 
are required to comprehend that act in the manner intended. The recip­
ient of a cooperative communicative act asks herself: given that we know 
together that he is trying to help me, why does he think that I ­will find 
the situation he is pointing out to me relevant to my concerns. Consider 
­great apes. If food is hidden in one of two buckets and then a ­human 
points to one of the buckets, apes are clueless (for a review, see Toma­
sello 2006). Apes follow the ­human’s pointing and looking to the bucket, 
but then they do not make the seemingly straightforward inference that 
the ­human is directing their attention ­there ­because he thinks it is somehow 
relevant to their current search for the food. They do not make this rele­
vance inference ­because it does not occur to them that the ­human is trying 
to inform them helpfully (­because ape communication is always impera­
tive), and this means that they are totally uninterested in why the ­human 
is pointing to one of the boring buckets. Importantly, it is not that apes 
cannot make inferences from ­human be­hav­ior at all. If a ­human first sets 

104	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
up a competitive situation with them then reaches desperately ­toward one 
of the buckets, the ­great apes know immediately that the food must be 
in that one (Hare and Tomasello 2004). They make the competitive in­
ference “He wants in that bucket, so the food must be in ­there,” but they 
do not make the cooperative inference “He wants me to know that the 
food is in that bucket.”
This pattern of be­hav­ior contrasts markedly with that of ­human in­
fants in this object-­choice task. In this same situation, prelinguistic infants 
of only fourteen months of age trust that the adult is pointing out to them 
something relevant to their current search—­they comprehend the infor­
mative motive—­and so they know immediately that the pointed-to bucket 
is the one containing the reward (Behne et al. 2005). Moreover, Behne et al. 
(2012) tested twelve-­month-­old infants, just beginning to point themselves, 
for comprehension in this situation and then reversed the roles, giving 
them the opportunity to point informatively to help the adult. What they 
found was a strong correlation between per­for­mance in the two tasks: in­
fants who ­were good at comprehending adult informative pointing ­were 
the ones who pointed informatively for the adult. This suggests that from 
the beginning infants produce their informative pointing gestures with 
comprehension of both its cooperative and its social-­cognitive bases.
Cognitive Under­pinnings  ​Engaging in cooperative communication of this 
type requires some new types of cognitive repre­sen­ta­tion and inference. 
With re­spect to cognitive repre­sen­ta­tion, the key novelty is that the par­
ticipants in the communicative interaction share some common-­ground 
understanding of a situation, which serves to perspectivize it. For example, 
in pointing to the bucket in the object-­choice task—­given a common-­
ground understanding that we are searching for a hidden object—­the 
communicator is not pointing to it qua physical object or qua vessel for 
carry­ing ­water, but rather qua location for the hidden object: I am in­
forming you of the fact that that the reward is located in ­there. Coopera­
tive pointing thus already creates dif­fer­ent conceptualizations or construals 
of ­things—it perspectivizes the referent for the recipient—­which pre­
figures the ability of linguistic creatures to place one and the same 
­entity ­under alternative “descriptions” or “aspectual shapes.”
With re­spect to inference, the key point is that the inferences used in 
cooperative communication are socially recursive. Thus, to comprehend 
an informative gesture as intended, ­there occurs a kind of backing-and-

	
Communication	
105
forthing with individuals making inferences about the partner’s inten­
tions ­toward my intentional states. In the object-­choice task, for example, 
the recipient infers that the communicator intends that she know that 
the hidden object is ­under that bucket—­a socially recursive inference that 
­great apes apparently do not make. This inference requires in all cases an 
abductive leap, something like: his pointing in the direction of that other­
wise boring bucket would make sense (that is, would be consistent 
with common ground, relevance, and newness) if it is the case that he 
intends that I know where the object is. The communicator, for his part, 
is attempting to help the recipient make that abductive leap in the way 
he intends. To do this the communicator must engage in some kind of 
simulation, or thinking, in which he imagines how pointing in a par­tic­
u­lar direction ­will lead the recipient to make a par­tic­u­lar abductive infer­
ence: “If I point in this direction, what inferences ­will she make about 
my intentions ­toward her intentional states?” And then, when making 
her abductive inference, the recipient can potentially take into account 
the communicator’s taking into account of what kind of inference she is 
likely to make about his communicative intentions.
Further in this direction is the phenomenon of “markedness” (typically 
described with re­spect to language, but also applicable to nonlinguistic 
communication). Liebal et al. (2011) had an adult and a two-­ or three-­
year-­old child tidying up toys into a large basket. In the normal course of 
events, when the adult pointed to a small box on the floor the child took 
this to suggest that she should tidy up this box into the basket as well. But 
in some cases the adult pointed to the box with flashing eyes and a kind 
of insistent pointing directed at the child, obviously not the normal way 
of ­doing it. The adult clearly intended something dif­fer­ent from the norm. 
In this case, many ­children looked at the adult puzzled but then proceeded 
to open the box and look at what was inside (and tidy it up). The most 
straightforward interpretation of this be­hav­ior is that the child understood 
that the adult was anticipating how she would construe a normal point, 
which he did not want; so he was marking his pointing gesture so that 
she would be motivated to search for a dif­fer­ent interpretation. This is the 
child thinking about the adult thinking about her thinking about his 
thinking.
Fi­nally, another impor­tant type of inference in infants’ communication 
is the exclusion inference. For example, Moll et al. (2006) had fourteen-­ 
to eighteen-­month-­old infants play with an adult and a toy drum. When 

106	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
a new adult entered the room and pointed to the drum excitedly, the child 
assumed he was talking about the drum. But if the adult with whom the 
child had just been sharing interest in the drum pointed to it excitedly in 
exactly the same way, the child did not assume that he was excited about 
the drum as a ­whole: how could he be, since it is old news for us? Rather, 
infants assumed that the adult’s excitement must be aimed at something 
new about the drum that they had not previously noticed, so they looked 
for some new aspect, for example, on the adult’s side of the drum. Infants 
made the inference that, ­because the adult desired to be informative, she 
was not excitedly indicating something already shared but rather some­
thing new.
Iconic Gestures and Pretense
The second form of uniquely ­human gestural communication used by in­
fants and young ­children is iconic gestures or pantomime, in which the 
child represents some external entity or event via her own bodily actions—­
again in an effort to get the recipient to share attention (in imagination) 
to it. As this could be seen as a form of pretense, it is not surprising that 
­children’s skills with iconic gestures and pretense seem to emerge along 
a similar development course.
Iconic Gestures  ​Iconic gestures would seem to be uniquely ­human. ­Great 
apes could easily gesture with their hands the way that ­humans do to 
mime eating or drinking, but they do not.* Indeed, ­great apes do not 
even understand iconic signs. In a modified object-­choice experiment, a 
­human held up a replica of the object ­under which food was hidden. Two-­
year-­old ­human ­children knew that this meant to search ­under the similar-­
appearing object, but chimpanzees and orangutans did not (Tomasello 
et al. 1997; Herrmann et al. 2006). In a variation on this theme, young 
­children but not apes understood that when a ­human mimed an action 
associated with an apparatus, the food they ­were seeking was on the side 
of the apparatus where that action was actually operative (Bohn et al. 
2016). In an attempt to elicit iconic gesturing from young ­children and 
*  ​Some researchers have claimed that some ­great ape intention-­movements are actually functioning 
iconically—­for example, when one gorilla ritualistically motions another in a direction in a sexual or 
play context (Tanner and Byrne 1996). But ­these are most likely ritualized be­hav­iors that appear to 
­humans to be iconic ­because they derive from attempts to actually move the body of the other in the 
desired direction; they are not functioning iconically for the apes themselves.

	
Communication	
107
apes in situations in which it would benefit them to gesture (that is, to 
show a naïve ­human how to extract food for them from an apparatus that 
only they knew how to operate), again the young ­children but not the 
apes ­were successful (Grosse et al. 2015).
Presumably, ­great apes do not understand iconic gestures ­because they 
do not understand communication marked ostensively as “for you” (co­
operatively). If an ape views someone hammering a nut, they know 
­perfectly well what he is ­doing; but if they view him making a ham­
mering motion in the absence of any stone or any nuts, they are per­
plexed. To comprehend iconic gestures one must be able to see inten­
tional actions performed outside of their normal instrumental contexts 
as communication—­because they are marked as such by the communi­
cator via vari­ous kinds of ostensive signals (such as eye contact). Ex­
tending an analogy from Leslie (1987) on pretense, the bizarre action 
must be “quarantined” from straightforward interpretation as an instru­
mental action by marking it as “for communication only.”
Infants begin using vari­ous kinds of nonpointing gestures from as early 
as they begin pointing—so from around their first birthday. For example, 
Iverson et al. (1994) report such ­things as shaking the head “no,” waving 
“bye-­bye,” raising the palms for “all gone,” raising arms high for “tall,” 
blowing for “too hot,” flapping arms for “birdie,” and panting for “doggie” 
(see also Acredolo and Goodwyn 1988). The prob­lem is that many of ­these 
“baby signs” are simply imitated from adults. This does not mean that they 
are uninteresting, but it means that their status as iconic for the child is 
not certain. If our focus is on spontaneously produced iconic gestures that 
­children create and not learn, ­there has been ­little research. But Carpenter 
et al. (in preparation) have reported diary observations of what ­were al­
most certainly spontaneously created iconic gestures by infants in the 
months immediately ­after the first birthday. ­These ­were rare, but all the 
infants observed produced one or more of ­these on several dif­fer­ent 
occasions.
Example 1: At age thirteen months, the infant playfully pan­
tomimes biting to indicate an action he was not supposed 
to do on a par­tic­u­lar object.
Example 2: At age fourteen months, the infant tilts his head to 
the side to indicate to Mom what she should do to dump a 
bucket off her own head.

108	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
Example 3: At age fourteen months, the infant “fin­gers” his 
chest, looking and smiling at Mom whose shirt has strings 
he likes to play with.
Example 4: At age seventeen months, the infant pantomimes 
crumpling a ball of paper to ask that it be done.
In a more systematic study of infants’ iconic gesture production, Behne 
et al. (2014) showed infants at around their second birthdays how to 
operate an apparatus. An ignorant puppet then entered and began fum­
bling unsuccessfully with the apparatus. Infants as young as twenty-­one 
months—­who ­were blocked from actually operating the apparatus by a 
barrier—­mimed for the puppet how it should push or poke the device for 
success.
To produce such creative iconic gestures, infants need to have some 
skills of imitation, simulation, symbolic repre­sen­ta­tion, or pretense, in the 
sense that they must enact a familiar action not for real to bring about its 
normal effect, but rather only in pretense to communicate something re­
lated to that absent action. Creative iconic gestures thus involve some 
kind of symbolic repre­sen­ta­tion, produced for purposes of interpersonal 
communication, in a way that pointing to (mostly) pres­ent entities does 
not. It is perhaps for this reason that infants in the second year of life use 
iconic gestures much less frequently than they use the pointing gesture. 
Indeed, over the second year of life iconic gestures (imitated and sponta­
neous) actually go down in frequency in comparison with pointing 
(Iverson et al. 1994; Acredolo and Goodwyn 1988). The explanation most 
often given is that ­children are learning language during this time, and 
imitated and iconic gestures compete with linguistic conventions in a way 
that pointing does not—­perhaps ­because iconic and imitated gestures, but 
not pointing, share with linguistic conventions some kind of symbolic 
repre­sen­ta­tion and even categorization of a referent.
Pretense  ​The suggestion is thus that iconic gestures compete with lan­
guage for the same function of communicating symbolically, so their 
function is quickly usurped as language acquisition begins. But, interest­
ingly, infants do continue to do something like iconic gesturing for non­
communicative purposes during this same developmental period: they 
begin to engage ever more frequently in pretense or symbolic play. Thus, 
when a young child pretends to drink from an empty cup, she is in some 

	
Communication	
109
sense iconically representing the real act; she is just not ­doing this for com­
municative purposes. It may then be that ­humans’ biological predisposi­
tion to iconically represent absent entities and actions for communicative 
purposes in the gestural modality is supplanted by vocal language in 
normal ontogeny; but this ability manifests itself instead in ­children’s pre­
tense activities in which they symbolically represent absent entities and 
actions for playful purposes. Indeed, when a young child pretends to drink 
from an empty cup and looks to the adult’s face playfully, one could say 
that in addition to pretense for the self this is also an iconic gesture to share 
this repre­sen­ta­tion with the adult communicatively.
­There has been a ­great deal of research on young ­children’s pretense 
or symbolic play, but just as in the case of gestures, in many cases acts of 
pretense with objects are simply imitated from adults pretending for them. 
Thus, Tomasello et al. (1999), Striano et al. (2001), and Rakoczy et al. 
(2005) gave ­children vari­ous kinds of objects in vari­ous kinds of situations 
and encouraged them to pretend, while at the same time modeling for 
them no pretense actions. The overall outcome was that young ­children 
before two years of age engaged in ­little pretend play with an object ­unless 
they had first seen ­others do so in a similar way. One pos­si­ble explanation 
is motivational. One-­year-­olds can “pretend” using an iconic gesture if 
their goal is to communicate, but if the goal is only to engage in pretense 
for its own sake, they need a social-­communicative context in which the 
adult is playing with them. Another possibility is that pretending with ob­
jects in par­tic­u­lar is harder than using iconic gestures ­because objects 
also have affordances for physical action, such as grasping, and in many 
cases conventional functions as well. In the spirit of DeLoache’s (2000) 
dual-­representation theory, it may be that young ­children have trou­ble rep­
resenting an object as both an object and a symbol. Supporting this view, 
studies of comprehension (see especially Tomasello et al. 1999) also find 
that young ­children are better at comprehending iconic gestures than they 
are at the use of objects as symbols.
­Children continue to engage in pretend play throughout childhood—­
coming at some point to specialize in all kinds of role playing—­and end 
up as adults in all kinds of artistic endeavors such as theater and repre­
sen­ta­tional art.
Cognitive Under­pinnings  ​Iconic gestures and pretense both require cogni­
tive skills of imitation, ­mental simulation, and imagination of the type 

110	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
that may not be possessed by other apes. This is in addition to the skills 
of cooperative communication—­discussed previously in connection with 
the pointing gesture—­that apes may not possess ­either. Moreover, iconic 
gestures and pretense are used by individuals to represent ­things for them­
selves and ­others symbolically; indeed, unlike pointing, this creates cog­
nitive categories. When an individual uses a hammering gesture to request 
a hammer, it is much like using a noun like hammer in language. ­There is 
no indication in the gesture by itself about which par­tic­u­lar hammer 
is desired; the gesture indicates a category of ­things, and the par­tic­u­lar 
item (hammer) must be indicated by other means, including from the 
common-­ground context of the communicative event.
Individual and Cultural Variation
The large majority of infants in longitudinal studies of communicative 
development begin pointing at around eleven to twelve months of age 
(for example, Camaioni 1997; Carpenter et al. 1998b). Moreover, infants 
who are destined to have autism show an absence of expressive (and per­
haps informative) pointing at this and older ages. ­These infants do point 
imperatively to get what they want, but the study by Baron-­Cohen et al. 
(1992; see also Baron-­Cohen 1989) found that when looking back retro­
spectively at ­children assessed across development, ­children with autism 
almost all had failed to point expressively as infants. ­These findings sug­
gest at least some maturational component for the pointing gesture, a 
view backed up by both cross-­cultural and training studies.
­There are three cross-­cultural studies that look carefully at the pointing 
be­hav­ior of infants in a variety of cross-­cultural contexts. First, Callaghan 
et al. (2011) had ­mothers and ten-­ to thirteen-­month-old infants explore 
a richly decorated room together. The infants and ­mothers ­were from 
a Western industrialized culture as well as two small-­scale, nonliterate 
cultures (rural India and rural Peru). Approximately half of the infants 
across cultures pointed at least once for their ­mothers (expressive point), 
although the Indian infants pointed a bit less often. Second, Lieven and 
Stoll (2013) compared the pointing be­hav­ior of eight-­ to fifteen-­month-­old 
infants from a Western industrialized culture and a small-­scale rural cul­
ture in Nepal; they found a similar age of onset for ­children from both 
cultures. Third, in the largest study to date, Liszkowski et al. (2012) looked 
at ten-­ to fourteen-­month-old infants from seven dif­fer­ent cultural contexts, 
at least one of them an isolated, small-­scale culture (Rossel Island, near 

	
Communication	
111
New Guinea); they found no cultural differences in the age of onset of 
the pointing gesture. ­These studies have reinforced the conclusion that 
the pointing gesture develops naturally in many dif­fer­ent cultural settings.
In­ter­est­ing complementary data come from a short-­term training study. 
Matthews et al. (2010) trained for a one-­month period over 100 infants 
aged nine, ten, or eleven months in pointing. The training consisted of 
­mothers giving their infants daily interactions with large amounts of 
pointing around shared activities (in a control group, other ­mothers gave 
their infants training in ­music). The infants ­were tested in an elicited 
pointing task at the end of the one-­month period. No differences ­were 
found in the age of onset of the pointing gesture as a function of training. 
Interestingly, the degree to which infants monitored their ­mothers visu­
ally as they pointed was affected by training, so the extra experiences did 
affect the infants in some ways. But the onset of pointing was the same 
regardless of training, providing further support for the idea that the de­
velopmental trajectory of the pointing gesture has a strong maturational 
component.
Iconic gestures and pretense have not been systematically studied in any 
of ­these ways to the same degree as pointing. It is a general finding that 
­children with autism are poor at pretense, which might suggest the im­
portance of maturational ­factors. But at the same time it has been fre­
quently noted that infants in small-­scale cultures typically have no repre­
sen­ta­tional toys and do not engage in extensive amounts of pretense 
(Gaskins, personal communication). Supporting ­these informal obser­
vations, the one systematic cross-­cultural study found a strong effect of cul­
tural context. Callaghan et al. (2011) found that all three-­year-­old ­children 
from all three cultures they studied (Westernized culture versus rural India 
and Peru) produced at least one pretend / symbolic act in their elicitation 
task; however, ­children from the Western industrialized culture engaged 
in significantly more pretense / symbolic play than did ­children from the 
two small-­scale traditional cultures. This finding is consistent with the 
training study of Rakoczy et al. (2006) in which ­children ­were given extra 
experience with pretend actions and discourse about pretense. ­Children 
given such training showed a better understanding at the end of training 
(than did a control group) at understanding the relation between pretense 
and real­ity. A general conclusion might thus be that the ability to engage 
in pretense is available to all typically developing ­children (although not 
­children with autism), but that the frequency with which they engage in 

112	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
such activities and the manner in which they understand them are strongly 
dependent on experience.
An impor­tant point in the current context is that ­there is functional con­
tinuity between gestures and the acquisition of words. Iverson and 
Goldin-­Meadow (2005) found that one-­ and two-­year-­olds often pointed 
at an object and si­mul­ta­neously named it “cookie.” But even more impor­
tant, ­children of this age sometimes point at an object and si­mul­ta­
neously predicate something about it, such as pointing to a cookie and 
saying “eat.” Interestingly, gesture-­word combinations of this type ­were 
extremely highly correlated with their subsequent grammatical combina­
tions in language (see also Ozcaliskan and Goldin-­Meadow 2005), pre­
sumably ­because they already manifest a kind of ­simple grammar: a 
pointing gesture to an object, as topic, combined with a word for an ac­
tion or property as predicate (see also Tomasello 1988). So not only do 
pointing and pantomiming communicate referentially, resting on many 
of the same under­lying cognitive and social skills as language, but when 
they are integrated with language it is done seamlessly, in the same way 
that linguistic items such as words are combined with one another in 
grammatical constructions. The fact that they fit together so seamlessly—­
united by pro­cesses such as joint attention, perspective-­taking, and emo­
tion sharing—­suggests that all are underlain by the same basic skills and 
motivations of shared intentionality.
Infants and toddlers are thus very capable communicators before they 
­really get ­going with language. But for the current hypothesis it is impor­
tant to observe that they are ­doing all this almost exclusively with adults. 
Indeed, Kachel et al. (in press) found—in the context of an object-­choice 
task—­that eighteen-­month-­old infants produced more informative 
pointing gestures for adults than peers, and they comprehended the adults’ 
informative pointing gestures better than ­those of peers as well. Effective 
communication by infants and toddlers depends on an adult partner who 
scaffolds the interaction.
Conventional Communication
Linguistic communication is an extension of natu­ral gestures. Both are 
invitations to jointly attend to an external situation for one of several 
­cooperative motives. The difference is that linguistic communication 

	
Communication	
113
achieves ­these functions via social conventions. This means that achieving 
joint attention and expressing emotions and attitudes within a linguistic 
act are achieved through means that reside in, and only in, the cultural 
common ground of our, and only our, linguistic community. ­Needless to 
say, the child knows nothing of the historical pro­cess of convention cre­
ation in the language she is acquiring. All that she needs to acquire a piece 
of conventional language—­and in the end to construct a language—is two 
basic sets of skills: (1) intention-­reading and (2) pattern-­finding (Tomasello 
2003). Intention-­reading refers to the meaning or intention side of the pro­
cess, involving such ­things as joint attention, common ground, and so­
cially recursive inferencing. Pattern-­finding refers to the more structural or 
grammatical side of the pro­cess, including such ­things as categorization, 
sequence learning, and analogy.
Acquiring Words
The age at which young ­children begin using language productively can 
be somewhat variable ­because it is a complex task that must recruit many 
dif­fer­ent cognitive and social skills. However, the most precocious Western 
­children begin producing their first words at around twelve to fourteen 
months of age. A very basic question is thus, why are ­children first able 
to use language productively at this age and not some other (Bloom 2000)?
Some researchers would claim that language acquisition actually be­
gins months earlier, as ­children “comprehend” words that ­others use (for 
example, Tincoff and Jusczyk 1999; Bergelson and Swingley 2012). But 
the method used to investigate this claim is a looking mea­sure, so when 
an adult says “car,” the six-­month-­old infant looks preferentially to a pic­
ture of a car over a cup. What this shows is that six-­month-­old infants have 
heard the word car in association with cars enough to make this connec­
tion. This is a necessary prerequisite for learning the linguistic conventions 
we call words, but it is far from sufficient. If ­simple association ­were suf­
ficient, then we would have to say that many domestic dogs—as well as 
some apes, parrots, and dolphins—­are linguistic creatures. For the child 
to understand a word as a piece of language she must understand it as 
something the adult is using to direct her attention to some referent in 
the environment—he is inviting her to jointly attend with him to that 
­referent—in a way that she, the child, could do in reverse ­toward the adult 
if she so wished. Then we can say that the child is comprehending lan­
guage qua language. So this is why ­children first begin using language at 

114	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
the age at which they do: it is not ­until then that they have (1) solid skills 
of joint attention in their nonlinguistic interactions with ­others, (2) a solid 
understanding of the communicative intentions of ­others as expressed 
in referential gestures, and (3) the ability to express their communicative 
intentions to ­others with their own referential gestures.
The reliance of language acquisition on skills of joint attention and the 
comprehension of communicative intentions is a well-­established empir­
ical fact. And conceptually it could be no other way. If a person enters 
into a situation with no shared context with the ­others already ­there, and 
one of them turns and says to her, “Gavagai,” ­there is no way that she 
could possibly comprehend what this linguistic expression is intended to 
communicate. But one could imagine instead a situation in which a one-­
year-­old infant is interacting with her ­mother in a well-­known shared ac­
tivity such as eating food in a high chair. Now if the ­mother brings the 
infant a new and unknown fruit and utters, “Gavagai,” then it is pos­si­ble, 
perhaps even likely, that this unknown expression is intended to refer to 
this new fruit. (For a word learning study based on exactly this scenario, 
see Grassmann et al. 2009.) This possibility would be strengthened if the 
­mother ­were looking back and forth from the child to the fruit and ex­
pressing excitement, or using a gesture like pointing or holding up and 
showing the new fruit.
The prob­lem of referential indeterminacy (as indicated by the socially 
barren initial example) may apply many times a day ­every day for a young 
child, as adults talk about ­things about which she knows nothing. But sev­
eral times a day, at least, ­children hear a new word in a situation in which 
they have much rich information of a nonlinguistic nature about what the 
adult might be intending to refer their attention to. ­These special situa­
tions are the ones in which they actually acquire new language. This is 
essentially the social-­pragmatic theory of word learning (Bruner 1983; 
­Tomasello 1992, 2000, 2003). In terms of empirical evidence, many studies 
have shown that one-­year-­old ­children learn new words best when they 
are interacting with an adult in a joint attentional interaction. For example, 
Tomasello and Farrar (1986; see also Tomasello and Todd 1983) coded the 
social interactions of ­mothers and their one-­year-­olds for joint attentional 
engagement. The most general finding was that the more joint attention 
engaged in at twelve months, the larger the child’s vocabulary at eigh­teen 
months. In addition, ­these researchers identified some ­things that ­mothers 
did that facilitated ­children’s word learning, but ­these only had an effect 

	
Communication	
115
if they occurred within a joint attentional interaction (for similar findings, 
see Carpenter et al. 1998b). Joint attentional interactions are thus kind of 
hot spots for the initial steps in word learning.
The most facilitative contexts for word learning in very young infants 
are thus ­those that take place within a well-­known, well-­understood joint 
attentional context with an adult. Given such a context, it is further helpful 
if the adult follows into the child’s attentional focus on a par­tic­u­lar entity 
or event within that interactive context (Tomasello and Farrar 1986; Car­
penter et al. 1998b). But as ­children pro­gress ­toward their second birth­
days, they do not have to rely on such a “child friendly” learning environ­
ment to acquire new language. Many studies have shown that when ­there 
is a discrepancy between the adult and child’s focus of attention—­when 
young ­children hear a novel word in situations in which their focus of at­
tention differs from that of an adult—­they nevertheless are able to do the 
extra work to determine the adult’s referential intentions, almost never 
assuming that the new word is being used for what­ever is their own focus 
of attention irrespective of what the adult is attempting to do (Baldwin 
1991, 1993a, 1993b). In all cases of word learning, ­children make active 
attempts to understand adult communicative intentions; it is just that in 
some situations they have to work a ­little harder to do it.
The point is made most clearly in a series of studies by Tomasello and 
colleagues in which young ­children had to discern the adult’s communi­
cative intentions in using a new word in some fairly complicated social-­
interactive situations (for a review, see Tomasello 2001). That is, in Bald­
win’s studies, the eighteen-­month-­old infants had to shift their attention 
to what the adult was focused on visually in order to learn the new word. 
In the studies of Tomasello and colleagues (2001), to learn a new word 
­children had to do much more complicated social-­pragmatic work. ­Here 
are some examples.
	
•	In the context of a finding game, an adult announced her in­
tentions to “find the toma” and then searched in a row of 
buckets all containing novel objects. Sometimes she found it 
in the first bucket searched. Sometimes, however, she had to 
search longer, rejecting unwanted objects by scowling at 
them and replacing them in their buckets ­until she found 
the one she wanted. Eighteen-­ and twenty-­four-­month-­old 
­children learned the new word for the object the adult 

116	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
­intended to find (indicated by a smile and termination of 
search) regardless of ­whether or how many objects ­were re­
jected during the search pro­cess (Tomasello and Barton 1994; 
Tomasello et al. 1996).
	
•	In the context of a finding game, an adult had the child find 
four dif­fer­ent objects in four dif­fer­ent hiding places, one of 
which was a distinctive toy barn. Once the child had learned 
which objects went with which places, the adult announced 
her intention to “find the gazzer.” She then went to the toy 
barn, but it turned out to be “locked.” She thus frowned at 
the barn and then proceeded to another hiding place, saying, 
“Let’s see what ­else is ­here” (taking out an object with a 
smile). ­Later, eighteen-­ and twenty-­four-­month-­old ­children 
demonstrated that they had learned “gazzer” for the object 
they knew the experimenter wanted in the barn, even though 
they had not seen the object ­after they heard the new word, 
and even though the adult had frowned at the barn and 
smiled at a distractor object (Akhtar and Tomasello 1996; 
Tomasello et al. 1996).
	
•	A child, her ­mother, and an experimenter played together 
with three novel objects. The ­mother then left the room. A 
fourth object was bought out, and the child and experi­
menter played with it, noting the ­mother’s absence. When 
the ­mother returned to the room, she looked at the four ob­
jects together and exclaimed, “Oh look! A modi! A modi!” 
Understanding that the ­mother would not be excited about 
the objects they previously had shared in play, but that she 
might very well be excited about the new object, twenty-­
four-­month-­old ­children learned the new word for the object 
that she and the ­mother had not shared previously (Akhtar 
et al. 1996).
	
•	An adult set up a script with the child in which a novel action 
was performed always and only with a par­tic­u­lar toy char­
acter (Big Bird on a swing, with other character-­action pair­
ings demonstrated as well). She then picked up Big Bird and 
announced, “Let’s meek Big Bird,” but the swing was nowhere 
to be found—so the action was not performed. ­Later, using a 
dif­fer­ent character, twenty-­four-­month-­old ­children demon­

	
Communication	
117
strated their understanding of the new verb even though they 
had never seen the referent action performed ­after the novel 
verb was introduced (Akhtar and Tomasello 1996).
	
•	An adult announced her intention to “dax Mickey Mouse” 
and then proceeded to perform one action accidentally and 
another intentionally (or sometimes in reverse order). 
Twenty-­four-­month-­old ­children learned the word for the in­
tentional not the accidental action regardless of which came 
first in the sequence (Tomasello and Barton 1994).
­Simple association cannot account for ­children’s word learning in ­these 
studies. In classic associationist accounts, word and referent should occur 
in relatively close spatial-­temporal contiguity (Smith et al. 2014). But that 
is clearly not the case in ­these studies, as in the first two studies distractor 
objects are actually experienced in closer spatial-­temporal contiguity with 
the new words than are target objects. In the third study, both distractors 
and the target are si­mul­ta­neously pres­ent when the new word is said, and 
in the fourth and fifth studies the referent action is ­either not performed 
­after the new word is heard or ­else it is performed (intentionally) along 
with another action (accidental). Young ­children are thus able to discern 
the adult’s focus of attention in fairly complicated situations, and the way 
they do this goes well beyond using social cues. Thus, in the first study, to 
learn the adult’s intended referent for the novel word toma, ­children had 
to first understand the game of hiding-­finding and all of the intentional 
relations therein. That is, the child had to infer in the first study that when 
the adult frowned at an object, that was not the one she was seeking, and 
when she smiled at an object, that was the one she was seeking. But then 
in the second study the adult frowned while she was attempting unsuc­
cessfully to open the toy barn containing the desired toy, so in this case 
the frown meant frustration at not being able to obtain the intended toy 
inside the barn—­which was the ­actual target of her referential intentions. 
The adult’s specific be­hav­iors, such as a smile or a frown as cues, ­were 
not sufficient by themselves to indicate for the child the adult’s intended 
referent.
The point is that word learning is not like an adult learning the words 
of a foreign language in the classroom. ­Children may learn some words 
like this—as adults hold up objects and name them, for example—­but 
this is a relatively rare learning context in many non-­Western cultures in 

118	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
which adults engage in virtually no linguistic pedagogy. Young ­children 
must learn the vast majority of their words within the ongoing flow of 
social interaction, and they must do this as well for words whose referen­
tial conditions are more highly variable than object labels across in­
stances—­for instance, verbs such as share and finish, as well as adjectives 
like happy and bad. Moreover, they learn words that regulate social interac­
tion such as hello, goodbye, please, thank you, and sorry, which are not referen­
tial in any straightforward way at all. Word learning is thus not about put­
ting labels on ­things but rather is about acquiring conventional means for 
coming to share attention with ­others in a variety of complex social con­
texts. Moreover, acquiring ­these conventional means, in the form of words, 
has a normative dimension in the sense that ­there are conventionally cor­
rect and incorrect ways of using them to invite joint attention.
Acquiring the words of a conventional language has momentous con­
sequences both for ­children’s cognitive repre­sen­ta­tions and for their in­
ferencing. With re­spect to repre­sen­ta­tion, the basic point is that ­children 
are inheriting from their culture a ­whole system of concepts that their 
forebears have found useful for categorizing and organ­izing their world. 
In acquiring the words of a conventional language, ­children are learning 
to carve up the world in all the ways that ­others in their culture have found 
useful—­for all their myriad communicative purposes—­over the entire cul­
tural history of their cultural group. With regard to inference, the lexi­
cons of ­human languages are hierarchically or­ga­nized, such that one can 
make vari­ous kinds of deductive inferences. So if we know that all the 
animals have been cleared out of ­these woods, we know that all the foxes 
are gone. Young ­children strug­gle with ­these implicational relationships 
­until late in the preschool years, but they soon become a part of their 
­everyday thinking. In addition, the fact that the words of a language 
form a kind of system leads to pragmatic inferences based on the word 
the speaker chose out of ­those she could have chosen. For example, if I 
say that the child ate “some of the meat,” the inference is that he did not 
eat all of it ­because if he had eaten all of it I would have said so. ­Children 
become able to make such inferences sometime ­after three years of age 
(Grosse et al., in press).
Transitions in Language around Age Three
Language acquisition is a continuous pro­cess, with no real breaks or stages. 
But a number of new developments nevertheless seem to unfold within 

	
Communication	
119
a few months on ­either side of the child’s third birthday, perhaps reflecting 
emerging capacities of collective intentionality—­such as understanding 
the conventionality and normativity of language as a group-­level cultural 
practice, as well as a growing understanding of the “objectivity” of 
propositions.
Conventionality and Normativity  ​In my larger theoretical claims, I have hy­
pothesized that age three signals the initial emergence of young ­children’s 
skills of collective intentionality. A natu­ral language is conventional, so 
­children’s sophisticated learning of language at one to three years of age—­
before the emergence of collective intentionality—­might appear to con­
flict with the hypothesis. But it does not. When young ­children are first 
becoming linguistically proficient, they understand what they are ­doing 
as something instrumental, like tool use, without an understanding of its 
conventionality. They acquire a piece of language by imitatively learning 
its use, just as they do a tool, and they do not ­really have to know any­
thing ­else. Initially they operate without an understanding that the con­
ventions of a language are shared by, and only by, ­people in the linguistic 
community and that they are normative for that group.
Some studies suggest that ­children as young as two years of age un­
derstand the conventionality of language ­because they predict that a new 
adult ­will know the name of an object whose name they themselves have 
just learned (but not an arbitrary fact they have just learned; Henderson 
and Graham 2005). But young ­children generalize many ­things, and not 
­others. A better test would be one in which they also display, in addition, 
an understanding that ­people outside their linguistic community do not 
share their linguistic conventions. Using this dual criterion, Diesendruck 
(2005) found that it is not ­until three to four years of age that young 
­children understand the conventionality of linguistic items. And—in this 
same direction but with nonlinguistic materials—­Schmidt et al. (2016a) 
found that it is only at three years of age that young ­children understand 
that conventional rules in general are established by the agreement of rel­
evant parties, an understanding critical to an understanding of conven­
tions of all kinds.
Conventionality also implies some degree of normativity: ­there are cor­
rect and incorrect ways of using the conventions of a language. Although 
two-­year-­olds ­will sometimes give the correct name of an object when 
another person misnames it (Pea 1982), the child might just be focusing 

120	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
on saying the right name herself, not on correcting anyone. Aimed at nor­
mative evaluation, Rakoczy and Tomasello (2009) found that three-­year-­
olds but not two-­year-­olds selectively criticize and correct someone who 
makes a statement that does not match real­ity, whereas a real­ity mismatch 
caused by a listener not accurately carry­ing out a command does not elicit 
criticism of the speaker (but rather of the listener).
The proposal (which is in fact not controversial) is thus that when one-­ 
and two-­year-­olds are using a language, they are simply ­doing what they 
see ­others ­doing. This is a creative pro­cess ­because to do this appropri­
ately they must understand the ­others’ referential and communicative in­
tentions. But they do not initially understand the conventionality of the lin­
guistic items they are using in the sense of their sharedness and normativity 
in the community (but not outside the community) or the fact that they are 
derived by agreement. This proposal fits well with Vygotsky’s repeated in­
sistence that ­children are scaffolded by cultural artifacts and symbols, en­
abling them to accomplish ­things before they are able fully to understand, 
from an adult point of view, what they are ­doing. So my claim ­here is that 
the second step in ­children’s acquisition of communicative competence—­
underlain by the emergence of skills of collective intentionality—is not 
their initial use of language, which they effect with their skills of joint inten­
tionality and cultural learning, but rather their emerging understanding, at 
around three to four years of age, of conventionality per se.
Grammatical Abstraction, Propositions, and Generics  ​Soon ­after they begin 
learning individual words, young ­children begin learning grammatical 
constructions. Initially ­these are quite concrete, comprising specific words 
and perhaps an open slot: for example, More __ , Eat __ , and __ gone. 
­These lexically specific constructions become more elaborate ­after the 
second birthday, but they still remain tied to a single lexical item that struc­
tures them (mostly the verb or predicate; for evidence, see Tomasello 2003). 
Interestingly in the current context, Croft (2001) argues that the linguistic 
items in a multi-­word construction do not gain their communicative func­
tions via their syntactic relations to other items, but rather from the syn­
tactic role they play in the construction as a ­whole: the subject of an En­glish 
sentence is defined by its role as the topic, or starting point, of the utter­
ance as a ­whole. A linguistic construction may thus be seen, in a way, as a 
kind of symbolic collaboration among all the contributing functional ele­
ments (a kind of dual-­level structure expressed symbolically).

	
Communication	
121
By around the third birthday, young ­children have constructed abstract 
constructions that are meaningful in and of themselves, in­de­pen­dent of 
the lexical items involved. For example, they know that The dax mibbed 
the toma a modi indicates that the dax somehow transferred a modi to the 
toma, without understanding any of the content words. From a cogni­
tive point of view, abstract constructions give ­children a new kind of ab­
stract, syntagmatically or­ga­nized, conventional format for cognitive 
repre­sen­ta­tion. ­These abstract constructions enable linguistic items to be 
used then reused in a wide variety of dif­fer­ent constructions, playing dif­
fer­ent roles on dif­fer­ent occasions. Importantly, this flexibility in how items 
are used creates the need to explic­itly mark the roles being played by dif­
fer­ent items. If I gesture or vocalize man, tiger, eat, it is impor­tant to know 
who is the agent and who is the object of the eating activity. Modern-­day 
languages have a variety of means for ­doing this, such as case marking 
and contrastive word order. ­These markers used to indicate participant 
roles may be seen as kind of second-­order symbols, as they are about the 
role the participant is playing in the larger construction (Tomasello 1992, 
2003). They serve as markers enabling ­children to analogize across utter­
ances to form abstract constructions.
Abstract constructions also contribute to ­children’s understanding of 
objective facts represented propositionally. Thus, virtually all languages 
have dif­fer­ent constructions for speech acts such as requestives and infor­
matives, both of which may contain the “same” fact-­like propositional 
content. A person may say, “She is ­going to the lake,” “Is she ­going to the 
lake?,” “Go to the lake!,” and so forth. In addition, communicators indi­
cate through vari­ous linguistic devices their modal or epistemic “attitude” 
­toward some propositional content in an utterance. Thus, a communi­
cator might opine, modally, that “She must go to the lake” or “She can go 
to the lake,” or, epistemically, that “I believe she is ­going to the lake” or 
“I doubt she is ­going to the lake.” The idea is that this in­de­pen­dence of the 
propositional content—­she goes to the lake—­from any par­tic­u­lar com­
municative motive or attitude encourages the conceptualization of prop­
ositional content as a quasi-­independent fact, in this case in­de­pen­dent from 
how speakers feel or think about it (Searle 2001). Diessel and Tomasello 
(2001) found that, although ­children sometimes use such constructions at 
earlier ages, it is not ­until about four years of age that ­children fully un­
derstand the relationship between the propositional attitude expressed in 
the main clause and the objective proposition expressed in the subordinate 

122	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
clause. An understanding of objectivity goes along, as we have argued, 
with skills of collective intentionality.
Fi­nally, and relatedly, ­children regularly encounter facts about the world 
that are presented to them by adults as objective propositions in pedagogy 
using generic language (“Birds lay eggs” or “Dreidels spin”) or in norm 
enforcement using normative language (“We ­don’t do that ­here” or “One 
­shouldn’t do it like that”). Young ­children begin both producing and com­
prehending generic propositions reliably at around two-­and-­a-­half to 
three years of age (see Graham et al. 2011; Gelman and Ramann 2003; 
Gelman et al. 2008). This emerging competence may very well reflect, in 
a more or less direct way, young ­children’s emerging understanding of an 
“objective” perspective on ­things, as characteristic of emerging skills of 
collective intentionality.
In all ­these ways, young ­children come to understand the conventional, 
normative, and objective dimensions of linguistic communication, all at 
around or soon ­after the third birthday.
Executive Self-­Regulation of Discourse  ​Words and grammatical construc­
tions are of no use if the child cannot use them effectively to communi­
cate with ­others. This often requires her to take into account the perspec­
tive of the listener in order to choose the most effective linguistic 
expression. In the beginning the pro­cess is a kind of dialogic negotiation, 
as the child says something, the listener misunderstands and possibly asks 
for clarification, and then the child produces some kind of “repair” (for 
example, Anselmi et al. 1986). Such discursive negotiation involves pro­
cesses of executive self-­regulation as the child self-­monitors the dialogue 
and repairs for the listener as needed. In a Vygotskian analy­sis, the pro­
cess begins interpersonally (dialogically) with conversational breakdown 
and repair, then becomes intrapersonal as the child anticipates breakdowns 
and precorrects them, as it ­were, by the choice of an appropriate referen­
tial expression without feedback from the listener.
­After some experience with requests for clarification, ­children begin to 
self-­monitor and anticipate when their listener might have difficulties. 
They thus say ­things like “He . . . ​um, I mean . . . ​Jeffrey . . .” in which they 
correct themselves before the listener has a chance to query them. They 
have internalized the dialogic pro­cess and used it to executively self-­
regulate. The ultimate internalization comes when the child does not 
even need to say out loud the potentially ambiguous expression, but simply 

	
Communication	
123
simulates and evaluates dif­fer­ent potential ways of expressing ­things for 
the listener—on the executive level—­and chooses the most appropriate 
one. An in­ter­est­ing instance of this is when ­children decide when to use 
pronouns which, in communicative circumstances with much common 
ground about the intended referent, can substitute for nouns. It is pos­
si­ble that in this case as well ­children are prompted into giving this deci­
sion some executive-­level attention by previous instances of clarification 
requests, but then ­these become unnecessary. Thus, Campbell et al. (2000) 
found that two-­ to three-­year-­old ­children’s choice of referring expression 
(noun versus pronoun) was strongly affected by the discourse common 
ground they had with the interlocutor, especially ­whether or not the ref­
erent had previously been mentioned in the conversation (if so, then they 
more often chose a pronoun). Relatedly, Matthews et al. (2006) found that 
three-­ and four-­year-­olds chose dif­fer­ent referring expressions (noun versus 
pronoun) depending on ­whether they and the listener ­were jointly focused 
visually on the intended referent (if so, then they more often chose a 
pronoun).
­Children’s executive regulation of discourse and conversation sets them 
up to construct listener-­sensitive discourse strategies that coordinate per­
spectives among themselves and their communicative partner. They are 
learning to perform the most basic forms of this coordination from two 
to four years of age. Monitoring what ­others comprehend of one’s lin­
guistic expression of one’s thoughts is a fundamental pro­cess in learning 
to think and communicate rationally—­that is, in conformity with the 
culture’s norms of rationality.
Brief Aside: The “Language” of Kanzi et al.
­Great apes do not use anything like a conventional language in their 
natu­ral communication. But a few ­great apes have been raised by 
­humans and taught some form of humanlike communication, ­either 
using manual signs or graphic symbols. ­These apes end up ­doing 
very in­ter­est­ing ­things, but it is not clear in which ways they are hu­
manlike. (For a more thorough review with more detailed citations, 
see Tomasello 2008, 2014, 2017.)
With regard to words, it is clear that apes can acquire and use 
more or less arbitrary signs. They can learn to both comprehend and 
produce them as indicators of categories of referents, from bananas 
to chasing. The contexts in which they are able to learn words has 

124	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
never been investigated systematically, but it is unlikely that they can 
learn them in complex social situations such as ­those reported for 
one-­year-­old ­children. Systematic studies have found that over 
95 ­percent of the communicative acts produced by ­these individuals 
are some form of imperative (and the other 5 ­percent are ­things like 
naming games: Greenfield and Savage-­Rumbaugh 1993; Rivas 2005). 
This is ­because no ­matter how they are trained by ­humans, ­great 
apes ­will not acquire a motive to simply inform ­others of ­things or 
share attitudes with them (Tomasello 2008). They also do not learn 
such ­things as pronouns (for example, he, she, it), which require as­
sessment of common ground.
With regard to grammar, language-­trained apes can learn to 
combine their words, sometimes in novel ways, but ­there is no real 
syntax. They have preferred orderings of words and word types, 
but they do not use second-­order symbols such as case markers 
or contrastive word ­orders to mark semantic roles and to indicate 
who is ­doing what to whom in the utterance. In general, what is 
missing is all the aspects of syntax that are geared at making the 
utterance comprehensible to the recipient, from his perspective—­
they do not “ground” their acts of reference for listeners to help 
them identify the referent (for example, with articles or relative 
clauses). They do not have constructions or other devices for indi­
cating for listeners what is old versus new versus contrasting infor­
mation. And they do not choose constructions based on perspec­
tive (for example, “I broke the vase” versus “The vase broke,” 
depending on the perspective most useful to the listener). The 
point is that in strictly imperative communication, ­there is ­little 
functional need for all the complexities of ­human linguistic com­
munication (prototypically, imperatives have no subject, no tense, 
and so forth).
The overall theoretical point is that apes trained in humanlike 
communication systems do lack skills of cognition and pattern-­
finding per se—­they can use words for categories and combine words 
in novel ways. What they are almost totally lacking is the skills of 
intention-­reading that are necessary for acquiring and using appro­
priately dif­fer­ent words and constructions adapted for dif­fer­ent re­
cipients’ knowledge, expectations, and perspectives. ­Humans also 
conventionalize expressions of motives and epistemic / modal atti­

	
Communication	
125
tudes in their constructions, and their discourse strategies are geared 
for their listener as well. We can call all of this the pragmatic dimen­
sion of grammar—­and we can call it all uniquely ­human.
Individual and Cultural Variation
­Children growing up in dif­fer­ent cultural contexts can have fairly dif­fer­ent 
linguistic experiences. In par­tic­u­lar, in many traditional cultures infants 
and toddlers are not directly addressed linguistically nearly as often as are 
­children in Western industrialized cultures (for example, Schieffelin and 
Ochs 1986). Nevertheless, all typically developing ­children in all cultures 
readily acquire skills of linguistic communication over the first several 
years of life. It is thus plausible to posit that ­there is a relatively strong 
maturational component to language acquisition.
But the maturational component of this developmental pathway is 
complex. The biological deficits that affect it almost invariably concern 
one or another component pro­cess. For example, ­children with pervasive 
developmental disorder (and also Down syndrome) typically have general 
cognitive disabilities, so they also have general prob­lems with language 
learning, from learning a word to forming a grammatical category. In 
contrast, some ­children with specific language impairment (some re­
searchers would say the prototypical case) seem to have all the other pre­
requisites for language acquisition, but have prob­lems of speech percep­
tion and production, which then have knock-on effects in such ­things as 
the acquisition of word endings and other small, nonsalient grammatical 
items. Fi­nally, of special interest in the current context, ­children with au­
tism have trou­ble with skills of joint attention and perspective-­taking, so 
half of all ­these ­children acquire no ser­viceable language at all, and any 
language they do acquire is used in pragmatically odd ways. The fact that 
joint attention is a key prob­lem is clear from a number of studies that have 
found that ­these two sets of skills are related to one another in autistic 
­children in the same way they are in typically developing ­children (Love­
land and Landry 1986; Mundy et al. 1990; Rollins and Snow 1998). As­
toundingly, Siller and Sigman (2008) even found that autistic ­children’s 
nonlinguistic joint attentional skills during early childhood are extremely 
strong predictors of their linguistic skills many years ­later in adolescence. 
Despite the role of maturation in ­these component pro­cesses of language 
acquisition, ­there is no evidence that par­tic­u­lar linguistic categories 
and structures—­such ­things as the subject of a sentence or the passive 

126	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
construction—­are universal or innate (Tomasello 2003, 2008; Evans and 
Levinson 2009).
At the same time that ­there are strong maturational components in 
­children’s acquisition of language, it is clear that variations in the language 
­children hear—­the raw material for their language learning, as it 
­were—­have profound effects on the developmental pathway. Cross-­
cultural studies have documented dif­fer­ent rates of acquisition, sizes of 
vocabulary, and so forth across cultures. Individual differences within cul­
tures are also due, in large mea­sure, to differences in ­children’s language 
learning environments (see Lieven and Tomasello 2008). One especially 
striking finding is a strong correlation between the amount of language 
­children hear and their vocabulary size at school age (Hart and Risley 
1995). And ­children brought up without a normal amount of linguistic 
input for vari­ous reasons end up with more-­or-­less seriously impaired lin­
guistic skills (for example, Candland 1995; Goldin-­Meadow 2003). Many 
par­tic­u­lar studies of language acquisition have used training methods to 
show the effect of par­tic­u­lar kinds of linguistic experience on the child’s 
acquisition of par­tic­u­lar linguistic structures (for a review, see Ambridge 
et al. 2015).
Fi­nally, an in­ter­est­ing fact of relevance in the current context is that 
young ­children display their linguistic skills mostly with adults, not with 
peers. Ninio (2016) found that two-­ and three-­year-­old ­children only rarely 
attempted to get peers to jointly attend with them to some external situ­
ation, whereas the same ­children did so much more often with adults. 
­Children in this age range also have difficulty engaging in extended con­
versations with peers in which they exchange turns about a common topic 
over time. In one of the few quantitative comparisons, Mannle et al. (1992) 
found that toddlers’ conversations with their ­mothers ­were much longer 
(comprised more turns) than their conversations with their preschool-­aged 
siblings. The point is simply that, once again, before three years of age or 
so, ­children are mainly adapted for interacting—in this case linguistically—­
with adults far more than peers. To communicate and mentally coordi­
nate with peers requires still more learning.
In all, language acquisition is the textbook case of a developmental 
pathway that is maturationally robust in its general arc, given a species-­
typical social environment, but one that is at the same time completely 
dependent on a specific set of cultural experiences, differences in which 
lead to large differences in phenotypic expression (that is, the language 

	
Communication	
127
actually learned). The pro­cess may be disrupted by ­either biology or an 
aty­pi­cal social environment. The answer to the nature-­nurture question, 
again in this case, is not ­either / or but both / and.
Becoming Symbolic
Virtually every­one who has thought about uniquely ­human psy­chol­ogy 
assigns a power­ful role to language. But many theorists invoke it as a kind 
of magic bullet, with ­little analy­sis of the pro­cesses of linguistic commu­
nication and how they work their magic from a psychological point of 
view. What I have attempted to explicate ­here is the complex pragmatic 
infrastructure of ­human communication—­built from skills and motiva­
tions of shared intentionality—­that make it pos­si­ble for a child first to 
communicate with gestures referentially and cooperatively, and then ul­
timately to acquire a conventional language.
Theoretical Explanations
Any typically developing ­human infant could be placed into any normally 
functioning ­human culture and acquire its par­tic­u­lar linguistic conven­
tions on the species-­typical developmental timetable. And no infant 
could acquire any linguistic conventions without being exposed to ­others 
using them. ­There is thus no doubt: ­children individually learn from their 
social-­communicative experience the linguistic items and constructions of 
the language(s) into which they are born, and they are capable of learning 
any existing set of them. Many studies attest to the role played by linguistic 
experience in producing individual differences of linguistic competence 
(for example, Ambridge et al. 2015).
All this language learning rests on biologically evolved cognitive and 
social capacities and is carried out with biologically evolved social learning 
skills. However, ­there is much controversy over the nature of ­humans’ bi­
ological predispositions for linguistic communication. At the extreme, 
Chomsky and his followers have maintained that ­children are born with 
a kind of innate template that guides language acquisition, a so-­called uni­
versal grammar, modeled as a quasi-­mathematical system. The evolu­
tion of its par­tic­u­lar structure was a kind of accident, as it has nothing to 
do with ­human cognition or communication. The prob­lem is that this pro­
posal is contradicted by cross-­linguistic investigations, which do not find 

128	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
any of the kinds of universal structures that universal grammar suppos­
edly makes available to all the world’s languages (Evans and Levinson 
2009). It also is contradicted by empirical investigations of language ac­
quisition, which have not found the kinds of abstract linguistic repre­sen­
ta­tions that universal grammar is supposed to make available to ­children 
(Tomasello 2000, 2003). Moreover, ­there are fundamental logical prob­lems 
of how a child born with a universal grammar, abstract enough to fit any 
of the world’s 6,000 languages, could actually link its structures to the par­
tic­u­lar linguistic conventions she experiences (Tomasello 2005).
At the other extreme, at least since the demise of behaviorism, ­there 
have been no serious proposals that ­children acquire language by the same 
kind of the ­simple and straightforward learning pro­cesses as other animals 
(the view of word learning comes close in Smith et al. 1996, 2014). ­Human 
beings are clearly biologically prepared for special forms of communica­
tion, including linguistic communication based on social conventions. The 
key is that this preparation is not about specific linguistic structures, as the 
universal grammar hypothesis claims; rather, it is about more general and 
basic psychological pro­cesses that are recruited for this specific task.
The social-­pragmatic view of language acquisition—as a specific instan­
tiation of shared intentionality theory—­thus again occupies a kind of 
theoretical ­middle ground, recognizing the importance of both matura­
tional and experiential pro­cesses. The theory argues and provides evidence 
for continuity from joint attention through pointing and pantomiming to 
linguistic items and constructions (­later understood as group-­wide com­
municative conventions), all underlain by the same skills and motivations 
of shared intentionality. For this account to work we need a theory of ges­
tural communication of the “rich” variety that is not based simply on 
behavioral or interactive patterns between adult and child (for example, 
Carpendale et al. 2013), but rather is based in a richer set of cognitive pro­
cesses involving such ­things as attention alignment, perspective-­taking, 
and recursive inferences (see Tomasello et al. 2007a). For this account to 
work we also need a theory of word learning of the rich variety that is 
not based on association learning as employed by animals (for example, 
Smith et al. 1996, 2014), but rather is based again in joint attention, com­
municative intentions, and conventional symbols (see Tomasello and 
Akhtar 2000). And fi­nally, for this account to work we need a theory of 
the acquisition of grammar that is not based in contentless abstract rules 

	
Communication	
129
(for example, Pinker 1991) but rather is based in a schema-­based notion 
of linguistic constructions acquired with the same basic cognitive and so­
cial pro­cesses as all other aspects of conventional linguistic communica­
tion (with an added boost from pro­cesses of categorization, analogy, and 
statistical learning; Tomasello 2003). Our account must also be able to ex­
plain ­children’s growing understanding of conventions in terms of the 
several components involved (for example, Kalish 2005) as well as “objec­
tive” propositions.
Our attempt to explicate this general account of uniquely ­human com­
municative development is depicted in Figure 4.4, which shows when 
and how the most impor­tant ­factors involved in the acquisition of co­
operative and linguistic communication enter into the pro­cess. In the be­
ginning are infants’ and toddlers’ pointing and pantomiming. ­These 
uniquely ­human communicative acts are especially clear cases of how the 
capacity for shared intentionality transforms basic ape skills into uniquely 
­human skills. Ape attention-­getters simply draw attention to the self, 
whereas ­human pointing invites joint attention to an external referent. 
Ape intention-­movements signal an impending action via a ritualized per­
for­mance of the initial step, whereas ­human iconic gestures symbolically 
represent an external action or event. For pointing and pantomiming to 
work communicatively, it is necessary that apes’ two types of communi­
cative gestures be reconfigured by the maturation of the dual-­level struc­
ture of joint intentionality.
Joint Intentionality
Collective Intentionality
Cog: dual-level + recursive inferences
Cog: CCG
S-R: normative
Emotion-
Sharing
Joint Attention
Imitative Learning
0
1 year
2 years
3 years
4 years
5 years
LINGUISTIC
COMMUNICATION
CONVENTIONAL
COMMUNICATION
SELF-MONITORED
DISCOURSE
Att.-Getters
Int. Movements
POINTING
ICONIC
Figure  4.4 ​The ontoge­ne­tic emergence of young ­children’s uniquely ­human 
skills of communication. Abbreviations: Att.-­Getters = attention getters; CCG = 
cultural common ground; Cog = cognitive; Int. Movements = intentional move­
ments; S-R = executive self-­regulation.

130	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
Of primary importance are skills of joint attention, which underlie in 
a very direct way the possibility of acts of reference (inviting joint atten­
tion to an external referent); ­these develop first, as indicated by the skills 
listed at the bottom of the figure. Also necessary is the reading of commu­
nicative intentions recursively, which is indicated ­here as an evolutionarily 
new capacity entering the pro­cess (from the top of the figure). ­There is 
also the need for new cooperative motives, especially the motive to share 
emotions and attitudes, inherited from younger infants’ emotion-­sharing 
protoconversations (as well as cooperative motivations to request help 
and to help ­others, which have at least some roots in nonhuman apes). 
The fact that ­these unique communicative be­hav­iors emerge so early in 
ontogeny—­and are used almost exclusively with adults—­supports the 
proposal that many of infants’ most distinctive social be­hav­iors evolved, 
partly or wholly, in a cooperative breeding context in which they competed 
with other infants for adult care and attention.
Productive linguistic communication emerges some months ­after and 
draws on the same joint intentionality infrastructure as pointing and pan­
tomiming: joint attention to a referent, recursive inferences to recover 
the communicative intention, cooperative motives of helping, and the 
sharing of emotions and attitudes. But in this case the form of communi­
cation does not come naturally the way that pointing and pantomiming 
do, but rather the child must imitatively learn the conventional means of 
the social group for performing acts of reference and communication (in­
dicated, again, by a skill listed at the bottom of the figure, indicating that 
it has its own developmental history). But, I have argued, to do this they 
do not need to understand linguistic conventions as conventions per se. 
They merely need to understand them as artifacts or tools designed to 
perform a job. In the case of linguistic constructions, ­there are a number 
of other cognitive pro­cesses involved, such as categorization, statistical 
learning, and analogy (all of which are pro­cesses also employed, at least 
on a basic level, by other apes). But, given ­these pro­cesses, young ­children 
acquire linguistic constructions and the meanings and perspectives they 
symbolize with the same joint intentionality infrastructure with which 
they acquire words: understanding invitations to joint attention, recursive 
inferencing, and cooperative communicative motives.
As ­children’s capacity for collective intentionality matures, they come to 
understand many cultural practices as conventions—as cultural practices 
in which most or all of the individuals in their cultural group engage (and 

	
Communication	
131
which individuals in other cultural groups mostly do not engage). Children 
follow conventions at the outset just to conform to adults, but in a third 
step in the ontogeny of uniquely ­human communication they come to 
understand and re­spect them as a kind of agreement of individuals—in 
their cultural common ground—to coordinate with one another by always 
­doing ­things the same way. Experiments suggest that young ­children 
do not understand this conventional dimension ­until around three years 
of age, exactly the age at which ­children’s skills of cultural common 
ground can be seen in a variety of other contexts.
Fi­nally, throughout this ­whole pro­cess ­children’s communicative in­
teractions with ­others have a discursive dimension: they produce a com­
municative act to the adult, and the adult responds, or vice versa, with 
the potential of further turns. Each communicative act is to some degree 
adapted for the par­tic­u­lar interactive context, including the discursive 
context, in which it is produced. But early in communicative develop­
ment, young ­children are poor at this, and they only become capable of 
a real conversation—­with multiple relevant turns on a common topic—
as they approach their third birthday. During this pro­cess they become 
sensitive to feedback from the listener, and ultimately they self-­monitor 
their own discourse by imagining the comprehension pro­cesses of the 
listener and adjusting for her ahead of time. This kind of internalized 
social self-­regulation—­albeit a bit indirect, as it does not involve adult 
instruction per se—is part and parcel of six-­year-­olds becoming reason­
able creatures.
Language acquisition is arguably the most complex developmental pro­
cess of the ­human species. It involves pretty much the ­whole child, with 
all of her cognitive and social competencies fully engaged. But when 
we take account of the fact that ­great apes communicate intentionally in 
some sophisticated ways as well, and we bracket the pro­cesses involved 
­there, most of what goes beyond that involves in one way or another 
skills and motivations of shared intentionality. So our account is only fo­
cused on ­these dimensions of the pro­cess. But they are, arguably, the key 
dimensions from a cognitive point of view. (Of course, ­there are uniquely 
­human pro­cesses of vocal-­auditory pro­cessing as well, but they are not 
our concern ­here, especially as all the key aspects of uniquely ­human 
communication are also pres­ent in conventional sign languages.) Given 
this limited focus, I have attempted to provide a thorough accounting of 
the way that developmentally earlier capacities for such ­things as joint 

132	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
attention and emotion sharing transform ­great ape communication and 
thereby give rise to uniquely ­human cooperative and conventional 
communication.
Cognitive Implications
­Human linguistic competence defies pigeonholing. It is clearly an evolved 
capacity of the ­human species, but it is totally learned. It is a fundamental 
cognitive capacity, but it is totally social. It is mastered and practiced by 
individuals, but it is culturally normative through and through. We cannot 
capture ­these many complexities in one ­simple account. Similarly, the cog­
nitive implications of acquiring skills of cooperative and linguistic com­
munication are so multifarious and so momentous that they cannot be 
readily summarized. But it is impor­tant to emphasize that it is indeed the 
acquisition pro­cess that creates the many and vari­ous new cognitive func­
tions. A child growing up on a desert island would not be evolutionarily 
equipped with ­these ­whole cloth; the biologically inherited capacities for 
communicating with ­others in uniquely ­human ways must be exercised 
in interaction with ­others for all their cognitive effects to be realized in 
individual ­human beings.
But we might characterize at least some of the effects as follows. En­
gaging with ­others in acts of cooperative communication with the goal 
of aligning perspectives leads young ­children to create perspectival cog­
nitive repre­sen­ta­tions. It also leads them to begin engaging in recursive 
and reflective inferences. Conventional linguistic repre­sen­ta­tions are ac­
quired through a pro­cess of cultural learning (see Chapter 5) and provide 
the child with the panoply of perspectives that her forebears in the cul­
ture considered useful to conventionalize, and ­these repre­sen­ta­tions do 
this with normative force. The grammatical dimension of conventional 
languages provides a conventional repre­sen­ta­tional format for symbol­
izing ­whole situations as propositions and then expressing propositional 
attitudes about them. Inserting words and other items into abstract 
­linguistic constructions, whose slots have conventional significance al­
ready, leads to vari­ous types of relational thinking, analogy making, and 
meta­phor. Engaging in joint attention to the ­mental content of linguistic 
expressions in conversation and discourse—in which individuals express 
differing perspectives and attitudes ­toward a topic of joint attention—­
represents a crucially impor­tant part of the pro­cess by which ­human 
beings come to represent situations “objectively.” And fi­nally, the child 

	
Communication	
133
executively monitoring her communicative acts with ­others is a form of 
social self-­regulation that, when internalized, plays a key role in the child 
becoming normatively rational—­that is, formulating and expressing her 
thoughts in ways recognized as rational by her cultural group.
Acquiring a conventional language means acquiring a culturally created 
set of cognitive and social tools. One’s forebears in the culture have al­
ready anticipated the kinds of perspectives one might like to take and the 
kinds of categories one might like to form. But at the same time, ­going 
beyond one’s forebears, ­these tools enable the individual to create all kinds 
of new conceptual combinations that have never been thought previously. 
Conventional languages are the quin­tes­sen­tial Vygotskian cultural product: 
inviting conformity to their conventions and si­mul­ta­neously empowering 
the individual to go beyond them.

W ​5 ​w
Cultural Learning
Social learning and cultural transmission, in their broadest senses, are 
ubiquitous in the animal kingdom. But the ­human versions are clearly spe­
cial. This can be most directly seen in the pro­cess of cumulative cultural 
evolution, characterized by the ratchet effect (Tomasello et al. 1993a; Boyd 
and Richerson 1996). When one individual in a group invents something 
useful, in ideal circumstances we all get it immediately. Then the stage is 
set for someone ­else to improve upon the original invention, which we 
all then get as well. The result is a pro­cess that, in an impor­tant sense, 
pools the cognitive resources of every­one in the cultural group ­because 
we all benefit from the insights of each of our groupmates. Cumulative 
cultural evolution via the ratchet effect is made pos­si­ble by special skills 
of imitation and even conformity, as well as uniquely ­human pedagogy 
and instructed learning (adults, as representatives of the culture, insist that 
­children learn). ­These unique cultural learning pro­cesses all derive in one 
way or another from pro­cesses of shared intentionality, especially ­those 
constituting the second step of collective intentionality.
­Great apes have some skills of social learning, and indeed some ­great 
ape populations have established behavioral “traditions” that persist across 
generations. But to survive and thrive in a culture, ­human ­children must 
possess more power­ful skills of cultural learning. Thus, ­human infants and 
toddlers do not just gather information for instrumental tasks by observing 
­others, as do apes, but they actively conform to ­others, even when that 
means overriding what they have learned on their own. In ­doing so, they 
do not just reproduce the results of the other person’s actions, as do apes, 
but learn through the other person as they take her perspective. And adults 
actively teach ­things to young ­children so that, beginning at around three 
years of age, ­children trust this transmitted knowledge even more than 

	
Cultural Learning	
135
they trust their own experience. This is ­because they understand such in­
struction as coming not from an individual but from the culture at large: 
they understand pedagogy as an attempt by an authoritative cultural ex­
pert to transmit objective knowledge to them. As ­children internalize the 
pro­cess of instruction, they learn to executively self-­regulate their own 
actions and thinking in terms of adult perspectives and, ultimately, in 
terms of the normative expectations (standards) of the group.
But ­human cultural learning is not just about acquiring impor­tant skills 
and knowledge, it is also about establishing impor­tant social relationships. 
One of the main sources of cohesion in all types of ­human social groups, 
including most ­human cultures, is conformity. ­People especially like and 
trust ­those who share their cultural practices—­those who speak and dress 
and eat like them. So ­people copy one another and even conform to one 
another in order to affiliate and fit in with the group. They even copy non­
instrumental cultural rituals. The result is that for ­humans, but not for 
other apes, cultural learning is not just about acquiring useful skills and 
knowledge but also about displaying, and hopefully reinforcing, one’s 
social solidarity with ­others and the group.
Having looked at how ­children come to mentally coordinate with 
­others, in the previous two chapters, we now focus in this chapter on the 
transmitive dimension of culture: how, during ontogeny, young ­children 
absorb all of the skills and knowledge that ­others in their culture have de­
veloped and, in many cases, that ­those ­others are attempting to teach 
them. Much of this knowledge—­this cognitive content, as it ­were—is nec­
essary for individual survival; in addition, much of it functions to solidify 
the individual’s place within the cultural group. The major ontoge­ne­tic 
transition occurs at around age three, when young ­children go from just 
imitating and culturally learning from ­others to a full understanding of 
adult pedagogy as the cultural transmission of objective knowledge.
From Apes: Social Learning
Most mammals and many primates interact with the world based almost 
solely on knowledge they have acquired individually. In some cases they 
learn ­things on the basis of being social animals—­for example, by fol­
lowing the herd they learn where to find ­water—­but they are not actively 
seeking information from ­others, and no one is teaching them anything. 

136	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
­Great apes definitely acquire new information from actively observing the 
actions of ­others, though this generally does not include ­things that they 
could not, if given the time and opportunity, learn on their own. And even 
for apes ­there is no active teaching; social learning is exclusively about one 
individual exploiting the skills and knowledge of ­others, not about co­
operating with them.
­Great Ape Social Learning
Dif­fer­ent populations of chimpanzees in the wild exhibit dif­fer­ent be­hav­
iors (Whiten et al. 1999), and this is true on a more limited basis for orang­
utans as well (Van Schaik et al. 2003). Population differences of be­hav­ior 
have also been reported for a number of other mammalian species, such 
as capuchin monkeys (Perry et al. 2003) and ­whales and dolphins (Ren­
dell and Whitehead 2001). Some of ­these differences are clearly due to 
ecological differences: termite fishing cannot occur in a population 
without termites. But across a number of field sites at which extensive 
observations of chimpanzees have been made, several dozen population-­
specific behavioral traditions have been identified as “cultural,” which 
means that they are used by most members of a population, are not used 
in most other populations, and are most likely due to social learning 
(­because they are not due to ecological ­factors). One prob­lem in labeling 
­these behavioral traditions as “culture” is that in some cases subtle eco­
logical differences between populations—­initially thought to be absent—­
might actually be pres­ent. For example, in one famous case it was ini­
tially thought that two populations of chimpanzees used dif­fer­ent 
techniques in fishing for ants. But it turns out that the dif­fer­ent techniques 
­were driven by the fact that the ants at the two locations ­were differen­
tially aggressive; ­because the chimpanzees did not want to be bitten, they 
­adopted dif­fer­ent techniques in response (Humle and Matsusawa 2002). 
It is thus not clear that the population differences are due to social learning 
at all.
In an attempt to clarify ­these issues, investigators have conducted ex­
periments with captive apes, mostly chimpanzees. One finding is that in 
many cases the social learning at work is only weakly social. For example, 
in many cases an individual chimpanzee observes an actor make some­
thing happen in the environment, then reproduces that effect. But what 
the observer has actually done is to notice an effect in the environment 
that can be produced (which she would other­wise not have noticed), and 

	
Cultural Learning	
137
then she reproduces that effect using her own techniques. ­These tech­
niques often match ­those of the actor ­because the observer has the same 
basic cognitive and motor capacities as the actor, but ­there is no attempt 
to copy the actions per se. This is so-­called emulation learning, in which 
the observer is focused not on an action but on an outcome (for reviews, 
see Tomasello 1996, 2011). In a series of studies Whiten and colleagues 
have found that chimpanzees pay more attention to the actions of ­others 
when the actor is another chimpanzee who is a member of their group 
(for example, see Whiten et al. 2005, 2009; Horner et al. 2006).
But in other studies Whiten et al. (1996) found that three-­year-­old 
­human ­children reproduced demonstrated actions far more faithfully than 
the chimpanzees (also see Call et al. 2005). The chimpanzees’ relative ne­
glect of actions in the pro­cess of social learning becomes even clearer 
when the observed be­hav­ior is an action with no environmental outcome. 
Thus, Tomasello et al. (1997) report an experiment in which one chim­
panzee was taught a novel gesture and put back into the group to dem­
onstrate it (on two dif­fer­ent occasions using two dif­fer­ent gestures and 
demonstrators). The other members of the group did not acquire this ges­
ture, reinforcing the conclusion that chimpanzees do not normally learn 
the specific actions of ­others. In all, the clear pattern is that chimpanzees 
are more focused on the outcome of an action than the action itself.*
An in­ter­est­ing twist to the story is that ­great apes raised or trained by 
­humans are better at imitating the specific actions of demonstrators. To­
masello et al. (1993b) systematically compared apes raised by ­humans (so-­
called enculturated apes) with typical captive apes and found that the 
human-­raised apes learned the specific actions of ­others much better. In 
addition, Custance et al. (1995) trained two four-­year-­old chimpanzees 
over a several month period to reproduce demonstrated actions in the “do 
as I do” paradigm. ­After this period of training, they could learn to re­
produce even some novel actions, but only around a third of the actions 
demonstrated for them (for a similar study with a single human-­raised 
orangutan, see Call 2001). Most impressively, Tomasello and Carpenter 
(2005a) found that three enculturated juvenile chimpanzees reproduced only 
intended and not accidental actions, and they produced a demonstrator’s 
*  ​Newborn chimpanzees engage in neonatal mimicking of mouth movements in much the same way 
as ­human infants (Myowa 1996; Myowa-Yamakoshi et al. 2004), but so do rhesus monkeys (Ferrari 
et al. 2006), who do not imitate ­others at all as adults. So the meaning of this be­hav­ior is unclear.

138	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
desired outcome even when the demonstration was of a failed attempt 
(paradigms first used with ­human ­children, with comparable results). 
Buttelmann et al. (2007) even showed that six enculturated chimpanzees 
engaged in so-­called rational imitation in which they took into account 
why the demonstrator had chosen the action she had then checked to see 
if ­those reasons applied in their own case as well. The conclusion is thus 
that ­great apes raised by ­humans display special skills of social learning 
and imitation relative to typical ­great apes, many of them comparable to 
the skills of ­human ­children. But even enculturated apes have not shown 
­great fa­cil­i­ty for imitating gestures and other actions without an instru­
mental goal. ­Those taught human-­like gestural signs mostly acquired 
them not by imitation but by shaping and reinforcement. Nonhuman 
primates do not imitate vocalizations at all.
A reasonable hypothesis, then, is that chimpanzees naturally focus more 
on outcomes than on actions in social learning situations. Being raised or 
trained by ­humans can lead them to focus more on actions. ­Human 
­children naturally focus much more readily on the actions involved, but 
it is impor­tant to note that they too focus quite a bit on outcomes in con­
crete problem-­solving situations (Nagell et al. 1993; Tennie et al. 2006). 
One might therefore say it this way: in observing instrumental actions, 
apes in general, including ­humans, tend to focus on the outcome, ­either 
produced or intended, but in some cases they analyze the outcome back­
ward to the behavioral technique used to see how that outcome was 
achieved. ­Human ­children engage in such analy­sis more naturally and per­
haps more skillfully than do chimpanzees. Supportive of this conclusion, 
Buttelmann et al. (2014) found that even when they did not perform the 
specific actions of a ­human demonstrator, chimpanzees could still discrim­
inate in a simpler task the demonstrated action from other actions. And 
Haun and Call (2008) showed that at least some apes know when they are 
being imitated.
­Human ­Children
From soon ­after birth, ­human infants (just as chimpanzees and other non­
human primates; see footnote on previous page) mimic the ­simple facial 
expressions of ­others (for a review, see Meltzoff 2007). During the rest of 
the first year of life, they learn to reproduce the effects produced by ­others 
in their intentional actions by emulating ­either the outcome or goal of an 

	
Cultural Learning	
139
action, again in the general ­great ape manner (for a review, see Tomasello 
and Carpenter 2005b). Then, in the months following their first birth­
days, infants begin to reproduce the actions of ­others in a variety of new 
ways, but ­these are all ­things that apes do, as we have just seen. Thus, in 
the so-­called failed attempts paradigm infants at twelve months of age 
begin to reproduce not the ­actual actions of ­others but ­those they in­
tended (Meltzoff 1995; Bellagamba and Tomasello 1999), and in the 
intention-­accident paradigm this occurs at around fourteen months of 
age (Carpenter et al. 1998a). Moreover, ­human infants also engage in ra­
tional ­imitation—in the period from twelve to fourteen months of age—in 
which they take into account ­whether an adult performed an action as a 
­free choice, in which case they reproduced it, or ­whether the action was 
forced by external circumstances that did not apply to them (for example, 
the adult’s hands ­were full), in which case they did not reproduce it 
(Gergely et al. 2002; Schwier et al. 2006). From soon ­after their first birth­
days, then, ­human infants imitatively learn the actions of ­others in ways 
that demonstrate an understanding of their goals, their chosen behavioral 
means or intentions for achieving that goal, and the reason they selected 
the behavioral means that they did. ­There are almost certainly quantitative 
differences in the ­human and ape versions of ­these social learning skills—­
human ­children employ them more frequently, more readily, and more 
skillfully—­but ­these are all ­things that other apes also do in some settings.
In all ­these pro­cesses of social learning that ­human ­children share with 
other apes, ­there is a clear difference of developmental timing, although 
the vast majority of studies with ­great apes have not looked at individ­
uals younger than three or four years of age. Figure 5.1 summarizes the 
data from Tomasello and Carpenter (2005a), who gave a systematic bat­
tery of imitation tasks to three human-­raised chimpanzees longitudinally 
over the first few years of life. The figure also includes the results of imi­
tation tasks from the Wobber et al. (2013) study with chimpanzees and 
bonobos (discussed in Chapter 2). Fi­nally, we summarize the results for 
­human ­children from the many studies just reported. The tests include 
straight imitation, in which individuals had to learn a new action on an 
object; the imitation of intentional over accidental actions; the reproduc­
tion of intended actions in a failed attempts paradigm; the reproduction 
of the “style” of an action, even when it was causally irrelevant; and ra­
tional imitation. ­Human ­children, as just reported, are successful in all 

140	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
­these tasks at around twelve to sixteen months of age. ­Great apes, in con­
trast, show no evidence of any of ­these kinds of imitative learning ­until 
two-­and-­a-­half to three years of age. Importantly, ­because of the devel­
opmental focus of ­these ape studies, in Figure 5.1 we have a number of 
well-­documented data points where ­great ape infants failed to imitate 
(which are marked with X). Such data points are crucial for setting the 
lower limit in ontogeny.
So once again—as in the case of gaze following (but not in the case of 
ritualized gestures)—we have a clear developmental shift of skills to a pe­
riod more than one year earlier in ­human infants. Importantly, a distinc­
tive fact about social learning and imitation in chimpanzees and other 
­great apes is the marked way they are affected by ­human interaction. In­
deed, the reviews of Call and Tomasello (1996) and Tomasello and Call 
(2004) found that social learning was one of the two domains (the other 
being communication) most strongly affected by ­human rearing and in­
teraction. This ­great plasticity in the ontogeny of ­great apes’ skills of so­
cial learning and imitation provides exactly the kind of individual vari­
ability needed for the evolution of ­human ­children’s stronger and more 
consistent skills of imitation and cultural learning, which we ­shall now 
examine in more detail.
0
1
2
3
4
IMIT., STYLE, FA,
ACC, RATIONAL
ROLE REVERSAL
Chimp #3
Chimp #2
Wobber Apes
H. INFANTS
x
x
x
x
x
x
ACC
IMIT.
ACC
FA
Chimp #1
x
x
ACC
IMIT.
ACC
STYLE
FA
x
x
x
Figure 5.1 ​Age (in years) of success in vari­ous types of imitation tasks for ­human 
infants (summarized across many studies) and three chimpanzee youngsters 
(plus a summary of a larger study: Wobber et al. 2013). The Xs represent task 
failure at younger ages. Abbreviations: ACC = imitation of intentional over ac­
cidental actions; FA = reproduction of intended actions in a failed attempts 
paradigm; IMIT = straight imitation; RATIONAL = rational imitation; STYLE = 
reproduction of the style of an action, even when it was causally irrelevant.

	
Cultural Learning	
141
Imitation and Conformity
The data are clear that ­human ­children are much more focused than ­great 
apes on the actions of ­others and are more motivated to reproduce them. 
One evolutionary hypothesis for this difference is that during earlier stages 
of ­human evolution it was impor­tant for individuals to acquire the use 
of causally opaque artifacts that one could not figure out on one’s own 
(for example, Lyons et al. 2006; Whiten et al. 2009). This would include 
also social conventions, such as linguistic conventions, that have no ob­
servable causal link to any environmental outcome.
An alternative, not mutually exclusive, hypothesis is that early ­humans 
also came to use imitation for a new and dif­fer­ent function: to show that 
they are like ­others in order to affiliate with them and to conform to the 
group. This is the “social side of imitation,” and it is clearly impor­tant in 
many ways in ­human cultural life (Carpenter 2006). When ­children are 
learning and enacting be­hav­iors whose function is not just instrumental 
but social or cultural—­for example, imitating or conforming in order to 
affiliate or bond—­the label that is perhaps more appropriate than social 
learning is cultural learning. In the next three subsections we briefly describe 
three forms of cultural learning that are, by all indications, unique to the 
­human species (with an account of instructed learning, which is also 
uniquely ­human, in the section that follows).
Role-­Reversal Imitation
From soon ­after the first birthday, ­human infants and toddlers begin en­
gaging in a form of cultural learning that requires perspective-­taking. The 
phenomenon is what has been called role-­reversal imitation. The basic 
idea is this: if I tickle your forearm, you could imitate me ­either by ­doing 
exactly the same ­thing—­tickling your forearm, like I did—or you could 
do the same ­thing with a perspective switch by reciprocally tickling my 
forearm. ­There is no correct response in such cases, only an issue of how 
the original action is interpreted. ­There is also the situation in which we 
collaborate and you play one role and I play another, and then, on a second 
round, the question is ­whether you can readily and easily switch perspec­
tives and play my role.
Carpenter et al. (2005) tested ­human infants for both of ­these types of 
role-­reversal imitation. They found that eighteen-­month-­olds quite often 

142	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
responded to an adult acting on their body (tickling their forearm) by 
­doing the same to her (on her arm) in reverse. They also found that ­after 
­these same infants played one role in a collaboration with a partner, they 
could quickly switch to the other role; for example, they could go from 
being the one who held the toy steady while the other placed ­things on it 
to the reverse. ­Children with autism in this study strug­gled to reverse roles 
in this way. In addition, Tomasello and Carpenter (2005a) found that chim­
panzees did not reverse roles in ­either of ­these ways. A reasonable 
explanation—­based on our analy­sis of ­great ape and ­human infant social 
cognition in Chapter 3—is that ­great apes simply do not take the perspec­
tive of ­others in the same natu­ral way as ­human infants.
I have argued previously that role-­reversal imitation is necessary for 
learning linguistic conventions, as, in most cases, ­children must learn to 
perform the same vocalization ­toward an adult that she has previously per­
formed ­toward them (Tomasello 1999). But the point is actually more 
general. When the members of a cultural group begin engaging with one 
another in some activity, they in some sense learn the activity from both 
sides, learning both roles, in a way that other apes do not (see Chapter 7). 
If, for example, we collaborate in net fishing by one individual holding 
the net while the other herds fish ­toward it, role-­reversal imitation en­
ables each of us in the ­future to play ­either role. Thus is born a conven­
tion in which every­one knows that every­one knows (ultimately in cul­
tural common ground) how to slot into each of the roles in a cultural 
practice.
Social Imitation
As documented at length in the previous chapter, infants and toddlers 
readily acquire via cultural learning arbitrary social conventions, such 
as linguistic symbols. Linguistic symbols require ­children to reproduce 
the actions of ­others more or less precisely—in the prototypical case, vo­
cally (whereas apes are basically incapable of vocal learning)—­for com­
municative ends. Apes who have been taught humanlike forms of com­
munication do not acquire them in this way. ­Either they are laboriously 
conditioned into making appropriate hand signs (the same ones that 
deaf ­children imitate from ­others easily), or ­else they learn to indicate a 
graphic sign by touching it (which does not require action imitation). 
­These be­hav­iors are, of course, extremely in­ter­est­ing in their own right, 
but from the point of view of cultural learning, apes are clearly not 

	
Cultural Learning	
143
adapted for imitating social actions aimed at social ends (recall also apes’ 
failure to copy a conspecific’s experimentally trained gesture in the con­
text of their social group).
It is pos­si­ble that this difference between apes and ­humans is at least 
partially explained by the fact that ­humans, unlike apes, reproduce the ac­
tions of ­others not just for instrumental reasons but also for social rea­
sons. That is to say, one of the main ways that ­humans affiliate with 
­others—­beginning already with infant emotional attunement and joint at­
tention—is to align psychological states with them. Imitating actions is 
another form of this same alignment pro­cess, in this case of intentional 
actions. Thus, the main way that unfamiliar toddlers break the ice and 
begin to play together is through the imitation of each other’s actions 
(Eckerman et al. 1989; Nadel 2002). Imitation in order to affiliate scales 
up ­later in ontogeny to conformity as a way of identifying with the group. 
Thus, Kinzler et al. (2011) found that young ­children are more prone to 
imitate the actions of an in-­group member than an out-­group member. 
Also, Herrmann et al. (2013) and Watson-­Jones et al. (2014) found that 
when preschoolers see a clear goal to an action, they quite often focus on 
that goal and its associated outcome; but when they see an action with 
no clear external goal, they assume that the actor is ­doing something ­else, 
perhaps performing some kind of cultural ritual aimed at affiliation, and 
so they focus more on actions.
What this all means is that in many cases young ­children have two si­
multaneous motives for imitating an adult: to learn something useful 
and to affiliate. When one’s goal is to learn something useful, it is not 
always necessary to focus on the exact actions performed; focusing on 
the outcome is often sufficient (­because one can create an effective set of 
actions on one’s own). But to display similarity, a focus on actions is al­
most always required. A variety of ­factors determine which motive, and 
so which strategy, predominates (Over and Carpenter 2012). A general 
finding is that ­human infants and toddlers, from age one to two, gradu­
ally focus more and more on actions over outcomes (Nielsen 2006), per­
haps ­because they are just discovering that aligning actions, in addition 
to emotions and attention, facilitates social bonding (or perhaps just 
­because they are becoming motorically more capable of imitating exact 
actions).
The conclusion is that when the goal is purely to learn useful instru­
mental be­hav­iors, the imitative learning of ­great apes and young 

144	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
­children is not so very dif­fer­ent. But young ­children usually have to 
some degree—­and in some contexts to a high degree—­a wish to affiliate 
with the person they are learning from (or a wish to identify with that 
person’s social group). Therefore, young ­children focus more—­a lot 
more in some contexts—on aligning with the ­actual actions performed 
by ­others with whom they wish to affiliate. Perhaps supportive of this 
hypothesis, Nielsen (2006) found that young ­children imitate actions 
more often when the adult demonstrator interacts with them in a warm 
and friendly manner instead of in an impersonal manner. And Nielsen 
et al. (2008) reinforced this result by having ­children observe adult dem­
onstrators ­either live or over tele­vi­sion, finding that, again, ­children 
focus more on actions when the demonstrator is more socially respon­
sive to them.
Conformity to ­Others or the Group
In some situations, ­children do not just display their likeness to ­others to 
affiliate with them, they feel the need to conform—­either to them or to 
their group. This need is so strong that they ­will override their own al­
ready established knowledge or preference in order to do so. The phe­
nomena are typically labeled as conformity or overimitation.
Following the classic adult study of Asch (1956), Haun and Tomasello 
(2011) presented four-­year-­old ­children with some perceptual judgments 
(for example, “Which is the larger elephant?”) that ­were quite easy to 
make, but three ­children before them had publicly announced a clearly 
incorrect judgment. When ­children had to give their judgment publicly 
as well, they conformed with the other three ­children’s clearly erroneous 
judgment. They did not conform when they could make the judgment in 
private, thus showing that this was clearly an instance of conformity with 
the other ­children. Haun and Tomasello (2014) adapted this paradigm for 
two-­year-­olds by making it more action-­based, which also enabled them 
to make a direct comparison to ­great apes. ­Children learned on their own 
into which hole of an apparatus they should insert a ball for it to eject a 
reward. Then they saw three other ­children put balls into a dif­fer­ent hole, 
and the apparatus still ejected a reward. A majority of ­children on their 
next turn switched to the new hole, especially if the three ­children ­were 
watching them, again providing support for an interpretation in terms of 
conformity. In stark contrast, chimpanzees and orangutans preferred to 
stick with what had worked for them before as individuals and so almost 

	
Cultural Learning	
145
never switched their preferred hole ­after watching three peer apes be suc­
cessful with a new one.*
Studies of so-­called overimitation also demonstrate a strong social com­
ponent to young ­children’s imitative learning. Horner and Whiten (2005) 
found that observer chimpanzees tended to ignore irrelevant actions on 
a box when their causal in­effec­tive­ness was clear, whereas three-­ and four-­
year-­old ­human ­children paid much more attention to ­these actions, re­
producing them no ­matter their causal effectiveness. In other compara­
tive studies, Nagell et al. (1993) and Clay and Tennie (2017) found similar 
results, with only ­children (and not apes) imitating irrelevant actions. In 
a study with ­children, Lyons et al. (2007) showed preschoolers how an 
­apparatus worked. In some cases the demonstrator performed clearly 
causally irrelevant actions—­and even told the ­children that they ­were 
­irrelevant—­but the ­children quite often reproduced them nonetheless. 
Interestingly, Kenward (2012) found that when ­children in this age range 
observed another child failing to reproduce the irrelevant actions that had 
been demonstrated (that is, failing to overimitate), they intervened and 
corrected her, often with normative language about how one ­ought to 
be ­doing it. This finding fits with ­those of Schmidt et al. (2011) that young 
­children intervene to correct the actions of third parties when they de­
viate from what they perceive to be the culturally normative way of ­doing 
them. Normative intervention goes beyond simply conforming in order 
to affiliate or to please ­others, and suggests that in some instances young 
­children perceive an adult intentional action as the right way for every­one 
in the group, including themselves, to perform it. Importantly in the 
­current context, such group-­mindedness is only pos­si­ble ­after the emer­
gence of skills and motivations of collective intentionality at three years 
of age.
We should also note at this point that, in many contexts, ­human infants 
and toddlers are more motivated to imitate adults than peers (Zmyj et al. 
2010), including overimitation (McGuigan et al. 2011). They also conform 
to the majority more strongly with adults than peers (McGuigan and Ste­
venson 2016), and conform to rules more readily with adults than peers 
(Rakoczy et al. 2010). ­These findings again comport well with the hypothesis 
*  ​­There is one study suggesting that chimpanzees also conform even when they have an already effec­
tive method (Whiten et al. 2005), but closer inspection of the data shows that only one individual reli­
ably switched its method of tool use to match that of ­others.

146	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
that the transmitive dimensions of culture come to ­children most natu­
rally from adults.
Individual and Cultural Variation
Callaghan et al. (2011) gave a number of dif­fer­ent tests of imitation to in­
fants and toddlers in three very dif­fer­ent cultural contexts—­for example, 
imitation of arbitrary instrumental actions and failed attempts—­and found 
very similar ages of emergence in all three (two of them small-­scale, non­
literate cultures). A reasonable hypothesis is thus that the basics of imita­
tive and cultural learning are pres­ent in infants and toddlers in all cultures. 
In addition, the basic phenomenon of overimitation has also been dem­
onstrated in a number of dif­fer­ent cultural contexts (for example, among 
Kalahari Bushmen by Nielsen and Tomaselli 2010; Nielsen et al. 2014). In­
deed, although adults in dif­fer­ent cultures may interact and teach 
­children in dif­fer­ent ways (see the next section), ­there are, to my knowl­
edge, no findings demonstrating qualitative differences in ­children’s imi­
tative learning across dif­fer­ent cultural contexts. ­Children in dif­fer­ent cul­
tures may be differentially prone to imitate, and adult be­hav­ior may 
influence this as well, but the basic way that ­children imitatively learn from 
­others is very likely a ­human universal—­indeed, something that is neces­
sary for the creation and maintenance of distinct cultural groups in the 
first place.
­Children with autism are clearly dif­fer­ent from typically developing 
­children in their skills of imitative learning. However, the data are ex­
tremely complicated. One prob­lem is certainly that ­children with autism 
do not form a homogeneous group, and dif­fer­ent studies may be dealing 
with dif­fer­ent populations. Classically, studies have found that ­children 
with autism are less skillful at imitation (for example, Hobson 2002), but 
Nielsen and Hudry (2010) found overimitation in ­children with autism. 
Using a similar but dif­fer­ent paradigm, Hobson and Lee (1999; see also 
Hobson and Hobson 2008) found that ­children with autism did not copy 
the “style” of the demonstrator (for example, scratching something vig­
orously versus tepidly), and Hobson and Hobson (2007) found that 
­children with autism did not engage in role-­reversal imitation (acting on 
the other person as the other person had acted on them) in the manner 
of typically developing ­children. And so, although the details are unknown 
at this point, it would seem to be the case that ­children with a biological 
deficit leading to autism do not imitate ­others in the species-­typical way.

	
Cultural Learning	
147
Instructed Learning
The other side of uniquely ­human cultural transmission is adult teaching 
or instruction. Active teaching is extremely rare in the animal kingdom; 
typically it occurs with a given species for only one specific function. For 
example, ­mother lions “teach” their cubs to kill mice by initially bringing 
them partially incapacitated ones, then ­later bringing healthier ones. 
Among primates, only ­humans actively instruct their young (Thornton 
and Raihani 2008). Boesch (1991) observed ­mother chimpanzees allowing 
their youngsters access to tools and food that they would not allow to 
other individuals—­which might have facilitated learning—­but ­there was 
­little that one would call active instruction.
Our focus ­here is on instruction from the child’s perspective, what To­
masello et al. (1993a) called instructed learning. One might think that 
being capable of receiving instruction is trivial, but it is not. Of course, 
many animals can be trained to do all kinds of ­things by vari­ous forms of 
conditioning with rewards and punishments, but this is not instructed 
learning. Instructed learning requires that a learner understands that the 
instructor intends to instruct her, and that she trusts this information and 
generalizes it appropriately. Indeed, one of the signature characteristics 
of instructed learning is that learners generalize immediately to large 
classes of objects and activities. They do this ­because they understand that 
the instructor is ­doing more than expressing a personal opinion about a 
singular item; rather, she is passing along generic cultural knowledge. Al­
though even infants and toddlers learn some ­things when adults attempt 
to instruct them, recognizing the generic mode of communication char­
acteristic of ­human pedagogy only becomes pos­si­ble with the emergence 
of ­children’s skills and motivations of collective intentionality at around 
three years of age.
Instruction of the type we ­shall be concerned with ­here is a specific 
type of cooperative communication. Adults may facilitate ­children’s 
learning in many ways while still staying in the background—­for example, 
by simplifying the task for them, directing their attention to relevant task 
components, or other­wise “scaffolding” their learning (Wood et al. 1976). 
But what we are concerned with ­here are cases in which the adult shows 
the child something or tells the child something overtly with the inten­
tion that she learn it. To do this, adults use the same kinds of ostensive 
signals (such as distinctive eye contact or calling the child’s name) used in 

148	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
other forms of cooperative communication (Csibra 2010). ­These are 
signals to the child that this is “for you” and you should trust it.
Testimony and Trust
From the beginning ­children almost always trust the information that 
adults convey to them via intentional communication involving showing 
and telling. Harris (2012) has mapped out the diverse ways in which young 
­children are predisposed to trust the information provided to them by 
adults, along with the many ways that they assess dif­fer­ent adults for their 
potential trustworthiness and reliability. Haux et al. (2017) indeed found 
that five-­year-­old ­children trust what ­others tell them as much as if they 
had seen it with their own eyes. And Bonawitz et al. (2011) found that 
when a child is instructed in how to use a novel, multifunctional artifact 
for a par­tic­u­lar use, they tend to stick with that use almost exclusively and 
ignore its other uses (much more than if they are left to explore it on their 
own without instruction). None of this can be taken for granted; when a 
­human attempts to show or tell chimpanzees where some hidden food is 
located—to intentionally communicate useful information to them—­they 
seem not to comprehend the communicative intention at all (Tomasello 
2006; also see Chapter 4).
­There comes a point when ­children must be more discerning about 
the source of information being communicated to them—­they must 
learn to show a certain amount of “epistemic vigilance” (Sperber et al. 
2010). But most of the time—­and pretty much all of the time at an early 
age—­young ­children trust anything coming to them from a source known 
to be generally reliable, ­whether it is being communicated or taught 
(Harris 2012).
Pedagogy and Instructed Learning
Following the general lead of Vygotsky (1930), Tomasello et al. (1993a) 
took as the prototypical case of instructed learning situations in which 
the child actually internalized the adult’s instructions and used them sub­
sequently to self-­regulate her own be­hav­ior (for example, telling herself 
to “find the corner piece” as she worked to solve a puzzle). To engage in 
instructed learning of this type—­typically not ­until four years of age or 
so—­the child has to take the adult’s ­mental perspective as he attempts to 
affect her ­mental perspective. But this is a special case to which we ­shall 
return ­later. ­There are more basic forms of instruction.

	
Cultural Learning	
149
A recent theoretical advance in the understanding of instructed learning 
is the theory of natu­ral pedagogy (Csibra and Gergely 2009; Gergely and 
Csibra 2006). This theoretical perspective has identified and characterized 
a form of instructed learning that goes beyond adult-­scaffolded child 
learning but still does not involve the internalization of instructions. The 
basic idea is that ­human ­children are evolutionarily prepared to be in­
structed by adults via one or another form of cooperative communica­
tion. First, as previously noted, ­children are already prepared to compre­
hend cooperative communication more generally, including special 
sensitivity to ostensive signals. Second, ­children are also prepared to be 
instructed in that they expect adult instructors to be attempting to convey 
to them not just episodic information about the world, as in cooperative 
communication generally, but rather generic, kind-­relevant information. 
Thus, an adult might communicate to a child that ­there is a nut on the 
ground that she might want to eat; however, in another context, the adult 
might attempt to teach her that nuts like ­these are edible (“One can eat 
­these kinds of nuts”). Csibra and Gergely (2011) have emphasized that 
adults in all cultures communicate with their ­children in this generic mode 
at least some of the time in instructional contexts (see Kruger and Toma­
sello 1996; Hewlett and Roulette 2016). As far as we know, no other an­
imal species communicates in order to teach at all.
Csibra and Gergely (2009, 2011) have provided much evidence that 
­human infants are extremely sensitive to signs of ostensive communica­
tion. They have theorized that this represents a sensitivity to pedagogy, 
but in fact ­there are few empirical data to separate out a sensitivity to ped­
agogy in par­tic­u­lar. Two studies show that eighteen-­month-­old and two-­
year-­old infants expect the attitudes and knowledge that one individual 
has about a novel artifact to be displayed as well by other individuals 
(Egyed et al. 2013; Vredenburgh et al. 2015). The prob­lem is that this does 
not address the question of kind-­relevant knowledge about objects and 
events in the external world, and is just as likely to reflect generalizations 
about ­people’s psychological states. In general, the theory of natu­ral ped­
agogy does not specify sufficiently how ­children distinguish the cases in 
which the adult is communicating episodic information from the cases in 
which the adult is teaching.
­There are only a few studies focused on ­whether ­children understand 
adult instruction to convey culturally significant, kind-­relevant knowledge 
about objects and events in the external world. Butler and Markman (2014) 

150	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
found that when ­children are shown pedagogically how a novel artifact 
works, they infer that what they are being taught is not something super­
ficial like the object’s color but rather its functional properties defining 
what it is; they assume that pedagogy is about culturally relevant and sig­
nificant ­things. More importantly, Butler and Markman (2012) had an 
adult instruct four-­year-­old ­children (using pedagogical cues) how a toy 
with a hidden magnet could be used to pick up paper clips. They then ­were 
left with some paper clips and several other toys that looked like the orig­
inal one. The question was how many of the new versions of the toy 
would they try before giving up (given that none of them worked). The 
result was that, ­after instruction, the ­children ­were much more likely to 
generalize to the novel toys of the same type than they ­were if they saw 
the magnet use of the original toy without any pedagogical marking of 
the adult’s be­hav­ior.
­Because we are interested in the question of age, a key study is that of 
Butler and Tomasello (2016). Using the same magnet toy paradigm, they 
investigated younger ­children. The first finding was a clearly positive re­
sult for three-­year-­old ­children; they behaved basically like the four-­year-­
olds in Butler and Markman’s study. But the two-­year-­old ­children did 
not—­that is, when they ­were taught pedagogically about the magnet toy, 
they did not generalize to other similar toys any more than if they just 
observed its use without pedagogy. Interestingly, if the magnet toy was 
named, and the other similar toys ­were verbally indicated to be of the 
same type (“­Here are some more of ­those”), the two-­year-­olds showed 
some positive effects of pedagogy. But presumably the generalizing part 
was coming mostly from the linguistic label, which has been found by 
many studies to facilitate categorization. In contrast, three-­year-­olds do 
not need a linguistic label to make a generic inference from a pedagog­
ical demonstration, and they do not even need the object acted upon to 
be an artifact (which one could argue signals generalizability ­because ar­
tifacts are cultural objects). Thus, when Schmidt et al. (2016a) taught three-­
year-­olds how to use a novel junk object, if a puppet then used it in a 
dif­fer­ent way the child objected in a generic way, using normative language 
such as “It ­doesn’t work like that.” The conclusion is thus that three-­year-­
olds, but not two-­year-­olds, understand pedagogy as such (see also Gelman 
et al. 2013).
Several interpretations of the effect of pedagogy on ­children’s generic 
inferences are pos­si­ble, but a plausible view is that ­children trust pedagog­

	
Cultural Learning	
151
ical communication and generalize it to new items ­because they see its 
generic formulation as coming from the cultural knowledge of the social 
group, with the instructor acting as a kind of authoritative representative. 
Thus, when the adult says, “­These kinds of nuts are edible,” the child un­
derstands that he is not just giving his opinion—he is imparting an objec­
tive fact about the world as “we” know it. It is a culturally impor­tant and 
relevant general fact. Instruction of this type is the authoritative, objec­
tive voice of culture, as represented by the instructor, and ­children know 
this. Arguably, the fact that young ­children take adult pedagogy to be about 
generic cultural knowledge requires them to think within the framework 
of collective intentionality, what “we” in the group take as an objective 
fact in­de­pen­dent of anyone’s par­tic­u­lar perspective.
­Children thus have many ways of acquiring knowledge, and they at­
tribute to that knowledge dif­fer­ent degrees of reliability, generalizability, 
and importance. Direct experience is in some sense primary, but it ac­
counts for only a tiny fraction of all the knowledge and skills young 
­children acquire. What they acquire most is culturally transmitted 
knowledge—­from knowledge of dinosaurs to knowledge of algebra—­that 
comes to them via adult communication and instruction. Knowledge that 
comes prepackaged in generic format presented pedagogically—­for ex­
ample, “birds eat insects” or “one holds scissors like this”—­occupies a spe­
cial place ­because it means that ­children do not have to observe nu­
merous instances to make an induction; they only have to recognize that 
pedagogical packaging marks the contents as reliable, generalizable, and 
culturally impor­tant. Such recognition is made pos­si­ble, beginning at 
around three years of age, by ­children’s emerging capacities of collective 
intentionality.
Self-­Regulated Learning
­Human ­children themselves engage in instruction at a much younger age 
than previously thought. Some evidence for this is apparent in the studies 
of “transmission chains,” in which preschool ­children learn something and 
then teach another child (and then another down the chain; for example, 
Flynn and Whiten 2008; Tennie et al. 2014). Other evidence comes from 
studies in which ­children as young as three years old become experts in 
something and then instruct naïve ­children when they arrive on the scene 
(for example, Ashley and Tomasello 1998; Göckeritz et al. 2014). ­Children’s 
instruction in ­these studies is often formulated in generic language about 

152	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
the object or apparatus involved, such as “­These ­things go ­there!” or “It 
works like this!” And recent evidence suggests that ­children as young as 
two years old imitate adult teaching, though they do not seem to under­
stand what they are ­doing ­until three years of age (Hardecker and Toma­
sello 2017). The two main ways that young ­children use generic language 
are in instructing ­others pedagogically in generalized cultural knowledge 
and in enforcing the norms of be­hav­ior formulated by the cultural group 
(Köymen et al. 2014a, 2015; see Chapter 9). This lends support to the char­
acterization of instructed learning as collective intentionality whose au­
thority emanates from the cultural group transmitting to ­children objec­
tive facts that predated their arrival on the scene.
The fact that young ­children can both teach and be taught enables them 
to engage in the kind of self-­directed, self-­regulating speech whose im­
portance Vygotsky (1930) repeatedly emphasized. That is to say, once 
young ­children are both understanding adult instruction and instructing 
­others, they can direct their own attention to ­things and self-­regulate their 
own problem-­solving activities by, in effect, instructing themselves. Given 
that the voice of instruction is the “objective” voice of the culture, the 
child is, in an impor­tant sense, self-­regulating in terms of the normative 
understandings and standards of the cultural group as she understands 
them. When she exhorts herself, “­These ­things go ­here,” she is overriding 
any momentary impulses she might have in order to think about and do 
­things in the culturally normative way. Such normative self-­regulation con­
stitutes a kind of enculturation of the child’s self-­regulatory capacities.
In a recent study, Herrmann et al. (2015) gave a battery of self-­regulation 
tasks to chimpanzees and to ­children at three and six years of age. ­These 
included a number of tasks best described as cognitive—­for example, the 
capacity to persist at problem-­solving attempts through failures and re­
peated distractions. The main result was that ­children at three years of 
age self-­regulated in a manner similar to the chimpanzees. In contrast, the 
six-­year-­olds looked very dif­fer­ent; they ­were much more competent at 
controlling their momentary impulses in order to complete tasks success­
fully. One pos­si­ble interpretation of this finding is that the period from 
the age of three to six years is the crucial for the emergence of uniquely 
­human forms of social self-­regulation, especially ­those based on ­children’s 
emerging skills of collective intentionality. Our hypothesis would be that 
this is the age at which ­children are beginning to self-­regulate collectively 
and normatively—­that is, in terms of the internalized voice of the cul­

	
Cultural Learning	
153
tural group as a ­whole. This age would fit well with the age at which 
­children begin to understand pedagogy as generalized cultural knowledge 
for their benefit and begin to teach ­others as a result. They now begin to 
teach themselves from the perspective of ­those who have taught them. 
According to Winsler (2009), ­children’s self-­regulatory speech peaks during 
the preschool years and is mostly internalized by age five or six. In addi­
tion, the content and structure of private speech is similar to what they 
hear directed to them, suggesting that ­children are indeed appropriating 
such speech from ­others.
Some theorists have argued that what is called internalization is a mys­
terious pro­cess ­because no concrete mechanism has been identified. But 
Tomasello et al. (1993a) argue that internalization is nothing other than 
role-­reversal imitation used in a flexible way: the child imitates ­others di­
recting her be­hav­ior or, alternatively, imitates herself teaching ­others, 
with herself substituted as learner. I have emphasized that this kind of 
role-­reversal imitation—in which individuals are able to freely substitute 
one agent for another in anything that they learn—­enables ­children to self-­
govern their own actions from the perspective of ­others or the cultural 
group (Tomasello 2016). This pro­cess has enormous consequences for the 
rational-­normative dimension of ­human cognition, as it enables young 
­children not just to respond to the culture around them but also to carry 
the culture around in their head, using it to self-­regulate their beliefs and 
actions. This pro­cess is thus central, in ways that ­will be elaborated ­later, 
to ­human normative rationality. This is essentially the shared intention­
ality interpretation of Vygotsky’s notion of internalization.
Individual and Cultural Variation
The significance of instructed or pedagogical learning in ­human evolu­
tion cannot be overstated. Cumulative cultural evolution is only pos­si­ble 
­because all individuals of a par­tic­u­lar generation mostly learn the same 
­thing from their elders, so it is reliable and stable over time for all indi­
viduals, which sets the stage for any of them to potentially innovate. Ob­
viously, when adults normatively expect ­children to learn, and they en­
force ­those normative expectations, this creates precisely the kind of 
cultural ratchet that keeps cultural knowledge and practices stable over 
time ­until the novel innovation occurs. We should therefore expect that 
one or another form of adult instruction—in which adults normatively 
expect ­children to learn and ­children are sensitive to this expectation—is 

154	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
universal across cultures, and indeed it is (Kruger and Tomasello 1996). 
Nevertheless, ­there are many well-­documented differences in how instruc­
tion operates in dif­fer­ent cultures, varying from the explicit verbal in­
struction in the generic normative language of Western educational sys­
tems to the normative expectations embodied in the “guided participation” 
of ­children in more traditional small-­scale socie­ties (for example, Rogoff 
1990, 2003). But ­these differences mainly concern differences of adult be­
hav­ior, not child learning.
­There are two well-­documented cross-­cultural differences in how 
­children learn from adult instruction. First, in a series of studies Rogoff 
and colleagues showed that young ­children from small-­scale Mayan cul­
tures are more patient and attentive in attending to the actions of ­others 
as they engage in tasks than are young ­children from larger-­scale indus­
trialized cultures (for example, Correa-­Chávez and Rogoff 2009; Silva et al. 
2010; López et al. 2010). This presumably reflects the lesser importance 
of direct adult instruction and the greater importance of ­children learning 
through observation in ­these small-­scale cultures. Second, Harris and Cor­
riveau (2013) have reviewed evidence suggesting that ­children from some 
Asian cultures are more likely than ­children from North Amer­i­ca to in­
teract with adults with “respectful deference.” This means that Asian 
­children tend to conform to adult demonstrations and instruction more 
than do North American ­children, presumably reflecting a cultural con­
text in which individuals with greater experience are trusted to an espe­
cially large degree.
Despite ­these cultural differences in learning styles, as we may call 
them, a key question is ­whether young ­children in dif­fer­ent cultures are 
engaging in fundamentally dif­fer­ent pro­cesses of cultural learning, or 
­whether, in contrast, ­children everywhere are learning in the same basic 
way when they are in the same kinds of social-­interactive circumstances 
and what differs across cultures is the kinds of social circumstances in 
which ­children learn. (And ­children come to expect the kinds of contexts 
in which they ­will be learning.) To date, we have ­little evidence to help 
­settle this question, but the current hypothesis is that, with re­spect to the 
­children themselves, the basic pro­cesses of cultural learning—­including 
instructed learning—­are the same across all cultures. That is ­because, 
again, ­these pro­cesses are what made ­human cultures pos­si­ble in the first 
place.

	
Cultural Learning	
155
Becoming Knowledgeable
­Human individuals learn more from one another than do ­great apes by 
many ­orders of magnitude. And this is not just a nicety, but a necessity. 
Whereas other ­great apes live as they always have in the tropics, ­human 
beings, beginning many tens of thousands of years ago, have come to live 
in a variety of other places on earth, even in the Arctic. To survive and 
thrive, individuals must acquire during their ontogenies a ­great deal of 
local knowledge, including how to make and use the culture’s material 
and symbolic artifacts. They cannot do this on their own; they need to 
­either observe ­others or be taught by ­others. In modern civil socie­ties, 
­children acquire knowledge about a plethora of ­things with which they 
have no direct experience, from dinosaurs to Pluto, and they acquire skills 
such as literacy and numeracy that they could never invent on their own. 
Much of this comes to them via adult pedagogy, which basically serves 
up to them on a silver platter the knowledge and skills in a generalized 
form, in “objective” form, with no further pro­cessing needed.
Theoretical Explanations
­There are no large-­scale theoretical controversies over the psy­chol­ogy of 
­human cultural learning. But ­there are a number of more local disputes. 
One issue is the relation of neonatal imitation to ­later cultural learning. 
Although it may be a necessary, stage-­setting pro­cess, even rhesus mon­
keys, who do not imitate ­others at all in ­later life, engage in neonatal imi­
tation, as do ­great apes, who socially learn from ­others ­later in life but 
not in humanlike ways. Obviously neonatal imitation is not sufficient for 
more complex forms of cultural learning, if all that comes ­later is gen­
eral primate ontogeny. What is needed in addition are uniquely ­human 
skills of shared intentionality, such as perspective-­taking and the ability 
to view ­things “objectively.”
­These unique cognitive skills of shared intentionality are explanatory 
in the debate over the degree of similarity or difference between ­human 
and ­great ape social learning as well. It is perfectly legitimate to stress 
the similarities between ­great ape social learning and ­human cultural 
learning, of which ­there are many; indeed, recent research has found 
even more (for example, Whiten et al. 2009). But at the same time 
­nonhuman ­great apes do not show any evidence of cumulative cultural 

156	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
evolution or the ratchet effect, suggesting that ­there are impor­tant dif­
ferences as well. Again, to explain the differences I would invoke the 
uniquely ­human pro­cesses of shared intentionality, including both the 
tendency of adults to teach and the tendency of ­children to conform 
(Tomasello 2011).
Another local dispute concerns the potential cross-­cultural differences in 
­human cultural learning. My view, as noted earlier, is that while ­there are 
fairly large differences in the contexts of cultural learning for ­children living 
in dif­fer­ent cultural groups, as well as differences in the way that adults 
teach and expect ­children to learn (see, for example, Rogoff 2003), the basic 
pro­cesses of imitative and instructed learning are universal in ­human 
­children. In fact, it is ­these universal pro­cesses of cultural learning that make 
the creation and maintenance of adult cultural practices—­including ­those 
for interacting with ­children—­pos­si­ble in the first place (Tomasello 2011). 
The unifying theoretical proposal is thus that ­great ape social learning is 
transformed during ­human ontogeny into ­human cultural learning, with 
all the unique characteristics I have enumerated in this chapter.
To summarize this explanatory account, I offer Figure 5.2. The earliest 
emerging novel feature of uniquely ­human ontogeny is simply develop­
mental timing: the most basic pro­cesses of social learning and imitation 
that are characteristic of ­great apes have migrated to an earlier age in 
­human ontogeny. Specifically, pro­cesses of emulation learning and imita­
tion first seen in chimpanzees at three years of age manifest in ­human on­
togeny approximately one to two years earlier, just ­after ­children’s first 
birthdays. This ontoge­ne­tic shift is consistent with the proposal that many 
of ­human infants’ most distinctive social and communicative be­hav­iors 
evolved, partly or wholly, in a cooperative breeding context in which in­
fants competed with other infants for adult care and attention. This early 
development leads to young ­children imitating adult-­like ­things preco­
ciously, as culture pulls them along to do ­things relatively competently 
before they ­really understand what they are ­doing (a point stressed repeat­
edly by Vygotsky).
The first uniquely ­human form of cultural learning is role-­reversal 
imitation (first box in Figure 5.2). On one level, it merely seems like a 
cute variation of imitation in general, but it actually is a deeply impor­
tant dimension of ­human collaboration; indeed, in Chapter 6 we ­will 
look more closely at how young ­children come to understand collabora­

	
Cultural Learning	
157
tion as a dual-­level pro­cess comprising both a joint goal and individual 
roles. In any case, the ability to simulate and learn both roles in the col­
laboration while only playing one of them is extremely impor­tant to the 
pro­cess of cultural learning as it enables individuals to learn about con­
ventional cultural practices as a ­whole from merely participating in one 
role. In addition, as we ­shall see ­later as well, many of the most impor­
tant pro­cesses of ­children’s social self-­regulation depend on their being 
able to take the role of ­others as ­those ­others perceive and evaluate them. 
And so, although we have focused ­here simply on infants and toddlers 
reproducing physical actions directed at themselves by directing them 
back at their partner, role-­reversal imitation in actuality reflects very 
deep pro­cesses of perspective-­taking that underlie the acquisition of 
many conventional cultural practices.
Another novel feature of ­human cultural learning is the way that 
­children’s social learning and imitation focus much more than that of 
other apes on the ­actual actions involved; indeed, by the time they are 
three or four years old young ­children experience a need to conform to 
­others in the social group in a way that ­great apes do not. They even over­
ride their own previous firsthand experience to do so (see the second box 
in Figure 5.2). In our evolutionary analy­sis (see Chapter 2), power­ful con­
formity is characteristic mainly of the second evolutionary step of col­
lective intentionality, which only emerges in ontogeny at three years of 
age. This presumably means that when two-­year-­olds conform with ­others 
they are conforming to individuals, whereas older ­children’s conformity 
Joint Intentionality
Collective Intentionality
Cog: dual-level
Mot: affiliate
Cog: objectivity
S-R: normative
Joint Att.
Conv . Comm.
5 years
4 years
3 years
2 years
1 year
0
Neonatal
Mimicking
ROLE REVERSAL
IMITATION
SOCIAL IMITATION/
CONFORMITY
INSTRUCTED
LEARNING
SELF-REGULATED
LEARNING
• Emulation
• Imitation
Figure  5.2 ​The ontoge­ne­tic emergence of young ­children’s uniquely ­human 
skills of cultural learning. Abbreviations: Cog = cognitive; Conv. Comm. = con­
ventional communication; Joint Att. = joint attentional activities; Mot = motiva­
tional capacity; S-­R = executive self-­regulation.

158	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
has the potential to be more group based. In any case, the outcome is that 
young ­children are conforming with ­others in power­ful ways at an early 
age, possibly even before they understand the cultural group qua cultural 
group. This is similar to the case of language acquisition in which young 
­children learn and use words and linguistic constructions with other indi­
viduals before they understand them as the social conventions of a cul­
tural group.
The most impor­tant novel pro­cess of ­human cultural learning is peda­
gogy. Adults are motivated to teach ­children, and from the time they are 
three years of age ­children comprehend the generic nature of pedagog­
ical content. Before three years of age, what ­children are learning are spe­
cific ­things that might generalize across ­people but do not constitute 
type-­relevant generic facts about an objective world. ­After this age they 
understand that ­things they are being taught pedagogically are generaliz­
able to other ­things of the same kind. Three-­year-­olds trust pedagogy—­
coming from an adult as representative of the culture—as much as they 
trust their own senses. ­Children then internalize the pro­cess (that is, they 
use role-­reversal imitation to turn the pro­cess on themselves, taking the 
perspective of the instructor) at around four years of age (Winsler et al. 
2000; Fernyhough and Fradley 2005). Whereas ­great apes and other ani­
mals clearly have an executive level of functioning with which they self-­
regulate their own individual actions, this kind of social, indeed norma­
tive, self-­regulation is unique to ­humans.
My view of the nature of ­human cultural learning, as compared with 
the nature of primate social learning in general, thus focuses mainly on 
differences. Research over the past two de­cades has revealed more and 
more similarities in the basic pro­cesses of social learning and imitation 
across primates. But ­humans’ unique social-­cognitive skills create the pos­
sibility of role-­reversal imitation, which is crucial for the creation of 
­social conventions. And ­humans engage in social imitation, conformity, 
and overimitation in large part to affiliate with ­those in the group; adult 
pedagogy ensures that young ­children ­will learn what they need to learn 
to survive and thrive in their group. All ­these unique pro­cesses together 
account for the fact that whereas chimpanzees have behavioral traditions 
that may persist across generations, ­humans live in the midst of pro­cesses 
of cumulative cultural evolution that inexorably change, hopefully for the 
better, many of the practices and much of the knowledge of the cultural 
group as a ­whole.

	
Cultural Learning	
159
Clearly, developing ­children are learning all day, ­every day from their 
cultures. The basic capacities for learning in this way—­that is, in a way 
that so clearly differentiates ­human culture from ­great ape culture—­are 
part and parcel of ­humans’ biologically evolved capacities for cultural 
learning, as special cases of their biologically evolved capacities for shared 
intentionality more generally.
Cognitive Implications
I have argued in the previous two chapters that the way ­human ­children 
come to coordinate with ­others mentally, including via communication, 
leads to new forms of cognitive repre­sen­ta­tion and inference, and that the 
acquisition of a natu­ral language provides a conventional symbolic tool 
that supports especially power­ful forms of ­mental coordination as well. 
In this chapter, we have focused on the pro­cesses by which ­children ac­
quire large amounts and novel types of epistemic content about which 
they may coordinate. Some of this epistemic content is tagged as “objec­
tive.” From the structural point of view, linguistically formulated propo­
sitions foster the idea that facts about the world are in­de­pen­dent of indi­
viduals’ motives and attitudes. In addition, from the point of view of 
content, ­children come to understand the cultural common ground of 
their group comprises many objective propositions. I have so far not elab­
orated on how ­children come to acquire an understanding of cultural 
common ground, but instructed learning almost certainly plays a key role. 
Studies show that by the time they are three years of age ­children under­
stand that some of their own knowledge is shared with ­others in the group, 
and that some knowledge is generic and kind-­relevant objective knowl­
edge about types of entities and events in the world. Understanding ped­
agogy as conveying this type of knowledge is one of the key capacities of 
collective intentionality, emerging, along with related capacities for ob­
jectivity, at around three years of age.
­Children’s internalization of adult pedagogical interactions—­using a 
pro­cess of role-­reversal imitation—­constitutes a form of normative self-­
regulation in which ­children begin to evaluate ­whether their decisions 
are good and their knowledge is valid, using as points of comparison the 
normative standards of rational action and knowledge learned via obser­
vation and instruction from their cultural group. This sets the stage 
for ­children to now put their heads together with a coequal peer in 
productive ways that transcend their own individual skills and knowledge. 

160	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
In this case neither child culturally transmits anything to the other, 
but they still each end up with novel understandings that they would 
not have had without the interaction. ­These novel understandings 
are  thus not transmitted but constructed—­that is, they are socially 
co-­constructed.

W ​6 ​w
Cooperative Thinking
Much, if not most, of the creative work in which ­humans engage is not 
done individually, but rather collaboratively, as individuals put their 
heads together to solve novel problems. Infants, toddlers, and young 
preschoolers—­the ­children we have been mostly discussing so far—­are only 
capable of such ­mental coordination in very ­simple problem contexts, for 
example, in pulling in a board together. But by the time they are five or 
six years old, young ­children understand beliefs, and this means that they 
are now capable of putting their heads together with ­others in new ways 
by jointly attending to and coordinating their respective beliefs.
The pro­cess of jointly attending to and coordinating beliefs provides 
the impetus for a new cognitive activity: reason-­giving. To argue for and 
justify their beliefs in the face of potential criticism, ­children relate to their 
partners the reason why they believe as they do, and they come to re­spect 
the reasons that ­others give for their beliefs, sometimes even changing 
their own beliefs as a result. Reasons and justifications serve to connect 
beliefs causally and logically and, in the end, to ground them in the cul­
ture’s rational norms. Just as beliefs may be normatively evaluated as true 
or false, reasons may be normatively evaluated as valid or invalid based 
on their causal or logical connections to beliefs that we all share in cul­
tural common ground. Although young ­children, perhaps especially in 
Western cultures, may sometimes engage in such cooperative thinking 
with adults, the prototypical situation is with coequal peers, ­because in 
this case it is especially clear that no one has the right answer ahead of 
time. As young ­children transition to school age, they become able to en­
gage productively in collaborative problem-­solving in which two or more 
coequal peers generate ideas and solutions to prob­lems that none of them 
could have generated on their own.

162	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
In addition, a related pro­cess of cooperative thinking that also emerges 
at this time is coordinated decision-­making. Young peers must engage in 
some serious thinking in order to coordinate with ­others when they 
are not physically together or their communication is other­wise inopera­
tive. Classic coordination prob­lems—­for example, attempting to coor­
dinate behavioral decisions in the absence of visual or communicative 
contact—­require recursive thinking (in which I expect you to expect me 
to expect you to . . .), and it is again at the transition to school age that 
young ­children can solve such coordination prob­lems. The ability to 
mentally coordinate with ­others in linguistic discourse leads to the con­
struction not only of normative concepts such as beliefs and reasons 
(see Chapter 3) but also to a variety of other multiperspectival concepts, 
including logicomathematical concepts requiring the coordination and 
synthesis of (sometimes conflicting) perspectives.
What we are investigating in this chapter is thus ­children’s ability to 
think together with peers to solve prob­lems, to provide reasons to one 
another for their differing beliefs, to coordinate their behavioral deci­
sions, and to construct multiperspectival concepts, which together con­
stitute the capstone of uniquely ­human cognitive development in the 
preschool years. It is indeed ­children’s ability to operate in this way—­
that is, to co-­operate mentally with peers and ­others (and to internalize 
this)—­that helps to convince adults that they have entered the “age of 
reason” and so are now ready for formal schooling and other forms of 
cultural instruction that turn them into rational and fully functioning 
members of the culture.
From Apes: Individual Thinking
One can certainly define thinking so that only ­humans are capable of it 
(for example, by requiring language). But in a broader view, many animal 
species are capable of thinking on a concrete level about instrumental 
prob­lems by using their past experience to cognitively simulate (imagine) 
what might happen ­under vari­ous contingencies. ­Human infants are ca­
pable of this most basic form of thinking as well; then during the pre­
school years they develop a more conceptual form of thinking, involving 
perspectives and recursive inferences.

	
Cooperative Thinking	
163
­Great Ape Thinking
­Great apes operate with the skills and motivations of individual inten­
tionality. They have a plethora of cognitive skills enabling them to make 
individual decisions about how best to pursue their goals. They are instru­
mentally rational. In addition, they operate with basic “core knowledge” 
of the natu­ral world, including, in the physical domain, a basic knowledge 
of space, objects, quantities, and causality, and in the social domain a basic 
understanding of intentional agency in the actions of ­others.
When they are confronted with a prob­lem that they are not equipped 
to deal with immediately, ­great apes are capable of thinking. They catego­
rize their experience into abstract iconic repre­sen­ta­tions of entities and 
situations in the world. (The repre­sen­ta­tion of ­whole situations is a pre­
cursor to ­humans’ propositional repre­sen­ta­tion.) Also, they are able to 
manipulate ­these repre­sen­ta­tions mentally by making causal, intentional, 
and logical inferences. They can infer from cause to effect, or from effect 
to cause; and they can infer from intention and perception to action, or 
from action to intention and perception. Their inferences are thus or­ga­
nized into quasi-­logical paradigms structured by the proto-­conditional 
(if . . . ​then . . . ​interpreted solely with causal relations) and proto-­negation 
(in terms of polar opposites, or contraries, such as presence-­absence, 
noise-­silence, successful-­unsuccessful, and so forth). So, for example, if 
predators make noise, and ­there is no noise currently, then ­there is no 
predator currently. And fi­nally, they are able to self-­regulate their be­hav­ior 
by executive monitoring, enabling them not only to learn from their ac­
tions but to anticipate prob­lems and ­mistakes ahead of time and so to 
“pre-­correct” them. (For a fuller description with appropriate references, 
see Tomasello 2014.)
In terms of ontogeny, ­there are not many studies of infant and juve­
nile apes’ prob­lem solving. The best studied task from a developmental 
perspective is object permanence, and the general finding has been that 
vari­ous ­great ape species go through the first five stages at roughly the 
same ages as young ­children, with stage 6 being somewhat delayed (see 
Tomasello and Call 1997, chapter 2, for a review). And ­great ape young­
sters also begin using tools in the same general age range as young ­children 
(see Tomasello and Call 1997, chapter 3, for a review). But ­these are just 
general age comparisons across studies. ­There is only one systematic 
comparative study of the prob­lem solving of ­great ape youngsters in 
comparison with ­human youngsters, and that is the cross-­sectional and 

164	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
longitudinal study of Wobber et al. (2013). In this study, chimpanzees, 
bonobos, and ­human ­children ­were given a variety of physical and social-­
cognitive tasks from ages two to four years. ­Because the tasks and 
methods of administration ­were more or less identical, we can get a reli­
able comparison between species. ­Because the two ­great ape species did 
not differ significantly, their results are reported together.
­There ­were five tasks administered that could be called prob­lem solving: 
object permanence (stage 6—­requiring a ­mental simulation of object 
movement), spatial transposition (in which food was hidden ­under one 
of several cups and then ­either the cups or the platform ­were moved or 
rotated—­also requiring a ­mental simulation of object movement), rela­
tive quantities ( judging which of two piles had more pieces of food), and 
tool properties ( judging which tool was the appropriate one for a prob­lem 
without actually using any—­requiring a ­mental simulation of pos­si­ble so­
lutions), and goal understanding (interpreting a ­human’s unsuccessful 
attempts to gain access to a container to indicate the location of food—­
requiring a ­mental repre­sen­ta­tion of the actor’s goal). Figure 6.1 shows 
the average age of success of the ­great ape youngsters for each of the 
problem-­solving tasks in this study. Three of the tasks ­were solved by the 
majority of youngsters at four years of age, and two of them ­were solved 
at three years of age.
1
2
3
relative
quantities
tool
properties
goal
understanding
4
spatial
transposition
object
permanence
relative
quantities
tool
properties
goal
understanding
spatial
transposition
object
permanence
Figure  6.1 ​Average age of success (in years) in vari­ous types of problem-­
solving tasks for ­great apes (chimpanzees and bonobos) and ­human toddlers 
(italics) in study of Wobber et al. (2013).

	
Cooperative Thinking	
165
­Human ­Children
Figure 6.1 also shows the age at which ­human ­children in the Wobber et al. 
(2013) study solved the exact same tasks as the ­great apes ­under conditions 
designed to be as similar as pos­si­ble. They solved four of them at two years 
of age and one of them at three years of age. In comparison with the ­great 
apes, ­children solved each and ­every task one to two years earlier. Thus, 
once again, we have evidence of a developmental pathway that seems to 
have shifted to an earlier age as ­humans diverged from other ­great apes.
In addition, ­there is evidence that young ­children also begin to think 
in some qualitatively new ways as a result of their emerging skills of joint 
and collective intentionality. When they are one and two years of age, 
­these new skills manifest as new forms of thinking, mainly in the domain 
of communication. Thus, as argued in Chapter 4, as young ­children com­
municate with ­others they are attempting to align perspectives with 
them, and once they begin to use language they acquire the symbolic ve­
hicles for dif­fer­ent perspectives. In communicating with ­others, toddlers 
at this age also must make recursive inferences: “she intends that I know 
where the toy is.” Further in this direction, as they are self-­monitoring 
their attempts at communication for their comprehensibility by their lis­
tener, ­children for the first time begin to engage in a kind of social self-­
monitoring unknown to other primates. ­These kinds of recursive infer­
ences and social self-­monitoring only exist in the social and communicative 
interaction itself.
But then, between about three and four years of age young ­children 
begin to extend this new form of thinking more broadly. As outlined in 
Chapter 3, their cognitive repre­sen­ta­tions are now not just perspectival, 
but “objective.” This sets the stage for their ability to solve such tasks as 
false belief, appearance-­reality, visual perspective-­taking, and dual-­naming. 
They also can begin to think in language, which gives their thinking prop­
ositional structure. This is also the age at which they begin to engage in 
a verbal self-­regulation of their own acting and thinking, a kind of inter­
nalized self-­monitoring in which the executive level can even take an “ob­
jective” perspective on ­things. This new kind of thinking does not have 
to take place only in social interactions; it begins to be internalized such 
that the child now has not just perspectival but dialogical or multiper­
spectival cognitive repre­sen­ta­tions, and the content is propositional 
repre­sen­ta­tions of both the social and the physical world.

166	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
But to complete the preschoolers’ construction of a new kind of ­human 
rationality based on shared intentionality, we need a few more cognitive 
components. ­These come not from ­children’s interactions with the world 
directly or from an authoritative adult—as is mainly the case with every­
thing we have investigated so far—­but rather from their interactions with 
other ­children of more or less their same age. Piaget (in several essays in 
his 1965 / 1995 work, for example) argued that when young ­children en­
gage with adults, ­there is always an ele­ment of deference or re­spect. This 
is necessary for them to trust adults sufficiently as they receive all the 
cultural information being passed along to them. However, when the 
more coordinative dimension of cognition is the issue, of special im­
portance are interactions with peers of equal status, to whom the child 
does not defer. This equal status enables them to engage in a true dialogue 
in which ­either individual’s point of view may potentially prevail, based 
not on power but on reason. ­These kinds of interactions are necessary for 
fully internalized norms of rationality and thus for ­children’s coming to 
a fully adult-­like ability to engage in normative self-­governance, as well as 
the ability to construct certain kinds of multiperspectival concepts. 
­Children are becoming reasonable.
Collaborative Reasoning
Many of the joint attentional activities in which infants engage, beginning 
from soon ­after the nine-­month revolution, are behavioral collaborations. 
Infant and adult form a shared goal, for example, to put away toys together 
or to stack blocks on top of one another together. The joint goal struc­
tures their joint attention, in the sense that each partner knows that the 
other is mostly focused on ­things relevant to their joint goal. Infants do 
this from at least fourteen months of age (Warneken and Tomasello 2007). 
But ­these are all interactions with adults, who scaffold and structure the 
interaction in vari­ous ways. When it comes to collaborating with peers, 
infants are not nearly so competent at this young age.
Collaborative Prob­lem Solving and Dialogue
The most frequent collaborative activity for many mammalian species, in­
cluding ­great apes, is the formation of co­ali­tions and alliances for ago­
nistic encounters with groupmates. The ­actual coordination of actions is 

	
Cooperative Thinking	
167
minimal in such co­ali­tions, as the basic idea is they are fighting against 
the same opponent in parallel. Something similar happens when chim­
panzees encounter unfamiliar conspecifics on their border. Their group 
hunting of monkeys is also mainly opportunistic, with one individual be­
ginning the chase and ­others then ­going to the remaining locations that 
give them the best chance to capture the monkey for themselves, without 
any communication to coordinate the group activity (for this interpreta­
tion, see Tomasello et al. 2005, and Tomasello 2014; for a dif­fer­ent view, 
see Boesch 2005).
In experiments, chimpanzees can work together to solve concrete prob­
lems, such as pulling in a board requiring two pullers (Melis et al. 2006a; 
Chalmeau 1994). In such situations, they have shown that they know they 
need a partner to be successful; they not only wait for their partner to 
­arrive, but they even ­will open a door to facilitate his arrival (for example, 
Melis et al. 2006b). ­These studies all involved adult and older juvenile 
chimpanzees. In two studies involving chimpanzee youngsters of around 
three to seven years of age working together in similar joint pulling tasks 
(Crawford 1937, 1941; Hirata 2007), youngster pairs failed completely on 
their own and had to be trained. Chimpanzees also can solve a collabora­
tive task with two complementary roles (unlike the rope-­pulling tasks, 
which have two identical roles), but they are poor at anticipating their part­
ner’s actions (Fletcher et al. 2012). The overall picture is thus that in the 
group activities of chimpanzees, the individuals are not working together 
as a “we” in the sense of having a joint goal and individual roles within it; 
rather, they are operating in what Tuomela (2007) calls “group be­hav­ior 
in I-­mode.”
True collaboration is difficult for ­human infants as well. ­Human infants 
who can collaborate reasonably well with an adult (as in, for example, 
Warneken et al. 2006) are not very skillful with a peer. (Recall also from 
Chapter 3 that they engage in ­little joint attentional interaction with peers; 
their interactions are much more “parallel play.”) Brownell and Carriger 
(1990) observed pairs of eighteen-­month-­old infants working together on 
a fairly ­simple task in which one individual had to move the lever to put 
a reward in front of a hole, and the other had to retrieve it. The infants 
­were sometimes successful, but then on the very next trial they could not 
reproduce their success; they did not seem to know what they ­were ­doing. 
By twenty-­four months of age, and especially by thirty months of age, the 
­children ­were much more skillful overall. Brownell et al. (2006) extended 

168	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
­these findings using a dif­fer­ent task, again focusing on one-­ and two-­year-­old 
­children, and found that “one-­year-­olds’ coordinated actions appeared 
more coincidental than cooperative whereas older ­children appeared to 
be more actively cooperating ­toward a shared goal” (803). This is despite 
the fact that in a visual habituation paradigm, even fourteen-­month-­olds 
differentiated between joint and individual goals (Henderson and Wood­
ward 2011).
From a cognitive point of view, one especially impor­tant aspect of the 
pro­cess is ­children’s understanding of the role of their partner, which in­
creases dramatically from about three years of age. For example, Fletcher 
et al. (2012) presented pairs of three-­year-­old ­children with a task requiring 
two active and complementary roles. In one experimental condition, 
­children ­were asked to play role B in a task with no previous experience. 
In another experimental condition, ­children played role B ­after they had 
previously played role A (with a dif­fer­ent partner). The finding was that 
the ­children who had previously played role A ­were more proficient in 
role B than ­were the ­children who had never played role A. In this same 
study, chimpanzees did not learn from having played the reciprocal role 
at all. Seemingly, the ­children but not the apes ­were simulating the role 
and perspective of their partner as they collaborated. In a similar but more 
demanding study, Warneken et al. (2014) presented three-­ and five-­year-­
olds with a task requiring them to survey the tool options available to a 
partner and to anticipate what she would do in order to collaborate with 
them effectively (given the tool they already had). The five-­year-­olds, but 
not the three-­year-­olds, performed skillfully in this very demanding task. 
(Chimpanzees performed very poorly in a similar task [unpublished data].) 
In general, young ­children take their partner’s perspective during collab­
oration in a way that other apes do not—­presumably ­because ­children are 
working with a joint goal and joint attention that makes the individual 
role and perspective of the partner especially salient.
An in­ter­est­ing question in this regard is why preschool ­children do not 
seem to get the point of competitive games such as most sports and board 
games (which typically come with instructions like “for age five and 
above”). Competitive games only make sense if (1) they are played within 
the context of cooperative rules, and (2) each partner plays the game ra­
tionally by trying to win. Schmidt et al. (2016b) had three-­ and five-­year-­
olds play a competitive game with a partner who ­either broke the rules 
or played it irrationally (by sabotaging themselves). The finding was that 

	
Cooperative Thinking	
169
five-­year-­olds protested against both types of violation in a flexible manner 
appropriate to the violation. By contrast, three-­year-­old ­children protested 
some breaches, but in a number of ways showed that they did not fully 
understand the two-­level normative structure of cooperatively regulated 
competition. What is needed to participate competently in ­these kinds of 
games is skills of executive self-­regulation that can coordinate (1) co­
operating within the rules of the game and (2) competing with the partner. 
If this interpretation is correct, then most likely three-­year-­olds still lack 
the relevant skills of coordination on the executive level (a point that we 
­will discuss more fully ­later).
But beyond ­these behavioral collaborations, a number of studies have 
focused on young ­children’s collaborative prob­lem solving and learning 
when facing more cognitively challenging situations, often requiring some 
kind of dialogic discussion. The main questions are ­these: How do indi­
viduals work together cognitively (including the nature of their dialogic 
interactions involving language)? And to what degree do they benefit cog­
nitively from their collaborative interactions? The Piagetian hypothesis is 
that collaborative prob­lem solving engages peers in an especially useful 
form of perspective-­taking that goes beyond the simpler aligning of per­
spectives in cooperative communication, which they have been ­doing since 
late infancy. Collaborative prob­lem solving on more cognitively based 
prob­lems requires ­children to jointly attend to each other’s thoughts or 
perspectives, for example, as expressed in a verbal statement. They alter­
nate jointly attending to each other’s linguistically expressed ­mental con­
tent (O’Madagain and Tomasello, forthcoming).
The vast majority of studies have been done with school-­age ­children 
and adolescents. For example, in the classic study of Doise et al. (1976; see 
also Mugny and Doise 1978) two school-­age ­children worked together on 
a conservation prob­lem. ­Because conservation prob­lems are in many ways 
perspective prob­lems—­children need to understand that even though the 
­water appears higher in one glass, the other glass is wider—­children 
ended up performing better in pairs than alone. And they maintained their 
new abilities for some time afterward. In reviewing much research with 
school-­age ­children and adolescents, Kuhn (2015) came to the following 
conclusions: (1) productive peer collaborations during school age can pro­
mote cognitive development (especially in using new conceptual knowl­
edge flexibly) better than adult instruction; (2) productive collaborations 
are ­those in which participants directly engage one another’s differing 

170	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
perspectives; (3) it is crucial for the pair to develop a shared repre­sen­ta­
tion of the prob­lem to which their differing perspectives are then anchored; 
and (4) argumentative discourse among peers—­presumably ­because they 
are of equal status and competence—­often ends up incorporating joint 
“meta-­talk” about standards of evidence and argumentation in a way that 
direct instruction and dialogue with adults does not.
­There is much less research on collaborative prob­lem solving and 
learning with preschoolers, presumably ­because it is widely thought that 
this pro­cess is less impor­tant for them. Young preschoolers of three to four 
years of age tend to work on a prob­lem more in parallel than collabora­
tively. But older preschoolers and ­children just beginning school—­around 
five to seven years of age—­are beginning to catch on. For example, in a 
study with six-­ and seven-­year-­olds, Fawcett and Garton (2005) found that 
­children ­were better at a card-­sorting task when they collaborated than 
when they worked alone. Pine and Messer (1998) found something sim­
ilar with five-­ to seven-­year-­old ­children working on a balance beam task. 
And Azmitia (1988) found that five-­year-­old ­children working together on 
a block-­building task gained more skills and also generalized ­these skills 
more readily to similar but dif­fer­ent prob­lems than did ­children working 
alone. Unfortunately, none of ­these studies with preschoolers investigated 
the pro­cess in enough detail to determine ­whether Kuhn’s conclusions 
with older ­children also apply.
The most detailed analy­sis comes from a series of studies by Kruger 
and colleagues on how peers discuss and come to a consensus on a slightly 
dif­fer­ent kind of prob­lem: moral dilemmas. In a first study Kruger and 
Tomasello (1986) found that when pairs of seven-­year-­old girls discussed 
a moral dilemma, they engaged more with the perspective of their 
partner—­for example, they mentioned the other’s perspective or argu­
ment while formulating theirs—­than did girls of a similar age discussing 
the same dilemma with their ­mothers. This documents the crucial role 
of peer versus adult interaction for collaborative thinking and learning. 
Investigating eight-­year-­old girls, Kruger (1992) found that the more a pair 
engaged with one another’s perspective (and this was true both of peer 
pairs and child-­adult pairs), the more their subsequent individual thinking 
on similar prob­lems benefited. Analyzing ­these same transcripts further, 
Kruger (1993) found that of special benefit was a pair’s ability to jointly 
discuss and assess a poor argument—­that is, one that they ultimately 
rejected—­which means that the benefit of peer discussions is not in sug­

	
Cooperative Thinking	
171
gesting good outcomes but in developing ways to engage one another’s 
thinking in the pro­cess. This suggests that perhaps the pro­cess of collab­
orative prob­lem solving and learning is similar in older ­children and 
­children just beginning formal schooling: they benefit from jointly at­
tending to and discussing one another’s perspectives and arguments. 
­Almost certainly this is not the case with younger preschoolers.
Reason-­Giving and Justification
One of the new ­things that happen in ­children’s collaborative decision-­
making, prob­lem solving, and learning is that they give one another rea­
sons for why they are thinking what they are thinking. They justify their 
perspective or line of thinking to their partner. Phi­los­o­phers have long 
focused on the importance of reason-­giving for all kinds of epistemic ac­
tivities, from moral argumentation to scientific collaboration. The point 
is that in a true, coequal collaborative discussion, I do not want you to 
come around to my way of thinking ­because I am physically power­ful or 
rhetorically persuasive, but rather ­because ­there are good reasons to take 
my perspective on the prob­lem.
Mercier and Sperber (2011) proposed a novel theory of ­human reason-­
giving, grounded in ­human evolution. Their proposal is that as ­human 
socie­ties grew larger, prob­lems of trust became more prevalent. In a group 
where every­one knows every­one, and every­one encounters every­one on 
a regular basis, trust is maintained ­because an untrustworthy person would 
be identified and excluded quickly. But in larger groups this is difficult, 
so individuals had to start practicing “epistemic vigilance”—­that is, being 
careful about what to believe. In this kind of social context, one could not 
expect ­others to accept a perspective or argument on trust. Individuals 
therefore started giving ­others reasons for why they should believe what 
they ­were telling them, typically pointing out facts that supported their 
view. Giving reasons in this way is a normative enterprise ­because it does 
not involve one individual attempting to overpower or coerce another into 
believing something, but rather, it invokes a third ele­ment—an impartial 
fact that does not depend on one’s point of view—to adjudicate: “you do 
not have to take my word for it, just consider for yourself this reason.”
­There are two studies on how ­children comprehend and respond to rea­
sons given to them. First, Mercier et al. (2014) found that four-­ and five-­
year-­old ­children (and to a lesser degree three-­year-­old ­children) could 
identify when someone attempted to give them a poor reason for believing 

172	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
something (a circular argument, for example: the dog went this way 
­because he went in this direction). Tellingly, they also found that ­children 
gave more credence to a proposal backed by a poor circular reason than 
to a proposal backed by no reason at all. Second, Schmidt et al. (2016b) 
had a puppet approach and request resources from ­children at three, five, 
and eight years of age. In all conditions the puppet gave a reason for re­
questing the resources, but in one case it was a personal reason (“I want 
it”) that, in this context, was not ­really a good reason. In three other con­
ditions the puppet gave a much better reason, one that fit at least partially 
a moral context: in one case it was need (“I ­haven’t eaten in a long while, 
I’m very hungry, I need some”); in another case it was fairness (“You have 
some, and I have none; that’s not fair”); and in a third case it was rules 
(“The rule says that you have to share”). The study found that eight-­year-­
olds (but not the younger ­children) gave more items to the requesting 
puppet than to a neutral puppet only for the three good reasons, not for 
the selfish reason. The older age of reason appreciation in this study might 
be due to the fact that the puppet always gave a reason and then was com­
pared to a puppet who gave no reason. As suggested by the study of 
Mercier et al. (2014), it might be that ­until this older age ­children think a 
poor reason is better than no reason at all.
In terms of producing reasons for ­others, Köymen et al. (2014b) had 
pairs of three-­ and five-­year-­old ­children making joint decisions about 
where to place toy animals and other objects in a toy zoo. The question 
was ­whether they could produce reasons flexibly depending on the knowl­
edge they shared with their partner in common ground. The trick was 
that some of the toys represented ­things that the ­children knew about (and 
both knew they both knew about them) that are conventionally found in 
a zoo. Other items ­were ­things that ­children might have known about but 
are not conventionally found in a zoo. The five-­year-­old ­children, and to 
a lesser degree the three-­year-­old ­children, gave reasons differently in ­these 
two situations. For example, if the item to be placed was a polar bear, one 
child would simply point out the location of a cage with ice and a frozen 
pond, which was sufficient ­because they both assumed it was in their 
common ground that polar bears live on ice. But when the item was a 
toy piano, ­there was ­little common ground to rely on relevant to their de­
cision about its placement. They could not just point out a location and 
expect their partner to accept it. They had to give a reason for the con­
nection between the piano and, for example, a place next to a bench: 

	
Cooperative Thinking	
173
­because ­people sit ­here, they could listen to a ­whole song. (For an experi­
mental demonstration in which ­children’s common ground was experi­
mentally manipulated, see Köymen et al. 2016.) Giving reasons appro­
priate to one’s common ground with a partner demonstrates at least 
some understanding of how reasons function: they justify a belief by con­
necting it to ­others that are already mutually accepted. And Köymen and 
Tomasello (2018) found that when each member of a pair of five-­year-­
olds was given dif­fer­ent information, from sources of dif­fer­ent reliability, 
they ­were nevertheless able to successfully come to an appropriate con­
clusion, often by engaging in meta-­talk about such ­things as the strength 
of evidence and the validity of reasons.
Throughout vari­ous essays, Piaget (1965) stressed the theme that 
without social interactants, especially peers, the child’s thinking would be 
plagued by a kind of inertia ­toward her own parochial perspective (known 
as “childhood egocentrism”). When talking to themselves, ­children have 
a hard time being coherent and consistent, and they contradict themselves 
regularly; they need an interlocutor to keep them on track. With specific 
reference to ­children’s collaborative prob­lem solving, argumentation, and 
the giving of reasons, Kuhn (2015) said, “The comparative merit of the 
dialogic form is that it inserts the missing interlocutor . . . ​to remedy the 
weakness . . . ​[of] ignoring or dismissing opposing perspectives and re­
stricting one’s interpersonal exchanges to the echo chamber of one’s 
own ideas” (12). While we ­humans can engage in some kinds of thinking 
on our own, the types that we consider rational and reasonable—­the types 
that make sense—­come out of our dialogic, perspective-­shifting interac­
tions with ­others. Such rational dialogue is fundamentally cooperative in 
nature ­because, at bottom, being reasonable means precisely being co­
operative in one’s epistemic interactions with ­others. All participants ba­
sically agree to yield to reason as impersonal arbiter, as it ­were, when 
that is appropriate.
Individual and Cultural Variation
­There are not many studies of individual or cultural variation in young 
­children’s collaborative prob­lem solving with peers, especially ­children 
younger than school age. The most relevant studies are ­those by Rogoff 
and colleagues comparing the group dynamics of ­children from mostly 
Mayan cultural backgrounds with ­children from mostly Western, middle-­
class backgrounds. A number of ­these studies have adults involved as 

174	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
well, but Mejia-­Arauz et al. (2007) studied triads of ­children six to ten years 
of age as they solved a prob­lem (making origami figures) together. They 
observed that the Mayan ­children behaved more often as an ensemble, 
whereas the Western middle-­class ­children engaged with the materials 
more often dyadically or individually. This presumably reflects the dif­
fering social contexts within which ­children from ­these two cultural 
backgrounds engage with peers, with the Mayan ­children spending much 
more of their time in mixed-­age peer groups. Nevertheless, although we 
do not have the kind of data we would need to come to a definitive con­
clusion, all indications are that young ­children in all cultures engage in at 
least some kind of collaborative prob­lem solving with peers in which they 
provide reasons, of one kind or another, to support their point of view.
Coordinated Decision-­Making
In infants’ earliest collaborative interactions with both adults and peers, 
the joint goal often is established gradually as ­things move along. The part­
ners coordinate their actions by coming to understand that they are both 
aiming at the same goal, and that consequently it is best for them to form 
a joint goal to pursue it together. And sometimes they form a joint goal 
by making together an explicit joint commitment. In both ­these cases, 
every­thing is out in the open: what the other is ­doing, and what he might 
be communicating. But decision theorists have also focused on other sit­
uations in which individuals must coordinate not just their actions but also 
their decisions, and not out in the open but without perceptual access or 
communication. The classic example is coordination prob­lems in the game 
theory sense of the term (Schelling 1960). In this case, partners need to 
effect a “meeting of minds” without the support of the perceptual con­
text or communication, which requires one or another form of coordi­
nated thinking.
Coordination Games with ­Children and Chimpanzees
A well-­known coordination game—­and one that may have special signifi­
cance in ­human evolution (Tomasello et al. 2012)—is the stag hunt. Stag 
hunt situations are ­those in which (1) individuals must collaborate with 
­others to benefit, (2) the benefits of the collaboration are greater than 
­those of any solo alternatives, and (3) all solo alternatives must be forsaken 

	
Cooperative Thinking	
175
(risked) in order to collaborate. In the classic dilemma, I am hunting alone 
for hares when I spy a stag—­which is much better food, but I cannot cap­
ture it alone. You are in exactly the same situation, so it is in both our in­
terests to drop our pursuit of hares, collaborate to capture the stag, and 
share the spoils. The prob­lem is that I cannot see or communicate with 
you, so I cannot be sure if you saw the stag or know that I saw the stag. 
And you are in exactly the same situation as me: you are not sure ­whether 
I saw the stag or know that you saw it also (and know that I know you 
know, and so forth). ­Because each of us only wants to go for the stag if 
the other does as well, the result could easily be paralysis.
Chimpanzees are not challenged by the stag hunt ­because they do not 
perceive it as a dilemma. In a recent experiment, Duguid et al. (2014) con­
fronted pairs of chimpanzees with the stag hunt situation. Each was 
feeding on a low-­value food (raisins) when a high-­value food (pile of 
­bananas) appeared some meters away. A spring-­loaded, locking door on 
the raisins ensured that ­going for the bananas meant forsaking the raisins. 
What happened for almost all pairs on almost all ­trials was that one indi­
vidual simply went for the bananas first, taking a significant risk. The other 
individual then just followed. This so-­called leader-­follower strategy 
worked fine as long as every­thing was out in the open. But when experi­
menters placed a barrier so that the apes could not see one another easily 
(they could do so only if they raised up their bodies to look over), their 
per­for­mance went down significantly. They still succeeded sometimes 
­because both of the individuals just went for the bananas, hoping the other 
would follow. Chimpanzees never communicated before they forsook 
their raisins—­even though they could have by making noise or gesturing 
over the barrier—­even though it would have reduced their risk signifi­
cantly. Two other studies have found a similar lack of communication 
between apes in collaboration situations in which it would have been 
beneficial to do so (Melis et al. 2009; Bullinger et al. 2014).
Four-­year-­old ­children in this same study behaved like the chimpanzees 
when every­thing was out in the open. The leader-­follower strategy is a 
­simple one; given that the follower usually does follow, every­thing works 
fine. But when ­there was a barrier, the ­children did something that the 
chimpanzees did not do: they communicated with one another. They ­were 
able to do this both vocally and with gestures by raising up above the bar­
rier. This communication enabled them to maintain their same level of 
success as without the barrier. A study by Wyman et al. (2013) suggested 

176	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
that ­children ­were communicating ­because they did indeed perceive the 
dilemma (and so helped the partner make her decision by advertising their 
decision). In a task in which ­children could not see their adult partner op­
erating her side of an apparatus, four-­year-­old ­children saw the stag ar­
rive and then looked over at the adult (programmed to behave in specific 
ways). In one condition the child saw the adult looking directly at the stag, 
so she knew he knew about it. But did he know that she knew about it 
too, which he would need to in order to take the risk? And then he would 
have to know that the child saw him seeing it, too. In this situation, many 
­children hesitated and did not go. In the other condition, this necessary 
recursive understanding—we both know that we both have seen it, and 
so forth—­was effected in a ­simple way. The adult looked at the stag and 
then looked to the child excitedly, making eye contact. With this “knowing 
look” the adult communicated that he saw the stag and knew that the child 
did also, and knew that she knew he had seen it, and so forth. With this 
common-­ground understanding of mutual knowledge, most ­children 
went for it.
The difference between chimpanzees and ­children in ­these situations 
is stark. But another study made it even starker. Duguid et al. (forth­
coming) presented pairs of chimpanzees and pairs of four-­year-­old 
­children with the simplest coordination game imaginable. Each of the sub­
jects learned on their own that a par­tic­u­lar type of box could be opened 
(and a reward extracted) only if two buttons—­one on each side of the 
box—­were pressed more or less at the same time (­there could be a slight 
delay). In the test, two partners each came into the room on one side of 
a row of four of ­these boxes, each having access to one of the buttons on 
each box. To be successful, all the pair had to do was choose the same 
box at roughly the same time. Every­thing was out in the open, and com­
munication was pos­si­ble. Nevertheless, the chimpanzees had a terrible 
time coordinating. ­After enough ­trials, a given pair might ­settle on one 
par­tic­u­lar box during ­every trial and thereby become successful. But when 
experimenters paired two individuals from dif­fer­ent successful pairs, they 
took just as long to ­settle on a par­tic­u­lar box with their new partner. What 
they learned was to ­settle on one par­tic­u­lar box. In contrast, the young 
­children coordinated more quickly by several ­orders of magnitude, and 
they chose vari­ous boxes with their first partner. When they got a new 
partner, they then coordinated almost immediately, presumably ­because 
they understood that the par­tic­u­lar box chosen did not ­matter—­what 

	
Cooperative Thinking	
177
mattered was simply that they coordinated on the same box. They saw 
the coordination prob­lem and solved it.
Three other experiments with young ­children modeled more closely 
classic coordination prob­lems in that they eliminated the possibility of 
­visual access or communication. A classic Schelling prob­lem goes some­
thing like, “We agreed to meet in Paris tomorrow at noon, but we did 
not specify where, and we have no way of communicating with each 
other.” It turns out that adults solve ­these prob­lems fairly easily—­for ex­
ample, by converging on a solution like the Eiffel Tower. Presumably, they 
are reasoning thus: Not only is the Eiffel Tower salient for my partner, 
but she knows it is salient for me as well, and she knows that I ­will think 
it is salient for her (and so forth). Schelling (1960) talked about ­these as 
focal point solutions, with the key ­factor being some kind of mutual sa­
lience. Grüneisen et al. (2015a) presented pairs of ­children with just such 
a “pure coordination” prob­lem. Again, the situation was that they both 
had to choose the same box, but in this case they could not see one an­
other or communicate. Three of the boxes had a similar picture on the 
outside, but the fourth had a unique picture on it. If the partners could 
assume that this unique picture was mutually salient to them, they could 
­settle on it without communication or visual access. Five-­ and eight-­
year-­old ­children, but not three-­year-­old ­children, succeeded in ­doing 
this. (This outcome occurred more often than chance level, and more 
often than in a control condition in which they ­were simply choosing a 
box on their own outside of a coordination prob­lem.) In a second study, 
five-­year-­old ­children solved a similar coordination prob­lem by conforming 
to how ­others before them had acted; indeed, such conformity is the way 
that adults most often coordinate with ­others in anonymous cultural 
settings (Grüneisen et al. 2015b).
Fi­nally, Grüneisen et al. (2015c) found evidence that young ­children in 
such coordination situations are indeed engaging in some kind of recur­
sive mind-­reading. One six-­year-­old child was presented with a row of four 
boxes; three had a picture of two gummy bears on it, whereas the fourth 
had a picture of four gummy bears on it. The pictures reflected the con­
tents of the box. The child was told that she would be coordinating with 
a partner who would come in ­later, so she should choose a box now. But 
just before the child chose, the experimenter told her that he had mixed 
up the contents of the boxes, so the one with the picture of four gummy 
bears ­really only contained two, and a dif­fer­ent box now contained the 

178	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
four. ­Because the goal was to coordinate, the child had to appreciate that 
the box with the picture of the four gummy bears would be the only pos­
si­ble box that could be mutually salient to her and her partner, so the vast 
majority of ­children chose this box—­even though it contained fewer 
gummy bears. They understood that to get anything they needed to co­
ordinate. But the real twist in this study was that the partner was actually 
in the hall watching the proceedings on a TV monitor. So she knew that 
the child in the room thought that she had a false belief about where the 
four gummy bears ­were located (which she in fact did not, ­because she 
had been watching on the monitor). Nevertheless, ­these ­children ­were 
able to coordinate by now choosing the box with the picture of four 
gummy bears. They understood a second-­order false belief—­she falsely 
believes that I have a false belief—so they solved the coordination prob­lem. 
(Again, this occurred more often than chance, and more often than in a 
control condition where ­children chose boxes without a partner.)
The close interrelation among coordination, communication, and re­
cursive mind-­reading very likely has, at least in part, an evolutionary ex­
planation (Tomasello et al. 2012; Tomasello 2014). Coordinating with 
­others on shared goals in the context of collaborative foraging, as sketched 
out in Chapter 2, was very likely the adaptive challenge leading to ­humans’ 
unique forms of cooperative communication and recursive mind-­reading. 
In individual ontogeny, the earliest communicative acts are attempts to 
align attention with ­others, and the first acts of mind-­reading occur within 
joint attentional interactions (see Chapter 3 and Chapter 4). ­Here we have 
scaled up to a situation in which ­children must align their decision-­making 
with that of a peer partner, which they normally would do by communi­
cating. But when the normal means of communication are blocked, a 
child can still coordinate her thinking with a partner by recognizing, re­
cursively, how the partner is thinking about how she is thinking about 
his thinking, and so forth.
Multiperspectival Concepts
Young ­children can think in complex ways without language—­for ex­
ample, in coordinating with ­others or solving complex sensory-­motor 
tasks. But much of ­children’s most sophisticated thinking occurs in lin­
guistic format. As they master more and more linguistic concepts and con­
structions, they are able to think in more and more adult-­like ways. But 
at the same time we must be wary of giving ­children credit for thinking 

	
Cooperative Thinking	
179
in adult-­like ways just ­because they are using language in ways that ap­
pear adult-­like. Often they fool us by using an expression that appears 
adult-­like, but with further probing it reveals itself to be quite dif­fer­ent 
or in some way more limited.
At four to six years of age, young ­children begin to master ways of 
talking and thinking that incorporate multiple perspectives in one thought. 
In linguistic constructions, for example, they can relate or coordinate two 
completely dif­fer­ent aspects of the situation. For example, if we are talking 
about where a toy is, a three-­ or four-­year-­old child becomes able to say 
­things like “I think it’s in the box.” The proposition it’s in the box is a sym­
bolization of the fact-­like understanding of ­things that even chimpanzees 
are capable of. But then, the child also symbolizes the propositional atti­
tude she is taking ­toward this proposition: I think highlights her uncer­
tainty. Three-­ and four-­year-­old ­children can express a range of proposi­
tional attitudes in such grammatical constructions, using a variety of 
epistemic verbs such as think, believe, know, guess, remember, and so forth. 
They can also express other types of propositional attitudes with verbs 
such as hope, wish, and won­der.
Diessel and Tomasello (2001) looked closely at the first propositional 
attitude constructions produced by seven English-­speaking ­children aged 
one to five years, and found that the earliest such constructions ­were very 
formulaic. For example, the child only said “I think X,” and never talked 
about someone ­else thinking X or the child not thinking X or the like. So 
they ­were not ­really referring to an act of thinking about X, nor did their 
utterances have the embedded structure of a proposition enveloped within 
a propositional attitude. An utterance such as “I think mommy’s home” 
was, to the child, more equivalent to “Maybe mommy’s home.” It was 
only by four to five years of age that ­children showed the kind of flexi­
bility and fa­cil­i­ty with ­these constructions that demonstrated an under­
standing of how to relate a subjective perspective (for example, I think, I 
­don’t know, or She believes) with the “objective” perspective of a proposi­
tion (for example, Mommy’s home).
In some cases, some single words even require a mastery of coordinated 
perspectives to use them in fully adult-­like ways. For example, English-­
speaking adults distinguish between Mary believing something and Mary 
knowing something. The basis for this distinction is not anything in Mary. 
It is not how certain she is, how well she is able to justify herself, or any­
thing ­else. I say that Mary believes something when I know, from my 

180	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
perspective, that she might potentially be wrong. When I say that Mary 
knows something, I am affirming that her understanding of the situation, 
from my “objective” perspective, is correct. ­There are other seemingly small 
and innocuous verbs for which something similar is ­going on; for ex­
ample, when we say that something seems to be the case or appears to be 
the case, we are highlighting the possibility that it is not the case from an 
“objective” perspective.
­There are other small but power­ful words, so-­called discourse particles, 
that incorporate within one word multiple perspectives related in com­
plex ways. We can examine just three examples from En­glish. I would say 
something like “Actually, she’s at home” when my listener thinks she’s 
somewhere ­else. I would say something like “Supposedly, she’s at home” 
in order to highlight that the general expectation is that she is at home 
but I am not sure. And I would say something like “She’s at home ­after 
all” in a situation in which we originally thought she was not at home but 
have now discovered that she is. ­Children can sometimes use such words 
before they fully understand them, but by late preschool they seem to 
grasp their import. For example, Schmerse et al. (2014) investigated 
German ­children’s understanding of the discourse particle doch, one of 
whose uses is similar to ­after all, by experimentally manipulating the situ­
ation such that an adult-­like understanding would lead to finding a toy, 
whereas anything less would lead to failure. They found that five-­year-­old 
­children ­were mostly successful, even though they ­were still not fully 
adult-­like in their understanding.
At the same age, young ­children also begin to master a variety of con­
cepts relating to the physical world that also, for fully adult-­like under­
standing, require the coordination of perspectives. One example is class 
inclusion, which basically indexes the child’s understanding of the hierar­
chical organ­ization of linguistic concepts. Thus, it is well-­known that 
young ­children have a ­great deal of difficulty understanding that the object 
in front of them may accurately be referred to as ­either a flower or a ­rose. 
When they are facing a ­whole ­table full of dif­fer­ent kinds of flowers and 
are asked, “Are ­there more flowers or roses?” ­children before about five or 
six years of age strug­gle. They cannot see one object as both a flower and 
a ­rose at the same time. Importantly, it is not the case that mastering ­these 
linguistic concepts occurs on a blank-­slate child. When young chimpan­
zees are given dif­fer­ent colored and ­shaped blocks to sort through sponta­
neously, they quite often classify them in ways similar to how a ­human 

	
Cooperative Thinking	
181
would do it (for example, Poti and Langer 2001). But from this basic begin­
ning, ­children learn how the linguistic concepts they are acquiring specifi­
cally relate to one another, sometimes requiring them to view the same 
­thing from two or more conceptual perspectives at the same time.
Another impor­tant example is the concept of number. ­Great apes have 
many skills in judging quantities, absolute quantities if the numerosity is 
small (perhaps one to four items), and relative quantities if the numer­
osity is large. But in learning how to count in language, ­human ­children 
come to understand the concept of number in the context of a number 
system. To understand the concept of number in an adult-­like way, the 
child needs to coordinate the classificatory or cardinal aspect of number 
(what is similar among all sets of n ­things) and the seriated or ordinal 
­aspect of number (the fact that n is larger than n − 1 but at the same time 
smaller than n + 1; that is to say, the numbers form an ordered series). The 
test for adult-­like understanding is classically a Piagetian test of number 
conservation, in which ­children understand that the number of items in 
a set stays the same no ­matter how they are spatially rearranged (for ex­
ample, spread out or tightly spaced). ­Children do not pass number con­
servation tasks ­until around five or six years of age, perhaps ­because ­these 
tasks require the child to coordinate the cardinal and ordinal aspects 
si­mul­ta­neously.
Other conservation concepts involve such ­things as liquid quantities, 
weight, and volume, all of which remain as invariants despite surface 
changes in spatial arrangement. An adult-­like per­for­mance requires under­
standing that although the ­water level is higher in one of the glasses, that 
glass is skinnier. Each of ­these concepts has its own par­tic­u­lar properties, 
and ­children are exposed to each of them in dif­fer­ent ways, so they are 
mastered at somewhat dif­fer­ent ages. But the fact is that ­children do not 
have a full understanding of any conservation concepts—­all requiring, in 
one way or another, the coordination of discrepant perspectives—­before 
about four or five years of age. Even when they are given extra training, 
adult-­like mastery of the concept emerges only just a ­little bit earlier.
It is true that ­children sometimes use language in a way that suggests 
they understand ­these concepts at an earlier age; but when this compre­
hension is experimentally probed, ­there is seldom understanding before 
age five. I have singled out the par­tic­u­lar concepts that I have ­because they 
all involve coordinating dif­fer­ent perspectives into one concept. But the 
particularities ­matter. The physical concepts involve coordinating such 

182	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
­things as dif­fer­ent hierarchical levels in a system of concepts or dif­fer­ent 
ways of viewing a set of items in terms of their classificatory and ordering 
relations. The multiperspectival concepts in the social domain—­including 
every­thing from belief to what­ever is encoded by the word supposedly—­
involve a coordinating of perspectives that sometimes are complementary 
(they are two compatible ways of looking at the same ­thing) but some­
times are conflicting (as in the fact that a false belief conflicts with an objec­
tive perspective). I have certainly not given a full account of the develop­
ment of ­these complex concepts, which involve maturational components 
(from both ape and uniquely ­human sources), learning components (as 
adults ­either directly or indirectly give ­children needed information), and, 
in most cases, a linguistic form of repre­sen­ta­tion. All I have tried to estab­
lish is that concepts and constructions requiring a complex coordination 
of dif­fer­ent ways of viewing ­things emerge only at the very end of the 
preschool period, as all educators of young ­children implicitly know.
Individual and Cultural Variation
­Little research has been done on ­children’s ability to coordinate with one 
another to formulate joint decisions, so ­little is known about ­either indi­
vidual or cultural variability in ­these skills. With regard to propositional 
attitudes and other multiperspectival social concepts, as might be ex­
pected almost all the research investigates beliefs. As we discussed in 
Chapter 3, ­there is a good bit of research showing the role of language in 
­children’s coming to understand beliefs and false beliefs. One in­ter­est­ing 
other piece of data is that in many languages what requires a full propo­
sitional attitude construction in En­glish is actually accomplished with 
small endings on words, usually the verb, called evidential markers or 
certainty markers. In some languages, such markers are quite frequent 
or even obligatory, such that ­every time one wishes to express a state­
ment one must choose an ending indicating that one knows it for cer­
tain, or one knows it only from hearsay, or one is not sure, and so forth. 
Matsui et al. (2009) found that the use of ­these markers (which are quite 
frequent in the speech of Japa­nese parents to ­children) facilitated Japa­
nese ­children’s assessment of the truth value of dif­fer­ent adult state­
ments in a false-­belief task.
With regard to multiperspectival concepts in the physical domain, ­there 
is a long tradition of research on vari­ous conservation concepts and how 
they emerge at somewhat ­later ages in vari­ous non-­Western cultures. The 

	
Cooperative Thinking	
183
reasons for this are not known, but it is pos­si­ble that ­these concepts are 
not as frequent in the discourse between adults and ­children in socie­ties 
where formal education is less impor­tant. With regard to the concept of 
number specifically, it is well-­known that in some cultures where mathe­
matics is not particularly needed or relevant, the culture only possesses 
number words for the smallest numbers (the rest being designated by 
something like “many”). Indeed, ­there is some evidence that in at least 
one culture working with numbers is so foreign that even adults appear 
not to understand them in ways that go beyond the basic kinds of quan­
tity comparisons that even very young ­children make (Frank et al. 2008).
The impor­tant point for current purposes is that something is hap­
pening in ­children’s development at about the time that adults across 
many dif­fer­ent cultures judge them to be ready to take on impor­tant tasks 
or to undertake formal schooling. This something would seem to be, in 
part, the ability to coordinate dif­fer­ent perspectives as explic­itly expressed 
in linguistic symbols and constructions—­that is, to coordinate them in a 
way that integrates them and makes their relation clear. ­Doing this obvi­
ously involves executive functioning. But we must not reify executive func­
tioning as a distinct domain-­general skill. It is much more likely that a 
part of gaining control of any set of concepts is relating them and coor­
dinating them to one another in the appropriate ways. Nevertheless, even 
nonverbal assessments of ­children’s skills of cognitive self-­regulation (in­
volving such ­things as persisting through failures, resisting distractions, 
and inhibiting no longer effective strategies) find a significant increase be­
tween the ages of three and six years of age. As ­children gain mastery 
over the conceptual material provided them by their culture, they are 
better able to coordinate this material and assess it from dif­fer­ent 
perspectives.
Becoming Reasonable
We have characterized ­children’s cooperative thinking with peers, begin­
ning just as they are reaching school age, as the capstone of early thinking 
abilities. ­Children have been putting their heads together with ­others for 
some time prior to this in acts of joint attention and linguistic communi­
cation, but that was mostly with adults, who could lead ­things in a direc­
tion, and mostly in concrete behavioral tasks. What ­children are ­doing 

184	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
now is putting their heads together with coequal peers, with no one 
leading, to assess beliefs, decisions, and even reasons in order to come up 
with the best way that “we” should think about ­things or do ­things. Cap­
stone of preschool thinking aside, ­there is still much cognitive develop­
ment to come ­after the emergence of ­these skills. School-­age ­children 
­acquire an im­mense amount of knowledge and an im­mense number of 
culturally specific skills, including advanced literacy and numeracy. But 
this knowledge and ­these skills would hold ­little power if ­children ­were 
not already able to coordinate multiple perspectives on ­things, to provide 
norm-­based reasons for their beliefs and decisions, and to think coopera­
tively with their peers in solving prob­lems and making decisions.
Theoretical Explanations
In modern cognitive science, the dominant meta­phor for the pro­cess of 
thinking is computation. How would we build a machine—­a computing 
machine—­that could perform all the cognitive feats we see ­humans per­
forming? In the current context, we might also ask how we would build 
a computational model to perform the cognitive feats we see ­great apes 
and ­human ­children performing. We could then compare the computa­
tional structure of ­human thinking to that of ­great ape thinking and so 
identify its unique aspects.
But if we now ask why ­human and ­great ape thinking differ in just the 
ways they do, computation-­based theories are impotent; they have no re­
sources for even formulating an evolutionary hypothesis. And the same 
could be said about ontogeny. We might be able to provide a computa­
tional answer to the question of how the thinking of an infant differs from 
that of a six-­year-­old, but we could not explain how this difference came 
about ­unless we simply say it is innate in the ge­ne­tic blueprint and that is 
the end of the story (in fact, this is the preferred explanatory strategy for 
many computational theorists such as Fodor [1983]). But even leaving 
aside criticisms of strong nativism from an ontoge­ne­tic perspective, this 
explanatory proposal just kicks us back to a version of the evolutionary 
question: How did the ­human ge­ne­tic blueprint get to be the way that it 
is, such that it now differs in systematic ways from that of other ­great apes? 
We need something more than computation.
My contention is that any answer to the fundamental question of the 
origins of uniquely ­human thinking ­will have to invoke something like 
the evolution and ontogeny of shared intentionality theory in the context 

	
Cooperative Thinking	
185
of a cooperative social ecol­ogy. ­There are theories of the evolution of 
­human cognition that instead invoke ­humans’ especially challenging 
feeding ecol­ogy, focusing on the fact that ­humans’ special foraging ecol­ogy 
and their use of tools could have provided the key se­lection pressures (for 
example, Rosati 2017). But chimpanzees have complex foraging ecologies 
and use tools as well, so ­under this theory we might expect a merely quan­
titative difference in cognitive skills focused on something like spatial and 
technical intelligence. But ­humans have some qualitatively dif­fer­ent cog­
nitive skills as well such as the ability to distinguish subjective perspec­
tives or beliefs from the objective situation; the ability to communicate 
by inviting ­others to jointly attend to referents, using conventional means 
to do so; the ability to teach generalizable cultural knowledge and to learn 
from such teaching; and the ability to think cooperatively with ­others, jus­
tifying one’s thoughts and beliefs to ­others with reasons. It is hard to see 
how an ecological theory could explain the origin of ­these fundamentally 
social-­cognitive pro­cesses, and that is without even considering such ­things 
as cultural institutions and moral judgments, which are social phenomena 
through and through.
And so I have attempted in this chapter to describe and explain the early 
ontogeny of ­children’s uniquely ­human thinking abilities. At each step of 
the way, the explanation has involved uniquely ­human social cognition in 
the form of skills of ­either joint or collective intentionality. ­These skills 
are constructed by ­children based on the maturation of their biologically 
evolved capacities as they are exercised, and executively regulated, in so­
cial interaction with ­others. As depicted in Figure 6.2, the first step of 
uniquely ­human thinking is to add a perspectival dimension to ­great ape 
cognitive repre­sen­ta­tions (the first box). This transformation emerges as 
a result of the maturation of the dual-­level structure of joint intention­
ality (at around the first birthday), enabling infants to engage with ­others 
in joint attentional activities requiring them to take the perspective of their 
partner. As toddlers begin engaging in cooperative communication with 
­others, mainly through the use of the pointing gesture, effective coordi­
nation requires them to align perspectives with ­others and to think recur­
sively by embedding their and their partner’s intentional states within one 
another (for example, “He intends for me to know X”—­the second box). 
So already by two years of age ­human ­children are thinking in ways that 
are qualitatively dif­fer­ent from other apes: their cognitive repre­sen­ta­tions 
and inferences are socially structured in species-­unique ways.

186	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
From that point on, much of uniquely ­human thinking takes place in 
the medium of a conventional language (third box in Figure 6.2). This has 
many implications, but at the very least it means that ­children’s thinking 
is being structured by the way that their forebears in the culture came to 
symbolize their experience. This is both in terms of the way that individual 
words carve up and perspectivize experience and the way that grammat­
ical constructions partition experience into objective propositions and sub­
jective propositional attitudes, perspectivizing the situation or event 
from the point of view of one of the participants. This structuring en­
ables young ­children to begin engaging with one another in conversation 
and discourse, thus inaugurating the pro­cess of joint attention to ­mental 
contents, in which the child and her conversational partner jointly attend 
to the propositional content of what each of them has to say, expressing 
their individual attitudes about it as appropriate (O’Madagain and Toma­
sello, forthcoming). They now coordinate perspectives not on external en­
tities and situations but on one another’s conventionally expressed per­
spectives. And in the case of collaborative prob­lem solving, they come to 
a joint evaluation about ­those perspectives or beliefs on the basis of shared 
rational norms, perhaps invoking the “objective” perspective that by this 
time they both share and know that they share.
Five-­ to seven-­year-­old ­children (final box) are now in a position to men­
tally coordinate with peer partners by engaging with them in coordinated 
decision-­making and collaborative prob­lem solving. In this context, “men­
Joint Intentionality
Collective Intentionality
Cog: dual-level
Cog: objectivity
S-R: normative
Thinking
Joint Att.
Coop. Comm.
Linguistic Comm.
Coord. of Perspectives
5 years
4 years
3 years
2 years
1 year
0
PERSPECTIVAL
REPRESENTATIONS
RECURSIVE
INFERENCES
THINKING
IN LANGUAGE
COOPERATIVE
THINKING
Figure  6.2 ​The ontoge­ne­tic emergence of young ­children’s uniquely ­human 
skills of cooperative thinking. Abbreviations: Cog = cognitive; Coop. Comm. = 
cooperative communication; Coord. of Perspectives = coordination of per­
spectives; Joint Att. = joint attentional activities; Linguistic Comm. = linguistic 
communication; S-­R = executive self-­regulation.

	
Cooperative Thinking	
187
tally coordinate” means many ­things. In a coordination prob­lem, it means 
embedding perspectives within one another recursively (I expect you to 
expect me to expect you to expect me . . .). In the case of collaborative 
prob­lem solving, much is determined by the specific content of the 
prob­lem; in a conservation prob­lem, ­children must see a perspective on, say, 
height as compensated by a perspective on, say, width. In coming to under­
stand number, coordination means understanding the numerosity of a 
group of entities as a certain set size that si­mul­ta­neously lies within an or­
dered series of set sizes. In a false-­belief task, coordinating means resolving 
the apparent discrepancy between where someone thinks an object is and 
where it ­really is. In the appearance-­reality task, coordinating means (in the 
classic tasks) resolving visual appearance with ­actual function. In reason-­
giving dialogical discourse, the kinds of coordinations are unlimited, again 
depending on the causal and logical structure of the prob­lem at hand.
Coordinated, cooperative thinking of this kind—­both as the child in­
teracts with a peer and as she internalizes this interaction and thereby con­
nects her beliefs to one another via reasons—­may be thought of as the 
capstone of cognitive development in the preschool period. Pro­cesses of 
internalization enable ­children at some point to reflect on and to evaluate 
their own thinking, and to construct multiperspectival concepts that re­
quire a coordination or integration of perspectives. The overall pro­cess 
depends on all the uniquely ­human cognitive developments that have pre­
ceded it: joint attention and perspective-­taking, cooperative and linguistic 
communication, and much causal and intentional knowledge passed on by 
the culture. ­These skills are then all marshaled for the tasks of coopera­
tive decision-­making and prob­lem solving with peers who are no more 
competent or knowledgeable than oneself. ­These tasks require some 
­serious skills of executive self-­regulation, and indeed some new skills of 
social self-­regulation as well. Whereas three-­year-­olds self-­regulate their 
thinking socially to some degree, by the end of the preschool period the 
self-­regulating agent has become enculturated and internalized so 
that now the child is coordinating and evaluating her own thinking from 
the perspective of “we” as the “objective” perspective of the group. The 
objective perspective of the group is embodied in the group’s norms of 
rationality, so we may now speak of normative self-­governance.
To reiterate the constructivist position once more: it is manifestly not 
the case that if a three-­year-­old child ­were suddenly stranded alone on a 

188	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Cognition
desert island, she would, at six years old, on her own come to multiper­
spectival concepts and reflective evaluations and normative self-­governance 
of her own thinking. Certainly ­there are maturational capacities that en­
able ­these skills, but ­there is also a developmental pro­cess involving so­
ciocultural interactions. Following Vygotsky, ­there is first an interindividual 
social process—­involving one or another form of shared intentionality fo­
cused on one or another form of ­mental content—­and this pro­cess is 
then internalized into intraindividual cognitive activities involving per­
spectival or even multiperspectival concepts, recursive and reflective in­
ferences, and executive oversight of every­thing via pro­cesses of normative 
self-­governance.
Cognitive Implications
Six-­ to seven-­year-­old ­children have entered, to use the somewhat old-­
fashioned phrase, the “age of reason.” In many (certainly not all) situa­
tions, ­children of this age not only think, but they know what they are 
thinking, and even what and how they are expected to think from a nor­
matively rational point of view. And they can often provide valid reasons 
for their thinking and beliefs. An adult or even a peer can thus reason with 
a six-­ or seven-­year old and expect them to respond in a reasonable way 
in return. This enables ­children of this age for the first time to put their 
heads together with a peer to consider ­things and solve prob­lems in ways 
that would be impossible on their own. They are now in a position, at least 
in a nascent way, to enter fully into the pro­cess of the collaborative cre­
ation of novel cultural products and practices.
As I have argued ­here, this new level of cognitive competence is the 
culmination of many dif­fer­ent ontoge­ne­tic strands. As ­these strands come 
together to enable ­children to engage with ­others in cooperative thinking, 
their individual thinking becomes socialized or enculturated. They work 
with mutual expectations, with thoughts embedded in thoughts, with rea­
sons for thinking in a par­tic­u­lar way, with perspectives on perspectives, 
and with an “objective” or normatively rational point of view. This all 
­results in a kind of interconnected web of beliefs, in which dif­fer­ent 
propositionally structured thoughts are logically related to ­others in the 
context of the group’s rational norms. This web is created during dialogic 
interactions with ­others involving perspective-­shifting discourse, especially 
as involved in collaborative prob­lem solving, coordinated decision-­making, 
and the giving of reasons, both to ­others and to oneself.

III
The Ontogeny of 
Uniquely ­Human Sociality
h
Mutual re­spect grows out of exchanges among individ­
uals who consider one another as equals. . . . ​Obligation 
thus engendered . . . ​is distinct in essence from intellec­
tual submission to [adult] authority or to coercive 
beliefs.
Jean Piaget
“Prob­lems of the Social Psy­chol­ogy of Childhood” (1960)
The shift to an ultra-­cooperative lifestyle during ­human evolution trans­
formed the nature of ­human social relationships. Whereas ­great ape so­
cial relations are based mainly on competition and dominance, with a dash 
of cooperation, early ­humans began forming with cooperative partners 
a joint agent “we,” comprising “you” and “me” (perspectivally defined), 
relating to one another as equally deserving, mutually respectful, second-­
personal agents. ­Later, this all scaled up to group-­minded cooperative 
relationships with all of one’s compatriots in the cultural group. At some 
point in this pro­cess, early ­humans, unlike apes, came to understand that 
­others ­were evaluating them as cooperative partners, and indeed they 
came to evaluate themselves as well, leading to a new sense of moral ­identity 
that normatively self-­regulated all their social decision-­making.
From early on ­children can form with ­others a shared agent, “we,” un­
derpinned by uniquely ­human sociomoral motives and attitudes. Thus, 
infants collaborate with ­others in ­simple ways. ­Later, as three-­year-­olds, 

190	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
they make joint commitments to collaborate, which they feel responsible 
for upholding (and trust that their partner does, too). Infants treat ­others 
with sympathy, and as three-­year-­olds with re­spect such that they feel ob­
ligated to treat ­others as they deserve to be treated—­that is, fairly. When 
they are not treated fairly and with re­spect, ­children resent it, and they 
normatively protest in an attempt to hold the partner accountable. Three-­
year-­old ­children also follow social norms and ­later feel entitled to en­
force ­those norms on ­others. By six years of age, ­children begin to execu­
tively self-­regulate their own motives and actions normatively, as grounded 
and justified by the group’s moral standards, and they feel guilty if they 
fail to do so appropriately. Overall, from the point of view of ­great ape 
competition and dominance, ­these unique sociomoral motives and atti­
tudes (commitment, responsibility, trust, fairness, respect, accountability, 
entitlement, guilt, etc.) mean that the decision-­making agent gives weight 
to the goals, values, and expectations of ­others, and normatively expects 
them to do the same.
The unique motives and attitudes of shared intentionality thus enable 
­humans, but not other apes, to relate to one another in some new ways 
cooperatively, even morally. But ­these motives and attitudes do not come 
into being full-­blown. They come into being through a developmental pro­
cess, extended over time, in which maturation, experience, and executive 
self-­regulation all play constitutive roles.

W ​7 ​w
Collaboration
Uniquely ­human cognition originates, as we have seen, in the nine-­month 
revolution when infants begin to interact with ­others in joint intentional 
activities. The phrase joint attention emphasizes the unique cognitive di­
mension of ­these activities as a kind of “meshing of minds,” which natu­
rally includes the partners’ differing perspectives on their joint attentional 
focus. But joint intentional activities also have a unique social-­motivational 
dimension, as a kind of “meshing of goals or intentions.” ­Children create 
with a partner a joint agent “we” that pursues a joint goal, which natu­
rally includes that each partner has her own individual role to play. 
Whereas the group actions of apes are all about individuals achieving their 
individual ends in group contexts—­they are using one another as social 
tools—in their early joint intentional activities, ­children and their partners 
decide to do something together. In forming this partnership, each indi­
vidual voluntarily makes herself cooperatively dependent on the other.
­These early joint intentional activities—­first with adults, who scaffold 
the collaboration, and ­later with peers—­spawn some new dimensions of 
social relatedness. If we as collaborative partners are equally necessary for 
our joint success, and if we could switch roles and still be successful, and 
if we both adhere to the same criteria in playing a role, then we must be 
somehow equivalent or equal as partners. This recognition of self-­other 
equivalence generates a mutual re­spect and sense of equality among (po­
tential) collaborative partners. Further, when it is necessary to assure my 
partner before we begin that he can trust me—­and to get a similar assur­
ance from him in return—­the two of us can make a joint commitment 
to collaborate. In a ­simple exchange such as “Let’s X” followed by “OK,” 
we both openly pledge to play our role in accordance with the role stan­
dards that we both know in common ground are necessary for joint 

192	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
success; moreover, we each entitle the other to call us to account if we 
do not. We thus enter into a web of normative relations in which each 
collaborative partner is accountable to the other for treating her with ap­
propriate re­spect by responsibly following mutually understood (and im­
plicitly agreed to) normative standards.
Following the lead of contractualist moral phi­los­o­phers, then, our 
working hypothesis is that the evolutionary and ontoge­ne­tic roots of 
­human morality lie in cooperative activities for mutual benefit: “The 
primal scene of morality is not one in which I do something to you or 
you do something to me, but one in which we do something together” 
(Korsgaard 1996, 275). Participation in joint intentional activities results 
in individuals who treat their partners as equals, with mutual re­spect, 
­because joint intentional activities are structured by the joint agent “we,” 
which creates a new kind of social relationship between “I” and “you” 
(perspectivally defined) as constituents of that “we.” That is to say, par­
ticipation in joint intentional activities creates the conditions for what 
moral phi­los­o­phers call second-­personal relationships, based on re­spect, 
commitment, accountability/responsibility, and fairness (Darwall 2006). 
Second-­personal agents, and only second-­personal agents (so not, for 
example, beloved pets or six-­month-­old infants), have the standing to 
enter into the kinds of joint commitments that make each partner respon­
sible for the fate of the other. ­These new second-­personal relationships 
in collaborative activities set ­children up to construct, ­later in ontogeny, 
senses of re­spect, commitment, and fairness to all in the cultural group 
or moral community (see Chapter 9).
Once again in this case we find age three as a kind of watershed. Al­
though infants sometimes “collaborate” with adults (in a sense that may 
differ significantly across cultures), it is only ­after the second birthday that 
toddlers begin to collaborate meaningfully with peers so that by age three 
they have begun to understand them as second-­personal agents. Then, 
­after age three, ­children begin collaborating with peers in some new ways, 
especially by making joint commitments to collaborate and by protesting 
when their partner does not honor that commitment. The relationship 
between partners has now become normative; each feels obligated to 
honor her commitment by responsibly playing her role and by accepting 
her partner’s criticism as legitimate if she does not.
Our goal in this chapter is thus to describe and explain the species-­
unique ways in which young ­children come to work together collabora­

	
Collaboration	
193
tively with ­others, both adults and peers, in pursuit of mutual benefits and 
as accompanied by the vari­ous sociomoral emotions and attitudes that, 
in a Darwinian world, make cooperation of this kind pos­si­ble.
From Apes: Acting in Parallel with ­Others
­Great apes’ social lives are most immediately and urgently structured by 
competition for food, mates, and other resources, which engenders a dom­
inance structure within the group. ­Great apes sometimes collaborate 
with one another as well, but, tellingly, the most common context is for 
purposes of competition, as they form co­ali­tions with one another to win 
fights and other dominance contests. Their “friends” are ­those with whom 
they groom and sometimes even share food, with the strategic goal of 
cultivating an ally with whom they can team up to defeat ­others. As 
Mueller and Mitani (2005) have said, “Competition . . . ​frequently repre­
sents the driving force ­behind chimpanzee cooperation” (278). Chimpan­
zees and other apes thus live their lives embedded in more or less con­
stant competition: they are constantly attempting to outcompete ­others 
by outfighting them, outsmarting them, or outfriending them. But beyond 
this cooperation for competition, the most in­ter­est­ing context for current 
purposes is chimpanzees’ group hunting ­because it could be seen, con­
ceivably, as a cooperative activity for mutual benefit.
Chimpanzee Group Hunting
As described in Chapter 2 and Chapter 6, in many but not all chimpanzee 
and bonobo populations individuals hunt together in a small group for 
monkeys or other small mammals (the vast majority of both field and ex­
perimental data are with chimpanzees). The basic idea is that ­because 
monkeys are so quick and agile in the trees, the apes must surround one 
to capture it. In formulating its plan of action, each individual hunter takes 
into account not only the actions of the monkey but also the actions, and 
even intentions, of the other hunters. The pro­cess is thus similar to that 
which occurs in social carnivores such as lions and wolves, but it may have 
some special qualities as well.
Experiments have shown that chimpanzees facing collaborative prob­
lems understand that they need a partner to be successful; indeed, they 
­will even open a door to enable a needed partner to join them in a task 

194	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
(Melis et al. 2006b). Chimpanzees ­will also give tools to individuals who 
need ­those tools to perform an action necessary for them both to access 
a reward (Melis and Tomasello 2013). Melis et al. (2006b) also found that 
­after a small amount of experience with one another, chimpanzees knew 
which individuals ­were good partners for them—­those with whom they 
had had past collaborative success—­and they chose ­those partners in pref­
erence to ­others. (It is unlikely that partner choice of this type happens 
in the wild, however; hunting in the wild is mostly opportunistic as 
­effected by preconstituted traveling parties. ­There is thus no partner choice 
in the wild and thus ­little chance for cheaters to be socially excluded.) But 
all ­these observations are still consistent with an interpretation in which 
­great ape collaborators are basically using their partners, in sophisticated 
ways, as social tools. The data to be reviewed in the sections that follow, 
in the form of studies comparing apes and ­children in collaborative tasks, 
­will make this interpretation the most likely one: chimpanzee group 
hunting is not best conceived as a cooperative activity for mutual benefit, 
if we are focused on how the chimpanzees themselves view it. They act 
in parallel when their individual motives happen to coincide.
The question thus arises: how do chimpanzee collaborators relate to 
one another? In both the wild and some experiments, choosing to collab­
orate involves at least some risks (as ­there are individual alternatives that 
could be pursued instead), so one might then think that some kind of trust 
among partners is required. In my analy­sis, chimpanzees acting in groups 
to acquire food are working with a kind of strategic trust (Tomasello 
2016). The notion of strategic trust is something like reliance on the laws 
of nature: we trust that a bridge ­will not collapse as we traverse it or that 
our dog ­will swim to shore if he jumps into the lake. The chimpanzees 
and bonobos acting in groups to acquire food understand that each of the 
­others is attempting to capture the monkey, and they trust that they ­will 
continue ­doing this. They rely on the fact that the ­others ­will continue 
pursuing their own self-­interest (see Engelmann et al. 2015). The point is 
thus that although chimpanzee collaboration appears on the surface to 
be similar to the ­human version, in real­ity—in terms of the psycholog­
ical pro­cesses involved—it is less like working together mutualistically and 
more like individuals using one another to achieve their individual ends. 
Overall, perhaps with some exceptions, we may say that chimpanzees 
view ­others mostly instrumentally: as social obstacles in competition, 
or as social instruments in collaboration.

	
Collaboration	
195
We know ­little to nothing about the age at which chimpanzees become 
capable of collaborating with ­others in complex tasks such as group 
hunting. In the wild, adults dominate the group hunting, and it takes some 
time for juveniles to get into the game. In experiments, ­because the basic 
requirements of the collaborative tasks have been challenging, chimpan­
zees have seldom been tested below about four years of age. The two ex­
ceptions, as noted in Chapter 6, are two studies in which chimpanzee 
youngsters faced a relatively ­simple parallel pulling prob­lem with a peer 
(Crawford 1937; Hirata 2007). In ­these studies, youngsters of around three 
to seven years of age failed completely on their own and had to be trained 
by ­humans. Chimpanzees thus do not seem capable of collaborating ef­
fectively with a peer, even on fairly ­simple prob­lems, ­until the juvenile 
period.
­Human ­Children
­Human toddlers clearly do not have the cognitive abilities to act in groups 
strategically in the complex ways that adult chimpanzees do. But they do 
begin to collaborate in some ­simple yet unique ways from early in devel­
opment; indeed, they do so at a younger age than chimpanzees. In 
Chapter 6 we looked at the ways in which young ­children collaborate with 
a peer to solve a ­simple prob­lem, and the finding was that they do so ef­
fectively and consistently from around two to three years of age. This is 
in contrast to the chimpanzee youngsters that have been tested up to seven 
years of age (as noted earlier), all of whom failed to coordinate with a 
peer partner to solve a prob­lem. We thus have, once again, ­human capaci­
ties and skills—in this case for peer collaboration—­that seem to emerge 
earlier in ­human than in ape ontogeny by several years.
Dual-­Level Collaboration
When chimpanzees surround and capture a monkey, the individuals are 
operating in what we have called, ­after Tuomela (2007), “group be­hav­ior 
in I-­mode”: they are using one another as social tools. When one-­ to three-­
year-­old infants and toddlers interact collaboratively with an adult, they 
are ­doing something dif­fer­ent. They act together as a joint agent ­toward 
a joint goal, which means, in this context, that they each have their own 
individual role. ­Because toddler and adult both take the perspective of the 

196	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
other, and can reverse roles as needed, a new social relationship emerges. 
“I” relate to “you,” with ­these designations being understood deictically—­
that is, depending on which perspective is being ­adopted. The recipro­
cally defined I-­you relation is the foundation for so-­called second-­personal 
social relationships, involving two second-­personal agents who relate to 
one another cooperatively, with mutual re­spect, as equals.
One-­ and two-­year-­old toddlers are not yet second-­personal agents, nor 
do they perceive or treat ­others in that way. But they are working on it. 
One-­ and two-­year-­old toddlers are in the pro­cess of constructing with 
adult partners a sense of I-­you-we, a sense of other individuals as equally 
deserving cooperative partners (who see me the same way). By three to 
six years of age ­children have, to a large extent, completed the pro­cess. 
They relate to collaborative peer partners as second-­personal agents with 
whom one may make normatively binding joint commitments and to 
whom one may normatively protest in case of a breach.
A Sense of “We”
A basic fact is that ­human ­children are more motivated to interact with 
­others in collaborative activities than are ­great apes. Melis et al. (2006b) 
found that chimpanzees would open a door for a needed collaborative 
partner, but when no partner was needed (­because the food could be re­
trieved by the subject alone) they almost never opened the door; they only 
collaborated when they ­were forced to by instrumental considerations. 
In an explic­itly comparative experiment, Rekers et al. (2011) gave chim­
panzees and ­human ­children the option to obtain food for themselves by 
pulling the rope alone or to obtain food for both themselves and a peer 
partner by pulling together with that partner (the rewards for the subject 
and the partner ­were the same in both cases). Whereas the chimpanzees 
­were indifferent to ­these options (­because the food was the same in both), 
thirty-­six-­month-­old ­children ­were much more likely to prefer the collab­
orative option over the solo option. When Bullinger et al. (2011a) doubled 
the amount of food for the collaborative option, the chimpanzees choose 
that option almost all the time, thus confirming that their sole motivation 
was indeed the food.
In another comparative experiment, Warneken et al. (2006) tested both 
young human-­raised chimpanzees and eighteen-­month-­old ­human infants 
in a series of four collaborative tasks (for a similar study with fourteen-­
month-­old infants, see Warneken and Tomasello 2007). Two of the tasks 

	
Collaboration	
197
­were instrumental ­toward goals, and two ­were simply collaborative games. 
Whereas the chimpanzees only engaged with the instrumental tasks, the 
­children engaged with both types of tasks equally enthusiastically. More­
over, when the activity was completed—­whether it was instrumental or 
a game—­the ­children often attempted to set the task up to do it again, 
just for fun, but the chimpanzees never did that. It is also noteworthy that 
­children are so trusting of a cooperative motive in ­others that they en­
gage collaboratively with almost any adult, familiar or novel (as demon­
strated in many experimental settings); further, just the thought that they 
are collaborating (when they are fooled into thinking they are) makes 
­children work harder and persist longer in a task (Butler and Walton 2013). 
In contrast, to induce chimpanzees to collaborate with one another in ex­
periments it is necessary to prescreen for partners who are generally tol­
erant of one another and who actively avoid aggression in close quarters 
(Melis et al. 2006c).
But beyond simply preferring collaborative interactions, young ­children 
collaborate with ­others in some qualitatively unique ways as well. Most 
especially, they form with their partner a joint agent “we” in order to 
pursue a joint goal, and maintaining this “we” is part of their continuing 
motivation. Thus, when eighteen-­month-­olds ­were collaborating with an 
adult in the Warneken et al. (2006) study, if the adult simply stopped in­
teracting (experimentally controlled), the infants made active attempts to 
re-­engage him by ­doing such ­things as beckoning and pointing. In con­
trast, the human-­raised chimpanzees never—­not once—­attempted to re-­
engage their partner; instead they strived to solve the prob­lem alone. One 
possibility is that the ­children, but not the chimpanzees, had created with 
their partner a joint agent “we” whose breakdown they sought to repair.
Support for this interpretation comes from three other findings. First, 
in the social games (which the chimpanzees mostly ignored), the ­children 
attempted to re-­engage their recalcitrant partner just as often as in the in­
strumental tasks. Their re-­engagement attempts ­were not aimed at reac­
tivating a social tool ­toward an instrumental end but at reinstating the co­
operative engagement. Second, in a follow-up study, Warneken et  al. 
(2012) found that when ­there was a reason for the adult disengagement 
(for example, he was called away), twenty-­four-­month-­old toddlers waited 
patiently for his return. In contrast, if the adult ceased cooperating for 
no discernable reason, toddlers continued attempts at re-­engagement. 
Toddlers ­were thus sensitive to the adult’s intentional state: if he was 

198	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
called away, he likely retained the joint goal; if he quit for no reason, he 
had likely lost it. And third, in this same experiment, toddlers attempted to 
re-­engage their partner even when the activity was one they knew they 
could perform successfully on their own. Again, the toddlers viewed 
their partner as more than a social tool; they waited for him or attempted 
to re-­engage him not to enlist his help in attaining an instrumental goal 
but to try to reconstitute their lost “we.”
The nature of the communicative acts that ­children used to re-­engage 
their partner in both Warneken et al. experiments is telling as well. The 
toddlers ­were not demanding that the adult return to the joint activity—
in which case they would have whined or vocalized insistently—­but rather 
they ­were inviting the adult back into the activity by ­doing such gentle 
­things as beckoning or pointing. As noted in Chapter 4, requests of this 
type are fundamentally cooperative in that they recognize that the recip­
ient has a ­free choice in the ­matter; they simply suggest or offer one 
choice. Indeed, attempting to force re-­engagement would be inconsistent 
with the goal of reconstituting their mutually cooperative “we.”
“I” and “You”
As young ­children interact collaboratively with ­others as a “we,” they 
come to understand and relate to them differently. Most importantly, col­
laboration implies a certain level of equality among partners. If you are 
coercing me, then it is not collaboration but domination or enslavement. 
If I am pretending to fully participate but ­really letting you do all of the 
work, then it is not collaboration but exploitation. Collaboration does not 
mean ­doing exactly the same work or same amount of work; collabora­
tion means working together, ceteris paribus, on a more or less equal 
footing. As they collaborate with ­others in their daily activities and games, 
one-­ and two-­year-­old toddlers gradually come to appreciate this equality 
in the situation, and indeed they come to appreciate ­others as equivalent 
to themselves in general.
­There are three aspects of ­children’s developing collaborative interac­
tions that foster an understanding of self-­other equivalence. First is the 
fact that in interdependent collaboration both partners are necessary agen­
tive forces in producing the jointly desired outcome—­and ­either could 
just as easily derail the pro­cess. Thus, during the one-­ to three-­year-­age 
period toddlers begin to recognize that not only do they need their col­
laborative partner for success (which chimpanzees already recognize) but 

	
Collaboration	
199
their partner also needs them. This transforms an asymmetrical social tool 
understanding of the pro­cess into something more symmetrical and mu­
tual. ­There are no directly relevant studies, to my knowledge, to demon­
strate toddlers’ understanding of this symmetry. But several ­children in 
the study by Warneken et al. (2006) teased the adult on several occasions 
by starting to play their role and then withdrawing and smiling or laughing 
coyly; they seemed to understand their partner’s need for their contribu­
tion. Chimpanzees ­were never observed ­doing this. The idea is thus that 
as young ­children are learning to collaborate, they are beginning to view 
collaborative partners in general, including themselves, as agents with 
equal causal and agentive power in the interaction.
The second aspect of early collaborative interactions that foster an un­
derstanding of self-­other equivalence is ­children’s growing recognition 
that the roles in a joint intentional activity are reversible—­indeed, they 
are agent in­de­pen­dent. In princi­ple, ­either partner could perform ­either 
role; they are interchangeable. Thus, as noted in Chapter 5, Carpenter 
et al. (2005) found that when an adult tapped on the arm of an eighteen-­
month-­old infant, quite often the infant responded by tapping the adult’s 
arm in return (not her own arm, which would be exact copying); they re­
versed roles. Similarly, if the adult held out a plate on which the child 
could place a toy, quite often a few moments ­later the infant held out the 
plate for the adult, looking to her expectantly—­again they exchanged 
roles, in this case with mediating objects. When Tomasello and Carpenter 
(2005a) gave similar tasks to young human-­raised chimpanzees, they did 
not reverse roles in this same way. The cognitive basis for this role reversal 
is the ability of young ­children to simulate the role and perspectives of 
the partner during collaboration (Fletcher et al. 2012). Young ­children 
from one to three years of age are gradually coming to cognitively con­
struct a bird’s-­eye view of the collaborative interaction in which the roles 
are interchangeable among partners; thus, in a straightforward sense, the 
partners are equivalent in the pro­cess.
Third, when young ­children engage with a partner repeatedly in a par­
tic­u­lar collaborative activity structured by joint intentionality—as they are 
wont to do—­they come to construct with that partner a common-­ground 
understanding of the ideal way that each role must be played for joint suc­
cess. That is, as they begin a familiar joint activity, the child and her 
partner implicitly construct subgoals for each of them based on their past 
experience together, the ideal way that “we” want “me” to play my role 

200	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
and “you” to play your role. For instance, if we are ­going to build a tower 
together, then we both know in our personal common ground that you 
need to hand me the blocks and hold the base steady while I place the 
blocks (or perhaps the reverse). Thus, in one study eighteen-­month-­old 
­children collaborated with a puppet in placing blocks into boxes in a par­
tic­u­lar way; when another puppet came along ­later and placed the blocks 
a dif­fer­ent way, the toddlers intervened to help her play her role the right 
way (Schmidt et al., forthcoming). ­These mutually understood role ideals, 
as we may call them, are thus impartial in the sense that they apply to 
whoever plays a par­tic­u­lar role: ­whether it is my ­mother, my peer, or a 
puppet, to build a block tower one of us must do X, and the other must 
do Y. Impartiality in the application of role ideals assumes partners of 
equal status. Plausibly, role ideals in collaborative activities are precursors 
to the more general normative standards of the cultural group at large, 
which ­will so thoroughly structure older ­children’s lives.
­Here, then, is the claim: participation in joint intentional collaboration 
leads young ­children to understand ­others as, in some sense, equivalent 
or equal to themselves. “You and I” represents the relationship of coequal 
partners. The effects of this way of viewing ­things on ­children’s interper­
sonal relations are momentous. Nagel (1970) argues that the recognition 
of ­others as agents or persons equivalent to oneself—so that the self is 
seen as just one agent or person among many—­provides a reason for con­
sidering the concerns of ­others as equivalent to one’s own; it is thus the 
cognitive basis for a sense of fairness. He describes the bird’s-­eye view and 
the reversibility of roles as, “You see the pres­ent situation as a specimen 
of a more general scheme, in which the characters can be exchanged” (83). 
His description of the most basic moral argument a victim can pres­ent to 
a perpetrator is, “How would you like it if someone did that to you?” 
(82)—­that is, if the roles ­were reversed. So I would argue that the reason 
that ­great apes do not treat ­others “fairly” (see Chapter 8) is that they do 
not participate in joint intentional collaboration, so they do not form a 
“we” comprising “I” and “you,” and they do not exchange roles or under­
stand impartial role ideals. As a result, they do not construct a sense self-­
other equivalence with a partner.
Second-­Personal Agency and Mutual Re­spect
In terms of ontogeny, the claim is that young ­children’s understanding of 
self-­other equivalence comes into being through their participation in joint 

	
Collaboration	
201
intentional activities, mainly during this early period between one and 
three years of age. But, importantly, the recognition of self-­other equiva­
lence is not by itself a moral motivation or act; it is simply the recogni­
tion of an inescapable fact that characterizes the ­human condition. We 
might ignore this insight in our ­actual behavioral decision-­making, and 
indeed we might even wish it ­were not true. It does not ­matter—­a fact is 
a fact. The recognition of self-­other equivalence is thus not in any way 
sufficient for making a fair or just decision in one’s interpersonal relations 
with ­others; it is simply the structure of the way that ­humans understand 
the social world in which they live.
But the understanding of self-­other equivalence is a critical cognitive 
component structuring young ­children’s species-­unique forms of socio­
moral interaction with ­others—­and this has decisive effects, in its own way, 
on moral decision-­making. Most basically, an understanding of self-­other 
equivalence is a necessary precondition for individuals to bestow upon one 
another the standing of second-­personal agents. For individuals to relate 
to one another as second-­personal agents they must have a basically co­
operative relationship and, at least in the ongoing interactive context, re­
spect one another as equals. Two men engaged in a fistfight are not en­
gaged with one another second-­personally, whereas two men engaged in 
a boxing match—in which they agree to certain cooperative rules and to 
treat one another with re­spect—­are. I have argued that second-­personal 
relationships arose in ­human evolution as part and parcel of joint inten­
tional collaboration: individuals forming a joint agent “we” are ipso facto 
in a cooperative spirit and re­spect their partner as equivalent to the self 
(Tomasello 2016). Ontoge­ne­tically, as we have just established, ­children 
construct a sense of self-­other equivalence in their collaborative interac­
tions with ­others in the one-­ to three-­year age period, which enables them 
to treat ­others as second-­personal agents.
­Because of this equivalence, second-­personal agents are entitled to 
make normative claims on their partner—­you must play your part as we 
both know you should—­and are at the same time obligated to respond to 
the normative claims that their partner makes on them. Making a promise 
or commitment is a prototypical second-­personal act. Second-­personal 
agents understand and re­spect that a promise or commitment creates on 
the part of the promisor an obligation to do what she has promised. The 
promisee, for his part, is now entitled to expect the promisor to do what 
she promised or committed to, and he is consequently entitled to protest 

202	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
legitimately if she does not. The promisor herself ­will agree that the pro­
test is legitimate ­because she agrees that she has broken the agreement 
on which the partner was depending. All this assumes an attitude of mu­
tual re­spect. Second-­personal agents thus recognize one another as having 
the requisite competence and knowledge to, for example, enter into a 
promissory relationship, and they recognize one another as equal in this 
re­spect; ­either could be the promisor or promisee, and the normative im­
plications would be the same in ­either case. Second-­personal agents—­
which, obviously, would not include other animal species or young ­human 
infants—do not just re­spect the power of the other individual (the way 
that a child might re­spect a bully’s size and strength) but accord her “rec­
ognition re­spect” (Darwall 1977), meaning that they recognize her as an 
individual with the competence and status to enter into second-­personal 
interactions and relationships.
One-­ to three-­year-­old toddlers are not yet second-­personal agents in 
this sense, nor are they capable of recognizing ­others as such. But they 
have started down that path. By three years of age young ­children already 
recognize that other individuals are cooperative agents with whom one 
can form a “we” and create a coequal partnership of “I” and “you.” This 
partnership is second-­personal in the sense that it involves a kind of mu­
tual re­spect for the cooperative partner as equivalent to the self. What is 
missing is the normative dimension, comprising an understanding of the 
ways that second-­personal agents should treat and expect to be treated 
by one another. That ­will come only ­after three years of age when ­children 
are first able to make a joint commitment with a partner, as we ­shall see 
in the upcoming section. Indeed, at the outset this joint commitment ­will 
be more or less implicit. The normative dimension ­will become more and 
more elaborate and explicit, and more and more sensitive to culture-­
specific norms in the several years that follow.
Individual and Cultural Variation
­There have been few studies of the collaborative skills and motivations 
of ­children with autism spectrum disorder, although researchers have re­
ported in this group a diminished motivation for peer interaction and 
play in general. In addition, in the only experimental study, when preschool 
­children with autism ­were induced to collaborate with an adult partner 
(in the four tasks of Warneken et al. 2006), their ability to do so was di­
minished relative to that of typically developing control ­children, and they 

	
Collaboration	
203
attempted to re-­engage a recalcitrant partner less often (Liebal et al. 2008). 
And so, although the data are sparse, ­there is reason to suspect that au­
tism has a significant effect on ­children’s collaborative skills and motiva­
tions, suggesting a significant maturational component.
­There are also few studies of infants’ and toddlers’ collaborative skills 
and motivations across cultures. Callaghan et al. (2011) had twenty-­ to 
twenty-­five-­month-­old toddlers from three very dif­fer­ent cultural contexts 
(two of them small-­scale and nonliterate) interact with an adult in sev­
eral of Warneken et al.’s (2006) collaboration tasks. When the adult 
stopped interacting for no reason, infants in all three cultures attempted 
to reengage the recalcitrant partner in the same basic ways, at the same 
basic frequency, and at the same basic ages. Schäfer et al. (in preparation) 
also found basic similarities in five-­ and eight-­year-­old ­children from two 
dif­fer­ent cultural contexts (one of them a Baaka pygmy cultural group of 
hunter-­gatherers) in the ways they operated an apparatus together to gain 
mutual rewards (though the two groups shared the rewards differently).
Nevertheless, it is a common observation among ethnographers that 
young ­children in many small-­scale cultures spend much more time in 
peer groups, often involving a mix of ages, than do ­children from Western, 
industrialized socie­ties. As a pos­si­ble effect of this dif­fer­ent form of peer 
interaction and socialization, Mejia-­Arauz et al. (2007) found that triads 
of school-­age ­children from dif­fer­ent cultural backgrounds (Mexican 
Mayan and Eu­ro­pean American) collaborated in a construction task dif­
ferently. In par­tic­u­lar, the Mayan ­children worked together as an ensemble 
of three much more frequently than did the American ­children, who more 
often acted as individuals or in dyads. We do not know if ­there are differ­
ences among ­children in ­these dif­fer­ent cultures in the preschool years, 
but one can imagine that more unsupervised peer interaction at early ages 
might lead to enhanced collaborative skills and motivations in school-­age 
­children. In that regard, Endedijk et al. (2015) found that Dutch pre­
schoolers who had had more peer experience earlier in their lives ­were 
more skillful collaborators with peers in a variety of collaboration tasks.
A related point is that in Western, industrialized cultures, ­there 
would seem to be much more collaboration between toddlers and adults 
than in most traditional cultures—­especially in play and games—as 
adults in ­these cultures get down on the floor and play with ­children in a 
way that adults in many traditional cultures do not (Gaskins 2006). Adults 
are clearly not “equal” partners, but in the context of the collaborative 

204	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
activity they act as equals. That is to say, when rolling a ball back and 
forth partners are on an essentially equal footing with re­spect to the 
game—­even if not in other ways—so it is still a kind of equal partner­
ship in a context-­bracketed sort of way. An in­ter­est­ing question for 
­future research is ­whether Western adults scaffolding collaboration 
with young ­children—­even if they are not coequal partners outside the 
collaboration—­facilitates the ­children’s development of collaborative 
skills and motivations more or less than extensive peer interactions with 
coequal partners, as in traditional socie­ties, even if ­these interactions are 
less adult-­like and sophisticated.
Joint Commitment
If joint agency ­toward a joint goal—as enacted even by toddlers (with 
adult partners)—is a kind of implicit agreement, a joint commitment is a 
more-­or-­less explicit agreement. Making such an explicit agreement re­
quires a certain level of cooperative communication and social-­cognitive 
sophistication as well as a sense of second-­personal agency, so in ontogeny 
we do not often see explicit joint commitments among peers ­until close 
to school age. It might also be that joint commitments are most appro­
priate when one or both partners’ participation or appropriate per­for­
mance is uncertain or risky, and three-­year-­olds do not typically perceive 
the situation in this way. In any case, as we ­shall now see, even three-­year-­
olds comprehend a joint commitment when an adult proposes one to 
which the child agrees or an adult orchestrates one between ­children, and 
they treat such commitments with appropriate re­spect.
Joint Commitment
When one has other ­things one could be ­doing, deciding to collaborate 
with ­others may be risky. But once one has deci­ded to collaborate, one 
wants to be chosen by a partner, possibly with some assurances. As noted 
in Chapter 6, in an experimentally constructed stag hunt game, virtually 
all pairs of chimpanzees began their collaboration with a leader-­follower 
strategy, in which one individual just bolted for the “stag”—­thereby taking 
on all the risk—­and just hoped that the partner would follow (Bullinger 
et al. 2011b). In contrast, four-­year-­old ­children sometimes did the same 
­thing, but when the risks ­were increased the ­children started communi­

	
Collaboration	
205
cating, typically with attention-­getting gestures and informative verbal ut­
terances announcing the arrival of the stag (Duguid et al. 2014). Even 
better for both partners would have been a communicative response from 
the partner, perhaps even a commitment, in return. ­Because the best op­
tion for each partner would be to obtain such a commitment from the 
other at the outset, the result would be a joint commitment to 
collaborate.
For social theorists focused on normativity, joint commitments repre­
sent nothing less than the “social atoms” of uniquely ­human social inter­
action (Gilbert 2003, 2014). Joint commitments are basic and essential 
­because they explic­itly acknowledge our mutual interdependence in the 
upcoming collaborative activity and seek to manage it. They assume that 
each party is a second-­personal agent who can be trusted both to do her 
part conscientiously and to treat her partner with appropriate re­spect. We 
may call this “normative trust” ­because a breach represents betrayal of 
the partner and their agreement. Joint commitments are created when one 
individual makes some kind of explicit communicative offer to another 
that “we” do X together, and that other accepts. Joint commitments are 
initiated and accepted via second-­personal address—in essence, addressing 
the partner as an agent who knows what it means to accept responsibility—­
with each partner explic­itly inviting the other to make plans, even risky 
plans, around the fact that he ­will do X, and to trust that he ­will persist in 
pursuing X ­until both of them are satisfied with the result (Friedrich and 
Southwood 2011). Crucially, joint commitments can only be terminated 
by some kind of joint agreement as well: one partner cannot unilaterally 
decide she is no longer committed; rather, she must ask permission of the 
other to end the commitment, and the other must accept (Gilbert 2011). 
Joint commitments are joint all the way down.
With linguistic creatures, joint commitments are typically initiated by 
something like, “Let’s X,” and accepted with “OK.” (They are ended with 
something like, “Sorry, I have to Y now. OK?” with the acknowl­edgment: 
“OK.”) In a study with very young ­children, Gräfenhain et al. (2009, study 
1) had an adult begin a collaborative activity with two-­ and three-­year-­olds 
in one of two ways. For some ­children, the adult established a joint com­
mitment by suggesting “Let’s X,” and only proceeded to collaborate if the 
child explic­itly accepted (typically with “OK”). For ­others, the collabora­
tive interaction was begun by the adult waiting for the child to begin ­doing 
something and then joining in unbidden. In both cases, at some point the 

206	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
adult abruptly stopped interacting. Three-­year-­olds who ­were party to the 
joint commitment ­were much more likely than the other ­children to try 
to reengage the recalcitrant partner. ­These ­children seemingly reasoned 
that if “we” have a joint commitment, then “you” ­ought to continue as 
long as needed. The two-­year-­olds, in contrast, did not behave any differ­
ently when ­there was or was not a joint commitment.
And three-­year-­olds know what a joint commitment means for their 
own be­hav­ior as well. Thus, Hamann et al. (2012) had two-­ and three-­year-­
olds commit with a peer to a joint task, but then, unexpectedly, one child 
got access to her reward early. For her partner to benefit as well, this child 
had to continue to collaborate even though ­there was no further reward 
pos­si­ble for her. Nevertheless, most three-­year-­olds (but again not two-­
year-­olds) eagerly assisted their unlucky partner so that both ended up 
with a reward—­and more often than if the partner just asked for help in 
a similar situation without any prior collaboration or commitment. In 
stark contrast, when pairs of chimpanzees ­were tested in this same ex­
perimental situation, as soon as the first one got her reward she abandoned 
the other and went off on her own to consume it (Greenberg et al. 2010). 
The three-­year-­olds ­were therefore fulfilling what Tuomela (2007) calls the 
“commitment condition” that committed partners persist ­until both have 
received their just deserts.
Joint commitments thus make partners responsible to one another. 
Each of them feels that each is responsible for the other’s fate in the situ­
ation. In this spirit, Gräfenhain et al. (2013) helped pairs of three-­year-­old 
peers make a joint commitment to work on a puzzle together. (The adult 
got them to agree with each other that they would collaborate.) Having 
done so, they then responded to experimentally induced perturbations in 
that context with such be­hav­iors as waiting for their partner when she was 
delayed, repairing damage done by their partner, refraining from tattling 
on their partner, or performing their partner’s role for her when she was 
unable to do it herself. (That is, they did ­these ­things more often than did 
pairs of ­children who simply played in parallel for the same amount of 
time.) When young ­children make a joint commitment with a peer, they 
help and support that peer much more strongly, and in a wider variety of 
ways, than when they are merely playing side by side.
In the same vein but offering even stronger evidence, Gräfenhain et al. 
(2009, study 2) had a child and an adult make a joint commitment to play 

	
Collaboration	
207
a game together. Then another adult enticed the child away to a new, more 
attractive game. In response, two-­year-­olds simply dropped every­thing and 
took off for the new game. But three-­year-­olds understood their joint com­
mitment; before switching to the new game (if they did in fact switch), 
they hesitated, looked to the adult, and often did something overt to “take 
leave” such as handing over the tool used in the game or even verbally 
apologizing—­much more than they did in the exact same situation with 
no prior joint commitment. The ­children recognized that they had a joint 
commitment; ­because breaking it would harm and disrespect their partner, 
they had a responsibility to her to acknowledge that they ­were breaking 
it and that they regretted it.
Three-­year-­olds, but again not two-­year-­olds, recognize that a joint 
commitment can be broken only if both parties agree. Kachel et al. (forth­
coming) had three-­year-­olds make a joint commitment with a puppet to 
collaborate, and then, ­after a brief time, the puppet left. ­Later the child 
reaped the spoils, and the puppet then returned and asked to join in again 
and share. If the puppet had asked permission to break the joint commit­
ment before leaving, ­children ­were happy to share. But if the puppet had 
not asked permission to break the joint commitment (but had simply 
abandoned the collaboration), ­children shared less. Taking leave preserved 
the puppet’s identity as a collaborative partner whereas simply abandoning 
the cooperation branded her as a defector.
It is noteworthy that the youn­gest age at which anyone has found an 
effect of joint commitments on ­children’s be­hav­ior is three years; using 
identical methods several studies have found no effect of joint commit­
ments in two-­year-­olds. Before three years of age, toddlers ­will encourage 
recalcitrant partners to rejoin a collaborative activity, but ­there is not nec­
essarily any recognition of a normative commitment in ­either direction. 
Toddlers may want and expect their partner to continue the cooperation, 
but for three-­year-­olds a joint commitment normatively binds both part­
ners to perform the actions to which they have committed ­unless they 
agree to terminate the commitment. We can think of joint commitments, 
then, as representing a kind of second-­personal normativity. As their 
capacity for collective intentionality matures, ­children at around three 
years of age are able to think of the partnership created by a joint com­
mitment as a shared agency, capable not only of collaborating but also 
of self-­regulating the collaboration.

208	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
Second-­Personal Protest
The content of the joint commitment is that each partner play her col­
laborative role diligently and in the mutually understood ideal way ­until 
both have benefited. But what happens if one partner does not? The an­
swer is that she gets sanctioned, and, of crucial importance, it comes from 
“us.” The essence of joint commitments is that “we” agree not only to 
act together but also to sanction together whichever of us does not fulfill 
her role-­specific ideal ­because a defector is showing a lack of re­spect for 
her partner and their partnership. This gives the sanctioning legitimacy: 
we agree that defection by ­either of us deserves sanctions. Such second-­
personal protest thus carries a socially normative force, coming from “us” 
and our agreement, and so acts as a self-­regulatory device to keep the joint 
activity on track despite individual temptations to defect. The normative 
force is both the positive force of equal re­spect that each partner feels for 
the other—my respected partner deserves my diligence—­but also the neg­
ative force of legitimate sanctions, deserved sanctions, for reneging. To 
reduce their risk, then, each partner to a joint commitment gives to the 
other the “representative authority” of “us” to initiate sanctioning when, 
by the common-­ground standards implicit in the joint commitment, it is 
deserved.
In a recent experiment, Kachel et al. (2017) orchestrated a joint com­
mitment to collaborate between two three-­year-­olds (an adult got them 
to agree with each other that they would collaborate). Then, in one 
­condition, one of them seemed to intentionally not play her role in the 
­mutually known way (her deviant be­hav­ior was experimentally induced). 
The other child then objected. Importantly, she did not object by physi­
cally confronting the partner or demanding compliance, but rather by 
simply pointing out the deviance, often resentfully, and leaving it up to 
the wayward partner to voluntarily self-­correct. The language the ag­
grieved child used was often normative: “It ­doesn’t work like that!” 
­Children did not protest if the partner was seemingly ignorant of how 
the apparatus worked (in which case they often taught her) or if the ap­
paratus accidentally broke. Similar protesting was seen by Warneken 
et al. (2011), who set up a situation in which two individuals collaborated 
to pull in a board with one pile of food in the ­middle. In a previous study 
it had been found that chimpanzees dealt with this situation based pri­
marily on dominance: if the subordinate attempted to take the food, the 
dominant attacked her, and if the dominant attempted to take the food, 

	
Collaboration	
209
the subordinate just let her (Melis et al. 2006a, 2006b). But the three-­year-­
olds in this study did neither of ­these ­things. Rather, if a greedy child at­
tempted to take more than half the sweets, she was met with protest. 
The aggrieved child expressed resentment ­toward the greedy child’s ac­
tions, for example, by squawking “Hey!” or “Katie!”
The ­children in ­these studies are not just protesting that the partner is 
not ­doing what they want her to do; they are protesting that she is not 
­doing what they both know she should do. Their common-­ground un­
derstanding of what they jointly committed to do hangs in the air above 
them, as it ­were, as an impartial arbiter to which ­either of them, by second-­
personal protest, may refer the other. Failure to live up to the commit­
ment demonstrates that the violator takes her own interests to be more 
impor­tant than her partner’s, and failure to recognize the legitimacy of 
the protest demonstrates that she does not value their joint commitment 
or their partnership ­going forward. Adam Smith (1759) says that the aim 
of second-­personal protest is “to make [one’s partner] sensible, that the 
person whom he injured did not deserve to be treated in that manner” 
(95–96). Second-­personal protest is thus a cooperative and respectful re­
sponse to the offender’s disrespectful actions; it does not seek to punish 
the partner directly, only to inform him of the injury and her resentment 
(“Hey!”), assuming him to be someone who knows better than to do this 
(that is, to treat ­others as less than equals) and assuming that he is com­
petent and motivated to rectify the situation appropriately. The offended 
partner is making a second-­personal demand for re­spect, and the partner, 
if he wishes to remain in the cooperative fold, must respond respectfully 
by recognizing its legitimacy.
Second-­personal protest may thus be seen as an explicit expression 
of a cooperative partner’s demand to be treated as an equally deserving 
individual, a second-­personal agent who is party to a joint commit­
ment. It is typically performed by the partner who is aggrieved, but it 
assumes that the offender ­will, of her own ­free ­will, recognize the va­
lidity of the claim and ameliorate the situation ­because, ultimately, it is 
coming from “us.” I protest directly to you—­with resentful second-­
personal address demanding re­spect—­but it is coming from our “we.” 
Recognizing the legitimacy of the protest, the derelict partner does not 
try to avoid sanctioning but rather joins her partner in judging herself 
as deserving of it, perhaps even feeling guilty (see Chapter 10). Joint 
commitments thus create a sense of responsibility to a second-­personal 

210	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
partner. “We” collaborate to self-­regulate each of us as individual 
partners.
Promising
­There is no clear-­cut distinction between commitments and promises, but 
the studies of ­children’s joint commitments all take place within the con­
text of a collaborative activity. Indeed, in some cases ­there is no verbal 
agreement at all. It is thus pos­si­ble that a good part of the sense of obli­
gation in ­these studies is generated by the ­children’s understanding of the 
interdependence of the collaborative activity and the “harm” that defec­
tion would cause the partner. In contrast, promises are commitments that 
are made to individuals but in the context of larger societal interests in 
­people keeping their commitments. The commitment one makes when 
promising is more of a “public” act in which one puts on the line one’s 
cooperative identity with the group at large. (For example, consider wed­
ding vows publically performed in front of all one’s friends and relatives.)
Although ­there are a number of studies of older ­children’s under­
standing of promising, ­there are few studies with preschoolers. Kann­
giesser et al. (2017) engaged three-­ and five-­year-­olds in two experiments. 
In the first experiment, ­children ­were the recipient of a promise from a 
partner. When the partner failed to perform the promised action, five-­
year-­old ­children (and to a lesser degree three-­year-­old ­children) pro­
tested normatively—­not just that they did not like it but that one should 
not do that—­often referring to the promise in their objection. In a second 
experiment, ­children ­were induced to promise to keep ­doing something 
boring ­after an adult had left the room (that is, the adult asked them to 
promise, and they agreed), and they ­were then tempted to break their 
promise. Again, both three-­ and five-­year-­old ­children showed some 
­understanding of promising, in this case by continuing at the boring 
task longer if they had promised to do so (again, especially the five-­year-­
olds). Even outside of collaborative interactions, then, by the end of the 
preschool period young ­children feel a normative obligation to keep 
their promises, and they expect ­others to keep theirs as well.
Individual and Cultural Variation
­There has been very ­little cross-­cultural research on young ­children’s joint 
commitments, second-­personal protest, or promising. What ­little research 
­there has been in non-­Western cultures (for example, Heyman et al. 2015, 

	
Collaboration	
211
with Chinese ­children) has also found an understanding of promising in 
the late preschool period. But ­there are almost no cross-­cultural studies 
of dif­fer­ent cultures with a single methodology that would allow detailed 
comparisons.
Becoming Second-­Personal
Chimpanzees can accomplish some ­things by acting in parallel with ­others; 
for example, they can prevail in a conflict by fighting side by side with con­
specifics, or they can acquire meat by chasing a monkey side by side with 
conspecifics. But ­human ­children, from a fairly young age, are able to form 
with ­others a joint goal to act together cooperatively, each with her 
own role, and with the joint expectation that they ­will share the spoils in 
the end.
As ­children are collaborating with ­others during ontogeny, they are 
at the same time coming to relate to them in new ways. To describe 
­these species-­unique ways in a single term, we have borrowed the phil­
osophical concept of the second-­personal (for example, Darwall 2006): 
individuals relate to one another face to face in a cooperative spirit, 
treating and expecting to be treated with re­spect as equally deserving 
partners. ­Children develop as second-­personal agents—­and recognize 
­others as such—­during the two-­ to three-­year age period, at which point 
they and their partners now have the standing to form with one an­
other joint commitments in which “we” normatively self-­regulate both 
“you” and “I,” entitling ­either of us to call the other out for noncoop­
eration. As compared with ­great ape social relations, which are based 
mainly on dominance with just a sprinkle of cooperation, ­human ­children’s 
development of social relations based on equality, re­spect, and collab­
orative self-­regulation represents a momentous transformation, culmi­
nating in a normative sense of joint commitment with collaborative 
partners at around three years of age. They are gradually becoming moral 
creatures.
Theoretical Explanations
The central theoretical issue in the ontogeny of ­children’s skills and 
motivations for collaboration is, most basically, the respective roles of 
maturation and experience in the developmental pathway. My view is that 

212	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
maturation and experience play somewhat dif­fer­ent roles at dif­fer­ent steps 
in the pro­cess. Figure 7.1 provides a graphical summary.
As with joint attention, the development of uniquely ­human collabo­
ration begins with infants’ emotion sharing with ­others (the first box in 
Figure 7.1). The explanation for this uniquely ­human form of emotional 
engagement is, presumably, as close to pure maturation as it gets; it is dif­
ficult to even imagine how such a motivation would be taught or learned. 
We have hypothesized that emotion sharing evolved in the context of co­
operative childcare (as something over and above general mammalian 
attachment) as a way for infants to affiliate and bond in especially strong 
ways with ­those whose care they need. One could still imagine, however, 
that individual infants and their caregivers might work out their own spe­
cial interactive routines, and ­these might lead to individual differences in 
the par­tic­u­lar ways they might share emotions (for example, more vocal 
or visual).
From ­there, maturation of the capacity for dual-­level engagement 
structures young ­children’s collaborative interactions with ­others (the 
second box in Figure 7.1), such that they now understand that the two of 
them are aimed together at a joint goal, with each having her own indi­
vidual role. It is again difficult to imagine that ­children’s unique motiva­
tion and ability to collaborate by forming a joint goal are ­things they are 
taught or learn in any significant way. ­These are almost certainly natu­ral 
developments based on the maturation of their capacities for joint inten­
Joint Intentionality
Collective Intentionality
Cog: dual-level
Cog: S = O
S-R: normative
Cog: objectivity
5 years
4 years
3 years
2 years
1 year
0
Comm. Offer
EMOTION
SHARING
DUAL-LEVEL
COLLABORATION
2P AGENCY/
MUTUAL RESPECT
PROMISING
PARALLEL ACTION
JOINT
COMMITMENT
WITH 2P
PROTEST
Figure 7.1 ​The ontoge­ne­tic emergence of young ­children’s uniquely ­human col­
laboration. Abbreviations: Cog = cognitive; Comm. Offer = communicative offer; 
S=O = self-­other equivalence; S-­R = executive self-­regulation; 2P = second-­
personal.

	
Collaboration	
213
tionality. ­Children with autism have deficits in collaboration: they do not 
attempt to re-­engage recalcitrant partners in the manner of typically de­
veloping ­children. Moreover, eighteen-­month-­old toddlers from small-­
scale, traditional cultures collaborate with adults in the same way as tod­
dlers from Western, industrialized cultures, including inviting recalcitrant 
partners to reengage, despite the fact that ethnographic observations sug­
gest that ­these ­children have had ­little experience collaborating with 
adults. The plasticity of the early phases of the developmental pathway 
for uniquely ­human collaboration would seem to be limited.
But if we focus on the new kinds of social relationships that collaborative 
activities open up for young ­children, their individual experiences are 
crucial. Infants and toddlers must actually interact with a partner as a “we” 
before they can construct the basic second-­personal relation between “I” 
and “you.” On the basis of ­those interactions, by three years of age ­children 
have come to appreciate ­others, including peers, as equally deserving 
second-­personal agents (third box in Figure 7.1). Informal evidence for this 
proposal is that at the end of this age period young ­children are collabo­
rating with peers on a daily basis and in more adult-­like ways. Moreover, at 
the end of this age period, young ­children initiate collaborative interactions 
with ­others (both adults and peers) via second-­personal address in a com­
municative offer (bottom of the figure) that does not demand collaboration 
or even request it directly, but rather invites ­others to agree to collaborate. 
This is respectful address, offering cooperation to a coequal partner.
As we ­shall see in Chapter 8, at three years of age young ­children also 
start dividing the spoils of a collaborative effort with their partner fairly 
and mostly equally (whereas they do not do this outside of collaboration). 
In all ­these aspects of their engagement with ­others, young ­children ap­
proaching their third birthdays seem to be thinking in terms of a self-­other 
equivalence (S=O at top of Figure 7.1), so they naturally show re­spect for 
their partners as equally deserving second-­personal agents. Presumably, 
a child developing on a desert island with no social interactions with ­others 
whatsoever would not automatically, at three years of age, view ­others 
as equally deserving second-­personal agents.
Although they do not often form joint commitments with peers spon­
taneously, three-­year-­old ­children do recognize the effects of a joint com­
mitment when someone (such as in an experiment) orchestrates one for 
them (fourth box in Figure 7.1). Thus, three-­year-­olds—­and, importantly, 

214	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
not two-­year-­olds—­show vari­ous signs of joint commitment such as per­
sisting ­until the partner gets her goal, inviting a partner back even when 
she is not needed for reaching a goal, “taking leave” when desiring to break 
a joint commitment, and sharing more fairly with a returning partner who 
previously took leave. Further, three years of age is the youn­gest age at 
which ­children have been observed to engage in second-­personal protest 
when someone breaks a joint commitment. Second-­personal protest not 
only is respectful ­toward a second-­personal partner but is normative—in 
the sense that it is not expressing my personal dislike of your be­hav­ior, 
but rather my resentment that you are not ­doing what we agreed you 
should be ­doing (if you consider me an equally deserving partner). Such 
be­hav­ior marks a watershed in the ontogeny of ­human sociality ­because 
this is when, for the first time, ­children’s interactions with ­others take on 
a markedly normative character—­what we have referred to, at this level, 
as second-­personal normativity.
Again, although it is difficult to imagine that this kind of relating to 
­others is trained, or taught, or socialized by adults in any direct way, it is 
nevertheless likely that the child must actually engage in collaborative in­
teractions with ­others to develop ­these special sociomoral motivations 
and attitudes. The meta­phor is thus once again one of construction or 
co-­construction. ­Children’s emerging normative orientation at three years 
of age—­which we ­will again see in the next two chapters with regard to 
fairness in sharing resources and in a tendency to enforce social norms—
is made pos­si­ble, first of all, by the maturation of ­children’s capacities for 
collective intentionality. ­These capacities manifest themselves in ­children’s 
re­spect for the supraindividual social structures in which they participate, 
including joint commitments with other individuals and (as we ­shall see 
in Chapter 9) collective commitments to the social norms of the group. 
Three-­year-­olds understand that their joint commitments obligate them 
normatively to behave in certain ways, and when they do not, they (but 
not two-­year-­olds; see Chapter 10) feel guilty. In this hypothesis, the sense 
of obligation is basically the internalization of an interpersonal commit­
ment (given an agent who already has a sense of instrumental pressure 
to do what is needed to attain goals), and guilt is likewise the internaliza­
tion of an interpersonal pro­cess of second-­personal protest (given an agent 
who already engages in executive regulation). The child growing up on a 
desert island would not develop this sense of obligation or guilt ­because 
she would have none of the requisite social interactions to internalize.

	
Collaboration	
215
As already noted in Chapter 2, all ­these normative phenomena evidence 
a species-­unique form of social self-­regulation: we > me self-­regulation. 
We > me self-­regulation gives the normative force of second-­personal pro­
test legitimacy in the child’s own eyes, and thus transforms their rela­
tions with ­others from merely cooperative into genuinely moral. As com­
pared with other apes, this is something totally new. Young ­children not 
only engage with ­others in collaborative activities, they, in a sense, collabo­
rate with ­others to self-­regulate ­those very activities—­a kind of second-­order 
collaboration. Internalized, the individual on her own can then norma­
tively self-­regulate her interactions and relationships to ­others through 
feelings of obligation and responsibility to her partner (and guilt). This 
“cooperativization of self-­regulation” is of the essence of ­humans’ nor­
mative sociality and morality. Given the maturation of capacities for col­
lective intentionality, the crucial role of social experience (as structured 
by ­those capacities) is clear. A child who never had the chance to form a 
“we” with a partner, and never experienced any kind of second-­personal 
protest from a partner, would not all of a sudden normatively self-­regulate. 
They must participate in collaboration and experience second-­personal 
protest in order to internalize it. Nevertheless, it is impor­tant that even 
in this case we are not talking about explicit adult instruction but the 
­individual’s experience and internalization of uniquely ­human social 
interactions.
With regard to the role of dif­fer­ent types of experience in the develop­
ment of uniquely ­human collaboration and its attendant sociomoral mo­
tivations and attitudes (and resulting social relationships), we might for­
mulate three relatively specific hypotheses.
The first hypothesis would be that adult teaching and scaffolding are 
critical to the pro­cess. However, for all the reasons discussed previously, I 
do not believe that this hypothesis is true at any step in this developmental 
pathway. Rather, the pro­cess is more a natu­ral one (maturationally guided 
learning) than a cultural one (adult socialization and instruction). But 
given that it is a natu­ral pro­cess, it is still pos­si­ble that certain types of 
social interaction facilitate ­children in constructing the necessary skills and 
attitudes.
A second hypothesis would be that it is interaction and collaboration 
with coequal peers that is of critical importance ­because (following Piaget) 
to become an autonomous moral agent ­children need interactions with 
­others of equal competence, knowledge, and status, with whom they 

216	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
work out cooperative arrangements on their own. However, in many of 
the studies reviewed in this chapter, ­children at three years of age are col­
laborating in sophisticated ways with peers in experimental situations, de­
spite the fact that they have had ­little experience in peer collaboration 
before this age. I thus do not believe that this hypothesis is especially plau­
sible before three years of age, although it likely does apply to develop­
ment at ­later ages, as we ­will discuss ­later.
The third hypothesis might be a more plausible claim that young 
­children’s maturational preparedness for collaborating with ­others struc­
tures their early social interactions with adults. Thus, when an infant is 
playing a game together with an adult, the adult’s greater powers and 
competence are not especially relevant to the game itself. Of course, the 
adult can turn authoritative at any time, but within the context of the 
game, the child perceives them as equals. ­Later, ­after three years of age, 
­children’s interactions with peers become crucial ­because they are no 
longer collaborating only in the safe environs of a game but are working 
out collaborative arrangements in real-­life interactive situations with 
­real-­life consequences. Perhaps collaborating with adults before three 
years of age—­not being taught by them, but collaborating with them 
naturally—is a kind of zone of proximal development for ­later collabor­
ative interactions with peers.
The best test of ­these hypotheses would come from cross-­cultural com­
parisons. As alluded to earlier, although ­there are few quantitative data 
available, ethnographic observations suggest that one-­ to three-­year-­old 
­children in Western, industrialized socie­ties engage in more collaborative 
activities with adults than do ­children in more traditional socie­ties, whereas 
­children in more traditional socie­ties have more and more varied experi­
ences with peers at ­these early ages. The test would be to mea­sure all kinds 
of social-­interactive and collaborative activities, with vari­ous kinds of so­
cial partners in the one-­ to three-­year age range across multiple cultural 
contexts. The outcome of interest would be ­children’s collaborative 
skills—­and their vari­ous sociomoral motivations and attitudes, from joint 
commitments to second-­personal protests—in the three-­ to six-­year age 
range. One could, of course, use the same basic design to mea­sure 
­children’s experiences at three to six years and outcomes at six years of 
age and older.
My overall hypothesis is thus that the pro­cess is one of construction 
or social co-­construction. As capacities for joint intentionality mature, 

	
Collaboration	
217
young ­children’s engagement with ­others takes on a new structure, the 
dual-­level structure. As they interact with ­others in dual-­level collabora­
tion, they naturally come to relate to them in some new ways with 
some new sociomoral attitudes, especially a sense of self-­other equiva­
lence, leading to a sense of mutual re­spect between partners. As their 
capacities for collective intentionality mature, young ­children become 
normative creatures. They now are capable of forming with other 
second-­personal agents a joint commitment (and engaging in its associ­
ated pro­cesses of second-­personal protest), leading to still other 
uniquely ­human sociomoral attitudes, especially a sense of commit­
ment or responsibility to partners, and resentment for partners who do 
not treat them in this same way. A child deprived of social experience 
would not develop ­these sociomoral attitudes at ­either of ­these levels. 
The developmental pathway is structured and innervated by the matu­
ration of capacities for shared intentionality, but the most immediate 
causal ­factors are the child’s social experiences as structured by ­these 
capacities and her attempts to executively self-­regulate her interactions 
with ­others normatively through the internalization of ­these unique so­
cial experiences.
Social and Moral Implications
In all ­human socie­ties, collaborative activities for mutual benefit are ubiq­
uitous. And most of ­humans’ most impressive cognitive achievements—­
from complex technologies to formal symbol systems to societal insti­
tutions—­are only pos­si­ble ­because individuals are both capable and 
motivated to coordinate their thoughts and actions with ­others 
collaboratively.
But beyond ­these cognitive consequences, collaborative activities for 
mutual benefit are also the birthplace of uniquely ­human sociality and 
morality. Mutualistic collaborative activities have within them the seeds 
of all the sociomoral motivations and attitudes that most clearly distin­
guish ­human sociality from that of other apes. In collaborating with other 
individuals—­initially adults and ­later peers—­young ­children create a 
new social order in which “we” is constituted by the two second-­
personal agents “I” and “you,” reciprocally defined. As compared with 
the ­great ape social order based mainly on competition and dominance, 
this new social order represents a radically new way of relating to 
­others—­namely, with mutual trust, re­spect, and commitment. Traversing 

218	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
the developmental pathway from dual-­level collaboration to joint com­
mitment is thus foundational for basically all uniquely ­human sociality 
and morality.
I would argue that ­these new ways of relating to ­others are not 
just strategic—­aimed at burnishing one’s reputation in ways that bring 
benefits—­but genuinely moral (Tomasello 2016). Of course, ­human indi­
viduals are concerned with their reputations and with not being taken 
advantage of by ­others, and ­these strategic motives are definitely a part 
of the picture, especially for adult ­human beings. But what we have con­
sidered ­here are only ­children up to age three or so, who have just begun 
interacting with ­others as in­de­pen­dent sociomoral agents and who, by all 
accounts, are not yet worrying about what ­others think of them (see 
Chapter 10). And yet from age three they are making and keeping joint 
commitments with ­others and engaging in respectful second-­personal 
protest to normatively self-­regulate ­those joint commitments. ­Children 
at three years of age are starting to become genuinely moral beings.

W ​8 ​w
Prosociality
­Humans do not just cooperate together, they even sacrifice for one an­
other. Individuals sacrifice by donating organs and blood to the sick, by 
volunteering to fight fires for the community, and by risking their lives in 
wars for their cultural group. And they perform many less heroic acts of 
helping and sharing—­opening doors for ­others and sharing their food—
on a daily basis. Indeed, one ­simple but power­ful way to see the pattern 
is simply to “follow the food.” When foraging parties of other primates 
encounter food, the first one to touch it is almost always the one—­the 
only one—to eat it. In ­human foraging parties and social groups—­from 
hunter-­gatherers to modern industrialized socie­ties—­extensive and com­
plex transfers of food among multiple individuals is the norm (Gurven 
2004).
The evolutionary origin of sympathy and self-­sacrifice across the an­
imal kingdom is undoubtedly the parent–offspring relationship. In mam­
mals, the social bonding hormone oxytocin has evolved to motivate 
­mothers’ nursing, protecting, and caring for offspring, and in some cases 
­fathers’ participation in the pro­cess as well. In some species, this sense of 
sympathy for offspring becomes generalized to other kin by normal pro­
cesses of kin se­lection. In a few species it becomes generalized to non-
­kin “friends” as well, based on general princi­ples of interdependence: it 
makes sense to help ­those on whom one depends. In ­humans in par­tic­
u­lar, the emergence of obligate collaborative foraging and ­later cultural 
organ­ization created new forms of interdependence that served to gen­
eralize the sense of sympathy even further to collaborative partners and 
in-­group compatriots (see Chapter 2).
­Human ­children’s prosocial be­hav­ior thus very likely has strong matu­
rational bases, as the most basic acts of prosociality—­helping and sharing 

220	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
with non-­kin—­are common to all ­great apes in some circumstances. But 
in addition to being much more frequent and pervasive, the ­human ver­
sion also has some special properties. ­Children’s proclivities for ­doing such 
­things as helping ­others paternalistically (that is, helping not with what 
­others want but with what they need) and providing extra help to ­those 
who have previously been harmed in other ways suggest a tendency to 
take the role or perspective of the other. Following Roughley (2015), we 
call such acts “Smithian” (­after Adam Smith) ­because they seem to derive 
from ­humans’ unique ability to put themselves in the place of the other 
imaginatively. ­Children also appear to help and share based on intrinsic 
motivations that are impervious to normal pro­cesses of external reinforce­
ment, again suggesting an impor­tant role for maturation.
But then, ­after age three, ­things take a normative turn. ­Children do 
not just help and share out of sympathy but also out of a sense of obliga­
tion. For example, ­after age three ­children begin to distribute resources, at 
least in collaborative contexts, with a sense of fairness. Acts of fairness are 
based on a sense of obligation to treat equally deserving ­others—­that is, 
other second-­personal agents—­with mutual re­spect. This way of oper­
ating is made pos­si­ble both by a sense of self-­other equivalence—­derived 
from collaborative interactions, and supporting a sense of fairness (see 
Chapter 7)—­and the ability to incorporate social perspectives and norma­
tive standards into the self-­regulatory pro­cess, engendering a sense of 
obligation.
Our topic in this chapter, then, is the developmental pathway consti­
tuting ­children’s prosocial tendencies: from helping and sharing with 
­others based on a sense of sympathy, to fairness ­toward ­others based on 
a sense of obligation. As all parents know, from the beginning ­children 
have a robust urge to satisfy their own needs and interests to the neglect 
of every­one ­else. But at the same time they are developing prosocial ten­
dencies that put the needs of ­others, at least in some contexts, ­either ahead 
of their own or on an equal footing with their own.
From Apes: Basic Sympathy
Feeling sympathy for, and so helping, ­those with whom one lives interde­
pendently is a natu­ral part of primate social life, within limits. If the 
helping is reciprocal, that makes it even more evolutionarily stable.

	
Prosociality	
221
­Great Ape Helping and Sharing
As noted in Chapter 7, ­great apes compete with groupmates for resources 
all day ­every day. For example, in the case of chimpanzee foraging, the 
typical situation is that a handful of individuals travel ­until they find a 
fruiting tree. Each individual then scrambles up the tree on its own, pro­
cures some fruit on its own, and seeks maximum spacing from ­others to 
eat. Such scramble competition, in which the winner is the one who gets 
­there first, is often complemented by contest competition, in which the 
winner is the one who wins the fight or dominance contest, as when a 
dominant in the tree takes what it wants while nearby subordinates defer.
But ­great apes do help one another and share with one another in some 
contexts. As noted in Chapter 7, the main context is co­ali­tionary support 
in dominance contests. ­Great ape individuals often rely on their kin to side 
with them in fights; in addition, they cultivate “friends,” often through 
co­ali­tionary support but also through other affiliative be­hav­iors such as 
grooming and food sharing. Grooming in chimpanzees is preferentially 
directed to co­ali­tion partners, and individuals who have been preferentially 
groomed by a partner preferentially groom that partner (Gomes et al. 
2009). In addition, male chimpanzees preferentially “share” food with their 
co­ali­tion partners (that is, they may tolerate their taking food). Add to this 
the finding that individuals who groom one another also share food with 
one another preferentially, and the result is a relatively tight set of recip­
rocal relations among grooming, food sharing, and co­ali­tionary support. 
But the evolutionary logic is still competition: in a world of constant com­
petition it pays to have good and power­ful friends. Mueller and Mitani 
(2005) summarize the situation for chimpanzees:
The most prevalent forms of cooperation among chimpan­
zees, however, are rooted in male contest competition. Chim­
panzee males maintain short-­term co­ali­tions and long-­term al­
liances to improve their dominance status within communities 
and defend their territories cooperatively against foreign males. 
Other prominent cooperative activities, such as grooming and 
meat sharing, relate strategically to ­these goals. Females are far 
less social than males, and they do not cooperate as exten­
sively. Nevertheless, the most con­spic­u­ous examples of fe­
male co­operation also involve contest competition, as females 
sometimes cooperate to kill the infants of rivals. (317)

222	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
A number of recent experimental studies have documented chimpan­
zees’ tendency to help ­others in instrumental contexts. For example, 
Warneken and Tomasello (2006) found that three human-­raised chimpan­
zees fetched an out-­of-­reach object for a ­human caretaker who was 
reaching for it, but they did not fetch objects for which the ­human had 
no use (see also Yamamoto and Tanaka 2009). ­Because human-­raised 
chimpanzees helping their ­human caretakers might be a special case, 
Warneken et al. (2007) presented chimpanzees living in a semi-­natural set­
ting with opportunities to help an unfamiliar ­human. The chimpanzees 
helped him as well, even paying an energetic cost to do so (by climbing a 
few meters high to fetch a desired object). Beyond helping ­humans, 
Warneken et al. (2007, study 2) found that chimpanzees also helped a con­
specific by opening a door to give her access to food (more than they 
opened the door in two control conditions; see also Melis et al. 2011; 
Greenberg et al. 2010). A key in all of ­these studies was that chimpanzee 
helpers perceived that they had no opportunity to get the food themselves; 
their helping did not cost them any resources.
Schmelz et al. (2017) found that when chimpanzees observed a con­
specific taking a risk to provide them with access to food, they rewarded 
that individual by ­later acting prosocially ­toward her. This is the only solid 
experimental demonstration of reciprocal sharing in ­great apes. Never­
theless, Tomasello (2016) argued that such behavioral patterns of reci­
procity in apes—­including ­those among grooming, co­ali­tionary support, 
and food sharing in wild apes—­are not based on any kind of tit-­for-­tat 
“agreement” to reciprocate (so-­called calculated reciprocity). Rather, they 
are based on the fact that individuals sympathize and develop an emotional 
bond with ­those who help them—­that is, with ­those on whom they 
­depend—so each helps the other ­because each sympathizes with the other 
in­de­pen­dently. ­There is not an agreement—­which might imply a norma­
tive sense of “we”—­but only sympathy in both directions.
­Great apes are not ­great at sharing food. As noted previously, they are 
highly competitive over food, and, like many mammals, they have evolved 
a system of dominance for resolving food competition. In situations in 
which competition is minimized—­a group of apes is provided with leafy 
tree branches (a low-­value food) tied together so they must eat in 
proximity—­there can be relatively peaceful “passive sharing” in which 
one individual allows ­others to take some leaves from her (de Waal 1989). 

	
Prosociality	
223
­After a successful group hunt for more highly desirable meat, the captor 
allows ­others to take pieces of the carcass, but only ­because they are ha­
rassing him, with ­those who harass the most vigorously getting the most 
meat (Gilby 2006). This is called tolerated taking or sharing ­under pres­
sure, ­because the captor is not offering up the meat freely; if he ­were to 
fight to prevent the taking, he would end up losing all of the meat to 
­others in the fray.
In an experimental paradigm, Silk et al. (2005) and Jensen et al. (2006) 
gave chimpanzees the option of pulling one rope that delivered food on 
a board only to themselves or pulling a dif­fer­ent rope that delivered that 
same amount of food both to themselves and to a conspecific (that is, the 
choice was between 1–0 and 1–1). Although ­there was no cost for being 
generous, chimpanzees pulled the two ropes indiscriminately, seeming not 
to care what their partner received; they ­were only concentrating on get­
ting food for themselves. Hare and Kwetuenda (2010) found that a bonobo 
provided with food in one room would voluntarily open a door and allow 
another to come in and feed with her. But Bullinger et al. (2013) found 
that bonobos (as well as chimpanzees) also would open the door quite 
frequently with no food available, suggesting that the motivation was not 
so much to share food as to have com­pany.
Another in­ter­est­ing and telling situation is food sharing between 
­mothers and their youngsters. When a chimpanzee ­mother has food, she 
rarely offers it to her offspring. If her offspring is begging and harassing, 
she mostly just gives up the poorest part of the food. Ueno and Matsu­
zawa (2004) found that chimpanzee ­mothers outright rejected about half 
of their infants’ begging requests, and in the other half allowed them to 
take mostly the skin, peel, or husk. Völter et al. (2015) found that in situ­
ations in which only the child could reach some food, orangutan ­mothers 
systematically waited for the child to obtain the food (often manipulating 
their bodies to facilitate acquisition), which they then took from her. This 
is in sharp contrast to ­human parents, who, in all socie­ties, actively provi­
sion their offspring with food up through adolescence (Gurven 2004).
Overall, food sharing is not something that comes easily and naturally 
to ­great apes. Nevertheless, they are ­doing something at least somewhat 
prosocial with their kin and friends if the cost is not too high. And ­there 
is evidence that this prosocial be­hav­ior is underlain by the emotion of sym­
pathy. Thus, in studies of wild chimpanzees, Crockford et  al. (2013) 

224	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
found that during a grooming bout the chimpanzee ­doing the grooming 
(as well as the one receiving the grooming) shows an increase in the mam­
malian bonding hormone oxytocin, and Wittig et al. (2014) found simi­
larly that the chimpanzee who gives up food during a food-­sharing epi­
sode (that is, tolerated taking) also shows an increase in oxytocin. This 
would seem to constitute at least indirect evidence that chimpanzees and 
other ­great apes feel sympathy for ­those whom they are helping.
The age at which ­great apes first help and share with ­others is not 
known ­because no infants or youngsters have ever been tested systemati­
cally. But in some experiments ­those who helped ­others ­were as young 
as three to four years of age (see especially Warneken and Tomasello 
2006).
­Human ­Children
­Human infants and toddlers are not involved in the kinds of competitive 
interactions characteristic of ­great apes, and they do not actively cultivate 
friends. But during ­human evolution, ­great apes’ sympathy for kin and 
friends evolved into ­humans’ sympathy for a wide variety of ­others, ini­
tially for collaborative partners and then for every­one in the social group. 
Modern infants have inherited both versions. Perhaps the purest case of 
sympathy in con­temporary ­human infants is when they comfort ­others 
in distress, typically by approaching, paying special attention to, and some­
times even touching a distressed person. A variety of observational and 
experimental studies have established that infants as young as one year 
of age ­will approach and console other crying infants as well as adults 
showing some kind of emotional upset (Nichols et al. 2009; for a review, see 
Eisenberg et al. 2006). And as we ­shall soon see, other manifestations of 
sympathy in the form of instrumental helping and the active sharing of re­
sources also emerge in ­human infants between one and two years of age.
Systematic age comparisons between apes and infants are thus not pos­
si­ble in this domain, as the social contexts within which the two species 
express their species-­appropriate sympathy are dif­fer­ent, and ­great ape 
youngsters have not been tested in most ­human infant paradigms. Nev­
ertheless, it is notable that ­human infants’ comforting be­hav­iors emerge 
quite early, soon ­after the first birthday. Informal observations of ­great 
apes suggest that it is unlikely that they are comforting, helping, or sharing 
at this inordinately early age.

	
Prosociality	
225
Smithian Helping and Sharing
­Human infants are not in­de­pen­dent agents. Most of their interactions 
with the world are mediated by ­mothers or other adults. It is therefore 
surprising, from an evolutionary point of view, that they have such a strong 
tendency ­toward prosocial be­hav­ior. If they are not cultivating friends or 
reciprocity or reputation, what are they ­doing (evolutionarily)? Presum­
ably, evolutionarily, the answer lies in their need to establish cooperative 
social relationships with the adults who care for them, although of course 
this is not their proximate motivation. Their proximate motivation is pre­
sumably sympathy for the person needing help.
Helping
­Human infants begin actively helping ­others with their instrumental prob­
lems from at least fourteen months of age (Warneken and Tomasello 
2007). They discriminate helpers from hinderers in perceptual displays 
from even younger than that (for example, Kuhlmeier et al. 2003; Hamlin 
et al. 2007). In a direct comparison between human-­raised juvenile chim­
panzees and ­human infants of eigh­teen months of age, Warneken and 
Tomasello (2006) found a ­great degree of similarity. Both species helped 
a ­human adult reach out-­of-­reach objects (although only the infants helped 
the adult with more complex prob­lems such as stacking books or opening 
a cabinet). In another direct comparison, Warneken et al. (2007) found that 
both chimpanzees and ­human eighteen-­month-­olds ­were insensitive to po­
tential rewards from the helpee, and both even paid modest energetic 
costs to do the helping.
Over and above ­these general similarities to ­great ape instrumental 
helping, ­human infants also help in some ways that apes do not. One dif­
ference is that infants as young as twelve months of age ­will help adults 
and peers achieve their goals by providing them with useful information 
using the pointing gesture, which ­great apes do not do (see Chapter 4). 
Another difference is that two-­ and three-­year-­old ­children ­will help a peer 
more in the midst of a collaborative activity than in the midst of other 
activities (Hamann et al. 2012), whereas the activity context makes no dif­
ference to ­great apes (Greenberg et al. 2010). ­Human toddlers at about 30 
months ­will also pay a very high cost to help ­others (sharing one of their 
favorite possessions; Svetlova et al. 2010), whereas this kind of high-­cost 

226	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
sharing is unlikely in other ­great apes. Toddlers also help other toddlers 
with their instrumental prob­lems (Hepach et al. 2017a), and, importantly, 
they distinguish a person in genuine need from other persons with whom 
they might interact positively in other ways (Köster et al. 2016).
In addition to ­these mainly quantitative differences, ­there are three 
other well-­established phenomena of ­children’s helping that suggest a 
qualitative difference of pro­cess as well. The first is that ­human infants’ 
helping is intrinsically motivated. Thus, infants spontaneously help ­others 
just as readily when they are alone with the helpee as when their ­mother 
is watching them, or even encouraging them, to help (Warneken and 
­Tomasello 2013a). Moreover, even stronger in this direction, infants ­will 
help someone who does not even know he is being helped (and no one 
­else is watching ­either; Warneken 2013; Hepach et al. 2017b). Further, em­
ploying the famous overjustification paradigm, when twenty-­month-­olds 
are given external rewards for helping, if the rewards are then stopped, 
their helping actually decreases relative to ­children who ­were never re­
warded, suggesting that external rewards undermine their intrinsic moti­
vation (Warneken and Tomasello 2008; but see Dahl et al. 2017, for a study 
with somewhat dif­fer­ent results for younger infants at thirteen to fifteen 
months of age). Social praise, in this study, did not diminish ­children’s mo­
tivation, but it did not increase it ­either. And fi­nally, most powerfully, 
using direct physiological mea­sures of emotional arousal—­pupil dilation 
and body posture—­Hepach et al. (2012, 2017b) found that young ­children 
are equally satisfied both when they help someone in need and when they 
see that person being helped by a third party (and more satisfied in both 
of ­these cases than when the person is not being helped at all), suggesting 
that their motivation is not to provide help themselves (for a reputational 
boost) but only that the other person be helped. Although ­great apes have 
not been tested in any of the paradigms cited ­here, ­these studies show 
that ­human infants’ helping be­hav­ior is intrinsically motivated, and is not 
much affected by externally administered rewards and punishments.
The second impor­tant phenomenon is paternalistic helping. ­Human 
adults are especially motivated to help ­others who are in dire physical 
straits. For example, take the proverbial stranger lying injured in the 
street. ­Humans ­will be urgently concerned for his physical well-­being—
so much so that even if he pleads with us to retrieve his bicycle from the 
street first, we ­will ignore his wishes and focus on stopping his bleeding. 
We ­will not be so much concerned with fulfilling his wishes as with 

	
Prosociality	
227
helping him physically (see Nagel 1986). Several studies of young ­children 
find such paternalistic helping emerges from a fairly young age (for ex­
ample, Martin and Olson 2013). In a comparative study with chimpan­
zees and ­human toddlers, Hepach et al. (forthcoming) had a trained con­
specific reach for one of two tools. In the key condition, he reached for a 
tool that the subject knew was not the one he actually needed. Chimpan­
zees followed the reacher’s reaching action and fetched him that one; 
­human toddlers, in contrast, ignored an adult’s reaching and fetched him 
the tool he actually needed. Further evidence along ­these lines is pro­
vided by Hepach et al. (2013). They had an adult express distress about 
something that had just happened. Young ­children did not help the adult 
when his distress was unjustified by the circumstances (for example, he 
was crying about something trivial), but only when his distress seemed 
justified by a clear cause. This finding suggests, again, that it is not the 
personal desires of ­others that ­children and adults are attempting to 
accommodate—­although they may do this in some cases—­but rather the 
well-­being of the helpee.
A third impor­tant phenomenon is sympathy for a person that extends 
beyond the immediate context of need. Thus, Vaish et al. (2009) had 
eighteen-­month-­old infants watch while one puppet “harmed” another 
(for example, tearing up his picture). The infants felt sympathy for the 
victim in the situation (as indicated by their facial expressions), and, im­
portantly, this sympathy extended into a subsequent unrelated situation 
in which the victim needed help: they helped the previous victim more 
than a neutral person. In a similar experiment with chimpanzees, Liebal 
et al. (2014) found no such “extended sympathy.” This species difference 
suggests the possibility of a qualitatively dif­fer­ent form of sympathy in 
­humans that goes beyond merely helping an agent with her instrumental 
prob­lem to actually empathizing with her, in the sense of taking her 
­affective perspective and putting oneself “in her shoes.” Roughley (2015) 
calls this “Smithian empathy” and gives as examples (following Smith 
1759) the way in which we feel bad for a dead or mentally incapacitated 
person—­even though they themselves are not feeling bad; presumably this 
feeling is based on how we would feel if we (in our current aware state) 
­were in their situation. The paternalistic helping studies we have discussed 
may be interpreted in a similar way: I fetch him not what he wants but 
what I would want if I, given my current knowledge, ­were in his shoes. 
Perspective-­taking and self-­projection are ­things that apes do not do 

228	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
­because, presumably, they do not possess the necessary cognitive skills of 
joint attention and perspective-­taking.
The hypothesis, then, is that whereas ­children’s instrumental helping 
shares many features with that of the ­great apes, it also has some unique 
features, and ­these are due mainly to uniquely ­human adaptations for co­
operation and shared intentionality. Thus, for many of the reasons out­
lined by Baumard et al. (2013), an intrinsic motivation to help and co­
operate might be an evolutionary advantage (for example, it would not 
display the kind of hesitation of decision that a more strategically moti­
vated version might display). Helping ­others paternalistically not with 
what they want but with what they need, especially in terms of their phys­
ical well-­being, is consistent with an evolutionary analy­sis in terms of 
interdependence, in which the most impor­tant ­thing is that ­those individ­
uals on whom one depends remain in good shape. And the kind of per­
spectivally based Smithian empathy that young ­children display, and 
apes do not, presumably reflects an ontoge­ne­tic interaction between 
­children’s sense of sympathy for ­those in need and their emerging 
perspective-­taking abilities.
The subsequent development of ­children’s helping be­hav­ior, ­after age 
three, is characterized by two main features. First, it becomes more se­
lective. For example, Vaish et al. (2010) found that when three-­year-­old 
­children ­were given the choice of helping one of two actors, they selec­
tively avoided helping the one whom they had previously observed being 
antisocial (as compared to a neutral actor), whereas they did not prefer­
entially help a prosocial actor. Thus, preschool ­children are moving be­
yond infants’ more or less indiscriminate helping and starting to take into 
account ­whether it would be wise to help this par­tic­u­lar individual. Along 
­these same lines, Plötner et al. (2015b) found that when five-­year-­old 
­children saw someone needing help, they did so much more readily if they 
­were the only one pres­ent than if ­there ­were ­others who could possibly 
help (that is, they showed an adult-­like bystander effect). Again, preschool 
­children are moving beyond infants’ indiscriminate helping, starting to 
take into account ­whether it might be safer to let someone ­else take the 
risk. It would also make sense for preschool ­children to start helping ­others 
who helped them first (as they do with sharing; see the next subsection), 
but Warneken and Tomasello (2013b) did not find this effect (although 
the analytic prob­lem was that they helped very frequently, near ceiling, 
even without someone helping them first).

	
Prosociality	
229
The second feature of helping be­hav­ior in ­children ­after three years of 
age is the role of social norms. Infants are helping out of sympathy, and 
this applies to older ­children and adults as well. But in ­every act of helping 
­there are also costs and risks. Based on vari­ous considerations, dif­fer­ent 
cultures have developed dif­fer­ent sets of social norms specifying when and 
in what circumstances an individual should help another (and when not). 
For example, in Western cultures, if I ask you to pass me the salt at the 
dinner ­table, you pretty much have to comply; but if I ask you at the dinner 
­table to drive to the store and purchase some salt for me, you may demur, 
and no one would think less of you. The point is that infants and toddlers 
help in pretty much any situation they can, if it is not overly costly. Older 
­children are starting to take into account what is expected of them by 
­others before determining ­whether to help.
Sharing
Helping only costs a few ergs of energy, but sharing costs resources. In 
situations of sharing, therefore, ­children’s natu­ral, internally motivated 
tendency to help ­others is mitigated by their selfish desire for the resources. 
We thus look ­here at infants’ and toddlers’ generosity with resources (in 
the next section we look at older ­children’s division of resources governed 
by a sense of fairness). The hypothesis is that whereas ­children’s sharing 
has some features in common with that of ­great apes, it has many unique 
features, and ­these are due, as in the case of helping, mainly to uniquely 
­human psychological mechanisms for taking the affective perspective of 
the other (Smithian empathy).
­Human infants give away objects and food quite freely, but that may 
be ­because they do not ­really value them. Toddlers and preschoolers, who 
do value toys and food, are often quite selfish with them. But that is mainly 
when they already possess them (that is, they show an “endowment ef­
fect”). Thus, in a situation in which the child already possessed some toys 
or food and an adult had none, Brownell et al. (2013a) found that eighteen-­
month-­olds shared only some of their ­things and only somewhat fre­
quently, mostly in response to verbal prompting. Twenty-­four-­month-­olds 
shared more often and more freely (sharing both food and toys with equal 
frequency and with less prompting needed; see also Dunfield et al. 2011). 
In a series of tasks in which somewhat older ­children ­were given the op­
portunity to divide a set of resources between themselves and an adult 
partner, Rochat et al. (2009) observed that three-­year-­olds gave about 

230	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
one-­third of the items to the partner, whereas five-­year-­olds gave them 
almost one-­half.
In situations in which they do not possess the toys or food ahead of 
time, even infants and toddlers share with ­others relatively freely. Thus, 
Ulber et al. (2015) had pairs of eighteen-­ and twenty-­four-­month-­olds enter 
a room together and encounter a bowl of small, attractive toys (a situa­
tion somewhat reminiscent of chimpanzee foraging). In this situation, 
they almost always divided up the toys in a relatively peaceful manner, 
without squabbling or hording by ­either child; and about half the time 
they divided them equally. Sharing in the sense of not trying to dominate 
all the resources for oneself comes naturally to toddlers. Interestingly, 
Ulber et al. (2016) found that three-­year-­old ­children’s motivation to share 
is not sensitive to—­indeed, is diminished by—­concrete rewards, which 
suggests that it, too, like helping, is intrinsically motivated. As in the sim­
ilar helping study by Warneken and Tomasello (2008), social praise did 
not diminish ­children’s internal motivation, but neither did it increase it. 
Another in­ter­est­ing finding is that of Brownell et al. (2013a) that individual 
differences in ­children’s sharing be­hav­ior are related to individual differ­
ences in their owner­ship understanding: one cannot ­really share some­
thing ­unless one has a sense that it is one’s to share as one likes.
Brownell et al. (2009) designed a task to be as similar as pos­si­ble to the 
tasks Silk et al. (2005) and Jensen et al. (2006) had given to chimpanzees: 
a child had to choose between one resource for only herself versus one 
for herself and one for a partner (1–0 versus 1–1). What they found was 
that eighteen-­month-­olds, like the chimpanzees, chose indiscriminately. 
But twenty-­five-­month-­olds more often chose to benefit both themselves 
and the partner (especially when that partner expressed a desire for the 
resource). House et al. (2012) administered a similar test to ­children from 
three to eight years old, and compared it to the chimpanzee data from 
Silk et al. (2005), finding that the ­children ­were much more prosocial than 
­were the chimpanzees.
As in the case of helping, the subsequent development of ­children’s 
sharing be­hav­ior ­after age three is characterized by two main features. 
First, it becomes more selective. For example, Warneken and Tomasello 
(2013b) found that three-­year-­old but not two-­year-­old ­children ­will share 
more resources with a person who has previously shared with them than 
someone who has not. Further, Olson and Spelke (2008) found that three-­
year-­olds are more likely to divide resources to especially benefit friends, 

	
Prosociality	
231
­people who have shared with them previously, and ­people who have shared 
with ­others previously. Moore (2009) looked more in-­depth at how the 
nature of the recipient affects five-­ to six-­year-­old ­children’s sharing and 
found that “young ­children prefer equitable division of resources with 
friends, treat non-­friends less well, and make prosocial moves with 
strangers when the cost to self is not high” (944). Svetlova and Brownell 
(forthcoming) found that when three-­ and five-­year-­old ­children ­were 
given the choice of sharing with ­either a needy puppet or a neutral puppet, 
they chose to share with the needy puppet. Thus, unlike ­great apes, young 
­children’s sharing is also (like their helping) based on affective perspective-­
taking of the needs of the recipient.
The second feature of ­children’s sharing be­hav­ior ­after three years of 
age is that it becomes sensitive to social norms. Thus, in cross-­cultural 
studies preschool ­children’s sharing be­hav­ior is fairly similar across cul­
tures, but sometime around ­middle childhood ­children start to diverge in 
the direction of their par­tic­u­lar culture’s social norms. Experimental ver­
ification of this age and pro­cess comes from a recent study by House and 
Tomasello (2018), who gave a prosocial task to Western ­children across a 
wide age range (that is, a choice between 1–0 versus 1–1, in which a partner 
gets one also). They found that ­children became gradually more proso­
cial over age into the school years, but, most importantly, school-­age 
­children ­were much more sensitive than preschoolers to information 
about social norms. Thus, when before their choice they saw other ­children 
(on a video) say ­things such as “This is the right one to choose” or “This 
is the one that most ­children choose,” older, but not younger, ­children 
went with the norm. Related to this finding, school-­age ­children tend to 
share more with in-­group than with out-­group peers (Fehr et al. 2008), 
suggesting a sensitivity to social norms, which prototypically apply only 
to in-­group compatriots. (See also McAuliffe et al. [in press] on the influ­
ence of social norms on sharing among four-­ to nine-­year-­old ­children.)
Individual and Cultural Variation
­Children with autism spectrum disorder help ­others with their instru­
mental prob­lems (Liebal et al. 2008). And their sharing of toys and re­
sources is not something that has been reported as being markedly dif­
fer­ent. But of central concern ­here are ­those aspects of helping and sharing 
that are uniquely ­human. To our knowledge, ­there are no studies of au­
tistic ­children’s intrinsic motivation to help or their tendencies ­toward 

232	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
paternalistic helping. The one suggestive study is that of Hobson et al. 
(2009; on which Vaish et al. 2009 was based) in which ­children with au­
tism ­were not as good as learning disabled control ­children at “affective 
perspective-­taking” when a victim had been harmed but had not expressed 
any outward signs of distress. This provides at least a hint of support for 
biological bases for uniquely ­human helping.
In terms of cultural variation, or lack thereof, Callaghan et al. (2011) 
found that in three very dif­fer­ent cultural contexts (two being traditional, 
small-­scale nonliterate cultures), ­human infants began helping ­others at 
almost exactly the same age, more or less eigh­teen months of age. This 
is despite the fact that ­mothers in ­these dif­fer­ent cultures have very dif­
fer­ent attitudes about the degree to which it is desirable or expected that 
­children this young help ­others. But at older ages, cultural differences 
begin to emerge. Thus, Rochat et al. (2009) found cultural differences in 
the tendency of three to five-­year-­old ­children to divide resources between 
themselves and a partner, with ­children from more collectivist cultures 
sharing more freely than ­those from more individualistic cultures. House 
et al. (2013) studied ­children from three to fourteen years of age across 
six diverse cultural contexts and found that when sharing with ­others was 
noncostly, ­children in all socie­ties became more generous over age, but 
when sharing with ­others was costly, ­children became less generous over 
age, with cultural differences (based on differences in cultural norms) 
emerging ­later in school age.
In terms of individual differences within Western industrialized cul­
tures, Brownell et al. (2013b) documented that a number of variables in 
­children’s social environments are associated with individual differences 
in their sharing be­hav­ior. But, of course, such correlations could be indi­
cating relationships in the opposite direction: when ­children begin to show 
a tendency to help, parents treat them differently. Or they could be re­
flecting the operation of some third ­factor.
Fairness
Being fair is not the same ­thing as being nice. If I am extra nice to one 
person by giving her extra resources, that nevertheless might be unfair to 
­others. But if the recipient needs the resources more, or is somehow re­
sponsible for more of the resources being available (for example, she did 

	
Prosociality	
233
more work), then perhaps it might be fair ­after all. The judgment of fair­
ness is thus always grounded in some judgment of equality—­equal re­
sources per person, or per unit of need, or per unit of work effort, or 
whatever—­with the self being treated, impartially, as equivalent to ­others 
(in terms of deservingness). A sense of fairness naturally comes with a 
sense of obligation: every­one including oneself should get what they de­
serve. A sense of fairness thus competes, in some circumstances, with both 
selfish and generous motives.
­Great Apes Do Not Have a Sense of Fairness
­Great apes sometimes share resources with ­others, as noted earlier, and 
friends preferentially share with one another. But they are not sharing with 
­others with a sense of fairness, as demonstrated by two main sets of ex­
perimental results. The first set of results came from the ultimatum game, 
in which a proposer proposes a split of resources with a responder. The 
responder can accept the proposal, in which case they each keep their al­
location, or reject it and no one gets anything. Adult ­human responders 
routinely reject low offers—­say, two or three out of a total of ten—­even 
though it means that they get nothing. The most likely explanation for 
this “irrational” be­hav­ior is that the responder thinks that the offer is un­
fair. She is not ­going to go along with it—­she is not ­going to be taken 
advantage of in this way—­even if rejection costs her resources. Modified 
versions of the ultimatum game have been given in nonverbal form to 
chimpanzees in two studies ( Jensen et al. 2007; Proctor et al. 2013), and 
to bonobos in one study (Kaiser et al. 2012). In all three studies the key 
result was identical: subjects virtually never rejected any non-­zero offers. 
Presumably they accepted every­thing ­because they ­were not focused on 
the fairness of the offer, but only on ­whether it would bring them food. 
Wittig et al. (2013) gave a very similar, nonverbal mini-­ultimatum game 
to pairs of five-­year-­old ­human ­children, and, unlike chimpanzees, they 
quite often rejected unfair offers (when the proposer had the opportunity 
to be fair).
The other set of studies involved social comparison. The phenomenon 
is that ­humans are happy to receive X number of resources ­unless they 
see ­others getting more, in which case they are unhappy. Presumably, 
again, the explanation for their unhappiness is a sense of being treated 
unfairly. Brosnan et al. (2005, 2010) reported two studies claiming that 
chimpanzees ­will reject food given to them by ­humans (which they 

234	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
other­wise would accept) if they see another chimpanzee getting better 
food for the same or less effort. But when appropriate control conditions 
are run, this effect goes away. The necessary control conditions are ­those 
in which the chimpanzee just expects better food in the same context, 
which makes the offered food less appealing (Bräuer et al. 2006, 2009). 
This experimental paradigm thus does not show social comparison in 
chimpanzees, only food comparison. Support for this interpretation 
comes also from a study by Brosnan et al. (2015) who compared a condi­
tion in which chimpanzees ­were given a less desirable food than they 
­were expecting (food comparison condition) to a condition in which they 
­were given a less desirable food than was given to a groupmate (inequity 
condition). Chimpanzees behaved identically in the two conditions (for 
similar negative results, see Hopper et al. 2013). And more recently, using 
a procedure in which food was distributed to two chimpanzees ­either by 
an experimenter or a machine, Engelmann et al. (2017) found that the 
“anger” of chimpanzees in this situation is not about an inequity in 
what they receive; rather, they are angry at the experimenter (but not 
the machine) ­because he has not given the food they are expecting in the 
situation. Overall, then, ­there is no reliable evidence that ­great apes en­
gage in any kind of social comparison in assessing how resources are di­
vided. (The same is true of the better-­known case of capuchin monkeys; 
see Tomasello 2016, for a review.)
Melis et al. (2016) also observed a stark difference between ­humans and 
apes in something like fairness in a situation in which simultaneous sharing 
was not pos­si­ble. In this study, pairs of chimpanzees and three-­ and five-­
year-­old ­children ­were confronted with an apparatus that required both 
of them to pull a rope (together, ­either left or right) for a single reward. 
The trick was that while ­either subject could potentially benefit on a given 
trial, only one actually did, depending on which way the rope was pulled 
(left benefiting one of them, right benefiting the other). The solution for 
keeping the rewards coming across ­trials was, of course, to take turns 
pulling left and right across ­trials. The majority of ­children at both ages 
alighted relatively quickly on this turn-­taking solution (and once they dis­
covered it they never abandoned it), whereas the chimpanzees never 
took turns reliably at all (in two experimental regimes).
Based on such evidence, the only reasonable conclusion (following To­
masello 2016) is that dividing resources with a sense of fairness is just not 
something that nonhuman ­great apes do.

	
Prosociality	
235
Three-­Year-­Old ­Children Share the Spoils of Collaboration Fairly
If ­children are given some resources and told that they can divide them 
with ­others in any way that they want (dictator game), they do not do so 
in an equal fashion ­until well into school age, and not always then (for a 
review, see Ibbotson 2014). But the dictator game is a poor test for mea­
sur­ing a sense of fairness (see Kurzban et al. 2015). By telling the child 
that she can do with the resources what­ever she wants, the adult implic­
itly sanctions selfishness. Moreover, it is well-­known that all ­humans ex­
perience an endowment effect such that objects already in their posses­
sion are seen as more valuable than ­others (for example, Kahneman et al. 
1991), thus making any sharing especially costly.
McAuliffe et al. (2017) reviewed studies using another task to investi­
gate young ­children’s sense of fairness in distributing resources. The basic 
task (as used by, for example, Blake and McAuliffe 2011; McAuliffe et al. 
2015) is that an adult sets up a potential distribution between the child 
and some other child on an apparatus. The child can ­either accept the dis­
tribution or reject it (into an inaccessible trash can) so that no one gets 
anything. The basic finding is that ­children normally accept unequal 
distributions—­especially if they are getting more than the partner—­well 
into school age. But the prob­lem ­here is that the cost for rejecting unfair 
distributions is extremely high: rejection means that neither child gets any­
thing and the resources are completely wasted. So perhaps this is not the 
best way to mea­sure ­children’s emerging sense of fairness ­either.
What is needed is a situation in which (1) the child does not have to 
give up resources already in her possession, and (2) the child can correct 
an unequal distribution to make it equal, rather than just trashing every­
thing. An especially good situation—­one that seems quite natu­ral from 
an evolutionary point of view—is collaborating to produce resources, 
which must then be divided among the collaborators. Collaboration might 
evoke a sense of fairness ­because, as argued in Chapter 7, it evokes a sense 
of mutual re­spect among partners, and in some cases is structured by a 
joint commitment and its normative force. And, initially at least, neither 
partner “owns” the resources.
In several studies pairs of chimpanzees and ­human ­children have been 
presented with a ­simple collaborative task in which to acquire resources 
both partners have to pull si­mul­ta­neously on the two ends of a rope con­
nected to a platform. In a study investigating pairs of chimpanzees, Melis 
et al. (2006b) found that when ­there ­were two piles of food, one on each 

236	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
end of the platform, the pairs ­were often successful. However, when ­there 
was only one pile of food in the ­middle of the platform, on the first trial 
the dominant individual simply took all the food. This naturally demoti­
vated the subordinate for ­future collaborative efforts, so cooperation fell 
apart over ­trials. In stark contrast, in a study designed by Warneken et al. 
(2011) to be as comparable as pos­si­ble to this one, three-­year-­old ­children 
­were not bothered by the food being in a single pile in the ­middle of the 
board; they collaborated successfully over many ­trials no ­matter how the 
food was laid out. The ­children knew that, no ­matter what, in the end 
they could always work out a mutually satisfactory division of resources—­
which they almost always did, most often by dividing them equally. Im­
portantly, if one child took more than half of the four candies, the partner 
often protested (as noted in Chapter 7), whereas if the partner took only 
her share, ­there was almost never protest. The protest was thus not about 
getting more but about getting an equal share. And, tellingly, when ­there 
was protest about taking more than half, the greedy child almost always 
relented; she knew she was not being fair.
Arguably, young ­children ­were more or less egalitarian in this study 
­because they did not have to give up anything in their possession, only 
refrain from hogging unowned resources. But this might conceivably have 
been done simply out of fear of conflict with the partner. Hamann et al. 
(2011) made ­things more in­ter­est­ing for ­children. In their study, pairs of 
two-­ and three-­year-­olds always ended up in a situation in which one of 
them had three rewards (the lucky child) and the other had only one (the 
unlucky child): to create an equal distribution, the lucky child would have 
to sacrifice. What differed across three experimental conditions was what 
led to the asymmetrical distribution. In one condition, the unequal distri­
bution resulted from participants simply walking into the room and 
finding three versus one reward at each end of a platform—­the lucky child 
almost never shared with the partner. In a second condition, each child 
pulled her own separate rope, resulting in the same asymmetrical re­
wards—­the lucky child shared sometimes. But in a final condition, the 
asymmetrical rewards resulted from an equal collaborative effort of the 
two ­children pulling together. In this case, the lucky three-­year-­olds (but 
not two-­year-­olds) shared with the unlucky child to create an equal 2:2 
split almost 80 ­percent of the time! Presumably, they felt that if they both 
had worked equally to produce the rewards, they both deserved them 
equally. When the same experiment was run with chimpanzees, they 

	
Prosociality	
237
hardly shared at all, even when all they had to do was not block the other 
from accessing the extra reward; ­whether ­there was collaboration made 
no difference. The impor­tant finding is that three-­year-­olds (but not two-­
year-­olds or apes) ­will actually sacrifice resources in order to balance ­things 
with a collaborative partner; in the vernacular, they are averse in this sit­
uation even to advantageous inequity. (For a similar finding as ­children 
make third-­party judgments, see Ng et al. 2011.)
The obvious interpretation is that in the context of a joint intentional 
activity young ­children feel that they and their partner both deserve an 
equal share of the spoils: we obtained them together, so we share them 
together. It could be argued that ­these ­children ­were only blindingly fol­
lowing a sharing rule that they learned from their parents. But if that ­were 
the case, they should have divided the rewards with the other child equally 
in all three conditions—­unless, implausibly, the rule they ­were taught was 
to share resources only ­after collaboration. More plausibly, the act of col­
laboration engendered a sense of “we” that led ­children to see their partner 
as equally deserving of the spoils. It was this sense of equal deserving­
ness that made the three-­year-­olds—­but not the two-­year-­olds—­feel that 
they ­ought to hand over a resource already in their possession, which they 
would not other­wise do.
Bolstering this view from the other direction, as it ­were, are studies in­
volving ­free riders. When chimpanzees work to produce a reward and 
­either a ­free rider or a collaborator approaches and requests to share in 
the spoils, they do not discriminate (Melis et al. 2011). In sharp contrast, 
five-­year-­old ­children systematically share with the collaborator but exclude 
the ­free rider (Melis et al. 2015). This finding supports the interpretation 
of ­children’s be­hav­ior in terms of a sense of “we”: we collaborators de­
serve the spoils (equally), but they (noncollaborators) do not.
Some sense of deservingness—as opposed to, say, a ­simple expectation 
or preference (as in the infant studies of Geraci and Surian 2011, and 
Schmidt and Sommerville 2011)—is crucial for the development of a mor­
ally grounded sense of fairness. The reason is that divvying up the spoils 
in a fair manner is only partly about the resources themselves; it is more 
directly about the resources one receives as compared with ­those received 
by ­others. Again, the issue is at bottom one of social comparison. The 
result that produced dissatisfaction in both the Warneken et al. (2011) and 
Hamann et al. (2011) collaboration studies was not the amount received 
but the amount received relative to what the other received. In an even 

238	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
more direct test of this social comparison hypothesis, Ulber and Toma­
sello (2017) had pairs of three-­ and four-­year-­old ­children and pairs of 
chimpanzees collaborate (or not); one partner then received more, or less, 
or the same as the other. The result was that in the context of collabora­
tion the ­children, but not the chimpanzees, ­were motivated to correct the 
in­equality, ­whether it advantaged them or their partner. They did not do 
this in a nonsocial control condition (lacking a partner or a collaboration) 
in which rewards simply appeared in front of the child and on the other 
side of the apparatus.
­Children’s sense of fairness is thus not about the absolute amount of 
resources received; it is about every­one, including the self, being treated 
with the re­spect they deserve (Honneth 1995). In the context of mutual­
istic collaboration, we both deserve the same amount, so an unequal dis­
tribution shows a lack of re­spect for whoever received less. This is why 
collaborating ­children are not just disappointed to receive less than ­others 
but positively resentful, and this shows up clearly in their second-­personal 
(resentful) protest. And it is also not fair if I receive more than you ­because 
I ­ought to show you the re­spect you deserve as well; I feel obliged to share 
fairly (even giving up resources to do so) ­because I genuinely see you as 
an equally deserving partner. Collaborators do not just prefer that we 
share the spoils equally but feel that we owe it to one another—as mutu­
ally respectful second-­personal agents—to share equally.
In terms of age, the study of Hamann et al. (2011) had a clear finding: 
three-­year-­olds, but not two-­year-­olds, gave up resources in order to 
equalize with their collaborative partner in a fair manner. This age for a 
normative turn in dividing resources is thus consistent with the norma­
tive turn established in the previous chapter for ­children’s making and re­
specting joint commitments. But it must be emphasized that the norma­
tive turn at this early age is restricted to the context of collaboration, where 
no individual owns the resources ahead of time and any cost associated 
with sacrificing resources is compensated by the apparent benefit of seeing 
the equally deserving partner getting her just desserts. The collaborative 
context would thus seem to be especially power­ful for ­children in miti­
gating their selfish impulses. Overall, we may say that for three-­year-­old 
­children and beyond, fairness is the respectful way that second-­personal 
agents treat their (potential) collaborative partners. Again, we may cate­
gorize this way of treating collaborative partners as a kind of second-­
personal normativity.

	
Prosociality	
239
Distributive and Procedural Fairness
Fairness in dividing resources with a collaborative partner makes even 
three-­year-­old ­children dif­fer­ent from other apes. But this is, of course, a 
rather limited sense of fairness. Tomasello (2016) proposed that in ­human 
evolution collective intentionality arose as a kind of group-­mindedness 
in which all members of one’s cultural group ­were seen as, in essence, 
partners in the collaborative activity of group life. And so we might ex­
pect that as ­children become more group-­minded ­after three years of age, 
they might begin to distribute resources fairly among group members in 
general in many dif­fer­ent situations.
Evidence for this proposal comes from a number of dif­fer­ent studies. 
Olson and Spelke (2008) found that even three-­year-­olds show a bias 
­toward equality in distributing resources among third parties. But equality 
when the self is not involved is easy; the test case is when the child her­
self is involved. In this case it seems that only school-­age ­children reliably 
sacrifice to equalize outside of a collaborative context. Fehr et al. (2008) 
found that ­children from the age of seven or eight years preferred an equal 
sharing of windfall resources between themselves and another child, and 
indeed they even sacrificed resources themselves to make sure that ­there 
was an equal division. Importantly, this was only if  the partner was an in-­group 
member. Studies by Blake and McAuliffe (2011), Smith et al. (2013), and 
McAuliffe et al. (2015) have also found that school-­age ­children feel that 
every­one in the group deserves an equal share, even if this means that they 
themselves must sacrifice resources. Shaw and Olson (2012) provided an 
especially stringent test. They gave ­children resources to distribute among 
third parties such that ­after equal distribution ­there was one left over. In 
many cases ­children just entering school ­were so dismayed by the possi­
bility of an unequal distribution that they threw away the extra resource 
rather than show favoritism. In one of the very few sharing studies in­
volving multiple ­children, Paulus et al. (2013) found that five-­year-­olds 
encouraged a “wealthy” member of a triad to share with a “poor” member 
of the triad; when the child herself was the “wealthy” member, she her­
self sacrificed to achieve something approaching equality among the three 
of them.
The finding, then, is that ­children at the transition to school age feel 
that, all ­things being equal, every­one in the group deserves an equal dis­
tribution of resources. But sometimes this is not pos­si­ble. In such cases, 
one solution is to find a fair procedure for allocating resources, for 

240	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
example, by casting lots, drawing straws, rolling dice, or playing rock-­
paper-­scissors. Grocke et al. (2015) had five-­year-­old triads confront three 
unequal reward packages and then agree on a procedure to allocate them 
among themselves. To allocate the rewards, they needed to use a “wheel 
of fortune.” ­Children who played with a fair wheel (where each child had 
an equal chance of obtaining each reward package) ­were mostly accepting 
of the outcome and the procedure, no ­matter how much they themselves 
received. In contrast, ­children who played with an unfair wheel (biased at 
the outset) often changed the rules of the game in medias res, and in a ­later 
interview said it was an unfair procedure. (For a similar study with sim­
ilar results in six-­ to eight-­year-­olds in a third-­party paradigm, see Shaw 
and Olson 2014.) The conclusion was that even preschool-­age ­children are 
already sensitive not only to distributive fairness but to procedural fair­
ness as well.
The basic idea of procedural fairness is that the rules or procedures 
should be formulated impartially—­that is, without knowing ahead of time 
how par­tic­u­lar individuals ­will be affected (­under a “veil of ignorance”; 
Rawls 1971). So long as individuals know that the pro­cess is treating them 
fairly, they are satisfied with any outcome. As further support for this view, 
Grocke et al. (2018) put young ­children in a situation in which they re­
ceived an unfair outcome, but they ­either did or did not participate in the 
decision-­making pro­cess specifying the distributive procedure. The finding 
was that no ­matter what resources they actually received, so long as they 
­were able to participate in the decision-­making pro­cess, they judged it to 
be a fair pro­cess. The negative side of this phenomenon, as it ­were, is rep­
resented by the study of Vogelsang and Tomasello (2016). ­After a puppet 
gave three-­ and five-­year-­old ­children five candies out of their pile of ten, 
when it was their turn the ­children reciprocated with something close to 
five most of the time. But when the puppet took five out of a common 
pile and left the child with five, ­children did not reciprocate to the same 
degree, even though the division was exactly the same in the two cases. 
One interpretation is that giving represents an act of re­spect for the other 
person as an equally deserving partner, whereas taking represents an ac­
tive disrespect for one’s partner.
Once again, the most natu­ral interpretation is that ­children’s attitudes 
and evaluations in such situations are not driven by the resources them­
selves. The determinative issue is that they do not want to get less than 
­others ­because this shows them disrespect—­they are being treated as less 

	
Prosociality	
241
than equal—­whereas they do not mind getting less than ­others if they feel 
that they have been treated with re­spect, as equal to ­others. The issue is 
not the resources themselves; the issue is being treated as one deserves to 
be treated: with equal re­spect.
Individual and Cultural Variation
A number of experimental studies have found cultural differences in the 
way that ­children choose to distribute resources. As was noted earlier in 
our discussion of prosociality, Rochat et al. (2009) and House et al. (2013) 
found cultural differences in how ­children chose to divide a set of wind­
fall resources between themselves and vari­ous other individuals.
Blake et al. (2015) set out to investigate a sense of fairness, or equity, 
more directly. They used the very demanding task previously used by 
Blake and McAuliffe (2011) and McAuliffe et al. (2015) in which ­children 
had to ­either accept or reject experimenter-­proposed divisions between 
themselves and another child. Rejection meant that no one got anything, 
and the resources ­were wasted in the trashcan. Using this task, they found 
that young ­children in all cultures rejected disadvantageous divisions that 
favored the other child at similar rates well into ­middle childhood. But at 
around eight years of age ­children from the Western, industrialized cul­
tures, but not ­children from the other cultures, began rejecting even ad­
vantageous divisions that favored themselves. However, Corbit et al. (2017) 
extended the findings of Hamann et al. (2011) that collaboration in young 
­children—in this case from one Western industrialized culture and one 
small-­scale rural culture—­prompts a more fair division of resources, even 
if ­children have to give up resources in their possession. Zeidler et al. 
(2016) found significant cross-­cultural differences in school-­age ­children’s 
willingness to take turns accessing a monopolizable resource, with ­children 
from two small-­scale cultures almost never establishing a clear turn-­
taking regime while ­children from a Western, industrialized culture did so 
readily.
The key to understanding ­these cultural differences in distributing re­
sources is the ontoge­ne­tic pattern. Younger preschool ­children from dif­
fer­ent cultures (who actually are not well represented in any studies) differ 
­little in their sense of fairness—­which, we may hypothesize, is confined 
to collaborative contexts broadly defined—­because they are all operating 
with a natu­ral, second-­personal morality involving re­spect for second-­
personal agents. But ­later, especially during school ­age, ­children begin 

242	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
subscribing to the social norms that their culture has worked out for dis­
tributing resources in fair ways among every­one (see Chapter 9).
Becoming Cooperative
Social animals are, basically by definition, cooperative: individuals of the 
same species are able to live together in peace. But ­great apes, in addition, 
actively help one another and sometimes share resources with one another 
if the costs are not too ­great, so they develop something like “friendships.” 
­Human ­children’s early helping and sharing are very similar, except that 
they add an ele­ment of perspective-­taking. But then, in addition, based 
on their understanding of ­others as in many ways equivalent to themselves 
(self-­other equivalence), at around three years of age ­children develop a 
normative sense of fairness in their dealings with ­those ­others, in which 
they treat them as equally impor­tant as themselves. Welcome to the 
­human—­and definitely not the ­great ape—­social world.
Theoretical Explanations
The central theoretical issue in the study of ­children’s prosocial be­hav­ior 
is the role of adult socialization and teaching. On two points, almost 
every­one agrees. First, every­one agrees that socialization and teaching 
cannot create cooperative individuals out of nothing. Attempting to so­
cialize a lizard into cooperativeness ­will not work; indeed, the way to make 
an animal species more cooperative is to selectively breed the most coop­
erative individuals with one another to affect ge­ne­tic change (also known 
as domestication; Hare and Tomasello 2005). It is uncontestable that 
­human infants naturally develop at least some cooperative tendencies. 
Second, every­one agrees that the prosocial be­hav­ior of ­children ap­
proaching school age, as well as that of school-­age ­children themselves, is 
strongly influenced by adult socialization, teaching, and social norms. 
­There is much that older ­children need to learn to become good coop­
erators in society, and most of what they learn comes from adults.
The central question is thus about the role of adult socialization and 
teaching in the development of prosocial be­hav­ior during infancy and the 
early preschool years. Focusing especially on helping and sharing, 
Warneken and Tomasello (2009a, 2009b) argue that socialization plays 
only a minor role during this early period; young ­children are mostly 

	
Prosociality	
243
becoming prosocial naturally, based on maturation and their own indi­
vidual learning. They cite three main lines of evidence (all of which ­were 
discussed earlier, with citations): (1) ­great apes engage in instrumental 
helping, and a bit of sharing, without any adult socialization or teaching; 
(2) in cultures in which parents do not seem to socialize or encourage pro­
social be­hav­ior in infants and toddlers (they wait ­until the child is ready), 
infants and toddlers nevertheless already engage in prosocial be­hav­ior; and 
(3) some experiments seem to show that young ­children engage in pro­
social be­hav­ior regardless of ­whether parents or other adults encourage 
or reward them, and indeed material rewards seem to discourage proso­
ciality. Suggestively, we might add that paternalistic helping, in which 
­children assist ­others in getting not what they want but what they need 
(which chimpanzees do not do), and ­children helping their collaborative 
partners especially enthusiastically (which chimpanzees do not do) are 
generally consistent with an evolutionary account in which ­there has been 
natu­ral se­lection for ­human prosocial be­hav­ior in the context of interde­
pendent collaboration and partner choice. (Also, paternalistic helping and 
enthusiastic helping during collaboration would not seem to be the kinds 
of ­things that adults actively teach.)
Brownell (2016) takes a somewhat dif­fer­ent view. Relying on correla­
tional studies and two experimental studies, she argues that socialization 
plays an impor­tant role in the development of ­children’s prosocial be­
hav­ior from the beginning. But a correlation between ­children’s proso­
cial be­hav­ior and parents encouraging ­children’s helping could indicate a 
number of dif­fer­ent causal relations. In par­tic­u­lar, in many domains par­
ents do not begin encouraging be­hav­ior ­until the child starts showing 
some signs of ­doing it, so the causal arrow might actually be in the direc­
tion from ­children’s prosocial be­hav­ior to parents’ encouragement. Ex­
perimentally, Dahl et al. (2017) found that infants whose parents encour­
aged them to help during an experimental session helped more. But this 
only applied to half the sample. In a continuous sample from thirteen to 
eigh­teen months of age, only the younger half showed the effect (and 
older infants in the two studies of Warneken and Tomasello (2008, 2013a) 
showed no effect). Also, Barragan and Dweck (2014) ­were able to elicit 
higher levels of helping from two-­year-­olds when they engaged them in 
reciprocal prosocial games. But in this study, as in the Dahl et al. study, 
what we see is an increase in the frequency of an already established be­
hav­ior; indeed, ­children in the control groups of both studies helped 

244	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
reasonably often as well. Socialization may influence early prosocial be­
hav­ior to some degree, but it does not create it.
It is perhaps relevant, in this regard, that researchers have not found a 
strong correlation between individual differences in helping and sharing 
be­hav­ior (Dunfield et al. 2011). This would require socialization theorists 
to hypothesize that parents are not rewarding or encouraging dif­fer­ent 
forms of prosocial be­hav­ior in a consistent manner across the dif­fer­ent 
types. It is unknown ­whether other ways of mea­sur­ing ­things might still 
find a relation, or ­whether, instead, ­these two be­hav­iors have in­de­pen­dent 
evolutionary foundations, both built on sympathy but somehow in dif­
fer­ent ways (see Warneken and Tomasello 2009a, 2009b). Paulus (2014) 
considered vari­ous explanations to account for early helping and sharing 
and their lack of correlation, and found that none is completely adequate 
to account for all the data. But, interestingly, the vari­ous mechanisms 
he considers—­emotion sharing, goal alignment, social interaction, social 
normative—­can all be seen as emanating in one way or another from 
young ­children’s early skills and motivations of shared intentionality.
To reiterate, none of this is to take away from the profound influence 
of culture and socialization pro­cesses on older ­children’s helping and 
sharing; it is only to give them an evolutionary foundation and ontoge­
ne­tic starting point. I have cited ­here significant cultural differences that 
occur in ­children’s sharing be­hav­ior to some degree already in late pre­
school but especially beginning in ­middle childhood. And I have cited 
studies identifying specific socialization pro­cesses that can have an effect 
on ­children’s helping and sharing, again to some degree already in pre­
school but especially beginning in ­middle childhood. I have also made 
some reference to ­things we ­will cover in more detail in the next chapter, 
including ­children’s learning of social norms that define the right and 
wrong ways of helping and sharing in dif­fer­ent ways in dif­fer­ent cultures. 
My proposal is thus that young ­children’s helping and sharing have strong 
maturational bases from one to three years of age—­based in skills and 
motivations of joint intentionality—­and then become much more sensi­
tive to cultural and socialization influences as ontogeny proceeds. This is 
reflected in the relatively light shading of the first box in Figure 8.1, which 
basically shows a transformation of ­great ape sympathy and helping into 
the ­human Smithian version, based on uniquely ­human capacities for 
taking the other’s perspectives.

	
Prosociality	
245
Turning now to ­children’s emerging sense of fairness (Figure 8.1, 
second box), ­there is already theoretical controversy in this case in simply 
describing the developmental pathway. Blake, McAuliffe, and colleagues 
have claimed that ­children do not show a full sense of fairness—­including 
sacrificing resources in order to equalize with ­others—­until something like 
eight years of age. But, as already noted, this is based on ­children’s be­
hav­ior in a par­tic­u­lar experimental paradigm in which rejecting unfairness 
is extremely costly and in some sense irrational (­because the child has to 
destroy resources to prevent unfairness). By contrast, Tomasello and col­
leagues have found that when three-­year-­olds get fewer of the spoils from 
a collaboration than their partner, they protest (aversion to disadvanta­
geous inequity). Also, crucially, when they get more of the spoils of a col­
laboration than their partner, ­children of this same age share the excess 
in order to equalize (aversion to advantageous inequity). And many studies 
have found that three-­year-­olds show a strong tendency to divide wind­
fall resources among third parties in an equal fashion when their own 
selfish motives are not intruding in the decision (equality bias). It is per­
fectly pos­si­ble that ­there is no conflict at all among ­these vari­ous findings: 
­children simply behave differently when the contingencies of the social 
situation are dif­fer­ent, involving such ­things as strength of selfish motives, 
aversion to wasting resources, and collaboration. Thus, further research 
is needed to sort out the vari­ous ­factors and their strength at dif­fer­ent ages. 
But my minimal claim is that collaboration is the natu­ral home of a sense 
of fairness—­second-­personal fairness (as a precursor to group-­minded 
Joint Intentionality
Collective Intentionality
Cog: dual-level
Cog: S = O
S-R: normative
Cog:
objectivity
2P agency
0
1 year
2 years
3 years
4 years
5 years
PROSOCIALITY
FAIRNESS
WITH
PARTNER
SMITHIAN
HELPING AND
SHARING
DISTRIBUTIVE
AND
PROCEDURAL
FAIRNESS
Figure  8.1 ​The ontoge­ne­tic emergence of young ­children’s uniquely ­human 
prosociality. Abbreviations: Cog = cognitive; S=O = self-­other equivalence; 
S-­R = executive self-­regulation; 2P = second-­personal. 

246	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
fairness and justice)—­and that ­children already are fair in this context at 
three years of age.
In terms of the role of socialization specifically, ­there is a widespread 
assumption that ­children’s sense of fairness is somehow taught or social­
ized. Social norms are often invoked, in this context, as crucial to the pro­
cess. Once again, my claim is not that this pro­cess does not occur—it 
manifestly does—­but rather that it is not what is happening with three-­
year-­olds. Recall that in the Hamann et al. (2011) study, when pairs of 
three-­year-­olds simply found two piles of resources, the lucky child almost 
never shared fairly; however, when the ­children generated resources col­
laboratively, the lucky child shared them fairly most of the time, giving 
up resources already in her possession to do so. To repeat this point, it 
seems highly unlikely that adults are socializing ­children to share or not 
depending on ­whether resources are generated collaboratively or not. This 
does not mean that I am positing “pure” maturation as an explanation 
(what­ever that might mean); rather, I am saying ­children’s earliest sense 
of fairness results from the maturation of their capacities for joint inten­
tionality as exercised in collaborative activities with ­others. Through their 
collaborative experiences, they come to see their partners as equally de­
serving second-­personal agents. This is based cognitively on a sense of self-­
other equivalence (S=O in Figure 8.1) and motivationally on a normative 
sense of obligation, acting as a self-­regulative standard, to treat ­others as 
they deserve to be treated (S-­R: normative in Figure 8.1). ­These are not 
­things that are socialized but rather ­things that are individually learned, 
or constructed, within the context of ­humans’ unique forms of joint in­
tentional activity.
The pro­cess of construction, or social co-­construction, in this case is 
one that aims at resolving competing values on the executive level. More 
concretely, we might say it this way: infants and toddlers naturally want 
­things for themselves, but at the same time they also want to be generous 
to ­others. When they are already in possession of something, their selfish 
impulses usually win out. When they observe a peer wanting something, 
if they themselves do not want it, they are more helpful and generous. 
Young ­children oscillate with the situation, and they often face a peer who 
oscillates with the situation as well. Their sense of fairness—in which they 
feel obligated to transfer resources in their possession to a peer so as to 
equalize—­first emerges in contexts of collaboration in which they and a 
partner have generated resources together. This is perhaps ­because the 

	
Prosociality	
247
collaborative context leads ­children to see their partner as equally de­
serving and to see that she has equivalent claims on the spoils (self-­other 
equivalence). Together, this all creates a conflict. In parallel with the cog­
nitive domain, we propose that the child constructs a sense of fairness 
when her contradictory impulses for selfishness and generosity arise 
­toward the same set of goods, while at the same time she realizes that 
her partner is experiencing the same conflict. A coordination of values 
and eventual co-­constructed resolution can only take place on the executive 
level, and it seems to take place initially and most naturally in a context 
in which the equality of partners is especially salient.
Overall, then, my proposal is that ­children’s earliest sympathy and 
­prosocial be­hav­ior develop relatively naturally, and their ­later sense of 
fairness at three years of age is constructed, or co-­constructed, in their 
collaborative interactions with ­others. We thus see a developmental 
pathway with an initially quite strong maturational component for pro­
sociality, which then develops into one structured and innervated by the 
maturation of basic capacities for shared intentionality. Integral to the 
­later pathway are social, especially collaborative, experiences, which 
serve to establish the self-­other equivalence and mutual re­spect (among 
second-­personal agents) on which the notion of fairness is based.
Social and Moral Implications
Sympathy for ­others is the sine qua non of ­human morality. ­Human indi­
viduals who do not care about ­others—­who merely interact with ­others 
strategically and use them as social tools—­are typically referred to as so­
ciopaths, and they are unwanted in ­human society and in fact subsist at 
only very low frequencies. During infancy and toddlerhood young ­children 
already have sympathy for ­others in need, and they gradually learn to ex­
press this in ways appropriate to the social and cultural contexts into 
which they are born. Of course, ­children’s prosocial motives must com­
pete with their selfish motives, and this conflict is the basis of many moral 
conflicts. But the fact that ­children experience such conflicts means pre­
cisely that they are becoming moral beings.
Central to any sense of morality is also a sense of fairness. In adult 
life, fairness grounded in mutual re­spect is foundational for the most 
basic aspects of an open society. Indeed, John Rawls’s (1971) influential 
normative theory of the ideal society is dubbed “justice as fairness.” And 
indeed, consistent with our developmental findings that ­children’s ear­

248	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
liest sense of fairness emerges within their collaborative activities, Rawls 
defines society itself as “a cooperative venture for mutual advantage.” To 
scale up from fairness in collaborative activities to justice in society at 
large, ­children ­will need to begin thinking in more group-­minded ways, 
not just in terms of joint commitments to individuals but also in terms 
of collective commitments to the society’s social norms.

W ​9 ​w
Social Norms
Collaborating and acting prosocially with a partner eventually scaled up 
in ­human evolution to participating in the larger cooperative enterprise 
known as culture. Although most primates live in social groups and are 
sometimes hostile to outsiders, the psy­chol­ogy involved has mainly to do 
with the familiarity, or lack thereof, of other individuals. In contrast, as 
modern ­humans first emerged ­there arose a distinct sense of in-­group 
versus out-­group as such—­based on similarity. In-­group members are 
­those who look, act, and talk like me even if I do not know them person­
ally, whereas out-­group members are individuals from another group who 
look, act, and talk differently from “us.” And early modern ­humans fa­
vored in-­group over out-­group members in many ways: liking them more, 
helping them more, and trusting them more.
To maintain cooperation within their distinct cultural groups, ­humans 
have evolved a unique form of social control in which the group as a ­whole 
expresses its collective expectations for individual be­hav­ior. ­These collec­
tive expectations are known as social norms, and individuals are norma­
tively expected both to conform to them and to enforce such conformity 
on ­others. Norm enforcement is thus based on a group-­minded sense 
of how the group best functions: “this” is how we in the group do or do 
not act, and nonconformists are a threat to the group’s cohesion and 
smooth functioning. Whereas the normativity of joint commitments is 
created by individuals on the spot and is just as easily dissolved, the nor­
mativity of social norms derives from individuals’ collective commitment 
to the group. ­These social norms—­representing the ways that “we” do 
things—­exist before the individual is born, and the individual, ­under 
normal circumstances, has no power to dissolve or change them.

250	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
­Human infants and toddlers know nothing of the cultural group or its 
social norms. They live in a world of social interactions and relationships 
with other individuals. When an adult enforces a social norm on an in­
fant or toddler, the infant or toddler understands it as a directive coming 
from an individual. They typically follow such directives as a ­matter 
of prudence, conformity, and re­spect for the adult. They only come to 
under­stand ­these directives as something larger—­coming from the group 
or even from some objective source—­gradually over the first three to five 
years of life, as their skills and motivations of collective intentionality de­
velop. The first solid evidence for such group-­minded understanding 
emerges at around the third birthday when young ­children start to en­
force social norms on ­others. In enforcing social norms on ­others—­often 
with generic normative language such as “One must do it like this” or 
“That’s not right”—­three-­year-­olds display an understanding that ­these 
norms express objective standards for how ­things should be done (by “us”). 
This understanding manifests itself even more clearly when, at around five 
years of age, ­children begin creating their own social norms with peers 
in the context of play.
With this new group-­mindedness, ­children approaching school-­age 
begin to develop a sense of justice: the “just” way that the social group 
should treat individuals, including the way individuals as members of 
the group should treat one another. Thus, ­children demonstrate a sense 
of retributive (or commutative) justice in their understanding of the ap­
propriate punishment for transgressing par­tic­u­lar norms (making the 
punishment fit the crime). They demonstrate a sense of distributive jus­
tice in their understanding of the appropriate way that resources should 
be divided among individuals in a group, given the prevailing social 
norms of personal property and owner­ship. From this age, ­children’s 
sensibilities with re­spect to ­these and many other issues of justice are 
structured—­for good or ill—by a strong sense of in-­group versus out-­
group status.
The upshot is that young ­children from three to five years of age are 
beginning to develop a second sense of “we.” In addition to feeling soli­
darity with an interdependent collaborative partner, they are also begin­
ning to feel solidarity with in-­group members, typically identified as ­those 
who resemble them in be­hav­ior and appearance. “We” are ­those in our 
cultural group. Interestingly, ­these two types of social solidarity ­were al­
ready recognized by Durkheim (1893) in his famous distinction between 

	
Social Norms	
251
organic solidarity (based on collaborative interdependence) and mechan­
ical solidarity (based on similarity), and they also find their way into the 
two basic princi­ples of group formation in modern social psy­chol­ogy: in­
terpersonal interdependence (based on joint work) and shared identity 
(based on similarity and group membership) (for example, Lickel et al. 
2007). Enforcing and creating social norms—­including for the just way of 
distributing punishments and resources—­emanate both from the desire 
to treat other individuals fairly and from the desire to facilitate the group’s 
smooth functioning.
In this chapter, then, we look at ­children’s emerging group-­mindedness. 
It begins at around three years of age and transforms joint commitments 
into collective commitments, second-­personal protest into the enforcing 
of social norms, and a sense of fairness ­toward individuals into a sense of 
justice to all in the group.
From Apes: Group Life
Most mammals, and almost all primates, live in social groups. Many of 
­these social groups are territorial in one way or another: individuals pro­
tect the members of their group and the resources on which they all de­
pend. This is a basic pro­cess of social life for the individuals of such social 
species. But ­humans have evolved some further motives and attitudes 
­toward their social group, both ­toward the individuals within their group 
and the group as such.
­Great Ape Social Groups
­Great apes live in social groups of varying kinds, but ­humans’ closest ­great 
ape relatives, chimpanzees and bonobos, live in highly complex social 
groups typically comprising several dozen individuals of both genders 
­(so-­called multi-­male, multi-­female groups). Interactions between neigh­
boring groups are almost totally hostile for chimpanzees, whereas for 
bonobos interactions with foreigners are more peaceful. Chimpanzees 
(mostly males) actively “patrol” the borders of their territory, attacking 
unrecognized individuals (mostly males) that they encounter ­there, in 
some cases killing them (Goodall 1986). Wrangham and Glowacki (2012) 
even make an explicit comparison between intergroup aggression in chim­
panzees and intergroup aggression—or warfare—in ­humans.

252	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
It is clear that chimpanzees, and very likely bonobos, have a sense of 
who is and is not in their group. But this is most likely based on ­simple 
familiarity with ­those in the group, complemented by a fear of strangers. 
­There are no data, to my knowledge, on the age at which chimpanzee 
and bonobo youngsters can discriminate individuals in and out of their 
group. Presumably it takes them some years to learn each individual group 
member (especially in fission-­fusion social systems, such as ­those of chim­
panzees and bonobos).
­Human ­Children’s Developing Group-­Mindedness
Despite the many similarities between chimpanzee and bonobo group life 
and ­human group life, ­human beings in addition display a seemingly 
unique set of emotions and attitudes most often characterized as an in-­
group / out-­group psy­chol­ogy. In-­group favoritism accompanied by out-­
group prejudice is one of the most well-­documented phenomena in all 
of con­temporary social psy­chol­ogy (for example, Fiske 2010). ­Humans’ 
group-­minded attitudes apply to groups as such, and they are loyal to their 
group as such, based not just on familiarity or unfamiliarity but on group 
membership as determined by conformity in behavioral practices and 
physical appearance. This represents a new kind of group-­mindedness, 
and indeed the tendency of ­humans to selectively help, cooperate, and 
trust ­those who behave like them and look like them is so strong that it 
has led some theorists to posit homophily—­the tendency to affiliate, ­favor, 
and bond with similar ­others—as the psychological basis of ­human culture 
(Haun and Over 2014).
Late in the first year of life, many ­human infants are wary of strangers, 
and they are more likely to imitate someone who speaks their language, 
perhaps based on familiarity (Buttelmann et al. 2013). Preschool ­children 
prefer someone who speaks their language (and with their same accent; 
Kinzler et al. 2009), and they are more likely to trust that person (Kinzler 
et al. 2011). When preschool ­children dance together to the same ­music 
in a group, they subsequently help and cooperate with one another more 
than with other ­children (Kirschner and Tomasello 2010).
But beyond familiarity and joint action, by the end of the preschool 
period young ­children can base their in-­group / out-­group judgments on 
the thinnest of veneers. In the so-­called minimal groups paradigm, young 
­children are randomly assigned to groups and given, for example, similar 
colored T-­shirts along with a collective label such as the green group. The 

	
Social Norms	
253
point is to have ­children judge group status solely on the basis of superfi­
cial appearance (with familiarity controlled). In this paradigm, school-­age 
­children are influenced in vari­ous ways by their minimal group status; for 
example, they show more sympathy and helping ­toward individuals la­
beled as in-­group than ­those labeled as out-­group (Rhodes and Chalik 
2013), and they expect and ­favor loyalty to the group from their in-­group 
compatriots, whereas they expect and ­favor disloyalty to the group in out-­
group individuals (Killen et  al. 2013; for a review, see Dunham et  al. 
2008). What is impor­tant for our current perspective is that late preschool 
and school-­age ­children understand that ­people may voluntarily form a 
group so long as they have shared intentions (and know in common 
ground that they have shared intentions) to do so (Noyes and Dunham 
2017).*
­There are only a few minimal-­group studies with preschoolers. Engel­
mann et al. (2013) found that preschool ­children care more about how they 
are evaluated by members of their minimally established in-­group than 
by out-­group members. Misch et al. (2014) found that five-­year-­olds un­
derstand that members of a minimally established in-­group should be 
loyal to one another. In an especially telling experiment, Over et al. (2016) 
observed that five-­year-­old ­children belonging to a minimally established 
group felt a need to apologize and make amends for violations by an in-­
group (but not for an out-­group) member. Fi­nally, in a large-­scale study, 
Plötner et al. (2015a) found that five-­year-­olds’, but not three-­year-­olds’, 
be­hav­ior was affected similarly by minimal group membership, such that 
they showed more helping, resource allocation, liking, affiliation, and trust 
to in-­group than to out-­group members. This study suggests that it is only 
sometime ­after three years that ­children understand minimally established 
groups in which members are identified only by similar clothing or la­
beling, though it leaves open the possibility of younger ­children making 
in-­group / out-­group distinctions based on such ­things as similarity of 
novel behavioral practices. Fi­nally, Engelmann et al. (2018) found that five-­
year-­olds actively attempt to influence how onlookers judge their mini­
mally established group itself, in­de­pen­dent of any attempts to influence 
how ­those onlookers judge them as individuals.
*  ​It should be noted that Powell and Spelke (2013) found that seven-­month-­old infants looked longer 
at a computer display in which similar shapes with ­faces (grouped together spatially) did not behave 
alike, as expected (which the infants did not do for similar shapes without ­faces). So ­there may be some 
perceptual precursors to group-­mindedness in infancy.

254	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
For our current purposes, the key point is this: from three to five years 
of age, young ­children become ever more group-­minded as their capaci­
ties for collective intentionality mature. Early in this period, toddlers may 
be physically in the com­pany of other toddlers, but they do not under­
stand the social group as such. Two-­year-­olds do not spontaneously or­
ga­nize themselves in group activities, and they do not address the group 
as a group. Likewise, toddlers may encounter group-­level conventions, 
norms, or institutions, but they do not understand them as such. The most 
impor­tant case in the current context is social norms—as direct manifes­
tations of collective intentionality—­because social norms are so integral 
to every­thing that ­human beings think and do. Young ­children’s lives are 
structured by social norms from the beginning, but our question is how 
they understand and relate to ­these norms. It may be that, in the begin­
ning, they do not understand them as group-­minded collective expecta­
tions at all.
Social Norms
­Great apes often retaliate against ­those who have harmed them directly 
(for example, Jensen et al. 2007). But they do not punish or intervene 
against an individual who is harming a third party, even if this is a relative 
or friend (Riedl et al. 2012).* ­Human social norms, in contrast, take a thor­
oughly third-­party perspective: they apply to every­one in the group 
alike—­and should be enforced on every­one alike—­because they express 
the group’s expectations for how anyone who would be one of “us” should 
act, on pain of admonishment, punishment, or ostracism.
­Human ­children are born into a nexus of social norms exhorting them 
to behave in some ways and not in ­others. From early in life, ­children con­
form to social norms as articulated and enforced by adults. But the ques­
tion is ­whether they understand ­these directives as a single person ex­
pressing her wishes or rather as a representative of the group expressing 
collective group agreements about expected be­hav­ior. Recent research 
makes it pos­si­ble to specify, with some precision, the developmental 
pathway through which young ­children come to a more adult-­like under­
*  ​Dominant chimpanzees sometimes break up fights between third parties, but they are likely only 
attempting to prevent the forming of a co­ali­tion that might ­later threaten them.

	
Social Norms	
255
standing of social norms as collective agreements whose normative force 
comes from, and only from, the pro­cess of agreement itself. This research 
involves ­children following, enforcing, and creating social norms.
Following Social Norms
Adult caregivers are constantly regulating young ­children’s be­hav­ior in ac­
cordance with the group’s social norms, and ­children usually comply. Ac­
cording to Piaget (1932), the reason ­children re­spect and follow social 
norms is obvious: ­because they re­spect the adults from whom they come. 
Based on his explicit questioning of ­children about the rules of ­children’s 
games (for example, the game of marbles), Piaget concluded that ­children 
well into ­middle childhood believe that rules are part of an objective order 
about which adults have special knowledge (this objective order including 
many other ­things that adults teach them through pedagogy as well).
But asking ­children direct questions about the nature of rules and their 
normative force is not the only method for assessing their understanding. 
Turiel and colleagues (summarized in Turiel 2006) asked ­children more 
indirect questions about vari­ous kinds of norms and rules, such as “If 
the teacher (or other authority) says it’s okay to do this, would it be okay?” 
and “If kids did this in another culture, would it be okay?” The conclusion 
from their studies is that preschool ­children know a lot more about norms 
and rules than Piaget thought. In par­tic­u­lar, they know the difference be­
tween moral norms, which are right or wrong in­de­pen­dent of authority and 
culture, and conventional norms, which apply only for certain cultures 
or in certain contexts.
If we look only at ­children’s conformity to social norms (and how they 
verbally articulate their understanding), it would be difficult to say when 
they understand them as expressing group agreements. But ­there is now 
a good deal of research based on how ­children relate to social norms be­
haviorally. The key age, once again, is three years, although ­there are 
significant developments and deeper understandings that occur ­after this, 
well into school age. The key point is that ­children first begin to under­
stand cultural common ground at around three years of age (see 
Chapter 3). The implication is that before this age they experience indi­
viduals enforcing social norms not as group-­minded expectations or agree­
ments but only as directives from individuals. ­After this age, ­children are 
potentially capable of understanding group-­minded, collective phe­
nomena, and thus social norms as such. And we have power­ful evidence 

256	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
of such understanding starting at around three years of age, when ­children 
start enforcing social norms on ­others themselves, even when they them­
selves have nothing to gain.
Enforcing Social Norms
Norm enforcement may be thought of as a kind of scaled up second-­
personal protest: the enforcer, as representative of the group (instead of 
the collaborative partnership), calls the violator to task for her violation 
of a social norm (instead of a joint commitment) presumed to be in the 
interest of the group (instead of the partnership) and in the cultural 
common ground of the group (instead of the partners’ personal common 
ground). Enforcers of social norms are enforcing from a third-­party 
perspective—­calling a violator to task for an act that does not necessarily 
affect them personally—­suggesting that the enforcer is motivated by 
something more than immediate self-­interest.
From as young as three years of age, ­children ­will intervene to sanc­
tion ­others for social norm violations on behalf of third parties. For ex­
ample, Vaish et al. (2011b) found that if a puppet begins attempting to de­
stroy someone ­else’s property, three-­year-­olds ­will intervene to stop the 
transgression. ­Because the child herself is not being affected, this is not 
second-­personal protest; she is not protesting how “you” are treating “me.” 
What she is protesting is a lack of conformity to the group-­minded social 
norm for how one should treat ­others. This interpretation is bolstered by 
the observation that young ­children also intervene against individuals who 
violate mere conventions (albeit with less emotion; Hardecker et al. 2016). 
Thus, in the first studies of this type, Rakoczy et al. (2008, 2010) found 
that if three-­year-­olds learn that on this ­table we play the game this way 
(while on another ­table we play it differently), and then a puppet plays 
the game the wrong way for this ­table, ­children intervene and stop him, 
even though no harm is being done to anyone. The child is not defending 
­either her own or any other individual’s self-­interest; the immediate goal 
is simply for the wayward actor to conform to the correct way of ­doing 
it. Importantly for our developmental hypothesis, although two-­year-­olds 
in this study did sometimes respond negatively to the puppet, they did not 
protest normatively.
Importantly, in all types of third-­party intervention three-­year-­olds quite 
often use generic normative language, as in “One ­can’t do it like that” or 
even “That’s wrong!” (for more on the normative language ­children use 

	
Social Norms	
257
during norm enforcement, see Köymen et al. 2014a). Such generic language 
suggests that the norm enforcer is not just acting as an individual 
expressing a personal opinion, but rather, as in the case of intentional 
pedagogy, as a kind of representative of the cultural group conveying 
impartial and objective knowledge (in this case about how “we” act). In 
princi­ple, anyone in the culture may enforce social norms; in princi­ple, 
anyone in the culture may be their target (perhaps within some demo­
graphic or contextual specifications); and, in princi­ple, the standards them­
selves are objective (not subjective). Norm enforcers are thus, in effect, 
referring the violator to an objective world of values that he himself may 
consult to see that his be­hav­ior is wrong. Norm enforcement is thus not 
a personal act, but a group-­minded cultural act—­the goal is to bring 
­others into line with how “we” do ­things—­and three-­year-­old ­children 
have begun to ­understand this.
But sometimes they overdo it. Thus, Schmidt et al. (2011) exposed 
three-­year-­old ­children to a conventional action on an artifact in several 
dif­fer­ent experimental conditions. Even when the act was not in any way 
suggested to be an instance of some kind of rule following—­the adult just 
picked up the artifact confidently and performed the act for himself 
(without pedagogy ­toward the child)—­they still intervened when a puppet 
­later acted on the artifact in a dif­fer­ent manner, using normative language 
to correct him. Even more extreme, Schmidt et al. (2016a) did every­thing 
they could to discourage a normative interpretation of what was essen­
tially an everyday intentional action. Nevertheless, they found that when 
three-­year-­old ­children watched someone confidently perform an action 
for themselves (no pedagogy) on “junk objects” (not artifacts), they still 
jumped to a normative interpretation and intervened against someone 
acting differently on that object, using normative language to do so. Young 
­children are thus “promiscuous normativists.” In addition, ­children of this 
same age ­will even intervene to protect the entitlements of ­others, for ex­
ample, when an actor has been entitled by an adult to do X, and then 
another person attempts to prevent him from ­doing it, ­children stand up 
for the rights of the actor, in essence enforcing (second-­order) against the 
unjust enforcement (Schmidt et al. 2013).
Norm enforcement of this type is distinctly group-­minded. Schmidt 
et al. (2012), used the basic norm enforcement experimental paradigm but 
with an in-­group / out-­group manipulation, as well as a moral / conven­
tional manipulation. They found that three-­year-­olds enforced moral 

258	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
norms equally often on both in-­group and out-­group violators, reinforcing 
the finding that ­children of this age see moral norms as universally ap­
plicable. But they enforced conventional norms selectively on in-­group 
members ­because conventional norms apply only to “us,” who should 
know better (the “black sheep” effect). The under­lying rationale was thus 
something like this: our conventional norms ­were created by us for us, 
and so they are good for the group and its functioning, and this makes it 
a good ­thing, a legitimate group-­minded ­thing, for me to enforce them 
on members of our group (whereas we do not care what out-­group indi­
viduals do). Based on this rationale, it is not surprising that Vaish et al. 
(2016) found that five-­year-­olds expressed approval of, and preferred to 
­interact with, individuals who enforced social norms in the group over 
­those who did not (even though they ­were acting somewhat aggressively), 
presumably ­because they saw such enforcement as a good ­thing that sig­
nals concern for the good of the group.
Obviously, young ­children see adults enforcing norms all the time, 
and so we may ask ­whether child enforcers are just imitating adults. One 
point is that in most of the experiments just cited the norms that ­children 
are enforcing are novel, and so they are not imitating enforcement of ­those 
specific norms. But still social learning may be playing some role. ­There 
is one relevant study with preschoolers. Hardecker and Tomasello (2017) 
had young ­children observe an adult enforcing norms for how to operate 
an artifact in three conditions. In one condition, the child operated the 
artifact however she wished, and the adult corrected her and showed the 
correct way (second-­party condition). In another condition, a third party 
operated the artifact, and then the adult corrected him and showed the 
correct way (third-­party condition). In a baseline condition, the adult just 
operated the artifact but without any norm enforcement. Both two-­ and 
three-­year-­old ­children subsequently corrected a new puppet who oper­
ated the artifact incorrectly more if they had witnessed adult norm en­
forcement (of ­either type) than if they had not. But, in addition, three-­
year-­olds also corrected the puppet at high levels in the baseline condition, 
when they had previously observed no norm enforcement at all, and they 
also corrected the puppet in a subsequent scene in which the puppet per­
formed a completely novel action with the artifact. The conclusion is thus 
that two-­year-­olds are capable of socially learning from adults how to in­
sist on a par­tic­u­lar course of action, but three-­year-­olds do not need to 
see adults enforce a norm to enforce it themselves; they already have the 

	
Social Norms	
259
idea that ­people should follow norms, and they generalize readily to novel 
noncanonical actions (for a study of the social learning of punishment, 
see Salali et al. 2015).
In general, then, young ­children are much more knowledgeable and 
competent with social norms than Piaget (1932) ever ­imagined. This has 
been a theme of Turiel (2006) and other social domain theorists for some 
time, and the research reviewed ­here has elaborated the picture consid­
erably. But still, in their first three years of life ­children experience adults 
enforcing norms all the time, and so solely on the basis of their following 
and enforcing social norms (as even enforcing could, at least in some ways, 
come from adults), one could reasonably remain somewhat skeptical 
about the depth of three-­year-­olds’ understanding. But by the time ­children 
are five years of age, such skepticism is no longer reasonable ­because 
­children can now create and enforce their own social norms in novel (play) 
contexts with peers, without any form of adult guidance.
Creating Social Norms
The vast majority of social norms to which young ­children are exposed 
come to them from adults. But how did adults come by them? At what 
point do ­children understand that social norms in fact reflect continuing 
collective agreements? To answer this question it is useful to examine how 
­children create social norms for themselves. Piaget (1932) recognized the 
importance of child-­created rules (that is why he studied child-­created 
games such as marbles and hopscotch), but his studies actually focused 
on situations in which younger ­children learned the rules from older 
­children as experts.
Several recent experiments have observed ­children in situations in 
which ­there are no established norms or rules, adult or other­wise, and 
so, for social control, they invent some for themselves. For example, in a 
recent experiment Göckeritz et al. (2014) exposed triads of five-­year-­old 
­children to a complex game apparatus and only told them that the goal 
was to have the balls come out the end into a bucket. If the ­children asked 
any questions about how the game was or should be played, the experi­
menter professed ignorance. In playing the game repeatedly ­there ­were 
certain recurrent obstacles that the ­children had to overcome (for example, 
the balls kept falling out of a tube on the way). The ­children’s reaction 
to ­these obstacles was not just to try to overcome them but, over time, to 
create explicit rules for how to do this. Thus, when it ­later came time to 

260	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
show naïve individuals how to play the game, the ­children did so using 
generic normative language, as in “You have to do it like this” or “It works 
like this.” They made up their own rules and then enforced them as au­
thorities, suggesting an understanding that self-­created rules are as author­
itative as any other.
But it is pos­si­ble that the ­children in this experiment actually thought 
about ­things in a slightly dif­fer­ent way. ­Because the apparatus was pre­
sumably set up by adults ahead of time, the ­children might have thought 
that ­there ­were indeed proper rules for how one played with the appa­
ratus, even though the adult in the room did not know them. Hardecker 
et al. (2017) thus simply gave groups of three five-­year-­olds a set of “junk” 
objects (for example, sticks and a box) and explic­itly told them that ­there 
­were no goals or rules; they should just play as they wished. If the ­children 
asked how they should play, the experimenter said that ­there ­were no 
rules. But even in this situation, the ­children in­ven­ted their own rules (for 
example, a rule about where one must stand in a throw-­sticks-­into-­the-­box 
game) and continued to pass them on to naïve peers in an explic­itly nor­
mative fashion. They knew for certain that they had in­ven­ted the rules 
­whole cloth, and yet still they saw them as normative and binding for all 
who would play the game. This suggests at least some understanding of 
social norms as based on social agreement.
But five-­year-­olds do not understand social norms in a totally adult-­like 
way. ­There was another condition in this experiment. Hardecker et al. 
(2017) had adults teach ­children the exact same rules that the peers had 
just made up (in a yoked design), and, as expected, the ­children again en­
forced them on naïve ­others in an explic­itly normative fashion. The dif­
ference between ­children’s be­hav­ior in the peer and adult conditions was 
that when, ­later, a naïve individual balked at the rule (experimentally con­
trolled), five-­year-­olds ­were more flexible in changing the rules that they 
had made up themselves with peers as opposed to the adult rules, per­
haps suggesting that ­children at this age still view adult authority as at least 
a partial source of normative force. In contrast, seven-­year-­olds saw their 
own self-­created rules and the adult-­prescribed rules as equally rigid; nor­
mative force comes only from the social agreement to which individuals 
bind themselves, no ­matter who that is. (For some similar findings, see 
Riggs and Young 2016.)
An in­ter­est­ing variation on this theme is provided by Grüneisen and 
Tomasello (2017). They set up five-­year-­old ­children in a conflict situa­

	
Social Norms	
261
tion (a “chicken” game from game theory). They found that ­children 
of this age could come up themselves with vari­ous kinds of rules and 
norms that ended up benefiting both ­children in the long run (for 
­example, a turn-­taking rule) and that served to obviate costly negotia­
tions and arguments across repeated playings of the game. In a follow-
up study, Grüneisen and Tomasello (forthcoming) had groups of four 
five-­year-­olds discuss what to do when pairs of them would ­later face 
the same dilemma situation (again a “chicken” game). ­Because they 
did not know which dyads would play at any point, a turn-­taking 
­convention was not pos­si­ble. In this situation, ­children made up rules 
like “The blue one always goes first” or they used rock-­paper-­scissors 
to decide on each turn. This situation mirrors more closely the situa­
tion in society in general, in which individuals encounter ­others with 
whom they have no specific agreement but who presumably know and 
re­spect the rules. Even preschool ­children can adapt to such situations 
by creating their own impartial rules for use at some indeterminate 
­future time.
Three-­year-­olds have never been observed to create with peers a social 
norm or rule. But ­there are two relevant studies. First, Wyman et al. (2009) 
found that in pretense, once three-­year-­olds had designated the pretense 
status of an object with an adult (for example, this stick is a ­horse), they 
objected if someone then treated it as something ­else. ­Because ­children 
at this age clearly understand that they helped to create the pretense des­
ignation, enforcement of deviations suggests some understanding that 
normative social rules can be the product of social agreement. Second, 
Schmidt et al. (2016c) looked at how three-­year-­olds understood the pro­
cess by which a social norm is formed. In two experiments, three-­year-­olds 
had the opportunity to agree upon arbitrary game norms with several 
puppets (they ­were encouraged to agree). When a puppet ­later ­violated 
the norm, ­children enforced it normatively only on a violator who had 
actually entered into the agreement (not bystanders who had not 
agreed). Interestingly, any dissent during the norm-­setting pro­cess (even 
if ­there was a majority of 90 ­percent agreeing on one way of ­doing ­things) 
prevented ­children from seeing a norm as established for anyone at all. It 
would thus seem that even three-­year-­olds understand something of the 
role of agreement in establishing mutually binding social norms, although 
their notion of norm formation is rather rigid and assumes una­nim­i­ty 
among all concerned.

262	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
In ­these studies ­children are making up their own social norms out of 
nothing. From the beginning, they enforce ­these norms on ­others in much 
the same way that they enforce adult norms, that is, using the normative 
language of should, must, and ­ought. By school age, they even have an adult-­
like understanding that social norms can be changed if every­one agrees 
to it, no ­matter their source. This developmental trajectory—­established 
by studies using behavioral rather than verbal methods—­pushes down by 
several years the age at which ­children deal competently and flexibly with 
social norms (for example, see Kalish and Sabbagh 2007).
Individual and Cultural Variation
In the context of life in a cultural group, developing ­children are ­under 
strong pressure to conform, both in order to coordinate smoothly with 
other group members and in order to display their group identity and loy­
alty. Dif­fer­ent cultural groups have created dif­fer­ent social norms for 
their par­tic­u­lar local circumstances, so of course young ­children must in­
dividually learn the par­tic­u­lar local norms of their culture.
But ­there has been ­little research into how ­children in dif­fer­ent cultures 
enforce and relate to their par­tic­u­lar norms. In one recent study, Kann­
giesser et al. (forthcoming) found that ­children from three dif­fer­ent cul­
tural contexts (two being small-­scale and basically nonliterate) enforced 
social norms on naïve ­others in the form of game rules that they had just 
learned from adults. Gampe and Daum (2018) found some evidence of 
cross-­cultural variability in the way that young ­children go about norm 
enforcement, suggesting learning from adults. ­There are no studies, to 
our knowledge, of young ­children creating social norms with peers in dif­
fer­ent cultural contexts, although ­there are many ethnographic reports 
of older ­children inventing vari­ous kinds of games.
Justice
As we saw in Chapter 8, by around three years of age young ­children are 
beginning to develop a sense of fairness in dealing with par­tic­u­lar ­others, 
especially collaborative partners. But collective intentionality and social 
norms are not just about individuals relating to other individuals but rather 
about the collectively agreed-­upon ways of behaving in a group. In this 
context, ­children ­after three years of age also begin developing what we 

	
Social Norms	
263
may call a sense of justice, which may be defined as a sense of fairness 
applied not just to individuals but to the members of a group, taking into 
account group interests (for example, showing compassion for a thief 
might in some cases be warranted, but it also might set a bad pre­ce­dent 
for other group members ­going forward). Like fairness, justice always in­
volves, in one way or another, some sense of equality, and the self has no 
special priority. But ­because we are dealing with the larger cultural group 
and its members, and often with noncooperative acts that have already 
occurred, justice often involves an especially complex balancing of the 
books.
For millennia, social theorists have distinguished two main forms of 
justice: retributive (or commutative) justice and distributive justice. Re­
tributive justice is about actions: how perpetrators should be punished for 
antisocial acts and how victims should be compensated, taking into ac­
count the needs of the larger social group ­going forward. Distributive jus­
tice is about resources: how food, money (in some cultures) and other 
basic resources are distributed among members of the social group based 
on every­thing from ­simple group membership to relative need to one or 
another form of merit, complicated in some cultures by norms estab­
lishing and regulating private owner­ship of resources. Young ­children 
are just beginning to develop senses of retributive and distributive justice 
during the late preschool period.
Retributive Justice and Punishment
The major way that nonhuman animals stop a perpetrator is aggression: 
he is stealing my food or harming my child, so I attack him to make him 
stop. Punishment requires, in addition, an eye to the ­future: I wish for him 
to quit stealing my food and harming my child altogether, so I inflict pain 
on him now so that he ­will think twice before ­doing it again. In their purest 
forms, neither aggression nor punishment involves social norms or jus­
tice. For that, we need a way to balance the rights of individuals in the 
social group—­some social norms that define the “right” way to punish 
or to compensate—so that, for example, the punishment fits the crime or 
compensates the victim fairly.
As noted previously, ­great apes retaliate against ­those who harm 
them, but they do not punish actors for harmful acts against third parties 
(Riedl et al. 2012). ­Because a third-­party, disinterested, impartial stance is 
crucial for any sense of justice—­all individuals, including the self, are 

264	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
conceptualized as more or less equal participants in group life—it would 
seem that ­great apes have no sense of justice. By contrast, third-­party pun­
ishment, in one form or another, is a ­human universal. Marlowe et al. 
(2008) pres­ent evidence that some con­temporary hunter-­gatherers rarely 
engage in norm enforcement or third-­party punishment; they mostly just 
move away from norm violators. But the fact is they do punish violators 
when leaving is not an option, and they punish violators reputationally 
through gossip on a regular basis (Marlowe, personal communication).
Young ­children from three years of age intervene or protest when 
­others are about to harm a third party, and they protest against norm vi­
olations, even when they are only conventional (see the previous section). 
But retributive justice is about actually punishing the perpetrator in a way 
that balances out the suffering to ­others he has caused. Piaget (1932) in­
terviewed preschool and school-­age ­children about how peers who ­were 
naughty in vari­ous ways should be dealt with. His classic finding is that 
preschoolers believe that the punishment should reflect the harm done 
(for example, the number of cups broken) regardless of ­whether the per­
petrator intended that outcome, whereas school-­age ­children privilege the 
perpetrator’s intentions (for example, ­whether the child intended to break 
the cups or not). Cushman et al. (2013) argue and pres­ent evidence that 
­children actually have two competing tendencies: to assign moral blame 
on the basis of intentions but to assign punishment on the basis of damage 
done. They find a shift in ­children’s verbal judgments from five to eight 
years of age in the relative weights that they assign to ­these two competing 
tendencies.
However, once again, verbal interviews are not the only way to assess 
­children’s moral judgments. Kachel et al. (2017) thus had a partner in a 
collaboration perform his role poorly but with dif­fer­ent intentions. When 
a partner neglected to perform his role ­because he selfishly preferred an­
other game, ­children protested normatively. But when he was ignorant 
of how his role was played, ­children did not blame him but rather tried 
to teach him. And when he accidentally caused collaborative failure, they 
did not blame him at all. It would seem that, despite their shortcomings 
in verbal interviews, even three-­year-­olds take into account the intentions 
of a violator in their moral judgments, at least in the context of a collab­
orative activity.
From an evolutionary perspective, a number of recent studies have 
investigated the possibility that young ­children have such a strong ten­

	
Social Norms	
265
dency to balance the books that they ­will pay a cost to punish violators. 
Several studies, for example, have found that ­children from four to six years 
of age ­will actually sacrifice resources (or pay some other costs) in order 
to make sure that a perpetrator gets punished for his acts (for example, 
Robbins and Rochat 2011; Kenward and Östh 2012; McAuliffe et al. 2015). 
Kenward and Östh (2015) found that the ­children would do this only if 
they could do so anonymously, showing that they clearly understood that 
punishing ­others carries with it some risk of retaliation. Jordan et al. (2014) 
report, in addition, that ­children in the same age range are more likely to 
punish members of an out-­group than members of the in-­group. And in 
a recent study Riedl et al. (2015) found that even three-­year-­olds ­will punish 
­those who attempt to steal ­others’ ­things. Indeed, they ­were just as likely 
to intervene against someone who stole a third party’s toy as someone 
who stole theirs. They intervened especially often to return the stolen 
goods to the victim, thus restoring the situation to its previous rightful 
status (so-­called restorative justice).
Punishment and enforcing social norms are obviously similar pro­cesses. 
­These studies of third-­party punishment show that preschool ­children ­will 
even pay a cost to punish third parties, presumably, as in the case of en­
forcing social norms, out of some sense of justice to the group at large. 
The key is that every­one is treated equitably, and when that is ­violated 
order must be restored.
Distributive Justice and Owner­ship
In Chapter 8, we documented that ­children as young as three years of age 
­will systematically divide the spoils of a collaborative effort among them­
selves fairly—­that is, mostly, equally. By around five years of age, they 
begin seeing every­one in their in-­group as, in a sense, collaborative part­
ners, so they share more or less equally with them all, other ­things being 
equal. But other ­things are often not equal. Although young ­children have 
a definite equality bias for in-­group members, they can take other ­factors 
into account, especially need and merit (which makes their judgments 
not about equality but about so-­called equity). For example, Svetlova and 
Brownell (forthcoming) found that when three-­ and five-­year-­old ­children 
­were given the task of dividing resources between a needy puppet and a 
neutral puppet, they gave more to the needy puppet. They only did this, 
however, if they ­were given an unequal number of resources to share; 
with an equal number they divided equally. Also, Engelmann et al. (2016b) 

266	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
found that five-­year-­old ­children recognized another child’s need to the 
degree that they overcame peer pressure to conform and instead shared 
with her. With regard to merit, Hamann et al. (2014) had three-­year-­old 
­children work together to acquire resources, but the apparatus was such 
that one child had to work much harder. If equal resources ­were the re­
sult, once again they distributed equally. But if unequal resources ­were 
the result, the harder-­working child systematically got more (see also Bau­
mard et al. 2012; Kanngiesser and Warneken 2012).
The overall developmental pattern of ­children’s sense of fairness and 
justice in sharing resources, then, suggests that collaboration is the natu­ral 
home for an equality preference, but with their emerging sense of mem­
bership in a cultural group, ­children believe that every­one in the group is 
deserving of equal resources; and further, in some cases need and merit 
should be taken into account. But a huge mitigating ­factor (perhaps es­
pecially in Western, industrialized cultures) is the rights bestowed on the 
­owners of private property. Many animal species have a sense of posses­
sion in the sense that an individual has something ­under its immediate 
physical control. The possessing individual ­will not give up the resources 
without a fight, and other individuals know this. But possession is not 
owner­ship. Owner­ship is a cooperative arrangement among individuals 
in a society who agree to re­spect one another’s property; it is not a rela­
tion between a person and a ­thing, as is possession, but rather it is a (co­
operative) relation between persons with re­spect to a ­thing. As such, owner­ship 
is very likely a uniquely ­human cooperative arrangement. And although 
its nature may differ across cultures, in all ­human socie­ties the division of 
resources is accompanied by at least some norms establishing private 
owner­ship (for example, at the very least pertaining to one’s immediate 
belongings such as clothing), and this re­spect for owner­ship is a coopera­
tive arrangement that every­one is motivated to keep in place.
A number of recent studies have explored young ­children’s earliest 
understanding of owner­ship. In one line of research, it has been shown 
that preschool-­age ­children are capable of inferring who is the owner of 
an object by relying on such ­things as first possession (for example, who 
holds an object at the beginning of a story), control of permission (for 
example, who says ­whether ­others can use an object), who created an 
object through creative ­labor, or more generally on the object’s history, 
not just when personally witnessed but also when obtained via ­others’ 
verbal testimony (for example, Friedman and Neary 2008; Neary et al. 

	
Social Norms	
267
2009; Kanngiesser et al. 2010; Neary and Friedman 2013). In addition, in 
a verbal interview study, Kim and Kalish (2009) found that five-­year-­old 
­children can talk coherently about the normative dimensions of prop­
erty, including such ­things as who (owner or bystander) gets to decide for 
certain objects: who can use them, who can sell them, or who can de­
stroy them. Rossano et al. (2011) investigated the normative dimensions 
of owner­ship behaviorally. In their study, two-­ and three-­year-­old ­children 
­were shown that a par­tic­u­lar object belonged to a par­tic­u­lar adult; in a 
dif­fer­ent condition, the object belonged to the child. A puppet then pro­
ceeded to announce that he would take that object home with him in his 
bag or, possibly, throw it away into the trash can. Two-­year-­old ­children 
objected when it was their property being purloined, but only three-­
year-­old ­children demonstrated a deeper understanding of owner­ship 
and property by protesting even when it was the adult’s property at risk. 
Quite often, the ­children’s interventions and protests ­were framed in 
normative language.
­These studies focus essentially on ­children’s understanding of the owner 
and her rights. Recently, several other studies have focused on ­children’s 
sense that they themselves must re­spect the owner­ship rights of ­others. 
One set involved both ­children and chimpanzees. Thus, Rossano et al. (in 
preparation) had both ­children and chimpanzees watch as a conspecific 
was raking in food for herself. The subject then had the opportunity to 
take that food or ­else other food nearby. The chimpanzees chose indis­
criminately. But ­children from three years of age systematically avoided 
the food being manipulated by the actor—­that is, her food. Similarly, 
Kanngiesser et al. (forthcoming) had child pairs and chimpanzee pairs in­
teract with an apparatus with two distinct sides. Each member of the 
pair worked from her side to dislodge objects, which then fell into a box 
between the pair. Five-­year-­old ­children systematically avoided taking the 
objects effortfully obtained by the other child—­that is, her objects (even 
though they ­were never labeled as such by anyone). They did this even in 
a condition in which the other child exited, leaving her effortfully obtained 
objects ­behind. By contrast, the chimpanzees took objects indiscriminately, 
no ­matter who had worked to obtain them and no ­matter who was 
pres­ent. Fi­nally, in a variation on this theme, Rossano et al. (2015) found 
that five-­year-­olds showed re­spect for the property rights that ­others had 
signaled via actions such as piling toys in one corner of the room. Indeed, 
­these ­children ­were even skillful at creative ways of marking owner­ship 

268	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
for themselves; for example, they might place their sweater on a chair so 
that the next child to come along would know the chair was theirs.
Together, ­these vari­ous studies of young ­children’s sense of distribu­
tive justice and property illustrate quite clearly that as ­children are ap­
proaching school age they are beginning to understand the basic princi­
ples not just of fairness to individuals but of justice at work in a cooperative 
society. Within potential contextual and demographic constraints, 
every­one is to be treated as equally deserving of resources, and ­there are 
social norms that govern how resources are justly apportioned. And when 
­people are accorded rights of owner­ship by the society’s norms, ­these 
carry normative force as well and must be respected.
Cross-­Cultural Variability
Early in development, ­there are few if any cross-­cultural differences in the 
most basic senses of retributive and distributed justice. However, in the 
study by Blake et al. (2015), described in Chapter 8, the differences between 
­children in dif­fer­ent cultures began emerging in ­middle childhood, pos­
sibly ­because it is at this age that ­children are learning the specific owner­
ship norms of their culture (for evidence, see House and Tomasello 2018). 
A study providing especially strong support for this view is that of House 
et al. (2013), who studied ­children from three to fourteen years of age 
across six diverse cultural contexts. They found that when sharing with 
­others was noncostly, ­children became more generous over age in all socie­
ties, but when the sharing with ­others was costly, ­children became less 
generous over age. Then, during ­middle childhood, ­children began to con­
form to the sharing norms of their par­tic­u­lar culture, reflecting differ­
ences in the way ­those cultures weighted such ­things as need and merit.
Of par­tic­u­lar interest in this regard is a study by Schäfer et al. (2015). 
They had pairs of ­children from three dif­fer­ent cultures (one Western, in­
dustrialized culture, one foraging / egalitarian culture, and one geronto­
cratic farming culture) “fish” for resources with magnetized sticks and 
then pool the captured resources. The experimenters rigged it so that one 
child ended up being much more productive than the other. When ­children 
­were then instructed to divide up the resources between them however 
they saw fit, school-­age Western ­children divided resources among col­
laborative partners proportional to the work productivity of each, whereas 
­children of the same age from the two small-­scale socie­ties focused their 
divisions differently: ­children from the egalitarian culture focused more 

	
Social Norms	
269
on absolute equality, whereas ­children from the gerontocratic culture ­were 
quite variable in their strategies (perhaps ­because they had ­little experi­
ence making such decisions in daily life).
With regard to property, it is well-­known from anthropological research 
that the sense of private property in some cultures is much more restricted 
than in modern cap­i­tal­ist cultures. Kanngiesser et al. (2015) observed 
something of this difference in a study investigating the tendency of five-­ 
to nine-­year-­old ­children from two dif­fer­ent cultural contexts (one 
Western, and one small-­scale and nonliterate) to infer owner­ship from first 
touch. They found that ­there was a significant delay in the small-­scale cul­
ture to use first touch as a cue to owner­ship (from age five to age nine). 
The difference was readily attributable to the dif­fer­ent role of private prop­
erty in the lives of young ­children: in the small-­scale culture, young 
­children have far fewer objects of owner­ship with which to deal. In a study 
cited in the previous subsection, Kanngiesser et al. (forthcoming) found 
that ­children in all of the three cultures they studied respected the prop­
erty of ­others to some degree, suggesting that property as a cooperative 
agreement among members of a cultural group is a ­human universal. 
However, they found some quantitative differences across cultures in 
­children’s re­spect for property as well. By around school age, then, all 
­children re­spect the property of ­others, but this re­spect manifests itself 
in dif­fer­ent ways depending on cultural circumstances and norms.
Becoming Group-­Minded
Most primates, including ­great apes, live in social groups and are more or 
less unfriendly to outsiders. But ­humans live in cultural groups, and being 
a cooperative member of a cultural group means favoring one’s group 
over ­others and valuing the group’s social norms as regulators of good 
group functioning. When someone breaks a social norm in a way that 
threatens the group’s good functioning, one should sanction them and try 
to bring them back into line (even if one is not directly affected oneself). 
When ­there is a conflict of interest between an individual group member 
and the group and its functioning as a ­whole, one is obliged to seek a just 
solution that takes into account both the individual’s and the group’s in­
terests. In ­these ways, young ­children gradually transform from more or 
less passive consumers of culture into active, group-­minded contributors 

270	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
to its smooth functioning. This new type of group-­mindedness represents 
a fundamental transformation in ­great ape social relations.
Theoretical Explanations
I have made the bold proposal that young ­children do not understand 
themselves as members of a social group ­until they are three years of age. 
Before this age, when they are in a group they interact with individuals 
only; they do not understand the group as a cooperative entity in itself. At 
three years of age ­children begin to understand cooperative groups based 
on their emerging skills and motivations of collective intentionality. But 
they do not recognize strangers as in-­group members based only on simi­
larity of appearance (for example, in the minimal groups paradigm) ­until 
around five years of age. So from three to five years of age young ­children 
are coming to understand ever more deeply the dual-­level structure of a 
cultural group and its individual members as structured by the members’ 
collective intentionality. Although it is certain that socialization and peda­
gogy play impor­tant roles in ­children’s attitudes ­toward in-­group and out-­
groups ­later in this developmental pathway, it is difficult to imagine that 
their capacity for group-­mindedness itself is taught or socialized.
Not by accident, three to five years is also the age at which young 
­children are coming to understand social norms and how they work. So­
cial norms are group-­minded phenomena of collective intentionality, so 
as ­children’s understanding of groups progresses so does their under­
standing of social norms. And, as I have argued, enforcing and creating 
social norms—­especially when applied from a third-­party stance—do not 
in any straightforward way emanate from selfish motives but rather imply 
a group-­minded motivation to facilitate the smooth functioning of the 
group and its activities.
­There is one proposal, however, that enforcing social norms may not 
be cooperative at all. Drawing on the fact that tattling in young ­children 
is mainly done not by subordinate ­children but by dominant ­children, 
Hawley and Geldhof (2012) view moral norms as “tools of the social 
elite.” In essence, the power­ful coerce the weak into accepting their rules. 
However true this may be about modern adults in some societal contexts, 
my position would be that it is absolutely not the case in young ­children’s 
enforcement and creation of social norms. They quite often do it from a 
third-­party perspective when their interests are not at stake, and, as we 

	
Social Norms	
271
­shall see in the next chapter, they feel guilty when they themselves 
transgress.
Figure 9.1 depicts my account of the pro­cess in the current context, 
considering group-­mindedness as a motivational capacity (top of dia­
gram), maturing as a dimension of collective intentionality at three years 
of age. It motivates the individual to take into account the welfare of the 
in-­group and its members, and to re­spect and identify with its collective 
expectations as embodied in its social norms—­and even to create norms 
when they are needed to facilitate group functioning. The diagram focuses 
on ­children’s changing relation to social norms, as they follow, enforce, 
and create them.
Before three years of age, toddlers are, of course, subject to social 
norms, but they are only understanding them as directives coming from 
individuals not as collective group expectations. Following ­these norms—­
even when they are not fully understood—­has a natu­ral grounding in 
­children’s tendency to conform to the directives of ­others (Figure 9.1, first 
box). Par­tic­u­lar social norms are culturally learned, but our focus ­here is 
on ­children’s ability to understand social norms as collective group 
expectations—­agreed to and committed to by all—­that they re­spect pre­
cisely ­because of their group status.
When three-­year-­olds start enforcing social norms, including on third 
parties from a noninvolved position, this can have an ele­ment of social 
learning and conformity as well: they are ­doing what adults do when they 
enforce norms. But, unlike two-­year-­olds, three-­year-­olds do not need an 
Joint Intentionality
Collective Intentionality
S-R: normative
Cog: objectivity
GROUP
LIFE
5 years
4 years
2P Protest
3 years
2 years
1 year
0
Conformity
Mot: group-
mindedness
FOLLOWING
ADULT
REQUESTS
ENFORCING
SOCIAL NORMS
CREATING
SOCIAL
NORMS
DISTR. AND
RETR.
JUSTICE
Figure 9.1 ​The ontoge­ne­tic emergence of young ­children’s understanding of so­
cial norms. Abbreviations: Cog = cognitive; DISTR = distributive; Mot = motiva­
tion; RETR = retributive; S-­R = executive self-­regulation; 2P = second-­personal.

272	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
adult model: they infer a generic norm from a single observation of an 
intentional action; they enforce that norm with no input from adults; and 
they use normative language in their enforcement. ­These facts suggest 
that three-­year-­olds are indeed coming to understand the group-­minded 
nature of social norms and how they work. The fact that ­children enforce 
conventional norms more strongly on in-­group than out-­group members 
also suggests a group-­minded understanding of norms. In the diagram 
we depict three-­year-­olds’ enforcement of social norms as having not 
only group-­minded and normative inputs, but also an input from their 
previously developed tendencies to engage in second-­personal protest. 
Second-­personal protest is a natu­ral precursor ­because the be­hav­ior is 
similar—­displaying resentment or indignation when someone behaves 
noncooperatively—­but it occurs when the disrespect is ­toward the self. 
Analogously, young ­children’s enforcing of social norms is a display of re­
sentment or indignation ­toward a disrespecting perpetrator, but in this 
case the target of disrespect is a group member or the group as such. 
Second-­personal protest is transformed by group-­minded and normative 
attitudes into the enforcement of social norms.
By the time they enter school, young ­children are creating their own 
social norms with peers (Figure 9.1, third box). True, this is mostly in game 
contexts; in real life their lives are still governed by adults and their norms. 
But in play and games, young ­children show the capacity by five years of 
age to make up their own conventions and norms ­either to help in their 
collective instrumental success or to help the game go better and be more 
fun. When newcomers violate ­these norms, the creators enforce them 
with normative language, which suggests that they do not just see them 
as somehow defective adult norms as having the same normative status 
as ­those of adults. Five-­year-­olds are more flexible in changing their self-­
created norms than ones coming from adults, but, at least to some de­
gree, they see them both as potentially mutable social contracts. By seven 
years of age, ­there is no difference between self-­created and adult norms.
Fi­nally, as part of this pro­cess of becoming group-­minded, young 
­children’s moral judgments begin to coordinate individual interests with 
group interests: they develop a sense of justice (Figure 9.1, the other third 
box). For instance, an individual child might be particularly needy, but ac­
commodating her would set a bad pre­ce­dent that might undermine 
­future group functioning. To make a judgment in this case, one must take 
both sets of interests into account and balance them in some way. Thus, 

	
Social Norms	
273
although young ­children judge norm violators based on their intentions—
it is only a bad act if the actor intended the effect—­they believe that just 
punishments take into account an act’s effects, even if not intended. Pre­
sumably, the focus on effects when assigning punishment reflects some 
kind of consideration of the group’s ­future functioning. In terms of dis­
tributive justice, it is during the late preschool period that ­children begin 
to fully understand individual owner­ship as one ele­ment in the coopera­
tive arrangement of the group that must be continually asserted by the 
individual and recognized by the group. Owner­ship is a kind of coopera­
tive and group-­minded form of possession. ­Because the notion of owner­
ship varies fairly significantly across cultures, one might assume that the 
attitudes in par­tic­u­lar cultures about individual rights are an impor­tant 
learning component in this development.
Overall, we do not think that ­children’s group-­mindedness is something 
they learn from adults; it reflects the maturation of capacities for collec­
tive intentionality. But the way this capacity manifests in dif­fer­ent behav­
ioral domains definitely does require learning and social co-­construction. 
Not only do ­children learn par­tic­u­lar social norms from adult enforcement 
activities, but they imitatively learn at least some ways of enforcement 
from ­those adult activities. But this kind of learning cannot, I would argue, 
provide the child with an understanding of social norms as collective 
group agreements. When ­children create social norms for themselves, 
they endow them with the same normative status as ­those enforced on 
them by adults. ­Children construct their understanding of social norms 
as their group-­minded and normative capacities mature, and they struc­
ture their social interactions with, and learning from, both adults and 
peers. And it is in interacting with ­others in group contexts that ­children 
construct, or co-­construct with ­others, new ways of relating to ­others as 
fellow group members, including as tempered by a group-­minded sense 
of justice.
Social and Moral Implications
By three years of age young ­children not only understand ­others as second-­
personal agents, worthy of re­spect and fairness, but they are also begin­
ning to understand them as fellow members of a cultural group subject 
to the same, mutually accepted, social norms (whereas out-­group mem­
bers are not). By five or six years of age ­children understand ­others as 
members of a cultural group based on similarity of appearance alone, and 

274	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
they treat every­one in their group as worthy of just treatment from them­
selves and the group. Preschool ­children already ­favor ­those in their cul­
tural group, and they also expect them to ­favor ­those in their cultural 
group as well as to re­spect the group’s social norms. All this reflects 
­children’s growing understanding of collective social products such as so­
cial norms and conventions and how they work, based on maturing ca­
pacities for collective intentionality and group-­mindedness.
As ­children’s skills and motivation of collective intentionality begin to 
blossom, they regulate themselves not only jointly with ­those with whom 
they are collaborating in joint intentional activities, but also by the social 
norms of the group. However, ­these social norms are often conflicting—­
moral dilemmas are a fundamental fact of ­human social life—­and ­children 
must find ways of dealing with that fact. So they begin to create their own 
normative standards, grounded in ­those of the culture but sometimes 
­going beyond ­these to more general princi­ples that work in their lives. This 
pro­cess often requires ­children to give reasons to ­others that justify their 
non-­normative actions, and ­these justifying reasons become a key part of 
their moral identity.

W ​10 ​w
Moral Identity
In many primates, individuals evaluate ­others for their suitability as so­
cial partners. Several hundred thousand years ago, as ­humans began 
moving ­toward a more cooperative and interdependent lifestyle, the eval­
uation pro­cess intensified (see Chapter 2). To survive and thrive, ­human 
individuals had to choose good collaborative partners and, crucially, to be 
chosen by ­others as good collaborative partners themselves.
But the pro­cess did not just intensify; it changed. Early ­humans, but 
not other apes, came to understand how the pro­cess of partner evalua­
tion and choice worked, in the sense that they now knew that ­others ­were 
also evaluating and choosing them. At that point it became impor­tant for 
individuals to actively manage the impression they ­were making on ­others, 
to proj­ect to ­others in the group an identity as someone who was coop­
eratively competent and trustworthy. And ­because individuals played the 
role of both judger and judged—­with “our” shared standards in the group 
applying in both cases—­they came to evaluate themselves in the same way 
that they evaluated ­others, thus creating an internalized moral identity. 
And so was born a species that executively self-­regulated its own beliefs 
and actions normatively—­that is, morally.
From an early age, even before their first birthday, infants engage in pro­
cesses of social evaluation. By three years of age ­children are making 
moral judgments: judgments that do not just express their personal pref­
erences but assess how ­others meet the objective normative standards that 
“we” all share. By four or five years of age ­children discover that ­others 
are judging them in this same way, using the same normative standards, 
so they engage in active attempts at self-­presentation to influence ­those 
judgments. But one cannot escape one’s own watchful eye, so ­children 
of this age also reverse roles and begin to evaluate themselves in the same 

276	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
way that they evaluate ­others, sometimes resulting in feelings of guilt for 
not acting in accordance with the shared standards.
Six-­ and seven-­year-­old ­children have begun to understand that they 
must make their own moral decisions—­adjudicating between selfish mo­
tives, sympathetic motives, fairness motives, and conformity to vari­ous 
norms—­and in so ­doing they begin to form their own social and moral 
identities. They make ­these moral decisions in ways that they can justify 
to ­others in the community and to themselves by giving reasons. ­These 
justifications express to ­others, “even if I have acted in ways that are ques­
tionable, I have done so for a good reason, so I still share the group’s 
normative standards and values.” Internalizing the reason-­giving pro­cess 
transforms social self-­regulation into normative self-­governance via one’s 
cooperative identity: “I now feel that I simply must do certain ­things in 
order to continue being the person that I am.” We all in the community 
share a hierarchy of values that forms the touchstone for how we view 
one another and ourselves as moral beings.
By the end of the preschool period, ­children begin to have a persona, 
a social and moral identity, both in the community and for themselves. 
This is the natu­ral outcome when individuals live in a cooperative social 
group in which they serve—in some cases with regard to the very same 
act—as both judger and judged. This is the natu­ral outcome when indi­
viduals live in a cooperative social group in which they depend totally on 
their social relationships with ­others, and any change in their social or 
moral identity can affect their standing in ­those all-­important relationships. 
To become a member of the culture in good standing, ­children must learn 
to act responsibly with re­spect to “us” and our norms.
Our focus in this chapter, then, is on ­children’s sense of who they are 
as cooperative and moral beings: their self-­presentation to ­others, their 
self-­evaluations of themselves, their sense of moral identity and respon­
sibility in the moral community, and their use of reason-­giving discourse 
to preserve and bolster their cooperative and moral identities.
From Apes: Social Evaluation
In all social species, individuals do best if they can confine their social in­
teractions to ­others who ­will benefit rather than harm them. Basic forms 
of social evaluation are thus impor­tant in the lives of many social species.

	
Moral Identity	
277
­Great Ape Social Evaluation
­Great apes engage in partner choice when choosing co­ali­tion partners for 
dominance competition. In this case, the choice is relatively straightfor­
ward: find the most dominant individual who ­will be your partner. ­There 
is thus social se­lection for dominance. In their group hunting for mon­
keys, chimpanzees do not ­really engage in active partner choice, as far as 
we know, ­because the situation does not allow it (hunting commences 
upon chance encounters with a prey). ­There is thus not social se­lection 
for cooperation. Nevertheless, in an experimental situation chimpanzees 
used a fairly small amount of social experience to determine who would be 
the best partner—­mostly the one with whom they had had past success—
in a collaborative activity for resources (Melis et al. 2006c).
In another experimental situation, chimpanzees and orangutans ob­
served a “nice” ­human, who had performed prosocial acts, and a “mean” 
­human, who had performed antisocial acts. In the first study, the ­human 
was nice or mean to the ape herself; in the second study the ­human was 
nice or mean to another ­human. In both of ­these studies, both species 
­later chose to approach and beg food from the nice ­human rather than 
the mean ­human (Herrmann et  al. 2013). ­These results make sense 
­because, again, cooperators should do every­thing they can to associate 
only with other cooperators. Fi­nally, Schmelz et al. (2017) found that chim­
panzees acted prosocially ­toward individuals who had taken a risk in 
order to cooperate with them—­that is, individuals who valued their 
cooperation.
We have no information on the age at which ­great apes begin to make 
social evaluations in the pro­cess of partner choice. All the relevant experi­
mental studies are with adults or older juveniles.
­Human ­Children
From a surprisingly early age, ­human infants also engage in pro­cesses of 
social evaluation. For example, one-­year-­old and younger infants already 
prefer to interact with individuals (actually puppets) who are “helpers” 
versus “hinderers” (for example, Kuhlmeier et al. 2003; Hamlin et al. 2007). 
Infants have been shown to make such social evaluations in a variety of 
complex situations in which apes have never been tested, except for Kru­
penye and Hare’s (2018) study with bonobos, who preferred the hinderer! 
Three-­ and four-­year-­old ­children ­will distribute more resources to a helper 
versus a hinderer (Kenward and Dahl 2011). The negative version of this 

278	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
same pro­cess is avoiding bad partners. ­Human ­children in the same age 
range ­will selectively withhold help and resources from an individual 
whom they perceive to be somehow “meaner” than another (Vaish et al. 
2010).
But beyond just choosing or preferring one partner to another, during 
the preschool years young ­children also begin judging potential partners 
morally, using impartial normative standards. This was the focus of Pia­
get’s (1932) seminal monograph, of course, in which he interviewed pre­
school and school-­age ­children about hy­po­thet­i­cal scenarios involving 
moral transgressions of vari­ous kinds. Kohlberg’s (1969) work on stages 
of moral development followed in the same theoretical and methodolog­
ical vein. Researchers in the social domains paradigm have used some­
what dif­fer­ent verbal methods to determine that young ­children’s under­
standing of the bases of moral judgments is much more adult-­like than 
­either Piaget or Kohlberg believed (for a review, see Turiel 2006).
Clearly ­children’s verbal moral judgments go beyond anything ­great 
apes might do. But in the current account we want to focus on ­children’s 
(possibly implicit) moral judgments that underlie their behavioral decision-­
making. And ­here we want to focus on how ­these judgments work in the 
context of partner choice, and especially on how ­children’s be­hav­ior is 
affected by the knowledge that they are themselves being judged.
Self-­Presentation and Self-­Conscious Emotions
In comparing the social lives of ­great apes and ­human ­children, one dif­
ference that stands out with special salience is ­children’s sense of self as 
seen through the eyes of ­others. Young ­children do not just judge ­others 
for their cooperativeness, but they also worry about how ­others are 
judging them for their cooperativeness. ­Great ape dominance displays—­for 
example, a male chimpanzee puffing itself up and stomping around in 
front of ­others—­are aimed at influencing ­others. But the pro­cess is a fairly 
direct one of threatening and intimidating and so trying to manipulate 
­others’ immediate reactions; it is not aimed at influencing the judgments 
and evaluations of ­others. And, of course, such dominance displays are 
not about cooperation at all.
­Human ­children might in some cases be ­doing similar ­things aimed at 
gaining power and status and the like, but most importantly in many cases 

	
Moral Identity	
279
they are worried about being perceived as a cooperative partner. They do 
all kinds of strategic ­things to make that happen. But in that peculiarly 
­human reflective step, characteristic of many domains of ­human activity, 
­children then begin to judge themselves as ­others might judge them, using 
the same standards, and to attempt to live up to their own judgments.
Self-­Presentation
Sometime between one and two years of age ­human infants begin showing 
signs that they know when ­others are observing them (for a review, see 
Rochat 2009). By three years of age, ­children ­will actively conceal for­
bidden actions from an adult (Melis et al. 2010), as ­will ­great apes (Melis 
et al. 2006a). But the key question is ­whether and when they know that 
­others are evaluating them.
One in­ter­est­ing context is reactions to seeing oneself in the mirror. 
From around eigh­teen months of age, ­human infants who are looking at 
themselves in a mirror quite often show signs of coyness or shyness, some­
times even burying their heads in their ­mother’s laps (Lewis 2000). ­Great 
apes recognize themselves in mirrors as well, demonstrating this recog­
nition by vari­ous kinds of self-­directed body inspection and so forth. But 
they show no signs of coyness or shyness. The most straightforward in­
terpretation of this difference is that ­human infants as they look in the 
mirror are imagining that this is how ­others see them, and this evokes their 
natu­ral shyness at being evaluated, whereas ­great apes are using the mirror 
as a kind of tool for inspecting their bodies, with no implication of evalu­
ation at all.
As ­children develop through toddlerhood and into preschool, they be­
come concerned with the evaluations of ­others in a much more direct 
manner. Thus, in the experiment of Haun and Tomasello (2011) on ­children’s 
conformity, cited in Chapter  5, four-­year-­olds made ­simple judgments 
about such ­things as which animal on the page was bigger. When other 
­children (actually confederates) made judgments before that, which ­were 
clearly wrong, four-­year-­old ­children went along with the crowd when 
they had to make their judgment publicly. The fact that they did not ac­
tually change their mind but ­were only managing the impression they 
­were making on the other ­children is clear: when they judged in private 
they mostly ignored the group’s judgments.
What we are focused on ­here, however, is ­children’s concern for how 
­others are judging their cooperativeness. In a comparative experiment, 

280	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
Engelmann et al. (2012) gave five-­year-­old ­human ­children and chimpan­
zees the opportunity to ­either help or steal from another child or chim­
panzee. In some cases they did so while they ­were being watched by a 
peer or conspecific; in other cases they did so while they ­were in the room 
alone. As might be expected, the ­children helped the other child more, 
and stole from her less, when they ­were being watched by a peer than 
when they ­were alone. Chimpanzees, in contrast, did not care, one way 
or the other, that they ­were being observed (for a similar finding, see also 
Engelmann et al. 2016a).
Further along ­these lines, Rapp et al. (in press) tested four-­ and five-­
year-­old ­children and found that they shared resources more generously 
if they knew that their (and other ­children’s) contributions might ­later be 
“advertised.” The five-­year-­olds ­were motivated more to create a positive 
impression on ­others than to avoid a negative one. ­Children as young as 
four years of age, then, are actively managing the impression they are 
making on ­others. In a more complex experimental arrangement, Herr­
mann et al. (forthcoming) had five-­year-­old ­children play a game in pairs, 
and they could be ­either generous or stingy with their partner. Again they 
­were sometimes observed by a peer and sometimes not, and they ­were 
told that the peer would be making a partner choice between the two of 
them to play a highly rewarding game. When they ­were being observed 
(but not when they ­were not being observed), the ­children actually com­
peted with one another to be more helpful and generous so that the 
observer would see them as better cooperators and so choose them as 
partners for the highly rewarding game. This phenomenon has been 
referred to as “competitive altruism.”
Fi­nally, Engelmann et al. (2018) set up a situation where in one condition 
five-­year-­olds could actively influence how onlookers judged them, or in 
another condition how onlookers judged their minimally established 
in-­group. That is, observers saw ­either how much the child herself donated 
to needy ­others or how much their group as a ­whole donated, with no 
way to identify the child’s individual donation. The result was that the 
­children actively attempted to influence how onlookers judged their 
minimally established group itself, in­de­pen­dent of any attempts to in­
fluence how ­those onlookers judged them as individuals (which they 
cared about as well in­de­pen­dently). Five-­year-­olds care not only about 
their own reputation but about their group’s reputation as well.

	
Moral Identity	
281
­Great apes lead complex social lives, mostly aimed at social competi­
tion. This has led some theorists to talk about apes as “Machiavellian”: they 
pursue their self-­interest intelligently and strategically by manipulating 
­others. But this precisely misses the point. The lesson from Machiavelli 
(1513) is that, yes, the prince should pursue his self-­interest intelligently 
and strategically by manipulating ­others, but he should do this in a way 
that does not suggest to ­those ­others (that is, is concealed from ­those 
­others) that this is what he is ­doing. So only ­humans can be truly Machia­
vellian, ­because only ­humans can simulate the perspectives and evalua­
tions of ­others for the purpose of actively managing the impression they 
are making on them. ­Because it comes so naturally to us, the importance 
of this dimension of ­human social competence is sometimes difficult to 
fully appreciate. (Perhaps this is part of the reason that so many primatolo­
gists see no prob­lem in equating ­great ape sociality with ­human sociality.)
Guilt and Shame
­Children’s strategic impression management is clearly not moral; it is 
about personal advantage. However, being able to simulate the judgments 
that ­others are making about oneself—­seeing oneself from the outside, 
as it ­were—is the cognitive foundation for the moral capacity to have a 
conscience, to feel guilty for transgressions, and for holding oneself ac­
countable to standards.
So how do we traverse the Rubicon from strategic impression manage­
ment to a moral conscience innervated by feelings of guilt? ­There are 
two keys. The first key is what I have called role-­reversal evaluation: 
­because of self-­other equivalence, I cannot help but judge myself in the 
same way I judge ­others (and / or how ­others would likely judge me) 
(Tomasello 2016). ­These are moral evaluations, so ­there is no question 
of manipulating the impression I am making on myself strategically; I 
cannot help but assess myself, as I assess ­others, with re­spect to some 
impartial standards of ­human conduct.
The second key is that ­these moral judgments are coming not from 
myself as an individual but rather from something larger than myself. 
Thus, in the context of a joint commitment to a partner, it is our joint 
intentional “we” on whose behalf I make a judgment. And in the context 
of a collective commitment to social norms, it is our collective intentional 
“we” on whose behalf I make a judgment. Thus, if I steal something and 

282	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
then reflect on that act and judge it harshly in feelings of guilt, it is not 
just an equal standoff between the self who wanted to steal and the self 
who now questions that—if that ­were the case, what basis would ­there 
be for one of the selves to win? No, it is an unfair fight ­because the me 
­doing the judging is me as a part of a larger “we” with whom I identify. 
The moral judgment from “we” thus has a self-­affirmed legitimacy: we 
believe that anyone who steals deserves censure. To ignore that judgment 
is to renounce some portion of one’s identification with “we.”
The natu­ral reaction when one feels guilty for one’s act is to attempt 
to repair the damage, and so to repair one’s moral identity. Observational 
studies have established that preschool ­children often show sympathy for 
a victim ­after they have done something antisocial ­toward her (for ex­
ample, Zahn-­Waxler and Kochanska 1990). But ­these studies have not 
distinguished clearly between sympathy for the harmed person and ­actual 
guilt. Guilt is a joint function of sympathy for the harmed person and re­
gret that I caused it. In a recent experimental study Vaish et al. (2016; see 
also Hepach et al. 2017d) sought to disentangle guilt from sympathy. In a 
2 × 2 design, they varied ­whether the breaking of a toy was perceived by 
the child as a result of his own actions or ­those of ­others, and ­whether 
the person who owned the toy cared about ­whether it was broken or not 
(that is, ­whether harm was done or not). The result was that when three-­
year-­old ­children—­but not two-­year-­old ­children—­thought that they had 
caused harm, they went to extensive efforts to repair it—­much more than 
if they had broken the toy when it caused no harm to anyone or when 
someone ­else had caused the harm. The three-­year-­olds thus ­were not just 
sympathetic to a victim and did not just feel the need to repair damage 
they had done, they felt guilty for causing harm and wanted to make up 
for the damage they had caused. In contrast, two-­year-­olds repaired the 
damage whenever harm was caused, no ­matter by whom, thus showing 
only sympathy. Guilt as a distinct motivator of prosocial be­hav­ior thus 
seems to emerge at about three years of age. It is pos­si­ble that at this age 
it is still a kind of second-­personal guilt (a form of second-­personal nor­
mativity) aimed only at the victim, whereas ­later ­children ­will experience 
a more “objective” guilt when they fail to conform to the moral norms 
of the moral community at large.
­Humans quite often feel the need to display their guilt overtly, in every­
thing from body postures to verbal apologies. This display may preempt 
punishment from ­others—­I am already punishing myself (and my suf­

	
Moral Identity	
283
fering evokes your sympathy) so you do not need to—­and this aspect 
may be seen as strategic. Indeed, when viewing dif­fer­ent individuals vio­
lating the same norm, even young ­children feel more positively about the 
one who shows guilt for having broken it than for someone who breaks 
it and seemingly does not care (Vaish et al. 2011a). But guilt displays also 
perform the even more vital function of letting every­one know (including 
myself ) that I now acknowledge publicly that I made a bad judgment, and 
I regret it. I thus show solidarity with ­those who judge me harshly, and 
indeed I agree that this negative judgment of my former judgment and 
resulting act is deserved and legitimate. Feeling guilty for violating a moral 
norm thus goes beyond a strategic concern for self-­reputation, and even 
beyond ­simple regret for what happened; it is a negative judgment, using 
“our” shared standards, about my previous poor judgment. Displaying my 
guilt is thus an attempt to repair my cooperative and moral identities.
­Human beings, including young ­children, understand this pro­cess to 
some degree, and so often reflect on pos­si­ble actions and their conse­
quences before executing them. At least on some occasions, they ask 
themselves before they act: Is this a good ­thing to do? Is this a good ­thing 
to want? Am I making a good judgment? The phi­los­o­pher Korsgaard 
(1996) calls this pro­cess “reflective endorsement,” and it is the basic 
decision-­making pro­cess of a socially responsible person. Guilt and reflec­
tive endorsement of this kind thus represent a new kind of social self-­
regulation: an internalized and reflective self-­regulation comprising mul­
tiple levels of moral judgment, what Korsgaard calls normative 
self-­governance. Guilt is retrospective: I feel guilty for what I did, and I now 
judge that my previous judgment that it was the right ­thing to do was 
faulty. I deserve censure. Reflective endorsement is prospective: it helps the 
individual decide what to do so as, negatively, to avoid censure and / or 
guilt and, positively, to deserve praise or the like. The overt response to 
guilt is thus to make reparations for the harm done, to undo the regretted 
act as much as pos­si­ble, and to reflect on one’s actions so as to avoid 
making the same ­mistake again in the ­future. This, in essence, constitutes 
what we think of as acting responsibly.
Guilt contrasts with shame, in which the main issue is ­whether an act 
affects my compatriots’ reputational assessment of me. For example, a 
neighbor might shame me in front of ­others if I fail to separate my recy­
clables from other trash. The normal response to shame situations is to 
withdraw and hope that ­others ­will forget (Tangney and Dearing 2004). 

284	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
Even if I correct my recycling ­mistake, I cannot undo the information that 
­others now have, which affects their reputational judgments of me—­I have 
lost face (Brown and Levinson 1987). It might also be that ­there are some 
individuals in our group who follow our conventions, norms, and institu­
tions strategically, but always with an eye to self-­interest, feeling neither 
guilt nor shame. But ­these sociopaths are not moral persons, so they 
cannot be fully trusted. “We” are ­those who genuinely believe—by virtue 
of our moral identities—­that ­there are certain ­things that persons in our 
moral community owe to one another and that this should be reflected 
in our actions.
Fi­nally, an especially in­ter­est­ing phenomenon in the context of collec­
tive intentionality and morality is the phenomenon of collective guilt (or 
pride). ­People often feel collective guilt (or pride) when someone in their 
group does something especially heinous or praiseworthy, even when they 
themselves have done nothing. In a recent experimental study, Over et al. 
(2016) arranged the situation so that five-­year-­old ­children thought of 
themselves as being part of a group (that is, a minimal group). Then ­either 
one of their in-­group compatriots or an out-­group member caused some 
harm by accidentally breaking a forbidden toy. The ­children felt a need 
to apologize and make amends for the violation if it was performed by 
an in-­group (but not by an out-­group) member. This kind of collective 
guilt illustrates with special clarity the vital role in all of this played by 
­children’s identification with a cultural group.
Individual and Cultural Variation
I am aware of no experimental studies investigating impression manage­
ment, guilt, or shame across dif­fer­ent cultures in young ­children. ­There 
is, however, a fairly extensive lit­er­a­ture on cross-­cultural differences in 
shame and related emotions in adults. On this basis, Fessler (2004) has ar­
gued that shame but not guilt is a cultural universal. In the current con­
ceptualization, this would mean mainly that ­there is a difference across 
cultures in the pro­cess of internalization of moral judgments. This is a 
perfectly plausible hypothesis ­because it is well known that dif­fer­ent par­
enting and socialization styles affect the pro­cess of internalization in 
­children significantly (for example, Hoffman 2000). This would seem to 
be an impor­tant question for ­future empirical investigation.

	
Moral Identity	
285
Moral Justification and Identity
I have referred on several occasions to ­children’s moral identity, and I am 
now ready to discuss more explic­itly what that is, as a kind of culmina­
tion of ­children’s moral development in the first six years of life. But first 
we must lay the groundwork by characterizing how it is that young 
­children reason with ­others about morality ­because the internalization of 
this reasoning pro­cess is a key constituent of ­children’s moral identity. 
­Children create and maintain their moral identities based on their ability 
to provide for ­others in their moral community, including themselves, mu­
tually acceptable reasons and justifications for their morally relevant acts. 
A morally commendable act is not just an act with good consequences 
but an act done for the right reasons.
Moral Reasoning and Justification
For many moral phi­los­o­phers (for example, Scanlon 1998), the rational 
basis of morality lies in the shared justificatory structures of a moral com­
munity ­because ­these are grounded in the community’s shared ordering 
of values. In arguing about a moral situation, the individual must always 
be prepared to justify—to give reasons for—­her choices both to ­others and 
to herself in ways that anchor her judgments in the community’s shared 
value system. Justifications demonstrate one’s continued identification 
with the group and its value system. For example, if a child has not put 
away her toys as asked, she might reply that she could not ­because she 
needed to help her baby sibling in trou­ble. This justification is likely to be 
accepted ­because we all accept together that helping a baby in need is 
more impor­tant than following cleaning-up instructions. But if the child 
attempts to justify her negligence by pleading that she was too tired, this 
is not likely to be accepted ­because resting is not as impor­tant as ­doing as 
one is told. Sometimes such justifications and excuses are strategic, simply 
to extricate oneself from trou­ble, but many times they are genuine in the 
sense that the child, as part of the “we” that is her community, judges her 
own reasons and excuses as ­either valid or not. She judges her own rea­
sons, just as she judges her own acts, with the internalized judgments of 
“we,” the moral community.
In a recent study, Kanngiesser et al. (in preparation) had five-­year-­old 
­children promise an adult to clean up some toys. The adult then left. The 

286	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
­children ­were then lured away from their promise, ­either for a good reason 
(to help someone having difficulties) or for a lame reason (to play a fun 
game). When the adult came back, she approached the child first without 
saying anything, and then, if the child did not say anything, she said 
something neutral like “What’s up?” or “What are you ­doing?” Fi­nally, 
she asked, “Why are you not cleaning up the toys?” ­Children’s excuses—­
their justifications—­differed markedly between the two conditions. 
When they left their task for a good reason, they usually just stated the 
good reason straightaway, assuming it would be accepted. When they left 
their task for a poor reason, they flailed around for an excuse, engaged 
in denial, and, in general, displayed that they knew they had no good 
excuse. Five-­year-­olds knew, in this context, how the relevant values 
would be ordered by the adult.
In comprehension experiments, ­children discriminate morally valid and 
invalid excuses at a somewhat ­later age. Thus, Schmidt et al. (2016d) had a 
puppet approach and request resources from ­children at three, five, and 
eight years of age, giving one of four dif­fer­ent reasons for requesting the 
resources: I am especially needy; I am especially meritorious; the rule says 
that I should get it; or, simply, I want it. The younger ­children did not dif­
ferentiate among the vari­ous kinds of reasons. But the eight-­year-­olds 
clearly did, seeing need, merit, and rule as valid reasons, but not ­simple 
desire (I want it). By sometime ­after age five, then, young ­children have 
constructed in their collective common ground with their cultural group 
a hierarchy of values—­not adult-­like in all ways, of course, but adult-­like 
in many ways—in which they know what kinds of reasons justify devi­
ating from the group’s norms. This shared hierarchy of values enables the 
child to engage now in new forms of moral discourse. Indeed, without 
under­lying values that are assumed to be cooperatively shared we cannot 
reason productively at all. For example, if I justify my negligence of raking 
leaves by saying, “I ­couldn’t just let that child drown,” and you reply, “Why 
not?” then we ­really cannot have a productive moral discussion. We must 
share some under­lying hierarchy of shared values to which we can refer 
if we are to have a meaningful back-­and-­forth discussion about ­whether 
any par­tic­u­lar act is justified.
Another prerequisite is that we must be discussing ­things on a more 
or less equal footing. Thus, Piaget (1932) argued that young ­children 
cannot ­really reason about moral issues with adults. The prob­lem is that 
adults know the “right” answer ahead of time. That is to say, if the child 

	
Moral Identity	
287
has hit someone at kindergarten and is discussing this with his parent, the 
child knows that the parent ­will be making sure that the discussion ends 
in the judgment she thinks is the right one. ­After all, she is socializing her 
child to be a moral being. But when the child is discussing the same act 
with a peer, the outcome of that discussion is not predetermined; the child 
might actually win the argument that hitting their playmate was, given 
the circumstances, the right ­thing to do. It is this freedom and in­de­pen­
dence in the reasoning pro­cess that makes peer dialogue so crucial for 
moral development.
Kruger and Tomasello (1986) and Kruger (1992) put Piaget’s claims to 
a test. They first assessed seven-­year-­old ­children’s moral reasoning skills 
using a semi-­standardized task. ­There ­were then two groups of subjects. 
One group engaged in a discussion of moral dilemmas with their ­mother, 
and the other group engaged in a discussion of moral dilemmas with a 
peer. The discussions ­were analyzed for, among other ­things, ­children’s 
sophistication in providing reasons for their judgments. As hypothesized, 
­children’s discussions with peers ­were characterized by relatively sophis­
ticated reason-­giving, whereas their discussions with ­mothers ­were more 
one-­sided, with much adult instruction. When the ­children’s level of moral 
reasoning was subsequently assessed, ­those ­children who had engaged in 
the most sophisticated reason-­giving made the most gains over their pre­
test assessments. That is, the number of reason-­giving turns predicted 
gains in moral reasoning, and ­these occurred more in peer discussions. 
In another recent study, dyads of five-­year-­olds shared equally with a third 
party ­either ­because they ­were instructed to by an adult or ­because they 
deci­ded to on their own (as individuals or as a dyad). Subsequently, when 
a new situation presented itself—­the opportunity to share with an espe­
cially needy or meritorious third party—­children who previously made 
decisions on their own, not instructed by adults, ­were more likely to take 
the new circumstances into account (Hardecker et al., forthcoming).
The key point is that reasons, justifications, and excuses are aimed both 
at ­others and at the self, as members of the same moral community, and 
if they are to be accepted they must be grounded in the value system that 
we all share. This pro­cess is of the essence to one’s moral identity. Thus, 
if part of my moral identity is that I am a loyal friend and then I do some­
thing seemingly disloyal, to keep my moral identity intact I must provide 
a reason for my action that shows loyalty is still a part of my moral 
identity—­that ­there ­were extenuating circumstances. If I cannot do this, 

288	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
then my moral identity must be modified. The negative side of the iden­
tity pro­cess is captured informally by the locutions that ­people often pro­
duce: “I ­couldn’t live with myself if I did that,” “That is just not me,” and 
so forth. The positive side of the identity pro­cess is captured by Adam 
Smith’s (1759) claim that we do not act prosocially to be praised but rather 
to be a praiseworthy person—­a responsible person—in the eyes of the com­
munity, including ourselves.
Moral Identity
As soon as ­children begin evaluating themselves from the point of view 
of “we” in the community, they may be said to have a sense of self. When 
­those evaluations begin to be moral, it is appropriate to talk about a moral 
self or moral identity. According to moral identity theorists, the proximate 
psychological mechanisms responsible for ­human moral action involve, 
essentially, moral judgments made by a moral self (with the representative 
authority of the moral community) that endures over time and evaluates 
the self impartially in the same way that it evaluates ­others (Blasi 1984; 
Hardy and Carlo 2005).
Moral identity, as we conceptualize it, has as its core four sets of values 
that govern ­children’s actions and that, by the end of preschool, are un­
derstood to be shared in their moral community. The particularities may 
vary by culture, but, on a general level, in all cultures ­there are four basic 
sets of moral concerns (see the inner circle of Figure 10.1). First ­there are 
me-­concerns: my self-­interested motives aimed at helping me to survive and 
thrive. Second, ­there are you-­concerns, expressed in sympathy and helping 
­toward ­others in the group. Third, ­there are equality-­concerns, in which 
­others and the self are seen as equally deserving individuals who should 
be treated fairly. And fi­nally, ­there are we-­concerns, both ­those emanating 
from a dyadic “we” formed in face-­to-­face interaction with a second-­
personal agent and ­those emanating from the need to conform to group-­
minded social norms created by “us” for “us.”
Many moral situations in the real world contain complex combinations 
of many or all of ­these concerns, sometimes creating moral dilemmas. But 
in their idealized “pure” forms, each of the sets of other-­regarding con­
cerns is associated with distinct emotions. Prototypically, violations of 
equality and re­spect are met with resentment (Strawson 1962; Darwall 
2006): the disrespected person feels that she does not deserve to be treated 
in this manner and resents the perpetrator. (Some theorists think that the 

	
Moral Identity	
289
third-­person, cultural, version of this emotion is indignation on behalf of 
­others or the group.) In contrast, when one does not receive the sympathy 
that one expects, especially from a friend or other close relation, one does 
not feel resentment but rather “hurt feelings”: the hurt friend feels that the 
offender has neglected the sympathy and trust on which their relationship 
is built. Violations of norms or rules are often coincident with other moral 
violations in which someone is hurt or disrespected, but in the pure case 
one would simply feel a sense of disapprobation or disapproval of the rule 
breaker: he is not a member of the moral community ­because he does not 
follow the rules for social conduct upon which we all have agreed.
Moral decisions are ­those that consider, at a minimum, one of the con­
cerns other than me-­concern, even if in the end one decides that the me-­
concern should win out. ­There is thus always more or less complexity in 
­human moral decision-­making. Nevertheless, the claim is that ­human in­
dividuals are strongly motivated to preserve their core moral identity as 
established by their past moral decision-­making and judgments. They pre­
serve it, first of all, by acting in ways that are consistent with it. But ­every 
situation is par­tic­u­lar to some degree; as a given situation is being assimi­
lated to past experience, its particularities must be accommodated in some 
we-concern
me-concern
you-
concern
equality-
concern
Core Moral
Identity
Interpretive-
Justiﬁcatory
Protective Belt
Figure  10.1 ​A moral identity model for ­human moral decision-­making (from 
Tomasello 2016).

290	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
way. One can thus interpret the wearing of a plaid coat to a funeral as 
being merely a breach of etiquette or as disrespecting the mourners. One 
can divide up food resources so that the ­people who weigh less get less 
(which means, for example, that ­women and ­children get less) ­under the 
interpretation that this preserves equality at the level of ounce for ounce, 
or one can see this as a violation of the equality of persons. And on and 
on. Just as scientists hold onto their core theoretical beliefs by construing 
and interpreting empirical evidence in par­tic­u­lar ways (Lakatos 1970), in­
dividuals may maintain a sense of core moral identity, despite commit­
ting what ­others believe are immoral acts, by interpreting the situation 
creatively.
But the creativity of interpretation has its limits. Since one’s moral iden­
tity is socially constructed, one must always be prepared to justify—­both 
to ­others and to the self—­why one chose one course of action over an­
other. As previously argued, justification means showing that one’s actions 
actually emanated from values that “we” all share. ­There thus comes to 
surround one’s core moral identity a protective ­belt of interpretations and 
justifications, as it ­were (see the outer circle in Figure 10.1). Perhaps I did 
not share my cookies with ­others as I might have, but I am ill and need 
more nutrition than them at the moment. Does this justify my be­hav­ior 
to ­others and to myself? Perhaps I hit another child, but that was ­because 
she was picking on a peer. Does this justify my be­hav­ior to ­others and to 
myself? If the answer to ­these questions is yes, then I proceed ahead in 
the status quo. But if the answers are no, then my core moral identity is 
challenged; if I want to preserve it intact, then I must do something to 
repair it, such as display guilt, apologize, or make reparations. Also cru­
cial to the pro­cess, of course, is ­whether an affected person is or is not a 
member of one’s moral community and who is the reference group for 
one’s justifications. We might find some actions that are unacceptable 
when directed to an in-­group member in good standing are acceptable if 
they are directed to an out-­group member or in-­group miscreant.
Fi­nally, critical to the ­whole pro­cess of moral self-­governance via moral 
identity is the recognition that the individual is always ­free to go beyond 
the culture’s social norms if necessary—­and indeed this freedom makes 
the force of obligation all the more binding ­because then one owns one’s 
decisions, as it ­were. Thus, in a recent study, Rapp et al. (2017) presented 
three-­ and five-­year-­olds with a peer needing help. Some ­children ­were 
ordered by an adult to help, and ­others ­were left to make a decision 

	
Moral Identity	
291
for themselves (almost all of them helped). When ­later given the chance to 
help still another person, the five-­year-­olds (but not the three-­year-­olds) 
who had freely chosen to help in the initial setting helped more in this 
subsequent setting (especially the girls). One could interpret this finding 
in attributional terms: as ­children observe their own ­free choices, they 
judge them and construct a moral identity consistent with them, which 
then governs their ­future moral decision-­making. It is a pro­cess of indi­
vidual construction from uniquely ­human moral actions and attitudes.
What­ever the interpretation, making moral decisions involving con­
flicting norms or values requires a personal weighing of values—on an 
executive level—in a manner that often conforms to no conventional pat­
tern. Should I harm ­others to save my friend in need? Should I lie to save 
a classmate from being punished? Even if the punishment is just? From 
childhood onward, ­human individuals must always in some sense freely 
assent to and identify with the moral decisions they make, and over time 
this pro­cess leads each individual to attempt to construct an internally con­
sistent moral identity.
Individual and Cultural Variation
Based on ethnographies of many dif­fer­ent ­peoples living in many dif­fer­ent 
cultural contexts, it is almost certain that members of dif­fer­ent cultures 
reason about moral issues and justify moral actions to ­others in dif­fer­ent, 
perhaps very dif­fer­ent, ways. This may be based on a dif­fer­ent hierarchy 
of shared values in their moral community, or in a dif­fer­ent pro­cess of 
moral discourse and justification, or both (see, for example, Shweder 1991, 
and Haidt 2012). But in terms of ontogeny, we actually know ­little about 
how young ­children—­especially young preschool ­children—­engage in 
­these dialogical pro­cesses, and almost nothing about how they do so with 
peers. Again we have an extremely impor­tant set of research questions 
ripe for empirical investigation.
Becoming Responsible
In many ways, we may view ­children’s construction of a moral identity 
as the capstone of their social development in the preschool period. It com­
prises all their cooperative and moral values, grounded in the common values 
of the culture (albeit with some individual variations), and internalized 

292	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
and interconnected such that individuals may justify and provide reasons 
for their actions in ways that are acceptable both to the group and to 
themselves. Their social self-­regulation has now become normative self-­
governance. They are in the pro­cess of becoming responsible persons.
Theoretical Explanations
­Great apes make social evaluations of potential social interactants and 
prefer to interact with individuals who are nice rather than mean. ­Human 
infants do this as well from a surprisingly early age. Infants have been 
shown to make such social evaluations in a variety of complex situations 
in which apes have never been tested. It is therefore unclear the degree to 
which ­human infants, in their first year or two of life, engage in pro­cesses 
of social evaluation unique to the species. But for sure when ­children start 
understanding that ­others are observing and evaluating them, they start 
down a new, uniquely ­human pathway.
­Human ­children know that they are being observed and evaluated from 
early in development (recall infants’ self-­consciousness in front of mirrors). 
This is a major shaper of their social lives from ­there on out (Rochat 2009). 
In Figure 10.2, we give ­children credit not just for knowing they are being 
evaluated but for self-­evaluation from soon ­after their third birthdays, 
based on a single well-­controlled study seeming to indicate that at this age 
they can feel guilty for harming ­others (Vaish et al. 2016). As with the cases 
of joint commitment and fairness, we are positing that as ­children’s ca­
pacities for collective intentionality are maturing at around three years of 
age, they can view their relationship to other individuals as a kind of col­
lective “we” that can, with a role reversal of judger and judged, make nor­
mative judgments about “me.” Over the next few years, their sense of 
guilt ­will become more objective, with reference to the group social norms 
as they have internalized and potentially modified them for themselves.
At around four or five years of age, ­children become able to actively 
simulate the perspective and potential evaluations of ­others and to adjust 
their actions accordingly (second box in Figure 10.2). ­These acts of self-­
presentation, or impression management, may be totally strategic, aimed 
at manipulating ­others’ impressions for personal benefit. But, again, the 
individual cannot escape her own watchful eye, so in some cases she at­
tempts to manipulate the impression she is making on herself—­that is, 
herself as part of a judging “we” (the same “we” that she represents when 
she judges ­others). It is this external perspective on the self, from the eval­

	
Moral Identity	
293
uating “we,” and the child’s active attempts to influence this perspective 
and evaluation that creates the sense of a social self. When the actions 
involved are more or less moral, and the ­whole pro­cess is internalized, 
we have the foundations of a moral identity. From that point on, one feels 
obliged to act so as to live up to one’s cooperative (for ­others) and moral 
(for the self ) identities.
To maintain their cooperative and moral identities ­children must also 
construct a hierarchically ordered set of values in common with ­others 
in the cultural group. Assuming capacities of moral judgment and a 
sense of being judged, this enables them to give reasons to ­others and 
the self for their actions that justify ­those actions by grounding them in 
the hierarchy of values that they all share (third box in Figure 10.2). The 
phrase “grounding in,” in this context, means that the child is able to 
give reasons, justifications, and excuses to show that she was acting 
in accordance with the same hierarchy of values and standards that 
govern every­one in the cultural group—­even if it requires some reason-­
giving to see that fact. This implies the ultimate justification: if you 
­were in my situation you would have done the same ­thing. Reason-­
giving moral discourse is thus a key constituent in ­children’s construc­
tion of a sense of moral identity as well as its continued maintenance 
over time.
Crucially, the pro­cess of constructing a moral identity transforms in­
dividual motivation—­the instrumental pressure to do that which one 
knows ­will advance one’s goals—­into a sense of obligation. We have re­
ferred previously to the phi­los­o­pher Korsgaard (1996), who claimed that, 
in the end, the feeling that I ­ought or must do something is the sense that 
Collective Intentionality
Cog: role reversal
S-R: normative
Cog: objective
Social Evaluation
5 years
4 years
3 years
2 years
1 year
0
SELF-
EVALUATION
AND 2P GUILT
IMPRESSION
MANAGEMENT
REASON-
GIVING AND
MORAL ID
Figure 10.2 ​The ontoge­ne­tic emergence of young ­children’s uniquely ­human 
sense of moral identity. Abbreviations: Cog = cognitive; S-­R = executive self-­
regulation; 2P = second-­personal.

294	
The Ontogeny of Uniquely ­Human Sociality
if I do not do it I ­will cease to be who I am—­that is, to “us” in the moral 
community. In contrast, ­doing that ­thing helps me to reaffirm who I am to 
“us” in the moral community. In voluntarily taking on an obligation—as in 
joint commitments or in accepting and identifying with the group’s collec­
tive commitments—­I put on the line, I put at risk, my cooperative and 
moral identities. I must fulfill the obligation in order to remain who I am.
The explanation for the emergence of ­children’s sense of moral iden­
tity is thus the coming together of all their dif­fer­ent social and moral ca­
pacities as they seek to become responsible persons in the moral 
community.
Social and Moral Implications
Before three years of age, young ­children’s social relationships with ­others 
are mostly mediated by parents and other adults. In traditional lifeways, 
this is the age before weaning from the ­mother. But from around three 
years, young ­children begin venturing out and forming relationships on 
their own, such as friendships with peers. They must now start worrying 
about being taken advantage of or being lied to, and they must also make 
sure that ­others view them in a positive light—­and ­there is no parent to 
mediate. They themselves judge ­others for their cooperativeness, and to 
make sure that ­others find them cooperative they engage in vari­ous acts 
of impression management, a key part of which is rationally justifying 
their actions to ­others. Internalizing the pro­cess, they begin judging them­
selves as they judge ­others, justifying their actions to themselves as they 
justify them to ­others, feeling such self-­conscious emotions and shame and 
guilt, and thereby forming their own moral identity.
What we now have, at around six or seven years of age, are thus na­
scent persons who can be held accountable for their actions. They share 
the moral values of the community, including their hierarchical interre­
lations, and they know what kinds of justifications for actions are accept­
able to the community. They now self-­regulate their social interactions 
with ­others in terms of a kind of normative self-­governance: they think 
before they act about ­whether, from the point of view of the moral com­
munity of which they are a part and whose values they share, this is a good 
­thing to do or to want. As they view themselves through the eyes of ­those 
whom they aspire to be like, young ­children are constructing what 
amounts to their social persona and its internal counterpart, their moral 
identity.

IV
Conclusion
h
The internalization of socially rooted and historically de­
veloped activities is the distinguishing feature of ­human 
psy­chol­ogy, the basis of the qualitative leap from animal 
to ­human psy­chol­ogy. As yet, only the barest outline of 
this pro­cess is known.
Lev Vygotsky
Mind in Society (1930)


W ​11 ​w
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory
From the beginning of the Western intellectual tradition, thinkers have 
asked how ­humans are dif­fer­ent from other animal species. Since Darwin, 
the additional question has been how they became dif­fer­ent. ­There certainly 
was no answering ­these questions as long as Western phi­los­o­phers and 
scientists ­were ignorant of ­great apes, which they ­were ­until about the time 
of Darwin. But even then ­there was no answering ­these questions in a 
precise manner ­until ­there ­were systematic comparative studies aimed at 
revealing subtle behavioral differences between species, which have come 
into existence only in the last few de­cades. And if the main behavioral 
and psychological differences are in cooperation and culture, ­there was no 
answering ­these questions ­until ­there ­were theoretically adequate concep­
tualizations of cooperation and culture in evolutionary terms, along 
with an understanding of the central role of ontogeny in the evolutionary 
process—­both of which are relatively new on the scene as well.
All ­these empirical and theoretical advances have created the possibility 
of an evolutionarily informed theory of the ontoge­ne­tic pro­cesses that 
produce uniquely ­human psy­chol­ogy. ­Here I have proposed one such 
theory. I have proposed that the key novelties in ­human evolution ­were 
all, in one way or another, adaptations for an especially cooperative, in­
deed hypercooperative, way of life. I have characterized ­these adaptations 
as skills and motivations of shared intentionality, and we have looked for 
how they express themselves in eight centrally impor­tant ontoge­ne­tic 
pathways. Our goal now, to wrap ­things up, is to look systematically 
across all eight of ­these pathways to see ­whether we can discern the 
bigger picture. How does ­human psychological ontogeny as a ­whole com­
pare with that of other apes, and how do we best explain the differences?

298	
Conclusion
Global Theories of ­Human Ontogeny
Global theories of ­human ontogeny have been out of fashion for some 
time. The current theory, in one sense, is not global ­because it is focused 
only on a delimited set of phenomena: ­those that distinguish ­human psy­
chol­ogy from ­great ape psy­chol­ogy. But in another sense the theory is 
global ­because it is intended to explain a wide range of impor­tant phe­
nomena in ­human development, every­thing from early communication 
to norm-­based morality. To the extent that the theory is global, it seems 
wise to preface a more systematic pre­sen­ta­tion by looking, at least briefly, 
at the global theories currently on offer in con­temporary developmental 
psy­chol­ogy.
The prob­lem is that global theories in con­temporary developmental 
psy­chol­ogy are not focused specifically on the question of ­human unique­
ness, with the pos­si­ble exception of classical Vygotskian theory (most 
modern Vygotskians do not focus on the unique characteristics of ­humans 
in general, as a species, but rather on cross-­cultural differences within the 
species). What we ­will discuss ­here, therefore, are brief descriptions of 
some existing global frameworks for explaining ­human ontogeny, and 
then we ­will look at what would be needed to modify them to fit our spe­
cific question about the ontogeny of ­human uniqueness.
Individualistic Theories
The majority of theories in the study of ­human ontogeny focus on the 
individual child, her competencies and motivations as she develops. And 
this, of course, has been an extremely productive way of proceeding in 
many impor­tant re­spects. But our question ­here is ­whether it is sufficient 
to capture the differences between the way that ­great apes relate to the 
world and the way that ­human ­children relate to the world as they de­
velop over the first six years of life.
Individualistic theories of ­human development begin with Piaget, and 
in par­tic­u­lar the ­later works of Piaget (we ­will address the earlier works 
and his concern with the social dimensions of ­human ontogeny, in the 
next subsection). Piaget (1970) explicates a basically individualistic account 
of the ontogeny of logicomathematical knowledge. He focuses on the 
overt actions of infants as they locomote in the spatial environment and 
manipulate and enumerate objects in vari­ous ways manually, all structured 

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
299
by a kind of practical logic or rationality. ­These overt actions become in­
ternalized into ­mental operations; for example, grouping objects into a 
pile becomes adding numbers, and removing objects from a pile becomes 
subtracting them. What Piaget calls “figurative knowledge” concerns spe­
cific facts about the world that ­children learn, and also the symbolization 
of their experience in a conventional language, which always takes place 
within the context of operative structures based on action. Piaget regu­
larly invokes the notion of equilibration as a kind of self-­regulating force 
(similar to bodily homeostasis) that serves to or­ga­nize and coordinate 
knowledge endogenously. The theory explic­itly acknowledges the role of 
the social and cultural environment in facilitating individual development, 
but, nevertheless, the fundamentals of the pro­cess are conceptualized as 
inherently individualistic: the child as scientist exploring her environment 
and learning how ­things work.
Piaget was not primarily concerned with isolating the unique aspects 
of ­human ontogeny. He cites Köhler’s (1925) famous research on problem-­
solving in chimpanzees mainly as a way of arguing against pure empiri­
cism and as a way of grounding sensory-­motor intelligence in action. He 
offers no explanation for how and why ­humans go beyond what apes do, 
other than general references to the symbolic function, language, culture, 
and so forth. But recent research has shown that apes have some of the 
basics in this direction—­from a nascent “theory of mind,” to skills with 
humanlike symbols, to social transmission in the wild—so we need a 
more specific account. One tack would be something along the lines of 
Spelke’s (2009) account in which ­humans and ­great apes share basic “core 
knowledge” of the world in terms of space, objects, causality, agency, and 
quantities, but then during development the acquisition of language sup­
plies ­humans with a common repre­sen­ta­tional medium and a common 
set of computational / combinatorial mechanisms for manipulating ­those 
repre­sen­ta­tions mentally. But, as I have argued previously (see Tomasello 
2008, 2014), the invocation of language as simply a medium of repre­sen­ta­
tion and computation is not sufficient to explain uniquely ­human cognition 
and sociality. Without a deeper analy­sis of ­human linguistic competence 
grounded in more basic abilities such as joint attention, the embedding 
of perspectives, and social self-­monitoring—­that is, basic pro­cesses of 
shared intentionality—it is impossible to explain the many and vari­ous 
ways that ­humans use language to communicate. And critically, ­these deeper 

300	
Conclusion
pro­cesses of shared intentionality—­and not linguistic repre­sen­ta­tion and 
computation—­are what is required for explaining the many and vari­ous 
other forms of uniquely ­human cognition and sociality, from ­children’s 
emerging senses of fairness and obligation to their cooperative thinking 
with peers.*
A similar assessment can be applied to the so-­called theory theory. Orig­
inating in the famous paper of Karmiloff-­Smith and Inhelder (1975) en­
titled “If You Want to Get Ahead, Get a Theory,” this approach to ­human 
development again focuses on the child as an individual scientist collecting 
data and proposing hypotheses to explain them. In more modern formu­
lations (for example, Gopnik and Wellman 2012; see also Xu and Kushnir 
2013) the approach adopts a Bayesian learning framework in which the 
individual always proceeds from some kind of existing assumptions or 
theory (all the way back to a kind of “starting state nativism”), but then 
accommodates new data by revising her assumptions or theories. The 
theory has been applied most directly to ­children’s development of false-­
belief understanding and other aspects of their “theory of mind,” and to 
the development of ­children’s causal understanding in the face of myste­
rious blicket machines and the like. Although dif­fer­ent domains focus on 
dif­fer­ent content, ­there is no fundamental difference in the theory theory 
in how the basic hypothesis-­testing mechanisms are applied. The theory 
theory does a good job at what it is aiming to do, but again, as in the case 
of Piaget, this theory was not designed to explain the species-­unique as­
pects of ­human ontogeny in par­tic­u­lar. As ­great apes understand some 
kinds of ­mental states but not all of the ones that ­humans understand, 
and they have some kind of causal understanding on the way to the ­human 
version, it is not clear how the theory theory might be modified and / or 
enriched to account for the difference. Some kind of principled distinc­
tion would have to be made between how ­human infants’ initial theories 
differ from ­those of other apes or how their abilities of further theory 
construction differ from ­those of other apes. Almost certainly, ­doing this 
would require invoking many of the same cognitive and social pro­cesses 
that I have invoked in this shared intentionality account.
*  ​In recent lectures, Spelke (for example, 2015) has argued that in addition to understanding ­others as 
agents, ­human infants near the end of the first year are also beginning to understand ­others as poten­
tial social partners. This is certainly a step along the way to recognizing that to explain the ontogeny of 
uniquely ­human psy­chol­ogy, we need something more than “core knowledge.”

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
301
It is all too easy—­and a bit unfair—to criticize scientific theories for not 
­doing what they ­were not designed to do. But I began this investigation 
with a specific question about the ontogeny of uniquely ­human psy­
chol­ogy, and I have my own theory that seeks to answer it. ­These more 
individualistic theories ­were not crafted to answer this question, with the 
point of this very brief review being only to show that they cannot easily 
be stretched to answer it without invoking many of the same psycholog­
ical pro­cesses invoked in our shared intentionality account, pro­cesses such 
as joint attention, perspective-­taking, dual-­level collaboration, cooperative 
communication, the enforcement and creation of social norms, and a 
sense of moral obligation. To account for ­these pro­cesses, we need to 
invoke not just general biological preparedness for learning and inference, 
but also specific biological preparedness for uniquely ­human cooperative 
interactions and ­mental coordination with ­others.
Sociocultural Theories
Sociocultural theories of ­human development begin with Vygotsky (for 
example, 1930 / 1978; though one can find historical roots in earlier 
scholars such as Baldwin 1896). Vygotsky’s major concern was to show 
that the “higher cognitive functions”—­which he explic­itly designated as 
uniquely ­human (for example, Vygotsky and Luria 1930 / 1993)—­are not 
the result of such ­things as individual learning and hypothesis-­testing. 
Rather, they are the result of ­humans’ ability to create and internalize 
social practices, especially ­those concerned with the use of cultural arti­
facts and symbols as cognitive prostheses. Thus, as ­children participate in 
cultural practices structured by the symbols and constructions of their na­
tive language, they benefit from the historical pro­cess by which earlier 
members of the linguistic community partitioned the world into discrete 
concepts that could be symbolized by par­tic­u­lar linguistic items and struc­
tures. And as ­children converse with adults using a conventional lan­
guage, they experience how adults engage ­others in discursive interactions 
and provide reasons and justifications for their vari­ous statements and ar­
guments. In the pro­cess, ­children inherit, as it ­were, ways of catego­
rizing, thinking, and rationalizing the world.
Vygotsky died at age 37, so ­there is much that he simply did not have 
time to address. The main issue in the current context is: What are the 
basic cognitive and social skills that ­humans, but not other apes, possess 
that enable them to create and internalize cultural practices and artifacts 

302	
Conclusion
in the first place? Vygotsky and Luria (1930 / 1993) specifically discuss 
Köhler’s (1925) research with apes, but their main focus was on how 
­human ­children grow up in the presence not just of physical tools but of 
cultural artifacts, and how ­these make every­thing pos­si­ble. But how did 
­humans come to invent cultural artifacts, and what is it about ­children 
that enables them to learn about and through them? As I have argued pre­
viously (for example, Tomasello 1999) what is missing ­here is an account 
of ­humans’ unique adaptations for culture and cultural learning—­for such 
­things as joint attention and instructed learning—­that enable them, but 
not ­great apes (even ­those raised in a ­human cultural environment), to 
develop into fully cultural beings. In general, Vygotsky was so concerned 
to show the crucially impor­tant role of culture and its artifacts in ­human 
cognitive ontogeny that he neglected the special skills required to partici­
pate in pro­cesses of culture to begin with, skills that emerge already in 
infancy and toddlerhood (which he never studied systematically). He 
also, as noted earlier, focused almost totally on the transmitive dimension 
of ­human culture and cultural learning, as opposed to its coordinative 
dimensions as manifest in such activities as collaboration, cooperative 
communication, and perspective-­taking. And, of course, Vygotsky did not 
focus at all on ­children’s social relationships and all the many unique 
ways that ­children relate to ­others socially and morally.
On the modern scene, a number of anthropologically oriented devel­
opmental psychologists—­most prominent among them Cole (1998) and 
Rogoff (1990, 2003)—­have ­adopted a generally Vygotskian perspective to 
investigate the cultural dimensions of ­human development. The focus of 
cultural psychologists has been almost exclusively on the way that varia­
tions in ­children’s cultural experience lead to variations in the ways they 
relate to the world cognitively and socially. Although again we should be 
mindful of criticizing other theories for not answering our question, 
Rogoff has emphasized throughout her work pro­cesses such as ­children’s 
observational learning and guided participation in the pro­cess of be­
coming a competent member of a culture. She has not focused on the 
under­lying psychological pro­cesses enabling ­human ­children—­but not 
­great apes, even ­those raised in a ­human culture—to develop in the unique 
ways that they do. Modern cultural psychologists have criticized Vygotsky’s 
notion of internalization as being too individualistic—as they prefer to 
focus on pro­cesses of distributed learning in which both the pro­cess and 
the outcome are indivisibly social. However, they have not explained the 

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
303
phenomena that internalization was meant to explain: ­children’s skills 
of executive self-­regulation.
Interestingly, a classic source that supplies many of the pieces that 
purely sociocultural theories are missing is the early work of Piaget. The 
most well-­known source is Piaget’s (1932) work on the development of 
moral judgment. Of most relevance to current concerns, Piaget argued 
that the key to ­children’s moral development is not individually learning and 
following adult rules—­which require only prudence and conformity—­but 
rather cooperating and negotiating with peers based on reciprocity and 
mutual re­spect. Our account of ­children’s moral development draws heavi­ly 
on many of his seminal ideas. But in other theoretical work during the 
1930s to 1960s, Piaget extended this general approach to cognitive devel­
opment as well (see the papers collected in 1965 / 1995). He argued that 
learning ­things from adult instruction was fine and necessary, but ­because 
it was basically conformity it could not be responsible for ­children’s 
reasoning, which originates in interactions with peers. In interactions with 
peers, the child has to cooperate and negotiate with an equal other in order 
to come to some kind of mutually acceptable outcome. This early work 
of Piaget is not a sociocultural theory as it actually downplays the impor­
tance of cultural learning and adult socialization per se, but it is certainly 
not an individualistic theory ­either as the key mechanisms are social 
interactions involving cooperation, discourse, and perspective-­taking. A 
term used by a number of modern scholars is “social co-­construction,” 
and this would seem to fit the situation as envisaged by Piaget quite well. 
Nevertheless, we should note that Piaget applied this way of thinking 
almost exclusively to ­children in ­middle childhood during the school 
years (as have more modern scholars of co-­construction), whereas our 
analyses suggest that something similar is ­going on—­albeit in a more 
basic form—at earlier ages as well.
So again in this case we may say that sociocultural theories of ­human 
ontogeny ­were not crafted to answer our question, and they cannot easily 
be stretched to do so without invoking many of the same psychological 
pro­cesses invoked in our shared intentionality account.
What Else Is Needed?
Neither purely individualistic theories nor purely sociocultural theories 
can do what we need them to do. Piagetian and other individualistic the­
ories recognize that experience and learning take place within the context 

304	
Conclusion
of a biologically prepared organism. But they do not recognize anything 
special about ­humans’ biological preparedness specifically for cooperation 
and culture, which, I would argue, is necessary to explain the ontogeny of 
uniquely ­human psy­chol­ogy. Vygotskian and other sociocultural theo­
rists recognize that much of what makes ­humans unique is their socio­
cultural experiences. But they fail to recognize biological preparedness 
altogether, again of the type that enables ­humans to have sociocultural 
experiences in the first place.
In light of ­these theories’ vari­ous limitations—­again, with regard to 
our specific question—­shared intentionality theory si­mul­ta­neously in­
vokes (1) uniquely ­human biological preparedness for shared intention­
ality as enabling cause, and (2) individual sociocultural experience (made 
pos­si­ble by uniquely ­human biological preparedness for shared intention­
ality) as proximate (efficient) cause. Both are needed (along with some 
uniquely social pro­cesses of executive regulation) to explain the ontogeny 
of ­human uniqueness.
Shared Intentionality Theory
Shared intentionality theory is a Vygotskian theory ­because it is focused 
not on all of ­human psy­chol­ogy but only on uniquely ­human psy­chol­ogy, 
and it explains uniquely ­human psy­chol­ogy mainly in terms of the unique 
forms of sociocultural activity in which individuals engage over the life 
course. But we have attempted to fashion a modernized neo-­Vygotskian 
theory by invoking an evolutionary approach to ­human ontogeny in 
which individuals are biologically adapted in specific ways for engaging 
in their species-­unique forms of sociocultural activity. Further, we have 
focused much more on the way that ­these adaptations facilitate social 
and ­mental coordination—in such activities as joint attention, collabo­
ration, and cooperative communication—­than did Vygotsky, whose pri­
mary focus was on the pro­cess of cultural transmission and its effects 
on ­human psy­chol­ogy.
In summary form, the theory is that ­human ontogeny is a constructive 
pro­cess involving maturation, experience, and executive self-­regulation. 
The maturational framework begins with general ­great ape cognitive 
and social ontogeny, but then also incorporates evolutionarily new and 

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
305
specifically ­human capacities that transform the pro­cess. ­There are two 
sets of specifically ­human capacities.
Joint Intentionality
Motivation: the motivation to socially affiliate and bond 
with other individuals (especially adults) by sharing / aligning 
psychological states (emotions, goals, attention, knowledge) 
with them.
Cognition: the cognitive capacity to create a joint agent “we” 
with other individuals, creating the possibility of taking the 
perspective of ­others, including recursively (aka the dual-­level 
structure), and relating to ­others second-­personally as equals.
Collective Intentionality
Motivation: the group-­minded motivation to affiliate with 
and care for the social group by respecting and conforming to 
(aligning with) its conventions and norms (that is, ­under the 
pressure of obligation).
Cognition: the cognitive capacity to form a group-­minded 
“we” and so to participate in conventions, norms, and institu­
tions, and to view ­things from “objective” and normative 
perspectives.
As ­these new capacities enter into ontoge­ne­tic pathways, they make pos­
si­ble new forms of sociocultural interaction and experience—­such as joint 
attention and dual-­level collaboration, along with their associated perspec­
tives and roles—­leading to new kinds of psychological attitudes, such as 
the senses of fairness and guilt. ­These capacities and experiences also 
transform the pro­cess of executive regulation from the individual self-­
regulation characteristic of ­great apes into the social self-­regulation and 
normative self-­governance that enable ­human ­children to internalize the 
perspectives and evaluations of ­others and the group, and so to create their 
own rational and moral identities. In this way, ­great ape psy­chol­ogy 
becomes uniquely ­human psy­chol­ogy.
Methodologically, our ontoge­ne­tic explanation of uniquely ­human cog­
nition and sociality—as all ontoge­ne­tic explanations—­comprises two 
basic steps: first, an age-­anchored description of the developmental path­

306	
Conclusion
ways involved; and second, an account of the ­factors affecting ­those de­
velopmental pathways. In each of the eight chapters in the main body of 
this work, we have described and explained a single, relatively specific 
developmental pathway. Our intention now is to look across ­these vari­ous 
pathways at the “­whole child” at par­tic­u­lar time slices. We focus on four such 
time slices: (1) infant emotion sharing, (2) the nine-­month revolution and 
second-­personal relations (joint intentionality), (3) the objective / normative 
turn (collective intentionality), and (4) reason and responsibility. Figure 11.1 
provides an overview of how we ­will proceed, down each of the four 
columns in turn. Near the top of the figure (in italics) are specifications 
of the four new and unique cognitive and motivational ele­ments, as just 
outlined, as they enter into the pro­cess. The six rows represent the six 
chapters in which uniquely ­human development begins in infancy or early 
childhood: social cognition, communication, cultural learning, collaboration, 
prosociality, and social norms (the other two are the later-­emerging 
capstones). Each of ­these pathways has its foundations in ­great ape 
functioning, so we do not need to explain the existence of ­these func­
tional domains; we only need to explain their transformation from a ­great 
ape form into a uniquely ­human form.
1 year
6 years
2 years
3 years
4 years
5 years
0
joint attention
cooperative communication
imitative learning
dual-level collaboration
helping/sharing
coordinating perspectives
conventional communication
instructed learning
joint commitment
fairness
social norms
cooperative
thinking
moral
identity
9-MONTH REVOLUTION
(JOINT INTENTIONALITY)
INFANT EMOTION SHARING
OBJECTIVE/NORMATIVE TURN 
(COLLECTIVE INTENTIONALITY)
REASON & RESPONSIBILITY
Cognition: perspectival; recursive
Motivation: share/align intentional states
Cognition: objective
Motivation: group-minded normative
Executive: social self-regulation
Executive: normative
self-governance
emotion 
sharing in
protoconversations
Motivation: share/ 
align emotional states
Figure 11.1 ​Overall ontoge­ne­tic course of uniquely ­human psy­chol­ogy.

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
307
Infant Emotion Sharing
­Human infants are adapted for a special social life from the beginning. 
From as early as two months of age, infants engage with adults in species-­
unique ways via pro­cesses of emotion sharing in protoconversations, 
which already have a turn-­taking structure and are innervated by a drive 
­toward emotional attunement. Infants’ motivation to align their emo­
tional state with that of their caregiver represents the first instance of the 
most basic motivational force of shared intentionality: sharing or aligning 
psychological states with ­others.
­Because ­great ape ­mothers and infants face many of the same tasks and 
challenges as ­human ­mothers and infants—­and both species show sim­
ilar patterns of mother-­infant attachment—we may ask why ­human in­
fants are so dif­fer­ent socially. The compelling answer proposed by Hrdy 
(2009, 2016) and Hawkes (2014) (and elaborated by Tomasello and Gon­
zalez-Cabrera 2017) is that at some point in evolution ­humans, but not 
other apes, switched to a system of cooperative childcare in which in­
fants’ relationships to many non-­mother adults became crucially impor­
tant as well. ­Because this system also led to greater fecundity, the result was 
that ­human infants had to compete with a greater number of siblings and 
peers for the care and attention of a greater number of adults, including 
at a distance. In this view, emotion sharing and other forms of shared 
intentionality emerge early in ­human ontogeny ­today ­because, evolu­
tionarily, infants who possessed them ­were better able to bond with (and 
so receive more care and attention from) more adults, and at a distance.
Infants establish strong affiliative and emotional bonds with adults by 
aligning their positive psychological states, as in protoconversations which 
evolved presumably as the motivational basis of social coordination in gen­
eral. Infants possess two species-­unique and early-­emerging social be­hav­
iors for ­doing this: smiling and laughing. Both continue to be impor­tant 
social bonding mechanisms throughout the ­human life span. In many so­
cial psychological experiments with adults it has been found that aligning 
psychological states with ­others—­for example, in emotional attunement, 
in joint attention, in imitation and conformity, and in joint goals for 
collaboration—­creates and reinforces affiliative social relationships (for 
example, Wolf et al. 2016). If the pro­cess works also between infants and 
adults (into which ­there is ongoing research), this would provide strong 
support for the hypothesis of Hrdy and colleagues. It is also telling, in 
this regard, that infants engage in their uniquely ­human forms of social 

308	
Conclusion
engagement with ­others almost exclusively with adults, not peers, which 
is compatible with the hypothesis as well. Fi­nally, also compatible with 
the hypothesis is the fact that for many of the social and social-­cognitive 
skills that both ­great ape and ­human youngsters possess (for example, 
gaze following, collaboration), ­human infants exercise them one to three 
years earlier in ontogeny, presumably ­because they are socially adaptive 
for ­human infants.
Overall, as compared with other ­great apes, ­human ontogeny takes a 
very long time and depends on much more adult investment and social 
support. This life history strategy is clearly geared ­toward a cultural way 
of life in which individuals are interdependent on one another, at all stages 
of ontogeny, for every­thing from acquiring food to obtaining life-­sustaining 
information. This all begins in early infancy. As they mature, ­children must 
continue to maintain good affiliative relations with the adults who feed 
them and teach them all the way into adolescence, so functional support 
for ­these affiliative relations is pres­ent throughout ontogeny into adult­
hood, at which point they underlie a wide array of culturally significant 
social interactions. ­Human infants’ strong motivation for emotional at­
tunement and alignment with ­others provides the emotional / motiva­
tional starting point for all uniquely ­human psy­chol­ogy.
The Nine-­Month Revolution and Second-­Personal 
Relations (Joint Intentionality)
From birth to two or three years of age, ­human infants’ cognitive skills 
for dealing with the physical world—­their “core” cognitive capacities for 
such ­things as object permanence and categorization, spatial relations 
and navigation, tool use and causality, and competence with small 
numerosities—­just are ­great ape cognitive skills. ­These skills emerge in 
­great apes and ­human infants in a very similar manner on similar time­
tables over the first few years of life.
But ­children’s skills and motivations for relating to their social world 
are a dif­fer­ent story. Already in early infancy infants engage with adults 
in species-­unique forms of emotion sharing, as we have just seen. Then, 
as the general ­great ape capacity for understanding ­others as intentional 
agents matures at around nine months of age, it combines synergistically 
with this emotion sharing to create the earliest skills and motivations of 
joint intentionality. Rather than just sharing with ­others’ emotional states, 

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
309
infants now share with them intentional states—­goals, attention, 
knowledge—­aimed at external referents. A dual-­level structure of shared­
ness and individuality is thus constituted, creating in addition the possibility 
of relating to ­others second-­personally as coequal partners.
Unique Ontoge­ne­tic Pathways  ​This new dual-­level structure of joint inten­
tionality changes every­thing. It changes infants’ cognitive skills of repre­
sen­ta­tion and inference as well as their social interactions and relation­
ships with ­others. This is manifest in all five of the ontoge­ne­tic pathways 
that we specified as uniquely ­human already in infancy and toddlerhood: 
joint attention, communication, cultural learning, collaboration, and 
prosociality (second column of Figure  11.1). Specifically, in all ­these 
pathways ­great ape skills and motivations of individual intentionality are 
transformed into uniquely ­human skills and motivations of joint inten­
tionality. Three of ­these pathways concern social and / or ­mental coordi­
nation directly.
	
•	­Great apes’ ability to imagine what ­others perceive and know 
is transformed into ­human infants’ ability to share attention 
(joint attention) and knowledge (common ground) with 
­others, in which “we” perceive and know ­things together. 
Motivationally, infants and toddlers seek to share attention 
and knowledge with ­others ­because this facilitates their 
social-­emotional bonding (that is, as continuation of the 
emotion sharing by which infants create species-­unique so­
cial bonds). Cognitively, joint attention, as an instantiation of 
the dual-­level structure, creates the possibility of dif­fer­ent 
perspectives on one and the same entity. The emergence of 
this dual-­level structure of joint attention and individual per­
spectives is foundational for the ­later emergence of the 
distinction between subjective attitudes (individual perspec­
tives, beliefs) and objective facts (dependent on no single in­
dividual’s perspective or belief).
	
•	­Great apes’ group action is transformed into ­human infants’ 
dual-­level collaboration, in which “we” form a joint goal 
specifying our individual, often complementary, roles. Moti­
vationally, sharing goals is another instance of the inherently 

310	
Conclusion
rewarding sharing of intentional states. Cognitively, dual-­level 
collaboration reflects more or less directly the dual-­level 
structuring of joint intentionality. Of crucial importance, 
dual-­level collaboration creates a new type of social relation­
ship: “I” and “you” as part of our interdependent “we.” 
Interacting in the context of this interdependent social 
relationship—in which we both are equal causal forces in 
pursuit of the joint goal and the roles have impartial stan­
dards of ideal performance—­creates a sense of partner 
equality (self-­other equivalence), resulting in a sense of mu­
tual trust and re­spect between partners, each of whom takes 
responsibility for the fate of the other. The outcome is that 
by toddlerhood, infants recognize both themselves and 
­others as the new and unique social beings known as second-­
personal agents, which is foundational for entering into nor­
matively binding commitments.
	
•	­Great apes’ ability to communicate intentionally with ­others 
for self-­serving purposes is transformed into ­human referen­
tial communication for cooperative purposes. As communi­
cator, the infant (initially by pointing) invites the recipient to 
align his perspective with hers so that they jointly attend to 
an external referent, relying heavi­ly on their common ground 
to do so. As recipient, the infant comprehends the communi­
cator’s similar attempts, relying again on their common 
ground but also on the ability to take perspectives recur­
sively, for example, as she recognizes that “he” intends for 
“me” to know something. Establishing joint attention is 
inherently motivating ­because it facilitates social-­emotional 
bonding, but, in addition, acts of reference are produced in 
order to attain cooperative social ends. Infants thus find it ad­
ditionally rewarding to share psychological attitudes with 
­others (for example, excitement or curiosity) about shared 
referents, which constitutes an expressive communicative 
motive. The pragmatic infrastructure for early forms of 
uniquely ­human communication—­cooperative motives, 
common ground, joint attention, recursive inferencing—­
makes pos­si­ble, ­after a time, the acquisition of communicative 
(linguistic) conventions understood as such.

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
311
Two other early emerging ontoge­ne­tic pathways of uniquely ­human psy­
chol­ogy are more similar to their ­great ape points of departure. ­These 
do not concern completely new forms of social coordination, but simply 
modified forms of general ­great ape social interaction, based again on 
emerging skills and motivations of joint intentionality in the first few years 
of life.
	
•	­Great apes’ ability to socially learn from ­others is trans­
formed into ­human skills of imitative learning, which focus 
more strongly on the actions performed (as opposed to the 
results achieved). Motivationally, infant imitation of actions 
in par­tic­u­lar (for example, in social imitation and confor­
mity) facilitates social bonding with adults, and so, again, the 
cooperative breeding context would seem to play a key role. 
Cognitively, ­human infants are also able to engage in role-­
reversal imitation, relying quite directly on their general 
ability to reverse roles and take the perspective of a partner.
	
•	­Great apes’ instrumental helping and (reluctant) sharing, 
motivated by sympathy, are transformed into ­human helping 
and sharing of a type we have called “Smithian.” The key 
fact ­here is that toddler helpers put themselves imaginatively 
in the shoes of the recipient, and only give help if it is de­
served (­there is good cause for the act of helping) and with 
the real needs of the recipient (not her subjective desires if 
they are not justified) in mind. That is, they help paternalisti­
cally. This dif­fer­ent form of helping again incorporates the 
ability to reverse roles and see from the other’s perspective.
Looking forward, we may say that, cognitively, the dual-­level structure 
of simultaneous sharedness (creating socially shared realities) and individ­
uality (individuals’ perspectives within ­those shared realities) characterizes 
every­thing from ­children’s pretend play to adults’ cultural institutions—­
that is to say, precisely ­those sociocultural activities that other ­great apes 
can neither create nor understand. From a sociomoral perspective, the 
emergence of the dual-­level structure of joint intentionality enables 
­human infants and toddlers to have species-­unique types of sociocultural 
experience (for example, in acts of collaboration or helping), which 

312	
Conclusion
form the foundation for all their subsequent species-­unique sociomoral 
interactions and relationships. Conceiving of “I” and “you” as equiva­
lent partners within our cooperative “we”—­that is, conceiving of one 
another as cooperative second-­personal agents—­characterizes every­
thing from dividing the spoils of a collaborative effort fairly among par­
ticipants to citizens debating with one another in a modern civil society. 
Again, this is precisely ­those sociocultural activities that other ­great apes 
can neither create nor understand.
The Contributions of Maturation and Experience  ​In much of modern psy­
chol­ogy, maturation and experience (or genes and environment, or na­
ture and nurture, or innate and learned) are often treated as mutually ex­
clusive alternatives. But in ­actual fact maturation and experience are 
complementary parts of a single pro­cess. In the construction meta­phor, a 
building cannot be built ­unless ­there are both raw materials (such as bricks 
and mortar) and some kind of plan or blueprint for how ­those raw mate­
rials should be put together. It is not incoherent to ask in par­tic­u­lar cases 
­whether the plan or (ge­ne­tic) blueprint is so power­ful it can use almost 
any raw materials (experiences), or ­whether the raw materials are so close 
to the final product that the plan or blueprint need be only very generic. 
But—­especially in complex psychological phenomena such as ­those we 
are investigating ­here—­both are always integral parts of the pro­cess.
The five joint intentional competencies reviewed above (corresponding 
to the first subsections of five of the corresponding chapters in our main 
account) all emerge in normal ­human ontogeny within a fairly narrow 
age range. The precise age depends on one’s methodological criteria, but 
if we focus only on experimental demonstrations (rather than natu­ral 
observations consistent with the emergence of the ability), we get the 
following ages (with one “best” citation for each; see the main chapters 
for other supporting citations).
	
•	Joint attention / common ground, ages twelve to fourteen 
months (Moll et al. 2008).
	
•	Cooperative / referential communication, age twelve months 
(Behne et al. 2012).
	
•	Role-­reversal imitation, ages twelve to eigh­teen months 
(Carpenter et al. 2005).

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
313
	
•	Dual-­level collaboration, age fourteen months (Warneken 
and Tomasello 2007).
	
•	Basic helping, age fourteen months (Warneken and Toma­
sello 2007).
In terms of a single sample of infants followed longitudinally, Carpenter 
et al. (1998b) followed twenty-­four infants from nine to fifteen months of 
age using a mix of naturalistic and experimental observations. The age 
of emergence for the first three of ­these competencies for all twenty-­four 
infants (collaboration and helping ­were not tested) was nine to fourteen 
months. In a training study, when nine-­ and ten-­month-­old infants ­were 
trained for four weeks longitudinally by their ­mothers in pointing be­hav­
iors, ­there was no effect on age of emergence (Matthews et al. 2012). And 
helping be­hav­iors do not increase in frequency when they are rewarded 
externally (Warneken and Tomasello 2008, 2013b). ­These age trends and 
experimental results thus suggest that ­these five developmental pathways 
are fairly heavi­ly canalized by a strong maturational component.
This conclusion is reinforced both by research on ­children with autism 
and by cross-­cultural developmental research. In terms of autism, ­there 
has been a ­great deal of research showing that ­children on the spectrum 
have serious prob­lems with joint attention, and indeed ­there are theories 
proposing that this is their primary deficit. In addition, it is well-­known 
that ­children with autism have trou­ble with imitation, and especially with 
role-­reversal imitation. ­Children with autism gesture imperatively, but 
they do not gesture just for the joy of sharing attention or attitudes with 
­others. And ­these ­children have a clear deficit in collaborating with part­
ners, including especially the forming of a joint goal. (Their helping be­
hav­ior seems unaffected, but they have never been tested in paternalistic 
helping that requires the taking of perspectives.) Cross-­culturally, in a 
study referenced repeatedly, Callaghan et al. (2011) investigated all five of 
­these joint intentional competencies in three very dif­fer­ent cultural set­
tings (one Western industrialized, and two traditional, small-­scale, non­
literate cultures). They found almost identical ages of emergence across 
cultures in all five of ­these competencies (although the imitation did not 
involve role reversal, and the helping was not paternalistic). Other studies, 
including on expressive pointing, find basic cross-­cultural uniformities 
as well.

314	
Conclusion
Combined with the uniformity of age trends across individuals in well-­
studied populations, ­these findings from ­children with autism and from 
cross-­cultural developmental research reinforce the conclusion that all of 
­these key competencies emerge in early ­human ontogeny structured by 
a strong maturational component. None of this is to say that a child raised 
in social isolation would develop ­these competencies normally or on a 
normal schedule. It is almost certain that a species-­typical social 
environment—­especially interacting with nurturing adults—is an integral 
part of the developmental pro­cess. The claim is simply that, given a 
species-­typical social environment with caring adults, the developmental 
pathways for ­these early joint intentional competencies are robustly struc­
tured maturationally, without the need for adults to actively intervene in 
acts of pedagogy or other forms of intentional socialization.
The other noteworthy fact is that all ­these competencies are mainly 
used in social interaction with adults, not peers (and most studies of in­
fants’ and toddlers’ skills of joint intentionality observe them in interac­
tion with adults). It takes only a few minutes in a kindergarten setting to 
observe that infants and toddlers before three years of age are well attuned 
to the adults in the room, but are basically playing in parallel with, almost 
ignoring, their peers. In our detailed analyses in the main chapters of 
the book we documented that infants and toddlers, even in ideal 
circumstances:
	
•	do not engage in joint attention with peers as much as with 
adults (Bakeman and Adamson 1984);
	
•	do not make bids for communicative interaction as much 
with peers as with adults (Ninio 2016);
	
•	do not point for peers as readily as they do for adults, and 
comprehend adult points better as well (Kachel et  al., in 
press);
	
•	do not imitate / conform to peers as readily as they imi­
tate / conform to adults (Zmyj et al. 2010; see also McGuigan 
and Stevenson 2016);
	
•	do not collaborate with peers as readily or skillfully as they 
collaborate with adults (compare Warneken et  al. 2006; 
Brownell and Carriger 1990; see also Endedijk et al. 2015);
	
•	do not help peers as readily as they help adults (compare 
Warneken and Tomasello 2006; Hepach et al. 2017a).

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
315
­Children at this tender age are clearly adapted for interacting in mean­
ingful ways mainly, if not exclusively, with adults. ­There are in­ter­est­ing 
cultural differences in the extent to which adults attempt to interact with 
infants and toddlers on an equal level (simulating peers), ­for example, by 
getting down on the floor and playing with them. Although adults can 
never become peers totally, this strategy might potentially facilitate a tran­
sition to peer interactions ­because it simulates egalitarian interactions; 
alternatively, it might inhibit them by encouraging ­children to always in 
all circumstances seek authoritative adult scaffolding. We do not know the 
answer to this question, as it has not been directly investigated.
The Role of Executive Regulation  ​Conceptualizing executive regulation as 
a causal ­factor in ­human ontogeny results from a basic meta-­theoretical 
choice: the choice is to view the “active organism” as an autonomous 
decision-­maker at least partially responsible for its own developmental 
fate. Nature in many cases (for example, many insects) hardwires many 
­things so that the individual makes few if any autonomous decisions and 
so does not cause anything. But in more complex organisms that make 
behavioral decisions based on their cognitive assessment of the current 
situation and their competencies for dealing with it, we may say that, to 
some degree, the individual actively chooses its own experiences and so, 
indirectly and partially, directs its own development. It is this conceptual­
ization of the autonomous, self-­regulating agent that leads us to treat pro­
cesses of self-­regulation not just as a separate set of skills but as a causal 
­factor inherent in the ontogeny—at one level or another—of all cogni­
tively complex organisms.
Infants and toddlers engage in executive self-­regulation in the same gen­
eral manner as all ­great apes. When tested in traditional tests of such 
­things as delay of gratification, susceptibility to distraction, per­sis­tence 
on task, inhibition of prepotent responses, and effortful control of emo­
tions, three-­year-­old ­children perform like apes. However, in some cases 
what one-­ to three-­year-­olds self-­regulate are uniquely ­human cognitive 
skills and motivations. And so, for example, in their early communication 
they must use the executive level to align the perspective of ­others with 
their own perspective (in the same repre­sen­ta­tional format), and also to 
recursively embed perspectives within one another. To reverse roles in col­
laboration they must do essentially the same ­thing: take a bird’s-­eye view 
(repre­sen­ta­tionally neutral) from the executive level in order to reverse 

316	
Conclusion
roles and establish self-­other equivalence and partner equality. When in­
fants reverse roles in imitation, again they need an executive level. This is 
all what we have called “individual self-­regulation of unique psycholog­
ical content.”
However, what we have posited as the most impor­tant uniquely ­human 
form of executive self-­regulation, social self-­regulation, is not something 
in which infants and toddlers regularly engage. Of course infants and tod­
dlers respond to imperatives from adults and may learn to behave in ac­
cordance with recurrent imperatives in the appropriate situation—as do 
many ­house­hold pets—­but ­there is no evidence that they have internal­
ized this social regulation as a way of controlling or counteracting their 
behavioral-­level natu­ral tendencies and prepotent impulses. The way that 
infants behave in front of mirrors suggests that they may understand when 
­others are looking at them, and this makes them shy, but we do not have 
evidence for any active efforts to manage the impression that they are 
making on ­others, which would demonstrate the key ability to regulate 
their own be­hav­ior from the perspective of ­others. But social self-­regulation 
­will become an impor­tant part of uniquely ­human ontogeny soon enough.
The Whole Toddler  ​The proposal is thus that between nine months and 
three years of age the uniquely ­human adaptations for joint intentionality 
synthesize with the developmental pathways characteristic of all ­great 
apes to create uniquely ­human ways of understanding, communicating, 
and learning from ­others, as well as unique ways of relating to ­others as 
sympathetic collaborative partners, worthy of trust and assistance. At the 
risk of oversimplification, we propose Figure 11.2 as a highly schematic 
depiction of the new way that ­human toddlers (that is, new relative to 
other apes and to younger infants) engage with ­others cognitively and 
socially.
In this diagram (Figure 11.2), ­there is a top level in which “we” share 
or align psychological states—­goals, attention, knowledge, and attitudes—­
which is inherently motivating to infants and toddlers. On the bottom 
level is the new form of social engagement that this joint intentionality 
engenders: the equal partners “I” and “you” (as part of a “we”), each with 
her own role (with the possibility of reversal) and her own perspective 
(also with the possibility of reversal, in acts of perspective-­taking, and in 
addition recursive embedding). By three years of age ­children see ­others 
and themselves both (self-­other equivalence) as competent and coopera­

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
317
tive second-­personal agents who engage with one another with mutual 
re­spect. In a very schematic way, then, this diagram depicts what it is about 
­human infants and toddlers that makes them so dif­fer­ent from other apes, 
and how they are prepared for ­later cognitive and sociomoral develop­
ments involving more “objective” and normative ways of dealing with 
the world.
But infants and toddlers are not in­de­pen­dent agents. Their competen­
cies are demonstrated almost exclusively with adults, who humor them 
and scaffold them in all kinds of ways, whereas they are almost totally 
incompetent with peers. The overall image is of a diapered toddler tod­
dling along ­behind an adult who filters and mediates her experience—­even 
chewing her food for her in some cultures—to scaffold her interactions 
with ­others and the world.
The Objective / Normative Turn at Three Years (Collective Intentionality)
Whereas joint intentionality arose in ­human evolution to facilitate co­
ordination between individuals, collective intentionality arose to facilitate 
coordination among the members of a cultural group, even if they ­were 
unfamiliar with one another. In-­group strangers coordinated with the sup­
port of supraindividual social structures such as conventions, norms, and 
institutions. The individuals who functioned best in cultural groups ­were 
“WE” ALIGNMENT:
 joint goal; joint attention; 
 joint knowledge; shared attitudes
“I”
“You”
S=O equality
my perspective
my role
your perspective
your role
recursive
reversible
2P Agent
2P Agent
Figure 11.2 ​The dual-­level structure of joint intentional competencies and moti­
vations as ­children approach their third birthdays. Abbreviations: S=O = self-­
other equivalence; 2P = second-­personal. 

318	
Conclusion
­those who had group-­minded ways of thinking and ­doing ­things: this is 
the way that “we,” in this cultural group, think about ­things, and this 
is the way that “we,” in this cultural group, do ­things. Group-­minded 
thinking and acting is not just scaling up from second-­personal to multi­
personal, but rather scaling up to the group’s self-­identity. It is under­
standing that this is the way that “we,” and anyone who would be one of 
us, think about ­things and do ­things; this is who we are. Cognitively, indi­
viduals who coordinate perspectives with “anyone who would be one of 
us” construct a kind of perspectiveless “objective” perspective on ­things. 
Motivationally, individuals who enter into collective commitments create 
supraindividual social structures (norms) that regulate all group members 
normatively, in the sense that violators lose their cooperative identity in 
the group.
Unique Ontoge­ne­tic Pathways  ​In con­temporary ­human ontogeny, young 
­children start becoming group-­minded at around three years of age, grad­
ually becoming more so, in a number of dif­fer­ent ways, from three to six 
years. In traditional cultural settings, three years of age has a special sig­
nificance, as it is the age at which toddlers are weaned and so start to be­
come more or less in­de­pen­dent individuals expected to, of their own ac­
cord, make their own joint commitments and re­spect the collective 
commitments (social norms) into which they are born. It is also the age 
at which ­children begin interacting with peers, thus inaugurating “the two 
social worlds of childhood” (adults and peers). In general, we may say that 
during ­these preschool years the child is moving on from her almost total 
dependence on adults to becoming si­mul­ta­neously more in­de­pen­dent as 
an individual, including especially with peers, and more integrated into 
the cultural group as an individual. Three-­ to six-­year-­olds’ maturing skills 
and motivations of collective intentionality enter into developmental path­
ways that are already structured by joint intentionality and, in so ­doing, 
create new, group-­minded ways of interacting, communicating, and 
learning from ­others in the cultural group as well as unique ways of re­
lating to them as moral beings.
The transformative pro­cess can be seen in each of the six ontoge­ne­tic 
pathways we reviewed that have a transition between early joint inten­
tionality and ­later collective intentionality: the coordination of perspec­
tives, conventional communication, instructed learning, joint commit­
ment, fairness, and social norms (the third column of Figure 11.1). The 

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
319
new cognitive capacity that emerges maturationally at this time is the ca­
pacity to think not just perspectivally but “objectively” in terms of how 
any rational creature, regardless of individual perspective, should think 
about ­things. The new motivation that emerges maturationally at this 
time is a normative obligation to think and act in accordance with the nor­
mative standards of the group. ­These evolutionarily new ways of oper­
ating transform all three of our cognitive pathways.
	
•	Toddlers’ ability to engage ­others in bouts of joint attention 
in which partners take one another’s perspective (or attempt 
to align them in communication) is transformed into young 
­children’s ability to coordinate ­those perspectives, and then 
somehow to create from this pro­cess the notion of an “ob­
jective” perspective (a kind of perspectiveless view from no­
where). Fa­cil­i­ty with an objective perspective enables young 
­children to construct the foundational notion of a belief as 
one potential (and corrigible) perspective on an objective 
situation, as well as both the distinction between appearance 
and real­ity and the aspectual nature of linguistic symbols 
(that is, that they enable us to symbolically construe the 
same objective entity in a variety of dif­fer­ent ways, depending 
on our communicative purposes).
	
•	Toddlers’ skills and motivations of cooperative communica­
tion, in which they use gestural acts to align perspectives 
with ­others, are transformed into young ­children’s skills of 
conventional communication using a natu­ral language. Ac­
quisition of linguistic conventions, including conventional 
linguistic constructions, before three years of age is made 
pos­si­ble by ­children’s participation in joint attention with 
mature speakers and their ability to imitatively learn instru­
mental actions from ­others. ­After three years of age they under­
stand what they are ­doing as conforming to conventions (as 
supraindividual social structures created by the group). The 
structure of conventional languages is such that ­children are 
led to make a distinction between propositional attitude and 
propositional content, a distinction that both depends on and 
contributes to an objective way of thinking. Self-­monitoring 
of one’s discourse with ­others, including perspective-­shifting 

320	
Conclusion
discourse, contributes in all kinds of ways to young ­children’s 
overall understanding of social and ­mental life.
	
•	Toddlers’ ability to learn ­things from ­others imitatively is 
supplemented with a new form of cultural learning: in­
structed learning. When ­children explore the world on their 
own, and even imitate ­others, they are mostly learning about 
par­tic­u­lar entities and pro­cesses. They may make generaliza­
tions, but each act of learning is more or less par­tic­u­lar. With 
instructed learning, ­children’s emerging group-­mindedness 
and sense of objectivity transform the learning pro­cess. 
­Children see the adult pedagogue as a representative voice 
coming from the culture at large that is attempting to convey 
objective cultural knowledge about the world. Inductive 
generalization from particulars is not needed; ­children are 
acquiring generalized, objective, cultural knowledge directly 
from the source. This mode of learning constitutes a 
quantum leap from the kind of particulate social learning in 
which other species engage.
From a sociomoral perspective, we can again see the transformative 
effect of skills and motivations of collective intentionality as they enter 
into the ontoge­ne­tic pro­cess. Toddlers collaborate and help and comply 
with ­others, but young ­children from three years of age inject an ele­ment 
of normativity into ­these and all the other social activities in which they 
engage. It is now not just about what one wants to do, but about what 
one ­ought to do.
	
•	Toddlers’ motivations for engaging with adults in dual-­level 
collaboration are transformed from personal to normative. 
Three-­year-­old ­children begin to understand that when indi­
viduals voluntarily make themselves dependent on one 
another in collaborative activities, they incur a normative re­
sponsibility for the fate of the other. When both individuals 
want to assure the other that they ­will act responsibly, with 
the other’s fate in mind, they can form a joint commitment, 
which is normatively binding. An impor­tant aspect of the 
joint commitment is that when ­either party is in violation, 
the other is entitled to call her out for her defection, and the 

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
321
violator / defector must accept this censure as legitimate and 
deserved or ­else lose her cooperative identity. At this age as 
well, ­children begin to understand groups qua groups and the 
collective commitments that hold them together normatively.
	
•	Toddlers’ prosocial motivations to help and to share are 
transformed from personal to normative. In par­tic­u­lar, 
three-­year-­old ­children begin to understand that when col­
laborative partners have both made contributions to pro­
curing resources, they both deserve to share them fairly. This 
normative sense of fairness is grounded, first of all, in 
­children’s more basic sense of self-­other equivalence, en­
abling an impartial evaluation of us both. Second of all, it is 
grounded in ­children’s sense of re­spect for second-­personal 
agents, ­because treating someone unfairly is essentially an 
act of disrespect. Third, it is grounded in ­children’s emerging 
sense of group-­level social norms of fairness. The normative 
dimension of all this is especially clear in the fact that the 
exact same division of resources is considered fair or not fair 
depending on what ­others receive (social comparison), and 
in the fact that ­children are content with receiving less than 
­others when a fair procedure of resource allocation has been 
used (procedural fairness).
	
•	Toddlers’ conformity to the requests and directives of indi­
vidual adults is transformed into an understanding of collec­
tive group norms of expected be­hav­ior. Soon ­after their third 
birthdays, young ­children begin intervening in interactions 
between third parties to enforce conformity to social norms 
as, in some sense, objective standards of be­hav­ior that should 
be followed for the good of the group. By five years of age 
­children are actually creating their own social norms in game 
contexts and showing an understanding that the rules may 
be broken if and only if the creators or users agree to it. 
They are beginning to understand that seemingly objective 
social norms are actually created by individuals making 
collective agreements and commitments. Young ­children’s 
sense of fairness is transformed by the understanding of 
social norms of justice to include variations based on merit, 
need, and other ­factors.

322	
Conclusion
The sociomoral structure of collective intentionality is thus normative 
through and through. The basic source for the sense of normativity is the 
individual’s sense of “­ought” in their instrumental be­hav­iors: if one knows 
that ­doing X ­will accomplish one’s goal, then ­there naturally arises a sort 
of private psychological force: one ­ought to do X. But ­children’s emerging 
group-­mindedness ­after three years of age transforms this more individual 
instrumental force into a sense of what individuals who have appropriate 
concern for ­others and the group’s smooth functioning ­ought to do.
The Contributions of Maturation and Experience  ​As we have said repeatedly, 
uniquely ­human cognition and sociality are a joint product of the matu­
ration of the capacity for shared intentionality and the sociocultural 
experiences that this enables. But the general pattern is that as ontogeny 
proceeds, the plasticity of the pro­cess increases; that is to say, the role of 
experience increases. And that is precisely what we see ­here with the emer­
gence of skills and motivations of collective intentionality at three to six 
years of age.
Maturation clearly plays a significant role in shaping all six of our 
main developmental pathways during the three-­ to six-­year age period. 
We have specified as particularly critical the emergence of ­children’s ten­
dency, cognitively, to take an objective perspective on ­things, and their 
tendency, motivationally, to view ­things as governed by group-­minded 
normative forces. ­These two tendencies emerge for the first time in all 
our developmental pathways at around three years of age. ­Table 11.1 
lists the main phenomena (with representative citations) in all six path­
ways (plus moral identity as a seventh). Importantly, for most of ­these 
phenomena ­there are good data, mostly within the same study, to show a 
lack of ­these same skills and tendencies in two-­year-­old ­children. The 
absence of ­these skills and tendencies in two-­year-­olds is consistent with 
the observation that infants and toddlers interact skillfully only with 
single partners, and they have no apparent skills for coordinating in 
meaningful ways on the level of social groups.
The obvious conclusion from the convergence in age for the emergence 
of objective and normative thinking across all ­these dif­fer­ent domains is 
that maturation is playing an impor­tant role in the pro­cess. It is perhaps 
also impor­tant that ­children with autism have deficits in most of ­these 
skills and motivations of collective intentionality, although this could just 
as well be due to deficits accrued earlier in joint intentionality and the ex­

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
323
periences that ­these enable (and this could even differ for autists at dif­
fer­ent locations on the spectrum).
One complication in all of this that is very telling (and very Vygotskian) 
is that even infants and toddlers are already imitating and / or conforming 
to many adult cultural practices—­including linguistic conventions—­and 
this might suggest that this developmental pattern is not so neat ­after all. 
However, my proposal, following Vygotsky, is that this early imitation of 
conventional cultural practices represents a kind of mimicking, in the 
sense that ­children do not understand what they are imitating as a con­
vention or norm per se, followed only by their cultural group. Toddlers 
understand pieces of language simply as instruments they use with other 
individuals to invite joint attention; they only come to understand them 
as shared cultural practices sometime ­after three years of age (as demon­
strated by experiments on cultural common ground and conventions as 
group-­specific). Similarly, toddlers understand an adult’s invocation of so­
cial norms as directives emanating from individuals; they only come to 
understand them as group-­wide normative commitments ­after three years 
of age (as demonstrated by experiments on the enforcement of social 
­Table 11.1 ​Evidence (only most relevant studies cited) for emergence of senses of objectivity and normativity at 3 years of age—­
and not at 2 years of age.
Developmental 
Pathway
Phenomenon
Pres­ent at 3–4 Years
Absent at 2 Years
Social cognition
“Objectivity” in false belief, 
appearance-­reality
Many studies (child-­friendly 
versions)
Many studies (using behavioral 
choice)
Cultural common ground
Liebal et al. (2013)
Liebal et al. (2013)
Communication
Understanding conventions
Diesendruck et al. (2010)
—
Normativity of speech acts
Rakoczy and Tomasello (2009)
Rakoczy and Tomasello (2009)
Cultural learning
Instructed learning of generic 
information.
Butler and Tomasello (2016)
Butler and Tomasello (2016)
Collaboration
Joint commitment
Hamann et al. (2012); Gräfenhain 
et al. (2009)
Hamann et al. (2012); Gräfenhain 
et al. (2009)
Normative protest
Kachel et al. (in press)
Kachel et al. (pilot data)
Prosociality
Fairness
Hamann et al. (2011)
Hamann et al. (2011)
Reciprocity
Warneken and Tomasello (2013a)
Warneken and Tomasello (2013a)
Social norms
Enforcing norms
Rakoczy et al. (2008)
Rakoczy et al. (2008)
Re­spect for possession
Rossano et al. (2011)
Rossano et al. (2011)
Moral identity
Guilt
Vaish et al. (2016)
Vaish et al. (2016)

324	
Conclusion
norms). As Vygotsky proposed, despite their lack of understanding, this 
kind of imitated be­hav­ior may be crucially impor­tant in ­children’s devel­
opment in that it provides a “zone of proximal development” in which 
their be­hav­ior outstrips their understanding, which provides a kind of 
bootstrapping effect as adults react to ­children as if they have full under­
standing. In any case, my proposal is that ­children’s capacities for collective 
intentionality—in the sense that they understand conventions and norms 
as group-­minded phenomena—­first emerge at three to six years of age.
This impor­tant role of maturation notwithstanding, we have in the 
main chapters of this book reviewed much evidence for significant cul­
tural and individual differences in young ­children’s skills and motivations 
of collective intentionality, resulting from differences of experience. Sev­
eral of the most impor­tant examples are as follows. First, ­children’s ability 
to coordinate perspectives in understanding false beliefs depends crucially 
on the amount and type of discourse experience they have had with ­others, 
with extremely impoverished experience (such as in deaf ­children not ex­
posed to a conventional sign language) leading to large delays. ­There are 
also training studies that have produced significant individual differences 
in false-­belief understanding as a function of dif­fer­ent amounts and kinds 
of discourse experience. ­There are no glaring differences in ­children’s per­
for­mance of false-­belief tasks across cultures, but that is ­because ­children 
in all normal cultural contexts get sufficient amounts of the appropriate 
discourse experiences. Second, the acquisition of conventional linguistic 
skills—­both the acquisition and use of both words and grammatical 
constructions—­varies enormously as a function of linguistic experience 
and culture. Third, the way that young ­children engage with adults at­
tempting to instruct them varies significantly across cultural contexts as 
well, and this is not to mention the huge differences in the content of what 
is learned via instruction in dif­fer­ent individuals and cultures. Fourth, 
several studies have experimentally demonstrated significant cultural 
differences in ­children’s tendencies to be fair in the division of resources. 
Fifth, ­there are also cultural differences in the ways ­children enforce social 
norms (again not to mention cultural difference in the content of norms), 
and training effects in individuals’ tendency to enforce social norms have 
been experimentally demonstrated as well. And ­there are ­others. In gen­
eral, despite somewhat sparse data in some cases, the overall tendency is 
clear: the normal developmental pro­cess in the case of ­these later-­
emerging skills and motivations of collective intentionality, as compared 

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
325
with the earlier-­emerging skills and motivations of joint intentionality, is 
much more plastic depending on the par­tic­u­lar experiences of individuals.
Not only does experience ­matter in ­these later-­emerging skills and mo­
tivations of collective intentionality, but dif­fer­ent types of experience 
­matter differently. The period from three to six years of age inaugurates 
the two social worlds of childhood. Whereas infants’ and toddlers’ skills 
and motivations of joint intentionality are evolutionarily tailored almost 
exclusively for interactions with adults, young ­children’s skills and moti­
vations of collective intentionality must function effectively with both 
adults and peers: some more with one, some more with the other, and 
some with both. Preschoolers’ interactions with adults are characterized 
by an asymmetry of knowledge and power, so their most common expe­
riences with adults at this age are adult behavioral directives and vari­ous 
kinds of instruction—it is the transmitive dimension of culture that pre­
dominates. In contrast, their interactions with peers are about working 
­things out with someone of equal knowledge and power, so their most 
common experiences with peers are playing or other­wise collaborating 
on an equal plane—it is the coordinative of dimension of culture that pre­
dominates. So ­children enter into their interactions with adults and peers 
with dif­fer­ent sets of expectations, and they learn from them differently.
We see evidence for this proposal in studies in which young ­children 
trust, or find more reliable, the testimony or instruction of adults over that 
of peers. This is presumably ­because they recognize adults as more au­
thoritative and expert in the transmission of knowledge and information. 
In terms of peer experience, ­there are a number of suggestive studies that 
siblings are especially impor­tant for ­children’s learning to coordinate per­
spectives in understanding false beliefs, perhaps ­because interacting with a 
more-­or-­less equal partner is more collaborative and so promotes 
perspective-­taking. Also, and for the same reason, siblings and peers can 
also play an impor­tant role in ­children’s conversational and discourse com­
petence. And fi­nally, in the moral domain, ­children near the end of this age 
period have more sophisticated moral discussions with peers than with 
adults, whose views they tend to accord (perhaps too much) re­spect. In­
deed, ­there are two studies showing that when adults instruct ­children, the 
­children tend to follow this instruction fairly strictly—­exploring a toy only 
in the way adults show them and following adult moral rules even when it 
might be better to be flexible—­whereas when they act on their own, or 
with peers, they more often come up with more flexible solutions.

326	
Conclusion
The overall point is that uniquely ­human cognition and sociality from 
three to six years of age must in large mea­sure be constructed, or co-­
constructed, by the child in interaction with ­others. In some types of in­
teractions, the power, knowledge, and status of the partner ­matters ­little; 
for example, in asking where my toy is, or in rolling a ball back and forth, 
it ­matters ­little ­whether the interactant is an adult or peer. But other types 
of interactions are fundamentally changed by the power, knowledge, and 
status of the interactant. Interactions in which ­children acquire informa­
tion and learn how to function in their culture take place most naturally 
with adults; they are the experts, ­after all. Interactions in which ­children 
co-­construct decisions and ways of thinking to solve a cooperative prob­lem 
take place most naturally with peers ­because the need is to create some 
novel cognitive or social product or perspective, without being overpow­
ered by adults and their entrenched and power­ful norms and practices.
The Role of Executive Regulation  ​All intelligent creatures self-­regulate their 
basic perceptions and actions from an executive level; ­doing so is almost 
the definition of intelligence. However, across the dif­fer­ent developmental 
pathways we have examined ­here, we have singled out two ways in which 
pro­cesses of executive self-­regulation play a unique role in ­human psycho­
logical ontogeny. The first is cases in which ­there is species-­unique psycho­
logical content that is being executively self-­regulated—­which toddlers 
already do to some limited degree in aligning perspectives, and so 
forth—­and the second is cases in which the self-­regulation pro­cess itself 
is socially (and / or normatively) constituted. Both forms of executive reg­
ulation play impor­tant roles in uniquely ­human cognition and sociality 
in the three-­ to six-­year age period.
First, following the general lead of Piaget and Karmiloff-­Smith, I have 
posited a mechanism of endogenous coordination on the executive level. 
Most impor­tant is the fact that ­human psychological organ­ization abhors 
contradictions and inconsistencies. When the child recognizes that she is 
taking contradictory perspectives on a situation or holds inconsistent 
values with re­spect to a situation, something must be done. The result is 
typically some kind of reconceptualization or reevaluation—­effected on 
the executive level—­that organizes the previously contradictory ele­ments 
in a new and more internally consistent manner. The most prominent ex­
amples from the cognitive domain all involve perspective-­taking. Young 

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
327
­children engage in discourse with ­others, and inevitably contradictions 
arise: I believe this to be the case, but you believe that to be the case; or I 
see it first as a rock, but then, ­after your prompting, I see it as a sponge; 
or I call it a dog, but you call it an animal. In all ­these cases, ­there is an 
apparent contradiction. But it is only apparent. The fact is that our be­
liefs may contradict one another ­because one or both of us may hold a 
false belief. The fact is that what is in real­ity a sponge may have the ap­
pearance of a rock. And dogs are not opposed to animals but are a class 
of animal. In the face of cognitive inconsistency, young ­children recon­
ceptualize the relationship of conceptual ele­ments, which can only take 
place on the executive level. Suggestive evidence for this proposal is the 
fact that, in the best-­researched case of false-­belief understanding, ­there 
is evidence that (1) confronting ­others with incompatible perspectives in 
discourse prompts developmental pro­gress, and (2) developmental pro­
gress is contingent on the individual’s level of executive functioning.
In the social domain, we may posit a similar pro­cess in ­children’s con­
structing a notion of fairness. ­Because ­children naturally want ­things for 
themselves and at the same time they want to be generous to ­others, they 
are often in conflict. And they understand their partner to be in the same 
conflict. In the context of collaboration, they see themselves and their 
partner as equivalent (self-­other equivalence), and this only exacerbates 
the situation. In parallel with the cognitive domain, then, we may pro­
pose that the child constructs a sense of fairness when her contradictory 
impulses for selfishness and generosity arise ­toward the same objects, 
while at the same time realizing that her coequal partner is experiencing 
the same conflict. This confronting of values leads the child to construct, 
or co-­construct with her partner, a coordinated resolution resting on a 
sense of fairness in the division of resources. This coordination and con­
struction can only take place, again, on the executive level.
Second, the uniquely ­human form of executive regulation is social 
and / or normative self-­regulation, in which the regulation is taking place 
from the perspective of ­others. Initially, this happens second-­personally 
as the child simulates and monitors her partner’s perspectives and evalu­
ations. Cognitively, the key is communication as the child monitors her 
partner’s perspective and comprehension of her communicative acts—­using 
both overt feedback from the partner and her own simulations—­and 
adjusts appropriately. As ­children internalize the pro­cess, they are able to 

328	
Conclusion
self-­correct their own communicative acts and eventually choose ap­
propriate communicative acts by ruling out alternatives mentally before 
producing one. At some point near the end of the preschool period, 
­children begin to tune into norms of rational discourse—­for example, 
not contradicting oneself—­and so to begin to normatively self-­govern 
their thoughts in the manner of all rational beings in the cultural group: 
we > me rationality. This presumably derives from their internalization 
of adult instruction. Instructed learning begins when ­children under­
stand the instructor as a representative of the cultural group conveying 
objective knowledge, which they believe legitimately overrides their 
own personal knowledge. They then internalize the instruction, in Vy­
gotskian fashion, to self-­regulate their cognitive interactions with the 
world via the objective perspective of the cultural group.
Socially, ­children are monitoring the ways that ­others are evaluating 
them as good cooperators—­again using both overt feedback and their own 
simulations—­and making adjustments accordingly. As they internalize the 
pro­cess, they begin to actively manage the impression they are making 
on ­others by behaving in par­tic­u­lar ways for par­tic­u­lar persons in par­tic­
u­lar contexts. Based on but ­going beyond this ability to simulate the per­
spectives and values of other individuals is the ability to self-­regulate using 
supraindividual social structures. At around three years of age ­children 
are beginning to understand joint commitments, which we have charac­
terized as a kind of we > me self-­regulation of a collaborative activity—­
that is, as a kind of collaborative regulation of their collaborative activity. 
Each feels an obligation to play her role according to the governing role 
ideal as mutually understood with her partner. When one of them does 
not live up to this ideal, the other protests normatively, and they feel it is 
deserved ­because they both have committed to the ideal. ­Children inter­
nalize this pro­cess of normative self-­regulation and feel a kind of second-­
personal guilt when they defect or other­wise behave nonideally ­toward 
their partner. In the end, each collaborator feels a responsibility ­toward 
her interdependent partner so that she does not defect at all.
In parallel to their comprehension of joint commitments, three-­year-­old 
­children are also beginning to understand social norms. ­Human ­children 
are born into a world of social norms, and they follow them from the 
outset based on re­spect for their source—­adults. This is arguably nothing 
more than obedience or conformity. But at around three years of age, 
­children start enforcing social norms on ­others, seemingly having come 

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
329
to some kind of a recognition of their legitimacy as group-­minded col­
lective commitments binding on every­one who would be one of us. To 
the extent that they identify with their cultural group, ­children see social 
norms as representing the same kind of we > me regulation that oper­
ates in joint commitments, with the “we” in this case being the cultural 
group with which they identify. They understand all of this fully by five 
years of age, as they create their own normatively binding rules with peers, 
understood as mutable agreements. At this point ­children are self-­
governing their beliefs and actions via social norms understood as such.
Key to all this is the pro­cess of internalization. It is not a mystical 
pro­cess. It is basically a kind of role-­reversal imitation: ­children adopt the 
perspective, attitude, or action of a partner or a group ­toward themselves. 
Internalization is therefore based both on a sense of self-­other equivalence 
and an ability to take perspectives, as well as a certain re­spect for social 
partners. The role of socialization in the internalization pro­cess has been 
extensively studied in the domains of problem-­solving and moral devel­
opment. In problem-­solving, Winsler (2009) has shown that preschool 
­children direct themselves in problem-­solving situations in much the way 
that adults have previously directed them. In the moral domain, ­there is 
a large lit­er­a­ture on ­children internalizing adult moral arguments and 
directives, and a key finding is that certain parenting styles—­especially so-­
called inductive parenting, in which ­children are given reasons for adult 
judgments—­facilitate the internalization of moral values in the sense that 
­children ­will now act morally even in the absence of adults (see Hoffman 
2000). So internalization and normative self-­regulation are pro­cesses that 
would seem to be quite sensitive to adult socialization and instruction.
The Whole Child  ​Three-­ to six-­year-­old ­children are no longer nursing, so 
they are no longer tied, in the same way as infants and toddlers, to their 
­mother. Of course, ­children this young are still dependent on adults in 
many basic ways, such as for food and basic cultural knowledge. But they 
are at the same time becoming more in­de­pen­dent members of the group, 
as seen most clearly in their more effective functioning in peer groups but 
also in their more effective functioning with supraindividual social struc­
ture such as joint commitments and social norms. ­Because they under­
stand the distinction between beliefs and the objective situation, they are 
able to deal effectively with peers who try to deceive them or take advantage 
of them. ­Because they can coordinate perspectives, they can understand 

330	
Conclusion
a ­whole panoply of concepts to which infants and toddlers cannot relate. 
­Because they perceive a basic self-­other equivalence, they have a sense of 
fairness ­toward ­others as equally deserving collaborative partners. Three-­ 
to six-­year-­olds are thus equipped not just to toddle along ­behind their 
mediating ­mother, but to begin venturing out—­without a safety net, as it 
­were—­into the sometimes challenging, sometimes scary world of peers. 
­Because adulthood is mainly about effective functioning with peers, we 
may view the three- to six-­year age period as a kind of infancy in the world 
of peers.
Reason and Responsibility
By six to seven years of age, ­children have consolidated their previous cog­
nitive and social achievements to take a first big step ­toward becoming 
reasonable and responsible “persons.” Being reasonable means being cog­
nitively cooperative with ­others: when ­others produce a good reason to 
change your beliefs, you do so. Being responsible means being socially or 
morally cooperative with ­others: when ­others produce a good reason to 
change your actions, you do so. And, indeed, as the reason-­giving pro­cess 
is internalized, ­others—­especially ­those with whom one shares in cultural 
common ground the group’s beliefs, values, and norms—­expect you to 
anticipate the reasons that “we” might give for par­tic­u­lar beliefs or actions 
and thus do the right ­thing of your own accord. The internalization of 
reason-­giving means that one is normatively self-­governing in a way that 
conforms not only to the group’s rational and moral norms but also to 
its manner of reason-­giving and justification (what kinds of ­things justify 
what kinds of ­things) when ­there are deviations from ­those norms.
Six-­ and seven-­year-­olds demonstrate their reasonableness and respon­
sibility most clearly as they interact with peers in such ­things as coopera­
tive problem-­solving and moral discourse. In such situations they feel ob­
ligated to give reasons for their beliefs and actions, to justify them to 
­others in ways that “we” (that is, every­one) should find reasonable and 
responsible—­indeed, in ways that are “objectively” reasonable and respon­
sible. School-­age ­children’s rational and moral identities are constituted 
by their abilities to interact with ­others in ­these ways, and this serves to 
transform the nature of their interactions, especially with peers.
	
•	Thinking individually is transformed into cooperative thinking 
in which individuals exchange beliefs about how to solve a 

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
331
prob­lem. ­Children’s growing ability to coordinate perspec­
tives enables them to use both partners’ contributions equally 
to assess the situation in new ways that they would never 
have considered on their own. Moreover, the collaborating 
thinkers justify their beliefs with reasons. Reasons are typi­
cally statements of beliefs or values that “we” share in cultural 
common ground and that are somehow determinative in 
our deliberations. They justify a belief or value in the situa­
tion by showing its connection to shared beliefs or values: it 
works this way ­because it is an instance of X, which we both 
agree works this way.
	
•	Deliberating individually or in parallel with a peer about the 
right ­thing to do is transformed into moral discourse in 
which individuals express their belief about which value best 
applies in a situation or which value ­ought to take pre­ce­
dence. Again, ­children’s growing ability to coordinate per­
spectives enables them to reach judgments and conclusions 
that they would never reach on their own. The discursive 
partners also provide reasons for their judgments, and again 
­these are effective precisely to the degree that they ground 
the expressed judgment in values that “we” share in cultural 
common ground. In the case of moral discourse, this 
grounding is not just in values we all share, but in our shared 
rank ordering of ­those values as they apply in the current 
situation (for example, saving a child’s life outranks other 
duties in the situation that one might have).
Being able to operate in ­these ways with peers constitutes the child’s 
rational and moral identities and provides an especially strong sense of 
obligation: to remain the person I am, I must do X in this situation. In the 
words of Korsgaard (1996): “An obligation always takes the form of a re­
action against the threat of a loss of identity” (102). To talk nonsense or 
to flout basic moral values is to become someone dif­fer­ent, someone un­
recognizable or unacceptable to “us.” Consequently, ­children must be 
able to correctly anticipate the reasons and justifications that “we” would 
give for vari­ous beliefs or proposed actions, and adjust their beliefs and 
proposals to ­these reasons and justifications ahead of time (reflective en­
dorsement). In this way six-­ to seven-­year-­old ­children come to engage in 

332	
Conclusion
normative self-­governance grounded in their rational and moral (coop­
erative) identities. They are nascent persons, with emerging public per­
sonas whose reputations among “us” must be preserved, and with inter­
nalized rational and moral identities that give them a sense of who they 
are. ­These are ­children whom the adults in most of the world’s cultures 
deem reasonable and ready to take on new and culturally impor­tant 
responsibilities.
The kinds of cooperative thinking and moral discourse in which six-­
year-­old ­children engage prob­ably has no direct maturational bases but 
only indirect ones in terms of more basic competencies. Cooperative 
thinking and moral discourse require participants who understand that 
when their partner states a fact she is actually expressing her belief or her 
set of values. Cooperative thinking and moral discourse also require 
­children to be able to take the perspective of their partner, and to re­spect 
the partner as a second-­personal agent with the standing to call them out 
for uncooperative or irrational be­hav­ior. And cooperative thinking and 
moral discourse require ­children who treat one another fairly and care 
what ­others think of them, leading to a re­spect for ­others and the group’s 
social norms. The main point is that despite requiring prerequisite skills 
with strong maturational bases, six-­ to seven-­year-­olds must co-­construct 
with peers discursive practices in the context of the kinds of reason-­based 
normative structures that are so impor­tant to uniquely ­human social life. 
Evidence that this is indeed the key pro­cess is provided by the many, and 
sometimes large, differences in the way that ­people from dif­fer­ent cultures 
use cooperation and reasoning in their problem-­solving and moral dis­
course with groupmates.
We must be careful in all of this not to make ­children into adults. In 
no society are six-­ and seven-­year-­old ­children considered full persons. 
That is typically reserved for adolescents, and indeed many cultures have 
rituals specifically marking the adolescent’s transition into full personhood 
(rites of passage, and so forth). And so we may ask what our six-­ and seven-­
year-­old ­children are missing. Our contention ­here would be that they 
are mainly missing cultural knowledge, the kind of knowledge of how 
our culture does ­things in which reason-­giving discourse is grounded. Six-­
year-­olds cannot participate in cooperative problem-­solving about how 
to deal with the coming drought or how to deal with a festering dispute 
among men over money, ­because they do not know enough about how 

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
333
droughts and money work. And they are not yet fully tapped into the full 
hierarchy of values that govern the social and moral decision-­making of 
persons in the culture. ­These are all the tasks of ­middle childhood, the 
school years during which ­children who are already to a significant de­
gree reasonable and responsible acquire the cultural knowledge necessary 
to apply ­these qualities appropriately in the many and vari­ous situations 
that arise in daily life.
Again at the risk of oversimplification, we pres­ent Figure 11.3 to sum­
marize in schematic form the basic ways in which six-­ to seven-­year-­old 
­children relate to their cultural worlds. ­There is in this diagram a top level 
of sharing psychological attitudes—­collective commitments to “our” way 
of ­doing ­things—­which come with a sense of obligation. ­There is on the 
bottom level the shared beliefs, values, and the manner of reason-­giving 
and justifying that enable individuals to preserve their cooperative and 
moral identities with “us” in the group. In a very schematic way, then, this 
diagram depicts what it is about ­human six-­ and seven-­year-­olds that makes 
them more reasonable and responsible than younger ­children, and how 
they are prepared for acquiring all the cultural knowledge that ­will soon 
make them fully fledged “persons” in the culture.
Collective Commitments 
to “Objective” View and to “Us” 
and our Conventions and Norms 
Moral ID:
reasonable and
responsible
reason-giving based on
shared beliefs,
values, reasons
Moral ID:
reasonable and
responsible
Moral ID:
reasonable and
responsible
Figure 11.3 ​Schematic summary of the competencies and motivations of collec­
tive intentionality, underpinned by practices of reason-­giving and justification.

334	
Conclusion
Prob­lems and Prospects
Many, if not most, of the conclusions we have come to in this book rest, 
in one way or another, on comparative studies of ­great apes and ­human 
­children. ­These studies have been criticized on several dif­fer­ent counts. 
Before proceeding to our final conclusions, I should address ­these criti­
cisms directly and offer suggestions for ways to improve comparative re­
search in the ­future.
Research with ­Great Apes
Most of the ­great ape research reported ­here supports conclusions about 
­great ape cognition and sociality that occupy a ­middle theoretical posi­
tion. On the one hand, ape “scoffers” such as Povinelli and Vonk (2003, 
2004), Lurz (2011), and Heyes (2015) have all criticized this research as at­
tributing too sophisticated skills to ­great apes. In par­tic­u­lar they claim 
that the mind-­reading experiments only show something like “be­hav­ior 
reading” or “submentalizing” in ­great apes rather than complex social-­
cognitive skills. On the other hand, ape “boosters” such as de Waal et al. 
(2008) and Boesch (2007) have criticized the research as attributing too 
­little sophistication to the cognitive and social skills of ­great apes. In par­
tic­u­lar they claim that the experiments on social learning and coopera­
tion are not well-­suited to ­great apes’ natu­ral capacities in one way or an­
other, and so they underestimate their skills. ­These are the kinds of 
disputes that must work themselves out over time in science, but I sup­
port a “radical ­middle” in which apes have very sophisticated cognitive 
and social skills, just not ­human ones.
I ­will not defend our results from the scoffers ­here. It is mainly a case, 
in my view, of theorists who have a bias against cognitive interpretations 
in general. If they ­were to apply their skepticism consistently, they would 
have to apply it to ­humans as well, since apes behave like ­human ­children 
of dif­fer­ent ages in many tasks. And then they are basically in the posi­
tion of behaviorists, as a theoretical framework that most ­people find too 
constraining for investigating the questions that interest us most ­today in 
the cognitive and social sciences.
The ape boosters have criticized the comparative aspects of the research 
on grounds of both internal and external validity. Internally, the basic com­
plaint is that the experimental situations are not identical for the ­children 
and the ­great apes. This is of course true, but identical is not what is needed 

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
335
in any case. In developmental psy­chol­ogy, it is quite often the case that 
­children of dif­fer­ent ages are observed in slightly dif­fer­ent situations, ap­
propriate for their age, in an attempt to make the situations functionally 
equivalent across ages, given the dif­fer­ent skills, motivations, and atten­
tion spans of the ­children. In our comparative research, therefore, making 
the experimental situations functionally equivalent is the goal. For ex­
ample, apes are not highly motivated by toys, and young ­children are not 
highly motivated by food. So we reward each species with the ­thing that 
most motivates them. In addition, we often give the apes more ­trials and 
more time to respond on a given trial, and we repeat the ­trials if they ­were 
not attending, based on our assessment that this is what they need to dis­
play their competence. ­There is no perfect solution, of course, but once 
we have established a phenomenon (for example, that apes understand 
seeing), we test it in multiple experimental paradigms, each of which may 
have its own limitations but which together provide a strong set of con­
verging operations.
The other main point in our defense is that if ­there are consequential 
differences of method for the dif­fer­ent species they ­will be detectable in 
control conditions. For example, both de Waal et al. (2008) and Boesch 
(2007) note that in many studies the apes, unlike the ­human ­children, are 
tested by a member of a dif­fer­ent species; the apes also, unlike the ­humans, 
are tested while in some form of caging. But this is why we have control 
conditions. The very same apes who are, for example, failing to under­
stand false beliefs in some paradigm, are passing a study of knowledge-­
ignorance with the exact same experimenter in the exact same housing 
situation. Typically in the studies ­there are also training ­trials before the 
­actual testing begins in which subjects, both child and ape, must demon­
strate an understanding of any prerequisite skills involved before they can 
proceed to testing. It is nevertheless often desirable to have studies in 
which apes interact with one another and have as ­little pretraining as pos­
si­ble. When we have done studies of this type and compared them with 
similar studies with pretraining and a ­human experimenter, we have found 
similar results from the two ways of testing (for example, Hare et al. 2000, 
and Melis et al. 2006a, 2006b).
In terms of external validity, Boesch (2007) has pointed out that the cap­
tive apes we are testing are not wild apes. In par­tic­u­lar, he believes that 
captive apes are growing up in “impoverished” conditions, so they may 
not develop the same skills as apes growing up in their natu­ral environment. 

336	
Conclusion
But very few of the skills we have found in captive apes have been found 
in wild apes ­because they have not been specifically tested for; and ­there 
are no instances of systematically documented cases of skills found in 
wild apes that are not found in captive apes. Kummer (1995) in fact ar­
gues that captivity often places animals in especially challenging problem-­
situations that they would never encounter in the wild, and which they 
must respond to with cognitive skills we would never see in the wild. Well-­
known cases in point are (1) tool use, which gorillas and bonobos do not 
engage in systematically in the wild but only in captivity (McGrew 1989); 
and (2) pointing for ­others gesturally, which apes in captivity do (for 
­humans) but apes in the wild do not (Tomasello 2006). And this is not even 
to mention all the cognitive skills displayed by apes “enculturated” by 
­humans (for example, “linguistic” skills; Savage-­Rumbaugh et al. 1993), 
which are obviously not shown by apes in the wild. And so while it is 
natu­ral for a fieldworker to claim that animals in their natu­ral environ­
ment have more skills than ­those in captive environments, it is not at all 
clear that this is the case. We should also add that this concern is relative 
to what is being studied: wild populations are presumably not crucial if 
we are studying chimpanzee color perception, for example, ­because that 
should develop in the same way in virtually any earthly environment. So 
the question is ­whether the cognitive and social skills we are studying are 
basic in this way. Given that the animals studied live in semi-­natural eco­
logical conditions in semi-­natural social groups, we believe that for the 
most part they are.
All of this aside, ­there is no question that comparative research in the 
­future could be improved in a number of ways. Most impor­tant is to find 
experimental paradigms in which apes can interact with a conspecific and 
­children can interact with a peer in as natu­ral settings as pos­si­ble, with as 
­little necessary pretraining as pos­si­ble. We ourselves have achieved this 
goal in a few experiment paradigms, but not nearly enough. In addition, 
and obviously, more field experiments with wild apes are highly desirable, 
though it is almost always the case that field experiments lack some of 
the controls that would be mandatory in captive settings. Nevertheless, 
just as is the case with research in captive settings, the goal should be to 
do the best field experiments pos­si­ble and see what we find. Combining 
laboratory and field research to come to a common conclusion is an es­
pecially worthy goal.

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
337
Another serious lacuna from the point of view of developmental psy­
chol­ogy is research on ­great ape ontogeny. As can be seen from the re­
search reviewed ­here, in the cognitive domain we have made a good start 
­toward a detailed ontoge­ne­tic account. But in the social domain, including 
cooperation and prosociality, we know almost nothing ontoge­ne­tically. In 
the wild, immature apes typically are excluded from the kinds of interac­
tions in which many impor­tant be­hav­iors are seen in adults (for example, 
co­ali­tions and alliances, grooming, and so forth), but they should be test­
able in captive settings.
Much of our confidence in ape–­child comparative research derives, as 
noted earlier, from the fact that in many dif­fer­ent cases we have tested 
for ape skills using several dif­fer­ent experimental paradigms, almost al­
ways with the same result (see, for example, the review of Call and To­
masello 2008). And the criticisms from both boosters and scoffers are al­
most totally theoretical—­based on other pos­si­ble interpretations—­without 
competing experiments that support ­those other interpretations. So, all 
­things considered, we believe that the ape–­child comparative experiments 
that are so impor­tant in the current theory of the ontogeny of uniquely 
­human cognition and sociality are both internally and externally valid, 
although of course improvements are always pos­si­ble.
Research with ­Human ­Children
A not-­unrelated criticism of our ape– child comparative experiments is that 
the ­children mostly are not representative of the ­human species in gen­
eral. That is, ­there is a prob­lem of external validity ­because the ­children 
are mostly ­children from Western Educated Industrialized Rich Demo­
cratic (WEIRD) socie­ties (see Bard and Leavens 2014).
Once again, a main consideration is what phenomenon is being studied. 
Presumably every­one would agree that, in terms of the kinds of ­things 
we are studying ­here, six-­month-­old babies are pretty much the same every­
where. The cross-­cultural study of Callaghan et al. (2011) that we have 
cited repeatedly looked at very basic social-­cognitive skills—­imitation, 
pointing, joint attention, helping, and collaboration—in three very dif­fer­ent 
cultural contexts (two of them non-­WEIRD), and found not only the 
same be­hav­iors in infants across cultures but also nearly identical ages of 
ontoge­ne­tic emergence. When the skills we are studying are very basic, 
we would not expect cultural differences.

338	
Conclusion
­Needless to say, as we and ­others have demonstrated, as ­children grow 
older the situation changes. ­There now come into play skills that are much 
more strongly influenced by adult socialization and teaching, such that 
now the cultural setting becomes of decisive importance. ­There are sev­
eral developmental research groups, including our own, that have recently 
begun systematic cross-­cultural research on ­these more culturally struc­
tured skills and motivations. We have reported some studies ­here that doc­
ument systematic cultural differences—­often based on the dif­fer­ent so­
cial norms of the cultures into which the ­children are born—in the ways 
that they go about cooperating with ­others. That having been said, much 
more research of this type is needed before we can draw firm conclu­
sions about the nature and degree of cross-­cultural plasticity in par­tic­
u­lar ontoge­ne­tic pathways in the development of uniquely ­human 
psy­chol­ogy.
As in ­great ape research, in cross-­cultural research we have the analo­
gous prob­lem of making the experimental settings comparable for ­children 
from dif­fer­ent cultures. Every­one ­doing this kind of research makes a con­
certed effort to ensure that ­children interact with adults from their own 
culture in learning about the task, and that they understand the task and 
are motivated for any rewards that might be involved. That having been 
said, in our own approach to cross-­cultural research with young ­children, 
we have tested ­children whenever pos­si­ble with peers. A potential source 
of cultural variability is ­children’s comfort level in interacting with adults, 
even adults from their own culture, and their tendency to defer to adults 
or to be wary of punishment. And so one good research strategy, in our 
view, is to provide ­children with a prob­lem that they must work on with 
a peer or peers—­with instructions from a native adult, who then leaves 
the room—­and let them work on it by themselves.
The major lacuna in cross-­cultural developmental research is investi­
gations of toddlers and young preschoolers. As a practical ­matter, in many 
non-­WEIRD cultures it is difficult to recruit and test ­children from one 
to four years of age ­because they are not yet reliably in school settings 
and ­because they tend to be very shy with unfamiliar adults, including 
­those from within their own cultural setting. (­There is more research with 
infants, but this is almost always focused less on the infant and its capa­
bilities and more on adult socialization and parenting.) It is also not pos­
si­ble in many cases to leave ­children this young alone with peers to work 
­things out. A number of pos­si­ble solutions have been discussed among 

	
A Neo-­Vygotskian Theory	
339
researchers in the field, and gradual pro­gress is being made, for example, 
by involving parents and teachers from local schools in the pro­cess.
New Possibilities
For each of the eight ontoge­ne­tic pathways on which we have focused 
­here, ­there are, ­needless to say, many outstanding questions. Answering 
them ­will not be easy, especially ­because ­there are not so many opportu­
nities for research with ­great apes. And cross-­cultural developmental re­
search, especially with very young ­children, has its own challenges. But 
we are optimistic for the ­future ­because more opportunities for research 
with ­great apes are now opening up in vari­ous ­great ape sanctuaries (see 
https://­www​.­pasaprimates​.­org). And cross-­cultural developmental re­
search is currently experiencing a boom, as impor­tant developmental 
questions are being addressed with culturally sensitive methods.
We are also optimistic for another reason. In the past de­cade or so, new 
mea­sures for investigating noninvasively the internal states of organisms 
have been developing rapidly, and ­these open up new and exciting ave­
nues of research. For example, in addition to new mea­sures of anticipa­
tory looking with apes (for example, Krupenye et al. 2016), Hepach et al. 
(2017c) have developed methods for using pupil dilation as a mea­sure of 
emotional / motivational arousal as ­children actually interact in live scenes 
(in most research using pupil dilation, subjects are fixed in front of a 
screen). It turns out that, despite impor­tant differences in the physiology 
of the eyes of ­humans and ­great apes, ­these methods can also be used 
validly to mea­sure the emotional / motivational arousal of ­great apes (He­
pach et al., forthcoming). Somewhat similarly, special thermo-­imaging 
cameras may be used noninvasively to detect blood flows beneath the sur­
face of the skin in both ­human ­children and, again despite physical differ­
ences, ­great apes as mea­sures of such ­things as anger and frustration (for 
example, Kano et al. 2016). And, although the work is still in an experi­
mental stage, ­there are ways of automatically assessing vari­ous postural 
patterns in ­human ­children (Hepach et al. 2017e), which are now being 
extended to ­great apes (again, despite physical and motoric differences), 
as indices of the vari­ous moods and motivations of the organism.
The upshot is that ­there are many questions about the ontogeny of 
uniquely ­human psy­chol­ogy that are still wide open, and ­there are several 
exciting, new, noninvasive techniques for mea­sur­ing the internal states of 
organisms that give us new ways of answering ­these and other questions.

W ​12 ​w
The Power of Shared Agency
A founding princi­ple of evolutionary psy­chol­ogy is that new adaptations 
only arise in response to specific ecological challenges. It is not sufficient 
to say something like being smart is a generally good ­thing, so ­humans 
evolved to be smart. Or being cooperative is a generally good ­thing, so 
­humans evolved to be cooperative. Evolution does not work that way. 
Evolution is mostly conservative ­until a specific adaptive prob­lem pres­
ents itself; then ­those individuals best equipped to solve it have an adap­
tive advantage. And so, ­because like begets like, the species evolves (Tooby 
and Cosmides 2005).
But the fact that a psychological adaptation is “aimed at” a specific eco­
logical challenge does not constrain its subsequent application. Although 
­there may be some adaptations that are narrowly targeted modules—­mate 
choice or a preference for sweets, for example—­not all work in this way. 
In par­tic­u­lar, shared intentionality does not work in this way. It is not just 
another blade in the Swiss Army knife. Although it was originally selected 
to deal with a relatively specific set of socioecological challenges presented 
by the need to cooperate, shared intentionality empowered individuals to 
meet ­those challenges by forming with one another a joint or collective 
agency. They could now act together and think together, in a sense, as one. 
As it turned out, operating in a joint or collective agency—­while still re­
taining individual agency—­required adjustments to a ­whole panoply of 
­great ape cognitive and social pro­cesses. The pervasiveness of the adjust­
ments is clear when we look across the most impor­tant ontoge­ne­tic path­
ways that distinguish ­humans from their nearest primate relatives, as we 
have just done: from social cognition to cultural learning to moral iden­
tity. The overall pattern looks much less like a set of punctate adaptations 
and much more like a thoroughgoing transformation.

	
The Power of  Shared Agency	
341
A partial list of the most impor­tant ­great ape psychological pro­cesses 
that have been transformed would include such ­things as imagining what 
­others perceive and know, intentional communication, social learning, in­
dividual thinking, acting in parallel with ­others, sympathy and helping, 
group life, and social evaluation. ­These psychological pro­cesses arose be­
fore ­humans even existed, but ­human ontogeny has transformed ­these 
pro­cesses to yield new and uniquely ­human outcomes. A partial list of 
the most impor­tant uniquely ­human psychological outcomes would in­
clude such ­things as joint attention, perspective-­taking, cooperative / ref­
erential gestures, conventional linguistic communication, role reversal imi­
tation, conformity, instructed (pedagogical) learning, recursive thinking, 
cooperative prob­lem solving, coordinated decision-­making, dual-­level col­
laboration, joint commitment, paternalistic helping, a sense of fairness 
and justice, second-­personal protest, enforcing and creating social norms, 
active impression management, a sense of shame and guilt, and a con­
ception of moral identity. A wide variety of diverse domains of ­great ape 
action and interaction have been transformed in a wide variety of diverse 
ways.
But ­there is unity in this diversity. Our review of scores of compara­
tive and developmental experiments has suggested that in ­every case a 
­great ape ontoge­ne­tic pathway has been transformed by the maturation 
of ­humans’ species-­unique capacity for shared intentionality and the ex­
periences that this makes pos­si­ble. The diversity of ­human outcomes re­
sults from the interaction of this transformative capacity with the already 
established ontoge­ne­tic pathways of ­great apes (and, to varying degrees, 
by individual experience). So, for example, “objectivity” manifests in the 
social learning domain as the child construing pedagogical communica­
tion as reflective of culturally universal and objective knowledge, while 
in the moral domain it manifests as the child’s sense of impartiality or fair­
ness. As another example, a normative attitude in the case of collabora­
tion leads the child to a sense of joint commitment with her partner to 
play her role in the ideal way; but in the case of social norms, the child’s 
normative attitude leads to active enforcement of conformity. ­Human psy­
chological ontogeny is thus a transformation of ­great ape psychological 
ontogeny, but par­tic­u­lar pro­cesses and outcomes differ significantly de­
pending on the nature of the existing ­great ape ontoge­ne­tic pathway un­
dergoing transformation and the nature of the challenges faced by devel­
oping ­children in dif­fer­ent domains of activity.

342	
Conclusion
As a final attempt to characterize the monumental transformation of 
­human ontogeny that shared intentionality has effected, let us invoke the 
­grand evolutionary scheme of Maynard Smith and Szathmáry (1995). 
They identified eight major transitions in the evolution of complexity of 
living ­things on planet Earth, including every­thing from the emergence 
of chromosomes, to the emergence of multicellular organisms, to the 
emergence of ­human culture (see also Wilson 2012). Remarkably, in each 
case the transition was characterized by the same two fundamental pro­
cesses: (1) a new form of cooperation with almost total interdependence 
among individuals (be they cells or organisms) that creates a new func­
tional entity, and (2) a concomitant new form of communication to sup­
port this cooperation. In this very broad scheme, we may say that shared 
intentionality represents the ability of ­human individuals to come together 
interdependently to act as single agent—­either jointly between individ­
uals or collectively among the members of a group—­maintaining their 
individuality throughout, and coordinating the pro­cess with new forms 
of cooperative communication, thereby creating a fundamentally new 
form of sociality.
That individuals are indeed acting together as a single agent is evidenced 
by the fact that they adopt a shared goal, they adjust per­for­mance of their 
role to coordinate with their partner(s), they share the spoils of their ef­
forts in mutually satisfactory ways, and so forth. But, perhaps most criti­
cally, individuals in a shared agency collaborate as a “we” to self-­regulate 
their collaborative activity. Thus, when individuals make a joint commit­
ment and one of them reneges, the other calls him out not just based on 
a personal preference but based on our joint understanding of our joint 
commitment: the “we” created by our joint commitment is calling “you” 
out. Or a member of a cultural group breaks a social norm to which 
every­one knows (in cultural common ground) we are all collectively com­
mitted. Someone then calls him out on this breach, again not based on a 
personal preference but based on our shared understanding of our col­
lective commitment to the group’s social norms: “we” in the group do it 
this way, and “you” are not conforming. In all such cases—at the level of 
both joint and collective intentionality—­the basic structure is a we > me 
mode of operation in which “we” self-­regulate each of us as individuals. 
This voluntary submission of “me” to “we,” more than anything ­else, is 
evidence that the participants understand themselves to be operating inter­
dependently as a single agent, whose powers of accomplishment and 

	
The Power of  Shared Agency	
343
normative force transcend ­those that ­either participant possesses on his 
or her own as an individual.
The outcome of ­these ontoge­ne­tic transformations leading to uniquely 
­human psy­chol­ogy—as far as we have followed them ­here—is the child 
of six or seven years of age, who operates in her culture as a nascent person 
based on reason and responsibility. Reason and responsibility are norma­
tive notions: they involve standards one “­ought” to meet. In our view, the 
origin of normative force lies in the individual agent’s sense of instru­
mental pressure—­the sense that I ­ought to do x in order to attain y—as a 
self-­regulatory pro­cess. Then, in first entering into a joint agency, the 
young child transforms this individual self-­regulation into social self-­
regulation, in which “we” self-­regulate “me” and “you” interchangeably. 
So now the question is what “I” and “you” as part of our “we” ­ought to 
do. Then, by six or seven years of age, the child starts to identify in addi­
tion with a cultural “we,” which, upon internalization, executively self-­
regulates her and her compatriots’ beliefs and actions normatively in the 
direction of collectively accepted group standards of rationality (reason) 
and morality (responsibility). From this point on, reason and responsibility 
represent the regulative ideals governing virtually all of ­children’s behav­
ioral decision-­making, as they gradually become fully fledged persons in 
a culture.


References
Acredolo, L. P., and S. W. Goodwyn. 1988. Symbolic gesturing in normal infants. Child Develop­
ment 59: 450–66.
Akhtar, N., M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 1996. The role of discourse novelty in early word 
learning. Child Development 67: 635–45.
Akhtar, N., and M. Tomasello. 1996. Two-­year-­olds learn words for absent objects and actions. 
British Journal of  Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 14: 79–93.
Ambridge, B., E. Kidd, C. F. Rowland, and A. L. Theakston. 2015. The ubiquity of frequency ef­
fects in first language acquisition. Journal of  Child Language 42 (2): 239–73.
Anselmi, D., M. Tomasello, and M. Acunzo. 1986. Young ­children’s responses to neutral and spe­
cific contingent queries. Journal of  Child Language 13: 135–44.
Apperly, I. A., and S. A. Butterfill. 2009. Do ­humans have two systems to track beliefs and belief-­
like states? Psychological Review 116 (4): 953–70.
Asch, S. E. 1956. Studies of in­de­pen­dence and conformity: I. A minority of one against a unan­i­
mous majority. Psychological Monographs 70 (9): 1–70.
Ashley, J., and M. Tomasello. 1998. Cooperative prob­lem solving and teaching in preschoolers. 
Social Development 7: 143–63.
Avis, J., and P. L. Harris. 1991. Belief-­desire reasoning among Baka ­children: Evidence for a uni­
versal conception of mind. Child Development 62 (3): 460–67.
Azmitia, M. 1988. Peer interaction and prob­lem solving: When are two heads better than one? 
Child Development 59 (1): 87–96.
Bakeman, R., and L. Adamson. 1984. Coordinating attention to ­people and objects in mother-­
infant and peer-­infant interactions. Child Development 55: 1278–89.
Baldwin, D. A. 1991. Infants’ contribution to the achievement of joint reference. Child Develop­
ment 62 (5): 874–90.
—­—­—. 1993a. Early referential understanding: Infants’ ability to recognize referential acts for what 
they are. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 29 (5): 832–43.
—­—­—. 1993b. Infants’ ability to consult the speaker for clues to word reference. Journal of  Child 
Language 20 (2): 395–418.
Baldwin, J. M. 1896. A new ­factor in evolution. American Naturalist 30 (354): 441–51.
Bard, K. A. 2012. Emotional engagement: How chimpanzee minds develop. In The Primate Mind: 
Built to Engage with Other Minds, ed. F. B. M. de Waal and P. F. Ferrari, 224–45. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Bard, K. A., and D. A. Leavens. 2014. The importance of development for comparative prima­
tology. Annual Review of  Anthropology 43: 183–200.
Baron-­Cohen, S. 1989. Perceptual role taking and protodeclarative pointing in autism. British 
Journal of  Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 7: 113–27.
—­—­—. 1995. Mindblindness: An Essay on Autism and Theory of  Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
—­—­—. 1997. The child with autism: First lessons in mind-­reading. Psy­chol­ogy Review 3: 30–33.
Baron-­Cohen, S., J. Allen, and C. Gillberg. 1992. Can autism be detected at 18 months? The needle, 
the haystack, and the CHAT. British Journal of  Psychiatry 161: 839–43.

346	
References
Barragan, R. C., and C. S. Dweck. 2014. Rethinking natu­ral altruism: ­Simple reciprocal interac­
tions trigger ­children’s benevolence. Proceedings of  the National Acad­emy of  Sciences of  the United 
States of  Amer­i­ca 111 (48): 17071–74.
Barrett, H. C. 2015. The Shape of  Thought: How ­Mental Adaptations Evolve. New York: Oxford Uni­
versity Press.
Bartsch, K., and H. Wellman. 1995. ­Children Talk about the Mind. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Bates, E. 1976. Language and Context: The Acquisition of  Pragmatics. New York: Academic Press.
Baumard, N., J. B. André, and D. Sperber. 2013. A mutualistic approach to morality. Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences 36 (1): 59–122.
Baumard, N., O. Mascaro, and C. Chevallier. 2012. Preschoolers are able to take merit into ac­
count when distributing goods. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 48 (2): 492–98.
Behne, T., M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2005. One-­year-­olds comprehend the communica­
tive intentions ­behind gestures in a hiding game. Developmental Science 8: 492–99.
—­—­—. 2014. Young ­children create iconic gestures to inform ­others. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 50 
(8): 2049–60.
Behne, T., U. Liszkowski, M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2012. Twelve-­month-­olds’ compre­
hension and production of pointing. British Journal of  Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 30: 359–75.
Bellagamba, F., and M. Tomasello. 1999. Re-­enacting intended acts: Comparing 12-­ and 
18-­month-­olds. Infant Be­hav­ior and Development 22 (2): 277–82.
Bergelson, E., and D. Swingley. 2012. At 6 to 9 months, ­human infants know the meanings of 
many common nouns. Proceedings of  the National Acad­emy of  Sciences of  the United States of  Amer­
i­ca 109: 3253–58.
Bjorklund, D. F. 2015. Developing adaptations. Developmental Review 38: 13–35.
Blake, P. R., and K. McAuliffe. 2011. “I had so much it ­didn’t seem fair”: Eight-­year-­olds reject 
two forms of inequity. Cognition 120 (2): 215–24.
Blake, P. R., K. McAuliffe, J. Corbit, T. C. Callaghan, O. Barry, A. Bowie, L. Kleutsch, K. L. Kramer, 
E. Ross, H. Vongsachang, R. Wrangham, and R. Wrangham. 2015. The ontogeny of fairness 
in seven socie­ties. Nature 528: 258–61.
Blasi, A. 1984. Moral identity: Its role in moral functioning. In Morality, Moral Be­hav­ior and Moral 
Development, ed. W. M. Kurtines and J. J. Gewirtz, 128–39. New York: Wiley.
Bloom, P. 2000. How ­Children Learn the Meanings of  Words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Boesch, C. 1991. Teaching in wild chimpanzees. Animal Behaviour 41 (3): 530–32.
—­—­—. 2005. Joint cooperative hunting among wild chimpanzees: Taking natu­ral observations 
seriously. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 28: 692–93.
—­—­—. 2007. What makes us ­human (Homo sapiens)? The challenge of cognitive cross-­species com­
parison. Journal of  Comparative Psy­chol­ogy 121 (3): 227–40.
Bohn, M., J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2016. Comprehension of iconic gestures by chimpanzees 
and ­human ­children. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 142: 1–17.
Bonawitz, E., P. Shaft., H. Gweon, N. D. Goodman, E. Spelke, and E. Schulz. 2011. The double-­
edged sword of pedagogy: Instruction limits spontaneous exploration and discovery. Cognition 
120: 322–30.
Boyd, R., and P. J. Richerson. 1996. Why culture is common but cultural evolution is rare. Pro­
ceedings of  the British Acad­emy 88: 77–93.
Bratman, M. 1992. Shared co-­operative activity. Philosophical Review 101 (2): 327–41.
—­—­—. 2014. Shared Agency: A Planning Theory of  Acting Together. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bräuer, J., J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2005. All ­great ape species follow gaze to distant locations 
and around barriers. Journal of  Comparative Psy­chol­ogy 119 (2): 145–54.
—­—­—. 2006. Are apes ­really inequity averse? Proceedings of  the Royal Society B, Biological Sciences 
273 (1605): 3123–28.

	
References	
347
—­—­—. 2007. Chimpanzees ­really know what ­others can see in a competitive situation. Animal 
Cognition 10 (4): 439–48.
—­—­—. 2009. Are apes inequity averse? New data on the token-­exchange paradigm. American 
Journal of  Primatology 71 (2): 175–81.
Brooks, R., and A. N. Meltzoff. 2005. The development of gaze following and its relation to lan­
guage. Developmental Science 8 (6): 535–43.
Brosnan, S. F., L. M. Hopper, S. Richey, H. D. Freeman, C. F. Talbot, S. D. Gosling, S. P. Lambeth, 
and S. J. Schapiro. 2015. Personality influences responses to inequity and contrast in chimpan­
zees. Animal Behaviour 101: 75–87.
Brosnan, S. F., H. C. Schiff, and F. B. M. de Waal. 2005. Tolerance for inequity may increase with 
social closeness in chimpanzees. Proceedings of  the Royal Society B, Biological Sciences 272 (1560): 
253–85.
Brosnan, S. F., C. Talbot, M. Ahlgren, S. P. Lambeth, and S. J. Schapiro. 2010. Mechanisms under­
lying the response to inequity in chimpanzees, Pan troglodytes. Animal Behaviour 79 (6): 1229–37.
Brown, P., and S. C. Levinson. 1987. Politeness: Some Universals in Language Usage. Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press.
Brownell, C. A. 2016. Prosocial be­hav­ior in infancy: The role of socialization. Child Development 
Perspectives 10 (4): 222–27.
Brownell, C. A., and M. S. Carriger. 1990. Changes in cooperation and self-­other differentiation 
during the second year. Child Development 61: 1164–74.
Brownell, C. A., S. S. Iesue, S. R. Nichols, and M. Svetlova. 2013a. Mine or yours? Development 
of sharing in toddlers in relation to owner­ship understanding. Child Development 84 (3): 
906–20.
Brownell, C. A., G. B. Ramani, and S. Zerwas. 2006. Becoming a social partner with peers: 
Cooperation and social understanding in one-­ and two-­year-­olds. Child Development 77 (4): 
803–21.
Brownell, C. A., M. Svetlova, R. Anderson, S. R. Nichols, and J. Drummond. 2013b. Socialization 
of early prosocial be­hav­ior: Parents’ talk about emotions is associated with sharing and helping 
in toddlers. Infancy 18 (1): 91–119.
Brownell, C. A., M. Svetlova, and S. Nichols. 2009. To share or not to share: When do toddlers 
respond to another’s needs? Infancy 14: 117–30.
Bruner, J. S. 1972. The nature and uses of immaturity. American Psychologist 27: 687–708.
—­—­—. 1974. From communication to language—­a psychological perspective. Cognition 3 (3): 
255–87.
—­—­—. 1983. Child’s Talk: Learning to Use Language. New York: Norton.
Bullinger, A. F., J. Burkhart, A. P. Melis, and M. Tomasello. 2013. Bonobos, chimpanzees, and mar­
mosets prefer to feed alone. Animal Be­hav­ior 85: 51–60.
Bullinger, A. F., A. P. Melis, and M. Tomasello. 2011a. Chimpanzees prefer individual over 
collaborative strategies ­toward goals. Animal Behaviour 82 (5): 1135–41.
—­—­—. 2014. Chimpanzees instrumentally help but do not communicate in a mutualistic co­
operative task. Journal of  Comparative Psy­chol­ogy 128 (3): 251–60.
Bullinger, A. F., E. Wyman, A. P. Melis, and M. Tomasello. 2011b. Coordination of chimpanzees 
in a stag hunt game. International Journal of  Primatology 32 (6): 1296–310.
Bullinger, A. F., F. Zimmerman., J. Kaminski, and M. Tomasello. 2011c. Dif­fer­ent social motives 
in the gestural communication of chimpanzees and ­human ­children. Developmental Science 14 
(1): 58–68.
Butler, L. P., and E. M. Markman. 2012. Preschoolers use intentional and pedagogical cues to guide 
inductive inferences and exploration. Child Development 83: 1416–28.
—­—­—. 2014. Preschoolers use pedagogical cues to guide radical reor­ga­ni­za­tion of category 
knowledge. Cognition 130 (1): 116–27.

348	
References
Butler, L. P., and M. Tomasello. 2016. Two-­ and 3-­year-­olds integrate linguistic and pedagogical 
cues in guiding inductive generalization and exploration. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 
145: 64–78.
Butler, L., and G. Walton. 2013. The opportunity to collaborate increases preschoolers’ motiva­
tion for challenging tasks. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 116: 953–61.
Buttelmann, D., F. Buttelmann, M. Carpenter, J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2017. ­Great apes distin­
guish true from false beliefs in an interactive helping task. PloS One 12 (4): e0173793.
Buttelmann, D., M. Carpenter, J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2007. Enculturated chimpanzees imi­
tate rationally. Developmental Science 10 (4): F31–38.
Buttelmann, D., M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2009. Eighteen-­month-­old infants show false 
belief understanding in an active helping paradigm. Cognition 112 (2): 337–42.
Buttelmann, D., H. Over, M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2014. Eighteen-­month-­olds under­
stand false beliefs in an unexpected-­contents task. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 119: 
120–26.
Buttelmann, D., N. Zmyj, M. M. Daum, and M. Carpenter. 2013. Selective imitation of in-­group 
over out-­group members in 14-­month-­old infants. Child Development 84: 422–28.
Call, J. 2001. Body imitation in an enculturated orangutan. Cybernetics and Systems 32 (1–2): 
97–119.
Call, J., M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2005. Copying results and copying actions in the pro­
cess of social learning: Chimpanzees and ­human ­children. Animal Cognition 8 (3): 151–63.
Call, J., and M. Tomasello. 1996. The effect of ­humans on the cognitive development of apes. In 
Reaching into Thought: The Minds of  the ­Great Apes, ed. A. Russon, K. A. Bard, and S. T. Parker, 
371–403. New York: Cambridge University Press.
—­—­—­, eds. 2007. The Gestural Communication of  Apes and Monkeys. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum.
—­—­—. 2008. Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? 30 Years ­later. Trends in Cognitive Sci­
ences 12 (5): 187–92.
Callaghan, T. C., H. Moll, H. Rakoczy, F. Warneken, U. Liszkowski, T. Behne, and M. Tomasello. 
2011. Early social cognition in three cultural contexts. Monographs of  the Society for Research in 
Child Development 76 (2): 1–142.
Callaghan, T. C., P. Rochat, A. Lillard, M. L. Claux, H. Odden, S. Itakura, S. Tapanya, and S. Singh. 
2005. Synchrony in the onset of ­mental state reasoning: Evidence from five cultures. Psycho­
logical Science 16: 378–84.
Camaioni, L. 1997. The emergence of intentional communication in ontogeny, phylogeny, and 
pathology. Eu­ro­pean Psychologist 2 (3): 216–25.
Cameron-­Faulkner, T., A. Theakston, E. Lieven, and M. Tomasello. 2015. The relationship be­
tween infant “hold out and gives” and pointing. Infancy 20: 576–86.
Campbell, A. L., P. Brooks, and M. Tomasello. 2000. ­Factors affecting young ­children’s use of pro­
nouns as referring expressions. Journal of  Speech, Language, and Hearing Research 43: 1337–49.
Candland, D. K. 1995. Feral ­Children and Clever Animals: Reflections on ­Human Nature. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Carlson, S. M., and L. J. Moses. 2001. Individual differences in inhibitory control and ­children’s 
theory of mind. Child Development 72 (4): 1032–53.
Carlson, S. M., P. D. Zelazo, and S. Faja. 2013. Executive function. In Body and Mind. Vol. 1 of The 
Oxford Handbook of  Developmental Psy­chol­ogy, ed. P. D. Zelazo, 706–43. New York: Oxford Uni­
versity Press.
Caron, A. J., E. J. Kiel, M. Dayton, and S. C. Butler. 2002. Comprehension of the referential in­
tent of looking and pointing between 12 and 15 months. Journal of  Cognition and Development 
3 (4): 445–64.

	
References	
349
Carpendale, J. I. M., S. Atwood, and V. Kettner. 2013. Meaning and mind from the perspective of 
dualist versus relational constructivist worldviews: Implications for the development of pointing 
gestures. ­Human Development 56 (6): 381–400.
Carpenter, M. 2006. Instrumental, social, and shared goals and intentions in imitation. In Imita­
tion and the Social Mind: Autism and Typical Development, ed. S. J. Rogers, 48–70. New York: Guil­
ford Press.
Carpenter, M., N. Akhtar, and M. Tomasello, 1998a. 14-­ through 18-­month-­old infants differen­
tially imitate intentional and accidental actions. Infant Be­hav­ior and Development 21: 315–30.
Carpenter, M., J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2002. Some 36-­month-­old ­children understand false be­
liefs. British Journal of  Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 20: 393–420.
Carpenter, M., K. Nagell, and M. Tomasello. 1998b. Social cognition, joint attention, and com­
municative competence from 9 to 15 months of age. Monographs of  the Society for Research in 
Child Development 63 (4): i–174.
Carpenter, M., B. F. Pennington, and S. J. Rogers. 2001. Understanding of ­others’ intentions in 
­children with autism and ­children with developmental delays. Journal of  Autism and Develop­
mental Disorders 31: 589–99.
Carpenter, M., M. Tomasello, and S. Savage-­Rumbaugh. 1995. Joint attention and imitative 
learning in ­children, chimpanzees, and enculturated chimpanzees. Social Development 4 (3): 
217–37.
Carpenter, M., M. Tomasello, and T. Striano. 2005. Role reversal imitation and language in 
typically-­developing infants and ­children with autism. Infancy 8: 253–78.
Chalmeau, R. 1994. Do chimpanzees cooperate in a learning task? Primates 35 (3): 385–92.
Clay, Z., and C. Tennie. 2017. Is overimitation a uniquely ­human phenomenon? Insights from 
­human ­children as compared to bonobos. Child Development, DOI:10.1111/cdev.12857.
Cole, M. 1998. Cultural Psy­chol­ogy: A Once and ­Future Discipline. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer­
sity Press.
Coqueugniot, H., J.-­J. Hublin, F. Veillon, F. Houet, and T. Jacob. 2004. Early brain growth in Homo 
erectus and implications for cognitive ability. Nature 231: 299–302.
Corbit, J., K. McAuliffe, T. Callaghan, P. R. Blake, and F. Warneken. 2017. ­Children’s collabora­
tion induces fairness rather than generosity. Cognition 168: 344–56.
Correa-­Chávez, M., and B. Rogoff. 2009. ­Children’s attention to interactions directed to ­others: 
Guatemalan Mayan and Eu­ro­pean American patterns. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 45 (3): 630–41.
Crawford, M. P. 1937. The cooperative solving of prob­lems by young chimpanzees. Comparative 
Psy­chol­ogy Monographs 14: 1–88.
—­—­—. 1941. The cooperative solving by chimpanzees of prob­lems requiring serial responses to 
color cues. Journal of  Social Psy­chol­ogy 13: 259–80.
Crockford, C., R. M. Wittig, K. Langergraber, T. E. Ziegler, K. Zuberbühler, and T. Deschner. 
2013. Urinary oxytocin and social bonding in related and unrelated wild chimpanzees. Proceed­
ings of  the Royal Society B, Biological Sciences 280 (1755): 20122765.
Croft, W. 2001. Radical Construction Grammar: Syntactic Theory in Typological Perspective. Ox­
ford: Oxford University Press.
Csibra, G. 2010. Recognizing communicative intentions in infancy. Mind and Language 25: 141–68.
Csibra, G., and G. Gergely. 2009. Natu­ral pedagogy. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 13 (4): 148–53.
—­—­—. 2011. Natu­ral pedagogy as evolutionary adaptation. Philosophical Transactions of  the Royal 
Society B, Biological Sciences 366 (1567): 1149–57.
Cushman, F. A., R. Sheketoff, S. Wharton, and S. Carey. 2013. The development of intent-­based 
moral judgment. Cognition 127 (1): 6–21.
Custance, D. M., A. Whiten, and K. A. Bard. 1995. Can young chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) imi­
tate arbitrary actions? Hayes & Hayes (1952) revisited. Behaviour 132 (11): 837–59.

350	
References
Dahl, A., E. S. Satlof-­Bedrick, S. I. Hammond, J. K. Drummond, W. E. Waugh, and C. A. Brownell. 
2017. Explicit scaffolding increases ­simple helping in younger infants. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 
53 (3): 407–16.
Darwall, S. 1977. Two kinds of re­spect. Ethics 88 (1): 36–49.
—­—­—. 2006. The Second-­Person Standpoint: Re­spect, Morality, and Accountability. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Darwin, C. 1871. The Descent of  Man. London: John Murray.
Davidson, D. 2001. Subjective, Intersubjective, Objective. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Dawson, G., A. N. Meltzoff, J. Osterling, J. Rinaldi, and E. Brown. 1998. ­Children with autism fail 
to orient to naturally occurring social stimuli. Journal of  Autism and Developmental Disorders 28 
(6): 479–85.
DeLoache, J. S. 2000. Dual repre­sen­ta­tion and young ­children’s use of scale models. Child Devel­
opment 71: 329–38.
Demuth, C. 2009. “Talking to Infants: How Culture Is Instantiated in Early ­Mother–­Infant Inter­
actions; The Case of Cameroonian Farming Nso and North German Middle-­Class Families.” 
PhD diss., University of Osnabrück.
D’Entremont, B., S. M. J. Hains, and D. W. Muir. 1997. A demonstration of gaze following in 3-­ 
to 6-­month-­olds. Infant Be­hav­ior and Development 20: 560–72.
De Villiers, J. G., and J. E. Pyers. 2002. Complements to cognition: A longitudinal study of the 
relationship between complex syntax and false-­belief-­understanding. Cognitive Development 17 
(1): 1037–60.
Devine, R. T., and Hughes, C. 2014. Relations between false belief understanding and executive 
function in early childhood: A meta-­analysis. Child Development 85 (5): 1777–94.
De Waal, F. B. M. 1989. Food sharing and reciprocal obligations among chimpanzees. Journal of  
­Human Evolution 18 (5): 433–59.
De Waal, F. B., C. Boesch, V. Horner, and A. Whiten. 2008. Comparing social skills of ­children 
and apes. Science 319 (5863): 569–69.
Diaz, V., and M. J. Farrar. 2017. The missing explanation of bilinguals false-­belief advantage: A 
longitudinal study. Developmental Science, DOI: 10.1111/desc.12594.
Diesendruck, G. 2005. The princi­ples of conventionality and contrast in word learning: An em­
pirical examination. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 41 (3): 451–63.
Diesendruck, G., N. Carmel, and L. Markson. 2010. ­Children’s sensitivity to the conventionality 
of sources. Child Development 81 (2): 652–68.
Diessel, H., and M. Tomasello. 2001. The acquisition of finite complement clauses in En­glish: A 
usage based approach to the development of grammatical constructions. Cognitive Linguistics 
12: 97–141.
Doherty, M. J., and J. Perner. 1998. Metalinguistic awareness and theory of mind: Just two words 
for the same ­thing? Cognitive Development 13: 279–305.
Doise, W., G. Mugny, and A. N. Perret-­Clermont. 1976. Social interaction and cognitive develop­
ment: Further evidence. Eu­ro­pean Journal of  Social Psy­chol­ogy 6 (2): 245–47.
Duguid, S., E. Wyman, A. F. Bullinger, K. Herfurth-­Majstorovic, and M. Tomasello. 2014. Coor­
dination strategies of chimpanzees and ­human ­children in a Stag Hunt game. Proceedings of  
the Royal Society B, Biological Sciences 281 (1796): 20141973.
Duguid, S., E. Wyman, S. Grüneisen, and M. Tomasello. Forthcoming. The strategies used by 
chimpanzees and ­children to solve a ­simple coordination prob­lem.
Dunbar, R. 1996. Grooming, Gossip and the Evolution of  Language. London: Faber & Faber.
Dunfield, K., V. A. Kuhlmeier, L. O’Connell, and E. Kelley. 2011. Examining the diversity of pro­
social be­hav­ior: Helping, sharing, and comforting in infancy. Infancy 16 (3): 227–47.
Dunham, Y., A. S. Baron, and M. R. Banaji. 2008. The development of implicit intergroup cogni­
tion. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 12 (7): 248–53.

	
References	
351
Durkheim, E. 1893 / 1984. The Division of  ­Labor in Society. New York: ­Free Press.
Eckerman, C. O., C. C. Davis, and S. M. Didow. 1989. Toddlers’ emerging ways of achieving so­
cial coordinations with a peer. Child Development 60 (2): 440–53.
Egyed, K., I. Király, and G. Gergely. 2013. Communicating shared knowledge in infancy. Psycho­
logical Science 24 (7): 1348–53.
Eisenberg, N., R. A. Fabes, and T. Spinrad. 2006. Prosocial development. In Social Emotional, and 
Personality Development, 6th ed. Vol. 3 of Handbook of  Child Psy­chol­ogy, ed. N. Eisenberg, 646–
718. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Endedijk, H., A. Cillessen, R. Cox, H. Bekkering, and S. Hunnius. 2015. The role of child charac­
teristics and peer experiences in the development of peer cooperation. Social Development 24: 
521–40.
Engelmann, J., J. Clift, E. Herrmann, and M. Tomasello. 2017. Social disappointment explains 
chimpanzees’ be­hav­ior in the inequity aversion task. Proceedings of  the Royal Society B, Biolog­
ical Sciences 284 (1891): 20171502.
Engelmann, J. M., E. Herrmann, and M. Tomasello. 2012. Five-­year olds, but not chimpanzees, 
attempt to manage their reputations. PLoS One 7 (10): e48433.
—­—­—. 2015. Chimpanzees trust conspecifics to engage in low-­cost reciprocity. Proceedings of  the 
Royal Society B, Biological Sciences 282 (1801): 20142803.
—­—­—. 2016a. The effects of being watched on resource acquisition in chimpanzees and ­human 
­children. Animal Cognition 19: 147–51.
Engelmann, J. M., H. Over, E. Herrmann, and M. Tomasello. 2013. Young ­children care more 
about their reputation with ingroup members and potential reciprocators. Developmental Sci­
ence 16 (6): 952–58.
Engelmann, J., D. Rapp, E. Herrmann, and M. Tomasello. 2016b. Young ­children (sometimes) do 
the right ­thing even when their peers do not. Cognitive Development 39: 86–92.
—­—­—. 2018. Concern for group reputation increases prosociality in young ­children. Psycholog­
ical Science 29: 181–90.
Evans, N., and S. Levinson. 2009. The myth of language universals: Language diversity and its 
importance for cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 32 (5): 429–92.
Fawcett, L. M., and A. F. Garton. 2005. The effect of peer collaboration on ­children’s problem-­
solving ability. British Journal of  Educational Psy­chol­ogy 75: 157–69.
Fehr, E., H. Bernhard, and B. Rockenbach. 2008. Egalitarianism in young ­children. Nature 454: 
1079–83.
Fernyhough, C., and E. Fradley. 2005. Private speech on an executive task: Relations with task 
difficulty and task per­for­mance. Cognitive Development 20 (1): 103–20.
Ferrari, P. F., E. Visalberghi, A. Paukner, L. Fogassi, A. Ruggiero, and S. J. Suomi. 2006. Neonatal 
imitation in Rhesus macaques. PLoS Biology 4 (9): e302.
Fessler, D. M. T. 2004. Shame in two cultures: Implications for evolutionary approaches. Journal 
of  Cognition and Culture 4 (2): 207–62.
Fiske, S. T. 2010. Social Beings: Core Motives in Social Psy­chol­ogy. 2nd ed. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Fizke, E., D. Barthel, T. Peters, and H. Rakoczy. 2014. Executive function plays a role in coordi­
nating dif­fer­ent perspectives, particularly when one’s own perspective is involved. Cognition 130 
(3): 315–34.
Flavell, J. H., B. A. Everett, K. Croft, and E. R. Flavell. 1981. Young ­children’s knowledge about 
visual perception: Further evidence for the level 1–­level 2 distinction. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 
17 (1): 99–103.
Fletcher, G., F. Warneken, and M. Tomasello. 2012. Differences in cognitive pro­cesses under­lying 
the collaborative activities of ­children and chimpanzees. Cognitive Development 27 (2): 136–53.
Flynn, E., and A. Whiten. 2008. Cultural transmission of tool use in young ­children: A diffusion 
chain study. Social Development 17 (3): 699–718.

352	
References
Fodor, J. A. 1983. The Modularity of  Mind: An Essay on Faculty Psy­chol­ogy. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Frank, M. C., D. L. Everett, E. Fedorenko, and E. Gibson. 2008. Number as a cognitive technology: 
Evidence from Pirahã language and cognition. Cognition 108 (3): 819–24.
Friedman, O., and K. R. Neary. 2008. Determining who owns what: Do ­children infer owner­ship 
from first possession? Cognition 107 (3): 829–49.
Friedrich, D., and N. Southwood. 2011. Promises and trust. In Promises and Agreements: Philosoph­
ical Essays, ed. H. Sheinman, 275–92. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gampe, A., and M. M. Daum. 2018. How preschoolers react to norm violations is associated with 
culture. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 165: 135–47.
Gaskins, S. 1999. ­Children’s daily lives in a Mayan village: A case study of culturally constructed 
roles and activities. In ­Children’s Engagement in the World, ed. A. Goncu, 25–81. Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press.
—­—­—. 2006. Cultural perspectives on infant-­caregiver interaction. In The Roots of  ­Human Soci­
ality: Culture, Cognition, and ­Human Interaction, ed. N. J. Enfield and S. Levinson, 279–98. Ox­
ford: Berg Press.
Gelman, S., P. Goetz, B. Sarnecka, and J. Flukes. 2008. Generic language in parent–­child conver­
sations. Language Learning and Development 4 (1): 1–31.
Gelman, S., and L. Ramann 2003. Preschool ­children use linguistic form class and pragmatic cues 
to interpret generics. Child Development 74: 308–25.
Gelman, S., E. Ware, E. Manczak, and S. Graham. 2013. ­Children’s sensitivity to the knowledge 
expressed in pedagogical and nonpedagogical contexts. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 49 (3): 
491–504.
Geraci, A., and L. Surian. 2011. The developmental roots of fairness: Infants’ reactions to equal 
and unequal distributions of resources. Developmental Science 14: 1012–20.
Gergely, G., H. Bekkering, and I. Király. 2002. Rational imitation in preverbal infants. Nature 415 
(6873): 755.
Gergely, G., and G. Csibra. 2006. Sylvia’s ­recipe: The role of imitation and pedagogy in the trans­
mission of cultural knowledge. In Roots of  ­Human Sociality: Culture, Cognition, and Interaction, 
ed. N. J. Enfield and S. C. Levinson, 229–55. Oxford: Berg Press.
Gergely G., and J. S. Watson. 1996. The social biofeedback theory of parental affect-­mirroring: 
The development of emotional self-­awareness and self-­control in infancy. International Journal 
of  Psychoanalysis 77 (6): 1181–212.
Gilbert, M. 1989. On Social Facts. Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press.
—­—­—. 2003. The structure of the social atom: Joint commitment as the foundation of ­human 
social be­hav­ior. In Socializing Metaphysics, ed. F. Schmitt, 39–64. Lanham, MD: Rowman & 
Littlefield.
—­—­—. 2011. Three dogmas about promising. In Promises and Agreements: Philosophical Essays, ed. 
H. Sheinman, 80–109. New York: Oxford University Press.
—­—­—. 2014. Joint Commitment: How We Make the Social World. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Gilby, I. C. 2006. Meat sharing among the Gombe chimpanzees: Harassment and reciprocal ex­
change. Animal Behaviour 71 (4): 953–63.
Göckeritz, S., M. F. H. Schmidt, and M. Tomasello. 2014. Young ­children’s creation and transmis­
sion of social norms. Cognitive Development 30: 81–95.
Goldin-­Meadow, S. 2003. The Resilience of  Language: What Gesture Creation in Deaf  ­Children Can 
Tell Us about How All ­Children Learn Language. New York: Psy­chol­ogy Press.
Gomes, C. M., R. Mundry, and C. Boesch. 2009. Long-­term reciprocation of grooming in wild 
West African chimpanzees. Proceedings of  the Royal Society of  London B, Biological Sciences 276 
(1657): 699–706.

	
References	
353
Goodall, J. 1986. The Chimpanzees of  Gombe: Patterns of  Be­hav­ior. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Gopnik, A., and A. N. Meltzoff. 1997. Words, Thoughts, and Theories. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gopnik, A., and H. M. Wellman. 2012. Reconstructing constructivism: causal models, Bayesian 
learning mechanisms, and the theory theory. Psychological Bulletin 138: 1085–108.
Gottlieb, G. 1997. Synthesizing Nature-­Nurture: Prenatal Roots of  Instinctive Be­hav­ior. New York: Psy­
chol­ogy Press.
Gould, S. J. 1977. Ontogeny and Phylogeny. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gräfenhain, M., T. Behne, M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2009. Young ­children’s understanding 
of joint commitments. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 45 (5): 1430–43.
Gräfenhain, M., M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2013. Three-­year-­olds’ understanding of the 
consequences of joint commitments. PLoS One 8 (9): e73039.
Graham, S., S. Nayer, and S. Gelman. 2011. Two-­year-­olds use the generic / nongeneric distinc­
tion to guide their inferences about novel kinds. Child Development 82: 493–507.
Grassmann, S., M. Stracke, and M. Tomasello. 2009. Two-­year-­olds exclude novel objects as po­
tential referents of novel words based on pragmatics. Cognition 112 (3): 488–93.
Greenberg, J. R., K. Hamann, F. Warneken, and M. Tomasello. 2010. Chimpanzee helping in col­
laborative and non-­collaborative contexts. Animal Behaviour 80 (5): 873–80.
Greenfield, P. M., and E. S. Savage-­Rumbaugh. 1993. Comparing communicative competence in 
child and chimp: The pragmatics of repetition. Journal of  Child Language 20: 1–26.
Grocke, P., F. Rossano, and M. Tomasello. 2015. Procedural justice in ­children: Preschoolers ac­
cept unequal resource distributions if the procedure provides equal opportunities. Journal of  
Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 140: 197–210.
—­—­—. 2018. Young ­children are more willing to accept group decisions in which they have had 
a voice. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 166: 67–78.
Grosse, G., M. Carpenter, M. Tomasello, and T. Behne. 2010a. Infants communicate in order to 
be understood. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 46 (6): 1710–22.
Grosse, G., H. Moll, and M. Tomasello. 2010b. 21-­Month-­olds understand the cooperative logic 
of requests. Journal of  Pragmatics 42 (12): 3377–83.
Grosse, G., C. Schulz, M. Tomasello, and N. Katsos. In press. Differences and similarities in 
­children’s acquisition of dif­fer­ent implicature types. Glossa.
Grosse, K., M. Carpenter, J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2015. Differences in the ability of apes and 
­children to instruct ­others using gestures. Language Learning and Development 11: 310–30.
Grosse Wiesmann, C., A. D. Friederici, D. Disla, N. Steinbeis, and T. Singer. 2017. Longitudinal 
evidence for 4-­year-­olds’ but not 2-­ and 3-­year-­olds’ false belief-­related action anticipation. Cog­
nitive Development 20: e12445.
Grüneisen, S., and M. Tomasello. 2017. ­Children coordinate in a recurrent conflict of interest by 
taking turns and along dominance asymmetries. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 53: 265–73.
—­—­—. Forthcoming. How ­children use rules to coordinate in a recurrent social dilemma.
Grüneisen, S., E. Wyman, and M. Tomasello. 2015a. ­Children use salience to solve coordination 
prob­lems. Developmental Science 18 (3): 495–501.
—­—­—. 2015b. Conforming to coordinate: ­Children use majority information for peer coordina­
tion. British Journal of  Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 33 (1): 136–47.
—­—­—. 2015c. “I know you ­don’t know I know . . .”: ­Children use second-­order false belief rea­
soning for peer coordination. Child Development 86 (1): 287–93.
Gurven, M. 2004. To give or not to give: An evolutionary ecol­ogy of ­human food transfers. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 27 (4): 543–83.
Haidt, J. 2012. The Righ­teous Mind: Why Good ­People Are Divided by Politics and Religion. New York: 
Pantheon.
Hale, C. M., and H. Tager-­Flusberg. 2003. The influence of language on theory of mind: A training 
study. Developmental Science 6 (3): 346–59.

354	
References
Halina, M., K. Liebal, and M. Tomasello. In press. Do chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and bonobos 
(Pan paniscus) point in order to direct attention? PLOS One.
Halina, M., F. Rossano, and M. Tomasello. 2013. The ontoge­ne­tic ritualization of bonobo ges­
tures. Animal Cognition 16 (4): 653–66.
Hamann, K., J. Bender, and M. Tomasello. 2014. Meritocratic sharing is based on collaboration in 
3-­year-­olds. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 50 (1): 121–28.
Hamann, K., F. Warneken, J. R. Greenberg, and M. Tomasello. 2011. Collaboration encourages 
equal sharing in ­children but not in chimpanzees. Nature 476 (7360): 328–31.
Hamann, K., F. Warneken, and M. Tomasello. 2012. ­Children’s developing commitments to joint 
goals. Child Development 83 (1): 137–45.
Hamlin, J. K., K. Wynn, and P. Bloom. 2007. Social evaluation by preverbal infants. Nature 450: 
557–59.
Hardecker, S., J. Buryn-­Weitzel, and M. Tomasello. Forthcoming. The double-­edged sword of 
moral education: Instruction limits ­children’s flexibility in moral situations.
Hardecker, S., M. F. H. Schmidt, M. Roden, and M. Tomasello. 2016. Young ­children’s behavioral 
and emotional responses to dif­fer­ent social norm violations. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­
chol­ogy 150: 364–79.
Hardecker, S., M. F. H. Schmidt, and M. Tomasello. 2017. ­Children’s developing understanding 
of the conventionality of rules. Journal of  Cognition and Development 18 (2): 163–88.
Hardecker, S., and M. Tomasello. 2017. From imitation to implementation: How two-­ and three-­
year-­old ­children learn to enforce social norms. British Journal of  Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 35 
(2): 237–48.
Hardy, S. A., and G. Carlo. 2005. Identity as a source of moral motivation. ­Human Development 48 
(4): 232–56.
Hare, B., J. Call, B. Agnetta, and M. Tomasello. 2000. Chimpanzees know what conspecifics do 
and do not see. Animal Behaviour 59: 771–85.
Hare, B., J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2001. Do chimpanzees know what conspecifics know and do 
not know? Animal Behaviour 61 (1): 139–51.
—­—­—. 2006. Chimpanzees deceive a ­human competitor by hiding. Cognition 101 (3): 495–514.
Hare, B., and S. Kwetuenda. 2010. Bonobos voluntarily share their own food with ­others. Current 
Biology 20 (5): R230–31.
Hare, B., and M. Tomasello. 2004. Chimpanzees are more skillful in competitive than in co­
operative cognitive tasks. Animal Behaviour 68 (3): 571–81.
—­—­—. 2005. Human-­like social skills in dogs? Trends in Cognitive Sciences 9 (9): 439–44.
Harris, P. L. 2005. Conversation, pretence, and theory of mind. In Why Language ­Matters for Theory 
of  Mind, ed. J. W. Astington and J. Baird, 70–83. New York: Oxford University Press.
—­—­—. 2012. Trusting What ­You’re Told: How ­Children Learn from ­Others. Cambridge, MA: Belknap 
Press.
Harris, P. L., and K. H. Corriveau. 2013. Judging for yourself versus listening to ­others: Confor­
mity revisited. In Navigating the Social World: What Infants, ­Children, and Other Species Can Teach 
Us, ed. M. Banaji and S. Gelman, 230–34. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hart, B., and T. Risley. 1995. Meaningful Differences in the Everyday Experience of  Young American 
­Children. Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.
Haun, D. B., and J. Call. 2008. Imitation recognition in ­great apes. Current Biology 18 (7): R288–90.
Haun, D. B., and H. Over. 2014. Like me: A homophily-­based account of ­human culture. In Cul­
tural Evolution, ed. P. J. Richerson and M. Christiansen, 75–85. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Haun, D. B., and M. Tomasello. 2011. Conformity to peer pressure in preschool ­children. Child 
Development 82 (6): 1759–67.
—­—­—. 2014. ­Children conform to the be­hav­ior of peers: ­Great apes stick with what they know. 
Psychological Science 25: 2160–67.

	
References	
355
Haux, L. M., J. M. Engelmann, E. Herrmann, and M. Tomasello. 2017. Do young ­children pref­
erentially trust gossip or firsthand observation in choosing a collaborative partner? Social De­
velopment 26 (3): 466–74.
Hawkes, K. 2014. Primate sociality to ­human cooperation. Why us and not them? ­Human Nature 
25 (1): 28–48.
Hawley, P. H., and G. J. Geldhof. 2012. Preschoolers’ social dominance, moral cognition, and moral 
be­hav­ior: An evolutionary perspective. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 112 (1): 18–35.
Helming, K. A., B. Strickland, and P. Jacob. 2014. Making sense of early false belief understanding. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences 18 (4): 167–70.
Henderson, A. M., and S. A. Graham. 2005. Two-­year-­olds’ appreciation of the shared nature of 
novel object labels. Journal of  Cognition and Development 6 (3): 381–402.
Henderson, A. M., and A. L. Woodward. 2011. Let’s work together: what do infants understand 
about collaborative goals? Cognition 121: 12–21.
Hepach, R., L. Benziad, and M. Tomasello. Forthcoming. Chimpanzees help with what you want; 
­children help with what you need.
Hepach, R., N. Kante, and M. Tomasello. 2017a. Toddlers help a peer. Child Development 88 (5): 
1642–52.
Hepach, R., S. Lambert, K. Haberl, and M. Tomasello. 2017b. Toddlers help anonymously. Infancy 
22: 130–42.
Hepach, R., A. Vaish, K. Mueller, and M. Tomasello. 2017c. The relation between young ­children’s 
physiological arousal and their motivation to help ­others. Neuropsychologia, DOI: 10.1016/j.
neuropsychologia.2017.10.010.
Hepach, R., A. Vaish, and M. Tomasello. 2012. Young ­children are intrinsically motivated to see 
­others helped. Psychological Science 23 (9): 967–72.
—­—­—. 2013. Young ­children sympathize less in response to unjustified emotional distress. Devel­
opmental Psy­chol­ogy 49 (6): 1132–38.
—­—­—. 2017d. ­Children’s intrinsic motivation to provide help themselves ­after accidentally 
harming ­others. Child Development 88: 1251–64.
—­—­—. 2017e. The fulfilment of ­others’ needs elevates ­children’s body posture. Developmental Psy­
chol­ogy 53: 100–13.
Herrmann, E., J. Call, M. V. Hernández-­Lloreda, B. Hare, and M. Tomasello. 2007. ­Humans have 
evolved specialized skills of social cognition: The cultural intelligence hypothesis. Science 317 
(5843): 1360–66.
Herrmann, E., J. Engelmann, and M. Tomasello. Forthcoming. Young ­children engage in com­
petitive altruism.
Herrmann, E., M. V. Hernández-­Lloreda, J. Call, B. Hare, and M. Tomasello. 2010. The structure 
of individual differences in the cognitive abilities of ­children and chimpanzees. Psychological 
Science 21 (1): 102–10.
Herrmann, E., A. P. Melis, and M. Tomasello. 2006. Apes’ use of iconic cues in the object-­choice 
task. Animal Cognition 9 (2): 118–30.
Herrmann, E., A. Misch, M. V. Hernández-­Lloreda, and M. Tomasello. 2015. Uniquely ­human 
self-­control begins at school age. Developmental Science 18 (6): 979–93.
Herrmann, P., C. Legare, P. Harris, and H. White­house. 2013. Stick to the script: The effect of 
witnessing multiple actors on ­children’s imitation. Cognition 129: 536–43.
Hewlett, B. S., and C. J. Roulette. 2016. Teaching in hunter–­gatherer infancy. Royal Society Open 
Science 3: 150403.
Heyes, C. M. 2015. Animal mindreading: What’s the prob­lem? Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 
22: 313–27.
Heyes, C. M., and C. D. Frith. 2014. The cultural evolution of mind reading. Science 344 (6190): 
1243091.

356	
References
Heyman, G. D., G. Fu, J. Lin, M. K. Qian, and K. Lee. 2015. Eliciting promises from ­children re­
duces cheating. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 139: 242–48.
Hill, K., M. Barton, and A. M. Hurtado. 2009. The emergence of ­human uniqueness: Characters 
under­lying behavioral modernity. Evolutionary Anthropology 18 (5): 187–200.
Hirata, S. 2007. Competitive and cooperative aspects of social intelligence in chimpanzees. Japa­
nese Journal of  Animal Psy­chol­ogy 57: 29–40.
Hobson, J. A., R. Harris, R. García-­Pérez, and R. P. Hobson. 2009. Anticipatory concern: A study 
in autism. Developmental Science 12 (2): 249–63.
Hobson, J. A., and R. P. Hobson. 2007. Identification: The missing link between joint attention 
and imitation? Development and Psychopathology 19 (2): 411–31.
Hobson, P. 2002. The Cradle of  Thought: Exploring the Origins of  Thinking. London: Pan Macmillan.
Hobson, R. P., and J. A. Hobson. 2008. Dissociable aspects of imitation: A study in autism. Journal 
of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 101 (3): 170–85.
Hobson, R. P., and A. Lee. 1999. Imitation and identification in autism. Journal of  Child Psy­chol­ogy 
and Psychiatry 40: 649–59.
Hoffman, M. L. 2000. Empathy and Moral Development: Implications for Caring and Justice. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Honneth, A. 1995. The Strug­g le for Recognition: The Moral Grammar of  Social Conflicts. Cambridge: 
Polity Press.
Hopper L. M., S. P. Lambeth, S. J. Schapiro, and S. F. Brosnan. 2013. When given the opportunity, 
chimpanzees maximize personal gain rather than “level the playing field.” PeerJ 1: e165.
Horner, V., and A. Whiten. 2005. Causal knowledge and imitation / emulation switching in chim­
panzees (Pan troglodytes) and ­children. Animal Cognition 8 (3): 164–81.
Horner, V., A. Whiten, E. Flynn, and F. B. M. de Waal. 2006. Faithful replication of foraging tech­
niques along cultural transmission chains by chimpanzees and ­children. Proceedings of  the Na­
tional Acad­emy of  Sciences of  the United States of  Amer­i­ca 103 (37): 13878–83.
House, B. R., J. Henrich, S. F. Brosnan, and J. B. Silk. 2012. The ontogeny of ­human prosociality: 
Behavioral experiments with ­children aged 3 to 8. Evolution and ­Human Be­hav­ior 33 (4): 
291–308.
House, B. R., J. B. Silk, J. Henrich, H. C. Barrett, B. A. Scelza, A. H. Boyette, B. S. Hewlett, and S. 
Laurence. 2013. Ontogeny of prosocial be­hav­ior across diverse socie­ties. Proceedings of  the Na­
tional Acad­emy of  Sciences of  the United States of  Amer­i­ca 110 (36): 14586–91.
House, B. R., and M. Tomasello. 2018. Modeling social norms increasingly influences costly 
sharing in ­middle childhood. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 171: 84–98.
Hrdy, S. 2006. Evolutionary context of ­human development: The cooperative breeding model. 
In Attachment and Bonding: A New Synthesis, ed. C. S. Car­ter, L. Ahnert, K. E. Grossmann, S. B. 
Hrdy, M. E. Lamb, S. W. Porges, and N. Sachser, 9–32. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—­—­—. 2009. ­Mothers and ­Others: The Evolutionary Origins of  Mutual Understanding. Cambridge, 
MA: Belknap Press.
—­—­—. 2016. Development plus social se­lection in the emergence of “emotionally modern” 
­humans. In Childhood: Origins, Evolution, and Implications, ed. C. L. Meehan and A. N. Crittenden, 
11–44. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Humle, T., and T. Matsusawa. 2002. Ant-­dipping among the chimpanzees of Bossou, Guinea, and 
some comparisons with other sites. American Journal of  Primatology 58: 133–48.
Ibbotson, P. 2014. ­Little dictators: a developmental meta-­analysis of prosocial be­hav­ior. Current 
Anthropology 55 (6): 814–21.
Iverson, J., O. Capirci, and M. C. Caselli. 1994. From communication to language in two modali­
ties. Cognitive Development 9: 23–43.
Iverson, J., and S. Goldin-­Meadow. 2005. Gesture paves the way for language development. Psy­
chological Science 16: 367–73.

	
References	
357
Jensen, K., J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2007. Chimpanzees are rational maximizers in an ultimatum 
game. Science 318 (5847): 107–9.
Jensen, K., B. Hare, J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2006. What’s in it for me? Self-­regard precludes 
altruism and spite in chimpanzees. Proceedings of  the Royal Society B, Biological Sciences 273 (1589): 
1013–21.
Jordan, J., K. McAuliffe, and F. Warneken. 2014. Development of in-­group favoritism in ­children’s 
third-­party punishment of selfishness. Proceedings of  the National Acad­emy of  Sciences of  the United 
States of  Amer­i­ca 111 (35): 12710–15.
Kachel, G., R. Moore, and M. Tomasello. In press. Two-­year-­olds use adults’ but not peers’ points. 
Developmental Science.
Kachel, U., M. Svetlova, and M. Tomasello. 2017. Three-­year-­olds’ reactions to a partner’s failure 
to perform her role in a joint commitment. Child Development, DOI: 10.1111/cdev.12816.
—­—­—. Forthcoming. Young ­children’s tendencies to stand by a commitment in the face of bribes.
Kahneman, D., J. L. Knetsch, and R. H. Thaler. 1991. Anomalies: The endowment effect, loss aver­
sion, and status quo bias. Journal of  Economic Perspectives 5 (1): 193–206.
Kaiser, I., K. Jensen, J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2012. Theft in an ultimatum game: Chimpanzees 
and bonobos are insensitive to unfairness. Biology Letters 8 (6): 942–45.
Kalish, C. 2005. Becoming status conscious: ­Children’s appreciation of social real­ity. Philosophical 
Explorations 8 (3): 245–63.
Kalish, C. W., and M. A. Sabbagh. 2007. Conventionality and cognitive development: Learning to 
think the right way. New Directions for Child and Adolescent Development 115: 1–9.
Kaminski, J., J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2004. Body orientation and face orientation: Two ­factors 
controlling apes’ begging be­hav­ior from ­humans. Animal Cognition 7 (4): 216–23.
—­—­—. 2008. Chimpanzees know what ­others know, but not what they believe. Cognition 109 (2): 
224–34.
Kanngiesser, P., N. Gjersoe, and B. M. Hood. 2010. The effect of creative ­labor on property-­
ownership transfer by preschool ­children and adults. Psychological Science 21 (9): 
1236–41.
Kanngiesser, P., B. Köymen, and M. Tomasello. 2017. Young ­children mostly keep, and expect 
­others to keep, their promises. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 159: 140–58.
Kanngiesser, P., F. Rossano, R. Frickel, A. Tomm, D. Haun, H. Zeidler, and M. Tomasello. Forth­
coming. Re­spect for owner­ship in ­human ­children from diverse socie­ties, but not ­great apes.
Kanngiesser, P., F. Rossano, and M. Tomasello. 2015. Late emergence of the first possession heu­
ristic: Evidence from a small-­scale culture. Child Development 86 (4): 1282–89.
Kanngiesser, P., and F. Warneken. 2012. Young ­children consider merit when sharing resources 
with ­others. PLoS One 7 (8): 1–5.
Kano, F., S. Hirata, T. Dreschner, V. Behringer, and J. Call. 2016. Nasal temperature drop in re­
sponse to a playback of conspecific fights in chimpanzees: A thermo-­imaging study. Physiology 
and Be­hav­ior 155: 83–94.
Karg, K., M. Schmelz, J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2014. All ­great ape species and two-­and-­a-­half-­
year-­old ­children discriminate appearance from real­ity. Journal of  Comparative Psy­chol­ogy 128 
(4): 431–39.
—­—­—. 2015a. Chimpanzees strategically manipulate what ­others can see. Animal Cognition 18: 
1069–76.
—­—­—. 2015b. The goggles experiment: Can chimpanzees use self-­experience to infer what a com­
petitor can see? Animal Be­hav­ior 105: 211–21.
Karmiloff-­Smith, A. 1992. Beyond Modularity: A Developmental Perspective on Cognitive Science. Cam­
bridge, MA: MIT Press / Bradford Books.
Karmiloff-­Smith, A., and B. Inhelder. 1975. If you want to get ahead, get a theory. Cognition 3 (3): 
195–212.

358	
References
Kaye, K. 1982. The ­Mental and Social Life of  Babies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kenward, B. 2012. Over-­imitating preschoolers believe unnecessary actions are normative and en­
force their per­for­mance by a third party. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 112 (2): 
195–207.
Kenward, B., and M. Dahl. 2011. Preschoolers distribute resources according to recipients’ moral 
status. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 47: 1054–64.
Kenward, B., and T. Östh. 2012. Enactment of third-­party punishment by 4-­year-­olds. Frontiers in 
Psy­chol­ogy 3: 373.
—­—­—. 2015. Five-­year-­olds punish antisocial adults. Aggressive Be­hav­ior 41 (5): 413–20.
Killen, M., K. L. Mulvey, and A. Hitti. 2013. Social exclusion in childhood: A developmental inter­
group perspective. Child Development 84 (3): 772–90.
Kim, S., and C. W. Kalish. 2009. ­Children’s ascriptions of property rights with changes of owner­
ship. Cognitive Development 24: 322–36.
Kinzler, K. D., Corriveau, K. H., and P. L. Harris. 2011. ­Children’s selective trust in native-­accented 
speakers. Developmental Science 14 (1): 106–11.
Kinzler, K. D., K. Shutts, J. DeJesus, and E. S. Spelke. 2009. Accent trumps race in guiding ­children’s 
social preferences. Social Cognition 27 (4): 623–34.
Kirschner, S., and M. Tomasello. 2010. Joint ­music making promotes prosocial be­hav­ior in 
4-­year-­old ­children. Evolution and ­Human Be­hav­ior 31 (5): 354–64.
Kobayashi, H., and S. Koshima. 1997. Unique morphology of the ­human eye. Nature 387: 
767–68.
Kohlberg, L. 1969. Stages and sequences: The cognitive development approach to socialization. 
In Handbook of  Socialization Theory of  Research, ed. R. McNally and D. A. Gosin, 347–480. Chi­
cago: Rand McNally.
Köhler, W. 1925. The Mentality of  Apes. London: Kegan Paul.
Korsgaard, C. 1996. The Sources of  Normativity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Köster, M., X. Ohmer, T. D. Nguyen, and J. Kärtner. 2016. Infants understand ­others’ needs. Psy­
chological Science 27 (4): 542–48.
Köymen, B., E. V. M. Lieven, D. A. Engemann, H. Rakoczy, F. Warneken, and M. Tomasello. 2014a. 
­Children’s norm enforcement in their interactions with peers. Child Development 85 (3): 
1108–22.
Köymen, B., M. Mammen, and M. Tomasello. 2016. Preschoolers use common ground in their 
justificatory reasoning with peers. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 52 (3): 423–29.
Köymen, B., L. Rosenbaum, and M. Tomasello. 2014b. Reasoning during joint decision-­making 
by preschool peers. Cognitive Development 32: 74–85.
Köymen, B., M. Schmidt, E. Lieven, and M. Tomasello. 2015. Teaching versus enforcing norms 
in preschoolers’ peer interactions. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 135: 93–101.
Köymen, B., and M. Tomasello. 2018. ­Children’s meta-­talk in their collaborative decision-­making 
with peers. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 166: 549–66.
Krachun, C., M. Carpenter, J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2009. A competitive nonverbal false belief 
task for ­children and apes. Developmental Science 12 (4): 521–35.
Kruger, A. 1992. The effect of peer and adult–­child transactive discussions on moral reasoning. 
Merrill-­Palmer Quarterly 38 (2): 191–211.
—­—­—. 1993. Peer collaboration: Conflict, cooperation, or both? Social Development 2 (3): 165–82.
Kruger, A., and M. Tomasello. 1986. Transactive discussions with peers and adults. Developmental 
Psy­chol­ogy 22: 681–85.
—­—­—. 1996. Cultural learning and learning culture. In Handbook of  Education and ­Human Devel­
opment: New Models of  Teaching, Learning, and Schooling, ed. D. R. Olson and N. Torrance, 369–
87. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

	
References	
359
Krupenye, C., and B. Hare. 2018. Bonobos prefer individuals that hinder ­others over ­those that 
help. Current Biology 28: 1–7.
Krupenye, C., F. Kano, J. Call, S. Hirata, and M. Tomasello. 2016. ­Great apes anticipate that other 
individuals ­will act according to false beliefs. Science 354: 110–14.
Kuhlmeier, V., K. Wynn, and P. Bloom. 2003. Attribution of dispositional states by 12-­month-­olds. 
Psychological Science 14 (5): 402–8.
Kuhn, D. 2015. Thinking together and alone. Educational Researcher 44: 46–53.
Kummer, H. 1995. In Quest of  the Sacred Baboon. Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press.
Kurzban, R., M. N. Burton-­Chellew, and S. A. West. 2015. The evolution of altruism in ­humans. 
Annual Review of  Psy­chol­ogy 66: 575–99.
Lakatos, I. 1970. Falsification and the methodology of scientific research programmes. In Criti­
cism and the Growth of  Knowledge, ed. I. Lakatos and A. Musgrave, 91–195. Cambridge, MA: 
Cambridge University Press.
Leavens, D. A., and W. D. Hopkins. 1998. Intentional communication by chimpanzees: A cross-­
sectional study of the use of referential gestures. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 34: 813–22.
Lee, W. S. C., and S. M. Carlson. 2015. Knowing when to be “rational”: Economic decision-­making 
and executive function in preschool ­children. Child Development 86 (5): 1434–48.
Leslie, A. 1987. Pretense and repre­sen­ta­tion: The origins of “theory of mind.” Psychological 
Review 94: 412–26.
—­—­—. 1994. Pretending and believing: Issues in the theory of ToMM. Cognition 50 (1–3): 211–38.
LeVine, R. A., S. Dixon, S. LeVine, A. Richman, H. P. Liederman, C. H. Keefer, and T. B. Bra­
zelton. 1994. Child Care and Culture: Lessons from Africa. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lewis, M. 2000. Self-­conscious emotions: Embarrassment, pride, shame, and guilt. In Handbook 
of  emotions, 2nd ed., ed. M. Lewis and J. M. Haviland-­Jones, 623–36. New York: Guilford Press.
Lickel, B., T. Schmader, and M. Spanovic. 2007. Group-­conscious emotions: The implications of 
­others’ wrongdoings for identity and relationships. In The Self-­Conscious Emotions: Theory and 
Research, J. L. Tracy, R. W. Robins, and J. P. Tangney, 351–69. New York: Guilford Press.
Liebal, K., T. Behne, M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2009. Infants use shared experience to 
interpret pointing gestures. Developmental Science 12 (2): 264–71.
Liebal, K., M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2011. Young ­children’s understanding of marked­
ness in non-­verbal communication. Journal of  Child Language 38 (4): 888–903.
—­—­—. 2013. Young ­children’s understanding of cultural common ground. British Journal of  De­
velopmental Psy­chol­ogy 31 (1): 88–96.
Liebal, K., C. Colombi, Rogers, S. J., F. Warneken, and M. Tomasello. 2008. Helping and cooperation 
in ­children with autism. Journal of  Autism and Developmental Disorders 38 (2): 224–38.
Liebal, K., A. Vaish, D. Haun, and M. Tomasello. 2014. Does sympathy motivate prosocial behaviour 
in ­great apes? PLoS One 9 (1): e84299.
Lieven, E. V. M., and S. Stoll. 2013. Early communicative development in two cultures: A 
comparison of the communicative environments of ­children from two cultures. ­Human 
Development 56 (3): 178–206.
Lieven, E., and M. Tomasello. 2008. ­Children’s first language acquisition from a usage-­based per­
spective. In Handbook of  Cognitive Linguistics and Second Language Acquisition, ed. P. Robinson, 
and N. C. Ellis, 168–96. New York: Routledge.
Liszkowski, U., P. Brown, T. Callaghan, A. Takada, and C. de Vos. 2012. A prelinguistic gestural 
universal of ­human communication. Cognitive Science 36: 698–713.
Liszkowski, U., M. Carpenter, A. Henning, T. Striano, and M. Tomasello. 2004. Twelve-­month-­
olds point to share attention and interest. Developmental Science 7 (3): 297–307.
Liszkowski, U., M. Carpenter, T. Striano, and M. Tomasello. 2006. Twelve-­ and 18-­month-­olds 
point to provide information for ­others. Journal of  Cognition and Development 7 (2): 173–87.

360	
References
Liszkowski, U., M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2007. Pointing out new news, old news, and 
absent referents at 12 months of age. Developmental Science 10 (2): F1–­F7.
—­—­—. 2008. Twelve-­month-­olds communicate helpfully and appropriately for knowledgeable 
and ignorant partners. Cognition 108 (3): 732–39.
Liszkowski, U., and M. Tomasello. 2011. Individual differences in social, cognitive, and morpho­
logical aspects of infant pointing. Cognitive Development 26 (1): 16–29.
Lohmann, H., and M. Tomasello. 2003. The role of language in the development of false belief 
understanding: A training study. Child Development 74 (4): 1130–44.
López, A., M. Correa-­Chávez, B. Rogoff, and K. Gutiérrez. 2010. Attention to instruction directed 
to another by U.S. Mexican-­heritage ­children of varying cultural backgrounds. Developmental 
Psy­chol­ogy 46 (3): 593–601.
Loveland, K. A., and S. H. Landry. 1986. Joint attention and language in autism and developmental 
language delay. Journal of  Autism and Developmental Disorders 16 (3): 335–49.
Lucca, K., E. MacLean, and B. Hare. 2017. The development and flexibility of gaze alternations 
in bonobos and chimpanzees. Developmental Science. DOI: 10.1111/desc.12598.
Lurz, R. W. 2011. Mindreading Animals: The Debate over What Animals Know about Other Minds. Cam­
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lyons, D. E., L. R. Santos, and F. C. Keil. 2006. Reflections of other minds: How primate social cog­
nition can inform the function of mirror neurons. Current Opinion in Neurobiology 16: 230–34.
Lyons, D. E., A. G. Young, and F. C. Keil. 2007. The hidden structure of overimitation Proceedings 
of  the National Acad­emy of  Sciences of  the United States of  Amer­i­ca 104 (50): 19751–56.
Machiavelli, N. 1513 / 1988. The Prince. Edited by Q. Skinner and R. Price. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Mannle, S., M. Barton, and M. Tomasello. 1992. Two-­year-­olds conversations with their ­mothers 
and preschool-­aged siblings. First Language 12: 57–71.
Markman, E. 1989. Categorization and Naming in ­Children. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Marlowe, F. W., J. C. Berbesque, A. Barr, C. Barrett, A. Bolyanatz, J. C. Cardenas, J. Ensminger, 
M. Gurven, E. Gwako, J. Henrich, N. Henrich, C. Lesorogol, R. McElreath, and D. Tracer. 2008. 
More “altruistic” punishment in larger socie­ties. Proceedings of  the Royal Society B, Biological 
Sciences 275: 587–90.
Martin, A., and K. R. Olson. 2013. When kids know better: Paternalistic helping in 3-­year-­old 
­children. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 49 (11): 2071–81.
Masangkay, Z. S., K. A. McCluskey, C. W. McIntyre, J. Sims-­Knight, B. E. Vaughn, and J. H. 
­Flavell. 1974. The early development of inferences about the visual percepts of ­others. Child 
Development 45: 357–66.
Matsui, T., H. Rakoczy, Y. Miura, and M. Tomasello. 2009. Understanding of speaker certainty 
and false-­belief reasoning: A comparison of Japa­nese and German preschoolers. Developmental 
Science 12 (4): 602–13.
Matthews, D., T. Behne, E. Lieven, and M. Tomasello. 2012. Origins of the ­human pointing ges­
ture: A training study. Developmental Science 15: 817–29.
Matthews, D., E. Lieven, A. L. Theakston, and M. Tomasello. 2006. The effect of perceptual avail­
ability and prior discourse on young ­children’s use of referring expression. Applied Psycholin­
guistics 27 (3): 403–22.
Matthews, D., E. Lieven, and M. Tomasello. 2010. What’s in a manner of speaking? ­Children’s 
sensitivity to partner-­specific referential pre­ce­dents. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 46 (4): 749–60.
Maynard Smith, J., and M. Szathmáry. 1995. Major Transitions in Evolution. New York: Oxford Uni­
versity Press.
McAuliffe, K., P. R. Blake, N. Steinbeis, and F. Warneken. 2017. The developmental foundations 
of ­human fairness. Nature ­Human Behaviour 1 :0042; DOI: 10.1038/s41562-016-0042.

	
References	
361
McAuliffe, K., J. Jordan, and F. Warneken. 2015. Costly third-­party punishment in young ­children. 
Cognition 134: 1–10.
McAuliffe, K., N. J. Raihani, and Y. Dunham. In press. ­Children are sensitive to norms of giving. 
Cognition.
McGrew, W. C. 1989. Why is ape tool-­use so confusing? In Comparative Socioecol­ogy: The Behav­
ioural Ecol­ogy of  ­Humans and Other Mammals, ed. V. Standen, and R. A. Foley, 457–72. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
McGuigan, N., and M. J. Doherty. 2002. The relation between hiding skill and judgment of eye 
direction in preschool ­children. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 38 (3): 418–27.
McGuigan, N., J. Makinson, and A. Whiten. 2011. From over-­imitation to super-­copying: Adults 
imitate causally irrelevant aspects of tool use with higher fidelity than young ­children. British 
Journal of  Psy­chol­ogy 102 (1): 1–18.
McGuigan, N., and A. Stevenson. 2016. Does the age and familiarity of the in­for­mant group in­
fluence the tendency of 3-­ and 4-­year-­old ­children to conform? Journal of  Ge­ne­tic Psy­chol­ogy 177 
(4): 122–30.
Mejia-­Arauz, R., B. Rogoff, A. Dexter, and B. Najafi. 2007. Cultural variation in ­children’s social 
organ­ization. Child Development 78 (3): 1001–14.
Melis, A. P., J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2006a. Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) conceal visual and 
auditory information from ­others. Journal of  Comparative Psy­chol­ogy 120 (2): 154–62.
—­—­—. 2010. 36-­Month-­olds conceal visual and auditory information from ­others. Developmental 
Science 13 (3): 479–89.
Melis, A. P., A. Floedl, and M. Tomasello. 2015. Non-­egalitarian allocations among preschool peers 
in a face-­to-­face bargaining task. PLoS One 10 (3): e0120494.
Melis, A., P. Grocke, J. Kalbitz, and M. Tomasello. 2016. One for you, one for me: ­Humans’ unique 
turn-­taking skills. Psychological Science 27: 987–96.
Melis, A. P., B. Hare, and M. Tomasello. 2006b. Chimpanzees recruit the best collaborators. 
Science 311 (5765): 1297–300.
—­—­—. 2006c. Engineering cooperation in chimpanzees: Tolerance constraints on cooperation. 
Animal Behaviour 72 (2): 275–86.
—­—­—. 2009. Chimpanzees coordinate in a negotiation game. Evolution and ­Human Be­hav­ior 30 
(6): 381–92.
Melis, A. P., and M. Tomasello. 2013. Chimpanzees’ (Pan troglodytes) strategic helping in a col­
laborative task. Biology Letters 9: 20130009.
Melis, A. P., F. Warneken, K. Jensen, A.-­C. Schneider, J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2011. Chimpan­
zees help conspecifics obtain food and non-­food items. Proceedings of  the Royal Society B, Bio­
logical Sciences 278 (1710): 1405–13.
Meltzoff, A. 1995. Understanding the intentions of ­others: Re-­enactment of intended acts by 
18-­month-­old ­children. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 31: 1–16.
—­—­—. 2007. The “like me” framework for recognizing and becoming an intentional agent. Acta 
Psychologica 124: 26–43.
Mercier, H., S. Bernard, and F. Clément. 2014. Early sensitivity to arguments: How preschoolers 
weight circular arguments. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 125: 102–9.
Mercier, H., and D. Sperber. 2011. Why do ­humans reason? Arguments for an argumentative 
theory. Behavioral and Brain Science 34 (2): 57–74.
Milligan, K., J. W. Astington, and L. A. Dack. 2007. Language and theory of mind: Metaanalysis 
of the relation between language ability and false-­belief understanding. Child Development 78 
(2): 622–46.
Misch, A., H. Over, and M. Carpenter. 2014. Stick with your group: Young ­children’s attitudes 
about group loyalty. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 126: 19–36.

362	
References
Moll, H., M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2007. Fourteen-­month-­olds know what ­others expe­
rience only in joint engagement. Developmental Science 10 (6): 826–35.
—­—­—. 2014. Two-­ and three-­year-­olds know what ­others have and have not heard. Journal of  
Cognition and Development 15 (1): 12–21.
Moll, H., and D. Kadipasaoglu. 2013. The primacy of social over visual perspective-­taking. Fron­
tiers in ­Human Neuroscience 7: 558.
Moll, H., C. Koring, M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2006. Infants determine ­others’ focus of 
attention by pragmatics and exclusion. Journal of  Cognition and Development 7 (3): 411–30.
Moll, H., and A. N. Meltzoff. 2011. How does it look? Level 2 perspective-­taking at 36 months of 
age. Child Development 82 (2): 661–73.
Moll, H., A. N. Meltzoff, K. Merzsch, and M. Tomasello. 2013. Taking versus confronting visual 
perspectives in preschool ­children. Developmental Psychology 49 (4): 646–54.
Moll, H., N. Richter, M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2008. Fourteen-­month-­olds know what 
“we” have shared in a special way. Infancy 13 (1): 90–101.
Moll, H., and M. Tomasello. 2004. 12- ­and 18-­month-­old infants follow gaze to spaces ­behind 
barrier. Developmental Science 7 (1): F1–­F9.
—­—­—. 2006. Level 1 perspective-­taking at 24 months of age. British Journal of  Developmental Psy­
chol­ogy 24 (3): 603–13.
—­—­—. 2007a. Cooperation and ­human cognition: The Vygotskian intelligence hypothesis. Phil­
osophical Transactions of  the Royal Society B, Biological Sciences 362 (1480): 639–48.
—­—­—. 2007b. How 14-­ and 18-­month-­olds know what ­others have experienced. Developmental 
Psy­chol­ogy 43 (2): 309–17.
—­—­—. 2012. Three-­year-­olds understand appearance and real­ity—­just not about the same ob­
ject at the same time. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 48 (4): 1124–32.
Moore, C. 2009. Fairness in ­children’s resource allocation depends on the recipient. Psychological 
Science 20 (8): 944–48.
Mueller, M. N., and J. C. Mitani. 2005. Conflict and cooperation in wild chimpanzees. Advances in 
the Study of  Be­hav­ior 35: 275–331.
Mugny, G., and W. Doise. 1978. Socio-­cognitive conflict and structure of individual and collec­
tive per­for­mances. Eu­ro­pean Journal of  Social Psy­chol­ogy 8 (2): 181–92.
Mundy, P. 2003. Annotation: the neural basis of social impairments in autism: The role of the 
dorsal medial-­frontal cortex and anterior cingulate system. Journal of  Child Psy­chol­ogy and Psy­
chiatry 44 (6): 793–809.
Mundy, P., and L. Newell. 2007. Attention, joint attention, and social cognition. Current Directions 
in Psychological Science 16 (5): 269–74.
Mundy, P., M. Sigman, and C. Kasari. 1990. A longitudinal study of joint attention and lan­
guage development in autistic ­children. Journal of  Autism and Developmental Disorders 20 (1): 
115–28.
Murray, L., and C. Trevarthen. 1985. Emotional regulation of interactions between two-­month-­ 
olds and their ­mothers. In Social Perception in Infants, ed. T. M. Field and N. A. Fox, 177–97. 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Myowa, M. 1996. Imitation of facial gestures by an infant chimpanzee. Primates 37: 207–13.
Myowa-­Yamakoshi, M., M. Tomonaga, M. Tanaka, and T. Matsuzawa. 2004. Imitation in neo­
natal chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). Developmental Science 7 (4): 437–42.
Nadel, J. 2002. Imitation and imitation recognition: Functional use in preverbal infants and non­
verbal ­children with autism. In The Imitative Mind: Development, Evolution, and Brain Bases, ed. 
A. Meltzoff, and W. Prinz, 42–62. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nagel, T. 1970. The Possibility of  Altruism. Prince­ton, NJ: Prince­ton University Press.
—­—­—. 1986. The View from Nowhere. New York: Oxford University Press.

	
References	
363
Nagell, K., R. Olguin, and M. Tomasello. 1993. Pro­cesses of social learning in the tool use of chim­
panzees (Pan troglodytes) and ­human ­children (Homo sapiens). Journal of  Comparative Psy­chol­ogy 
107: 174–86.
Neary, K. R., and O. Friedman. 2013. The origin of ­children’s appreciation of owner­ship rights. 
In Navigating the Social World: What Infants, ­Children, and Other Species Can Teach Us, ed. M. R. 
Banaji and S. A. Gelman, 356–60. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Neary, K. R., O. Friedman, and C. L. Burnstein. 2009. Preschoolers infer owner­ship from “con­
trol of permission.” Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 45: 873–76.
Nelson, P. B., L. B. Adamson, and R. Bakeman. 2008. Toddlers’ joint engagement experience fa­
cilitates preschoolers’ acquisition of theory of mind. Developmental Science 11 (6): 847–52.
Ng, R., G. D. Heyman, and D. Barner. 2011. Collaboration promotes proportional reasoning about 
resource distribution in young ­children. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 47 (5): 1230–38.
Nichols, S., M. Svetlova, and C. Brownell. 2009. The role of social understanding and empathic 
disposition in young ­children’s responsiveness to distress in parents and peers. Cognition, Brain, 
Be­hav­ior 4: 449–78.
Nielsen, M. 2006. Copying actions and copying outcomes: Social learning through the second 
year. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 42: 555–65.
Nielsen, M., and K. Hudry. 2010. Over-­imitation in ­children with autism and Down syndrome. 
Australian Journal of  Psy­chol­ogy 62: 67–74.
Nielsen, M., G. Simcock, and L. Jenkins. 2008. The effect of social engagement on 24-­month-­olds’ 
imitation from live and televised models. Developmental Science 11: 722–31.
Nielsen, M., and K. Tomaselli. 2010. Overimitation in Kalahari Bushman ­children and the origins 
of ­human cultural cognition. Psychological Science 21 (5): 729–36.
Nielsen, M., K. Tomaselli, I. Mushin, and A. Whiten. 2014. Where culture takes hold: “Overimita­
tion” and its flexible deployment in Western, Aboriginal, and Bushmen ­children. Child Development 
85: 2169–84.
Ninio, A. 2016. Bids for joint attention by parent–­child dyads and by dyads of young peers in in­
teraction. Journal of  Child Language 43: 135–56.
Noyes, A., and Y. Dunham. 2017. Mutual intentions as a causal framework for social groups. 
Cognition 162: 133–42.
Okamoto, S., M. Tanaka, and M. Tomonaga. 2004. Looking back: The “repre­sen­ta­tional mecha­
nism” of joint attention in an infant chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes). Japa­nese Psychological Research 
46 (3): 236–45.
Okamoto-­Barth, S., J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2007. ­Great apes’ understanding of other individ­
uals’ line of sight. Psychological Science 18 (5): 462–68.
Oktay-­Gür, N., A. Schulz, and H. Rakoczy. 2018. ­Children exhibit dif­fer­ent per­for­mance patterns 
in explicit and implicit theory of mind tasks. Cognition 173: 60–74.
Olson, K. R., and E. S. Spelke. 2008. Foundations of cooperation in young ­children. Cognition 108 
(1): 222–31.
O’Madagain, C., K. Helming, and M. Tomasello. Forthcoming. Young ­children understand their 
own beliefs as corrigible.
O’Madagain, C., and M. Tomasello. Forthcoming. Joint attention to ­mental content.
Onishi, K. H., and R. Baillargeon. 2005. Do 15-­month-­old infants understand false beliefs? Science 
308: 255–58.
Over, H., and M. Carpenter. 2012. Putting the social into social learning: Explaining both selec­
tivity and fidelity in ­children’s copying be­hav­ior. Journal of  Comparative Psy­chol­ogy 126 (2): 
182–92.
Over, H., A. Vaish, and M. Tomasello. 2016. Do young ­children accept responsibility for the nega­
tive actions of ingroup members? Cognitive Development 40: 24–32.

364	
References
Ozcaliskan, S., and S. Goldin-­Meadow. 2005. Gesture is at the cutting edge of language develop­
ment. Cognition 96: B101–13.
Paulus, M. 2014. The emergence of prosocial be­hav­ior: Why do infants and toddlers help, com­
fort, and share? Child Development Perspectives 8: 77–81.
Paulus, M., S. Gillis, J. Li, and C. Moore. 2013. Preschool ­children involve a third party in a 
dyadic sharing situation based on fairness. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 116 (1): 
78–85.
Pea, R. D. 1982. Origins of verbal logic: Spontaneous denials by two- ­and three-­year olds. Journal 
of  Child Language 9 (3): 597–626.
Perner, J., J. Brandl, and A. Garnham. 2003. What is a perspective prob­lem? Developmental is­
sues in understanding belief and dual identity. Facta Philosophica 5: 355–78.
Perner, J., M. C. Mauer, and M. Hildenbrand. 2011. Identity: Key to ­children’s understanding of 
belief. Science 333: 474–77.
Perner, J., and J. Roessler. 2012. From infants’ to ­children’s appreciation of belief. Trends in Cogni­
tive Sciences 16 (10): 519–25.
Perry, S., M. Baker, L. Fedigan, J. Gros-­Louis, K. Jack, K. C. MacKinnon, and L. Rose. 2003. Social 
conventions in wild white-­faced capuchin monkeys. Current Anthropology 44 (2): 241–68.
Peterson, C.C., and M. Siegal. 1995. Deafness, conversation and theory of mind. Journal of  Child 
Psy­chol­ogy and Psychiatry 36: 459–74.
Piaget, J. 1932 / 1965. The Moral Judgment of  the Child. New York: ­Free Press.
—­—­—. 1960 / 1995. Prob­lems of the social psy­chol­ogy of childhood. In So­cio­log­i­cal Studies, ed. 
L. Smith, trans. T. Brown et al., 287–318. London: Routledge.
—­—­—. 1965 / 1995. So­cio­log­i­cal Studies. New York: Routledge.
—­—­—. 1970. Piaget’s theory. In Carmichael’s Handbook of Child Psy­chol­ogy, ed. P. H. Mussen, 703–32. 
New York: Wiley.
—­—­—. 1977. The Development of  Thought: Equilibration of  Cognitive Structures. Trans. A. Rosin. New 
York: Viking.
Pine, K. J., and D. J. Messer. 1998. Group collaboration effects and the explicitness of ­children’s 
knowledge. Cognitive Development 13 (1): 109–26.
Pinker, S. 1991. Rules of language. Science 253: 530–35.
Plötner, M., H. Over, M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2015a. The effects of collaboration and 
minimal-­group membership on ­children’s prosocial be­hav­ior, liking, affiliation, and trust. 
Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 139: 161–73.
—­—­—. 2015b. Young ­children show the bystander effect in helping situations. Psychological Sci­
ence 26 (4): 499–506.
Poti, P., and J. Langer. 2001. Spontaneous spatial constructions by chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes, 
Pan paniscus). Developmental Science 4 (4): 474–84.
Povinelli, D. J., and J. Vonk. 2003. Chimpanzee minds: Suspiciously ­human? Trends in Cognitive 
Science 7: 157–60.
—­—­—. 2004. We ­don’t need a microscope to explore the chimpanzee’s mind. Mind and Language 
19: 1–28.
Powell, L. J., and S. Carey. 2017. Executive function depletion in ­children and its impact on theory 
of mind. Cognition 164: 150–62.
Powell, L. J., and E. S. Spelke. 2013. Preverbal infants expect members of social groups to act alike. 
Proceedings of  the National Acad­emy of  Sciences of  the United States of  Amer­i­ca 110 (41): E3965–72.
Proctor, D., R. A. Williamson, F. B. M. de Waal, and S. F. Brosnan. 2013. Chimpanzees play the 
ultimatum game. Proceedings of  the National Acad­emy of  Sciences of  the United States of  Amer­i­ca 
110 (6): 2070–75.
Pyers, J. E., and A. Senghas. 2009. Language promotes false-­belief understanding: Evidence from 
learners of a new sign language. Psychological Science 20 (7): 805–12.

	
References	
365
Rakoczy, H. 2015. In defense of a developmental dogma: ­Children acquire propositional attitude 
folk psy­chol­ogy around age 4. Synthese 194 (3): 689–707.
Rakoczy, H., A. Clüver, L. Saucke, N. Stoffregen, A. Gräbener, J. Migura, and J. Call. 2014. Apes 
are intuitive statisticians. Cognition 131 (1): 60–68.
Rakoczy, H., K. Hamann, F. Warneken, and M. Tomasello. 2010. Bigger knows better: Young 
­children selectively learn rule games from adults rather than from peers. British Journal of  De­
velopmental Psy­chol­ogy 28 (4): 785–98.
Rakoczy, H., and M. Tomasello. 2009. Done wrong or said wrong? Young ­children understand 
the normative directions of fit of dif­fer­ent speech acts. Cognition 113 (2): 205–12.
Rakoczy, H., M. Tomasello, and T. Striano. 2005. On tools and toys: How ­children learn to act on 
and pretend with “virgin objects.” Developmental Science 8 (1): 57–72.
—­—­—. 2006. The role of experience and discourse in ­children’s developing understanding of pre­
tend play actions. British Journal of  Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 24 (2): 305–35.
Rakoczy, H., F. Warneken, and M. Tomasello. 2008. The sources of normativity: Young ­children’s 
awareness of the normative structure of games. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 44 (3): 875–81.
Rapp, D. J., J. M. Engelmann, E. Herrmann, and M. Tomasello. 2017. The impact of choice on 
young ­children’s prosocial motivation. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 158: 112–21.
—­—­—. In press. Young ­children’s reputation management in a peer group context. Developmental 
Psy­chol­ogy.
Rawls, J. 1971. A Theory of  Justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Rekers, Y., D. B. M. Haun, and M. Tomasello. 2011. ­Children, but not chimpanzees, prefer to col­
laborate. Current Biology 21 (20): 1756–58.
Rendell, L., and H. Whitehead. 2001. Culture in ­whales and dolphins. Behavioral and Brain Science 
24: 309–82.
Rhodes, M., and L. Chalik. 2013. Social categories as markers of intrinsic interpersonal obliga­
tions. Psychological Science 24 (6): 999–1006.
Richerson, P., and R. Boyd. 2005. Not by Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed ­Human Evolution. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Riedl, K., K. Jensen, J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2012. No third-­party punishment in chimpanzees. 
Proceedings of  the National Acad­emy of  Sciences of  the United States of  Amer­i­ca 109 (37): 14824–29.
—­—­—. 2015. Restorative justice in ­children. Current Biology 25 (13): 1731–35.
Riggs, A. E., and A. G. Young. 2016. Developmental changes in ­children’s normative reasoning 
across learning contexts and collaborative roles. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 52 (8): 1236–46.
Rivas, E. 2005. Recent use of signs by chimpanzees (Pan Troglodytes) in interactions with ­humans. 
Journal of  Comparative Psy­chol­ogy 119 (4): 404–17.
Robbins, E., and P. Rochat. 2011. Emerging signs of strong reciprocity in ­human ontogeny. Fron­
tiers in Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 353 (2): 1–14.
Rochat, P. 2001. The Infant’s World. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
—­—­—. 2009. ­Others in Mind: Social Origins of  Self-­Consciousness. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer­
sity Press.
Rochat, P., M. D. G. Dias, L. Guo, T. Broesch, C. Passos-­Ferreira, A. Winning, and B. Berg. 2009. 
Fairness in distributive justice by 3-­ and 5-­year-­olds across seven cultures. Journal of  Cross-­Cultural 
Psy­chol­ogy 40 (3): 416–42.
Rochat, P., U. Neisser, and V. Marian. 1998. Are young infants sensitive to interpersonal contin­
gency? Infant Be­hav­ior and Development 21 (2): 355–66.
Rogers, S., and B. Pennington. 1991. A theoretical approach to the deficits in infantile autism. De­
velopmental Psy­chol­ogy 3: 137–62.
Rogoff, B. 1990. Apprenticeship in Thinking: Cognitive Development in Social Context. New York: Ox­
ford University Press.
—­—­—. 2003. The Cultural Nature of  ­Human Development. New York: Oxford University Press.

366	
References
Rogoff, B., M. J. Sellers, S. Pirrolta, N. Fox, and S. H. White. 1975. Age and assignment of roles 
and responsibilities to ­children: A cross cultural study. ­Human Development 18: 353–69.
Rollins, P. R., and C. E. Snow. 1998. Shared attention and grammatical development in typical 
­children and ­children with autism. Journal of  Child Language 25 (3): 653–74.
Rosati, A. G. 2017. The evolution of primate executive function: From response control to stra­
tegic decision-­making. In The Ner­vous Systems of  Non-­Human Primates. Vol. 3 of Evolution of  Ner­
vous Systems, 2nd ed., ed. J. Kaas and L. Krubitzer, 423–37. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Rossano, F., L. Fiedler, and M. Tomasello. 2015. Preschoolers’ understanding of the role of com­
munication and cooperation in establishing property rights. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 51 (2): 
176–84.
Rossano, F., H. Rakoczy, and M. Tomasello. 2011. Young ­children’s understanding of violations 
of property rights. Cognition 121 (2): 219–27.
Roughley, N. 2015. Resentment, empathy and moral normativity. In Forms of  Fellow Feeling: Sym­
pathy, Empathy, Concern and Moral Agency, ed. N. Roughley and T. Schramme, 225–47. Cam­
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rubio-­Fernandez, P., and B. Geurts. 2013. How to pass the false-­belief task before your fourth 
birthday. Psychological Science 24 (1): 27–33.
Ruffman T., J. Perner, M. Naito, L. Parkin, and W. A. Clements. 1998. Older (but not younger) 
siblings facilitate false belief understanding. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 34: 161–74.
Salali, G. D., M. Juda, and J. Henrich. 2015. Transmission and development of costly punishment 
in ­children. Evolution and ­Human Be­hav­ior 36 (2): 86–94.
Savage-­Rumbaugh, S., J. Murphy, R. Sevcik, K. Brakke, S. Williams, and D. Rumbaugh. 1993. Lan­
guage comprehension in ape and child. Monographs of  the Society for Research in Child Develop­
ment 58 (3–4).
Scanlon, T. 1998. What We Owe to Each Other. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Schäfer, M., D. B. M. Haun, and M. Tomasello. 2015. Fair is not fair everywhere. Psychological Sci­
ence 26 (8): 1252–60.
Schelling, T. C. 1960. The Strategy of  Conflict. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Schieffelin, B. B., and E. Ochs. 1986. Language socialization. Annual Review of  Anthropology 15 (1): 
163–91.
Schmelz, M., J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2011. Chimpanzees know that ­others make inferences. 
Proceedings of  the National Acad­emy of  Sciences of  the United States of  Amer­i­ca 108 (7): 3077–79.
Schmelz, M., S. Grüneisen, A. Kabalak, J. Jost, and M. Tomasello. 2017. Chimpanzees return ­favors 
at a personal cost. Proceedings of  the National Acad­emy of  Sciences of  the United States of  Amer­i­ca 
114 (28): 7462–67.
Schmerse, D., E. V. M. Lieven, and M. Tomasello. 2014. Discourse particles and belief reasoning: 
The case of German “doch.” Journal of  Semantics 31 (1): 115–33.
Schmidt, M., L. Butler, J. Heinz, and M. Tomasello. 2016a. Young ­children see a single action and 
infer a social norm. Psychological Science 27: 1360–70.
Schmidt, M., S. Hardecker, and M. Tomasello. 2016b. Young ­children’s understanding of co­
operatively structured competition. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 143: 34–47.
Schmidt, M. F. H., H. Rakoczy, and M. Tomasello. 2011. Young ­children attribute normativity to 
novel actions without pedagogy or normative language. Developmental Science 14 (3): 530–39.
—­—­—. 2012. Young ­children enforce social norms selectively depending on the violator’s group 
affiliation. Cognition 124 (3): 325–33.
—­—­—. 2013. Young ­children understand and defend the entitlements of ­others. Journal of  Ex­
perimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 116 (4): 930–44.
—­—­—. 2016c. Young ­children understand the role of agreement in establishing arbitrary 
norms—­but una­nim­i­ty is key. Child Development 87: 612–26.
—­—­—. Forthcoming. Eighteen-­month-­old infants correct non-­conforming actions by ­others.

	
References	
367
Schmidt, M. F. H., and J. A. Sommerville. 2011. Fairness expectations and altruistic sharing in 
15-­month-­old ­human infants. PLoS One 6 (10): e23223.
Schmidt, M., M. Svetlova, J. Johe, and M. Tomasello. 2016d. ­Children’s developing understanding 
of legitimate reasons for allocating resources unequally. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 
37: 42–52.
Schneider, C., J. Call, and K. Liebal. 2012. Onset and early use of gestural communication in non­
human ­great apes. American Journal of  Primatology 74 (2): 102–13.
Schulze, C., and M. Tomasello. 2015. 18-­Month-­olds comprehend indirect communicative acts. 
Cognition 136: 91–98.
Schwier, C., C. Van Maanen, M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2006. Rational imitation in 
12-­month-­old infants. Infancy 10 (3): 303–11.
Searle, J. R. 1995. The Construction of  Social Real­ity. New York: ­Free Press.
—­—­—. 2001. Rationality in Action. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—­—­—. 2010. Making the Social World: The Structure of  ­Human Civilization. Oxford University 
Press.
Shaw, A., and K. R. Olson. 2012. ­Children discard a resource to avoid in­equality. Journal of  Experi­
mental Psy­chol­ogy: General 141: 382–95.
—­—­—. 2014. Fairness as an aversion to partiality: The development of procedural justice. 
Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 119: 40–53.
Shweder, R. A. 1991. Thinking through Cultures: Expeditions in Cultural Psy­chol­ogy. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Silk, J. B., S. F. Brosnan, J. Vonk, J. Henrich, D. J. Povinelli, A. F. Richardson, S. P. Lambeth, J. 
­Mascaro, and S. J. Schapiro. 2005. Chimpanzees are indifferent to the welfare of other group 
members. Nature 435: 1357–59.
Siller, M., and M. Sigman. 2008. Modeling longitudinal change in the language abilities of ­children 
with autism: Parent be­hav­iors and child characteristics as predictors of change. Developmental 
Psy­chol­ogy 44 (6): 1691–704.
Silva, K. G., M. Correa-­Chávez, and B. Rogoff. 2010. Mexican-­heritage ­children’s attention and 
learning from interactions directed to ­others. Child Development 81 (3): 898–912.
Smith, A. 1759 / 1982. The Theory of  Moral Sentiments. Indianapolis: Liberty Classics.
Smith, C., P. R. Blake, and P. L. Harris. 2013. I should but I ­won’t: Why young ­children endorse 
norms of fair sharing but do not follow them. PloS One 8 (8): e59510.
Smith, L. B., S. S. Jones, and B. Landau. 1996. Naming in young ­children: A dumb attentional 
mechanism? Cognition 60 (2): 143–71.
Smith, L. B., S. H. Suanda, and C. Yu. 2014. The unrealized promise of infant statistical word-­
referent learning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 18: 251–58.
Sodian, B., M. Licata, S. Kristen-­Antonow, M. Paulus, M. Killen, and A. Woodward. 2016. Under­
standing of goals, beliefs, and desires predicts morally relevant theory of mind: A longitudinal 
investigation. Child Development 87 (4): 1221–32.
Southgate, V., A. Senju, and G. Csibra. 2007. Action anticipation through attribution of false be­
lief by 2-­year-­olds. Psychological Science 18 (7): 587–92.
Spelke, E. S. 2009. Commentary. In M. Tomasello, Why We Cooperate, 149–72. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
—­—­—. 2015. Core knowledge and conceptual change: The concept “person.” Paper presented 
at The Nature and Origins of  ­Human Cognition. Berlin School of Mind and Brain, Humboldt 
University, Berlin.
Sperber, D., F. Clément, C. Heintz, O. Mascaro, H. Mercier, G. Origgi, and D. Wilson. 2010. Epi­
stemic vigilance. Mind and Language 25: 359–93.
Sperber, D., and D. Wilson. 1986. Relevance: Communication and Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Har­
vard University Press.

368	
References
Stern, D. N. 1985. The Interpersonal World of  the Infant: A View from Psychoanalysis and Developmental 
Psy­chol­ogy. New York: Basic Books.
Strawson, P. F. 1962. Freedom and resentment. Proceedings of  the British Acad­emy 48: 1–25.
Striano, T., M. Tomasello, and P. Rochat. 2001. Social and object support for early symbolic play. 
Developmental Science 4 (4): 442–55.
Svetlova, M., and C. Brownell. Forthcoming. Three-­year-­olds ­favor ­those in need.
Svetlova, M., S. Nichols, and C. Brownell. 2010. Toddlers’ prosocial be­hav­ior: From instrumental 
to empathic to altruistic helping. Child Development 81 (6): 1814–27.
Tangney, J. P., and R. L. Dearing. 2004. Shame and Guilt. New York: Guilford Press.
Tanner, J. E., and R. W. Byrne. 1996. Repre­sen­ta­tion of action through iconic gesture in a captive 
lowland gorilla. Current Anthropology 37: 162–73.
Tennie, C., J. Call, and M. Tomasello. 2006. Push or pull: Imitation vs. emulation in ­great apes 
and ­human ­children. Ethology 112 (12): 1159–69.
—­—­—. 2009. Ratcheting up the ratchet: on the evolution of cumulative culture. Philosophical 
Transactions of  the Royal Society B, Biological Sciences 364 (1528): 2405–15.
Tennie, C., V. Walter, A. Gampe, M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2014. Limitations to the cul­
tural ratchet effect in young ­children. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 126: 152–60.
Thornton, A., and N. J. Raihani. 2008. The evolution of teaching. Animal Behaviour 75 (6): 
1823–36.
Tincoff, R., and P. W. Jusczyk. 1999. Some beginnings of word comprehension in six-­month-­olds. 
Psychological Science 10: 172–75.
Tomasello, M. 1988. The role of joint attentional pro­cess in early language development. Lan­
guage Sciences 10: 69–88.
—­—­—. 1992. First Verbs: A Case Study of  Early Grammatical Development. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
—­—­—. 1995. Joint attention as social cognition. In Joint Attention: Its Origins and Role in Develop­
ment, ed. C. Moore and P. J. Dunham, 103–30. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
—­—­—. 1996. Do apes ape? In Social Learning in Animals: The Roots of  Culture, ed. J. Galef and C. 
Heyes. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
—­—­—. 1998. Reference: Intending that ­others jointly attend. Pragmatics and Cognition 6: 229–44.
—­—­—. 1999. The Cultural Origins of  ­Human Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
—­—­—. 2000. The social-­pragmatic theory of word learning. Pragmatics 10: 401–14.
—­—­—. 2001. Perceiving intentions and learning words in the second year of life. In Language Ac­
quisition and Conceptual Development, ed. M. Bowerman and S. Levinson, 132–58. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
—­—­—. 2003. Constructing a Language: A Usage-­Based Theory of  Language Acquisition. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
—­—­—. 2005. Beyond formalities: The case of language acquisition. Linguistic Review 22 (2–4): 
183–97.
—­—­—. 2006. Why ­don’t apes point? In Roots of  ­Human Sociality: Culture, Cognition and Interac­
tion, ed. N. J. Enfield and S. C. Levinson, 506–30. Oxford: Berg.
—­—­—. 2008. Origins of  ­Human Communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—­—­—. 2011. ­Human culture in evolutionary perspective. In Advances in Culture and Psy­chol­ogy, 
ed. M. Gelfand, 5–51. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—­—­—. 2014. A Natu­ral History of  ­Human Thinking. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
—­—­—. 2016. A Natu­ral History of  ­Human Morality. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
—­—­—. 2017. What did we learn from the ape language studies? In Bonobos: Unique in Mind, 
Brain, and Be­hav­ior, ed. B. Hare and S. Yamamoto, 95–104. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—­—­—. In press. How ­children come to understand false beliefs: A shared intentionality account. 
Proceedings of  the National Acad­emy of  Sciences.

	
References	
369
Tomasello, M., and N. Akhtar. 2000. Five questions for any theory of word learning. In Becoming 
a Word Learner: A Debate on Lexical Acquisition, ed. R. Golinkoff and K. Hirsh-­Pasek, 115–36. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tomasello, M., and M. E. Barton. 1994. Learning words in nonostensive contexts. Developmental 
Psy­chol­ogy 30 (5): 639–50.
Tomasello, M., and J. Call. 1997. Primate Cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—­—­—. 2004. The role of ­humans in the cognitive development of apes revisited. Animal Cogni­
tion 7 (4): 213–15.
Tomasello, M., J. Call, and A. Gluckman. 1997. The comprehension of novel communicative signs 
by apes and ­human ­children. Child Development 68: 1067–81.
Tomasello, M., J. Call, Nagell, K., Olguin, R., and M. Carpenter. 1994. The learning and use of 
gestural signals by young chimpanzees: A trans-­generational study. Primates 37: 137–54.
Tomasello, M., and M. Carpenter. 2005a. The emergence of social cognition in three young chim­
panzees. Monographs of  the Society for Research in Child Development 70 (1): vii–132.
—­—­—. 2005b. Intention-­reading and imitative learning. In New Perspectives on Imitation, ed. S. 
Hurley and N. Chater, 133–48. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tomasello, M, M. Carpenter, J. Call, T. Behne, and H. Moll. 2005. Understanding and sharing in­
tentions: The origins of cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain Science 28 (5): 675–91.
Tomasello, M., M. Carpenter, and U. Liszkowski. 2007a. A new look at infant pointing. Child De­
velopment 78: 705–22.
Tomasello, M., and J. Farrar. 1986. Object permanence and relational words: A lexical training 
study. Journal of  Child Language 13: 495–506.
Tomasello, M., J. Farrar, and J. Dines. 1984. ­Children’s speech revisions for a familiar and an un­
familiar adult. Journal of  Speech and Hearing Research 27: 359–63.
Tomasello, M., B. George, A. Kruger, J. Farrar, and A. Evans. 1985. The development of gestural 
communication in young chimpanzees. Journal of  ­Human Evolution 14: 175–86.
Tomasello, M., and I. Gonzalez-­Cabrera. 2017. The role of ontogeny in the evolution of ­human 
cooperation. ­Human Nature 28: 274–88.
Tomasello, M., D. Gust, and T. Frost. 1989. A longitudinal investigation of gestural communica­
tion in young chimpanzees. Primates 30: 35–50.
Tomasello, M., and K. Haberl. 2003. Understanding attention: 12-­ and 18-­month-­olds know 
what’s new for other persons. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 39: 906–12.
Tomasello, M., B. Hare, and T. Fogleman. 2001. The ontogeny of gaze following in chimpanzees 
and rhesus macaques. Animal Behaviour 61 (2): 335–43.
Tomasello, M., B. Hare, H. Lehmann, and J. Call. 2007b. Reliance on head versus eyes in gaze 
following of ­great apes and ­human infants: The cooperative eye hypothesis. Journal of  ­Human 
Evolution 52: 314–20.
Tomasello, M., A. Kruger, and H. Ratner. 1993a. Cultural learning. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
16: 495–552.
Tomasello, M., A. Melis, C. Tennie, E. Wyman, and E. Herrmann. 2012. Two key steps in the 
evolution of ­human cooperation: The interdependence hypothesis. Current Anthropology 53 (6): 
673–92.
Tomasello, M., and H. Moll. 2013. Why ­don’t apes understand false beliefs? In Navigating the So­
cial World: What Infants, ­Children, and Other Species Can Teach Us, ed. M. R. Banaji and S. A. 
Gelman, 81–88. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tomasello, M., and H. Rakoczy. 2003. What makes ­human cognition unique? From individual to 
shared to collective intentionality. Mind and Language 18 (2): 121–47.
Tomasello, M., S. Savage-­Rumbaugh, and A. Kruger. 1993b. Imitative learning of actions on 
objects by ­children, chimpanzees and enculturated chimpanzees. Child Development 64: 
1688–705.

370	
References
Tomasello, M., T. Striano, and P. Rochat. 1999. Do young ­children use objects as symbols? British 
Journal of  Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 17: 563–84.
Tomasello, M., R. Strosberg, and N. Akhtar. 1996. Eighteen-­month-­old ­children learn words in 
non-­ostensive contexts. Journal of  Child Language 23: 157–76.
Tomasello, M., and J. Todd. 1983. Joint attention and lexical acquisition style. First Language 4: 
197–212.
Tomonaga, M., M. Myowa-­Yamakoshi, Y. Mizuno, M. Yamaguchi, D. Kosugi, K. Bard, M. Tanaka, 
and T. Matsuzawa. 2004. Development of social cognition in infant chimpanzees: Face recog­
nition, smiling, gaze and the lack of triadic interactions. Japa­nese Psychological Research 46: 
227–35.
Tooby, J., and L. Cosmides. 2005. Conceptual foundations of evolutionary psy­chol­ogy. In Hand­
book of  Evolutionary Psy­chol­ogy, ed. D. Buss, 5–67. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Trevarthen, C. 1979. Communication and cooperation in early infancy: A description of primary 
intersubjectivity. In Before Speech: The Beginning of  Interpersonal Communication, ed. M. Bullowa, 
321–47. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tronick, E. Z. 1989. Emotions and emotional communication in infants. American Psychologist 44 
(2): 112–19.
Tuomela, R. 2007. The Philosophy of  Sociality: The Shared Point of  View. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Turiel, E. 2006. The development of morality. In Social, Emotional, and Personality Develop­
ment. Vol. 3 of Handbook of  Child Psy­chol­ogy, 6th ed., ed. N. Eisenberg, 789–857. New York: 
Wiley.
Ueno, A., and T. Matsuzawa. 2004. Food transfer between chimpanzee ­mothers and their infants. 
Primates 45: 231–39.
Ulber, J., K. Hamann, and M. Tomasello. 2015. How 18-­ and 24-­month-­old peers divide resources 
among themselves. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 140: 228–44.
—­—­—. 2016. Extrinsic rewards diminish costly sharing in 3-­year-­olds. Child Development 87 (4): 
1192–203.
Ulber, J., and M. Tomasello. 2017. Young ­children, but not chimpanzees, are averse to disadvan­
tageous and advantageous inequities. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 155: 48–66.
Vaish, A., M. Carpenter, and M. Tomasello. 2009. Sympathy through affective perspective-­taking 
and its relation to prosocial be­hav­ior in toddlers. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 45 (2): 534–43.
—­—­—. 2010. Young ­children selectively avoid helping ­people with harmful intentions. Child 
Development 81 (6): 1661–69.
—­—­—. 2011a. Young ­children’s response to guilt displays. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 47 (5): 
1248–62.
—­—­—. 2016. The early emergence of guilt-­motivated prosocial be­hav­ior. Child Development 87 
(6): 1772–82.
Vaish, A., M. Missana, and M. Tomasello. 2011b. Three-­year-­old ­children intervene in third-­party 
moral transgressions. British Journal of  Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 29 (1): 124–30.
Van der Goot, M. H., M. Tomasello, and U. Liszkowski. 2014. Differences in the nonverbal re­
quests of ­great apes and ­human infants. Child Development 85 (2): 444–55.
Van Schaik, C. P., M. Ancrenaz, G. Borgen, B. Galdikas, C. D. Knott, I. Singleton, A. Suzuki, S. S. 
Utami, and M. Y. Merrill. 2003. Orangutan cultures and the evolution of material culture. 
Science 299: 102–5.
Vogelsang, M., and M. Tomasello. 2016. Giving is nicer than taking: Preschoolers reciprocate based 
on the social intentions of the distributor. PLoS One 11 (1): e0147539.
Völter, C. J., F. Rossano, and J. Call. 2015. From exploitation to cooperation: Social tool use in 
orang-­utan ­mother–­offspring dyads. Animal Behaviour 100: 126–34.

	
References	
371
Vredenburgh, C., T. Kushnir, and M. Casasola. 2015. Pedagogical cues encourage toddlers’ trans­
mission of recently demonstrated functions to unfamiliar adults. Developmental Science 18 (4): 
645–54.
Vygotsky, L. S. 1929. II. The prob­lem of the cultural development of the child. Pedagogical Semi­
nary and Journal of  Ge­ne­tic Psy­chol­ogy 36: 415–34.
—­—­—. 1930 / 1978. Mind in Society: The Development of  Higher Psychological Pro­cesses. Edited by 
M. Cole. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S., and A. R. Luria. 1930 / 1993. Studies on the History of  Be­hav­ior: Ape, Primitive, and 
Child. Edited and translated by V. I. Golod and J. E. Knox. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Warneken, F. 2013. Young ­children proactively remedy unnoticed accidents. Cognition 126 (1): 
101–8.
Warneken, F., F. Chen, and M. Tomasello. 2006. Cooperative activities in young ­children and chim­
panzees. Child Development 77 (3): 640–63.
Warneken, F., M. Gräfenhain, and M. Tomasello. 2012. Collaborative partner or social tool? New 
evidence for young ­children’s understanding of joint intentions in collaborative activities. De­
velopmental Science 15 (1): 54–61.
Warneken, F., B. Hare, A. P. Melis, D. Hanus, and M. Tomasello. 2007. Spontaneous altruism by 
chimpanzees and young ­children. PLoS Biology 5 (7): 1414–20.
Warneken, F., K. Lohse, A. P. Melis, and M. Tomasello. 2011. Young ­children share the spoils ­after 
collaboration. Psychological Science 22 (2): 267–73.
Warneken, F., J. Steinwender, K. Hamann, and M. Tomasello. 2014. Young ­children’s planning in 
a collaborative problem-­solving task. Cognitive Development 31: 48–58.
Warneken, F., and M. Tomasello. 2006. Altruistic helping in ­human infants and young chimpan­
zees. Science 31: 1301–03.
—­—­—. 2007. Helping and cooperation at 14 months of age. Infancy 11: 271–94.
—­—­—. 2008. Extrinsic rewards undermine altruistic tendencies in 20-­month-­olds. Developmental 
Psy­chol­ogy 44: 1785–88.
—­—­—. 2009a. Roots of ­human altruism. British Journal of  Psy­chol­ogy 100: 455–71.
—­—­—. 2009b. Va­ri­e­ties of altruism in ­children and chimpanzees. Trends in Cognitive Science 13: 
397–402.
—­—­—. 2013a. The emergence of contingent reciprocity in young ­children. Journal of  Experimental 
Child Psy­chol­ogy 116: 338–50.
—­—­—. 2013b. Parental presence and encouragement do not influence helping in young ­children. 
Infancy 18 (3): 345–68.
Watson-­Jones, R., C. Legare, H. White­house, and J. Clegg. 2014. Task-­specific effects of ostra­
cism on imitation in early childhood. Evolution and ­Human Be­hav­ior 35: 204–10.
Wellman, H. M., D. Cross, and J. Watson. 2001. Meta-­analysis of theory-­of-­mind development: 
The truth about false belief. Child Development 72: 655–84.
Wellman, H. M., S. Lopez-­Duran, J. LaBounty, and B. Hamilton. 2008. Infant attention to inten­
tional action predicts preschool theory of mind. Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 44 (2): 618–23.
Werner, H., and B. Kaplan. 1963. Symbol Formation. New York: Wiley.
West-­Eberhard, M. J. 1979. Sexual se­lection, social competition, and evolution. Proceedings of  the 
American Philosophical Society 51 (4): 222–34.
—­—­—. 2003. Developmental Plasticity and Evolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Whiten, A., D. M. Custance, J. C. Gomez, P. Teixidor, and K. A. Bard. 1996. Imitative learning of 
artificial fruit pro­cessing in ­children and chimpanzees. Journal of  Comparative Psy­chol­ogy 110: 
3–14.
Whiten, A., J. Goodall, W. C. McGrew, T. Nishida, V. Reynolds, Y. Sugiyama, C. E. G. Tutin, 
R. Wrangham, and C. Boesch. 1999. Cultures in chimpanzees. Nature 399: 682–85.

372	
References
Whiten, A., V. Horner, and F. B. M. de Waal. 2005. Conformity to cultural norms of tool use in 
chimpanzees. Nature 437: 737–40.
Whiten, A., N. McGuigan, S. Marshall-­Pescini, and L. M. Hopper. 2009. Emulation, imitation, 
over-­imitation and the scope of culture for child and chimpanzee. Philosophical Transactions of  
the Royal Society B, Biological Sciences 364 (1528): 2417–28.
Wilson, E. O. 1998. Consilience: The Unity of  Knowledge. New York: Random House.
—­—­—. 2012. The Social Conquest of  Earth. New York: W.W. Norton.
Winsler, A. 2009. Still talking to ourselves ­after all ­these years: A review of current research on 
private speech. In Private Speech, Executive Functioning, and the Development of  Verbal Self-­regulation, 
ed. A. Winsler, C. Fernyhough, and I. Montero, 3–41. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Winsler, A., M. P. Carlton, and M. J. Barry. 2000. Age-­related changes in preschool ­children’s sys­
tematic use of private speech in a natu­ral setting. Journal of  Child Language 27: 665–87.
Wittig, R. M., C. Crockford, T. Deschner, K. E. Langergraber, T. E. Ziegler, and K. Zuberbühler. 
2014. Food sharing is linked to urinary oxytocin levels and bonding in related and unrelated 
wild chimpanzees. Proceedings of  the Royal Society of  London B, Biological Sciences 281 (1778): 
20133096.
Wittig, R. M., K. Jensen, and M. Tomasello. 2013. Five-­year-­olds understand fair as equal in a mini-­
ultimatum game. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 116 (2): 324–37.
Wobber, V., E. Herrmann, B. Hare, R. Wrangham, and M. Tomasello. 2013. Differences in the 
early cognitive development of ­children and ­great apes. Developmental Psychobiology 56 (3): 
547–73.
Wolf, W., J. Launay, and R. I. Dunbar. 2016. Joint attention, shared goals, and social bonding. British 
Journal of  Psy­chol­ogy 107 (2): 322–37.
Wood, D., J. Bruner, and G. Ross. 1976. The role of tutoring in prob­lem solving. Journal of  Child 
Psy­chol­ogy and Child Psychiatry 17: 89−100.
Woolfe T., S. C. Want, and M. Siegal 2002. Signposts to development: Theory of mind in deaf 
­children. Child Development 73: 768–78.
Wrangham, R. W., and L. Glowacki. 2012. Intergroup aggression in chimpanzees and war in no­
madic hunter-­gatherers: Evaluating the chimpanzee model. ­Human Nature 23 (1): 5–29.
Wyman, E., H. Rakoczy, and M. Tomasello. 2009. Normativity and context in young ­children’s 
pretend play. Cognitive Development 24 (2): 146–55.
—­—­—. 2013. Non-­verbal communication enables ­children’s coordination in a “Stag Hunt” game. 
Eu­ro­pean Journal of  Developmental Psy­chol­ogy 10 (5): 597–610.
Xu, F., and T. Kushnir. 2013. Infants are rational constructivist learners. Current Directions in Psy­
chological Science 22 (1): 28–32.
Yamamoto, S., and M. Tanaka. 2009. Do chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) spontaneously take turns 
in a reciprocal cooperation task? Journal of  Comparative Psy­chol­ogy 123 (3): 242–49.
Zahn-­Waxler C., and G. Kochanska. 1990. The origins of guilt. Socioemotional Development 36: 
183–258.
Zeidler, H., E. Herrmann, D. B. M. Haun, and M. Tomasello. 2016. Taking turns or not? ­Children’s 
approach to limited resource prob­lems in three dif­fer­ent cultures. Child Development 87 (3): 
677–88.
Zmyj, N., D. Buttelmann, M. Carpenter, and M. M. Daum. 2010. The reliability of a model influ­
ences 14-­month-­olds’ imitation. Journal of  Experimental Child Psy­chol­ogy 106: 208–20.

Adamson, L., 58
“Age of reason,” 6, 162, 172, 188
Appearance-­reality, social cognition 
perspectives and, 71–72
Asch, S. E., 144
Attention-­getters, gestures, 95, 98, 129
Autism, 52–53, 63, 110, 125, 141, 146, 313; 
collaboration and, 213; dual-­level 
collaboration and, 202–203; false-­belief 
understanding and, 81, 88–89; sharing 
and, 231–232
Azmitia, M., 170
Bakeman, R., 58
Baldwin, D. A., 115
Baron-­Cohen, S., 82, 110
Barragan, R. C., 243
Bates, E., 97, 99
Baumard, N., 228
Behne, T. M., 104, 108
Blake, P. R., 239, 241, 268
Boesch, C., 147, 335–336
Bonawitz, E., 148
Bonobos. See ­Great apes
Brain, 26, 43, 75, 177–178, 334
Brooks, R., 51
Brosnan, S. F., 233–234
Brownell, C. A., 167–168, 229, 230, 231, 243
Bruner, J. S., 83, 99
Bullinger, A. F., 102, 103, 196
Butler, L. P., 149–150
Buttelmann, D., 49, 73, 138
Call, J., 12, 138, 140
Callaghan, T. C., 53, 63, 110, 111, 146, 203, 
313, 337
Cameron-­Faulkner, T., 97
Campbell, A. L., 123
Carpenter, M., 53, 57, 58, 60, 107, 313; 
role-­reversal imitation and, 140–141, 142, 
199; social learning and, 137–139
Carriger, M. S., 167–168
Case markers, 121, 124
Catholic Church, 6
­Children, 6, 9, 28, 29, 43, 164, 189, 195, 212; 
collective intentionality and, 329–330; 
cultural learning and, 134–135, 157; fairness 
and, 220, 235–238, 245–247; games with 
chimpanzees and, 174–178; group-­
mindedness and, 252–254; infant emotion 
sharing, 307–308; intentional communica­
tion and, 96–98; with nine-­month 
revolution and second-­personal relations, 
308–317; research with, 337–339; social 
cognition, 50–52, 86; social learning and, 
138–140; toddlers, 316–323; “two social 
worlds of childhood,” 8, 31, 35, 318, 325; 
weaning and, 8, 25, 30–31, 35, 294, 318
Chimpanzees, 28, 29, 140, 299; games with 
­children and, 174–178; group hunting and, 
4, 193–195. See also ­Great apes
Chomsky, Noam, 127
Clay, Z., 145
Cognition, 19, 21, 22, 28, 29, 188; collective 
intentionality and, 305; cultural learning 
and, 159–160; early ­human collaboration 
and joint intentionality, 15–18; ­great apes, 
12–13; iconic gestures and pretense with, 
109–110; perspectival cognitive repre­sen­
ta­tions, 16, 17, 90, 132, 165; pointing and, 
16, 104–106; symbolic communication 
and implications for, 132–133. See also 
Social cognition
Cole, M., 302
Collaboration, 9, 191–192, 212, 
213; chimpanzee group hunting 
and, 4, 193–195; dual-­level, 195–204, 
309–310; joint commitment and, 190, 
204–211; joint intentionality and early 
­human, 15–18; second-­personal and, 
211–218
Collaborative reasoning, 166–171
Index

374	
Index
Collective intentionality, 18–21, 88, 305, 317; 
with child, ­whole, 329–330; executive 
regulation and, 326–329; maturation and 
experience with, 322–326; ontoge­ne­tic 
pathways, 318–322
Commitment. See Joint commitment
Communication, 342; conventional, 112–127; 
cooperative, 16–18, 98–112; intentional, 4, 
93–98, 131, 310; symbolic, 127–133. 
See also Language; Pointing
Conformist learning, 4, 8
Conformity, 141–146
Consilience (Wilson), 1
Conventional communication: with executive 
self-­regulation of discourse, 122–125; 
grammatical abstraction, propositions 
and generics with, 120–122; individual and 
cultural variation, 125–127; “language” of 
Kanzi and, 123–125; language transitions 
around age three, 118–125; word 
acquisition, 112, 113–118
Cooperation, 242–248, 342
Cooperative breeding, 11, 25, 30, 130, 156, 311
Cooperative communication, 16–18, 111–112; 
iconic gesture and pretense, 106–110; 
pointing, 98–106
Cooperative thinking, 161, 184–188, 331–332; 
collaborative reasoning, 166–174; 
co­ordinated decision-­making, 174–183; 
individual thinking, 162–166
Coordinated decision-­making, 183; games 
with ­children and chimpanzees, 174–178; 
multiperspectival concepts, 178–182
Corbit, J. K., 241
Corriveau, K. H., 154
Crockford, C., 223–224
Croft, W., 120
Csibra, G., 149
Cultural learning, 134, 159–160; imitation and 
conformity with, 141–146; instructed and, 
147–154; social and, 135–140; theoretical 
explanations, 155–159
Culture, 43, 262, 291, 294; collaborative 
reasoning and, 173–174; collective 
intentionality and modern ­human, 18–21; 
conventional communication and, 125–127; 
cooperative communication and, 110–112; 
coordinated decision-­making and, 182–183; 
dual-­level collaboration and, 202–204; 
fairness and, 241–242; instructed learning 
and, 153–154; joint attention and, 59–64; 
joint commitment and, 210–211; justice 
and, 268–269; Smithian helping and 
sharing with, 231–232; social cognition 
and, 52–53, 77–81; sociocultural 
theories of ­human ontogeny, 301–303
Cushman, F. A., 264
Custance, D. M., 137
Dahl, A., 243–244
Darwin, Charles, 3, 297
Daum, M. M., 262
DCCS task. See Dimension Change Card Sort 
task
Deafness, 78, 142
Decision-­making, 289; coordinated, 174–183
DeLoache, J. S., 109
Demuth, C., 62
The Descent of  Man (Darwin), 3
Developmental psy­chol­ogy: evolution and, 
32–42; executive regulation and, 36–38
De Villiers, J. G., 79
Devine, R. T., 79–80
De Waal, F. B. M., 334, 335
Diaz, V., 81
Diesendruck, G., 119
Diessel, H., 68, 121–122, 179
Dimension Change Card Sort (DCCS) task, 
79–80
Doise, W. G., 169
Dolphins, 136
Dual-­level collaboration, 195; “I” and “you,” 
198–200; individual and cultural 
variation, 202–204; joint intentionality 
and, 309–310; second-­personal agency 
and mutual re­spect, 200–202; sense of 
“we,” 196–198
Dual-­level structure: joint intentionality and, 
129–130, 317; of sharedness and 
individuality, 15, 311–312; social cognition 
and, 45–46
Dual-­naming task, 75
Duguid, S., 175, 176
Durkheim, E., 250–251
Dweck, C. S., 243
Emotion: guilt and shame, 281–284; infants 
sharing, 307–308; joint attention with 
protoconversations and sharing of, 54–55; 
self-­conscious, 278–284

	
Index	
375
Emulation learning, 137, 156
Endedijk, H., 203
Engelmann, J., 234, 253, 265–266, 280
Evo-­Devo. See Evolutionary developmental 
biology
Evolution, 3, 7, 10, 340; with cooperation and 
communication, 342; developmental 
psy­chol­ogy and, 32–42; ­human, 11–22; 
­human ontogeny and, 22–32
Evolutionary developmental biology 
(Evo-­Devo), 5, 22–23
Evolutionary psy­chol­ogy, 340
Executive regulation, 14, 21, 36–38; collective 
intentionality and, 326–329; joint 
intentionality and, 315–316
Executive self-­regulation, 8–9, 36–37, 89, 
122–125
Experience, 33–35, 82–83; collective 
intentionality and, 322–326; joint 
intentionality and, 312–315; sociocultural, 
8, 42, 88, 304, 311, 322
Expressive pointing, 99–101
Fairness: ­children and, 220, 235–238, 245–247; 
prosociality and, 232–242
False belief, 49, 52, 81, 88–89; language 
and, 78–79, 84; social cognition perspec­
tives and, 72–75; theoretical explana­
tions, 82–85; theory theory and, 
84–85, 300
Farrar, J., 114–115
Farrar, M. J., 81
Fawcett, L. M., 170
Fessler, D. M. T., 284
Fizke, E., 81
Fletcher, G., 168
Frith, C. D., 84
Games, coordinated, 174–178
Gampe, A., 262
Garton, A. F., 170
Gaskins, S., 62–63
Gaze, 47, 50–53, 57, 62
Geldhof, G. J., 270
Generics, conventional communication with, 
120–122
Ge­ne­tics, 5–6, 7, 8, 98
Gergely, G., 83, 149
Gestures, 313; attention-­getters, 95, 98, 129; 
­children and, 96–98; ­great apes with, 
94–96, 107, 137; iconic, 98, 106–110; 
pantomime, 98, 106, 112. See also Pointing
Geurts, B., 74
Glowacki, L., 251
Göckeritz, S., 259
Goldin-­Meadow, S., 112
Gonzalez-­Cabrera, I., 31
Gopnik, A., 85
Gräfenhain, M., 205
Grammar, 67–68, 120–123
­Great apes, 24–26, 55, 60, 72, 131, 163–164, 
233–234, 310; with gestures, 94–96, 107, 
137; helping, 4, 221–224; hunting in 
groups, 4, 193–195; individual intention­
ality and, 11–14; “language” of Kanzi, 
123–125; ontogeny of, 6, 32–33; pointing 
and, 95, 103; psy­chol­ogy, 32–33, 42, 298, 
305, 341; research with, 334–337; social 
cognition, 47–49; social evaluation, 277; 
social groups and, 251–252; sociality, 4, 
13–14; social learning, 136–138
Grocke, P., 240
Grosse, G., 101–102
Group-­mindedness, 252–254, 270–274
Groups, 144–146; chimpanzees hunting in, 4, 
193–195; ­great apes and social, 251–252
Grüneisen, S., 177, 260–261
Guilt, shame and, 281–284
Gussi ­people, 62
Haberl, K., 59, 60
Halina, M. K., 95
Hamann, K., 206–207, 236–238, 241, 246, 266
Hardecker, S., 258, 260
Hare, B. J., 47–48, 51, 223
Harris, P. L., 148, 154
Haun, D. B., 138, 144, 279
Haux, L. M., 148
Hawkes, K., 31, 307
Hawley, P. H., 270
Helming, K. A., 74
Helpers, 277–278
Helping: ­great apes, 4, 221–224; Smithian 
sharing and, 225–232
Hepach, R., 226–227
Herrmann, E., 27–30, 143, 152
Heyes, C. M., 84, 334
Hinderers, 277–278
Hobson, J. A., 63, 146, 232
Horner, V. A., 145

376	
Index
House, B., 230, 231, 241, 268
Hrdy, S., 30, 55, 307
Hughes, C., 79–80
­Human evolution: with early collaboration 
and joint intentionality, 15–18; ­great ape 
individual intentionality and, 11–14; modern 
culture and collective intentionality, 18–21
­Human ontogeny: evolution and, 22–32; 
global theories of, 298–304; individualistic 
theories of, 298–301
­Human psy­chol­ogy, 27–32, 295, 306, 343
Hunting, chimpanzees and group, 4, 193–195
“I” and “you,” 198–200
Iconic gestures, 98, 106–110
“If You Want to Get Ahead, Get a Theory” 
(Karmiloff-­Smith and Inhelder), 300
Imitation, 140; conformity and, 141–146; 
role-­reversal, 141–142, 156–157, 199, 281
Individual intentionality, ­great apes and, 11–14
Individualistic theories, of ­human ontogeny, 
298–301
Individuality, dual-­level structure of 
sharedness and, 15, 311–312
Individual learning, 34, 60
Individual thinking, 162–166
Informative pointing, 102–104
Inhelder, B., 300
Inherited variation, 5–6
Instructed learning, 34–35; cultural and, 
147–154; self-­regulated and, 151–153
Instruction, active, 4, 147
Intentional communication, 4, 93–98, 131, 310
Intentionality, 11–18. See also Collective 
intentionality; Joint intentionality; Shared 
intentionality theory
Intention-­reading, 113, 124
Iverson, J., 107, 112
Jensen, K., 223, 230
Joint agent, 15, 87, 189, 191, 195, 197, 201
Joint attention, 125, 191, 309; with common 
ground and cultural common ground, 
59–62; social cognition and, 53–64; 
theoretical explanations and, 83, 86–87
Joint attentional interactions, 58, 62–65, 
114–115, 167, 178
Joint commitment, 192, 328; collaboration 
and, 190, 204–211; second-­personal 
protest and, 208–210
Joint intentionality, 15–18, 305, 308; dual-­level 
structure and, 129–130, 317; executive 
regulation and, 315–316; maturation and 
experience with, 312–315; ontoge­ne­tic 
pathways, 309–312
Jordan, J., 265
Justice, 262; cross-­cultural variability, 
268–269; owner­ship and distributive, 
265–268, 273; punishment and retribu­
tive, 263–265, 273
Justification: moral identity and, 285–291; 
reason-­giving and, 171–173
Kachel, G., 207, 208, 264
Kalish, C., 267
Kaminski, J., 50
Kanngiesser, P., 210, 267, 269, 285–286
Kanzi, “language” of, 123–125
Kaplan, B., 99
Karmiloff-­Smith, A., 36, 300
Kaye, K., 83
Kenward, B., 145, 265
Kim, S., 267
Kinzler, K. D., 143
Kohlberg, L., 278
Köhler, W., 299
Korsgaard, C., 282, 293–294, 331
Köymen, B., 172–173
Krachun, C., 71
Kruger, A., 170–171, 287
Krupenye, C., 49
Kuhn, D., 169, 170, 173
Kummer, H., 336
Kwetuenda, S., 223
Language, 20–21, 39, 75–76, 92, 105; 
false belief and, 78–79, 84; grammar 
and, 67–68, 120–123; of Kanzi, 
123–125; transitions around age three, 
118–125; word acquisition and, 112, 
113–118
Last common ancestor (LCA), 11–14
Learning, 4, 8, 34–35, 41–42, 60, 156. See also 
Cultural learning; Instructed learning; 
Social learning
Lee, W. S. C., 146
Leslie, A., 107
LeVine, R., 62
Liebel, K., 60, 105, 227
Lieven, E. V. M., 110

	
Index	
377
Life history. See Psychological life history
Liszkowski, U., 97, 100, 101–102, 110–111
Lohmann, H., 78–79
Luria, A. R., 301–302
Lurz, R. W., 334
Lyons, D. E., 145
Machiavelli, N., 281
Mannle, S., 126
Markman, E. M., 149–150
Marlowe, F. W., 264
Matsui, T., 182
Matsuzawa, T., 223
Matthews, D., 111, 123
Maturation, 83, 88, 125–126, 246; collective 
intentionality and, 322–326; develop­
mental psy­chol­ogy and, 33–35; joint 
intentionality and, 312–315
Mayan ­people, 154, 173–174, 203
Maynard Smith, J., 342
McAuliffe, K., 235, 239, 241
Mejia-­Arauz, R., 174, 203
Melis, A. P., 48, 194, 234, 235–236
Meltzoff, A., 51, 69–70, 85
Mercier, H., 171
Messer, D. J., 170
Mind in Society (Vygotsky), 295
Mind-­reading, 43, 75, 177–178, 334
Misch, A., 253
Mitani, J. C., 193, 221
Moll, H., 51–52, 59, 69–70, 71–72, 105–106
Moore, C., 231
Moral identity, 276–277; justification and, 
285–291; self-­presentation and self-­
conscious emotions with, 278–284; 
theoretical explanations, 292–294
Morality, 217–218, 247–248, 273–274, 303
Mueller, M. N., 193, 221
Mundy, P., 63
Murray, L., 55
Nagell, K., 145
Natu­ral se­lection, 5, 22–23, 33, 39
Nepal, 110
Newell, L., 63
Nielsen, M., 144
Ninio, A., 126
Normativity, conventional communication 
and, 119–120
Nso ­people, 62
Objectivity, social cognition, 82–90
Observational learning, 34–35
Olson, K. R., 230–231, 239
O’Madagain, C., 74, 79
Ontogeny, 6, 32–33, 318–322. See also ­Human 
ontogeny
Östh, T., 265
Over, H., 253
Owner­ship, distributive justice and, 265–268, 
273
Pantomime, 98, 106, 112
Pattern-­finding, 113, 124
Paulus, M., 239, 244
Pedagogical learning, 34–35, 148–151
Pennington, B., 63
Perner, J., 68
Perspectival cognitive repre­sen­ta­tions, 16, 17, 
90, 132, 165
Peterson, C. C., 78
Phenotypes, 5, 23, 126
Phyloge­ne­tic sequence, 8, 98
Piaget, J., 36, 69, 166, 169, 173, 189, 255, 303; 
individualistic theories and, 298–299, 300; 
justice and, 264; moral reasoning and, 
286–287; social evaluation and, 278; social 
norms and, 259
Pine, K. J., 170
Play, 63, 95, 174–178; pretense and, 106–112
Plötner, M., 228, 253
Pointing, 60, 91, 95, 97; cognition and, 16, 
104–106; cooperative communication and, 
98–106
Povinelli, D. J., 334
Pretense, play and, 106–112
“Prob­lem of the Cultural Development of 
the Child, The” (Vygotsky), 43
“Prob­lems of the Social Psy­chol­ogy of 
Childhood” (Piaget), 189
Prob­lem solving, 164, 166–171, 299
Promising, 210–211
Propositions, conventional communication 
with, 120–122
Prosociality, 219, 220–224; fairness and, 
232–242; Smithian helping and sharing, 
225–232; social and moral implications, 
247–248; theoretical explanations, 
242–247
Protoconversations, 54–55, 62, 101
Psychological life history, 27–32

378	
Index
Psy­chol­ogy, 340; ­great apes, 32–33, 42, 298, 
305, 341; ­human, 27–32, 295, 306, 343. 
See also Developmental psy­chol­ogy; 
­Human psy­chol­ogy
Punishment, retributive justice and, 263–265, 
273
Pyers, J. E., 78
Rakoczy, H., 75–76, 79, 109, 111, 120, 256
Rapp, D. J., 280, 290–291
Rawls, John, 246–247
Reading, 43, 75, 113, 124, 177–178, 334
Reason, 171–173, 285–288. See also “Age of 
reason”; Collaborative reasoning; 
Cooperative thinking
Referential indeterminacy, 114
Reflective endorsement, 283
Regulation. See Executive regulation
Rekers, Y., 196
Requestive pointing, 101–102
Research: with ­children, 337–339; with ­great 
apes, 334–337
Re­spect, second-­personal agency and mutual, 
200–202
Riedl, K., 265
Rochat, P., 83, 229–230, 232, 241, 279
Rogers, S., 63
Rogoff, B., 154, 173, 302
Role-­reversal imitation, 141–142, 156–157, 
199, 281
Rossano, F., 267
Roughley, N., 220, 227
Rubio-­Fernandez, P., 74
Schäfer, M., 203, 268
Schelling, T. C., 177
Schmelz, M., 222, 277
Schmerse, D., 180
Schmidt, M., 119, 145, 150, 168, 172, 257–258, 
261, 286
Second-­personal, 192, 200–202, 208–210; 
relations and nine-­month revolution, 
308–317; social and moral implications, 
217–218; theoretical explanations, 
211–217
Self-­conscious emotions, with self-­
presentation, 278–284
Self-­regulated learning, 151–153
Self-­regulation, 8–9, 36–37, 89, 122–125
Senghas, A., 78
Shame, guilt and, 281–284
Shared intentionality theory, 85, 128, 184–185, 
304, 305, 307; nine-­month revolution and 
second-­personal relations, 308–317; 
objective / normative turn at three years, 
317–334; reason and responsibility, 
330–334
Sharedness, 15, 311–312
Sharing, 307–308; ­great ape helping and, 
221–224; Smithian helping and, 225–232
Shaw, A., 239
Siegal, M., 78
Sigman, M., 125
Sign language, 92
Silk, J. B., 223, 230
Siller, M., 125
Smith, Adam, 209, 220, 227
Smith, C., 239
Smithian helping and sharing, 225–232
Social cognition, 45–49; ­children, 50–52, 86; 
culture and, 52–53, 77–81; joint attention 
and, 53–64; objectivity, 82–90
Social cognition perspectives: coordination of, 
64–81; individual and cultural variation, 
77–81
Social evaluation, 276–278
Social groups, ­great apes and, 251–252
Social imitation, 142–144
Sociality, 4, 13–14, 20–21, 22
Social learning, 135–140
Social norms, 249–250, 255, 328–329; 
creating, 259–262, 272; enforcing, 256–259, 
271–272; group life and, 251–254; justice, 
262–269; social and moral implications, 
273–274; theoretical explanations, 
270–273
Social self-­regulation, 37
Social solidarity, 250–251
Sociocultural experiences, 8, 42, 88, 304, 311, 
322
Sociocultural theories, of ­human ontogeny, 
301–303
Sociopaths, 247, 284
Sodian, B., 83
Spelke, E. S., 230–231, 239, 299
Sperber, D., 171
Stern, D. N., 54
“Still face” paradigm, 54–55
Stoll, S., 110
Striano, T., 109

	
Index	
379
Svetlova, R., 231
Symbolic communication, 127–133
Sympathy, prosociality and, 220–224
Szathmáry, M., 342
Tango, learning, 41–42
Tennie, C., 145
Testimony, trust and, 148
Theory of mind, ­great apes and, 4
Theory theory, 84–85, 300
Thinking. See Cooperative thinking; 
Individual thinking; Mind-­reading
Toddlers, 316–323
Tomonaga, M., 57
Touch-­back gesture, 94
Trevarthen, C., 54, 55
Trust, testimony and, 148
Tuomela, R., 195
Turiel, E., 255, 259
Turtle task, 69
“Two social worlds of childhood,” 8, 31, 35, 
318, 325
Ueno, A., 223
Ulber, J., 230, 238
Vaish, A., 227, 228, 256, 258, 282
Van der Goot, M. H., 95
Visual perspective-­taking, with social 
cognition, 69–70
Vogelsang, M., 240
Völter, C. J., 223
Vonk, J., 334
Vygotsky, L. S., 6–9, 34–35, 43, 120, 122, 153; 
on ­human psy­chol­ogy, 295; instructed 
learning and, 148; sociocultural theories 
and, 301–302
Walking, 33
Warneken, F., 168, 199, 208, 222, 225, 228, 
230; cooperation and, 242–243; dual-­level 
collaboration and, 196–198; fairness and, 
236, 237
Watson, J. S., 83
Watson-­Jones, R., 143
“We,” 196–198, 305
Weaning, 8, 24–25, 30–31, 35, 294, 318
WEIRD socie­ties. See Western Educated 
Industrialized Rich Demo­cratic socie­ties
Werner, H., 99
Western Educated Industrialized Rich 
Demo­cratic (WEIRD) socie­ties, 337–338
Whiten, A., 137, 145
Whole-­hand pointing, 97, 101
Wilson, E. O., 1
Winsler, A., 153, 329
Wittig, R. M., 224, 233
Wobber, V., 28–29, 139, 164, 165
Words, acquisition of, 112, 113–118
Wrangham, R. W., 251
Wyman, E., 175–176, 261
“You and “I,” 198–200
Yucatec Mayan ­people, 62
Zeidler, H., 241


