Vladimir Bekh
THE PHILOSOPHY OF
SOCIAL WORLD
Kyiv 2017

УДК 140.8+130.3+141.8
ББК
Ю 612.1 + С55 + С 55.372
Б55
Bekh, V.P. The Philosophy of Social World: Epistemological Analysis. – K. :
Lesya Ltd., 2017. – 339 р.
ISBN 978-966-97599-3-1
The monograph exposes the social form of the universum’s movement as the
holistic process of the living matter self-expansion. It scrutinizes the world-view
and ideological bases of the process of comprehension of a field form of life as
well as the quality of methodological toolkit applied to the study of the
noosociogenesis theory.
In the course of the epistemological analysis the quantum-wave nature of
social relations, essence, substance and form of social life are being consecutively
revealed. Simultaneously it is shown that the person is not only a source of the
social form of the universum’s movement, but also that by beginning the
interaction with a society at the macrolevel, an individual creates the organic
integrity – the social organism. Thus, further insights into the place and the role of
the second nature in the universum’s self-movement is provided.
The book is intended for the researchers of social process, university
professors, postgraduates, students and for all those who are interested in the
problems of the noosociogenesis as an inherent part of the cosmogenesis.
This publication is produced with the permission of the Zaporozhya National
University Academic Council.
© Bekh, V.P., 2017

3
Бех В.П. Філософія соціального світу: гносеологічний аналіз. – K. :
МП Леся, 2017. – 339 с.
У монографії висвітлюються соціальна форма саморуху Всесвіту як цілісний
процес саморозгортання розумної живої речовини. Аналізується світогляд і
ідеологія процесу пізнання
полевої форми життя, а також якість
методологічного інструментарію, що використовуються для вивчення теорії
ноосоціогенезу.
У ході гносеологічного аналізу послідовно розкриваються квантова-хвильова
природа соціальних зв’язків, сутність, зміст та форма соціального життя. При
цьому доведено, що особистість людини є не тільки невичерпним джерелом
соціальної формі руху Всесвіту, але й те що, вступаючи у взаємодію з
суспільством на макрорівні, вона утворює органічну цілісність – соціальний
організм. При цьому по-іншому пояснюється місце і роль другої природи у
саморусі Всесвіту.
Для дослідниками соціальних процесів,
викладачів ВНЗ, аспірантів,
студентів, а також і для всіх тих, хто цікавиться проблемами ноосоціогенезу
як невід’ємної складової частини космогенезу.
Бех В.П. Философия социального мира: гносеологический анализ.
– K. : МП Леся, 2017. – 339 с.
В монографии освещается социальная форма движения универсума как
целостный 
процесс 
саморазвертывания 
разумного 
живого 
вещества.
Анализируется мировоззренческая и идеологическая основа процесса
познания полевой формы жизни, а также качество методологического
инструментария, применяемого для изучения теории ноосоциогенеза.
В ходе гносеологического анализа последовательно раскрываются
квантово-волновая природа социальных связей, сущность, содержание и
форма социальной жизни. При этом показано, что личность есть не только
неиссякаемый источник социальной формы движения универсума, но и то,
что, вступая во взаимодействие с обществом на макроуровне, она образует
органическую целостность – социальный организм. При этом по-иному
объясняется место и роль второй природы в самодвижении универсума.
Для исследователей социальных процессов, преподавателей вузов,
аспирантов, студентов, а также для всех тех, кто интересуется проблемами
ноосоциогенеза как неотъемлемой составной части космогенеза.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
4
Preface
Dear reader!
The offered work is a logical continuation of the previous
research devoted to conceptualization of a person’s place and role
in the mechanism of the universum’s self-movement. It has
fundamentally scrutinized a mediating role of men in a process of
transition from the first nature to the second one; genesis of the
person as a functional body of a biological organism; sense and
content of the potential social world subjectified within the structure
of the human person; finally, the function of the planetary
reasonable living matter in the universum’s self-expansion was
revealed.
The present work attempts to cognize the genesis, nature,
essence, substance and form of the social world, as it is impossible
without it to understand the chaos which has arisen at the planetary
level, and it is especially critical and even amplified within the CIS
borders and the countries of a former socialist camp.
The general idea of the undertaken step is that on the basis of a
conceptual explanation of social life come to understanding of the
organismal mode of functioning and development of the planetary
civilization. It has matured under the influence of upcoming
informational phase of development of the world community in the
XXI-st century, and also the requirement to accelerate the
construction of the Pan-European home, civilized exploration of the
Euro-Asian 
space, 
formation 
of 
other 
continental 
and
intercontinental structures which Ukraine aspires to join with
dignity as the active and self-sufficient member.
“To act is simple; to master the theory is difficult”, – a famous
Eastern proverb says. Within it the superlative wisdom is hidden.
That is why the author is assured that without fundamental
theoretical insights into the selected problem, it is impossible
competently, that is reliably, to diagnose a pathology in a family of
social organisms, and furthermore to give a system of government

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
5
of a particular country, all the more local governments the
recommendations on optimization of social life, developing the
programs for overcoming the crisis at the national level.
As all serious concepts arise primarily through deductive way
of reasoning, it does make sense to follow it. Thus, it is necessary to
regret only that the analysis of “painful points” of social
development of countries, including Ukraine as a self-operating
subject of the world community, the final stage of morphogenetic
formation, is put off indefinitely.
I express sincere gratitude to all those who with the advice,
critical remark or practical action have helped the present
publication.
Zaporozhye, January, 1999

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
6
Dear Reader!
Almost twenty years have passed since publication of this work.
It was written not so much for external use, but rather for the author
himself to bring theoretical and semantic clarity in genesis and life
of social systems. The problem at issue was elucidating the origin
and life of the family of social organisms: from the elementary ones
– firms, organisations and institutions to specific formations of the
national economy sector, and further – to a social organism of the
country and, eventually, a planetary social organism.
In due course the solution to that scientific problem was
successfully found. I defended the doctoral thesis and wrote several
original scientific monographies that
formed the basis for
establishing my Author’s school of thought investigating the
problems of noosociogenesis and the social systems’
self-
organisation 
and 
self-regulation. 
More 
than 
ten 
doctoral
dissertations and near fifty candidate’s dissertation were defended
within the framework of the school over the period of its existence
as at the beginning of 2017.
After presenting the given concept of an origin of the social
world 
in
the 
National 
Pedagogical 
Dragomanov
University Scientific Library Repository, unexpectedly, as a total
surprise for me, it has become the most-referred-to by foreign
researchers. In almost two years the researchers from 29 countries
of the world referred to it. This led me to the idea of publishing its
English version especially for foreign readers.
Of course, I couldn’t do it myself, and that is why I was
pleasantly surprised and truly grateful to my colleagues from
Foreign Philology Department of
the National Pedagogical
Dragomanov University who have volunteered to translate the given
work into English. Thus, my heartfelt thanks and profound gratitude
to the virtual collective of translators under the leadership of my
colleague As. Professor Olena Yu. Tytarenko for making the given

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
7
concept of generation of the social world available to foreign
readers.
It is pleasant that the publisher Ivan A. Chalchynskyi, his son
Vlad and editor Lesya – the “Lesya” Publishing House staff –
displayed tremendous skills, and, as always, enthusiastically,
professionally and with superb artistry handled design and
production of the book. My profound gratitude to them for all they
have done.
Scrupulously having reconsidered its text once again before
translation, I didn’t feel the need to change anything in it. The work
was rather self-sufficient and almost time-independent. Therefore, it
appears in its original version, as it was written several dozens of
years ago. It is available not only through the National Pedagogical
Dragomanov University Scientific Library Repository, but also
through 
my 
personal 
official 
website:
www.http://bvp.npu.edu.ua/ua/
Volodymyr Bekh
Kyiv, 2017

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
8
Contents
Preface ......................................................................................................4
Introduction ..............................................................................................9
Chapter 
1
The 
scientific 
methodological 
bases 
for
comprehension of the social world
1.1 The strategy for comprehension of the social world..............17
1.2. The world-view and ideological aspects of the social
world study..............................................................................................32
1.2.1. Substantiation of the world-view approach to the
study of the social world ..............................................................32
1.2.2. The ideology of the social world comprehension .............57
1.3. The cognitive-instrumental complex of methodological
means of the social world comprehension study ....................................68
1.3.1. The instrumental complex general characteristic .............68
1.3.2. The epistemological analysis means ................................77
Chapter 2 The epistemological analysis of the social world
2.1. The social phenomenon genesis ...........................................90
2.2. The quantum-wave nature of the social world ...................113
2.3. The social world essence ....................................................151
2.4. The social world substance ................................................180
2.5. The social world form ........................................................239
2.6. The social world as a contradiction between a person
and a society .........................................................................................265
Chapter 3 The major outcome of the epistemological analysis of
the social world
3.1. The philosophical characteristic of the social world...........277
3.2. The concept of noosociogenesis as an idea of
philosophical account for the social organism’s life-sustaining
activity...................................................................................................322
Conclusions ..........................................................................................331

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
9
INTRODUCTION
In the mid-80s and the beginning of 90s of the XX-th century it
became absolutely clear that we are living through the epoch of
major crisis in social development. The turmoil that has overtaken
the organism of the world technogenic civilization, not just of the
CIS and countries of Eastern Europe, is of geological character, and
hence until now, of unknown force.
The social organism within a structure of which we find
ourselves today, is a product of the Neolithic revolution that has
allowed the man to begin organization of the natural and social
environment gradually by way of using the new technics designed to
exploit the nature and to organize the society. The Neolithic
“technologies” – kinds of domestic animals and cultural plants bred
by means of selection and hybridization; pottery, weaving,
metallurgy – are widely used even nowadays. Over a long enough
period of time our social organization has been based on the writing
technique, geometry, arithmetic similar to the one that was
necessary to organize the structured and hierarchically differentiated
social groups of the Neolithic cities-states1.
However, suddenly by the end of XX-th century, this organism
started moving itself and transforming in unknown for us direction.
The mankind long ago apprehended a possible global collapse but
didn’t know when and where from to expect it.
Today in this very context, we ask ourselves a number of
rhetorical questions. Why, for example, has the catastrophic self-
damage of the social organism been taking place? Why does the loss
of its stability lead to spontaneous differentiation? What kind of
nature does the polysystem of our interest have? How are the
spiritual and material worlds related? Are we capable of creating a
“comprehensive, complete philosophical thought” on the threshold
of the XXI-st century?
1См.: Пригожин И., Стенгерс И. Порядок из хаоса: Новый диалог человека с
природой. – М.: Прогресс, 1986. – С.80 .

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
10
Instead of the evolutionary mechanism, as it has already
happened more than once in the history of mankind, this time the
bifurcate organism has come into action. It means that as if at
present and in the given point of the Universe, the ways of evolution
of the universum are branching off. It is the uncertainty of future,
which all of us experience today, that is its main feature. The point
of no return has been passed, no doubts about it; where we are being
taken by fate no one knows. In addition, the role of the subjective
factor, which nowadays is attributed to it in an effort to account for
sources of the crisis, loses its significance for destiny of the
terrestrial civilization.
The reasoning about the days to come is a vital responsibility of
philosophers and scientists also because they should promote the
establishment of intellectual and moral climate necessary for the
cardinal change of that channel of our life’s river that inevitably
carries us through slightly shaded phantoms of nuclear Moloch,
Chernobyl and Hiroshima, Aral and ozone gaps toward the
planetary collapse if we do not change our thinking paradigm, if all
planetary Reorganization does not come to the end with success.
Liquidation of consequences of the cold war between East and
West, capitalism and socialism again acts as a catalyst of mutual
interest in searching out an effective solution to the modern
civilization’s global problem – establishment of its integrity and
forming the self-expansion mechanism based on the substantive
unity of nature, person and society. Ii is its presentation that is the
general and unique aim of the present philosophical work.
What is more, in our opinion, all necessary and sufficient
preconditions have already been made available to understand at last
the interaction between the individual and society, after all, as one
that is reasonable, rather than a compelled, and most commonly a
defective interrelation for an individual.
We can succeed only if there is the strong confidence in the
power of the human Mind. There is a pattern before us: the pattern
on a huge carpet of life weaved by human thought over millenia.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
11
The author admires its beauty and admires its creators reserving the
only thing – the desire to reveal to readers the philosophical prism
which makes it possible to discern on it a family of social
organisms. Thus, one day of synthesizing work consumes results of
long-term analyses accomplished by different researchers at
different times and in different countries.
Broadening, as much as it is in power of a single researcher, the
noocosmogenesis and noosociogenesis bases as its integral component
– the theory that is vital and extremely essential to formulate the all
planetary strategy for the development of global community – all
gravity and responsibility of this step should be especially realized,
because an invalid attempt, erroneous statement of basic questions,
incorrectness of first solutions can compromise the problem for a long
time, for years and years waive the interest and attention of those who
ought and want to deal with it. After all, such thing has already
happened in our history, and not once. A known principle “Do not
harm!” is vital not only in relation to a human organism. But it appears
to be even more relevant in relation to a family of social organisms
within which patrimonial life of mankind is running.
To cognize the reasons of the storming crisis within social life
profoundly, it is necessary, as the research on the role and place of
the man in the universum’s self-movement has shown, to
comprehensively investigate the second nature. It means that in a
process of philosophical analysis, it is necessary to use the
categories “nature”, “essence”, “substance”, “form” and others.
Social philosophy is capable of it. However, we consider it to be
necessary to substitute the term “the second nature” for the term
“the social world”. We have strong reasons for doing this. All the
matter is that the second nature is found in any corner of the
Cosmos where the first nature representing in its being the
universum is found. But subjectification of the first nature can be
conducted by different agents of living matter.
Under the conditions of our Universe, the subjectificator is the
man who emerged and evolved in the environment consisting

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
12
basically of four elements: hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen and oxygen.
Besides, the environment of our planetary system acquires certain
characteristics depending on a distance from the Galaxy centre (we
have in mind gravitational, electromagnetic, temperature and other
characteristics). However, even under the planetary conditions, there
are all reasons to consider the protein-nucleonic life to be not the
only form of living matter on the Earth.
In recent times, in national science, for example, K. E.
Tsiolkovsky’s hypothesis about existence of at least four forms of
life in the Universe has been growing in importance. The four forms
of life are the protein-nucleonic form and three not protein plasma
forms named according to a spectrum – blue, green and black. The
latter ones are identified as manifestation of so-called higher
Cosmic collective mind. A virus-bacterial organization, for
example, is an integral component of the living matter; it has the
atomo-molecular basis. Further, today the effectiveness of the idea
of “reasoning aether” is actively fomented. All it means that
different Cosmic conditions might support origin of life on novel
bases. The living matter can then adopt a form that is different from
the terrestrial one. The latter will lead to different content of the
process of objectification. It may come out that by its functions the
second nature generated by a form of life other than men is similar
to the one generated by men, but by its form is different beyond
recognition. Thus, not to create collisions, the present research will
be limited to the analysis of accessible to us form of the second
nature found in a form of the planetary social world.
If researchers of the future generations do have a need to study
the similar original processes outside the Galaxy limits, they will,
for certain, succeed in doing this, because it will be absolutely
different Cosmic philosophy at origins of which we, the earth
inhabitants, have been clumsily going round in circles over a
millennium.
Time hurries us up. Thus, I invite the reader to try through the
boiling unrestrainedness of today’s events proceeding within the

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
13
scope of historical process, to glance into the abyss of geological
process; through turmoil of the Anti-Mind to discern the contours of
the most complicated polymechanism of the Universe evolution,
elevating the terrestrial civilization to the tops of the world Mind, an
integral part of which we, dear Reader, are as well. To struggle with
currently dominating outlook through verbal polemic alone does not
make sense. We must destroy antiscientific developments with
factual evidence uncovering their scientific validation inadequacies;
this present work attempts to do that. We are empowered by
comprehension of the fact that time is growing in strength, “timing
from the future”, and that the work to be done “makes internal
essence of time” we are living through.
It ought to be done to estimate objectively the huge shift
forward, which the XX-th century has prepared and undertakes
today, the value and force of which for the XXI-st century remain
absolutely not understood and not revealed. It ought to be done at
the present moment, to enable the emerging global community to
come into the mysterious but inevitably approaching enigmatic
XXI-st century and the third millennium of the existence.
It is also fundamental because, if in near future, it is still impossible
to project purposefully mechanisms of self-development of particular
countries (let’s say, Ukraine, Russia, Belarus, if globally speaking – the
CIS), continental and intercontinental social constructions, then at the
very least, there will be understanding in response to a logical and
natural ending of the morphological formation and effective
functioning phase of the noospheric, or if more exact, reasonable form
of the universum’s movement under the conditions of the Earth as well
as its dialectic transition to the cosmic phase.
The last remark is especially essential for politicians on whose
activity directly depend the quality and rates of formation of the
effective mechanism of self-expansion of a separate country, as the
structural unit underpinned by the generic social organism.
There are no futurological or utopian models in this work. Its
research materials include both well-known philosophical ideas and

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
14
philosophical ideas of little popularity, also the world social study
theoretical provision, especially of sociology, psychology and
political science. To analyze their interaction the dialectic principles
for comprehending the universum’s self-motion are applied.
Many results used in the given work could have been obtained
many years ago,
but research of such problems of social
development was suppressed by a cultural and ideological context
of the time.
This is no longer the case, and hence new possibilities to
comprehend the social world are being introduced. However, it is
not all so simple, as it can seem at first sight. All it not because of
complexity of studied processes, but because modern science and
philosophy are challenged by the subtlety and uniqueness of
notions, in terms of which the life of Homo sapiens abruptly
transformed during modern crisis in the form of Homo intelligens
can be conceived.
The thing is that for an explanation of the social world, it is
necessary to descend to the microlevel that is living a completely
different life, compared with the macrolevel. However, as modern
crisis proves, philosophy and social philosophy, in the first place, is
lacking the categorical toolkit to explain the essence, causes of the
crisis, and the mechanism of its overcoming. Therefore, in the
conceptual idea, especially when explaining the social world genesis
and formation, inverted commas should be used almost with each
word. It is impossible to illustrate it with examples; the reader
should either agree to share intuitive inspirations of the author, or
simply put the book aside. It is a realm of irrational comprehension
of Truth. It is in this realm that the philosophical thought is called to
reign.
Here we deal with the internal, as I. Kant termed, aprioristic
feeling: not pure thinking, but pure (archetypal) feeling of
organisation of the world. Where it comes from is not clear.
Whether it is true is not clear either. Here and today the developed
stereotype of perception of scientificity is challenged. It concerns

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
15
the scientific character of philosophy upon which orthodox
materialists build up, and the traditional social study as well.
Landing upon the microlevel demands creation of the new, and at a
given stage almost poetic irrational language which can only be
used in an endeavor to express the sensations of aprioristic intuition
about origin of the living and ideal. The bases of social world
resulting from the phenomena of self-perception and self-reflexion,
which are under investigation in the context of this conceptual idea,
are searched at the level of a deep structure of the universum, and
are rooted in the ontologic base of the maximum depth.
However, the situation with categorical toolkit used for
explanation of the social world at the macroscopical level is not less
complicated. Apparently, one of the most complex things that all
serious philosophers in the world have faced when dealing with
explanation of the social world was that each of them had to create
own thesaurus; it made their concept ideas non-comparable.
Absence of such specific thesaurus is a feature of the given work.
Another feature of this research consists in absence of a
common for philosophical research empirical base, because, already
existing 
philosophical, 
psychological, 
sociological, 
cultural
urological and political science concepts are used as the initial
material or data bases. In this connection it becomes clear, that the
work widely uses ideas, hypotheses and particular parts of concepts
to form the author’s way of explanation of the mechanism of the
social world self-expansion. The author openly declares it and asks
to be tolerant to results of his long-term research work, as only the
scheme of conceptual explanation of the phenomenon of the
social world is the increment here. All the rest already exists.
The world outlook, ideological and methodological approaches
implemented within the work to search the Truth in the field of the
second nature, to which the reader will be introduced, have resulted
under the influence of integration of objective – subjective dialectics
in synergetics. The author perfectly realizes that offered work is still
very far from being perfect. It is more the desperate jerk in

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
16
unknown, made in a form of monographic investigation of the
second nature. The aim of the work does not consists in reporting
on recognized achievements of science and social philosophy, their
stable and authentically established results, not at all. The author
attempts to draw readers’ attention to the field form of life, and
hence, to the new prospects and new problems revealed by the
modern crisis of social development.
In addition, we apparently found ourselves only at the very
beginning of a new stage of philosophical research; for philosophy
and social study, it is called to open access to the second nature
investigations. The road that lies before us is the road of many
difficulties and dangers, misunderstandings, and at times of
prejudice. In the given book the problem is stated in the way the
author sees it at present; therefore, he distinctly realizes
imperfection and incompleteness of his answers to many questions.
The author is convinced that the modern crisis of social
development stimulate more profound understanding of the global
(and local too) objectives of the world community development.
That is why the main thing that he wants to achieve on this way is
the clear understanding of how to arrange the world rationally, that
is, according to the immanent requirements of human nature as the
subjective image of the objective universum.
The offered work is of a paradigmatic character. It means only
that it gives rise to a specific research tradition in a field of the
social life research, allowing it to solve many present puzzles in the
noosociogenesis field of knowledge. The new ideas of the social
phenomenon comprehension will surely come into being, and they
will necessarily improve the offered paradigm of the field form of
life.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
17
Chapter 1
THE SCIENTIFIC
METHODOLOGICAL BASES
FOR COMPREHENSION
OF THE SOCIAL WORLD
1.1. The strategy for comprehension
of the social world
The social world has matured during the evolutionary
development of the planetary life. Its philosophic and the world
outlook aspects should be cognized and thus explained by Social
Philosophy, while theoretical – by a special branch of scientific
knowledge known as the noosociogenesis. The noosociogenesis
appears from the anthropogenesis with the Homo sapiens as the
driving force. As known, the above-named forms of evolution have
been preceded by the biogenesis and cosmogenesis. Stated
differently, the noosociogenesis is a specific form of evolution of
human life embodied in the social structures of various levels and
purposes. Its originality consists in the social life progressing
through changing not only an individual person, but also a society,
that is to say the Collective Mind.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
18
Today’s noosociogenesis evolution has a form of crisis. We
witnessed the dynamic self-disintegration of a social organism of
the USSR. The government system of one of the world’s super
states has failed to stop it. The situation is so dramatic that even ten
years after the beginning of that process, the feebleness of re-
emerged CIS countries’ government structures to formulate a
positive doctrine for overcoming the crisis declares itself. However,
it has not been generated over the years of Soviet power either.
The absence of the developed theoretical thought adequate to a
reached level of scientific, technical and social development affects
in a negative way a prompt overcoming of the crisis in these
countries The situation is also aggravated by a fact that productive
forces, collected during scientific and technical revolution, have
turned out to be lacking the adequate intellectual maintenance. The
situation is cardinally complicated by the lowest developmental
level of the organizational factor. The same reason explains a series
of technological catastrophic accidents. The largest of them
happened at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Station. Dramatic
situations occurred also in a social field. Suffice to mention the
events that took place in Albania, Yugoslavia, Palestine, Kurdistan,
Nagorno-Karabakh, the Czech Republic. The domestic practice is
far from being safe too. Nowadays the total dramatic fall in the
living standards of the Ukrainian people is strictly accompanied by
decaying of moral foundations of the nation. As known, the spiritual
impoverishment of the nation will slow the process of overcoming
the crisis of the state.
Only the thorough analysis of the event, and elaborating on its
basis the whole conceptual idea of the social life self-expansion is
capable of improving the situation both in Ukraine and other CIS
countries. The latter should be based, first of all, not on the patterns
of the advanced foreign experience, but rather on features of
Ukrainian mentality multiplied by country’s mental potential
capacity, quality and quantity of available productive forces, and
also 
character 
of 
cultivated 
relations 
of 
production 
and

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
19
organizational humanism. It is dictated by the fact that for any
system and moreover for Ukraine, which is undergoing a formation
phase, internal relations are more important than external ones, as
they create its unique shape, sustain survivability and progressive
development.
The problem situation. The essence of the problem situation is
that the developed social life of people on the threshold of the XXI-
st century began its spontaneous differentiation on the unknown
basis, and mankind under the condition of geological turmoil,
because of ignorance of the causes and nature of the phenomenon,
cannot substantiate the algorithm of the optimum behaviour.
The object of research. Within the framework of the present
research, an extremely broad philosophical category “the
universum” presents itself as the object. We consider it to be the
epistemological and ontological unity of material and spiritual
worlds or the modality of the potential and reality. Therefore, for us
the universum arises as an organic unity of the spiritual (noumenal)
and material (phenomenal) worlds. This substantival basis of the
world acts as the quantum vacuum, which has two interconnected
forms – a physical form and a semantic one.
We also proceed from the fact that philosophical understanding
of the universum is based on the epistemological interpretation of
the modality “potential” which is referred to the worlds, viewed a
priori. In this connection the assertion “world set” is considered by
us as “the set of all possible worlds”, i.e. facts, viewed consistently,
or relations of things and ideas, without the reference to ontological
realization of any of these potentials, but with the proviso that only
one of them is realizable.
In the ontological aspect, we see the universum as “the world as
a whole” or “all in existence”. In this case the given notion is a
general notion of nonidentical logically, but equal ontologically
worlds, that is such worlds to which one ontological modality –

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
20
reality – is equally attributed2. Stated differently, the universum is a
substance, which pulsates, self-realizes steadily; it is self-penetrated
by all its parts, each of them is actually something that is involved in
everything that potentially and beyond time has “the share” in all
universum. Speaking figuratively, in the universum “everything
ingrowths into everything”.
The subject of research. The subject of the present research is
the social life which adopts an organismic form and is developed as
the planetary process of geological character. It proceeds as a man’s
transformative activity in various kinds and all sorts of forms; it is
subjected to
the laws of distribution and division; it is
simultaneously occurring as a person’s subjective cognitive process,
and objective process of the goal-oriented collective labour; stiffens
in a form of objects of labour or vanishes as the song sounding, or
disappears as a lightsome movement of a national dance. It is of it
that the original body of the social world is being woven.
However, today as the man is ignorant of these laws, the world
seems hostile to him, and he instinctively oppresses the nature of the
social phenomenon; therefore, the knowledge of them introduces to
the man qualitatively new horizons of mankind’s development and
destiny.
The research idea. The essence of the research idea is, from the
methodological standpoint of nonlinear thinking, to consider the
social life as a multiphase process of self-expansion of human Mind.
In our opinion, therefore, the logic of the process of the social world
formation entirely predetermines the stages of the present research
work, and the order of the received results statement.
In view of lacking for comprehending the social world
formation process the research tools, adequate to complexity of
examined object of knowledge, we are dealing rather with a
2 См.: Философскаяэнциклопедия.Гл.ред.Ф.В.Константинов. – М.: “Советская
энциклопедия”, 1970. – Т.5. – С. 279.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
21
problem than with a task. In search of a solution to this problem
situation, at first, it is necessary to substantiate the nature, then to
create the complex of research tools and tools of cognition and, at
last, to reveal the essence, substance and form of the social
phenomenon, i.e. to present the social world as the object
susceptible to natural and social studies.
The methodological basis of a solution of the given problem is
formed on the basis of critical estimation of available in the
scientific and philosophical arsenal categorial apparatus necessary
for effective philosophical analysis of the problem situation and
means of cognitive activity developed by the world philosophical
thought and science.
In our opinion, the integration of rational and irrational
approaches is, presumably, the only effective approach to conduct a
huge scale synthesis that commensurate to the requirements of the
present research. In philosophical research, as experience proves, it
should be a norm. The last statement is necessitated by a need in
simultaneous investigation of the micro– macro- and mega- levels
of the universum’s self-movement.
The methodological basis should, first of all, ensure the
generation of the social phenomenon at the micro-level, because it
makes possible to determine the substantive basis, the nature of a
social form of the universum’s movement, the bottom border of the
social world and many other things. Striking into the depth of the
micro-level gives rise to a great deal of difficulty addressing the
problems of comprehension. Social philosophy is completely
lacking the categorical apparatus for its studying; what is at hand is
not always welcomed by the modern community of philosophers
and social scientists. It’s not all that simple for those who try to
study the phenomenon at the micro-level by using the intellect
either. The latter is connected with occurrence of contradicting and
not understandable things, for explanation of which the research
tools are simply lacking. It is accounted for by the fact that the
researchers continue to think through the categories of the macro-

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
22
level, but intend to understand absolutely different level, the level
that is beyond our perception.
Forming methodological basis of the micro – and also of the
macro – level, we cannot be perfectly satisfied with the remark that it
is necessary to overcome the old East – West and the subject – object
oppositions. General impasse in a domain of knowledge of the social
world at the end of ХХ-th century forces both the East and the West to
descend to foundations of the Universe. The application of the
synergetic approach to the social life is nothing but a stepping stone to
a realm of the micro-cosm cognition in which it is necessary to
describe something that is lacking causality, or does have causality but
of an unknown kind, or has nothing for our mind to link chains of,
when repeatability at the macro-level is caught. Hence there is no time
either. However, where is all suchlike developed, how and where does
the transition from the micro-level into the phenomena of the macro-
level take place? There is no being yet, it has only just been in a
process of becoming. Instead of it, if to scrutinize the history of
philosophy, the application of other ideal entity is more appropriate.
Suffice to recollect at least the Schopenhauer’s World Will, Platon’s
Giperuraniia of Ideas, Gegel’s Absolute Spirit, etc. The Space here
does not play that role which is attributed to it at the macro-level
either.
At the same time, it is here and now that vast expanses for
philosophical comprehension of the world are opening. Philosophy
through the examination of a front line of the social world
comprehension ought to put forward hypotheses, form the
conceptual apparatus, and then construct a plausible representation
of the social world creation. The new social study about the micro-
level is urged to test its viability. Its basic features from the point of
view of a “rigid” science are given by a group of the St.-Petersburg
authors. The essence of their remarks is that these features are “non-
rigidness of thought, neglecting of basic rules of reasoning,
infringement of the things scientists have diligently collected since
Aristotle.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
23
If proceed from this point of view, it is possible to state that texts
of “a new science” existentially “float”. They to a limit are loaded by
synonymy. Within them by all means are condensed the uncertainty,
ambiguity, constant discrepancy of definitions, basic terms are lacking
the accurate meanings (compare, for example, a couple of expressions:
“passes by the fact of the existence in other element” and “exists within
the being of other element”), texts are characterized by imperativeness,
suggestion – blandishment, because the proof is impossible though, by
force of habit, it is supposed.
However, on the other hand, one may point out the freedom of
statement when mind is not constrained by discipline of
consciousness, and even discipline of the accepted forms of
statement. Instant ejection of internal images in the science is the
means for “liberation” of undeveloped and critically elaborated
preliminary ideas”3.
To examine the macro-level, at which the social life is running,
dialectics enriched by all that is valuable and useful, that is collected
by all schools and directions of the world philosophical thought will
be effective.
To provide methodological foundation for the study of the
social world upper border is not an easy task either. Here there is no
even the slightest hint of methodology to cognize the descending
folding world. In addition, the research methodology should ensure
the comprehension of the mega-level at which the process of coding
or self-folding of the social world proceeds. In this context, for
comprehension of the social world, the significance and importance
of the category “self-folding” should be especially underlined. In a
short time, when we begin the exploration of the Cosmos
practically, as a constant dwelling place, it will appear that the
human life time is not invariant to time of a flow of the space
processes; then, we will work with this category as intensively as
today we work with the category “self-organization”.
3Самоорганизация: 
психо-
и 
социогенез.
–
СПб.: 
Издательство
С.-
Петербургского университета, 1996. – С.97.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
24
As far as the methodological basis, the only thing is clear: we
bring in here the methods which we used to apply for investigation
of the macro-level phenomena, and in the relative reliability of
which we believe. At the same time, here the logic of the duality
should work, or perhaps, the logic of multiplicity, because the social
form of movement occupies the particular volume of space in which
interaction takes place not according to the automatic principle
(reason – consequence – reason, input – output), but rather bears the
features of chaos, intercomplementing, eluding, and uncertainty. To
determine the most effective methods, the researchers themselves
must change. They must face the spiritual perception of the social
world. The formation of the researchers’ noospherical thinking is
the first step. It is due to the fact that, it is exactly where the
breakthrough to the outlook of the third millennium will occur.
However, at present we are rather going away than approaching the
idea of the noosphere. Even social philosophy treats it the way the
stepmother and her daughters used to treat Cinderella.
General characteristic of research. All largest achievements of
natural sciences are based on the analysis of the principle of
organisation of objects as integral systems: biology, chemistry,
physics, mathematics of the XIX-th and XX-th centuries. The study
of people’s social life is not an exception. We consider that the
increase in knowledge of the social phenomenon can be received
only having considered it as a spontaneous logic system.. Thus, it is
essential to reveal its two major aspects, namely:
- epistemological, i.e. to conduct the systemic conceptualization
of genesis and nature of the given phenomenon, as well as its
essence, substance and form;
- ontological – to reveal the systematicity of the social world as
an independent and self-operating subject.
In this connection what is already available to the researcher
today is a rather burning issue. According to our vision, nowadays it
is realistic to reflex the social phenomenon and to consider through
available to social philosophy cognitive means the social life

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
25
epistemological aspect as the self-sufficient integrity. Such step
opens good prospect for the ontological analysis of the given
phenomenon.
This will ensure necessary conceptual maintenance for its special
examination of the social phenomenon by social scientists who can
proceed to a qualitatively new stage of its comprehension only after
discovery of an elementary particle-bearer of basic attributive properties
of the social life. In addition, using the research tools of the genetic
analysis, we intend to reveal the genesis, nature, essence, substance and
form of people’s social life, and on this basis to describe its key
parameters. By means of the structural approach we will uncover the
functional structure and substructures of the logic construction, within
which people’s social life is running, and also to construct their heuristic
models. Owing to possibilities of the functional analysis, it is necessary
to show a mechanism of its functioning, and on the analytics and
dialectics basis to formalize the source and driving forces of people’s
social life.
It means that to eliminate the above-named negative
manifestations, the theory of a social organism has to be offered.
But such theory cannot be developed without the methodology a
modern development of the second nature requires; it, in turn,
cannot be created without a perspective for the XXI-st century
ideology. However, the deepest stumbling-block on the way of
overcoming the crisis is a selection of the outlook for elaborating
the effective ideological maintenance for the problems of
optimization of formation, functioning and development of young
social organisms.
This mode of induction about approaches to deal with the
consequences of the overall noosphere crisis explains our choice of
the algorithm of conduct: in the beginning, to consider the world
outlook aspect of the problem; next, to formulate the ideological
credo; then, to put in order methodological research tools; and only
after that, to start developing philosophical bases of the
noosociogenesis theory.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
26
From this the distinctive features of the present research
naturally follow. Its character cannot be other than a philosophical
one. It is natural that exactly philosophical character of forthcoming
research determines the maintenance and the formulation of all,
without exception, elements of algorithm of the cognitive
procedures we are to perform. It is clear that here we have the issue
of the maintenance of a system of the research hypotheses, a tree of
objectives, a complex of problems and all its other attributes.
Stated differently, the essence of the present research consists
in developing the philosophical bases of the theory of
noosociogenesis that uncover the self-expansion mechanism of the
phyle of the human Mind as the leading subject of a specific form of
the universum’s movement – information which is based on the
human attributive properties.
The evidence base of research. The initial material for
synthesis of the philosophical concept of the social life self-
expansion are the conceptual products of many years’ analytical
work of human thought, and, first of all, certainly, works of social
philosophers, 
sociologists, 
psychologists, 
political 
scientists,
culturologists, economists, and managers. Not less valuable is the
author’s perception of social reality.
Thus, the evidence base of the research is made up of highly
intellectual products of previous generations of researchers – the
concepts of social development of the planetary mankind in which
the empirical data about social life of people “came to rest”. It is in
this way that the evidence base essentially differs from familiar
empirical base of research. The term “empirical base” in the given
research is not absolutely correct, as it is connected with an attempt
to probe through hypotheses the basis of the Universe or the
Nothingness, then to study a condition of public consciousnesses in
respect to the maintenance of concepts of social development or the
Something, which entails the withdrawing of social reality or its
returning to the basis, i.e. transformation again into the
Nothingness.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
27
It means that at the first and third stages we are compelled to
follow intuition, and at the second one – to subject to profound
philosophical reconsideration the basic social ideas laid down in the
theory of social integration by M. Veber, “a mass society” of K.
Mangeim, “a postindustrial society” of D. Bell, “stages of economic
growth”, “democratic elite” of W. Rostow and J. Schumpeter,
“technotronic era” of Z. Bzezinski, “a uniform industrial society”,
“deidelogisation” of R. Aron, “a political utopia” of M. Oekshott,
“collective democracy” of C. Birr, “moderate designing of social
institutes”
of K. Popper,
“social institutes as kinds of an
objectification of human will” of N. Rottenshtraikh, superindustrial
and a society of the third wave of O. Toffler, A. Ettsioni’s active
society, J. Galtung’s postrevolutionary society, a transformational
society of J. Dator, a cybernetic society of J. Platt, K. Bolduing’s
post civilization society, A. Gartman and F. Risman’s consumer
society, a society of world village of M. Makljuen, L. Braun’s
society without borders, a society of balance of L. Memford,
“consensus models of political system” of S. Hantington, “models
of administrative efficiency” of V. Wilson, “a planetary society” of
G. Hirshfeld, Z. Roben, R. Koks, “new forms of wide democratic
control” of M. Harrington, “ the New Leviaphan “ of R. G.
Collingwood, a labour society, an information society and variety of
other concepts of modern Western and Eastern researchers. In the
mathematical language it means that it is necessary to take the
second derivative from earlier reached in this area.
Therefore, our efforts should be aimed at constructive synthesis
of ideas of the latter in the integrated doctrine of self-expansion of
social life of the planetary mankind. Thus, we are deeply convinced
that each concept of this sort existing nowadays is a unique
achievement of human thought, intellectual peak of skills of their
founders, reflects one or several aspects of the problem of our
interest, and consequently has eternal value for the mankind. In
other words, if they did not exist, they should have been developed
on purpose.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
28
Thus, in the light of the preceding reflections, it is safe to say,
that without an accurate plan of action, to start the development of
the given problem is a very risky business; one may sink in the
richest evidence material accumulated by the history of science.
Initial preparation of the problem situation is best of all to
conduct through a system of hypotheses which will allow us to begin
the purposeful search for the problem solution: to determine the
nature of the phenomenon; to explain the essence and substance of
the social world; to analyze the forms of its manifestation under the
conditions of the Universe.
The scientific assumption that the social world is a field, i.e. a
form of life of the planetary mankind existing in the form of a field,
organizationally adopted an organismic form is the general
hypothesis of research. The possibility of explanation of a social
development processes in both the concrete historical form and in
the “abstract and theoretically consecutive form” was already
pointed out by F. Engels and V.I. Lenin4. In his turn V.I. Vernadsky
persistently underlined the thought that it was impossible to be
limited only to the inductive approach in cognizing phenomena5. In
practice even appeared a specific branch of philosophical
knowledge which studied “a social reality” as a phase of self-
expansion of the universum – social philosophy6.
As the leading hypotheses of the research the following ideas
that require theoretical verification in a course of research are stated:
at the present stage the natural-scientific picture of the
world developed on the basis of the binary foundation of
the universum is sufficient to effectively explain the
phenomena of social world;
4 См.: Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.13. – С. 497; Ср. Маркс К., Энгельс Ф.
Соч. – 2-е изд. -Т.20. – С.544; В.И. Ленин Полн. собр. соч. – Т.4. – С. 85-86.
5Cм.: Вернадский В.И. Биосфера (Избранные труды по биогеохимии ). – М.,
1967. – С.279.
6
См.: 
Философский 
энциклопедический 
словарь.
–
М.: 
“Советская
Энциклопедия”, 1989. – С. 548.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
29
social life of people is generated by the lowest forms of the
planetary life (Pre-life) and serves as a necessary step of
ascension to a higher form of space life (Supra-life);
therefore, it is an integral element in a chain of consecutive
transformations of substantive bases of the Universe;
not only a form of modification of the universum, but also
a vector of its movement play an important role in
development of social reality;
social life of people, having the nature similar to the nature
of other forms of life, due to organic substantive unity of
the 
Universe 
bases, 
possesses 
essentially 
distinct
morphological substratum;
the living matter (Pre-life) is nothing but the universum’s
structure material and spiritual components in interaction;
a biological human body is a unique converter of the first
nature into the second one;
the social world has the quanta-wave nature and is
generated by
intellectual energy of a person
that
subsequently generates social organisms of various
configuration and orientation;
the organizational form of the social world is the specific
kind of an organism which is functioning as the
contradiction between a person and a society;
within a human body, a structure social world has the
potential form, but when comes out it unfolds through a
family of original social forms;
the exit of the potential social world in the real one has a
virtual character, i.e. depends on a set of internal and
external conditions;
morphological basis of the social world is the information,
and its most qualitative condition is defined by scientific
knowledge;

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
30
all existing directions of world philosophical thought are
productive, because they explain separate fragments of the
universum’s self-movement;
the social world should be considered as a functional body
of the Universe;
components of the social world by their nature are
material-spiritual and subjective-objective formations;
the social world is a dissipative structure freely exchanging
with the environment the substance, energy and
information;
the structural shift in the social world self-expansion is
connected with a substitution of the technical unity of
social organisms, i.e. created according to accidently
represented purposes, for architectonic unity, i.e. according
to the universum’s nature;
the crisis of the present stage in the planetary mankind’s
development is a quantum leap in the universum’s self-
expansion;
social philosophy is the forerunner of the noosociogenesis
theory.
The general purpose of philosophical research consists in the
deductive explanation of the mechanism of the social life self-
expansion as a specific form of the universum’s self-movement.
The primary objectives of research naturally follow from the
maintenance of the above-named general purpose as, as it is known,
the purpose is developed through objectives. The following are the
prime objectives:
to update scientifically-methodological bases of research
of the social world;
to explain the genesis of the social phenomenon;
to substantiate the quantum - wave nature of the social
world;
to reveal the essence of the social world;

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
31
to analyze the substance of the social world;
to characterize the organismic forms of the social world;
to represent a social organism as the person – society
contradictions;
to substantiate the directions and ways of an individual’s
assistance in a process of architectonic unities formation of
the social world organizational forms.
The 
fore-said 
implies 
that
theoretical 
and 
practical
comprehension of a social organism is for today, perhaps, the most
difficult and pressing problem of social philosophy. It is on its
solution that all available intellectual and other resources ought to
be directed to. The aggravation of the problem at the present stage
extremely negatively affects the humanity. Never before the
mankind has felt such feebleness and hopelessness of the existence.
Former senses of life are lost. The peoples of the Earth ought to find
new senses of existence, and on this basis to apprehend, or even to
guess, a general direction of self-expansion of human phyle of
Mind.
So, the research idea is of a humanistic character, and it is
important for any type of the public form as promotes the
philosophical substantiation of an individualization and increase of
human life’s value, is directed on economy of material and
intellectual forces of the world community, provides insight into
principles and criteria of formation of universal values, directly
specifies for the earth dwellers a mode to get into the Cosmos.
It does entail that a solution to the problem of the social
organism development should be sought on a joint of materialistic
and idealistic directions of world philosophy. During research, it is
necessary to synthesize them in a comprehensive and complete
system to which the world philosophical thought had a very long
way to go. That national philosophy had to carry out such an
important mission is not an accident at all. It is explained by the fact
that we are found on a joint of the East and the West, rational and
irrational. On the basis of such synthesis should arise new world

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
32
outlook revaluation of the past, be generated a non-traditional way
for solution of the problems of the present, and a deeper view of the
future should develop. The choice of the world outlook and
ideological platforms for research of the problem of social organism
is the following step on a way toward accomplishing the above-
named general purpose.
1.2. The world-view and ideological aspects of the
social world study
1.2.1. Substantiation of the world-view approach to
the study of the social world
Social life, although it is a form that unfolds at the macro level,
has a “triune “ causation. At the same time the source of its self-
unfolding (trigger mechanism) is hidden within the micro-level
processes, its purpose for the Universe and its employment as
immanent factor of self – motion of the Universe should be searched
for at the mega level, though, it itself has emerged at the macro level
and keeps functioning at it. It should be obvious that without
consideration of the most common issues problems of formation and
functioning of the world, the problem of the social organism cannot
be solved professionally.
In order to implement the philosophical reflection, and even
more so, to construct a theory of noosociogenesis, it is necessary, if
not to develop a fundamental theory, then at least put forward a
working hypothesis of the universum. And it is the task of science
as a social institution of austerity and consolidation of the era

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
33
thinking. Thus, it will give us the key to the whole nature and the
Cosmos as well. Philosophy is to provide reflection of the
fundamental substance, that is, to explain the nature of the
universum.
For this we need to rethink the place and function of man in the
evolution of nature. Cosmic matter and energy having formed the
biological basis of man as a living being, laid down the prospect of
his unlimited social development.
Therefore, any form of state or public institutions that we want
to put into practice would inevitably have to be consistent with the
need to intensify the production process as an objective reason
humanity needs for self-unfolding of the universum, including, of
course, a process of creating the artificial intelligence capable of
stabilizing and increasing the latter one without limits. However, in
the field of knowledge there was, in our opinion, dramatic situation.
Its origins consist in the fact that philosophical thought while
serving the science seemed to spread out through the tree of life, lost
its wholeness, and ceased to be philosophy in the strict sense of the
word. It follows directly from the fact that humanity has lost the
general dialogical approach to solving the strategic problems of
social development. “It seems – writes V.V. Nalimov about
philosophy – that it has ceased to evolve; it has ceased to be the core
of ideological culture; it has become nothing but the commentary of
what has been said before – not only in our country but abroad too.
The thinkers from the West, with who we have had chance to meet
the last few years, share this opinion “7.
The planetary crisis of culture has made the situation in this area
even worse. There is ongoing confrontation between the Eastern and
Western cultures; sharing the same object of research they cannot
find a common language.
This also means that the universal culture still remains split into
two parts. The civilization born of the culture that had arisen back in
7Налимов
В.В.
В
поисках
иных
смыслов.
–
М.:Издательская
группа"Прогресс”,-1993.-С. 95-96.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
34
Athens, Jerusalem and Rome comes to end. Although in Western
culture as the problem “consciousness – matter” as a philosophical
issue remains open, we observe the maturation of breakthrough into
the unknown; something that not so long ago was simply
unthinkable. It ought to be noticed and adequately appreciated. To
appreciate the processes taking place in Eastern culture is more
complicated thing, as we are less familiar with them.
Native philosophy, taking into consideration its advances,
succeeded more than others in a realm of comprehension of the
essence of new outlook. In our opinion the solution will be found, if
we succeed in integration of the Western tradition, which prioritizes
experiment and quantitative formulations, with such tradition as the
Chinese one, with its concept of the world as spontaneously
changing and self-organizing.
It means to comprehend the modern world we need to deepen
drastically the process of comprehension and also update, note that
first of all, categorical apparatus of philosophy itself. Not ignoring
generic-type philosophic categories “substance” and “spirit”, not
diminishing their role and significance, philosophy should, we should,
after all, move to adoption of genus-type category “the universum”. In
another words, from our standpoint, perspective of philosophy
including social philosophy as well is to move from opposition of
substance to spirit towards explanation of their organic unity, search
for a new reason of the world. Peculiarity of comprehension of
problem of social world is that, in general, never before in cognitive
theories social institutions have been considered as outcomes of mega
evolutional process. Investigators ignore this issue considering it as
some temporary formations, providing normal functioning of man
within the framework of planetary processes taking place within the
framework of historical time. This fact is also rightly highlighted by I.
A. Safronov who has suggested perspective approach for
comprehension of unity of a person with the nature and Cosmos8. For
8Сафронов И. А. Человек и Вселенная: философско-методологический аспект
//Диссертация на соискание ученой степени доктора философских наук в форме

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
35
this reason, for nearly eighty years, despite the obvious realities we
have been expecting the state to wither away.
Available philosophical and specific scientific literature is
devoted to analysis of various aspects of man and society’s life, as a
rule, without considering their place in a general process of the
Universe 
evolution. 
Thus, 
the 
currently 
predominant
“differentiated” approach to the study of the second nature finds its
reflection in differentiation of knowledge about it. Elaborating upon
sense of life issue, “exposure of an individual to eternity” closes,
mostly, on society without examining the role of a social form
movement in the Universe.
It signifies, regardless how paradoxically it sounds, that the
main issue of philosophy not only remains to be the key
contradiction, but even is getting more actualized. Recall that the
essence of it lies in the “opposition” of substance and spirit.
However, now it has turned to us its different side. Problem of
clarification of primacy of origin of oppositions is transformed in
necessity of conceptualization of them as integrity. We believe that
only through comprehension of attributive properties of integrity the
nature and characteristics of the social world can be explained.
It is qualitatively different situation. It has been brewing for
along time. Such qualitative spring accounts for dramatic and
according to cosmic measures even spontaneous increase of
consciousness. According to V. Vernadsky, “such moment in
history of thought has advented, when it is put in the forefront as an
important and profound foundation of a new scientific outlook of
future which is being formed”. However, world and native
philosophy hasn’t made appropriate inferences from this fact.
Therefore, in practice, we seem encounter with it unexpectedly.
In this respect debate between K. Marx, F. Engels, and G.
Hegel, on issue whose philosophies they have rooted their
arguments at, is extremely significant. G. Hegel postulated existence
научного
доклада.
Санкт-Петербург:
Издательство
Санкт-Петербургского
университета экономики и финансов,1994.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
36
of spiritual factors such as reality that operated autonomously from
physical body; he, in particular, based himself upon the experiments
that presently have received the name parapsychological. This
allowed him to note the internal contradiction of the notion “ego”:
on the one hand, every “Self” exists as something in – itself –
reflected, absolutely unique and distinct from another, with a
separate identity;
“the other
-Self”
is completely universal,
absolutely continuous, not interrupted, a common essence for all
people"9. Both “selves”, as G. Hegel noted, form a single identity,
and immanent conflict is a struggle between them.
F. Engels categorically denies the possibility of existing of
parapsychological phenomena 10. Together with K. Marx he declares
that nothing in the world exists, but substance of this or that state.
Substance is primary, spirit, and consciousness are secondary. Ideal
is material that has gone through human brains. This constitutes a
credo of Marxist materialism.
In the XX-th century success of unorthodox natural science
caused urgent necessity to revise the ideas about correlation of
substance and conciseness had been established in materialistic
worldview. Such scientists as K. Tsiolkovsky, V. Vernadsky
considered it reasonable. K. Tsiolkovsky saw the world as material
one, but believed that there were higher intelligent forces in power
whose authority had been the outcome of prolonged evolution; the
very Universe at present condition was the result of interaction of
those forces11. V. Venadsky’s merit, as it is known, is the
development of science about biosphere and concept of noosphere.
These investigations signified a very valuable step in overcoming
shortage of mechanistic materialism.
In the second half of the XX-th century the scientific method
allowing to begin investigation of complex self-organizing systems
with unlinear inverted connections (thermodynamics of irreversible
9Гегель Г. Философия духа. – М.,1977. – С. 240.
10См.: Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. – Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.20. – С.263-283.
11См.: Циолковский К.Э. Грезы о Земле и небе. – Тула,1986. -С.300-322.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
37
processes, synergetics, theory of catastrophes, systemical analysis)
was developed. Biosphere, noosphere, human being belong to the
above mentioned systems. Science stepped in a new post
unorthodox stage of its development. Such principle regularities of
processes in self-evolving systems as stochastic, indefiniteness,
bifurcation were found in a focus of attention. Con struction of
imitating models of evolution of complex systems demanded
recognition of principles of theoretical variability, probability, NP-
algorithms, multycriterion optimization and etc. However, modern
social philosophy does not take them cautiously at all.
Synergetics takes standpoint of thermodynamics to study
phenomenon of self-organization. The effects of mutual action of a set
of interconnected elements of systems, remote from balanced
condition, actively exchanging substance, energy, and information
with environment are its objects. Its success in a realm of investigation
and modeling of physical and chemical processes has initiated
penetration of concepts and means of synergetics in biology,
economics, sociology, political science, and social philosophy.
Synergetic models of process of perception and artificial intellect give
us hope to discover, after all, logic that generate miraculous
phenomenon of spontaneous order in human communities.
For the study of social systems, it is extremely important to use
methodological potential of biological autopoetic theory, enriched
with the ideas of self-reference, that is, it-selfness, and self-
relatedness. This closeness is manifested through absence of causal
relationships as the unequivocal response to input actions. The
environment only simulates a change within the structure of social
systems, giving rise to bifurcation, the outcome of which is
determined by the level of complexity of the structure, and is
essentially unpredictable. N.N. Moiseyev refers to these phenomena
as the loss of the system memory12. It can be said that such systems
are lacking “inputs”.
12См.:Вопросыфилософии. -1992. -№11.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
38
The signals that cause systems’ self-change emerge within the
system itself. Their response to the same, from the observer’s
standpoint, environmental impact may be different, and, generally
speaking, cannot be a reaction at all. Such systems are unobservable
by essence, not only due to the incompatibility of the observer and
system cognitive domains.
The methodological tools should be formed with the expectation
that the social systems themselves generate their own internal
regularity. Recursive subsystems interaction creates a dynamic
landscape, in synergy called an attractor. The fluctuations of the
medium conditions that trigger structural changes in order to
preserve the organization, and within the range conditioned by this
requirement, the system continuous synthesis of their own behavior,
which is nothing but the natural drift of the social system.
Perception of autopoetic social system places priority on the
goal of the organization preservation. Under conditions of the
present stage of social development the problems of profit and
growth in turnover fall by the wayside. This means that today,
actually not so much the extension of the planning horizon and
strengthening of social systems management is topical as a deep
conceptual change. Its essence is the abandoning by researchers the
unidirectional deductive competitive and hierarchical thinking,
typical for industrial type of development, and transition to the
spontaneously operating information type. It is necessary to
understand and accept as a guiding life principle a new type of
causality – the so-called free causality.
Our methodological thinking must not only formally recognize
the legitimacy of the apparatus of cybernetics as a means of
studying the social body, but also the urgent need to apply the ideas
of so-called alternative cybernetics that began with U.R. Ashby’s
works, who in 1956 identified isolation, resistance and survival.
This cybernetics focuses on a holistic perception of the behavior of
complex systems as the coordinated interaction of its parts. The
autonomy of such systems is manifested through particular

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
39
dependence on the external environment. Identification and control
of such systems is possible only when the integrity is maintained.
This area is now referred to as the second-order cybernetics. It is
characterized by presence of positive feedback, reinforcing minor
deviations resulting in morphogenetic evolutionary mode of
behavior that changes the structure. The advantage of negative
feedback in the systems of common cybernetics usually leads to a
morphostatic mode preserving the structure.
It seems that now because of adaptive inferiority we find
ourselves at the stage of our world destruction. We have neither the
experience nor the intellectual tools to understand the inner laws of
social systems. Recognition and identification of self-organizing
tendencies as well as the autopoetic aspiration of systems to survive
can be a life-saving step in a proper direction.
Thus, to adopt social world, by using qualitatively enriched
categorical apparatus of social philosophy substantial beginning
should be discovered, which accounts for not only dialectics of
material and spiritual things, but more precise, reveals their motion
through all three above-mentioned levels (mega-, macro-, micro-),
and shows its mechanism of its self-evolving as organic wholeness.
Category of substance is that very logical beginning which other
categories (which in their unity constituting coherent knowledge about
the universum and its social form of motion) have been derived from. It
is possible only because this beginning contains within itself
contradiction which becomes the source of its development. Peculiarity
of dialectical method of investigation of social life as logical outcome
of evolution of the Universe consists in theoretical reproduction of this
contradiction, analysis of structure of its motions. Thus, paradox of
substance consists in the fact that only under the condition of being a
reason for itself it is capable of generating something else.
Otherwise, relation of substance as a foundation of “something
else” to itself as a subject should gain a form of self discovery. This
is the way of evolving into reality the substantial relation poles of
which seem to be segmented in time.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
40
Consequently, to move from substance to social organism the
universum should be studied as totality, that self-evolves, generates
a set of concrete forms of motions one of which is a social one.
The survey of rational account of the world is the dramatic one.
From time to time it seemed that rather ambitious program got close
to its completion: scientists began to behold the very fundamental
level from which its properties could have been derived from. We
will give only two examples. One of them is formulation of
renowned Bor’s model of atom, due to which all variety of atoms
were brought to simple planetary systems with electrons and
protons. Einstein’s hope to integrate all physical laws within the
framework of the common theory of field signified the next period
of intensive expectations.
Today we experience next in turn period of intensive
expectations of discovery of deeper than atom and field foundations
for constructing the picture of the world. Their search continued
even after the discovery of the theory of fields. For the last century
it has been especially intensive. However, only in the second part of
the XX-th century physics asserted the role of quantum vacuum as a
prime source of the Universe origin. In this context the “touch” to
the mystery of origin of the Universe is considered to be an essential
point in the process of development of natural sciences of a modern
period.
Being a quantum-mechanic object vacuum possess complicated
inner structure, that is characterized by a set of quantum numbers
combination of which cause the number of the most unexpected
attributes at different levels of its self-unfolding. It is used as a base
for construction of the scientific picture of evolution of the
Universe. Presently creation of a new picture of the world, as it can
be traced through modern scientific publications, is being formed in
two separate and diametrically opposite directions. Two kinds of
vacuums (physical and semantic) account for this. Some researchers
are taking quantum vacuum to create the physical Universe; others
do the same to create the semantic Universe.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
41
Original scientific picture of the world, as it is known, is formed
on the base of substance of physical vacuum. It is called to give
more elaborated account for the world around us and for us within
the framework of this world. Physical value is considered the one
which should undergo the rigid scientific description (with the help
not only natural sciences but social sciences as well) 13.
Within its framework it is realized that it is all its elementary
particles organizing the Universe that are the excitation of vacuum;
its peculiarities define not only the logics of atoms and molecules
but also the global attributes of evolution of the Universe.
Dialectical analysis of electromagnetic interaction as the
principle one allows in a more concrete way to express correlation
of macroscopic form of motion of material objects, having clarified
the inner foundation of their unity. Moreover, by means of
electromagnetic interaction with other types of interaction:
gravitational, weak and strong – the unity of qualitatively defined
forms of macroscopic motion (social one is among them) with
micro- and mega- worlds and through them with the Universe can
be established.
Already in the elemental form of electromagnetic interaction,
which is a contradictory relationship between the two microscopic
objects – material (electron) and immaterial (the photon) – there is
the possibility of “separation”, which is realized through the fact of
a single interaction process splitting. This refers to a split in
electromagnetic radiation and matter. This occurs at a certain stage
of evolution of the universe.
This dichotomy makes the process of formation of a specific
level of the universe – namely, macroscopic, when organization of
material objects takes place that finds its manifestation in the
formation of the atom nuclei, and then – molecules and intangible
objects that manifest itself through social processes and their
specific products.
13ЯнковМ. Материя и информация. – М.: Прогресс, 1979. – С. 45.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
42
Separation of substance and electromagnetic radiation is also a
prerequisite for the formation of galaxies, stars, planetary systems,
including the earth, on which about three billion years ago life
emerged, and therefore a cosmic prerequisite for human existence.
Moreover, the condition of our existence serves not just the fact of
“polarization”, but also quite certain proportion of radiation and
matter. This “balance” is about 10
9:1 in favor of radiation (measured
by the ratio of the number of photons, the radiation energy quanta to
the number of protons and neutrons).
We can hence assume that the world of substance is just a
barely perceptible ripples on the surface of the ocean vacuum that
fills the universe and on a colossal scale is filled with energy. The
energy density of the vacuum fluctuations is enormous – about 10
95
g/sm
3. For comparison, the density of nuclear matter is 10
14 g/sm
3 ,
and the density of water – 1 g/sm
3
However, despite the extraordinary explanatory potential of this
point of view on the origin of the world, it is not all that simple as it
seems to its proponents. The main problem was that the image of
the world, built by the classical natural science, proved to be totally
spiritless. The contradiction between a tiny microcosm of man and
almost limitless Cosmos was striking, and with the beginning of the
era of the noosphere it became unacceptable.
Subsequent non-classical and post non-classical stages in the
development of science did not significantly change this situation.
Unsolved within its framework problems accumulated in various
fields of natural science intensified researchers’ search of an idea of
a universe other than the Physical one.
Thus, the failure to get a consistent classical view and to prove
something that was once credible became the sad truth. Sometimes
it seems that the positivist rejection of the very intention to
understanding world became the only interpretation capable of
competing with the classical interpretation of science. Hence, it is
natural to expect from here two negative consequences – theoretical

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
43
uncertainty and practical helplessness of the world social science –
to follow. The first of them, according to materials of the XII World
Congress of Sociology, reveals itself in the fact that because of the
lack of clear understanding of the “social reality”, as well as the
meaning and the method of its rationalization, social cognition has a
pronounced relativistic nature.
The majority of its members believe that there is no need to
strive for a sociological theory to explain adequately the diversity of
ongoing social processes. President of the International Sociological
Association T. K. Oommen stated that sociology needed
consolidation of approaches, concepts, cultures, lifestyles and
mindsets, not the integrated theory for the whole world. The
Thirteenth Forum of Sociologists added almost anything to this. In
practice, this means that today, in a majority, according to the
opinion of the researchers, spontaneously occurring social
processes, even in theory, cannot be opposed to reasonably
organized social life of people, because there is no way to know,
even in principle, the objective laws of the social world self-
development.
At the end of the XX-th century in scientific-philosophical
literature in contrast to the Physical Universe, the concept of the
Semantic or Informational Universe proliferated. Its roots are
hidden in the profundity of the history of philosophical thought. For
a long time in philosophy mainly idealistic ideas have been
dominating ideas: ideas about some creative spiritual power,
designing according its own will and is perceived as all reviving
principle of nature and life, as “the world engine” (Plato, Aristotle),
“the world soul” (Plato, stoics, neoplatonics, Gerder, Hete, Fekhner,
Scheling, and others), “the world spirit” (“nus”, Anaxagoras,
“absolute idea” of Hegel and others), “the world will” (Spengler,
Nietzsche and others), “the world energy” (Oswald), “entelehia”
(Aristotle, Drysh, neovitalizm and others). In the main, all religious
teaching connected with the act of creation in one or another way
support this idea. It is quite appropriate in this context to refer to

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
44
Dao Lao Tsy: ideas about general logics and its embodiment that
have a character of world rationality and that outwardly is expressed
in a form of orderliness of being and sequences of its changes.
Adding to scientific circulation the concept of informational
space signifies, in particular, recognition of informational potential
as autonomous reality. Similar thoughts were repeatedly expressed
before. It would be fallacious to think that similar ideas are
characteristics only of proponents of idealistic
and mystic
worldviews. Such renowned philosopher as B. Russel, physics
theorists E. Shredinher, V. Heisenberg, D. Bom recognized their
content value14.
The work of a founder of French “atheistic” existentialism A.
Camus A Man who revolts is significant in this context. A. Camus
made the conclusion in it that the sense governs the world, and the
way to comprehend it goes through the discovery of the essence of
revolt.
The idea of the Semantic Universe has been present in Russian
scientific – philosophic literature for a long time. Suffice it to
recollect the idea of pneumatosphere or spiritosphere of P.
Florentskyi. The same idea is also energetically supported by L.V.
Leskov15.
To ground the Semantic Universe it is important to underline
the content value or statistic value of information. Using the works
of Frehe and Chercha in a field of mathematical logics as a
foundation16, derivative notion of the sense as information or sum of
knowledge 
that 
sign, 
word, 
symbol 
contain 
should 
be
comprehended. Spiritual reality manifests itself in the binary
hypostasis: continuity (language semantics) and discontinuity (sign
system). Lacking of the sense signifies the existential vacuum. The
14См.:Рассел Б. Почему я не христианин.- М.,1987; Философия и мистика
//Новые идеи в философии. -М.,1991.- С.111-122.
15Лесков Л.В.Семантическая Вселенная //Вестник МосковскогоУниверситета,
Серия7, Философия. -1994. -№2. – С.3-18.
16См.: Кондаков Н.И. Логический словарь – справочник – М.,1975. – С.553.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
45
sense turns sign system into the content of the text that emerges
when the senses are compared.
The principle function of a sense consists in the endowing the
processes of developing with the direction. V. Frankl wrote, “Sense
of the sense is that it directs the course of being”.17 Its impact is so
strong that a man physically feels it. And at the level of naiive
consciousness he gains the statute of God’s beginning or God.
In addition, it is important we should bear in mind, if sense is a
result of placing of one meaning in a particular relation with other
meaning or placing of one sign in a particular relation with another
sign, we have deal with a specific form of relations. The sense is a
particular relation of meanings. It is prime and principle essential
attribute. The sense is truly spiritual relations. The Semantic
Universe exists, according to the point of view of proponents of this
theory, in the form of the “meon” (ether). It should be point out
here, that no one objects the existence of ether along with the
substance. In addition, existence of the meon as the referent of
energo informational exchange or as the Semantic space does not
contradict any known physical law.
V. Vernadsky, who by no means can be suspected in ideological
conjuncture, wrote: “Further scientific analysis will provide us with
a new picture of the process which has been taking place; the picture
which doesn’t coincide with the adopted mode of comprehension of
heliocentric system. Modern dominating in science conviction split
the substance into a pile of the smallest particles or properly located
centers of forces, eternally maintained in diverse motions. The ether
is not different. It penetrates the substance, constantly actuates
wavelike fluctuating. All these motions of the substance and ether
are in the closest and uninterrupted connection with infinite for us
world space"18.
17Франкл В. Человек в поисках смысла. – М.,1990. – С. 285.
18Вернадский В. И. Научное мировоззрение //На переломе. Философские
дискуссии 20-х годов: Философия и мировоззрение. – М.:Политиздат,1990. –
С.195.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
46
The scientific – philosophic literature introduced the category
“ether” long ago. The description of vacuum in such terms as
“ayperon” and “amer” was given long ago by the renowned
Hellenists Anaximander, Democritus and their followers. The
discovery of the wave nature of light demanded the introduction to
science the hypothesis about existence of the light ether of the
electro-magnitic fluctuations carrier. From the idealistic standpoint
it should be understand as the Absolute Spirit connected with the
intelligible substance.
In modern science to name the energo-informational field,
which constitutes the physical essence of noosphere, different terms
are used. Thus, American scientist of Australian origin Wilhelm
Raykh, and Italian investigator of paranormal phenomenon L.
Markezi call it organic field. Raykh is considered to be the author of
the term. Other investigators call this physical fluctuating field
telurgic one, (from Lat. “tellurus” – “earth”), since in ancient times
people used it as the one which was radiated by the Earth to search
underground water springs and ore fields. Belarus scientist A.
Veynyk calls it hronal one, a sea group of the scientists (Ye.
Akimov and others) calls it “torsion”, others (A. Okhatrin and
others) – microleptonne”. In literature you can find it defined as
“spinor”, “axionic”, “ansdronic” and other terms. Presently based on
these hypotheses a special science “eniology” is being formed.
There is a commonly recognized fact that society is the whole
system in the process of functioning and development of which
from reason to consequence not only substance, energy, and
information are transferred , but also, using K. Marx’ terminology,
the “crystals of social substance”, “clusters deprived of differences,
human labor”, embodied in products of labor, and due to this,
particular not substantial, but nevertheless, material social relations
are reproducted19. Here we are fixing only the fact of existence of
the ether, without commenting other nuances of the used thesis.
19См.: Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч.- 2-е изд.- Т.23.-С.46; Чинакова Л.И.
Социальный детерминизм: Проблема движущих сил развития общества.- М.:

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
47
Recognition of the semantic field (intelligent ether)
performing as a carrier of the electro-magnitic fluctuations,
organically connected to the motion of the Universe, signifies
insertion of corrections in the modern world view paradigm. From
the materialistic standpoint it can be considered as the intelligible
form of the substance.
It should be noted, however, that the philosophical definition of
matter is already overburdened in terms of content to the extreme. So,
the Marxist philosophical dictionary lists the following forms of matter:
inanimate nature systems, biological systems, people, society20.
If we extend this definition and include meon in it – obviously,
within such approach, it is not a difficult task – it is necessary to
bear in mind that this is a very unusual form of matter that does not
contain anything of actual material, but endowed with such
paradoxical properties as having interpersonal and even cosmic
consciousness. In other words, the matter in development goes
beyond its own “physical” frame.
V. Nalimov and Zh. Drohalina in the work The Reality of
Unreal writes: “It is important to pay attention to the fact that the
Semantic field, like the physical one, plays the role of the
environment across which interaction takes place. Man interacts
with himself or with other people with the help of the discrets of
words or symbols. This process takes place by means of generation
the words (symbols) and their understanding. Both processes are
done by means of interaction with the semantic field. Using the
physics’ terminology, probably, we should say: radiation and
absorption of the quantum of the Semantic field take place”21.
It is important that information theory regards man as an active
producer and carrier of sense, since he constantly changes his
Политиздат, 1985.- С.25.
20Философский словарь. – М.,1991. – С.253.
21См. :Налимов В.В., Дрогалина Ж.А. Реальность нереального. Вероятностная
модель бессознательного. – М.: Издательство “МИРИДЕЙ”, АОАКРОН, 1995. –
С.93.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
48
system of values through ongoing interaction with the outside
world. Therefore, he can be regarded as a very special living text,
continually reinterpreting himself. Thus, the Ego – it is rather not a
subject, but a process; this constitutes (in a large time scale) the
illusory nature of the individual.
You can also talk about the semantic multidimensionality of the
individual. In this case, separate components of an individual are
correlated with each other. The simplest example of the
multidimensional 
personality’s 
manifestation 
is 
a
continuous internaldialogue with himself. 
A 
more 
interesting
example – it is now widely discussed in psychiatry idea of the
multiple personality, which can bind as pathological manifestations
and creative activity.
Thus, the classical science, the mythical science of a simple
passive world today is the heritage of the past. Deadly strike was
triggered not by criticism on the part of philosophers, or the
empiricists humble refusal from attempts to understand the world
but the internal development of the science itself. After it the
transformation of philosophy follows. Although, it should be the
other way around. And from the ruins of our modern culture,
apparently, as in the days of the Renaissance, have already raised
the seeds of a new philosophical culture, designed to ensure the
effective development of a planetary humanity in the third
millennium.
The above integration is possible in principle, as the physical
and semantic universes are versions of one and the same substance –
the quantum vacuum. In this model, the universe resembles the
Möbius strip. The comparative ontology of two realities – physical
and psychological – was done by V. Nalimov and Zh. Drogalina in
the work “The Reality of Unreal”. They conclude that “our system
represents all manifestations of life, including man – every man in
its individuality,- is only a selective display of the semantic field,
which can be described as the Semantic Universe. If the selectivity
disappears and we face a uniform distribution of the probability

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
49
distribution function that defines the being, then the Semantic
Universe goes into semantic vacuum. But the semantic vacuum is
connected with us: both functions of distribution the selective and
uniform functions are built on the same set of elementary events.
Fluctuations of semantic vacuum ... preserve our ability to interact
with it"22.
These authors consider unmanifested semantic Universe or the
semantic vacuum as the one that received the name Nothingness
within the framework of philosophy, and that so excited the East
(“nervana”) as well as the West (think of Gnostic, Eckhart, Beme,
Scheling, Sartre, Heidegger, Yung, Tyllykh and others).
Since man is one of the possible states of the semantic field, he
has the ability to freely move in and out of it. Special symbols
termed in psychological literature as archetypes serve as the means
of inclusion of a man into the semantic field. They can turn into
something similar to virtual particles. This opens the possibility of
human interaction with semantic vacuum. Here, as in case of
physical plane, any particle continuously emits and absorbs any type
of virtual particles. What is happening here can be described as
continuously flowing fluctuations of the probability distribution
function that defines an individual in the semantic field.
In view of the above, legitimately put forward a working
hypothesis that any observed reality is a product of the quantum
vacuum self-unfolding; on its exit from the base, bifurcating in the
material and spiritual components (fields) that make up a single
substance-semantic space of the Universe. We, thus, proceed as
once recommended P. A. Florentsky, who wrote: “It is necessary to
have at least one point of human activity where a visual unity of the
two poles would be given, there is an undeniable incarnation of the
sense or that is the same – an undeniable spirituality of things"23.
22См.:Налимов В.В.,ДрогалинаЖ.А. Реальность нереального. Вероятностная
модель бессознательного. – М.: Издательство"МИРИДЕЙ”, АОАКРОН,1995. -
С.101.
23Флоренский
П.А.
Из
богословского
наследия
//
Труды
Московской

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
50
Despite the fact that the information flow between the world of
meon and the world of matter have both way direction, the
researchers suggest that it is the information pressure from the
semantic space of meon that defines the direction of evolutionary
processes of animate and inanimate nature24. By this circumstance
we explain the viable nature of development, and ascent from
simple to complex. Suffice to recall informational pressure on the
Soviet Union from the capitalist world constituting the essence of
the Cold War.
In accordance with this criterion, for distinguishing between
these worlds there should be such type of fundamental
interaction, which is the basis of their properties and laws. So, in
our opinion, fundamental interaction constituting the inherent nature
of the universe is inter- transition of material and spiritual. In
addition, they, as the ingredients of the same substance, not only
mutually transit into each other, but they also move from the micro-
through macro- to mega-level and back.
Self-propulsion of the universe as the foundation of all things,
therefore, it has horizontal and vertical components. The horizontal
component in the self-movement of the universe is manifested in
inter-transitions of the material and spiritual, and back at the micro-,
macro- and mega-levels. The vertical component displaces itself in
transition of interacting material and spiritual ingredients of the
three above-mentioned levels, due to the self-unfolding of deeper
phase vacuum qualities. Since moving into these areas is carried out
at different speeds, the movement trajectory is converging and
unfolding spiral.
It’s amazing how slowly theoretical human thought realizes the
dialectical relationship of material and spiritual. The fact that in the
materialistic study the material and spiritual foundations were
considered as contraries excluding each other signifies nothing else
Патриархии.-Вып.17. – С. 103.
24Лесков Л.В. Семантическая Вселенная //Вестник Московского Университета,
Серия7, Философия. -1994. – №2. – С.11-12.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
51
but that the researchers used to look at the contrary to each other
differences as the “indifferent to each other different”. And if for all
previous period of time philosophic thought had not fought over the
problem what was prime – being or consciousness, material or
spiritual – but tend to synthesize them in the organic wholeness, we
would have proceeded much farther and would have known about
the social life far and away more.
In practice the ante-synthesis caused, as it is known, the
formation of the ideological contradiction between the materialists
and idealists, which due to the incompatibility of the
methodological and ideological positions, instead of looking for a
substantial foundation of social world, moved along the direction
opposite to the truth. Investigators seemed didn’t notice that they
were trying to solve one and the same problem only from different
sides. Indeed, the proponents of the subjective as well as objective
approaches of the world explanation appeared to be the ordinary
metaphysicist.
Thus, the epistemological reason is likely to be one of the
reasons of the crisis in the social development. We obviously
exaggerated the division of the world into the material and spiritual
one and paid to it too much attention. We wasted time and a great
deal of intellectual efforts looking for the prime and secondary
instead of going beyond the boundaries of those contraries by means
of their synthesis in something third and the whole one . Until this
whole third one in the process of its self-motion began to destroy the
social organisms – the products of self-evolving of human reason,
that apparently have been existing at the phase of unconscious.
Available literature proves that human reason existed always,
though not always in a conscious form.
The idea of natural – scientific picture of the world, built up on
integration of physical and the semantic variety of vacuum, paves
the way to a fundamentally new step in comprehension of the world
by means of developing super uniting theory that integrates in
organic wholeness physical and the semantic worlds, substance and

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
52
consciousness, substance and information. Such theory is capable of
broadening 
considerably 
the 
degree 
of 
our 
freedom 
in
conceptualization and transformation of ruins of national social
organisms in effective constructions of new type, also to increase
out intellectual capacity in construction of a planetary social
organism.
There are a number of arguments in favor of the adoption of the
fruitfulness of this ideological foundation for building the
noosociogenesis theory. Here are the most important ones.
The first argument is that many objectively established in recent
years scientific facts force to review existing presentation of the
material structure of the world and turn the ideas of thinkers who
defended an alternative point of view. Today, one can no longer
bypass with the profound philosophical silence the most important
discovery that has made an impact on the scientific outlook of the
late twentieth century, the essence of which lies in the fact that
“material particles can be created out of pure energy, and again
converted into pure energy in the reverse process"25.
The second argument is that it has received support in the
scientific community. The original version of this hypothesis
recently put forward V.V. Nalimov who offered to consider a
multiplicity of meanings, existing simultaneously and independently
from the world of matter, as the semantic space. Its merit lies in the
fact that, unlike other authors, he was able to give to this hypothesis,
the form of the mathematical theory.
S. B. Krymsky points out the legitimacy of the existence of the
unity of being and mind in noosphere too; he writes that “instead of
the dilemma of choosing between monism of matter or spirit, their
complex mediation in certain ranks of reality emerges – from
spontaneous extra-human objectivity to the virtual being objectified
thought forms. In the latter case we are talking about a special type
of reality that occurs in the computer – simulation systems"26.
25Донченко Е.А. Социетальная психика. – К.: Наукова думка, 1994. – С. 21.
26Фiлософська i соцiологiчна думка. – 1996. – №3 – 4. – С.106.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
53
The third argument is related to the fact that the classification of
physical theories proposed by M. P. Bronshteyn shows that all
possible physical theories are described in the coordinates of the
three fundamental constants – gravitational constant, Planck’s
constant and the reciprocal world’s speed27.
If to these three dimensions to add numerical meanings axis,
there is the possibility of a common methodological approach to the
description of the dimensions of our world, including the
phenomena of consciousness. Interestingly, zero of coordinate
system will be the axis of the senses that corresponds to the
particular case of the conventional material universe.
The fourth argument is that it is time to move from a monistic
view of the world and nature to a dualistic one, in order to avoid
abusing of philosophical material as well as the results of
development of natural sciences in the philosophical issues. It is
necessary to make the transition from black-and-white vision of
variants to a multi-color palette of colors and shades. Otherwise, the
life pattern will remain gray and bleak.
The fifth argument in favor of the recognition of the above
constructive inter-transition of worlds, we see that the world
philosophy has long been attempting to include the consciousness
into the picture of the physical world. It is based on this hypothesis,
such philosophical trends as pantheism, hylozoism, esoterism, and
others. Some researchers point out the presence of the spiritual
element in such material particles like atoms and crystals28.
Finally, the sixth argument – ontological. We just know a case
where the material ensures its quality through opposites. It is the
magnet whose contrasts are present as different poles. And, if you
look at the original substance, by analogy, nothing prevents in
27См.: Окунь Л.Б. Фундаментальные константы физики //УНФ. -1990.-Т.165. –
№8. – С.177-194.
28См.:"Дух в атоме” (Daviesand Brown, 1989), “Сознание атома” (БейлиАлиса,
1994), “Закон
синархии
и
учение
о
двойственной
иерархии
монад
и
множеств"(ШмаковВ.,1994) и др.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
54
reality the material and spiritual co-exist in the same form. This
hypothesis 
could 
potentially 
contr-act 
only 
mechanistic
materialists, but life if not rejects, then significantly alters their
ideological basis.
In the light of epistemology accepting of such theory signifies
that we in a course of examining of material and spiritual move
from category of discerning and opposition to category of
contradiction. In this case we even today are already ready to
discover in a foundation of the Universe “the root of any
movement and vitality”. Nevertheless, true self – motion is based,
according to G. Hegel (Science of Logic), on contradiction which
makes its appearance in opposition, is only the developed nothing
that is contained in identity and that appears in the expression that
the law of identity says nothing. This negation further determines
itself into difference and opposition, which now is the posited
contradiction"29.
The last remark
is especially valuable, since often a
contradiction is considered as a contradiction of the subject in
different ways. This approach does not allow the main thing –
understanding the universe in its necessary development and self-
movement. Such understanding is possible only when the conflict is
perceived as a contradiction, taken “in the same relation.” The thing
considered in different relations does not cease to be “abstract
identity,” which, as G. Gegel points out, “is not yet the vitality.”
Just due to the fact that “the positive in itself is the negative; it goes
beyond itself and starts to change"30.
This inevitably leads to modification of controversy, previously
considered to be antagonistic, between materialism and idealism,
which at the same time, but with different epistemological positions,
studied the social world with a particular view of the social
organism, of course, as it is an integral part. At the ontological plane
– the adoption of this hypothesis is the elimination of the
29Гегель Г.Наука логики. – М.: Мысль,1970. – Т.1. – С.31.
30Гегель Г. Наука логики. – М.: Мысль,1970. – Т.1. – С.31.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
55
epistemological gap between the world of man and the universe, the
micro- and macro-cosm.
Thus, in selecting of world view platform to achieve the main aim
of current research, we came to necessity of integration of material and
spiritual within substantial foundation of our world as equal
constituents of the Universe. However, there is nothing new in this. It
has been already known. Such approach was developed by other
generations of philosophers in the history of philosophical thought.
It is necessary to recognize the integration natural, and on this
basis to offer own version of the philosophical approach to solve the
problem under investigation. This is due to the fact that a
qualitatively new target has required other, than the current
dominant ideology, vision of the world. It happens whenever the
explanatory power of the existing philosophical systems is
exhausted. The increase of knowledge about the subject of
investigation, we hope to receive by taking a look at it through
another epistemological prism, creatively applying the tools and the
knowledge of more advanced technology, formed by world
materialistic philosophy. This is the firstly.
Secondly, the process of transition to the new outlook is subject
to strict guidelines. It all starts with a group of people, who already
are carriers of the new outlook appealing to their hearts. Under the
dominance in a society of a very different values such resonance is
possible only in people with the most unclouded, the brightest and
purest ideational values. Spiritually, these people are very similar;
they constitute the “pure group”. When public need arises, this
group begins to move and become the center of the crystallization of
a new world view.
The emergence of “pure group” resembles the birth of a new
“body"- attractor – to perform a specific system function, vital to the
ethno-social organism. Fortunately, the body as the ethno social
systems are extremely reliable, so you always find about one
percent of people born with the potential ability to work in the
spiritual sphere of information for the common good, – as points

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
56
out, for example, the leading expert of the Center for the study of
information problems of territories, National Academy of Sciences
of Ukraine, I. Kaganets31.
Thirdly, we understand under whose fire and criticism in this
case we expose ourselves. But, we repeat ourselves, that without
changing the existing philosophical approaches, the problem of the
development of the social organism cannot be solved. In connection
with this philosophical approach, synthesizing the substantial
foundation of the world is a logical step, as the researchers applying
the old approaches to the problem, even do not try to put it, to
address social science.
Fourthly, the criterion of truth here, as always, is the practice.
Who is right, the following presentation will show. If we manage to
get out of the ideological and methodological deadlocks and build a
consistent logical structure of the organic type, then, the selected
ideological approach will be considered to be correct and reliable.
Otherwise, everything ought to be started again.
Thus, the put forward hypothesis about the higher ontological
unity of material and spiritual principles in self-unfolding of the
universe opens a qualitatively new perspective on the theoretical
explanation of the riddle about origin and functioning of the social
world. They are connected with the fact that only the realization of
cosmic options for the development of humanity guarantees the
possibility to find the correct strategic path of becoming self-
unfolding mechanism of the cultural world, the backbone factor of
which is undoubtedly the human person. And we still are to deploy
the philosophy of human personality as a part of a much larger in its
evolutionary possibilities than the whole – the social world.
Therefore, we are faced with the need to seek a positive
ideology – the ideology of world civilization, which would disclose
the cosmic orientation of earthly humanity. At the same time, we
emphasize that the idea of the cosmic nature of life as a natural
31См.: Финансовая Украина. -1996. – 29 октября

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
57
stage of self-organization of matter is not identical with the well-
known hypothesis of S. Arenius’ panspermia.
The problems of modern social development, as never before,
demand search of the cosmic ideology of development of humanity,
so we should fearlessly move forward to face cosmic philosophy.
Since surrounding world of the second nature is not built by anyone,
we face the problem to describe its smallest “bricks” (that is to say,
microscopic structure of the world) in a way that will account for
the process of its self origin (self construction). In the connection
with ascertainment of substantial foundation of the world problem of
comprehension of the social organism shifts from outlook rank to
ideological one. This requires practical use of the idea of re-
integrated substance for a comprehensive review of the most general
laws of social form of self-movement of the universe.
1.2.2. The ideology of the social world
comprehension
The elaboration of ideology of investigation as well as the
selection of the outlook standpoint is a personal business of the
investigator. Provided that the definition of ideology as a system of
“views and ideas, in which relations of men to each other and
reality, social problems and conflicts are realized and evaluated,
which also contain complete (programs) social activities, focused on
consolidation or change (development) of given social relations"32,
than the integrity of ideas (semantic filters) underlying our
endeavors to begin recomprehesion of social phenomenon should be
considered as ideology of this investigation. In other words,
32Философскийэнциклопедическийсловарь.-М.:Советскаяэнциклопедия,1989.-
С. 206

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
58
ideology
is a means to include an individual into the spiritual
world.
The condition of native philosophical thought has been
complicated by the fact that ideological horizon is lacking the
advancing ideology. It is a paradox, however, philosophical trend,
formed at the end of the XIX-th century as ideological trend, and
which in practice has won its opponents only due to development of
effective for that moment methodology, itself has turned to its
victim. Ideology appears also to require a regular updating in
accordance with progress of spiritual production.
This simple fact is that if the former socialist countries with
advanced academic science still do not have a changed concept of
national development, then the previously cultured in the USSR
materialist ideology fails to achieve the general goal of the present
study. This conclusion should be taken as a sentence for old
ideology for two reasons.
Firstly, in the former Soviet Marxist ideology it has undergone
significant changes. It lost contact with materialistic foundation, on
which Marx and Engels built, and gradually transformed into a
deadlock apologetic direction, named marxocentrism. As V.S. Barulin
rightly points out: “The essence of the socio-philosophical direction
was the fact that the social philosophy of Karl Marx – historical
materialism – was seen as a kind of matrix for the initial consideration
of any other social philosophical current, the past and present one.
Social-philosophical direction that marxocentrism put forward its
assessment criteria of social and philosophical currents “33.
Since these criteria – materialism, a reflection of class interests,
scientific approach – are nothing more than a product of social and
philosophical reflection of Karl Marx, and they were on top of
ideological installations for the materialist trend in the world of
philosophical thought. All other areas were recognized, within the
borders of the USSR official philosophy, unscientific.
33Барулин В.С. Социальная философия .Ч.1: Учебник. – М.: Изд-во МГУ,1993.
– С.5.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
59
We agree in many respects with the other V. S. Barulin’s
comments about negative effects of marxocentrism. But when
choosing a study of the problem of the social world ideology, it is
important that progressive, of course, for its time, ideology of the
study of social reality is gradually degraded, and at the end of the
twentieth century led to the crisis of the social system built on that
twisted ideological basis of Marxism. The latter ended in a fiasco, due
to the fact that his supporters tried to extend its heuristic properties to
the processes that needed other ideologies to be explained by. Within
the boundaries of “its” competence, for example, to explain the role
and place of the material factor in a person’s life, it was and remains
indispensable. Thus, even it is even increasing its value, despite the
fact that the range of application is reduced exactly halfway.
About how far this artificial ideology penetrated in the intellectual
production of the modern period, evidenced the existence in the past
such disciplines as “Marxist-Leninist philosophy,” “Marxist-Leninist
sociology” and others. The practical result of it was the crisis of the
community of socialist countries, built on the “scientific” principles of
historical materialism, while at the time there is a steady development
(we are not talking here about progressive development) of the so-
called capitalist world, guided by “unscientific” ideology. If we judge
the cultural and historical process of socialism as outlookers, then it
turns out that someone deliberately led the scientifically-guided
community to the fatal end.
Thus, the philosophy of the former Soviet Union could not
conduct an objective analysis of the current social practices, to
formulate recommendations for the correction of the political course
of the country. Z. Brzezinski not accidently in the article “The Cold
War and Its Consequences” called strengthening of the crisis in
philosophy over the 1979 -1991 period one of the main reasons for
the defeat of the USSR in the ideological confrontation to the
West34. And this is true, because in theory for all the years of
34См.:Константы //Альманах социальных исследований. – Херсон: МГНПП
“Взаимодействие”,1994. – Т.1. – №2. -С. 16.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
60
practical construction of socialism “Soviet philosophical thought did
not managed to put forward a single solid idea, which would play a
revolutionary role in the development of natural, technical and
social sciences"35.
Secondly, we feel that time has come to move from totalitarian
ideologies that serve as a justification for murder, to building
ideology. It is well known that even in Pascal “Provincial letters”
indignant casuistry of the Jesuits, permitted the killing contrary to
the Christian commandment “Thou shalt not kill.” And on the tables
of the twentieth century it was written just the opposite – “Kill”.
Camus in “Revolt of Man” traces the genealogy of this maxim of
modern ideologies. Over the past three and a half millennia the
entire civilized world has lived without war only 230 years.
The ideology of militant materialism is inherently aggressive,
because it requires to reshape the social life in favor of a class, even
if the class of workers. It’s not much different from the desire to
reshape it in the interests of any nation or party. Two world wars
thunders – a clear confirmation. Today mankind is more than ever
employing self-destruction on a planetary scale. Ghost of a third
world war even if somewhat faded after the crisis of the late 80’s –
early 90’s of this century, but has not yet disappeared.
On the basis of these two considerations or limitations, since it
can be regarded as constraints, we have formulated a method of
operating a theoretical material available to provide implementation
of the general objectives of the study – to explain the social life of a
planetary humanity.
So, we endeavoring by means of philosophical tools to transcend in
the XXI-st century should break through new technology. For this it is
necessary we should move from the ideology of destruction to the
ideology of creation. It should be started from the most important thing,
from the search of the ideology based on a new world view approach to
35Орлов В.В. Какой должна стать философская наука? //Диалектический
материализм: вчера, сегодня ,завтра/ Материалы Всесоюз.конф. /.-М.: Моск. отд-
ние филос.о-ва СССР, 1989. – С. 10.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
61
the comprehension of the world we live in. Proceeding from the
technocratic to the information type of development it is reasonable to
count on noospheric and even, probably, on a cosmic by character
ideology. The degree of scientific quality of any of cultivated ideology is
determined by its connection with civilization which defines the
principle life tendencies of planetary humanity. And nothing terrible will
happen in case we are not able to solve the problem completely. It is a
radical change in the mode of thinking of philosophers and scientists
who define the character and structure of spiritual production of epoch
that is important. Others will go further, will be more fearless and will
achieve more.
But, first of all, the essence of ideology as a tool of
comprehension as well as a tool of transformation of social life
should be established. As M. Mamardashvili rightly admitted:
“Marx’s way of analysis suggests that ideological production is
always some rationalization of complete spiritual products of social
relations (that is to say, products beyond and independent from
activities of rational scientific thought) provided by outward means
of “knowledge”, employment of rational procedures as means of
comprehension and appropriation of these products by individuals
who in this way are being integrated in social system. But if these
means are “rational” in bourgeois society (that is to say, always
inverted to capacity to make judgments by anatomized individuals),
than in other historic epochs these means can be means of animistic,
mythological, religious and other systems"36.
Such definition of ideology of investigation proceeds from the
fact that we consider the main function of ideological relations
involved in a sphere of spiritual production as being analogical to
one of the economical relations in sphere of material production.
This idea has been already recorded in existing literature.
Particularly, O. Bohdanov underlining organizing principle of
36Мамардашвили
М.К. К
вопросу
о
материалистической
схеме
анализа
сознания (по работам К.Маркса) //Социальная природа сознания. -Вып.1. –
М.,1973,-С. 33-34.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
62
ideology and defining its place in the life of society wrote the
following: “These are organizing forms for all practice of society, or
what is the same, they are its organizational instruments”. They
indeed are defined in its development by conditions and relations of
production (spiritual is among them V.B.), however, not only as
their superstructures but as forms organizing some content, which
are defined by this content, and adjusting to it"37.
In the collective work Spiritual Production the following proof
of organizing role of ideology for investigation is found, ” It is not
simply the consciousness (it is produced by all individuals
spontaneously included in material process) that is formed, but its
special social – “secondary” , “ideologizied” – form, by means of it
individuals” are being integrated in social system” system"38.
It is clear, that in our case ideas that constitute the content of
social and natural science are being integrated in a system to enrich
arsenal of social philosophy. In derivative variant the point can be
some the semantic material or senses creating the semantic
continuum. There is no urgent need to dwell in details on the role of
ideology for organization of mental activity of researcher, because
all those regulations K. Marx wrote about in German Ideology,
expand to it with a slight difference that not all practical and
transforming activities of the man but specific philosophical
thinking constitutes that its subject.
A principle function of ideology of investigation is that it de
facto is a relevant the Semantic filter through which all richness
of ideas have been accumulated by the end of the XX-th century by
the world social thought on issues of social life of people should be
filtered.
V. 
Nalimov 
emphasizes 
this 
aspect 
of 
process 
of
comprehension; he notes: “Development of culture as well as
37Богданов А.А. Всеобщая организационная наука. Тектология.-М.,1989. – Ч.1.
– С. 135.
38Духовное
производство:
Социально-философский
аспект
проблемы
духовной деятельности. – М.: Наука,1981. – С. 142.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
63
science is again and again endless filtering of new ideas through
paradigmatic conception generated by senses of the past. And if
filters are incapable of evolving along with the form, which soften
their rigidness, than their revolution rejection takes place. In history
of Western Christianity it is religious and ideological wars and
revolutions, in science – revolutional change of paradigm so
perfectly described by Kun"39.
So, because in the process of deepening of comprehension it is not
the entry content of the social world but the filter, it is being analyzed
through, that changes, to gain a new image it is necessary that
qualitatively different ideological directives should be employed.
The more radical difference between the filters, the more
contrast received product. In this connection sometimes in particular
cases the texts formed by the investigators of one and the same
processes seem to be incomparable with each other. For example, it
is true concerning the scientific and theological comprehension of
the world. The idea that plays the role of the semantic filter and
constitutes the epistemological set of instruments of research gains a
new quality and consequently should be termed for sure as
ideologema. The leading idiologema of this research consists in
that social organism is a field form of life, proceeding in an
organismic form. In addition, it is a specific part of the universum,
substance transformed in information, more precisely in knowledge
due to attributive properties of man.
It becomes clear that spread enough directive focused at
deideologization of social, political, and other investigations is quite
absurd. Principally, it is not possible to examine even the smallest
problem without the employment of the particular semantic filters,
since we will be lacking the criterion of selection and ordering of
the information under investigation.
In connection to above given it is reasonable to study ideology
as a moment bringing to order not only naive but also scientific
39См.:Налимов В.В., Дрогалина Ж.А. Реальность нереального. Вероятностная
модель бессознательного. – М.: Издательство “МИРИДЕЙ”, АОАКРОН, 1995. – С. 42.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
64
consciousness. We do not discover anything new here because we
are talking about the methodological function of ideology.
Therefore, ideology as a set of instruments of investigation, to our
mind, is effective way of rationalization of philosophic ideas within
which the real social connections between people and phenomenon
have been perfectly fixed. It can be said, that in the process of
investigation we should transform the real social phenomenon
being, since it brings about the pressure over people and is felt by
people, into the form of knowledge. K. Marx and F. Engels in
German Ideology wrote: “Relations in jurisprudence, policy, etc. –
in consciousness – turn into notions”.40
In other words in the process of investigation we have to
produce in an ideal form a definite system of really existing
relations. The only relation the scholars recognize is “man”-to-
himself attitude and that is why for them all realistic relations turn
into ideas”. In addition, more precise definition of relation as the
one “that philosophers call idea” is given. So, we should select
special methodological means, more universal than usual
methodological instruments, to be able by employing it purposely
and rationally transform the ensemble of social relations fixed by
naive and scientific consciousness in a form of the idea of the social
organism. As we can see the necessity of elaboration of special
ideology of investigation is not our caprice but a rigid demand of
technology of spiritual production.
The ideology of investigation, as any other system, consists of
particular set of elements. And it seems to us it should include at
least four ideologems. We mean four semantic filters to research
different 
aspects 
of 
chosen 
problem:
worldview, 
logic,
epistemological and ontological.
In fact, we have already though partially accomplished
formation of ideology of investigation, since above given outlook
directive towards one in two content of foundation of the universum
40См.:Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. -Соч. -2-е изд. – Т. 3. – С.100.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
65
is nothing but the outlook ideologema. Next, the necessity to point
out the semantic filter in the field of the logical analysis of the
problem arises. The thing is that by means of the logic ideologema
the pack “materialistic-spiritual” in the most extraordinary.
modifications of the Universal forms should be discovered. The
same should be discovered also within the structure of the social
body. It seems to us that at macrolevel, where the second nature is
developed, in subjective form, the spiritual component has
penetrated and has frozen in a field of the material world in a form
of technology; however, the materialistic component has been trying
to penetrate the spiritual sphere in a way of the artificial intellect.
The search of epistemological filter proceeds from the outlook
standpoint taken earlier, which leads us to the search for a new
ideologema in ordering the material under consideration. We
connect this search with the dialectical method of analysis of the
social form of the Universe motion.
However, we are not pleased with the subjective dialectics which
was masterly developed and left to us by G. Hegel; simply because it is
effective for the studying of the regulations of manifestation of nothing
but the spiritual component of the world generating substance. The
same reason explains why we do not find satisfaction in the objective
dialectics, which we have inherited from K. Marx, F. Engels, V. Lenin
and which was brought to primitive linearity by their “faithful”
followers, because it reveals the regularities of manifestation of
nothing, but the materialistic component of the Universe foundation.
After all, V. Lenin happened to be right writing, “dialectics is by itself
the theory of comprehension of (Hegel and) marxism …”41.
The ontological filter consists in the following: the original
substance of the social life of people is defined as the quantum
vacuum possessing the quantum-wave nature that provides quite
specific forms of spreading in the Cosmos and existence in
condition of the Earth.
41ЛенинВ.И. Полн. собр.соч.-Т.29.-С.321.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
66
In short, we cannot proceed to the investigation of chosen topic
unless we use some different from existing, even dialectical,
ideological approaches. The conceptualization of the problem from
the standpoint of any of existing ideological approaches, regardless
of the thesis about the dichotonomeous foundation of the world,
means joining to the dominating ideology with the aim surely to fail
the solution of the most complex problem of modern social
philosophy.
Presently being in the condition of ideological vacuum we are
enforced to take a risk and to formulate a specific ideological
directive to study the logics of social reality that has revolved. We
completely understand that it should dwell upon strong aspects of
Hegel and Marx’ teaching overcoming at the same time their main
shortcoming – monism. That is why we introduce the working type
of hypothesis: to achieve the main aim of the research, the most
appropriate way of organization of informational material should be
other than the uncritical one, proceeding within the framework of
Hegelian and Marxist teaching, that is to say, subjective and
objective dialectics; but tracing of mutation of the world generating
substance from the standpoint of such dialectics, which takes into
consideration the inter-supplementation of the above named
approaches within the contradictory in itself organic wholeness.
Such epistemological ideologema, to our mind, allows us to
reveal logical interrelations and intertransition of the material and
spiritual one not just at the level of the macro world but through
self-evolving of the origin substance at the micro and mega levels.
In such connection the ideological aspect of researcher’s
activity grows in a purpose driven employment of above listed
semantic filters (ideologems) as the means of comprehension and
mastering of the products of the past philosophic and scientific
work, which with the aid of the rational procedures, are being
integrated in the qualitatively new system of social philosophy, and
after this in a theory of noosociogenesis. It is obvious that synthesis
of ideas, gained by different schools and trends, into the organic

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
67
wholeness is perspective and will be typical for the development of
philosophy and science of the XXI-st century.
Thus, taking into consideration all above given, ideology of
investigation can be defined as the purposefully constructed system
of the semantic filters, ideologemas that organize our research
activities in a process of conceptualization the spiritual inheritage of
the past in the light of the concept of social organism. By the
“spiritual production” in this context we mean the broad sense of
this term, “all activity of people focused on production, exchange,
distribution, and consuming of spiritual values"42.
It is this kind of production in which cultural relations play the
same system-forming role as production in the sphere of material
production.
It is important to see that the ideology of this study requires a
synthesis of materialism and idealism in the organic unity. We were
led to such idea by the complexity of the problems that must be
addressed to optimize the social life of a planetary humanity. And in
general, apparently, the synthesis of ideas of different schools of
developments and trends in the organic unity is promising and will
be characteristic of the development of philosophy and science of
the twenty-first century.
To continue the study of the social organism, it is necessary to
select the methodological means of converting a raw material and to
present them in the form of cognitive-instrumental complex. This is,
actually, what is the next on our agenda here.
42БоголюбоваЕ.В.Культураиобщество. – М.,1978.- С.209

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
68
1.3. The cognitive-instrumental complex of
methodological means of the social world
comprehension study
1.3.1. The instrumental complex general
characteristic
For productive study of the phenomenon of our special interest,
such means of epistemological analysis should be obtained which
would allow us to study noosociogenesis as a peak of evolution of
the universum within the framework of our Universe.
The letter statement is based on the fact that evolution begins as
cosmogenesis, with the emergence of the living substance, it
proceeds to biogenesis, with emerge of a human being it transcends
to anthropogenesis, with the emerge of the society it transcends to
noosociogenesis.
The thing is that depression in the world philosophical thought
caused the stagnation of conceptual apparatus of philosophy and
science. It is confirmed by the fact that the categorical apparatus of a
particular native or foreign philosophy doesn’t reflect coherently
processes taking place within the framework of our Universe. This
accounts for researchers’ incapability to embrace and analyze
coherently social phenomenon as inalienable constituent of
noocosmogenesis.
The synthesis as we believe and as it was recognized earlier is
supposed to take place on the base of integration of Hegel’s Science
of Logic that reflects laws of cognitive activities of the subject of
comprehension and Marxist teaching about social processes.
Logically that the science of logics likewise the materialistic
teaching comes to realization due to theory of reflection, fixes its
object in the epistemological processes and categories.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
69
We are lacking the possibility to dwell in depth on evaluation of
the condition of the most significant means of comprehension that
are found in arsenal of both sides and all the more to have a
comparative analysis of their heuristic possibilities. We will
speculate only over a key moment. The thing is that in selection of
the apparatus of philosophic analysis, we base ourselves on the
general in the social domain, that is to say, on well recognized laws
of dialectics, however, principles of the letter are considered as the
mechanism of the practical application of the former to the social
reality.
A very common truth is that of thinking that any axiomatical
means does proceed from a notion. It is important to bear in mind
that under notion we mean the thought, which reflects in generalized
form the objects and phenomenon of reality, as well as relations
between them by fixing the general and specific attributes –
properties of objects and phenomenon and relations between them.
However, notions turned to play a different role in the process
of investigation. To be able to discern them it is necessary to reveal
the mechanism of heuristic triggering of notions. It operates, as it is
known, through the juxtaposition of noumenonal unities – senses,
fixed in notions. Since the mechanism of operation of notions is
based on the contrasting the senses fixed within them, then
outwardly it performs as language. Due to the language spiritual
world finds its self-manifestation in the objective reality. The
language materializing generates text. That is why learning about
the social organism can be started from any notion. The main thing
is to sense their hierarchy.
As we have mentioned, in our case the notion “language” is a
complex one, since we are talking about language used for
conceptualization of both irrational and rational realities.
Simultaneously they irrational and rational languages are supposed
to supplement each other, to make comparison of results of
investigation of macro-level with results of macrolevel investigation
possible. It is the motion of the notions in philosophic investigation

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
70
that constitutes the essence of the letter one, since logics underlying
such new system of notions is going to reflect the logics of self-
evolving of the social world.
It turns out that in the course of the study some concepts some
notions turn to be the notions to comprehend, other turn to be the
instruments for comprehension. Function, which a particular notion
is endowed with in the process of comprehension of a phenomenon
at any level of philosophical analysis, is, to our mind, a criterion of
their discernment.
In a course of investigation of the social phenomenon three
levels can be defined: general philosophical theoretical level, special
theoretical level (social philosophy), and special scientific or
“empirical” level (social and natural sciences).
At the theoretical level, for instance, the essence, structure,
dynamics of the social world are studied and defined in the most
general form. Mastering the most general issues of the social
phenomenon philosophers elaborate theoretical, methodological,
worldview, ethical, value and ideological aspects. The problem of the
social organism is not represented as the independent one. Social world
is still a constituent of some general scientific picture of the world.
Obviously it is at the second level, that is to say, at social
philosophy, that the explanation of a field form of life is given a
particular emphasis, because it is here, where the structural and
dynamic aspects of the social phenomenon in different domains of
its manifestation are determined and the knowledge of special
sciences is systemically generalized. Within the same framework,
interdisciplinary investigation of the social form of the motion of the
universum is being conducted. Undoubtedly there is an inner link
between the evidences about social phenomenon received by
different sciences.
But it doesn’t mean that the general theoretical comprehension
of the category “social world” is simply a sum of its particular
aspects. It’s far from it. Theoretical concept is never formed by
means of combining the fragments of different thoughts, or as a sum

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
71
of the theoretical waste products of the study of both the one and the
other its levels. It is always the product of pain taking theoretical
work, in which speculations, observations, and conclusions of much
higher level seem to be alloyed and reinterpreted in a context of a
new vision.
Precise and profound logic study of the concept of social world
as a field form of life is the foundation and essence of the
philosophic aspect of the problem. It is the force, the analysis of
notion, that makes the most profound impact on science, including
social studies. G. Hegel confirms this idea; he answering the
question “What is the notion of philosophy?” says, that for in this
science the peculiar characteristic is that its Notion forms the
beginning in appearance merely, and it is only the whole treatment
of the science that is the proof, and indeed we may say the finding
of its Notion; and this is really a result of that treatment.
At the special scientific level empirical investigations of
different concrete – scientific aspects of social phenomenon takes
place. By this we mean sociological, political-economical,
politological, acciological, ecological, pedagogical, psychological,
and other aspects of social organism which, in their turn, are being
dismembered and concretized.
The fact that theoretical knowledge, gained in the process of the
development of social and natural sciences, for example, sociology
and physiology of biological organisms presents the “empiric
level”, is the distinctive characteristic of the present study.
Many researchers point out the difference in the above-named
levels. But relation between the possibilities of philosophic
comprehension of the field forms of life and sociologic approach,
within the framework of which the social being is studied by
methods inherent to sociologic methodology, should not be
confused. E. Durkheim writes, that as long as sociologist stay under
influence of philosophy he will study social phenomena only from
the most general side, from the one they resemble other phenomena
of the Universe the most of all. Though in such condition sociology

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
72
is capable of illustrating philosophic premises by interesting facts,
it cannot enrich them with new views, since it is not discovering in
reality, if basic facts of other branches are also discovered in a
sphere of social phenomena, they are of some specific form that
makes their nature more comprehensible, because they are the
highest level of its expression. The only thing, to be able to see it
from this very side, we should go beyond the limits of general
premises; go to detailed study of the facts. Thus, sociology by its
own specializing, will be providing more special material for
philosophic speculations"43.
Unfortunately, we still are lacking the material accumulated by
natural sciences and needed for the elaboration of the concept of a
field form of human life. It is connected with the fact that natural
sciences cannot begin the study of the phenomenon of social
phenomena, because a scientist – naturalist cannot begin elaboration
of this phenomenon unless he discovers its elementary particle
substance performing as a bearer constituting social body. Though,
it should be noted, that its search continues unceasingly and since
recently has been considerably intensified.
For scientist – naturalist the phenomenon of the social field
should arise as the natural body existing in the “space-time”
continuum. Otherwise, contrary to philosopher or sociologist,
scientist – naturalists simply cannot continue his work, cannot
remain within a scientific paradigm. To achieve his specific goals he
will be forced to construct a different image of social world.
Thus, to select the means of research we take into consideration
experience of employing
the categories of natural sciences,
accumulated by morphology and physiology and other special
sciences, studying the field as a special case of the universe state.
Thus, within the framework of the present investigation, the
categories of social philosophy play the role of the material, which
is being studied, and require a particular attitude, namely, the social
43Дюркгейм Э . О разделении общественного труда: метод социологии.- М.:
Наука, 1991.- С.524.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
73
facts are supposed to be studied as the thing of the field origin.
Let’s dwell upon this fact in depth taking into consideration its
crucial importance for the construction of the research procedures
and comprehension of the following deduction of the results of
investigation. In this context term “thing” should be considered as
the social fact that due to its attributive features is able to impose its
enforced pressure over the man that is acts through the field.
In other words, social phenomenon is supposed to be studied
not differently from any other object of conceptualization, which by
itself is impenetrable for human mind; by this we mean everything
relatively to which we cannot formulate adequate notion with the
aid of the common procedures of the intellectual analysis;
everything that the mind can embrace only under the condition of
surpassing its own limits by way of intellectual speculation,
consistently moving from more prevailing and more specific
towards less specific and deeper.
That is exactly what, for instance, K. Marx and F. Engels do
giving to economy as a social phenomenon some sociological
substantiation: “political economy has deal not with the things but
with the relations between people, and after all, between the classes,
but these relations are always connected to things and are
manifested as things are”44. In his turn also E. Durkheim stated that
the prime and principle rule consists in the fact, that social facts
should be studied as things in addition as things of the same rank,
the material things rank , though, with some peculiarity.
The given E. Durkheim’s statement has deep methodological
sense: it doesn’t assert that social facts are the things but proves that
they should be studied as things. He writes in above mentioned
work that in fact, the thing manifests itself through the property,
which cannot be changed by simple act of will. It doesn’t mean that
it is unchangeable. But what it does mean is that the change cannot
be obtained by the bare desire, some intensive efforts should be
44Там же.- С. 394.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
74
added to overcome the resistance of the thing, which, moreover, not
always can be overcome. Indeed, we have seen that such property is
in a character of social facts. They are not the outcome of our will,
even more, they determine it externally.They seem being the
patterns according to which we are supposed to shape our actions.
Often this necessity is so urgent that we cannot escape it. But even if
we are able to overcome it, the pressure we face testifies that we are
in the presence of something out of our control. So, considering
social phenomenon as things, we just get conformed to their nature”.
Thus, E. Durkheim leveled social facts with such facts as biological,
psychological facts of human activities referring to, as it is known,
norms, customs, beliefs, types of behavior and thinking, that is to say,
facts of collective psychology and consciousness. Social facts are
objective, they are found outside the individual, have own, independent
from man existence and compulsory for a man character; by his/her
unsubmission individual exposes himself/herself to sanctions on the part
of society. It is their mandatory character that distinguishes social facts
from social phenomena other then social facts.
Within the framework of the current investigation, general
theoretical philosophical categories jointly with the categories of
social science and terms of natural science play the role of the
means of comprehension of categories of social philosophy. Jointly
they constitute special cognitive-instrumental complex.
From philosophic aspect, to achieve the main aim of
investigation – elucidating the nature, essence, and contents of
social world – a complex of specific methodological means is
required, since philosophy doesn’t have any rights to overstep
boundaries of the notion-word.
The development and narroving the philosophic aspect of social
phenomenon consist in more elaborated and deep analysis which
discovers new staff in an old thing. Philosophic theoretical knowledge
by itself has some particular levels, differentiating by form and
content. According to form there are levels of abstraction, and
according to content there are levels of organization of social world.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
75
Such complex of methodological means is a subsidiary product of
investigation. It is necessary to reduce obvious in the phenomenon, in
which the motion of social world is revealed, to real internal motion of
the quantum vacuum world generating substance.
That “inner movement” of the phenomenon appears, as you
know, “modification” of its nature.
The categories of the general theoretical level play the role of
structurebuilding elements in the present complex; it is due to them
that social reality can undergo epistemological and ontological
analysis. The categories of social and natural sciences play the role
of intermediate, subsidiary working elements, due to which such
types of scientific analysis of social phenomenon are conducted.
Here we can decide which means should be selected and in which
combinations they can be employed in the process of investigation.
It is a common knowledge, that philosophy, science, theology, art,
and literature use the same words , and nevertheless, by organizing
them differently they achieve such different outcome.
Named complex of heuristic means should possess a number of
attributes. Let’s list the most important of them. First of all, it supposed
to represent the special form of development of conception about social
phenomenon which is formulized by theoretical notions.
It is theoretical notion that fixes empirical and theoretical
knowledge about the social world.
As it is known, the specificity and role of theoretical knowledge
consists in reflection of the essence of the subject under
consideration, in our case, the social life. Since essential relation is
interaction of contraries, essence is represented by either as
contradiction or as a system of contradictions. The comprehension
of the essence of the subject is possible not by means of elimination
of contradictions, but rather by means of the dialectical solution.
The analysis of all chain of real mediated links between opposite
moments, aspects of reality is the principle means of finding a
solution for contradiction. This principle is compulsory for any
science; it is true for domain of philosophic knowledge as well.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
76
The factological level constitutes a set of scientific facts and
descriptions which serve as a base for developing the subject of
research.
This level is being formed at empiric knowledge. Empirical
comprehension of social life reflects particular aspects and relations
of unitary and individual, taken separately as independent
phenomenon.
To sum up, factological (empirical) knowledge in domains of
economic, sociologic, politological, ideological, axiological, historical
and other generalizations fixes the variety of things and phenomenon
which as if lacking the inner ties. That is exactly what we de facto face
today. Each of phenomena is represented as an isolated, clearly
separated from all the rest, because with the aid of notion of this level
on the external aspects and relations of social objects are fixed.
The complex of the means for investigation should be capable
of revealing the internal relations; otherwise, it is impossible to
account for the mechanism of self-evolving of social life.
Secondly, complex of heuristic means is supposed to give
possibility to make complete and parametrical description of the social
world. Completeness, as G. Hegel asserts, is understood in philosophy
as the complete amount of identities belonging to a particular sphere”.
For I. Kant to describe the conception completely means the necessity
to give prime and complete exposition of notion of a thing within its
boundaries That is, as he writes in his work Critique of Pure Reason it
must be precise, and enumerate no more signs than belong to the
conception; and on primary grounds, that is to say, the limitations of
the bounds of the conception must not be deduced from other
conceptions, as in this case a proof would be necessary, and the so-
called definition would be incapable of taking its place at the bead of
all the judgments we have to form regarding a subject”45.
Thirdly, above named apparatus supposed to provide an access
to account for the nature and mechanism of vital activity of
45Кант И. Критика чистого разума.- М.:Мысль,1994. – С. 430

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
77
organism as a coherent system. The shortage of theoretical
researches on the problems of the social field is not some
insurmountable obstacle. This circumstance dictates the necessity to
begin elaboration of such theory deductively. The methodological
means of investigation seems to constitute the spiritual forms into
which social reality should be poured off. Otherwise, it is not
acceptable for theoretical thinking of a person.
1.3.2. The epistemological analysis means
A thorough examination of means of genetic analysis in this study
is due to the fact that the existing approaches to the explanation of the
origin of the social world suffer from a common drawback.
Researchers tend to be especially delicate about this moment and do
not consider it, referring to the simple fact of its generation by human
activity. This is true, in general, as the original premise of the
derivative nature or artificial origin of the second nature substantially
obscures the question of the nature, essence, content, form and manner
of functioning of its self-development. At the same time, it is well
known that the more accurate and deeper epistemologically developed
basic category of research is, the richer its results.
Heuristic capabilities allow the genetic analysis to clarify its
basic function in this study. It seems that in this case it is to explain
the genesis of social reality, based on the natural process of self-
unfolding of the universe. In this sense universe serves as the
organizational form of the harmonization of the coexistence of
several types of worlds: the physical, spiritual, social and otherwise,
if such already exist or arise later in the cosmos.
To be able to select the means of the genetic analysis, it is
important 
we 
should 
proceed
from 
several 
significant

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
78
methodological speculations. First of them proceeds from the fact
that widely known philosophic categories – essence, content, form
of social world – fulfill fixed in philosophic investigation functions,
that is why there is no point to dwell on them. Nothing can be
accounted for without them.
The second speculation of the same kind comes out from
selected by the author, and underlying the foundation of the present
one unity of the substantial foundation of the Universe requires from
outlook credo of a researcher some coherent approach to selection
of the means of the social reality genetic analysis. It means that to
make the analysis of such type appropriately, means for its
accomplishment should be selected from the arsenal of both the
materialistic and idealistic trends of the world philosophic thought,
and then they should be integrated in the organic system.
Suggested operation is not a new one. The researchers who
belong to mentioned contrary trends, have been actively
implementing the same means of the genetic analysis. The only
thing they differ in is directive concerning the subject and
course of investigation, and also in secondary, in regard to taken
ideological standpoint, means of interpretation of its outcome. In
our conception syntheses should take place on the basis of
integration of Hegel’s Science of Logic which elicits the laws of
mental activity of a subject of conceptualization, and Marxist’s
teaching about the materialistic foundation of the social processes. It
is principally permissible, because science of logics leads to
practice as well as the materialistic teaching which also (but only
due to the materialistic theory of reflection) fixes its object in
epistemological structures and categories.
The third methodological speculation consists in the fact that quality
and quantity of the epistemological means of investigation are defined
by the necessity to have rather representative by size and profundity of
the outcome for the comprehension of the ontological and evolutional
aspects of the problem under consideration, since they are the keys to the
following morphological, functional and dialectical analysis.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
79
The theory of origin and evolution of a social world should
have the statute of philosophic reflexion. It means that it supposed
to account for social reality, regardless of where the latter
emerges, and regardless of its possible functions which it may
obtain in the process of unfolding of the Universe, broader of the
universum at any point of the Galaxy.
That is why we can set out the theoretical investigation of the
social organism beginning from the philosophical idea, which is a
realized identity of the material and spiritual reality or
comprehended consolidation of their form and content known under
the name of social phenomenon. The confirmation of this thesis we
find in Hegel who emphasizes that reality which the Idea gains as
natural life is on this account a reality that appears. Appearance, that
is to say, means simply that there is some reality which, instead of
having its being immediately in itself, is posited negatively in its
existence. However, negation of immediate externally existing
members like the activity of idealization comprises more than mere
negative relation; on the contrary, affirmative being for self is
present in this negation at the same time”46.
So, goal of philosophy is to elicit the social ”in external
existence”, and not merely elicit but to exhibit its “activity” in this
world, that is to say, to trace transformation of actual being existing in
a field form and mutating under the influence of process of
spontaneous self-evolving of the fundamental substance of the
Universe.
Therefore, the social world which can be accounted for only
under the condition that visible merely in phenomenon motion,
coming forward in the phenomenon, will be reduced to an actual
inner motion of the fundamental substance, that is to say, to the
universum. Such “internal motion”, as it is known, is nothing but the
“modification” of its nature. In this connection, the pivot of genetic
analysis of the problem under consideration consists in clarification
46ГегельГ. Эстетика. В 4-х томах. – М.: Искусство,1968. – Т.1. – С. 131

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
80
of the way of transformation of the initial substance or so-called
prime nature into the second one and after that, the logical
transformation of the latter into the third nature.
Moreover, the nature of social phenomenon should: first of all,
logically proceed from the prime one; secondly, be unitary with it;
and thirdly, possess its own face. It means the following: if
nowadays
the world science has proved to everyone that
phenomenon in reference to prime nature, for instance, physical or
chemical links, have the quantum-wave foundation, than the nature
of social relations is supposed to have the same attributive
characteristic.
The peculiarity of the epistemological analysis consists in the
following: it is supposed to be fulfilled with the aid of the irrational
means, since the generation of social world is a process hidden from
researchers’ eyes – it is not possible to model it, find analogues in the
macro world or give other examples. The analysis of a named type
should be conducted in such way, that to disclose what is accounted for
in science with the help of the latent functions, and then to construct
upon it the process of explanation of phenomenon at the macro-level.
In this case, only owing to intuition and trained sense of investigator’s
“unreasonable logic” some positive result can be achieved.
“Self-organization as the notion” carries a main load in a course
of the epistemological analysis of social phenomenon.
Thanks to it only, the attempt can be taken to reproduce the
process of generating a second nature. The degree of complexity of
the case can be judged by the difficulties encountered by
researchers, such as Prigozhin’s school, in explaining the means of
generating synergy of the physical world.
The category of “self-organization” concerning the processes
taking place in the second nature is a novel one for the native school
of social philosophy.
The lack of appropriate elaboration of the problem is manifested
by inadequate interpretation and definitions which are encountered
in the last Materialistic dialectics five volume set. Thus, accounting

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
81
for the cybernetic concept “self – organization” authors assert that
the “internal ties and contradictions in material systems “are the
source of self-motion and that the external ties are only “the
condition of the self-motion realization"47.
The same authors underline the role of immanent factors in
organization of the system, “The concept of self-organization
proceeds from the philosophical principle about the inner resources
of development of substance, that allows displaying dominating role
of inner contradictions, which are found in a particular congruity
with some external regularities. In another words, such
interpretation of self – organization reveals the inner mechanism
and inner reasons of self -motion of the material objects which
belong to self – organizing systems”48.
The authors give a definition of self-organization: “Self-
organization refers to the ability of the system to stabilize some of
the parameters by means of a streamlining of its structural and
functional relationships, in order to counter entropy environmental
factors.” So in the foreground, there are the external influences. But,
nevertheless, is it possible to reduce the essence of self-organization
only to the parameters stabilization? Where are the selection and
accumulation of information, improving the reliability and
survivability of the system, its further development, which leads to
self-improved system, to the emergence of new structures and self-
organization? This is the basis for explaining the generation by
social organism other organisms.
In
Philosophical Encyclopedical Dictionary
(1989) such
definition can be found, “Self-organization is the process in a course
of which organization of complex dynamic system is being formed,
reproduced or improved. Processes of self-organization may take
place only in systems which are notable for high degree of
complexity and big number of elements, ties between which have
47См.:
Материалистическая
диалектика.
В 
5т. 
/Под
общ
.ред.
Ф.В.Константинова, В.Г.Марахова. – М.: Мысль,1983. – Т.3. – С. 160-163.
48Там же. – С. 160-163

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
82
not rigid but probabilistic character. The peculiar feature of the
processes of self – organization consists in their purpose-driven, and
along with it natural, spontaneous character: these processes, taking
place under the condition of interaction with environment, are to
some 
degree 
autonomous 
relatively 
independent 
from
environment"49.
The analysis of key words of above given definition proves that
the process of self – organization of the social world is complicated,
and to both the one and the other degree conscious, even if one can
always speak about the presence of strictly clear realization within it,
one should always speak about its inevitable though in the super-weak
forms of its manifestation presence, which can be defined as the quasi-
consciousness, probabilistic or precarious which can be expressed in
mathematical expressions, according A. Kolmahorov, as maximal
complexity; spontaneous, that is to say, that is characterized by
unpredictable change of their parameters. In another words, the social
field self-organization is the process of free game of intellectual forces
resisting submission to a rigid determination on the part of both the
substantial foundation and environment.
Self-organization, 
the 
most 
important 
philosophical
characteristic 
of 
social 
phenomenon, 
is 
the 
domain 
of
comprehension in which needs and achievements of practice are left
far behind their theoretical conceptualization. The problems of self –
organization have not received elaboration yet , if not to take in
consideration works of L. Petrushenko published back in 70s, who
wrote: “Philosophical problem of substance self – motion is poorly
elaborated, though it is one of the pivotal problems of dialectical
materialistic philosophy.
Without its elucidation proper investigation of the problem of
the self – motion and understanding of objective connection of the
latter one with systematicity and orderliness is not possible"50.
49Философский словарь. – М.:Политиздат,1989. -С. 591
50Петрушенко
Л.А.
Единство
системности,
организованности
и
самодвижения.-М.:Мысль,1975. – С. 146

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
83
However, postulated by L. Petrushenko ideas didn’t found their
reflection in the conceptual apparatus of philosophy of 80–90s of
the XX-th century.
In the light of “underinvestigation” of dialectics law the rest of
philosophy categories have not been developed properly. This fact
doesn’t give an opportunity to investigate social realities today.
Among the insufficiently developed categories, in the first instance,
such categories as “a part” and “a whole”, “simple” and “complex”,
“lower” and “higher” and some others should be mentioned.
Substituted by prevalent intuitive conceptions these categories have
been kept apparently in the background of late years and have not
been attracting attention of logic and methodology of science.
To connect together theoretically the first and the second nature
becomes possible only with the help of the mediation process, but
for this purpose a special mediator is necessary, which is able to
realize the mentioned procedure with the help of theoretical means.
Thus, to prove theoretically the unity and singularities of the first
and the second nature, it is necessary to find particular universal
means within our realities or even a complex of specific intellectual
implements of such mediation. Provided such theoretical means is
found, it will be possible to increase the efficiency of social
phenomenon genetic analysis. Hegel, for instance, says that the
mean term – mediation – makes up the nerve of the argument, that is
why there is only something, in which this connection reveals itself
and where it becomes external"51. Elsewhere he defined mediation
“as parity to itself being in motion”.
Taking into account the large scale of the first and the second
nature, we may admit it acceptable to be a searched moment of
mediation only such process as life, and admit the category “life”
as the means of mediation. But in such case life also should be
defined by means of the unity of material and spiritual as the
principle reason of the Universe origin. As mentioned above, the
51ГегельГ. Наука логики. – М.:Мысль,1972.-Т. 3. -С. 275.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
84
social realities are the product of the people’s vital activity. This fact
makes it possible to consider the life to be the mediation process of
transformation of the first nature into the second one, and the human
organism as the implement of mediation. But this doesn’t denote
that the means of mediation may be such simple process as
psychogenesis!
For all that the temporary character of the existence of
mediation means should be mentioned there and then. For mediation
as the means should be used for the purpose of the Universe self-
development and it is its direct mission to be consumed, used
unreversibly for this particular purpose mentioned above. It is
known, that any means should be thrown away after gaining the
ultimate aim. From this we may explain the finiteness or lethality of
the human organism, for any means of mediation have temporary
character.
The content of the mediation process lies in the subjectification
of the first nature into the structure of the human organism, and after
this in the objectification of just subjectificated content into the
second nature. In practice it denotes, that the first nature may be
considered to be the objective base of the social organism. The
reverse movement is also possible, i.e. from objectificated second
nature to subjectification it into the first nature, i.e. into the human
organism. We explain this by the universality of attributive features
of the human as an agent of the mediation process.
That is why before the beginning of further study of the process
of transformation of the first nature into the social realities, we have
to define more accurately such notions as “subjectificated” and
“objectificated” to comprehend the central category of the thesis
and to show their connection with such notions as “objective” and
“subjective”.
In the process of investigation we understand “objective” as
everything, 
existing 
beyond 
individual 
consciousness 
and
independently of it, and “subjective” as everything, coming through
the consciousness and existing in it in the form of subjectificated

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
85
content of the objective. Though, if the notions “the objective” and
“the subjective” are the most general levels of human nature, then
the categories “the objectificated” and “the subjectificated”
describe the process of interpenetration of these levels.
Both, the subjectificated and the objectificated have a general
objective content, the basic substance of the social world, the first
nature. In the mediation processes under consideration the first
nature, subjectificated by the man is transformed into the
objectificated form and exists furter in the form of the smallest
indivisible parts (the morphs) of the social body. Further on the
morph has its independent destiny, which is described by the
regularities of morphogenesis. But if the subjectificated content is
transformed into the objectificated form, then the reverse
transformation will be possible and even necessary, as far as this is
the formation of species of one and the same universum. In these
particular interconversions the seamless unity of not only
ontological but also of functional aspects of the first and the second
nature is formed.
Dialectical integrity of the objectified and the subjective
material, of course, involves the well-known differences between
them and between their structural elements. So here we have to look
for the difference between subjectivized and objectified forms, both
the first and second natures during all subsequent logical analysis.
In order to reproduce the process of creation of the
subjectificated and the objectificated material theoretically, it is
necessary to have a special means – the procedure of formation of
the social process. It is known that in the instrumental complex of
investigation this procedure of formation was widely used by Hegel
as an effective methodological means in order to explain the
begetting of the first nature phenomena.
Firstly, the formative process of the social world is a universal,
substantia land total, its internal process and, therefore, it has only
what already exists in nature, therefore, is nothing new in it what is
no longer there. For us, this observation is extremely important.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
86
Structurally it is divided into three relatively independent
processes:
a) interaction with the environment, nature; b) interaction inside
of the body; c) the generic process as the interaction between the
first and second. If a generic process is considered in relation to the
man, a body acts in this moment as a target and a means, it has the
action of realisation. External product is necessary at this only in
order the body could get together and come back again to self-
production.52
Secondly, social world itself only exists as reproducing itself,
with its functional elements working against each other, thereby
serving each other; they exist only in interaction with each other.
These results in the destruction of consumed, its relegation to lower
forms; at this, its converting is done through transformation into
opposition, and it has certain limits. During the formation the
decomposition of its unity into three sub-processes takes place; each
of the three creates own product. They must be distinguished by the
number of processes: a) for purely internal consumption; b) to be
used externally; c) as a neutral one to be ejected into the
environment.
Thirdly, the social life is organized and supported only upon
external products. This process should be carried out continuously
as an organic part of the micro-, macro- and mega processes. In this
regard, for effective explanation of the origin and nature of the
social phenomenon, it is necessary to resort to the laws of synergy.
But today, at last, we have come to the understanding of the world
not only as a project, that can be ’estimated’ according to
elementary laws of linear perspective and foresee everything up to
the end (Plato-Hegel-Marx tradition), to the ultimate ’radiant’ aim
(for example, Hegel Prussian state, Marx’s communism), but as the
global system, which generates itself and exists exclusively
according to the nonlinear laws. Such approach to the investigation
52Гегель
Г.Энциклопедия
философских
наук.-Т.2.
Философия
природы.-
М.:Мысль,1975. – С. 444; 466 и др.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
87
of the social world along with the system approach and the principle
of historism approved itself in physics, chemistry, biology,
technology, showing on numerous examples, that one of its most
essential features is its nonlinearity.
This is largely contributed by the science of synergetic,
conceptually established by the mid-80th of this century; it revealed
the versatility of moment of self-generating of various elements of
our reality of the substantial base of the universe. I. Prigozhin’s
works on the theory of irreversible processes in open non-
equilibrium systems led to the award of the Nobel Prize in 1977 in
Chemistry. In these works, in contrast to the cybernetics, the
emphasis is not on the control processes and the exchange of
information, not on functioning of the system but on its structure, on
the principles of building the organization under the terms of its
origin, development and self-complication.
If the synergetic rules are applied to the processes of social life,
here you can investigate the peculiar states of the complex systems,
being in unsteady equilibrium, to be more precise – the dynamics of
their self-organization next to the bifurcation point, when even
slight effect may result in unexpected, swift (“snowballing”)
development of the process.
But one should see essential peculiarities in the character of the
self-generating processes or of the form creation in the first and in
the second nature. The essence of such peculiarity lies in the fact,
that “the order comes from the order” in the second nature, as far as
the human activity, being based on his thinking, is a unique
nongenetropic process.
In characterizing of self-generating process of the social
organism the notion of chaos, which often is regarded as both: as the
initial and as the ultimate point of the universum eternal self-
motion, gains an important value. A modern interpretation of the
term “chaos” is significantly different from the conventional
understanding of the chaos as the maximum entropy. In synergy, for
example, the chaos is associated with the concept of randomness,

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
88
with a chaotic variety of fluctuations in a complex system, chaotic
variations of some parameters. At the heart of this chaos might be
the active principle, and in certain circumstances even a single
deviation, low impact of a parameter can become essential for
macro-process: new organization can develop. It has a promising
treatment in the sense of chaos, which was given to it by A. F.
Losev.
The word “Chaos” (Gk. Chaos), in his opinion, contains the
root cha- from which such verbs derived as: chaino, chasco, which
means “yawn”, “open mouth”. Etymologically chaos, therefore,
means 
primarily”
"dehiscence”, 
“gaping 
space”, 
“empty
stretch."It is wrong, says Losev, to build this concept upon the word
cheo– “pour”, “spill”, as do the scholastics (ancient and medieval
commentators, who formed the explanations concerning obscure
places in the text – the so-called scholia). This starting point
“hiatus” in the concept of Chaos, though become complicated
almost beyond recognition by the end of the Ancient world, but is
never fully out of sight53. It contains the moment of formation, of
spontaneous motion, self-differentiation and self-organization as an
agent of chaos is still the same subject – the individual.
For example, in the condition of unstable stability of the social
environment the activity of every individual may influence the
macrosocial process. This reason explains a particular role of the
leader personality in the history. Hence, it appears the necessity of
everyone’s awareness of the enormous load of responsibility for the
fate of the whole social system, the whole community. A human
being is a source of activity. His behaviour depends on both:
conscious and subconscious instructions. The potential of an
outstanding individual may reveal in the open society, especially in
the condition of its unstable stability. The openness of the system is
a necessary but not sufficient condition for its serf-organization.
Everything depends on the relationship of the individual and the
53См. :Лосев А.Ф. История античной эстетики: В 8т.- Т.8. Итоги тысячелетнего
развития: В 2кн. – Кн.2. -.: Искусство, 1994.-С. 335.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
89
environment, on the character of the interaction and sometimes on
absurd accidents or on the awareness level of the opposed social
forces. The administrative command system, as an extremely close,
strictly determined social institution of people-cogs in the wheel,
demonstrated by all its history, what is a blind alley of the social
evolution. It extinguished the
initiative, acts of activity
(fluctuations), eradicated entrepreneurial activities, disabled itself to
choose best of the best. When the initiative is punishable, any slight
indignation falls to the same institution, to the same structure. And
nothing changes. Therefore, the experts in synergetics say, that
without the unsettleness there is no progress. Thereby the progress
realizes 
through 
unbalance, 
through
bifurcation, 
through
randomness54.
Thus, one should start the theoretical development of the social
world from the reference to the source of production of the social
material by means of reproduction of the transformation process of
the first nature into the second one by means of theoretical analysis.
The natural steps of the given analysis are more precise definition of
the origin, the essence, the content and the form of the social
phenomenon.
54См.:
Абдеев
Р.
Ф.Философия
информационной
цивилизации.
-М.:
ВЛАДОС,1994.-С. 200

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
90
CHAPTER 2.
THE EPISTEMOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
OF THE SOCIAL WORLD
2.1. The social phenomenon genesis
Explanation of genesis of the second nature assumes showing the
origin, occurrence, and in the broader sense – birth and the following
process of its development as a specific phenomenon. Moreover, it
needs to be done in the form of theoretical knowledge of the substance
that underlies the universe. It should be considered, that social
phenomenon is determined by two factors: the basis and conditions.
It is well known that the second nature appears on the planetary
scene much later than the first nature, and that it is a product of
human activity. From experience, it is known also that a man is a
product of the evolution of the first nature. In another way, we can
say that the second nature appeared as a result of converting
activities of the man who crowned the evolution of the first nature.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
91
The foregoing is not a game of terms, and the search for ways to
solve this problem, since it is clear that an explanation of the
determination of the social world is necessary. We also know that
every phenomenon is determined by two factors: the base and
conditions. At the same time the difficulty of explaining the origin
of the second nature is further complicated by the fact that today
even at least reasonable hypothesis about the mechanism of self-
unfolding intellect is lacking.
In the work “The Place and Role of Man in the Universe of
Self-movement”, we considered in detail the transformative and
mediating functions of man in the self-unfolding universe,
morphological and functional fit of the human body to the first and
second natures. From the foregoing, it can be concluded that human
is the basis of social world.
At a certain level of the organization of the universe, as a result
of natural selection occurs the “separation” of organic kind, a
human that becomes a starting point of a new namely, the social
phase of Universe movement.
55
Moreover, this pattern does not have a “local” (i.e., earthly)
value. But the subject that has the ability to transform the conditions
of their occurrence in the means of its development becomes a self-
generating entity and operates as a social subject. This explains the
uniqueness of a man as the base. In such a way, a person, as the
foundation, is inexhaustible.
In this regard, the organic subject is a starting point for the
formation of a universal (compared with the immediately preceding
it) interactions, and thus prerequisites of the social form of the
motion of macroscopic objects. And then it is just a transition state,
to resolve the contradictions of which serves the process of anthrop
social genesis that finally leads to the formation of a subject with the
55See.: Абдеев Р. Ф. Философия информационной цивилизации. – М.: ВЛАДОС,
1994. – С. 200.
See.: Амосов Н.М. Разум, человек, общество, будущее. – К.: “Байда”, 1994. -
С.34.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
92
universal flesh organization capable of really causing yourself in
reality.
The relation of substance as the grounds for everything actual-
flesh should make its own discoveries for itself. And we tend to
treat the transition of phenomenon of the biosphere into the
noosphere that way. This is explained by the fact that the substance
is the essence of self-reproducing, because of the evolution of the
world, the basis of occurrence of which it is. The kind of thinking
individuals becomes a necessary way of its self justification. That is
why to understand what man is as a natural result of self-substance,
it is possible only knowing the substance itself as a subject.
Thus, the relation of the substance as a base for the world to
itself in the form of essential result of its development is a universal
relation of reality itself, subject to which becomes a family of
thinking individuals. But then even the quantum vacuum, which is
an embodiment of flesh, and the nature of individuals are the poles
of this substantial attitude. It is not only a prerequisite for being of
the kind, but also the self of its self-development, thereby emerging
as universal: the being of individuals as thinking beings is
impossible without being caused by it. Figuratively speaking,
beyond this relation, they are nothing but when being a part of it –
everything. So being like thinking individuals means “to include” a
general relation, to be a subject of universal field.
Therefore, not a family itself is a valid integer, but its unity with
the cosmological process of its formation, in dialectical relation to
the overall structure of the evolution of the Universe and its
quantum ground. As actual flesh objects, thinking subjects
reproduce the internal contradictions of substantial relations in
themselves. In this sense family contains “cosmic code” that we
have to decipher.
Dialectical “wrap” of condition into conditional, reason into
consequence, the general into particular, base into result are a
general law of formation of integrated systems – from the social to
the cosmological. In accordance with this happens the converting of

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
93
the biological objects and forms of their interaction into the
relatively closed world of social reality that is constantly evolving.
And, in the real process of development the total raises the whole
mass of all the previous content, and not only does not lose anything
from the dialectical movement forward, does not leave anything
behind itself, but also carries everything acquired and is enriched
inside itself56.
This assumption is correct but, it seems to us, is not entirely
accurate. If to follow from the idea that the social life is a
phenomenon of a cosmic measure, then the basis generated it ought
to be of the same measure. In connection with this in the course of
genetic analysis, we ought to be extremely attentive when defining
of the grounds and conditions, which is a very difficult task.
Based on the works by V.I. Vernadsky, Pierre Teilhard de
Chardin, E.Lerua, the biota of living matter should be chosen as the
reason for the existence of the social world. Thus, it is possible to
consider that living matter is the source that generates a second
nature. The living matter contains all attribute qualities for this. We
mean its all-round and continual activity. In the history of
philosophy the activity of substance and its manifestations is
defined as “vitality”, “momentum to the movement” (Hegel), “the
active side”, “ the active ratio” between the poles of dialectical
contradiction, as “energetic, tense form, which leads to solving this
contradiction (Marx), “repulsion”, “activity of functioning”, “self-
reaction force” (Engels) “driving force” (Lenin).
Maturation of a living matter and the accumulation of its mass
on the planet leads to the fact that noospehere matures out of the
biosphere, in Greek – the sphere of reason. The term was first used
by the French philosopher and mathematician Edouard Leroy in the
lectures at the Collège de France in 1927, published at the same
time. Thus, Leroy emphasized that the concept of the noosphere
emerged because of his acquaintance with the book by Vernadsky
56Гегель Г. Наука логики. – М. : Мысль, 1972. – Т.3. – С. 306-307.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
94
“Le Geochimie”, published in Paris in 1924, and which has a
section devoted to the topic “The geochemical activity of mankind."
The thought that living matter carries the inorganic, organic and
supraorganic content at the same time is confirmed in the works of
other researchers of later time. For example, Sorokin says that
supraorganic phenomena “in expanded form are found only in the
man and civilization. Other species of the living world show only
rudimentary form of over organic”. The best definition of over
organic and extent of its spread are given by E.De Roberti, who
rightly points out that the transition from inorganic to organic, and
then to supraorganic is gradual. Wildlife has inherent rudimentary
mental processes, like irritability, sensations, feelings, emotions and
associations of images.
Category of base gives a reason to believe that the latter is
sufficient for social life to take place. On this occasion, there is a
direct indication by G.Gegel, who wrote that “the foundation is
enough to add it, in fact, is quite unnecessarily, because it is self-
evident; something for which the base would not be sufficient,
would have had no reason, and yet in fact everything should have its
own foundation».57
However, only the activity of living matter as attributive
quality, it is not enough for the social world to emerge. It is
necessary that its another fundamental quality, wisdom, be fully
experienced. In this regard a new working hypothesis seems fruitful,
according to which a wise living substance, which must contain a
sociality in the potential form, is the ground for noosphere. The
established is only that, the case here is the objective social world
that left it a ground and developed in Genesis. Then the ground
should be treated as subjective social world that exists in the
structure of living matter in a potential form.
57 Сорокин П. Человек. Цивилизация. Общество. – М.: Политиздат, 1992. – С.
156.
1 Гегель Г. Наука логики. – В 3-х т. – М.: Мысль, 1971. – Т.2. – С. 72-73.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
95
In the normal course of the process it is reasonable that living
matter must be mature in the course of evolution, but the base can
become an artificial system, say, product of alien origin – which can
be pumped with the social energy and sent as a charge into space by
highly developed mind. In other words, the base of the social world
can be Homo sapiens fiber – or creating Homo sapiens (a term
coined by the French philosopher Henri Bergson). Artificial tools
and human work, in his opinion, are the logical continuation of the
natural evolution of life on the Earth. Vernadsky applied the term to
the geological characteristics of the noosphere, since science is not
only a system of knowledge, or a manifestation of consciousness,
but something much more important as a factor of development,
environmental adaptations, and the main instrument of the reality
formation.
Thus, we clarified that particular subject in the biological sphere
that, when the contradictions between the inorganic and organic are
removed, generates superorganic or social form of existence of the
Universe as a basis. And the task of social philosophy is to reveal
the mechanism of removal of this contradiction and thus to
understand the nature of the social world as a field form of self-
development and life of macro objects.
In the work “The Place and Role of Man in the Universe of Self-
movement”, we thoroughly reviewed the morphological and functional
aspects of a person and have shown not only the ability to act as a
source of his second nature, but as the mechanism of generation of the
society. There is no need to repeat it. But there is a need to consider
separately the attributive quality of a person that provides him with the
property to be the base the social world. This means that a person must
be represented as a single force field that can create multiplied by
many-times ethnic force field, finally, the humanity.
This problem has a solution. In the course of a special analysis,
based on patterns of morphogenesis, it was shown how in the human
body matures and stably operates the system of field substructures
for its effective living as a reasonable living substance. In his

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
96
specific substructure, in return, arise, develop and stably operate
original information elements, which in the psychological literature
are called functional bodies. They occur on the basis of anatomical
and morphological organs, under the determining influence of
activity and communication. Although in the interpretation of the
latter, there is a lack of unanimity.
The fact, that everything is working as described, is proved by
psychological science. For example, V.A. Zinchenko and A.E.
Morgunov write the following: “In our domestic traditions A.
Uhthomsky, A. Bernstein, A. Leontiev, A. Zaporozhets to
functional, rather than anatomic-morphological organs added live
traffic, substantive action, the integral image of the world, attitude,
emotion, etc. In its totality, they constitute a spiritual body”58.
Here once again let’s turn our attention to the words by
E.Ilenkov that “, “as human organs of human body are transformed
into organs of human activity, emerges the very person as an
individual set of human functional organs (highlighted. – V.B.). In
this sense the occurrence of individual acts as the process of
converting of biological material by means of social reality, existing
before, outside and quite independently of the material"59
The theoretical basis for allocation of these constructs, as
functional organs of the nervous system or moving parts of the brain
are the works of a physiological nature by Ukhtomsky. They were
later reinterpreted in relation to psychology by A.V. Zaporozhets,
A.N. Leontiev, A.R. Luria and others. As an example of such bodies
Ukhtomsky pointed out, as it is known, on parabiosis and dominant
or certain functional states of the body, he characterized them as a
“integral whole”, complicated symptom complex”.
The reason causing functional organs in the human structure,
and at the same time, the result of their functioning is action. Its
58 Зинченко В.П., Моргунов Е.Б. Человек развивающийся. Очерки российской
психологии. – М.: Тривола, 1994. – С.170.
2 Там же. – С.175.
59Ильенков Э.В. Философия и культура. – М.: Политиздат, 1991. – С.397.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
97
field form is proved in the already mentioned study. It needs to be
restated that auotopoesis takes place here, i.e. organs themselves
generate themselves and support for the operation stage. That is why
the action certainly is the basic category of analysis for
psychological science. “Numerous research activities performed,
within the framework of psychological theory of activity, led to the
conclusion that it possesses generating properties. Action is a living
form, like the organic system, within which developed not only its
inherent properties, but also lacking in this system organs are
composed”60 When proving the element base of personality, we
proceeded from the fact that modern psychological science has
accumulated enough material to recreate such a system of stably
functioning new formations in the structure of a human. To do this,
we first selected the clots of semantic substance, which function in
the human body as ideas-meanings and then we arranged them in
the substructures by defining the principle of the formation of
internal substructural mechanisms. As a result, the informational
counterpart of a human was formalized. In the studied process of
morphogenesis, we consider ideas-meanings as subjects. Giving the
motive, the ideal, the setting, for example, the mandatory properties
of objectivity one can surprise many, but let us remind that A. N.
Leontiev uses complete identification: motive is an object61
It was further verified the specificity of the role of each of the
functional organs in the human life. Function of the new formation
is the physical meaning of the action, produced by a real change in
other functional organs – senses. It appeared that in the semantic
world the relation between the semantic units is exactly the same as
in the physical world, where every action has its original meaning,
and where one action affects another action and thus changes the
meaning of what is happening. In these operations lies the essence
of the mechanism of spiritual relations. The difference between the
60Гегель Г. Философия права. – М.: Мысль, 1990. – С. 56.
61См.: Зинченко В.П., Моргунов Е.Б. Человек развивающийся. Очерки
российской психологии. – М.: Тривола, 1994. – С. 94.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
98
morphological organs of the material world and the units of the
spiritual world is only that the functional bodies in one case have
almost unlimited degree of freedom. The latter is especially clearly
confirmed by ability to dream. Here reigns the free causality.
Therefore, the essence of action of functional organs is
qualitative transformation of the semantic material that transits from
one substructure to another and moves from the entrance to exit of
it. So, if one traces the change of the semantic field, it becomes
possible to see the end product of their functioning and to
understand the purpose of mechanism in human life. However, the
physics and chemistry of this process remain beyond our attention.
As a result, we have come to an understanding of a human
personality as a system of functioning organs, or to be more
specific, qualitatively different bunches of substance, which is
starting from the stage of morphogenesis, not to mention the
operation and development, in the field form.
Functional organs found in intra-personality substructure, form
an extremely complicated mechanism of generation of the second
nature. The ontological unity of the three stages of the self-
unfolding of the human body is organic in nature, as provided by
their morphological and functional link between them. This unity is
achieved through the modification and interpenetration of each other
with the help of material and spiritual substrates. It is vital to remind
that the material ingredient of the human body represented with a
chain: the physical body – the brain – system of functional organs
and the spiritual ingredient, in turn, with a chain: meanings –
knowledge – structural information.
So, a person is a field form of human life. Based on the
emergence of such a natural function a human can interact with
other people, forming amazing ensembles. Here, we agree with the
thesis by E.V. Ilyenkov that “in the body of an individual a
personality carries him/herself, develops him/herself, performs as
fundamentally different from his/her body and brain a social
creature (“essence”, namely a set (ensemble) of real, sensory-

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
99
substantive, ongoing relationships of one individual to another one
(other individuals) ”62.
Personality as a functional organ is diffused throughout the
human body and is not reducible to any of the above-mentioned
social formations, such as the brain, intellect, mind, intellect,
consciousness, self-consciousness, superconscious and others. With
the quality of the individual display of the human body becomes
more attributive property – thinking as to maintain the vital
functions of the body in the manner of the functional needs of
constant production and reproduction (or reflection) of semantic
units – the individual elements of the structure. Thus, personality is
a system feature of human organism, the leading function of which
is the inclusion of a human into the social world. Since a man’s
personal identity is a specific field, then it can only connect to the
same field or fields. These fields may occur anywhere in the
universe, and produced and maintained by extraterrestrial
intelligence. This means that the field or form of social life must
have flexibility.
In fact, the force field of the person acquiring the morphological
design and stable functioning in the structure of the human body
along with the physical body as a relatively independent whole. For
a person, in order to fit in any niche of a social field, he/she should
learn to perform a new role.
As used herein we have to recall the words by Marx that this
man is the “king” only because others refer to him as “subjects ”.
Meanwhile, the paradox here is that they themselves consider
themselves “subjects to” because he is “the king."
And a person doe this through the cultivation of the principle of
overlapping of fields: his/hers and the predictable one, such as an
occupation. E. Ilyenkov evaluated this aspect of human self-
development with following words: “A function set outside, creates
(forms) a relevant organ, necessary for its existence “morphology
62Ильенков Э.В. Философия и культура. – М.: Политиздат, 1991.- С.399.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
100
“this type, not any other type of connections between neurons, this
type, not any other type of “pictures” of their reciprocal forward and
backward linkages. Therefore, there may be any of the “figures”,
depending on which functions a human body needs to perform in
the external world, the world outside his/her skull and skin cover.
The moving “morphology” of the brain (more accurately, the crust
and its relationship with other departments) emerges exactly of that
kind that is required by an external necessity, external conditions of
human activity, a specific set of relations of an individual with other
individuals, within which this individual appeared immediately after
its introduction into the world, the “ensemble of social
connections”, which immediately turned it into a “living organ”,
immediately putting him/her in a system of relations that makes him
act so and not otherwise”.63
Let us underline another important point of explanation of the
grounds of social world.
The fact is that the personality, the essence of which, in our
opinion, is not the absorption and reflection of the ensemble of
external and objective social relations, but it is a production of own
social content that is generated and processed for admission from
outside the human body, being in syncretic, i.e. non-deployed form
as a base, and at the confluence of favorable circumstances it gets
embodied in other people or freezes in a man materialized through a
process of alienation. Personality, as a functional body caused by
another person, and directed at another person, appears (but does not
manifest oneself – E.V. Ilyenkov) in the space of “real interaction at
least two individuals linked together through things and real-
physical actions with these things”.64
The base of the social world is not a confluence of coincidences,
but it is the substantial strict constant. Otherwise, it would not
guarantee a product of just social content. Moreover, it is structured.
To explain the configuration of the force field of the person is
63Ильенков Э.В. Философия и культура. – М.: Политиздат, 1991.- С.398-399.
64Ильенков Э.В. Философия и культура. – М.: Политиздат, 1991.- С.404.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
101
possible due to the concept of “social roles”. Under the social role
here we understand a personalized function. Through
an
implemented system of social roles, a man takes the form of social
media, putting pressure on the other members of the social process,
and it becomes obvious to them, and, finally, he gets fused with
them so much that he gets specific appearance due to the constant
training of the physical body in the system of social relations
To understand how personality is formed as a social
phenomenon, not a natural-natural formation, it is necessary to
study the events that take place not within the organic individual,
but in the “space” of social relations, in the socially determined
actions. In other words, it is necessary to investigate man’s
interaction with others.
The latter are for the individual, producing wealth of his social
content into the environment, as if it was the canvas on which it is
fixed for the public. This point is described in the literature as the
concept of human monadity.
In this case the individual scale is only measured by the scale of
the real problems in the solutions of which he arises, and is established
in his certainty, and where he develops in the actions which affect the
interests of other people, not just his own person. The wider is the
circle of these people, the greater is a person. Then the force of
personality is an individual expression of the energy force field –
“ensemble” of social relations – that set in motion a group of
associates and enemies of the individual, on the basis of which there is
an actual functional organ. This person preserves himself only, if he is
in the constant development of his capacity and expanding his
activity. His epistemological counterpart – entelechy, which is nothing
more than an activity or the ability of the noumenal and phenomenal
substances to perform work when changing the state.65
Our understanding of the nature and content of this mysterious
concept for the domestic social philosophy – entelechy – is the same
65См.: Философская энциклопедия. – Т.5. – С. 563.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
102
as it appears in the philosophy of Aristotle and Leibniz’s monad. In
other words, the entelechy expresses the unity of the material, the
formal, current and target reason.66
When material world goes out to the objective reality through
the second stage, a human is functioning as ontological organ able
to do physical work. If spiritual world goes outside, his qualities
called spirituality are shown. Altogether they form the system of
attributive qualities, known to us as abilities. Abilities have creative
functions which coming to outer environment as a neutral product
“freeze” there and exist as a sensual second outer nature of human.
Here we admire best practice of philosophers-existentialists
who stood up for the idea of transcending of social world from the
inner content of personality. Here we have not only considered the
technological side of the process, but also we have proved it in
theory and consequently, the direction of existentialistic
–
philosophy in the world of philosophical thought.
Integration of the stage of the human body in the organic unity
is provided by the links of the weak interaction. Executive
mechanism of integration is, as we know, thinking process which
does not stop for a moment. The process takes place in the form of
internal unrest of human force field. In the human body, there are
spread so-called standing waves that transport matter and energy in
the cardiac muscle and information in the structures of the brain.67
At the same time, natural forces are used for the organization of
interaction of the subject with others horizontally, at the macro
level, and information products or semantic photons are used to
communicate with other sources of such radiation vertically at mega
and micro levels. In addition, the fact of having two types of circuits
or communication means the presence of two types of feedback
loops in the system. The physical construct of a human has a
66Там же.- С. 564.
67См.: Добронравова И.С. Синергетика: становление нелинейного мышления. –
К.: “Либiдь”, 1990. – С. 59.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
103
planetary mission, and therefore the person stops his/her physical
existence after running out of material resources.
Now, when we consider the functional aspect of the human
body from the social world, it turns out that now a human
intelligence, comes to the fore, representing both physical and
spiritual components of the universe. Therefore, from this
perspective, P. D. Yurkevich is right, who has written: “Mind is the
top, not the root of spiritual life of a human. Mind rules the soul, but
it is not a force that generates love of beauty and goodness: love
grows from the depths of the heart. Religious life was born earlier,
than the light of reason”.68
In other words, thereby appears a new, functional organ of
individuality. As a result, a person has a new degree of freedom,
which multiplies the effect of one’s accomplishment in planetary
and space systems. It is important to understand that the main
content of the process of life of a human is not the adaptation to the
environment but the generation and implementation of internal
programs of social purpose. This is precisely the function of a
foundation. At the same time active actions of an individual directed
to another individual, returning back to the individual, being
“reflected” from another individual as from the obstacles and
thereby they turn from actions aimed at the “other”, into the action
directed (indirectly through “other” ) to oneself.
Ontologically a personality is a specific force field, which is
created by a specific person in the process of interaction with other
people. He is a person, who has two kinds of relations with the
external environment. The first kind is a functional connection
implemented through society as a direct exchange of live activity,
mediated by mediators- sense, a symbol, a myth, etc. “In general,
personality is a unit of life, the expression of “ the ensemble of
social relations in general, “This person is a single expression of the
necessarily limited totality of these relations (not all) of which it is
68Юркевич П.Д. Чтения о воспитании. – М., 1965. – С.198

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
104
directly connected to the other (with some but not all) individuals –
“organs” of the collective “body” – the body of a human race” -
wrote E.V.Ilyenkov.69
The second kind of relations is the mediation of things. In
addition, a person is not within the “body of the person”, but within
“the human body”, so a person is the “body”, which, as noted by
E.V. Ilyenkov, is “more complex and wider space, including in its
morphology all those artificial “organs”, which are created and
continue to be created by people (tools and machines, words and
books, telephone networks and radio and television channels of
communication between individuals of the human race), i.e. all the
“total body” of separate individuals operating within live organs. “70
Thus, the human person has two ways of communication with
the public. One mechanism is used being hidden at the subconscious
level, and the second is conducted through the external
environment. This is the insurance of highly organized and complex
living organism in case of accidents in planetary life.
As ontological object, a person is not a theoretical abstraction,
but a real tangible reality, which puts pressure on others. His/her
“bodily organization” is part of a “collective body” or “the ensemble
of social relations”, the force field, and a part of “authority” which
appears in every single human individual.
When an individual is so fused with the role that he is doomed
to play in the well-known system of relations with other individuals,
with the specific system of social roles, which he entrusted to the
group, then he begins to train intensively exactly those organs of the
body, which provide him/her the best of their execution. In this case,
even a particular individual acquires specific appearance. As an
example, reference is made to the proud posture of royal figures, a
muscular athlete, a stooping accountant and others. Although
69Ильенков Э.В. Философия и культура .- М.: Политиздат, 1991. – С.394.
70Там же.- С.395

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
105
sociobiologists believe, on the contrary, that the behavior of the
person in society is to be explained by genetic factors.71
This person has an internal social content ontologically, which
is recorded in each semantic nest – the social content of the
semantic structure of the element, and the outer part is represented
in the form of skills (social roles or functions of the system) of the
specific types of relationships with other people. The inner and
outer parts of the social content represent the thing, which is called
subjective social relationships or individual social world.
Only social philosophy, based on developments of various
branches of social science of science, can introduce other social
content of the inner world of the individual thoroughly as the basis
of social peace. This is due to the fact that the formalization of
human interaction of external structure will be explained by
different specialists who for initial will use “their” elements or
rather, the foundation aspects. Thus, sociologists reproduce the
structure of the external relations of the human person through the
functions carried out by it in the external social environment. In
their eyes, the man looks like a multi-functional subject, that is why
materialistic philosophers previously considered a man as a “partial
worker, a simple carrier of a known partial social function”, who
now replaces the fully developed individual, for whom “the
different social functions are successive ways of life."72
Psychologists will treat this aspect with the help of the idea
about social role of human behavior in society. In this regard, the
structure of the individual social psychology can present through the
theory of social roles that a person plays in life. The functions
carried out by the human individual, act out as a character of his
own that are, the individual social needs. External human activity is
shown as the nature of work. The latter is the same basis for
volitional processes as intelligence is the foundation of the mental
processes and temperament is the base for emotional processes.
71См.: Смелзер Н. Социология: пер. с англ. – М.: Феникс, 1994. – С.98-100.
72Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т. 23. – С.499.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
106
Potential social world is always unique and always the result of
an active inner life, the idea of producing an optimal arrangement of
the social world for oneself and others. At the same time, as wrote
G. Gegel: “Thinking process as subjective process can only watch
the development of this idea as its own activity of its intelligence,
for its part, and it does add anything to it. To consider anything
wisely means not to bring the outside mind to the subject, working
on it this way, but seeing the subject as intelligent; the spirit here in
its freedom, as the highest peak of – conscientious mind, conveys
the reality and creates a world as existing."73
In the course of this reflection on life, it is born a unique social
world in a single and unique design. It is worth recalling the words
of G. Skovoroda who said that people should “see the light lurking
in their body like eternity ... And this spark is a spark of other
worlds”.74 Once emerged, the potential human social world has been
relatively independently throughout, as a rule, one’s life. And any
personality carefully tries to preserve it, because, according to G.
Gegel, “the nature of the spirit is more in the highest sense, than the
nature of living in general, which tends not to take itself a different
original, in other words, to avoid a continuation of any reason but
interrupt or transform it.”75
It follows several important consequences for the development
of the theoretical foundations of social world. One of them is that
the self-realization of the human person, as a result of which the
objectified social reality requires a great degree of freedom, and is
of virtual character, that is, it is the probabilistic by nature, because
it is very much dependent on the external environment as a factor
shaping the social world.
The second consequence follows from the fact that the life of
the human person takes place simultaneously in two planes– the
73Гегель Г. Философия права. – М.: Мысль, 1990. – С.91.
74Сковорода Г.С. Диалог. Имя ему – Потоп Змиин // Сковорода Г.С. Соч. в 2-х
тт. – М.: Изд-во соц. – эконом. лит-ры, 1973. – Т.2. – С. 148.
75Гегель Г. Наука логики. – М.: Мысль, 1971. – Т.2. – С. 213.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
107
value-semantic plane and spatial-temporary plane. Let us recall that
the self-movement of the individual in two planes is possible due to
the presence in his/her structure of two mechanisms: a mechanism
of self-determination and a mechanism of self-actualization.
Therefore, the individual is spatial-temporary plane is the real field
of acting (actual and potential), which stands for the mechanism of
self-actualization, and the value-semantic plane is a field of
production or pinnacle of values and meanings, which, in turn is
associated with a mechanism of self-determination. However, full
implementation of its attribute as a basis of the social world a person
reaches through the functioning of the mechanism of self-
realization, based on transactions.
In terms of theory, this means that the potential social world,
while staying in the structure of personality and being already
deployed in axiological kind, and when coming into spatial-
temporary plane, before it becomes a real and gets familiar to us, its
parametric characterization requires measuring in a fundamentally
new system of coordinates. This conclusion follows from the fact
that the above-mentioned notions must “roll up” before they become
the axes of the social world.
Finally, a third consequence is that the person, as the basis of the
social world, depending on the development of intrapersonal
substructures, determines the nature of the social world as a whole
system. These factors are related directly as the objective social world
is released from solitary confinement of potential social world. And if
we take into account the rate of social reactions of the individual, the
potential social world, as virtual reality, on the one hand, is determined
by the character of human activity, which can be of three types –
reproductive, adaptive and creative, and on the other hand, it depends
on the external conditions, which can also be different according to the
degree of its influence on the process of self-unfolding and functioning.
Basis and based do not interrupt their relationships globally.
The analysis shows that if you reduce the works of sociologists
and psychologists in the organic system, it appears that the potential

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
108
social world, being in syncretic state, is already structured. To
uncover the structure can be the type of major external relations of
the human person. The analysis shows that here it is necessary to
talk about the four major types of human interaction: social,
economic, ideological, and organizational or managerial. This will
be at the same time the potential elements of the social world, and
the individual elements of the structure, so that we are interested in
(see Figure 2.1.). This typology is inspired by an objectified
structure of society, in which there are, as you know, the same
fields.
Where: 1 – social element; 2 – economic element; 3 – political
element; 4 – ideological element.
Figure 2.1. The structure of the potential social world of the
human personality
PERSONALITY
Politological
functions
Economic
functions
Social
functions
Ideological
functions

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
109
Potential social world of a personality can indefinitely stay in
syncretism condition, rarely undergoing the inventory from his
master, or it can actively become apparent if an individual holds a
high position in the organization and management field or in the
field of science or culture. For the potential social world to enter the
world, there needs to be public demand for it. There should be a
niche for “perception” of the social content in the external
environment. This is common knowledge.
Virtual social worlds serve as an effective factor of generation
of the social world. Let us admit that the semantic worlds are as real
as material world. If today hardly anyone doubts the reality of the
material world, the existence of the Semantic reality is known for a
few people. Meanwhile, the present level of scientific and
technological progress and physiological human development, have
led the planetary mankind to such a threshold, when information
technology has enabled it to discover a new world, the world of so-
called “virtual reality”, “the world of imaginary reality”, or “VR
world systems”.
The essence of this world is that through the development of
special means information transfer and development of quality of
perception and feelings, a human gets the opportunity to become not
only a spectator and a permanent observer of this world, but also its
active and sympathetic participant and creator of the events of the
world. According to Dr A. Berestov, this imaginary world is as real,
and when in terms of extent of feelings, is even more sensitive, than
the existing world. According to Japanese scientists, by the year
2000 sales of new technologies related to the imaginary reality
world will be 100 million US dollars, which will cause a real
revolution, like the nuclear, space, information, sexual and others.
Based on the above structure of the potential of human social world,
it can explain how and why individuals or groups of people in a
state of social chaos, usually intellectuals, are attractors and they
begin to form social structures. This is due to the fact that they
actively manifest some form of essential powers, which by

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
110
overstimulation causes the excitation of the field surrounding
structures.
In connection with the above mentioned, a person must be
regarded as monadic formation, that is, as an integrated system that
can represent the entire universe, compressed within a particular
individual. Not for nothing in the human philosophical literature, it
has been called a microcosm. A Russian philosopher and lawyer I.
A. Ilyin, exploring the conditions for ensuring an effective state of
life, wrote that living individuals are “body – soul – spirit
organisms; they do not just need the freedom and require it, but they
must be worthy of it ... A person involved in the life of the state – as
a living organism, becomes a living body of the state organism.76
This analysis can be completed regarding the foundation of
social world and we can move on to describe briefly the conditions
as a factor in the determination of the social world. It appears that
the conditions that determine the appearance of the social world,
too, can be at least two types: primary and secondary. Because the
man is the biological integrity, then to the primary conditions it
should include everything that is associated with the organization
and biological processes. It follows directly from the authority of
the Marxist postulate of the primacy of the material world for the
generation of the social world, as indeed, in order to act, people
must be able to drink, eat, sleep, breathe, and so on, that is, to meet
their primary vital needs.
The primary conditions should include the human mind, which
connects together the world and the individual mind. Thanks to it, a
person cashes the content of the spiritual world. The latter occurs,
however, only at the time of maturity of the fact that “the ideal acts
along with real and builds for itself in the image of the intellectual realm
of the same world, to comprehend in its substance."77 Thus, the
foundation has “its” body for cashing the potential of the social world.
76Ильин И.А. Собрание сочинений. В 10 т. – М.: Русская книга, 1993. – Т.2. Кн.1.
– С.379.
77Гегель Г. Философия права. – М.: Мысль, 1990. – С. 56.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
111
A biological human life is not simply a process of mediation
of dialectical interaction between the material and spiritual
worlds, and it has the production of a specific type of energy, of
which is formed the second nature. Moreover, it is necessary to
show the mechanism of the above-mentioned process and to
reveal the structure of the human body a source of production of
social reality.
The secondary conditions of the generation of the social world
are the parameters of the space environment as a determinant of the
biological form of human existence. Let’s recall that in whatever
particular form or there was a man in the universe, its most general
laws and properties will remain the same due to the substantial unity
of the world. This follows directly from the organic unity of the
human body with the universe. To do this, it suffices to show its
quantum nature and the ability to maintain a stable, or rather, the
natural link with the micro and mega-level.
Human microcosm not only contains everything that is in the
cosmos, but also has the ability to play it holistically. To prove this,
it is necessary to open a process, which leaves a subjective form and
transmits “its” reformulated content into the base.
Reproducing in its structure and properties of macroscopic
patterns, an organic system converts inorganic conditions of life in
the process of self-motion, allowing thus the contradiction between
them and their livelihoods. This contradiction becomes an impulse
of over organic world.
At the same time, this means that social form is not only
necessary universe, but indestructible, for the simple reason that it
means to destroy itself is to destroy the universe. This ability to self-
movement of life and, consequently, to the substantial change in the
conditions of its functioning is expressed not only in the change of
its specific conditions, but also in self-replication rate.
Thus, a human person is presented to us as the absolute
foundation of the social world in which, firstly, the essence of social
is primarily given as the basis for the foundation of all; more

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
112
precisely, the human person defines himself as a social form and
social fabric and the social content of itself.
Secondly, a human person is a certain foundation as a basis
specified, that is, the social content; as the base ratio, realizing itself,
it is generally outside itself, it becomes conditional on mediation.
Therefore, its vital functions have dynamic process of self-
realization. And so how any change in person’s life is reflected in
logical categories of action and reflection.
In this case, it appears as a change of the existence of the social
thing as of itself, the movement of its properties, components,
therefore, the substrate, changing matter. In connection with this
change, the personality’s structure should be analyzed on the basis
of reflection. At the same time action – that, on the contrary, as
referring to the existence of other beings, movement relationship
that acts as matter action of substance, its content. In the external
environment, when it is connected with the actions of other persons,
it should be seen as an interaction.
Thirdly, the human person requires a specific condition of life
for the production of social world– free exchange with the medium
substance, energy and information; but a condition of life as much
assumes it as a base; unconditioned – is their unity, the very essence
of the matter, which is through the mediation of which it determines
the relationship that moves into existence.
Fourthly, the amount and intensity of the production of social
reality is entirely dependent on the level of human development and
wealth of its internal content, which is supported by the material and
spiritual components of the universe, they are practically unlimited.
The form of production and the level of development of social
phenomena depend only on the conditions in which a person
resides.
Fifthly, and very important, the person cannot be connected
with the brain, mind, intelligence, consciousness or self-awareness.
It is the quality of the system of the human body. Its structure is
“diffused” throughout the human body and the elements that are the

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
113
functional elements that arise during the self-movement of the
human body as a whole system. This single field form of intelligible
matter at the exit of the biological form of the new conditions
constitutes the social form of the universe.
After all the above, we can finally move on to the analysis of
the nature of the social world.
2.2. The quantum – wave nature of the social world
For understanding the current state of the world, we have to,
using the words of V.I. Vernadsky, develop a complete realistic
view of the noosphere and hyperorganic nature of the social
relations. But it is not very easy to develop such views. In fact, the
main categories, which we have to use in this analysis, such as
“spirit”, “intellect”, “mind”, “thought”, “science”, “knowledge”,
“psychology”, “reflection”, “intelligence” and the others assumed to
be known, and they are too often used only according to the
psychological concepts and differences; but, as G.Gegelsaid, “their
nature and the concept –what is the only important, is not
investigated”78 As far as the study makes it difficult to be seen by
the way researchers approach to the definition of the nature of the
social world.
The fact that today there is no unity of opinions on the nature of
the social world, even more than that, there are diametrically
opposed approaches to its definition, it has long been known. For
example, Sorokin wrote:
"The social phenomenon is a social connection with a psychic
nature that is implemented within the consciousness of an
individual, going beyond its content and duration at the same time.
78Гегель Г. Энциклопедия философских наук. – М.: Мысль, 1974. – Т. 1. – С. 187.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
114
This is what many call “the social soul”, this what others call
civilization and culture, this is what others define through the term”
the world of values” unlike the world of things, which form the
object of study of natural sciences. Any interaction between
whoever it occurs; if it is of a mental nature (in the above mentioned
sense of this word) is a social phenomenon”.79 Elsewhere he wrote
that “all social relations, in the end, are determined by the
thought".80
But it is contrary to E. Durkheim, who wrote that “ social facts
are not only qualitatively different from the facts of mental, but their
substrate is different as well, they develop in another environment
and depend on other conditions. It does not mean that they are not
mental facts in some way, i.e. they are in some ways of thinking and
action”.81 However, he stressed that “we have even refused to bring
their characteristic of immateriality sui generis to the immateriality
of the complex psychological phenomena."
Exposing the positive relationship of mental and social facts, E.
Durkheim wrote: “The first (mental) are unformed matter, which
transforms the social factor.” He emphasized that “social scientists
attributed the mental factor of a more direct role in the genesis of
social life because it was taken for purely psychological facts of
state of consciousness, which are only transformed social
phenomena"82. And he cited that other evidence of the same
provisions, the most important among which it was independence of
social facts in relation to the ethnic factor, belonging to the psycho-
organic medium, and that social evolution is not explicable by
purely mental examples.
Our attempt to establish the nature of the social world through
the analysis of the epistemology of the term “social” is also not
79Сорокин П. Человек. Цивилизация. Общество. – М.: Политиздат, 1992. – С. 39
80Там же. – С. 531.
81Дюркгейм Э. О разделении общественного труда. Метод социологии. – М.:
Наука, 1991. – С. 399.
82Дюркгейм Э. О разделении общественного труда. Метод социологии. – М.:
Наука, 1991. – С. 526

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
115
successful. The concept of “social” as a characteristic of one of the
sides of public life was introduced by K. Marx. The scientific works
of K. Marx and F. Engels with the analysis of the society, its
processes 
and 
relationships 
use 
two 
terms
–
-public
(gesellschaftlich) and social (sozial). K. Marx and F. Engels used
the concept of “public”, “public relations”, etc., when it came to the
society as a whole, the interaction of its parts -economical, political,
ideological, etc. When they examined the nature of the peoples’
relationship with each other, person with person, with the factors
and conditions of life, the human condition and its role in the
society, the concepts of “social”, “social relations “were used.83 In
their works, “social” is often equated with the concept of “civil”.
With the latter, the interactions of people within specific social
communities (family, class, and so on.) was connected.
While working out
the theory of society (historical
materialism), Marxist scholars began to identify the concept of
“public” and “social”. Doing that, the specificity of the “social” in
the narrow sense of the word (as the subject of sociology) was
naturally lost.
The opposite opinion was formed in Western Europe and the
US, where the dominant development had the empirical sociology.
Here, when the question of working out the general sociological
theory was raised, the concept of “societal”
(sozietal) was
introduced. It was used to describe the society as a whole, the entire
system of social relations (economic, social, political, etc.).
According to Spencer, the relationship between human beings
belongs to the type of phenomena mainly superorganic. In “The
Principles of Sociology”, he writes: “I felt it necessary to draw
attention to the fact that over the organic evolution constantly
appeared, a new and higher type of evolution, which I would
willingly call superorganic”. There are several types. Each type is
determined by the peculiarities of the animal kingdom, in which we
83См.: Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. -Т.4. С.489; Т.13. С. 7; Т.19. С.25; 25.
Ч.II. С.167; Т.47. С. 488 и др.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
116
observe it. Spencer begins his review with insects and completes its
study of phenomena peculiar to people.84
In Soviet science, the absence of a clear distinction between
“public” and “social” was to some extent due to the prevailing of
some language traditions. The Russian language is generally used
the concept of “public” and “civil”. At the same time, the concept of
“social” was seen as a synonym for “public” concept, and the term
“civilian” refers to the legal science.
With the development of social science in the USSR, the term
“social” has acquired the independent meaning. It was the most
often seen as a special aspect of the public relations. In confirmation
of this, as a rule, the following provision is mentioned, written in the
collective monograph on the sociology: “Social is a collection of
various properties and characteristics of the public relations,
integrated individuals or communities in the process of the joint
activities (interactions) in the specific conditions and manifested in
their relationship with each other, to their position in the society, to
the phenomena and the processes of social life. Any system of the
social relations (economic, political, etc.) is connected with the
relationship of people with each other and to society. Therefore,
each of these systems has always got a distinct social aspect”.85
We do not agree with this definition of social because it is not
an indication of the social aspect specificity, which means that the
term is undefined in this case. Thus, the practice of using the term
“social” is unsatisfactory. That is why, it is impossible to establish
the specific quality of the concept that distinguishes it from the
other definitions.
At the same time, as we see, the term “social” is in the constant
making. A striking proof of this is the substitution of a synonym
“social” to the notion “public”, “public” to “societal”, etc. The
84См.: Ковалевский М.М. Социология. – С.-Петербург: Типография М.М.
Стасюлевича, 1910. – С. 209.
85 Социология / Г.В. Осипов (руководитель авт. кол), Ю. П. Коваленко,
Н.И.Щипанов, Р.Г. Яновский. – М.: Мысль, 1990. – С. 27.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
117
observed metamorphosis that is experiencing the term “social”,
indicates that there is a tendency to the fact that it could take its
place in the system of the philosophical categories.
If you try to look at the nature of the social material from the
position of the different ideological platforms, we will find
ourselves in a familiar situation and we will be forced to select a
theological, idealistic and materialistic angle of view on the subject
of study. For obvious reasons, here we do not consider the
theological approach to the determination of the nature of the social
world.
The idealist position on this matter is well seen in the works of
thinkers of the Enlightenment. Their point of view deserves much
more attention, because at this stage of development of the social
thought, the above-mentioned concept began to acquire the
philosophical content and a touch of science, so, in many respects,
they can help to reveal the true picture.
It has developed a number of approaches. One of the most
powerful, of course, is the approach to the nature of the social
world, developed by G. Gegel, who understood it as self-developed
World Spirit, “which in its true nature must be understood as pure
activity”.86 In another place, he will notice that it is “the spirit, the
absolute definition of which has an active mind”.87 In the third place,
he points to the fact that “the spirit is the concept, and it is a
perpetual, consists precisely in the fact that it carries out the
destruction of the vile, leads to vanity of the vain”.88At the same
time, for him the spirit exists in the form of knowledge. This time G.
Gegel emphasizes the words “the mind is direct knowledge, the
faith”89.
In “Philosophy of Spirit”, the famous German philosopher
explains in details that “the existence of the spirit, knowledge is an
86Гегель Г. Энциклопедия философских наук. – М.: Мысль, 1977. – Т.3. – С. 96.
87Там же. – С. 372.
88Там же. – Т.3. – С. 35.
89Гегель Г. Энциклопедия философских наук. – М.: Мысль, 1974. – Т.1. – С. 186.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
118
absolute shape – i.e. form, which has in itself the content, or existing
as a concept of a concept, telling the reality to itself”.90Here, but a
little earlier, he says: “The progress of the spirit is a development,
since its existence, the knowledge, in itself has its content and
purpose of the in-itself-and-for-itself-being-determination, i.e. the
rational and activities of transferring this goal into reality is,
therefore, a purely formal shift it to its discovery, and the detection
of a return to themselves”. It is impossible to overlook the fact that
G. Gegel to refer the material from which arises the social world
uses several categories. We must also find out which category is
true.
The links to the human nature of the social world are well
known. In support of this thesis can be given many examples from
the available literature. At the same time it must be noted that
modern scholars usually emphasizing the artificial nature of the
phenomenon, trying to escape from a deeper explanation of this
issue. The link to the noosphere even makes some inaccuracy while
explaining the merits of the case, as the material from which it is
done, and in fact must be explained, to start with.
Secondly, noosphere unlike biosphere still hasn’t got its face.
We can’t stop recalling the fact that the biosphere is a minimum of
five 
concepts 
of 
development 
(biochemical, 
biophysical,
geophysical, biocybernetic, biogeotsenological or ecological)91. At
the same time, it is obvious that the noosphere, too, must have its
psychological, cybernetic, informational, semantical, energetic,
magnetic, gravity, photons and the other faces.
Human consciousness, or rather enlightening or scientific
consciousness – that is the true nature of social as the part of
research problem of social claims. These include, for example, Jean-
Jacques Rousseau, who in his work “The Social Contract or
Principles Political Rights”, wrote that
“enlightened social
consciousness creates in the social world the unity of understanding
90Гегель Г. Энциклопедия философских наук. – М.: Мысль, 1977. – Т.3. – С. 257.
91Там же. – С. 256.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
119
and will, from here will appear a proper competition of the parts
and, finally, the greatest strength of the whole”92
The link to the class nature of the social organism formation to
which we are accustomed in such a situation does no help as well.
So, from the point of view of the class approach, that explanation of
the social world originally met the needs of their recognition of the
ideological struggle purposes. During the ideological analysis,
though various sides were described and analyzed, but the concept
itself its subtypes, as well as its nature and substance remained
unconscious and not shown. The specificity of the social organism
has again slipped away from our sight. This means that this
approach to working out the material specificity of “social” does not
suit us.
So, in the philosophical and sociological literature, there are no
consensus of opinion on the nature of the social world. It is
associated with the ability to live, activity, action, public relations,
social and individual consciousness, the noosphere, the knowledge,
the divine substance, and so on. But none of these items can suit us
for the simple reason that there is no indication of the substance
base specificity, so, we cannot distinguish it from the others.
According to K. Marx, “the explanation, in which there is no
indication on the differentia spezifica (specific difference – V.B.)
does not have an explanation”.93 Obviously we got into these traps.
The access to study of the nature of the social world specificity
must be searched, as we see, from the source of the social phenomena
production, that is, from the attribute properties of a living being. So,
let us go back to the second stage of the formative processes of the
human and examine carefully what is happening there.
This stage of mediation is a “quality” node or bunch of energy.
This, to put it in Gegel language, is a quality modularity “of the
92См.: 
Философский 
энциклопедический 
словарь.
–
М.: 
“Советская
энциклопедия”, 1989. – С. 432.
93См.: Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.1. – С.229; Т.24. – С. 252; Т.26.
Ч.1.- С.142 и др.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
120
objective world, logically connected phenomenological and social
worlds in an integral unity, and there is an integrative form of the
universe existence, the nature of which corresponds to the three
realities.
This is our vision of the mediation level essence. At the same
time, we recall that in the methodological part, we agreed that we
should consider social as the things. But as you know, “the thing is
the power that can be generated only by another force. Therefore, in
order to explain the social facts, you need to find the energy, that are
able to produce them” – rightly wrote E. Dyurkgeym. 94
Here we have the opposite case, when there is energy, and it is
necessary to explain a thing, and there is nothing wrong that it
implies the social world as a unit. In other words, we need the
philosophical means to cut this Gordian knot into the structural
parts, and while examining them provide the evidence of our
version of the nature of the social world. And the beginning of the
philosophical analysis is a justification criterion for distinguishing
the energy interactions.
Our methodological approach of their differentiation is based on
the fundamental laws of the universe self-motion. This means that
we put the supporting hypothesis that the criterion for separating
the above-mentioned processes is the motion vectors of the original
substance. Above, we have shown that those are only two. One,
relatively, in the horizontal plane, the other – in vertical, again
conventionally. In the horizontal the the process of the material and
spiritual interaction of the Universe origins going on, and in the
vertical – the moving of the Universe on the micro-, macro- and
mega-levels is carried out. Let us not forget that.
At the same time, it is necessary to proceed from the fact that
this energy node appeared in the structure of the human body at the
mediation stage, which was formed as a result of the dialectical
interaction between mental, physical and psychological. These
94Дюркгейм Э. О разделении общественного труда. Метод социологии. – М.:
Наука, 1991. – С. 525-526.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
121
means that in the course of further philosophical analysis of the
problem, the essence of the concept of “intelligent” should be
considered, which removes all the contradictions of the above
mentioned “quality nodularity” of the thing – information – energy
content. Thus, is necessary to put aside the analysis of the “social”
concept content for a while, as at first, we are dealing not with the
social world, but with the energy from which it arises. The essence
and content of the social world we will examine further.
In this regard, we are forced to consider the motion of the
concept of “intellectual” as a kind of independent unit. The
algorithm is self-unfolding of the concept as a whole is presented in
Hegel’s “Science of Logic”.
However, as G. Hegel wrote: “The concept for its development
does not need any external stimulus; its own, including the
contradiction between the simplicity and distinction, and what is
why a restless nature prompts itself to self-realization, it causes the
development and makes a real difference, finds ideal in itself, i.e. in
the form of a controversial non-distinction; it leads to the fact that
by removing it simplify as a lack, a one-sided to make it really a
whole, what it initially contains only an opportunity”.95
Then we have no choice as to reveal the essence of the concept
of “intelligent” according to the logic: the existence
–
phenomenonorbeing – the reality. Now we turn to a brief
characterization of the above-mentioned self-unfolding stages of the
concept of “intelligent”.
It is necessary to start here with review of the essence of
“intellectual” as a reflection of the universe in itself. In other words,
the essence, taken primarily as a direct, there is a certain
determinate being of a base, which is opposed to the other
determinate being of the same grounds: it is a significant
determinate being as opposed to the immaterial.
95Гегель Г. Энциклопедия философских наук. – М.: Мысль, 1977. – Т. 3. – С. 12.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
122
From the above mentioned, it follows that the essence of the
intellectual should be understood as the original form of universe,
which subjectified in living matter and therefore opposes it as an
essential.
According to the content, the intellectual is a new quality,
arising on the basis of organic synthesis of the physical and spiritual
Universes, because there is nothing else here yet. To such
conclusion leads us dichotomous vision of the world creation. Their
functional state, we believe can be regarded as entelechy. This does
not contradict the meaning of the concept entelechy, which put in it
the founders of the philosophy, say, Aristotle and the others. We
have very little information about this term “entelechy”. All that we
have today are the works by Aristotle, Leibniz, and a few
representatives of the Vitalist School in the world of philosophical
thought.
In the “Metaphysics” by Aristotle, energy means action, the
transition from the possible to reality and the entelechy is the result
of this transition. However, in most cases he does not make this
distinction and uses the terms “energy” and “entelechy” as
synonyms.
The essential role the concept of entelechy played by in
Aristotle’s psychology, defining the soul as “the first entelechy of
the natural body, potentially having life” (“On the soul” 412a 27).
Exactly here Aristotle distinguishes between “first” (or simple)
entelechy and “second (highest) entelechy; thus, knowledge
(epistime), is understood as the “first” entelechy, can realize
themselves further in speculation” as the entelechy of the second
order. In Latin scholasticism (in particular by Thomas Aquinas) the
energy and the entelechy are translated by one term “act” (astus). In
our interpretation, it is just a question of the individual and
collective forms of manifestation of the intelligence.
In modern philosophy the concept of entelechy is revived by
Leibniz, referring it to the monads (Aristotele had never given the
term “entelechy” a substantive sense), by which he means “the state

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
123
of a substance (substantiaeaffectio), in other words, that there is
another 
and 
is 
submitted 
through 
another”
(“per
guodetiamconcipitur”) (“Ethics”, the 5thdefinition in the first part)96.
The existence of the essence of “intelligent” is connected with
anxiety of the human soul, so its essence is manifested in the form of
attribute human qualities. “But – as G. Hegel notes – it finds them not
as something external and not an external relation, but as a base, it
makes as determined, its simple materiality merges with itself in the
determined, and have this removed itself disappearance of its
differences from its determination and, therefore, a simple significant
spontaneity. Consequently, the base does not remain anything other
than based; the truth of the base is that the base is connected with itself
in it, and, therefore, its reflection in the other is its reflection in itself.
That is why the essence of the matter, just as it is free from the
(external) conditions, just as it is something that has no base and
extends from the base, but because the base have disappeared, and
since it has gone–it appears from something that hasn’t got the
foundation, that is, from its own substantial negative or pure form. This
base-mediated condition and immediacy, which became after the
removal of mediation identical with itself, is the existence”.97
It should be noted that the moment of transition of the essence
of “intelligent” in its existence as a human reflexivity, is an
extremely important and sensitive issue for the subsequent analysis
of the problem of the social world. So, the intelligence manifests
itself in our world through entelechy, since, as G. Hegel wrote, “to
reveal itself – that’s its own action”.98
Subsequent movement of “intellectual” from the existence to
the phenomenon “is a transition into something completely
opposite.
Therefore it is infinite, and this output of the opposite from the
infinity or of its non-existence is a leap, and the actual existence of
96См.: Гегель Г. Наука логики. – М.: Мысль, 1971. – Т.2. – С. 241.
97 Гегель Г. Наука логики. – М.: Мысль, 1971. – Т.2. – С. 109-110.
98Там же. – С. 184.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
124
the image in its revived strength is, the beginning of itself, before it
will aware its attitude towards the alien”.99
At the same time, as noted by G. Hegel, “that is performed
according to an inner necessity, is that the result is not a prerequisite
by the other, but rather, what preceded, and also is created as the
result coincides with itself, finds itself or in other words, both
moments–the direct actual existence and determination–are
determined as one moment”.100
Here, when considering the structure of the concept of
“intelligent”, we are analyzing only the dialectic of the material and
spiritual principles. We have already noted that this mutual
transition is fundamentally possible, and even in living matter is
necessary because the material contains a structural information and
the spiritual is a phenotypic information. And since it is one and the
same material, staying in different forms, it should flow from one
state to another. The complexity of the explanation, as always, lies
in the mediation moment. This last remark means that the sticking
point here is finding an intermediate state in which the structural
and phenotypic information is one original product and is
knowledge. The most valuable of which is the scientific knowledge.
In order to ensure the constant interaction in the personality
structure, two functional organs are formed and operated. They are
familiar to psychologists. From the material component is a
psychophysical and from the spiritual is psychological.
The philosophers of course, know about their separate
existence, who have long been enshrined this in the idea of spiritual
duality. One part of it exists as unconscious and is involved in the
life cycle intuition, and the other – as a conscious or theoretical. For
example, F. Shelling wrote that “the intelligentsia is productive in
two ways: either blindly and unconsciously or consciously and
freely: it unconsciously productive in the contemplation of the
99Гегель Г. Политические произведения. – М.: Наука, 1978. – С. 274.
100Гегель Г. Философия религии. В двух томах. – М.: Мысль, 1977. – Т.2. – С. 65.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
125
world, deliberately – in the creation of an ideal world”.101 G. Hegel
also pointed to the dual nature of the spiritual, when he wrote: “The
knowledge (conscious – V.B.) is now the mind subjective and
objective mind (unconscious – V.B.) is the knowledge”.102
F. Shelling even criticized G. Hegel for having neglected the
unconscious, leaped through it, and in fact described the theoretical
mind. He wrote that G. Hegel could “see where in the system the
world of the concepts in all its diversity and systematic, completely
disengagement enters the unit; he could even see that the forms of
the so-called logic treated exactly the same way as a forms of
nature, it is an analogy which G. Hegel himself uses, at least where
he says about reasoning figures. Here, where the infinite potency,
which has passed through the nature, for the first time became the
subject itself, where it deploys in the subjective consciousness as
world of mind, its objectively detailed world, here in advancing,
actually emerging first philosophy was the only place for the
concepts as such. They could be for it, as well as the corporeal
world, plants or anything else found in the nature, only the objects
of a pure priori elimination and therefore for it to be available only
from the moment when they come consciously into reality, at the
end of the philosophy of nature, at the beginning of the philosophy
of mind. At this point, most concepts are also something truly
objective, while G. Hegel considers them only something
subjective, artificially made objective. The concepts as such, in fact,
exist only in the conscious; therefore, they are objectively after
nature, and not before it. G. Hegel deprived of their natural place,
placing them at the beginning of philosophy. He starts with the most
abstract concepts, such as becoming, determinate being, etc.
Meanwhile, the abstraction cannot, naturally, be considered as valid
before there is something from which they are abstracted: the
101Шеллинг Ф. Сочинения в 2-х т. – М.: Мысль, 1987. – Т.1. – С. 182.
102 Гегель Г. Энциклопедия философских наук. – М.: Мысль, 1977. – Т.3. – С.
310.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
126
emergence cannot appear before the emerged, the existence before
the existed”.103
An indication of this fact is also found in S. Frank, who found
that a person’s inner world is not homogeneous; it has the
experience or feeling, “peripheral”, “external” type associated with
the physical senses of pleasure, bitterness, fear, etc., but there are
also in-depth experience, more fully express the nature of human
beings. S. Frank defined the first kind of the experience as mental,
and the second as spiritual. 104
Even a mathematician Poincare, for example, pointed to the
existence of two types of mind (conscious and unconscious), each of
them obeys the laws of their own dynamics, and each of them
performs a different function with the limited ability of the
interaction in the activities of the others105
But the unconscious according to Poincare differs from the
unconscious according to Freud. It is located away from the pre-
logical, related to sexuality and primary processes, rather
reminiscent of an emotionally neutral, highly logical combinatorial
machine.106
So, now, the problem is to show what is inside and how
operates the mediation body. In the existed philosophical and
psychological 
literature, 
we 
find 
only 
the 
most 
general
characteristics that are always reduced to one and the same – the
human soul. For example, G. Gegel, on the subject wrote: “Until
now, we have considered a special reality in its closed features as
something positive. However, this independence negated in a living
being, and only a perfect, spiritual unity within the bodily organism
remains valid to relate positively to itself. Soul should be
understood as this ideality, assertive in its rejection. Therefore, if in
the body is the soul, then the phenomenon itself is affirmative. The
103Шеллинг Ф. Сочинения в 2-х т. – М.: Мысль, 1989. – Т.2. – С. 508.
104См.: Франк С.Л. Духовные основы общества. – М.: Республика, 1992. – С. 7.
105См.: Пейперт С. Переворот в сознании. – М.: Педагогика, 1980. – С. 192.
106Там же. – С. 193.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
127
soul, however, manifests itself as a force opposing self-isolation of
the members; however, it creates them as it contains an internal and
an ideal beginning that is externally detected in forms and members.
Thus, in the external is an internal with its positive content, the
external remains outside with an abstraction and one-sidedness”107
A real element of consciousness is represented by the so-called
“intelligible matter”. In the course of its development psychologists
were fruitfully affected by L. Feuerbach’s old idea of the existence
of the consciousness for the consciousness and the consciousness
for being, which L.S. Vygotsky has developed. This idea was at
different times and from different angles mastered by A.N.
Leontiev, A.V. Zaporozhets, V.P. Zinchenko, S.L. Rubinstein and
other psychologists. N.A. Bershteyn, for example, introduced the
concept of a living movement and its biodynamic fabric. “When you
add to the number of generators the conscious of the biodynamic
fabric, we get – says V.P. Zinchenko, – a two-layer or two-level
structure of the conscious. The existential layer forms the
biodynamic tissue of a living movement and action and the sensory
fabric image. The reflective layer forms the value and meaning.
All components of the proposed structure are already built as
the objects of scientific research. Each of these components are the
subject of the numerous studies, there have been discussions about
their nature, characteristics, new and new ways of analyzing the
mare working out.
Of course, each of these entities has been studied both as an
independent, and in the wider context, including the conscious, but
they did not act as components of its whole structure”.108
So, taking into account the whole course of the previous
analysis, we have summed up the need to recognize the fruitful
hypothesis that energy is the intermediate product in which there are
structural and phenotypic information in nature. But this power is
107Гегель Г. Эстетика. В 4-х томах. – М.: Искусство, 1968. – Т.1. – С. 131.
108Зинченко В.П., Моргунов Е.Б. Человек развивающийся. Очерки российской
психологии. – М.: Тривола, 1994. – С. 189.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
128
not infinite. It is quantile in the meanings. We were made to refer to
this hypothesis because of the logic of the previous analysis of the
physical and the spiritual interaction in the structure of the human
body. In the light of this hypothesis, the statement by M.I. Setro
seems very important to us: “it is impossible to understand the
essence of the information, without considering it as a special form
of energy processes”. The developing of the functional-energy
theory of information can also evidence this. “The description of
information mechanisms at various levels – says M.I. Setrov –
shows that information, first of all, has the energy and functional
character”. 109
In his turn, S.N. Lazarev writes:“Every object in the universe
can be considered as a process, at the same time, any process is also
an object. Each process and facility has oscillatory motion of the
information to the physical unity of the differentiation. Physical
differentiation must strictly correspond to the spiritual unity. The
condition of the two opposites development is the presence of the
third element, providing manifested presence of one extreme in the
other. This role carries energy, which is a mediator in determining
the development of the Universe”.110
The problem, as we see, is very difficult, but to solve it we need
time. We, of course, without claiming for its final withdrawal from
the agenda of philosophy and psychology, dare to put forward
another working hypothesis for its decision. The gist of it is that we
will proceed from the fact that the mediation authority is, of course,
as well as the physical and spiritual ingredients of the two parts of
the original intermediate form of the universe substance: matter,
known as a “living tissue” in modern psychology, and information
abiding in the mediation stage in a specific form – namely, in the
form of the energy pulse.
109Сетров М.И. Информационные процессы в биологических системах. – Л.,
1975. – С.77.
110Лазарев С.Н. Диагностика кармы. Книга первая. Система полевой
саморегуляции. – Санкт-Петербург: АО “СФЕРА”, 1993. – С. 32.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
129
The last is a kind of the Morse code in the wild, where every
burst of energy, no matter in what form – light, sound or
electromagnetic pulse –is to be a certain quantum information
message – sense, which is building on the principle of holographic
images in the human brain, or causes the processes of assimilation
or dissimilation ingredient in the physical human body. Hence, an
increase or decrease in the acidity in the stomach and the
importance of acid-base balance in the human body.
In the modern biochemistry there is a hypothesis that the
sodium-potassium permeability of the membrane should be
regarded as a material expression of human thought flow111. The
results of the laboratory experiments on the role of light in the
regulation of the physiological information and the biological
processes of a living organism prove these as well. Another result of
these experiments is photodynamic influence of visible light
(wavelength 300 nm) on proteins, fats and carbohydrates in living
organism 112.
The presence information element in the psychological
component of the structure is very important also for understanding
the processes of self-organization and self-regulation of the human
body. The transmission of information on intra and interconnectors
leads to the implementation of the regulation and control
instruments. Information is not only organizes the real-energetic
processes in the living systems, but also makes them feasible. The
transition of the chemical autocatalysis in biological self-
organization and self-reproduction (self-renewal) is associated with
the information as a measure of “irregularities in the distribution of
energy (or matter) in space and time”, – wrote V. Glushkov113.
111См.: Донченко Е.А. Социетальная психика. – К.: “Наукова думка”, 1994. – С.
32.
112См.: Казначеев В.П. Феномен человека: космические и земные истоки. -
Новосибирск: Новосибирское книжное издательство, 1991. – С. 52-53.
113 Глушков В.М. О кибернетике как науке. Кибернетика, мышление, жизнь. –
М., 1964. – С. 53.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
130
We have already shown that the interaction takes place in the
form of a weak electromagnetic interaction. Managed by the
electromagnetic field of the human mind. The man as a being
endowed with the ability to create, to build a new, possessing
consciousness and will, of all living beings “makes his life activity
the object of his will and his consciousness.”114
At the same time, we emphasize another point. The gist of it is
that a process of mediation is huminal, and it is nothing but a
psychophysiological or just mental life. Humanity will render its
due to psychology and psychologists, when it recognizes itself in its
entirety.
Mediation takes place in a biological organism as an interaction
of the psychophysical and psychological components. Psychologists
are well aware that the psycho-physical component is connected
with the human senses, and psychological – with the meanings.
Pulses are initiated or “reflex of purpose” (instinct) or “criterion
will” (consciousness). In the first case, the source is the motion of
the physical body, hence the therapeutic properties gymnastics and
sports, and the second is the human brain, hence the importance of
auto training and other all kinds of methods development and
consolidation of strong-willed qualities. N.M. Amosov describes the
above mention process of interaction between mental, physical, and
psychological in the human body adequately115.
It is known that the energy transfers from the structural state
into the phenotypic accompanied by bursts of energy into the
external environment, and from the phenotypic into the structural,
taking the energy from the outside. Here is how it writes R.F.
Abdeyev: “Informational processes are impossible without energy
costs. This fact was once again confirmed in the solution of the
famous problem with Maxwel’s demon. To write a book or to
capture the information in the form of a drawing, you must spend
114Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.42. – С. 93.
115См.: Вопросы философии. – 1992. – № 6. – С. 52-53.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
131
some energy. Accordingly in wild life the recording, for example, of
the genetic information is not done for free”.116
Even in a state of the physical rest, man consumes about 2,000
calories a day, and this heat is a “payment” of the informational
processes in the body. The information contained and circulating in
the body (both structural and operational), is very high. Each
individual cell is like a complex chemical plant, which is
programmed “anti-entropic” automatic machines, the biological
membranes operate, their ionic pumps are capable to transport the
material and information, using energy. The body, creating on one
hand, “order out of disorder” (E. Shredinger), and on the other hand
“the order of the order”, with the help of information flows,
manages a coordinated work of the thousands of plants cells. This
information flow is associated with the interaction between the cells.
Information flows, due to the interaction with the environment,
are composed of the adoption, assimilation of food (the structural
information), on the one hand, and on the other hand, the perception
of 
the 
various 
operational 
information 
(social, 
scientific,
technological, entertainment, musical etc.) by senses.
The body directs the flow of information (negative entropy)
inside it, on which is also expended the energy released as the heat.
For biological organisms, as well as for technical systems, general
is that high-quality energy – chemical, electrical, lighting, mechanical –
after reading the information is converted into the “low-quality”, the
thermal energy in the chaotic oscillations of the medium molecules.
Therefore, there occur simultaneously two interrelated and seemingly
contradictory processes: the introduction of new information that
improves the negentropy of the system in the cybernetic sense, and the
conversion of various forms of energy into heat, which means an
increase of entropy in the thermodynamic sense.
But not every living substance is able to develop phenotypic
information. By this, it should come up in the course of the upward
116Абдеев Р.Ф. Философия информационной цивилизации. – М.:"ВЛАДОС”,
1994. – С.178.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
132
evolutionary development. And science already has a version that
“at some point, when the living matter has got 15-20 billion
neurons, the biological process of development is replaced by the
process 
other 
than
biological”.117
Sobiosensor 
changes 
to
anthropogenesis.
A living being receives entirely new quality, as each neuron has
got a field, they are all connected, arranged by the conductors. So, in
such a way a field form of living matter is created. It can absorb
information from the outside, define it, adapt, reproduce, and
propagate. The field form of the living matter has no mechanical limits.
“It can sit in a protein-nucleic life, though it may withdraw from”,-
V.P. Kaznacheev writes.118The moment of appearing the idea that the
field form appears in subjectificator of the first nature, at first, is a
fundamental transition to the explaining the nature of the actual social
world. Since we are dealing here with an explanation of a qualitative
leap in the evolution of living matter, which suddenly becomes the
reasonable living matter. It took, even using the toughest calculations,
less than one quarter of one percent of the evolutionary time!
Let us consider the occurrence timing of the person and the
nature of his/her intellectual activity (noosphere quality according to
V.I. Vernadsky or consciousness in the usual formulation) across
the cosmoplanet, geological time.
V.P. Kaznacheev writes: “If we consider that the development
of living matter on the Earth lasts 3.6 – 3.8 billion years (maybe
even 4.5 billion years), then take this time to 100%, it is easy to see
that the time from the appearance of ancient man (anthropo-
evolution period) is only about 0.07% (3 mill.years) and 0.25% with
an increase of the term up to 10 mill. years. It is obvious, that the
explosive phenomenon is not comparable with any other known
phenomena in the evolution of the biosphere”.119
117Казначеев В.П. Феномен человека: космические и земные истоки.
–
Новосибирск: Новосибирское книжное издательство, 1991. – С. 8.
118Там же. – С. 8
119Там же. – С.74

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
133
Thus, the evolutionary explosion! “In this connection it should be
assumed -V.P. Kaznacheev continues, – that the combination of two
kinds of living matter of the biosphere of the Earth (up to a certain level
of evolution) was dominated by the properties and function of protein-
nucleic shape. The field form combined with the first, was an integral
part, but was not functionally dominant. The hominid neural brain mass
increases. Further psycho-physiological and intellectual activity of the
brain cannot be realized by only the existing neuronal – synaptic
connections. The field form of the neuronal communication becomes a
necessity. Those individuals, who changes the dominant functional
forms of living matter, are transformed from hominids into human
precursors, and then in humans (the second leap by Ya. Ya. Roginskiy
about 40 thousand years ago)”120. Thus, it is hard to overemphasize this
moment. It is the pinnacle of the social world nature. We have found,
finally, the movement and material, which display the living matter
beyond it and turn it into a reasonable living matter. The latter just gets
the specific attributive quality of the subjective nature of the first and
generates the social world. These are the weak electromagnetic pulses,
which constitute the force fields. The legitimacy of the central
theoretical position of the intellectual nature in existence we confirm
the results of the nature years, obtained in the laboratory of Biophysics
Institute of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Academy of Medical
Sciences of the USSR. So, V.P. Kaznacheev states: “For many years,
studying the super-weak radiation in human cells and tissues, we
concluded that the tissue culture cells emit photons of electromagnetic
fields. It can be assumed that the radiation for the cell is a necessary
manifestation of its activity that is peculiar electromagnetic
transmission system for the cell, without which the life of a cell is
impossible. This assumption has repeatedly been expressed.
Apparently, this is a universal law of propagation of the living matter in
space”.121
120Казначеев В.П. Феномен человека: космические и земные истоки.
–
Новосибирск: Новосибирское книжное издательство, 1991. – С.74.
121Там же – С. 28.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
134
Living matter, and more over intelligent matter gets out of it a
variety of products, among which, first of all, coming into contact with
the outside, the space environment in the other words, may receive the
incoming stream of protons – the basic “building” material of the
universe. It becomes active, collects and distributes into the biosphere
the obtained in the form of radiation energy; in the end, it transforms it
in the Earth’s environment into free energy capable of producing work.
This means that we have found the conditions under which a reasonable
living matter can create the social world. There is a reason to take a
closer look at the ideas of Eastern philosophy, and, in particular,
Taoism. As we know, Lao Tzu proclaimed the cosmological theory,
according to which from “Tao” is born “chi” (energy), then “form”,
“substance” and then “all things”.122 This approach is similar to modern
physics, in which energy can be preceded by the substance.
123 The
social world, as we see, is not an exception. On the other hand, the living
matter is found within the ongoing photon radiation  field and is also
being acted upon by it. The number of photons in the universe 109 or
even 1010 times outnumbers protons.124
This means that a person coming into contact with the external
environment, filters, space flows of matter – energy – information,
such as jellyfish filters sea water, removes the necessary for himself
context and thereby makes the useful work of the sea cleaning.
There is a special need to look at the messages that appear in the
literature that there is a tendency to expand the range of human
organism susceptibility and even expanding the number of the
external world perception organs, up to the acquisition of these
functions by the skin.125 Thus, Engels is right when he writes that
122См.: Хироси Н. История философской мысли Японии. – М., 1991. – С.83.
123
См.: Пилипенко В.Е., Поддубный В.А., Черненко И.В. Социальный
морфогенез: эволюция и катастрофы (синергетический подход). – К.:Наук. думка,
1993. – С.18-19.
124См.: Казначеев В.П. Феномен человека: космические и земные истоки. -
Новосибирск: Новосибирское книжное издательство, 1991. – С. 28.
125См.: Зинченко В.П., Моргунов Е.Б. Человек развивающийся. Очерки
российской психологии. – М.: Тривола, 1994. – С.151.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
135
“the power of act is something embedded in the body from the
outside, rather than inherent and inseparable from it.” 126
The assimilation processes of the exterior material and creation
of his/her social world by the living matter are rather original. For
example, proton flux absorption occurs in the form of excitation in
the human body in the same content as it is present in the form of an
objective universe. “The fact that instead of external causes, we
found for the body the definition of the external excitation
potentialities – G. Gegel wrote – is an important step on the way to
a true representation of the body”. 127
In physical terms, the interaction looks like the excitement of the
internal force field of the individual and the oscillation of the external
enegro-informational field of the social community - the group, collective,
ethnic group, nation, and, finally, the humanity. The mechanism of self-
excitation of energetic interaction between the individual and the social
group was named “passionarity”. It is described by L. Gumilev, of course,
based on the creative application of the latest Gurvich field theory to the
development of the ethnogeny phenomenon.128
In this case, in the process of development of the information,
the person, for example, involves 1015cells, which, being in fact a
giant bioantenna, occupies about 2,000,000 square meters, which is
about 200 hectares. Their dry weight equals nearly five kilograms.
The length of the capillary, these connecting channels in the human
body, is up to 100 000 km.129 And in the same, about 100,000 genes
are participating, according to the N.M. Amosov, concentrated in
the genome of nerve cells in the cerebral cortex – neuronal 1010,
1011-1012links that promise an immense number-models.130
126Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.1. – С. 597-598
127Гегель Г. Энциклопедия философских наук. – М.: Мысль, 1975. – Т.2. – С. 504.
128См.: Цехмистро И.З. Поиск 
квантовой концепции физиологических
оснований сознания. – Харьков: Выща школа, 1981.
129 См.: Малахов Г.П. Целительные силы. Биосинтез и биоэнергетика. – СПб.:
АО “Комплект”, 1994. – Т.2. – С. 98.
130См.: Амосов Н.М.Разум, человек, общество, будущее. – К.: “Байда”, 1994. – С.
34.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
136
It is important to remember that all the genetic information in
biological systems is concentrated in the macromolecular package
and the extract of the necessary information, structuring it in a
sequence are determined by the metabolic processes of the dynamic
function of the field. The entire volume of chemical reactions in the
cell, are equal to 1011-1012acts of reactions per second, governed by
directing cell function field, and realized by the chemical chain
reactions.131
Thus, from the above mentioned model of self-unfolding of the
universe through the levels, it should be clear that when there is a
pulse from the cosmic consciousness, the macro-level is being
enriched; vise versa, the macro-level enriches the universe with its
content.
Thus, it turns out that the macro-level, which is set of the living
substance biota, as an organic unity of the irrational and rational, is
a giant quantum vacuum pump membrane in the body of the
universe, the universe pumps through itself the material, while
ensuring its modification. This modification process is a transition
from a universe materialization phase
to the phase of
dematerialization.
Taking into account that the macro-level, as well as the whole
universe is of a quantum nature, all appearing here should have a
quantum origin and pulsate to the beat of the action described above
the membrane structure. If this hypothesis is confirmed in the future,
then the universe needs the social world as a vital organ without
which self-development is impossible. It seems that the social
worlds are the organs of self-movement of the universe. How it
actually goes, it should be figured out. There is every reason to
believe, that there is the process in the anti-world that is reverse to
the described one that is, the dematerialization phase transforms into
a phase of materialization. Then the circle is closed, because the
mechanism of self-movement of the universe is clearly seen.
131Казначеев В.П. Феномен человека: космические и земные истоки.
–
Новосибирск: Новосибирское книжное издательство, 1991. – С. 57.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
137
However, we continue to study the essence of the concept of
“intelligent” in the being. Going “intellectual” essence in its being
is, therefore, a process in which the result as well as the premise are
different only in form. Here, the essence of “intellectual” and its
being, are final, both are one-sided definitions, each of which
becomes more and presents itself as a non-self in another moment,
and as producing a different definition, which it carries in itself.
This transition has two opposite values; on the one hand, each
member is represented as a point, that is, passing from direct to
another, so that each member has something posited; on the other
hand, it also has the significance that each of them produces a
different, suggests another. Thus, the one and the other side is
movement.
But the acquisition by the mind of the form through the
phenomenon – it is also a definition of the content; cause and effect,
both sides of the relationship are therefore also different content of
the “intelligent”. This unity of form as the ratio of being is being
first and foremost the establishment of the transition of one certainty
of life to another, as if to say more specifically, it is the process of
the subjective form transition (psychological) into the objective
(psychophysical) and vice versa (the most interesting to us), which
is at a certain level of maturity, begins to produce an intelligent field
form of living matter.
From the material discussed in the second stage the essence of
the notion “intelligent” follows a very important conclusion that the
self-determination of a reasonable living matter in the form of the
field has got an objective appearance, and “in view of the fact that it
is at the same time identical with itself, it is an absolute
contradiction”.
132
Thus,
the resolution of the dialectical
contradictions between the psychophysical and psychological or
sensory consciousness and rational process of experiences and
132Гегель Г. Наука логики. – М.: Мысль, 1972. – Т. 3. – С. 227.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
138
awareness has an inexhaustible source of material for the social
world formation.
The leptonov human biofield, represented by us as the
noosphere, arises from the thoughts, feelings and desires of millions
and billions of people, embodies the weak biocurrents in nerve cells,
as well as in low and ultra Leptonov electromagnetic pulses emitted
by the cells become the clotted semantic space. Energy and power
of the Leptonov fields (gods) is directly proportional to the number
of people who believe in them, and the power of their faith. Perhaps
it is this fact meant the P.A. Florensky, when he spoke of the
existence of pneumatosphere and spiritosphere.133
But let us continue further study of essence movement of the
concept “intellectual” on the next stage – the stage of reality.
“Actuality – as it follows from G. Gegel’s teachings – a unity of
essence and existence; it has its truth devoid of the shape nature and
devoid of support phenomenon, in other words, the uncertain
sustainability and devoid of strength diversity. The reality is
“effectiveness”, it is not just one predicates of reality, but its
attribute of its inactive reality. The inactive actuality is the
contradiction in the definition.
So, in the phenomenon “the differences of form, the inner and
outer, is posited within itself as the totality of itself and its other; the
inner, as simple identity reflected into itself, is the immediate and
accordingly is as much being and externality as essence; and the
outer, as manifold, determinate being is only an outer, that is, is
posited as unessential and as withdrawn into its ground, hence as an
inner. This transition of each into the other is their immediate
identity as substrate; but it is also their mediated identity; for it is
precisely through its other that each is what it is in itself, the totality
of the relation…
The essential relation, in this identity of Appearance with the
inner or with essence, has determined itself into actuality”.134
133Наука и религия. – 1992. – № 4-5. – С. 15.
134Гегель Г. Наука логики. – М.: Мысль, 1971.-Т.2.- С. 169-170.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
139
This unity of the internal and external aspects of the
“intellectual” is an absolute reality, which is its absolute relation to
itself - the  substance. In other words, this is a morph of the social
world. It is of it that the second nature is woven.
Since the development of the absolutely “spiritual” is its own
action, and in this case, the one that begins with it, as well as come
to it, then it means that it is absolutely absolute. However, the
absolute, which is given only as absolute identity, is only the
absolute towards the external reflection. It is therefore not absolute,
it is absolute in a certain certainty, in other words, it is attribute.
Therefore, the absolute forms itself, causes it to be visible inside,
and defines it as an attribute.
It is clear from the history of philosophy, that the result of the
formation of “intellectual” or its attribute is egregor, understood by
us as the pulsating force field. Since this field arises based on
human mental processes, it can be considered as thoughtful air.
Thanks to it, the earthly humanity is able to break free, finally, from
a variety of external dependencies and to create a mechanism of
self-development that can help the man to lift into the space.
It is useful to refer to the egregor definitions existing in the
esoteric philosophy. For example, in the original material from
which the social reality is created, it indicates the following
position: “... Egregors isothermaterial formation, arising from some
psychic human secretions over the large groups: the tribes, states,
some parties and religious society. They are deprived of monads,
but have temporarily concentrated willed charge and the equivalent
of the consciousness”.135
So, in egregor we have the moment of the synthesizing the
physical and spiritual or phenomenal and noumenal worlds, in
particular, material from which arises the social world. The last,
as it is mentioned in the philosophical literature, is an ethereal realm
of being with a fundamental substance.
135Андреев Д. Роза мира. – М.: Тов-ство “Клышников – Комаров и К`”, 1993. –
С. 294.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
140
In this context this product, as it is evidenced by G.Gegel, is
“without the end disappearing phenomenon which presents itself;
easy etheric body, which disappears as soon as formed; not the
subjective intelligence, not its accident but its reasonableness as
real. This very reality is perfect and infinite and directly in its being
as its opposite, namely, non-being, so that the etheric body, which is
the extreme terms, is real in terms of the concept, but to preserve the
body of the creature, its ideality should immediately come to
nothing – and there is a manifestation of it in this very
connectedness to each other, and the appearance of dying. This
middle term is completely intelligent, it is subjective, there are
individuals in the intelligence, but its physicality general objective
and the subjective being (for) the immediacy of the nature of this
being given directly as objectivity. This idealized reasonable
medium term is speech, an instrument of the mind, a child of
intelligent beings”.136
Only the esoteric philosophy purpose fully studies egregor that
under it understands the consciousness of society as opposed to the
individual minds of the individuals. Egregor is the combination of the
noumenal and the phenomenal, and is the disclosure the system of ideas
in certain conditions of the phenomenal world. For example, V.
Shmakov writes: “the totality of the members of the group
consciousness is something essentially relevant in the esoteric tradition,
it is called egregore. So, egregore is an organic totality of the actual
consciousness of all members of the group”.137 However, it considers the
family consciousness as the simplest egregor.
138 Along with it, it
highlights the economic, political and other its types.139
This particular product is a force field, which is sometimes
described in the literature as a functioning element of the culture or
136Гегель Г. Философия права. – М.: Мысль, 1990. – С. 291.
137 Шмаков В. Закон синархии и учение о двойственной иерархии монад и
множеств. – К.: “София”, Ltd., 1994. – С. 261.
138Там же. – С. 267-269; 279; 283-285 и др
139Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.12. – С. 733.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
141
specific formation of ether type. This “whole” K. Marx also
describes “as a special ether which defines the specific weight of all
that exists, and can be found in it”.140 This “whole” is the “the
beginning” according to V.I. Lenin.141
At the same time, it must be noted that the scientific thought of
mankind is the most efficient of its kind.
It has an energy-informational character, corresponding to the
nature of the world base. On the one hand, it is the product of the
purposeful scientific or reasonable human activities, and on the
other it carries in the quantum-vacuum form the semantic
information about objects and processes that take place not only
within the boundaries of our universe, but going far beyond its
borders. It gives the World evolutionary process the cosmic scale,
the special geological significance and the total character.
Today it is quite clear that the thought, including science, is the
interaction of the neutrons in the brain, which are already available
for the studying by the modern science. This is primarily done by
quantum bio-energy and computer science that studies the processes
of exchanging weak and ultra-weak energy informational signals. It
is, incidentally, helps to take a fresh look at the phenomenon of
telepathy, 
telekinesis, 
clairvoyance, 
dowsing, 
poltergeists,
levitation, reincarnation, and others.
For an electron, the neutron processes are the energy cloud with
an individual spot patterns and weight. And, of course, with their
magnetic, gravity, photon replicas, unique space-filling, we call it
the noosphere. In this way the idea surpasses the limits of head. So,
it is really becomes a material. This is the mechanism of its effects
on the global order. Let us remember: “Every thought affects the
course of world development”.
But, we can already point out, that lepnoton-electromagnetic
hypothesis of material carriers of the physical fields in the form of
leptons (light elementary particles, starting from electrons) and their
140Ленин В.И. Полн. собр. соч. – Т.1. – С. 318.
141Там же. – С. 274.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
142
division – microleptons (starting from neutrinos) looks rather pretty.
According to this hypothesis, as we know, the space, surrounding
us, is permeated with the microlepton waves that transmit the
movement of the global lepton gas. According to its creator B.I.
Isakov: “Around all bodies there are standing lepton wave” – the
quantum hologram inserted into each other and copying the
geometry and structure of the body. Each hologram contains all the
information about the body, being its “counterpart information”.142
In a physical way, this phenomenon takes place at the macro
level as the social world, a naturalized person in the objectified
form. The man himself/herself appears as its chief architect and the
builder.
The above-mentioned arguments are convincing us that we
correctly identified the nature of the second nature of the wave-
corpuscle field, which produces a reasonable living matter. In this
connection, it is necessary to take a fresh look at the whole animal
kingdom – biota, which should also be considered as the source of a
specific range of the force field, not only as a food or vehicle.
In his time V.I. Vernadsky spoke about the organization of the
biosphere, which produces the noosphere. So, the latter consists of
the organic energy of the living matter (matter). This idea V.P.
Kaznacheev brilliantly demonstrated by the following experiment.
He took two flasks and segregated the filler with the quartz glass,
than the experimenter placed inside the same cell culture. Then, the
cells from one flask were struck with a virus or poison that killed
them. The cells, securely isolated in the second flask, died four
hours later. This experience encourages us to think about the
transmission of information at unknown energy level, not only of
human, but also at lower levels of the living matter organization.
However, we have not still finished the consideration of the
category of “intelligent” as we didn’t make a single concept model
of self-motion nature and didn’t give its definition.
142Наука и религия. – 1992. – № 4-5. – С. 15.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
143
Thus, it follows from the above, that the concept model of
“intelligent” is as follows (see fig .: 2.2):
Phase of existence Phase of being or occurrence Phase of reality
REFLECTION
Fig. 2.2. The structure of the category “intelligent”.
We have tracked the changes of the “intellectual” in the chain:
the existence – the phenomenon or being – reality, we have covered
the laws of its transition from one state to the other based on a
qualitative transformation of the content. Thus, we have come
closely to working out our understanding of this category, showing
the most significant properties, natural connections and relationships
we found above.
So, we propose a working definition of the category of
“intelligent”, under which, in our opinion, it is understood a special
way of human liberation in the process of mediation of dialectical
interaction between the material and the spiritual principles of the
free energy of the universe, which in the beginning appears as an
internal stress edentelechy form, and then in the phenomenon
takes place a total reflective process, revealing itself in reality by a
surge of energy specific force field – egregor.
If you look at the ontology of the intellectual, the following
picture emerges: from the sphere of the material at this stage of the
PSYCHOLOGICAL
ENTELECHY
EGREGOR
PSYCHOPHYSICAL

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
144
fundamental interactions mediation “the material – the spiritual” the
rejection of the particle energy in the form of a signal is possible,
and from the area of the spiritual –the bits of knowledge on the stage
of transition from the meaning to the structural information.
Thus, the egregore is exactly that energy-or force field from
which the pattern of the social world appears. There is no pure
form of the matter (substance) or spirit (mind) in egregor. They exist
here in a modified form as an organic unity. This objectified human
universe. It sounds ironically, but it’s true: the universe turned itself
inside out. First, from the objective state, it moved to the subjective,
taking the form of the human body, and later intensively began to
objectify itself in the social form.
Thus, ontologically egregore
is
a weak electromagnetic
interaction of the material particles resulting from the human brain,
further enriched by the particles of the intelligence – knowledge.
This material is of a quantum-wave origin and it creates the fabric of
the social world. V.I. Vernadsky has repeatedly stressed the idea of
the special conditions (types of organizations) of spatial-temporary
phenomena, which are associated with the vital activity of the living
organisms, the living matter.
The process of producing egregor coincides with the production
of new knowledge; it arises during the transition of the universe
from the spiritual to the material state. In the same case, when the
motion is on the line “the material – the spiritual”, the power
consumption takes place from the outside to the human body.
The phenomenon egregor appears as the pulsing energy-field.
The double name is not a coincidence. Structurally, it consists of the
quantum energy and quantum semantics. After an elementary
particle is defined, representing the egregore in the existence, this
duality will be overcome. In practice, the total force field arises
from the products of the mind, rejected by the individuals. The
force field is built by the specific gravity of the energy and
semantic charge, getting a stable structure. But since these are the

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
145
pulsating elements, from them are formed and function the highly
dynamic functional systems.
In reality, there is a constant process of self-consistent and self-
destruction of the social systems, for example, lepton molecules
(mother-child, pair of lovers, predator -victim, political parties,
religious sects and world religions, God, etc.). Using them the
stronger fields are a constant process, the largest of which is the
force or energy-informational field of the Earth, whose existence is
no longer a doubt. In practice it has several names. Here, we only
theoretically have explained the legitimacy of its existence.
Since self-generation of the energy-power fields is a natural
process, it is necessary to proceed from the general laws of
thermodynamics while explaining the laws of self-manifestation and
functioning break the boundaries of thermodynamics to the power of
semantic processes, as well as to modify its conclusions at the
beginning in relation to the subjective, and then to the objectify
form of energy. The world is unified, therefore at the same levels of
the organization operate the same laws and regularities. Only a form
of the universum’s  external  manifestation changes depending on
the phase of its self-motion.
We’re very close to confirm V.I. Vernadsky’s idea that in the
different areas and at the different levels of the hierarchical
organization of the universe, the different types of material and
energy flows are used, there are the diverse forms of living matter
that are based on the various field forms. In particular, it is what we
have now reached, means that there is a specific form of the
reasonable living matter with the electromagnetic field of the
species. Thereby, Sorokin’s brilliant idea is confirmed that “the
most complex forms of civilization occur only from the
development of the mental life”.143
V.P. Kaznacheev indicates the existence of an objective
“programmed” by the general physical laws of the space – time
143Сорокин П. Человек. Цивилизация. Общество. – М.: Политиздат, 1992. – С.
490.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
146
local area, in which the conditions are created for the emergence of
the thinking beings. In particular, he writes: “As a result of the
evolution of the cosmic whole, the living matter and the reasonable
living matter arise, objectively; the emergence of the specific,
complex form of the space organization of material flow in certain
local areas within the spatial-temporal organization of the universe
is becoming possible”.144
The proof of the above-mentioned hypothesis we intend to
expand in the future. It is, though, debatable, however, does not
contradict the known functional definitions of life that were
previously formulated by A.N. Kolmogorov and A.A. Lyapunov.
In such a way can be formalized the main law governing the
self-unfolding of the philosophical categories of “intelligent”. Its
essence lies in the fact that the free energy ejected by the humanity
in the space environment, achieving the critical amount, determined
by the strength of the external compression under the Earth
conditions creates a qualitatively new form of the planetary life,
which should be called social. The latter is the product of the
integration of individual pulsing fields.
It is important to emphasize the fact that a reasonable living
matter grows through evolution of the biosphere, which means that
it is the same natural body as “primary” living matter. Therefore, a
reasonable living matter is also the subject of study of the natural
science. And the quantum bioenergy, using the ideas of the quantum
statistical physics, can explain the materiality of the basic
elementary particles of the intelligent, it is capable to maintain
stability, develop, transform and demonstrate the organismic
features.
So, during the peoples’ life, steadily specific formation is
formed and functioned, according V.V. Nalimov and Zh.A.
Drogalina, it is the semantic field. They wrote: “It was previously
assumed a lot of terms to denote that problem field, which we are
144Казначеев В. П. Феномен человека: космические и земные истоки. –
Новосибирск: Новосибирское книжное издательство, 1991. – С. 33.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
147
now considering from the point of concept of the unconscious, and
various verbal formulations already indicate that the authors gave
preference to value of the individual components of this immensely
broad field. Freud wrote about unconscious; Jung – the collective
unconscious; James – a stream of consciousness; Buchan – cosmic
consciousness; Bergson – intuition; Husserl – transcendental
phenomenology; Whitehead – the category of eternal objects;
Popper – third world world intelligibly; Assagioli– subpersonality;
Leibniz – dark picture of the soul, in which the contents of the mind
slumber; Gegel – a developing spirit; ... Plato – the world of
ideas”.145 To this we can add the archetypes of our contemporary
S.B. Krymskiy.
Apparently, it may take a little time, and the natural scientists,
for sure it will be biophysics, will disclose the substantial is
possible, that it will be a bit like the quantitative information unit,
which is firmly establishing itself in the field of informatics. There
is a possibility, that noomi must be recognized or the elementary
particle of the social field. This particle is now intensively sought
for not only by cybernetics but also psychologist.146Moreover, the
scientific practice has already argued that the fact of setting the
targets for the discovery of a particle is an indirect proof of its
existence (objective and material), since the problem never arises
until there are no preconditions to resolve it.
And here again, in the future, mankind expects another
evolutionary leap, which must take place on the basis of abrupt
increase by the planetary humanity the intellectual power. In this
regard, it is the assertion that “if the co-operation of several billions of
cells in the brain can produce our capacity of consciousness, the more
acceptable is the idea that some sort of co-operation of all mankind or
145Налимов В.В., Дрогалина Ж.А. Реальность нереального. Вероятностная
модель бессознательного. – М.: Издательство “МИР ИДЕЙ”, АО АКРОН, 1995. –
С. 365-366.
146См.: Зинченко В.П., Моргунов Е.Б. Человек развивающийся. Очерки
российской психологии. – М.: Тривола, 1994. – С. 104.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
148
part of it will determine what Cont called “superhuman supreme
being”.147It is clear that the work on the creation of the artificial
intelligence is a necessary preparatory stage on the way to it.
The “quality nodularity” of the universe, which we have just
considered in the structure of a reasonable living matter, is marked,
as we now understand, with the term “vital functions”, in this case
of the human body. This ingredient “life”, as it follows from the
previously proposed hypothesis, reflects the interaction of the
material and the spiritual, and “activity” – reflects the production of
free energy that can do work on the formation of the social
environment. Even in Bhagavad-gita is said that “this world is
bound by the action”.
Thus, the “quality nodularity” possessing the enormous energy
potential is the integration of nature, man and the second nature. It is
the energy nodularity and it is a derivative value of the original state
of the universe. With this approach, to the man is put the
corresponding discrete unit – the energy photons, corresponding to
the possible states of the universe: the natural and the artificial, the
subjective and objective, observable and unobservable, visible and
invisible.
But the energy in general and the cultivated intellectual energy
cannot be the basis of the universe, because it is observable and of it
should be considered non-existence in a state of not observability,
which is a potential basis of the reality, having the features of the
observability.148
It turns out that to a man, thanks to his/her possession of the
knotted quality, the various kinds of energy, is available the entry
(multiple and instant) in the area of physical and semantic vacuum.
Based on his basic needs, he can use the power of fluctuations
(effects), and inform in turn the photon or semantic vacuum, if it is
possible, both at the same time, a sufficient amount of energy for the
147Цит. по:Тейяр де Шарден П. Феномен человека. – М.: Наука, 1987. – С. 56.
148См.: Физика микромира (ред. Ширков Д.В.). – М.: Советская энциклопедия,
1980.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
149
generation of photons, or particles of semantic vacuum, which does
not yet have a name. So the vacuum state of the universe from
unobservable becomes observable. Only then, by further subjection
(transformation) in a biological organism universe gets the output to
the external environment. This is due to the special process of
objectification of the person’s inner content.
So, the distinction of the social world consists of the fact that its
foundation is intellectual energy of the rational living matter, which
arises in the course of the dialectical interaction of the physical and
semantic vacuum in the structure of the biological body. It means
that its nature is the derivative magnitude of the intermediate
product – the psychic energy of the living matter in which
Nothing, and Something has once undergone a transformation
and has formed a new reality, which we call social. It, in its turn, is
just another transitional step in the self-unfolding of the universe.
This is how functions the self-propulsion mechanism of the
universe, which, as we see, is a multistage. Multistage is the
attributive property of the universe, it provides its access to
Something (being) and returns to Nothing (base).
Thus, we can finish analyzing the nature of the social world.
However, before we do that, we will just draw the main conclusions
arising from the fact that we have opened in the course of the
foregoing. Their essence is as follows. First, the disparity of the
views on the nature of the social world is overcome. To do this, we
had to analyze in depth the process of the development of the living
matter and to allocate in it two levels: the simplest living matter and
the reasonable living matter. The path of transition from the first to
the second is shown. The factors and conditions of maintaining a
reasonable progression in planetary terms is opened. The intelligent
by its function in the self-unfolding of the universe in the logical
area is the same as the psychic unconscious or urological phase of
self-movement.
Second the corpuscular-wave nature of the social world is
proved. This means that the social form of the movement is

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
150
organically merged with other sublayer forms of the universe. As
the analogue here can be mentioned the London-Heitler quantum
theory of the chemical bonds, developed in 1926-27 by V. Heitler
and F.London. Thelogical conclusion follows that the laws of self-
unfolding of the living organism as a whole can be applied to the
social world as well.
Third, in the course of the analysis we came across with the
existence of the field form of the reasonable living matter – the
human. On the basis of it, the hypothesis is grounded about the
existence of a specific field form of a generic human life, based on
the total variance in the nature of the base universe structure.
Fourth, we have defined the philosophical category of
“intellectual” as a way to produce free energy capable of doing
work outside the human body. At the same time, the human body
becomes an instrument of production of social world, based on the
intellectual energy.
The explanation of the nature and the content of the category
“intellectual” revealed the specifics of the intellectual stage
generating second nature by converting the first nature. First, the
latter was subjected by man in the intrapersonal products and then
objectified in the social structure. As a product of the social world is
a continuous process, man becomes a part of the specific form of the
universe self-movement, called social life, where he/she merges
with the whole human race. In other words, thanks to the attributive
feature of producing the intellectual energy, there is a generic
human life.
In fact, we have disclosed a particular stage in the chain of
continuous mediation of the universe changes. The latter is deployed
in the other plane than the one in which occurs the mutual transition
“the material – the spiritual”. Ontologically the intelligent is the
particle, which has synthesized in the organic unity from the
spiritual field – knowledge and from the material the signal – an
electromagnetic pulse. This is the objectified universe.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
151
Fifthly, it is theoretically shown that the mental substrate
contains the biological life, and intellectual contains the generic life
of man, which forms a completely different, according to the
principles of formation and functioning, social world. At the same
time, the human race in order to maintain the necessary level of its
ability to live forms a collective intelligence that leads it beyond the
planet Earth. Currently, the planetary humanity seeks to strengthen
this function by creating an artificial intelligence. However, the
research work is hampered due to the lack of hypotheses about the
nature and mechanisms of the mind self-movement.
At this point we can stop and turn to the nature of the social
world.
2.3. The social world essence
To define the essence of the social world scientists should pay
attention to its inner structure characterized by the unity of
multifunctional and contradictory forms of its existence. According
to this assumption, social phenomenon is defined as the expression
of the social world. In the terms of cognitive mechanism categories
of the social world essence and its expression we observe the
transition from the diversity of social world existing forms to its
inner structure and unity – to the notion. As the social world
represents the totality, the understanding of its essence is the main
task of philosophy or its branch social philosophy.
By that time the understanding of the social world essence was
the main task of sociology. The theoretical background of sociology
shows that the essence of social phenomenon was interpreted in
different ways and the scientists have not reached the agreement yet.
F. Giddins writes “Professor Ludwig Gumpilovych made an attempt

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
152
to prove that even true social phenomena are considered to be the
assimilation of different social groups”. Novikov had moved further.
The scientist claimed that social evolution is a progressive form of
conflict diversity and as a result the conflict itself is not considered
as a physical struggle any more. Moreover, it should be analyzed as
an intellectual struggle. Professor De Greed is agree with their
assumption. He found a different feature of social phenomenon. His
measure of social progress is rather original. He was sure that forced
power should be replaced by the conscious agreement. Another
scientist who represented original and interesting research works
was Gabriel Tard. He proved that primary social fact lies in the
difference between labour and agreement.
Professor
Émile
Durkheim didn’t agree with Tard. He tried to prove that existing
social progress depends on the individual mind in relation to its
external actions, thoughts and feelings149.
F. Giddins was sure that Tard and Durkheim were very close to
the understanding of the social world essence but the essence of
elementary social fact, which is closely connected with imagination
and imitation, is not imitation and imagination itself. F. Giddens
states that we have to find it in such form, which would suit the
existing society and nothing else150.
Modern scientists express different points of view too. They try
to explain the essence of social phenomenon through the prism of
sociology. For example Y Autweid states that “social” is closely
connected with the notion “social reality”. N Smelzer identified it in
terms of “society and social relations”. V.N. Ivanov relates it to the
notion “social relations”. V.A. Yadov relates it to the category
“social community”.
Zh. T. Toshchenko
and V.E. Boykov
consideres “civil society” to be the main object of sociology. M.S.
Komarov doesn’t take into account social essence of this
149 Американская социологическая мысль: Тексты / Под ред. В.И. Добренькова.
– М.: Изд-во МГУ, 1994. – С. 301.
150Американская социологическая мысль: Тексты / Под ред. В.И. Добренькова. –
М.: Изд-во МГУ, 1994. – С.302.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
153
phenomenon. He states that the initial social elements are “steady
forms of these relations” – typical and standard aspects of social
relations which contain changeable social reality151.
There are numerous attempts of different scientists to give the
definition of this notion. One of them is represented in monograph of
Russian scientists “Sociology” which was published in 1990. The
authors claim that “social” is represented as the unity of characteristic
features and peculiarities of social relations which is integrated by
individuals or community in the process of common activity
(interaction) under some definite conditions152, it is identified in the
process of their relation to each other” and social role in society, the
attitude to social processes. This typical definition of “social” doesn’t
help us to identify the essence of the social world.
Moreover, it leads to negative consequences. One of them is
theoretical uncertainty; another one proves the practical helplessness
of sociological science.
The first of them is revealed by the means of the materials of XII
and XIII world sociological congresses because of the absence of clear
definition of ’social reality’ and also about the sense and the way of its
rationalization, sociological cognition has brightly evident relative
character. According to the opinion of the majority of the participants
of the XII congress there is no even a need to aspire for creation of
general sociological theory which would give satisfactory explanation
for variety of current processes. This ideological policy created
ethnomethodology as a scientific discipline.
As it was emphasized by the President of the International
sociological association T.K. Oommen it is not the integration of the
theory needed for the whole world but the consolidation of
approaches, concepts, cultures, lifestyles and ways of thinking. In
reality it means that nowadays in most cases sensibly organized
151Комаров М.С. Размышления о предмете и перспективах социологии //
Социологические исследования. – 1990. – № 3. – С.37.
152Социология // Осипов Г.В. /рук. автор. кол./ Ю.П. Коваленко, Н.И. Щупанов,
Р.Г. Яновский. – М.: Мысль, 1990. – С.27.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
154
social life of people cannot be opposed to naturally flowing social
processes even theoretically as there is no opportunity to cognize
objective regularities of human civilization self-development. With
this, as it is well known, researches who support positions of
materialistic dialectics cannot agree.
Paradoxically but fact that there is no the definition in
’Philosophical Encyclopedia’, and among the 150 terms with the
descriptive form ’social’ there are no terms as ’social pathology’,
’social norm of pathology’, ’social pathology of science’, ’social
physics’,
’social 
physiology’,
’social 
defection’,
’social
dismemberment’, ’social illnesses’, ’social instinct’, ’social reaction
of animals’ as far as the terms ’social movement’, ’social form of
movement’ etc. To be precise there is one notion given ’social
movement’, but in the meaning of ’national movement’.
Till the present moment the analysis of social form of material
movement (we will keep to the spread terminology) has been
usually restricted to general discussions about material production,
productive forces, productive relations and stating the fact that there
are social systems of different order in the society. At the same time
it has been discovered that works devoted to private issues of social
movement not rarely happen to be methodologically vulnerable
namely as a result of the fact that more global problems of society
development have not been solved.
At the same time from the philosophically-economical heritage
by C. Marks and F. Engels it is clearly seen that the reason of
appearing of social is social division of labor in which they firstly
found a key to understanding the history of social development and
then explanation of origin of social and ’personal relations’. Namely
they represented ’social’ as ’humanistic relation of a human to
another human’153.
In the work ’The German ideology’ the classics of Marxism
rather clearly stated the idea of isolating individuals’ activity in
153 Marx C., Engels F., Comp. – 2nd edition – T.42. – p. 154

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
155
relation to their own corporal organization, “alongside their attitude
to the nature and one another” 154. The specifics of social relations
they saw in the fact that process of labor presumes the existence of
special relations connected with conditions of existence and
widened reproduction of cumulative individual as working force and
personality and in these relations people have been personalities,
subjects, individuals, expressing particular relation from a person to
a person, ’personal relations’, a person’s to a group, collective,
society and so on155. V.I. Lenin made an important conclusion about
’practical identity of a human to human used to “signify social or
human attitude of a human to human’ 156.
By the end of XX-th century in the theory of cognition it has
been stated that ’social’ is not a synonym to ’societal’. It has been
rather strictly fixed in scientific literature157. And the fact must be
admitted as positive. However in practice to a great regret these two
terms have been often used as identical which logically leads to
logical mistakes and misunderstandings.
We are deductively approaching the essence of the social world.
For us the essence allows its alternative being, it means that it
can be actualized in its potential forms given empirically. To put it
another way, the essence does not emerge by itself or as a result of
external factors, it is the formation of the functional relations of the
social world itself.
Abovementioned way of studying the essence of the social
world is described in Hegel’s study of essence. Its sense is in the
fact that thanks to the operation of definite reflection it is possible in
really existing social world to look for and to find its truth which is
presented to us as truth of social connections. H. Hegel writes about
this: Since the goal of knowledge is the truth, whabeing is in and for
154 Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.3. – С.24 .
155См.: Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.3. – С.438-441; Т.23. – С.181-183,
243-244, 586-587.
156См.: Ленин В.И. Полн. собр. соч. – Т. 29. – С.14.
157См.: 
Социология 
//Осипов 
Г.В. 
/рук. 
автор. 
кол./ 
Ю.П.Коваленко,
Н.И.Щупанов, Р.Г.Яновский. – М.: Мысль, 1990. – С 25-26.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
156
itself, knowledge does not stop at the immediate and its
determinations, but penetrates beyond it on the presupposition that
behind this being there still is something other than being itself, and
that this background constitutes the truth of being. This cognition is
a mediated knowledge, for it is not to be found with and in essence
immediately, but starts off from another, from being, and has a prior
way to make, the way that leads over and beyond being or that
rather penetrates (sich erinnert) into it. Only inasmuch as knowledge
recollects itself into itself out of immediate being, does it find
essence through this mediation. 158.
Thus, on the basis of the above explained policy we in the being
of the social world must find something that in case of reflexive self
penetrating becomes its essence as the last has been always
understood as functional aspect of the notion.
‘However, in our research, as it was mentioned before, we are
going not from the existing social world to the essence, but from the
first nature through the person to the second nature; therefore, we
have to find another method of explaining the essence of the social.
G. Hegel points out the principal possibility of such direction of the
research. According to him, the basis, on the one hand, is the basis
as the reflected into itself definition of the content typical for the
present existence, which it founds; and, on the other hand, it is from
what the present existence should be understood; (in reality as Hegel
points out) it is vice versa, we go from the present existence to the
basis, and the basis is understood from the present existence’.’159.
With this approach to explanation the social notion ’simply and
rather conveniently comes out of its basis'.
It is clear that we need other categories and logic to structure the
proof. The other question that results of our explanation of social
essence notion and result got earlier by other researchers have to
coincide. Moreover, it is even better, for we have a reference point,
158 Hegel H. The Science of logic. In 3 v. – M.: Mysl, 1971. – V. 2. – P.7.
159 Hegel H. The Science of logic. In 3 v. – M.: Mysl, 1971. – V. 2. – P.88.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
157
which other researchers, such as K. Marx and his contemporaries,
interested in this problem, did not have.
Over all, we become more and more convicted that the
approach of studying the social world through the prism of a person
is very promising. It has become possible thanks to the theoretical
reconstruction of the process of formation of human man’s personal
identity and thanks to the validation of it as the basis of the social
world.
Let us remind that whilst analysis of the form making of the
third stage of the human personality we stated that its self cognition
creates the product which goes beyond human’s mind and has its
own life. We called it over-consciousness.
At this, the over-consciousness of a person is an intellectual
product that got the shape of a notion. The latter is the noumenal
element that starts to exist separately. Therefore, beyond the human
organism this material and spiritual body gets the original shape
and exists in a different environment; and because of that it displays
new, not found earlier, attributive qualities of universum. This is
how the process of personal partial rejection of individual life from
its source occurs. So, we will discuss the fate of this strange product
as the initial moment of self – creation of the social world.
This specific product is stated in philosophy under the notion of
“social”. At that, the difference between “intellectual” and “social”
lies only in the fact that the first is the alienated (rejected) product of
one human body and the second is the joint functioning of these
alienated (rejected) products in the external environment, which we
call social. During the integration of the intellectual products
created by separate individuals into the organic system that
functions in a different environment the change in their quality
takes place. Usually the appearance of new qualities of the
substance happens upon the change of existence. Therefore, the
answer to the stated question should be searched in the notion of
“social”.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
158
Again, we have to go back to Hegel theory about the essence of
the notion in order to research the self-motion of the essence of
“social” in three stages, namely: the existence of the phenomenon or
the essence of the reality. In other words, we will have to do the
same analysis of the change of substance that we have done in
respect of the notion of “intellectual” with the only difference being
that in this case the self – development happens not inside of the
human body, but in the external environment, where different
factors play their role.
We judge by the fact that at the stage of existence the essence
of “social” becomes the collective energy field that appeared on the
basis of the integration of the individual force fields, i.e. the
products, which we called the over-consciousness. As the self –
consciousness has created it as a notion and rejected it in the form of
energetic impulse beyond the head of the person, it mediates as the
notion for other members of the force field and “such mediacy is the
intellect” 160.
Hegel wrote that spirit must be understood as attraction as it is
activity namely first of all … the activity with mediation of which
the object that seems to be odd instead of an image of something
premise, different and accidental is gaining the form of something
that became inner, subjective, overall, necessary and sensible’161.
The mechanism, thanks to which the transpersonal product is
received, is the action. It is understood here under the interpretation
given to it by the psychological science.  Earlier we have underlined
the circumstance that psychology considers the category of “action”
to be its main subject.
It is important for us to emphasize the psychological definition
of the content of this category. As V. Zinchenko and E. Morgunov
write, “the action is the live form similar to the organic system,
where not only its typical features develop, but where the
160Гегель Г. Наука логики. В 3-х т. – М.: Мысль, 1971. – Т.2. – С. 73.
161 Hegel H. Encyclopedia of Philosophical Sciences.- M.: Mysl, 1977. – V. 3. P. 258

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
159
(functional. – V.B.) organs, which such system lacks, are arranged
and developed” 162.
Based on such definition of the category of the “action” by the
psychologists, we view the integration of the over-consciousness of
the individuals as the intellectual interaction of people among
themselves. In other words, here we deal with the spiritual form of
communication of the subjects of the historical action among each
other on the “subject – subject” principle. Such a process corresponds
to the meaning of the term “Verkehr” introduced in the work German
ideology by K. Marx and F. Engels. Communication as the event of
intersubjective character is studied by M. Kagan in the work World of
communication. He wrote, that “not the exchange of ideas and things
happens in the process and in the result of communication, but the
transformation of the state of each partner into their mutual
acquisition. Communication creates oneness and exchange keeps the
detachment of its members” 163. How not to recall L. Humilyov’s
passionarity here.
It will be only fair to note that G. Zimmel in his sociological
works was the first to point out that the communication was the key
notion of social life. But we agree with him only partially, as we
distinguish interrelation of intellectual energetic impulses as
primary detection of essence of ’social’ on the stage of existence
namely as a simple in itself the very essence in its inside
themselves.
Just over whilst the substantiation of social world nature we
showed that it was the field form of life.
M. Weber views the separate individual and his action as the
prime element, as the “atom” of the social world. He writes that we
call the action of a personality (regardless of its character, external
or internal. It comes down to noninterference and tolerant
acceptance), if and because the acting individual or individuals
162Zinchenko V.P., Morgunov E.B. A Human Developing. Essays of Russian
Psychology. – M.: Trivola, 1994. – P. 94 – 95.
163 Kagan M.S. The World of Communication. – M.: Politizdat, 1988. – P. 150.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
160
connect the subjective meaning to it. We call “social” such an
action, which, based on a predicted by the persona or personae
meaning, corresponds to the action of other people and focuses on
them. 164.
M. Weber considered action as an action of a person that had a
subjective meaning, namely sense. That is why sociology, to his
point of view, studies not only facts, as positivism offers, but the
inner world of an action – ideas, motives, objective reasons which
are put into an action by a person. From this the general method of
sociology he saw in understanding and interpretation of the sense of
an action. F. Znanetskiy includes into the subject one of the main
branches of sociology ’actions accomplished under a person as an
object and admitted to call particular reactions from his side. These
are social actions. Rather distinguishable from other actions
accomplished not on the people but on the material things,
economical values, sacral objects and mystical forces, objects of
esthetical perception, linguistic symbols and scientific theories
called to
produce
not the human reactions, but technical,
economical, religious, artistic, literature and scientific results’165.
T. Parsons put the action into the basis of his social system, and
he turned the person into the doer. According to T. Parsons, action
is some process in the “active subject – situation” system, which has
the motivational meaning for the acting individual or, in case of the
collective, individuals that make it up. This means that the
orientation of corresponding processes of action is connected with
the achievement of satisfaction or avoidance of trouble from the side
of the corresponding active subject no matter how specific it looks
from the point of view of the structure of this personality. Only
because the attitude towards the situation from the side of the
subject of action will have the motivational character in this
164 Weber M. Chosen compositions. – M.: Progress, 1990. – P. 602 – 603
165Znanetskiy F. Initial Data of Sociology // American Sociological Thought: Texts. –
M.: Publ. MGU, 1994. – P. 70 – 71.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
161
understanding, it will be viewed as the action in the exact meaning.
166.
The theory of interpersonal interaction of people, proposed by
N. Smelser, appeared in order to explain the importance of this
moment in the life of the planetary humanity. He states as its
components G. Homans’ theory of exchange, G. Mead’s and G.
Blumer’s symbolical interactionism, E. Gofman’s management of
impressions and psychoanalytical theory of Z. Freud167.
The sociology studies not only rational action (which has
clearly acknowledged goal, means, results and benefit), but the
traditional action (the action based on the formed habit or custom),
the value rational action (according to the duty or the belief) and the
affective action (the action based on the emotional condition). In the
work “Protestant ethics and spirit of capitalism”, Weber turns to the
exploration of irrational ethical and religious motives of the
appearance of the capitalistic relations 168.
K. Marx, studying the problem of alienated (rejected) labour,
also has found the category of interaction of people in the process of
the generic life of a person. In connection to this, he wrote that “we
got the notion of alienated labour(alienated life) based on political
economy, as the result of the movement of the private property.
However, the analysis of this notion shows that even though private
property acts as the basis and the reason of the alienated (rejected)
labour, in reality it is, vice versa, its result, similar to the fact that
gods initially are not the reason, but the result of the deception of
human intellect. Later this attitude transforms into the attitude of
interaction” 169. At that, the Marxism interprets the social action as
the form or the means of the solution of social problems and
166Парсонс Т. Система координат действия и общая теория систем действия:
культура, личность и место социальных систем // Американская социологическая
мысль: Тексты. – М.: Изд-во МГУ, 1994. – С.449.
167См.: Смелзер Н. Социология: пер. с англ. – М.: Феникс, 1994. – С.133.
168См.: Веселов Ю.В. Экономическая социология: История идей. – СПб. :
Издательство С-Петербургского университета, 1995. – С. 37.
169Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.42. – С. 97.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
162
contradictions, in the basis of which lays the conflict of interests and
needs of the main social forces of the given society 170. According to
apparition of Marxism the social action is being prepared by social
movements led by particular programs and ideology. Developed
social movements create their own organizations
–
parties,
associations, political unions.
In the present literature the moment of out coming of the
essence of the social from a human organism as its foundation onto
the stage of existence has been noticed for a long time and caught
with the notions as ’archetypes’ or universal images and models for
cognition of the world, ’unconscious structures’, ’It’ by Z. Freud,
’Understanding’ by V. Dilthey, ’Collective unconscious’ by C. G.
Jung, ’Civil Religion’ by E. Durkgame, ’Communicative action’ by
M. Weber, ’Anthroposphere’ by V. I. Vernadskiy, ’Orientation’ by
D. N. Uznadze, ’Acceptor of the notion’ by P. K. Anokhin, ’the
image of required future’ by N. A. Berstein, ’Scheme’ by P. Fress
and S. Moskovichi,
’Information model’
by V.N. Pushkin,
’Passionarity’ by L. Gumilev, ’Mentality of Nation’, ’Spirit of
nation’, ’Mentality of the Nation’ and etc. Therefore, it is no
coincidence, that their studies as a rule were restricted to the
attempts to establish the extent and the forms of influence of the
collective intellect upon the individual one. The influence of the
individual on the collective was less examined. The latter was often
analyzed through the prism of the leadership in a group, videlicet for
the solving the morphological, but not functional tasks.
As Liliein field has mentioned that there is a great analogy
between development of the organism in the nature and
development of public groups. In both cases the cells, if there is
enough of them, aspire for uniting with each other. In the social
organism individuals correlate with each other with the help of
reflexes directly or indirectly. That is why here the grouping of cells
does not lead, as it happens in nature, to mechanical piling or plastic
170См.: Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.27. – С. 410.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
163
that has a shape of a leaf or a plate, but awakes simultaneous
vibrations, movements, activity in particular directions in different
individuals. It is especially applied according to his opinion to
general social dynamics.
E. Durkheim, for example, trying to realize what the society that
does not transcend anything, but that self – transcends all of its
members is based on, finds the source in the unity of feelings
towards the goal and the ideals and calls it “civil religion” that
connects people by the force, which cannot be ruined by the
technological progress.
The moment of interaction looks very convincing according to
L. Gumilyov, who wrote “the collective feeling that lights up at the
meeting expresses not only what is common between all the
individual feelings. As we showed, it is something absolutely
different. This is the result of common life, the product of actions
and 
contractions 
that 
happen 
between 
the 
individual
consciousnesses. And if it reflects in every one of them, it is due to
that special energy, which has the collective origin. If all the hearts
beat like one, this is not because of random or present agreement,
but because they are moved by the same force and in the same
direction. Everybody is inspired by everyone” 171.
Thanks to the fact that there exists O. Donchenko’s work
“Societal Mentality”, we do not have to bring more detailed
arguments of display of the essence of “social” on the stage of
existence. It is connected with the fact that in the above mentioned
work the author analyzes the given moment as a phenomenon of
societal psychic which is considered by it as ’archetypes, societal
behavioral models, tendencies of social processes development’172.
It is important to pay attention to the fact that when S. Freud
legitimized the analysis of unconscious in the structure of a person,
and C. Jung took this problem beyond the single person and
171Гумилев Л. Н. География этноса в исторический период. – Л.: Наука,
Ленинградское отделение, 1990. – С. 418.
172Донченко Е.А. Социетальная психика. – К.: “Наукова думка”, 1994. – С. 36.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
164
proposed a theory, it was Uznadze who opened the mechanism of
formation of unconscious. When Freud turned to the ontogenesis of
unconscious, and Jung showed its phylogenesis, Uznadze and his
followers tried to make its parametric description, and it was O.
Donchenko who tried to show its action as a system that self-
develops on the side of collective whole.
At that E. A. Donchenko was absolutely correct when she wrote
that ’from the moment entering of scientific ideology into the sphere
of admission of possibility dividable and independent existence of
material substrate (brain) and psychic (conscious and different
forms of unconscious) a new coil of humanitarian science prepared
by achievements in the branch of natural sciences starts’173.
It is important here to constantly remember about M. Weber’s
warning that ’not all types of actions including outer are ’social’ in
the accepted sense of this word. An outer action can’t be called
social in the case if it is oriented only on the behavior of material
objects. The inner relation bears the social character only in that
case if it is oriented on the behavior of the rest’174.
Action is not that much inner product of a person as his
collaboration with outer structures of society. Here it is appropriate
to call for a definition of an action by P. Shtompka who writes:
’Action is attributive notion; it sums up particular notions of social
factory this ’really real reality’ of social world.
It is worthwhile to quote P. Shtompka’s definition of the action;
he writes that action is the attributive notion; it generalizes certain
qualities of the social factory, this “actually real reality” of the
social world. It is the place, where the structures (possibilities for
operations) and the agents (possibilities for action) meet; it is the
synthetical product, the combination of structural circumstances and
abilities of the doers. Thus, the action is conditioned twice: “from
above” by the balance of constraints and limitations and also by the
resources and the possibilities provided by the existing structures;
173Донченко Е.А. Социетальная психика. – К.: “Наукова думка”, 1994. – С. 25.
174Вебер М. Избранные произведения. – М.: Прогресс, 1990. – С. 625.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
165
and “from below” by the abilities, talents, skills, knowledge,
subjective relations of the members of the society and of the
organizational forms, where they unite into collectives, groups,
social movements etc. However, the action cannot be narrowed
down to either this or the other; in relation to both levels (totality
and individuality) it creates a new, emerging quality. 175.
Dialectics of categories ’action’ and ’interaction’ has not found
its scientific explanation yet. Many researches intuitively feel that
only upon conceptual explanation of their connection it will be
possible to come to the new understanding of the social reality of
such science as, for example, sociology. Y. Volkov writes about this
in his article ’Basic notion and logic of social paradigm’176.
Thus, the essence of the ’social’ at the stage of existence is
represented for us as interaction of individual minds, which are
considered by us as ’social intellect’, unlike the intellect of an
individual. The mechanism of this interaction has been well
described by L. Gumilev through the notion of the ’passionarity’
(rooted from the Latin words passio – passion) under which he
understood ’the effect produced by variations by this (intellectual –
V.B.) energy as a specific feature of people’s character. At that he
emphasized 
that
’passionarity’
is 
characteristic 
dominant,
unbreakable inner aspiration … to an activity, directed onto
realization of any purposes’177.
By its origin, this is the throbbing energy object of the total
character. From it, before us, the field form of life appears and it
creates the social world within our planetary system.
In practice, the theory of action has formed and is
developing; it spined a circle from Buckley to Archer and
became richer. Herewith, the theory of action is starting to be
175Shtompka P. Sociology of social changes/Tran. From English under the edition V.
A. Yadova. – M.: Aspect Press, 1996. – P. 274.
176Volkov Yu. V. Basic Notions and logic of social paradigm // Sociological
researches. – 1997. – No1. – P. 22 – 33.
177Gumilev L. N. Geography of Ethnos in Historical Period. – L.: Nauka,
St.Petersburg Dept., 1990. – P. 33.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
166
realized as the central problem of sociological theorizing. This is
acknowledged not only by its founders, but also by other authors
who think, that “in some time it promises to become that theoretical
field, where one can expect considerable advancement”3. Its main
question today is correlation of action and structure.
Now let us have a look at what is going on with the field form
of intellectual life at the stage of appearing, where it coexists in
organic unity with maternal, that is to say with a form of life that
gave it the birth and inseparable from a human organism. On the
second stage of self-development of the notion of “social”, we
finally can explicate the essence of the social world, i.e. “show what
it is in real existence” 178.
For its achieving it is a very important to understand that the
further movement of ’social’ from existence into the notion ’is a
shift into something absolutely opposite; consequently, it is endless
and this issue of the opposite from the eternity or from its non
existence is a leap, and presence of being of an image in its reborn
force is initially for the being, before it realizes its attitude to the
strange’179.
At the same time the shift of the essence of ’social’ from the
stage of existence into the stage of notion or being is accomplished
according inner necessity of self development of the given notion.
By its content this shift is the one that ’the result of precondition is
nothing else but what has been conditioned also appears as a result
coincides with itself, finds itself or in other words both moments are
direct presence of being and availability they are available as one
moment’180.
That is why a person through interaction with other people ’first
of all, defines himself and with it supposes himself as being denied
and with this correlates with other into relation to him indifferent
178Shtompka P. Sociology of social changes/Tran. From English under the edition V.
A. Yadova. – M.: Aspect Press, 1996. – P. 254
179 Hegel H. Encyclopedia of Philosophical Sciences.- M.: Mysl, 1975. – V. 2. P. 561
180 Hegel H. Political Compositions.- M.: Nauka, 1978. – P. 247

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
167
objectivity but that it, secondly, is not lost in this loosing of itself,
keeps itself in it and remains as identity of equal to him notion; with
that it is impulse to supposing for itself another relating to it world
equal to the notion, to coping of the world and to objecting itself. As
a result of it, self identification of living has a form of objective
appearance, and on the account that it is identical with itself it is an
absolute contradiction’181.
The shift of the essence of the ’social’ into its being is
consequently the process in which the result and precondition are
different only in the form. Here both the essence of ’social’ and its
being, social world, sure both of them are one sided notions each of
them goes into another and presents itself in the another as
independent moment and also as productive other notion which it
bears in itself. This shift has two opposite meanings; from one side
each member is represented as a moment in other words it is
represented as shifting from direct to the other, as each member is
something available; from the other side it has such a meaning that
each of them gives a birth to another. Thus the both of the sides are
movement.
But acquiring by process of interrelation of people of form in
the notion it is also a definition of contents; the reason and
movement, the both sides of relation; the other content of the social
is the meaningful too. That is why it is necessary to separately
research the contents of ’social’ as here the qualitative turning into
the self developing contents of the social world happens. We shall
get back to the explanation of the contents of the social world later
but now let’s continue analysis of emerging of the essence on the
stage of the being.
It is necessary to dualize the interaction into its components.
One of them is inside the live physical human organism, and it is
expressed as its main attributive quality - human activity; another
one is represented by the varied sum of activities of people or by the
181 2Hegel H. Philosophy of religion. In two volumes – M.: Mysl, 1977. – V. 2. P. 65

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
168
integrative activity that make up the category of the generic life of
humanity. L. Feuerbach brought into social studies the notion of
“gender”, “generic life”, “generic essence”. He thought that generic
essence allowed each separate individual to accomplish oneself in
uncountable number of different individuals.
Let us look at the correlation of individual and generic activity.
Their unity lies in the fact that both of them are the conscious vital
activity of a person, by the means of which the first nature provides
through itself the existence creating at the same time the second
nature. Therefore, K. Marx, studying the person through the prism
of the second nature, is absolutely right when he views the activity
of a person as the essence of his life, and the work as the main
attributive quality of the human organism, as the “substance of a
person” 182.
K. Marx, having separated the category of labour, and the latter
he viewed as the “positive creative activity”, was able to separate
such a “system of systems” that could explain the interaction and
subordination of all its “subsystems” and to find the really working
system that operated according to the laws of a single whole
organism 183.
This profound idea about the essence of the social event was
expressed before K. Marx by the contemporary of G. Hegel, the
original French thinker, Saint Simon. He was one of the first
scientists in pre-Marxian sociology to determine that the unification
of people into a whole organism is done not only under the
influence of philosophical, religious and moral principles, but, in his
opinion, it was done on the basis of socially useful labor activity.
The labor activity was viewed by him as the natural need that set up
connections between people.
K. Marx explained the origin of the generic life of a person
through the prism of alienated work (rejected labour). He showed
how the collective form of life in practice becomes the specific form
182 Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т. 23. – С. 62.
183Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.4. – С. 133-134.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
169
of support of vital activity of a person. “The alienated work
(rejected labour) of a person rejects from him 1) the nature, 2) the
person him/herself, his/her personal active function, his/her vital
activity and due to this it rejects the gender from a person: it turns
the generic life into the means of support of individual life for a
person” 184.
With this in mind, he also warned that the “society” could not
be presented as the opposition to the abstraction of the individual.
“The individual is the social being. Therefore, any expression
(manifestation) of his life, even if it is not presented in the direct
form of collective, is done alongside with the other displays of life
and is the manifestation and the confirmation of the social life. The
individual and generic life of a person are not something different;
however, based on the necessity, the means of existence of
individual life can be either more special or general manifestation of
generic life, and the generic life can be either more special or
general individual life” 185.
The moment of partial alienation of individual life or free
activity in form of alienated labor is fixed in the structure of a
person by qualitatively new fundamental trait – a need of
communication and activity sharing with other people. Now for an
intellectually developed person the other person becomes extremely
necessary as his not organic continuation for organization of the
common productive life. At this, the self-assertiveness of a person
as a conscious generic being, that is a being that treats gender as his
own essence or treats himself as the generic essence, is fixed in the
existence as the practical creation and the processing of physical
world by the means of division of collective labour.
Therefore, in reality the essence of social is viewed as the
exchange of activity between a separate person and social groups,
classes and finally humanity. The exchange brings the individual
needs of a person and material objects from the sphere of
184 Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т. 42. – С.92.
185Thesamesource. P. 119

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
170
individuality to the sphere of collectivity, i.e. into the sphere of live
social interactions. The exchange of activity and later of the goods
led to the necessity of qualitative and quantitative analysis in social
life. In order to realize these functions, the need for science and
money appeared.
The interaction of people among each other by virtue of the
social environment has the features of violence against a person,
because “the social fact is only recognized by that external forced
power, which it has or can have over the individuals” 186. And here it
is necessary to separately research the level of necessity of fulfilling
the demands of social sphere because this is the activity of
compression force, without which the interaction of people is
impossible and so the creation of the social world; it is necessary to
research where this boundary is broken and the violence against a
person takes place, which suppresses his development.
At the same time, this unity of form as the correlation of
existence is above all the formation in the existence, the transition of
one of existence into another, and if to say more specifically, this is
the process of transition of the subjective form of “social” into the
objective form and vice versa and we are interested in this process.
A person usually thinks that only the need forces him to adapt to the
really existing, and sometimes hostile world opposed to him. In
reality this unity with the world should be recognized not as the
forced relation, but as the rational relation. To solve this problem
means to explain the way of their interaction.
In the very beginning of the research we with the general
hypothesis have tied ourselves to the given interaction of people
with each other as we identified it as an organic unity. The structure
of the heuristic model of this process factually represents before us
am image of opening before us physiognomy of social organism. In
connection of this we have to more deeply research the process of
exchange of activities flowing as a total life activity of having
186Вебер М. Избранные произведения. – М.: Прогресс, 1990. – С. 418.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
171
cooperated humanity. It is itself a field form of life or social life
which develops according to the laws of noosocialgenesis.
Thus, communicating with each other throughout their daily
lives, people gave rise to a specific type of social relations. These
connections between people enabled them to live together and
develop a social organism. This is why throughout all stages of
history of humanity people were eager to develop and to support in
each representative of a new generation the personal need for
communication with others and the need for mastery of the most
effective means of communication for the given culture. However,
up to a point, it was a kind of a byproduct of their activities. L.
Feuerbach was the first who noticed it and, for whom the
communication between people was according to the apt definition
of Karl Marx. ’An internal, dumb generality tying many individuals
in natural knots only’. According to L. Feuerbach, the force, uniting
the ’I’ and the ’You’187 was human’s love for another human188.
However, Marxists didn’t give him credit for this for a rather long
time though, K. Marx considered it a kind of L. Feuerbach’s ’feat’
to make a ’social relationship ’human to human’ one of the ’basic
principles’ of his ’truly materialistic theory’. K. Marx and his
followers believed that this social relationship was practical,
establishing from a joint production of human activity, rather than
an innate sense of community of the ’I’ and the ’You.’ Their
position shows clearly visible rough materialism and the denial of
spiritual stimuli in people’s lives. It was only with the advent of the
industrial phase of development, communication and social relations
as its product have become the subject of a special theoretical
analysis. Thus, in the ’German Ideology’, as we know, it was
emphasized that ’during a production process people had to enter
into relationship with each other’ and that and that this practical
communication’ has created and is now recreating universally the
187Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.42. – С.266.
188See the same source. – p.154.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
172
existing relations189’. In his turn, V. I. Lenin also emphasized that
people ’begin communication’ in the course of joint practical
activity which produces a certain kind of social relations190,
although the people themselves are not aware of those relationships,
and become dependent on them. M.S. Kahan, describing the
interconnection of communication and social relations, wrote that
“there is an interaction between them, but it is not described in
terms of ’form and content’ or personification’, but rather in terms
of ’process and product’. Communication is a real activity that
develops in a process, and the social relations are the type of
connection of its members that becomes the structure of society
and, while forming in the process of practical communication of
people, it also conditions it” 191. Except it referring to C. Marx points
out the other aspect of dialectic interconnection of communication
and society relations realizing purposefulness of the communication
(as a form of a subject’s activity) and unconscious, spontaneous and
gaining the accidental power over subjects force of social relations.
He finishes the characteristic of their peculiarities with the reference
that the third aspect of dialectics of communication and social
relations is bound by connections of notions ’direct’, ’mediate’,
’indirect’, ’dependent’.
His conclusion that
’whatever forms communication is
conducted, its aim is to reach the community (or increasing the level
of community) of active subjects with their free common efforts
whilst keeping the original individuality of each is very important
for us’192.
Let us now look at what happens with the essence of the social
on the next stage of self development of the notion ’social’. As it is
known in the notion ’thank to “the differences of form, the inner and
189 Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Избр. соч. В 9 т. – Т.2. – С.411.
190Ленин В.И. Полн. Собр. соч. – Т.18. – С.343.
191Каган М.С. Мир общения: Проблема межсубъектных отношений. – М.:
Политиздат, 1988. – С.136.
192Каган М.С. Мир общения: Проблема межсубъектных отношений. – М.:
Политиздат, 1988. – С.163.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
173
outer, is posited within itself as the totality of itself and its other; the
inner, as simple identity reflected into itself, is the immediate and
accordingly is as much being and externality as essence; and the
outer, as manifold, determinate being is only an outer, that is, is
posited as unessential and as withdrawn into its ground, hence as an
inner. This transition of each into the other is their immediate
identity as substrate; but it is also their mediated identity; for it is
precisely through its other that each is what it is in itself, the totality
of the relation…
The essential relation, in this identity of Appearance with the
inner or with essence, has determined itself into actuality”. 193.
In this way the reality of ’social’ is unity of its essence and
existence. In it faceless essence has its truth and baseless
phenomenon in other words unidentified stability and forceless
variety. This unity of inner and outer as composing parts of ’social’
is absolute reality which is absolute relation of it to itself – a
substance of which the second nature is made up of.
Development of the absolute ’social’ is its own action and is the
one that starts from it and comes to it that means that it is absolutely
absolute. But absolute which is only given as an absolute identity is
an absolute of outer reflection. That is why it is not absolutely
absolute but absolute in its some identity, in other words, it is an
attribute. Consequently the absolute form itself makes it visible
inside of itself and defines it as an attribute.
’Attribute is only relatively absolute, a sort of connection, H.
Hegel notices, – not meaning anything else except of absolute in some
identification of a form. Namely form from a very beginning to the
finishing of its developing being only inner or the same only outer and
generally is only identified form or negation at all. But as it is at the
same time given as a form of absolute the attribute makes its contents
of absolute, it is unity, earlier representing itself as a world or as one
of the sides of sufficient relation each of which is a unity’194.
193Гегель Г. Наука логики. В 3-х т. – М.: Мысль, 1971. – Т.2. – С. 169-170.
194Гегель Г. Наука логики. В 3-х т. – М.: Мысль, 1971. – Т.2. – С. 177.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
174
From the above stated it clearly follows that the result of the
’social’ statement or its attribute is collectivism as the overall
principle, the way of common people’s activity. Its formation is
necessary for the humanity to break away from the infinity of
external dependencies and to create within itself the mechanism of
self – development of the social organism.
K. Marx wrote that the social as the means of common activity
of people will create “the
195. E. Durkheim as known ’admitted
Marx’s idea that social life must be explained by not the
representations by its participants but by more deep reasons rooted
mainly in the way individuals are grouped between each other to be
productive. Though, according to E. Durkheim, this idea is a logical
finish of the social idea evolution, it is by no means connected with
socialistic movement and ’a sad spectacle of inter class conflict’196.
And V. I. Lenin directly pointed out that social side of the material
process is unification, grouping and organization of employees197.
At the dawn of XX century the most sophisticated and general
in spirit representative of Russian culture, as he was spoken about
by N. Berdiaev, Russian poet and philosopher Vyach. Ivanov in
modern to him reality finds “non-deceiving sings that point to the
fact that the individualistic division of people is only the transitional
stage of humanity and that the future appears under the sign of
universal collectivism”198. According to his belief it is not only the
era of the tightest social joining is coming but new forms of
collective consciousness. At that the highest level of human
community in his opinion is not organization but the collegiality.
The same thoughts are reflected in works of modern period
explorers. Thus, for example, Yu. V. Volkov and V. Z. Rogovin
write: ’The notion of social expresses, first of all, the common
195Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.42. – С. 119
196Дюркгейм Э. О разделении общественного труда. Метод социологии. – М.:
Наука, 1991. – С. 539.
197See Ленин В.И. Полн. собр. соч. – Т.1. – С. 178.
198Иванов Вяч. И. Родное и вселенское. – М.: Республика, 1994. – С.98.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
175
character of life activity of people, defines the existence of
connections which in virtue of social character of productive
economic activity, unites them into something solid, making
something that is called community life’199. And many other authors
believe that a category of ’social’ in modern interpretation ’should
be understood as a base for… collectiveness’200.
With the same the reality of ’social’ as direct formal unity of its
inner and outer owns the definition of directness which is opposite
to reflection in selfness, in other words it is a reality in opposition of
a of both is the third – real, defined as reflected in its existence. This
third is a necessity.
Their interaction is that is why only core causation as a reason
does not only have some action but in the action the reason
correlates with its self. Thanks to this the causation is back to its
absolute definition and at the same time it has reached the definition
itself. It is, first of all,a real necessity, an absolute identity with itself
as distinction of necessity and correlating in it with each other
definition of substance sense, free in relation to each other realities.
The necessity in the way is inner identity; causation is itsself-
identification in which his vision is existence in substantive sense
has eliminated itself and the necessity has been turned into freedom.
This their simple identity is a peculiarity which from singular
contains a moment of identification and from common – the
moment of reflection in itself, has them in direct unity. That is why
these three entireties are the same sense which is reflection which,
as a negative correlation with itself reveals itself, as a difference
between the two shown sides but as an absolutely transparent
difference namely a definite simplicity or simple definition which
are both the same identity. This is the definition of ’social’, reign of
subjectivity and freedom.
199Волков Ю.В., Роговин В.З. Вопросы социальной политики КПСС. – М.:
Политиздат, 1981. – С.7.
200Желтухин 
А.И. 
Обсуждается 
предмет 
социологической 
науки 
//
Социологические исследования, 1985. – № 1. – С. 183.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
176
Thus, having followed the changing of the sense of “social” in
the sequence: existence
–
phenomenon
–
reality, we have
theoretically rendered self-extraction of the noumenal formation,
have uncovered the regularities of its transaction from one condition
into its own but different based on quality transformation of its
contain. With this we have closely approached to the moment when
we can reveal our understanding of the mentioned category, to fix
found above its most significant characteristics, regular connections
and relations.
But let us firstly imagine heuristic model of expandability of the
notion ’social’. It has the following image (see. Pic. 2.3.)
Phase of existence Phase of being or occurrence Phase of reality
Communication
Pic. 2.3. The structure of philosophic category ’social’
As it comes out from the facts stated above, the “social” is the
notion that shows the means, with the help of which the
universum (and the humanity is only its generalized subjective
image) presents itself in the conditions of Earth. The meaning of it
lies in the fact that originally the universum is the quantum-
corpuscular (energy) field that pulsates, which appears on the
basis of integration of intellectual (organic) energy of individuals
that manifests in the existence as the total process of exchange of
Activity of a
man
Intellectual
interaction
Collectivity of
people
Activityof a
genus

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
177
activity between people that shows and states itself in practice by
the way of collectivism.
It must be clear why all moral systems of the world turn around
mutual understanding, justice, togetherness and solidarity of
participants of common life process.
It is apparent from this why all the moral systems of the world
turn around mutual understanding, justice, unity and solidarity of
the members of general life process.
Theoretical perception of the essence of the social world leads
us to the formalization of the main law of its development, because
“the law and the essence are the homogenous forms” that express
the enhancement of the perception of events and the world by a
person. We have all the grounds to think that the main law of self –
development of the social world is the intensification of the
process of exchange of activity between people and to view the
strengthening of cooperative beginnings in the life of planetary
humanity as its natural practical result.
However, we cannot stop the research of the essence of the
“social” on this, because the category of the essence will give us the
possibility to specify more notions important for the given research.
Thus, in the life of people the content of the “social” appears to be
the social event. At this, we will underline that the activity, the
relations, the connection, the process are only its various factors.
The general definition of the “social” leads to its dissection into
social connections and social processes that can be viewed as its
static and dynamic aspects. It is necessary to consider that social
connection is any type of relations between people based on the
exchange of activity that happen in any of its forms: live or material.
The social science has determined the varieties of forms of
social interaction. The most common one is friendly help, stable
common activity; episodic collaboration; contacts, mutual provision
of information; side interrelation (for example, through the product
of labor); neutral relations; contraction to one another; antagonism,
struggle.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
178
At this we should point out that relation of people due to their
production and reproduction got a name of social relations in a
narrow meaning of the word. But here we continue to consider
social relation only in a broad meaning of the word. From this
point of view, even the informal contacts between people on the
basis on any aspect of self-development either of a single person or
the humanity are the social connection. Connections grow into
processes if they bring with them any changes.
If formal or informal interaction of people lead to strengthening
of connections between them, there is a moment of development
occurring between them which is called a process of social
establishing. Togetherness is an indicator of its maturity. Increasing
of people’s togetherness is considered by us as a progressive
tendency in maintenance of social and decreasing, on the contrary,
as regressive tendency.
Thus, while formalizing the category
’social’
we have
approached the notion of sense of the secondary nature as a field
form of existence of a rational human being appearing as integration
of energy informative fields of individuals for changing of which we
are offering to use a unit which is noomen. At this it is established
that 
the 
notion
’social’
has
two 
basic 
characteristics:
morphological and functional. Morphological aspect is opened in
an absolutely new layer of the Earth mantle which covers biosphere
forming its absolute new layer – noosphere. Functional aspect of
’social’, in its turn, is an intensifying process of activity exchange
between participants of over planetary life. Functionally connected
society in scientific literature as it is known is called socium201.
Thus, is has been established that according to their structures
individual and family activity of a man consists of two parts:
intellectual which is connected with learning of the semantic
Universe contains physical too, based on practical transforming
movement making products of physical world.
201SeeКарташев В.А. Система систем. Очерки общей теории и методологии. –
М.: “Прогресс-Академия”, 1995. – С.51.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
179
Certainly it is also possible to say that we in practice have faced
the regular change of social being base. It has been before.
Inorganic
base has been
replaced
by organic; organic by
overorganic or intellectual. Here we have closely approached to
understanding the neolife. And this is the base of space form of,
universe movement. To master it is a process of noocomogenesis.
Which makes Teyar de Sharden to be true, when he is writing about
neolife born artificially the following:
’Thought artificially
improving its own member. The life making a leap forward under
collective thinking… Yes, the dream which is being dimly cherished
by scientific exploration is in its core to be able to master the main
energy that lies outside of the realm of all atomic and molecular
features, and that in relation to which all other powers are only
secondary and having united all of them together to take in your
hands wheel of the world, to find the spring of evolution’202.
At this we will emphasize only two circumstances. The first of
them concerns only a fact that the task of philosophical learning of
social organism results in learning of something which is in social
world, ’as what exists is mind’203. Here the philosophical idea of
social organism must disclose itself as the comprehension of the
identity of form and content of a specific phase of the universum’s
state, as form in its the most direct meaning is mind as learning in
notions cognition, and sense is as mind in substantive essence of
ethic and natural reality’204. Today we must after gaining freedom
from idiom of class struggle understand more deep sense of a
famous quotation of H. Hegel which is ’what is rational will become
real, and what is real will become rational’.
From the above explained quantum-wave nature of the second
nature, it comes out that the new reality – the generic social life
appears before us as the soft dynamic social field. P. Shtompka in
his work Sociology of social changes characterized it like this: “the
202Тейяр де Шарден П. Феномен человека. – М.: Наука, 1987. – С. 198.
203Гегель Г. Философия права. – М.: Мысль, 1990. – С. 55.
204Seethesamesource

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
180
social reality appears to be the interindividual (interpersonal) reality,
in which the network of connections, favors, exchange, and relations
of personal loyalty exist. In other words, it is the specific social
environment or matter that connects people between themselves.
Such interpersonal field is in constant movement; it expands and
shrinks (for example, when individuals enter it or leave it),
intensifies and loosens (when the quality of connection changes, for
example, from acquaintance to friendship), thickens and diffuses
(when it has the leader or when the leader loses his position), mixes
with other segments of the field  or distances from them (for
example, when coalition and federation form or when people simply
gather together)”205. But with the purpose not to withdraw from the
general aim of the study we must further consider the specifics of
identified in existence the essence of field form of rational living
being or in other words, social world, which is the same.
2.4. The social world substance
The next step of the epistemological analysis of the social world,
after the definition of its essence, is detection of its content, which isn’t
connected with a form and “the form is external to that; the content is
something different than the form”206. In this study, a content of the
social world is not understood as an independent social substrate, but
as its inner state, a set of processes that characterize the interaction of
the elements constituting the social world among themselves and with
the environment and are responsible for their existence, development
and change; in this sense, the content itself acts as a social process.
205Штомпка П. Социология социальных изменений / Пер. с англ. под ред.
В.А.Ядова. – М.: Аспект Пресс, 1996. – С.27-28.
206 Гегель Г. Наука логики. – М.: Мысль, 1972. – Т.2. – С.86.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
181
This axiom is the perception of the world as an affordable all
rational thought and irrational social observation, abiding in the
field form. At the same time we note that the social world,
according to the information above, consists of two parts:
subjectified and objectified, which originate at the micro level, the
located at the macro level and go on mega level.
Now we have every reason to believe that subjectified part is in
the structure of the human personality and in its potential form. It
goes to the micro level with genetic roots. Its content is partially
discussed above, which shows the social content as a person or as a
set of social roles that the human personality has to play in its life.
But we do not consider the bare social roles, because they are likely
only outward signs of social quality in unity with a spiritual
component which comes out in the form of ether. Subjectified
content of the social intuitively is familiar to us.
Another part of the social content is objectified in the external
environment. It is an objectified reality that we know. It is called the
society. Unfortunately, for the national philosophy, the term has
little to say. It just fell out of its problem field. For a long time we
thought it was “a godsend” Western philosophical thought. For us, it
was enough to operate the category “society”, which was a
productive tool in the materialist analysis of social reality. It is
gratifying that today this concept finally became the subject of
attention of Russian and domestic social philosophers207.
In history there are several options at the approach of defining
the society as a “middle world”, “mesokosm” (from the Greek of
mesos - middle, intermediate and kosmos – universe) placed
between the microcosm, on the one hand, and the macrocosm at the
other. It is considered in an anthropomorphic way that is in the
207Кризисный социум. Наше общество в трех измерениях. – М.: Ин-т философии
РАН, 1993; Система социологического знания: Учебное пособие / Авт. – сост. Г. В.
Щекин. – К.: МАУП, 1995; Прокофьев Ф.И., Гугнин А.М. Социум: сущность,
развитие, прогнозирование. – Днепропетровск, 1992 ; Бойченко І.В., Куценко В.І.,
Табачковский В.Г. та ін. Суспільнізакони та їхдія. – К.: Наукова думка, 1995. – С.
179 и др.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
182
image of the human. At the same time society can be interpreted as
a reflection of the universe, a replica of it, that is ekomorfic (or
ekumorfic; from the Greek oikumene – inhabited earth, Wed-Latin
oecumenicus – universal and Greek morphe – form). In another
way, the essence of the latter consists of its likening to the world as
a whole, transferring it features inherent in the universe in all its
volume and fullness.
So, it is better to analyze the content of the social at the level of
objectified social world. That is connected with the fact that this
analysis would help us to understand it more clearly, because
society is a kind of external object to the investigator. In this case, it
appears as a social thing which can be played. If we want to
genetically withdraw its constituent elements, it is necessary to
introduce the social world as “real process of formation in its
various phases."
It is necessary to make one more methodological digression. It
is due to the fact that although individual pieces of categorical
schemes forming surprisingly well projected on the theoretical
model of synergy and cosmology, the conduction of the further
analysis apart from the determination of issues is impossible.
Indeed, the categories of internal and external, to which we now
have to move in accordance with an algorithm of forming
procedures, cannot be analyzed outside the categories of
determination. Besides the fact of causation, we set a potential
genetic link and updated social worlds.
So, objectified social world or society is the product of a double
determination such as: the rationale and conditions. At the same
time the rationale generates the content of the social world in the
process of self-organization of the substrate “social” and the
conditions quantize it in specific sites – clots social content –
intelligible matter. Therefore, we first consider the content of self-
generation “social” rationale or under the influence of internal
forces, factors, and then the loan analysis method of its metering by
external conditions.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
183
But first, we shall state a few general remarks on the problem of
existence of the content of the social world. The initial capacity of
the universe to self-organization is to form the forces which are
inherent to the universe per se, for without them no discernable
origin conceivable whether it sensibel or intelligible fit and bonding
material. However, precisely because the formative force prevails in
the first nature, second nature to it must join the beginning, which
elevates it above the first.
Here the question arises naturally: how does a general formative
force of the universe, which was inherent to sensible matter that is
perceived by ordinary senses, becomes the desire to create
intelligible matter perceived spiritual senses?
The notion of “striving for the formation” is in that fact that
formation proceeds not blindly by forces which are peculiar for the
universe in general, but the necessary things contained in these
forces are joined by random strange influence that thorough
modifying form the universe of force, at the same time makes them
produce a certain substrate of the social world, which is relatively
stable and repetitive in its main features over the centuries, at the
same time having the ability for constant renewal, and at the same
time is a part of the subjective and objectified parts of the social
world. In this particular quintessence, in which the universe is by
itself and entered into a random of each organization and this
random in the formation, in fact, finds its expression in the concept
of “striving for the formation”.
Organization and life in general express not something self
abiding in it, but only a certain phase of the existence of the
universe, something in common, due to the close co-efficient
causes. Therefore, the origin of social or intelligent life is only a
reason of a certain existence quality, rather than a cause of being
itself, for it is in the self-organizing environment in general cannot
be even imagined.
Consequently, the forces that act in the tribal life are not special
powers connected to the second nature; something that introduces

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
184
the forces in the game, the result of which is intelligent life, should
be the special beginning, which withdraws the reasonable nature of
the scope of universal forces of nature and moves that would be a
dead product of the formative forces into a higher sphere, the sphere
of intelligent life."Only in this way – F. Shelling wrote – the origin
of any organization manifests itself as random as it should be in
accordance with the concept of the organization; for nature does not
make it necessarily; where it occurs, nature acts freely; only in such
organization a product of nature is in its freedom (the free play of
nature), it can cause the feasibility of the idea, and only to the extent
that it causes these ideas, it is the organization “208.
Such qualitative leap is possible only through collective thinking,
which, in contrast to the individual thinking, loses negentropic features.
Collective thinking, as it follows from the above, are directly involved
in a production of intellectual energy of the collective person. This is
connected with the fact that the collective entity capable of thinking in
the process of producing scientific knowledge, giving information
uniform phenotypic character.
As we have already substantiated the fact of the existence of the
exchange of knowledge between members of the social process,
there should come out of it as a self-evident from the circumstances
that contribute to a reasonable interaction between people. We note
in passing that knowledge, as logic design, cause internal tension in
a certain space, which occupies an updated social world. This is
achieved due to the fact that knowledge represents meanings,
quantified and packaged ideas. Between them, there are energy
fields. But for this, a critical mass of conceptual material should be
present. Then the tribal life of the ethnic group becomes a single
channel development, with which each participant gives a steady
and direct feedback. Acting as a motive, the semantic field becomes
the center of the crystallization of people’s thinking, directing their
actions to achieve specific goals.
208Шеллинг Ф. Сочинения в 2-х томах. – М.: Мысль,1987. – Т.1. – С.179.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
185
So, from the thoughts of people a kind of semantic core is
being formed; it becomes the attractor of the process of generation
of a local social world. As a result of this, the local fields (centers)
of sociality spontaneously appear, occupying, as a rule, those parts
of the space in which the elite ethnic group are focused.
Thus, the product of social content is, as we have shown above,
the product of intelligent interaction between people. However, such
understanding of the social world producers was not always like
that. Initially the “agent” was placed outside the human and social
world to the supernatural world. At the next step it was lowered to
the Earth. Generating social content began to be seen as the action
of physical, biological, climatic, geographical and even astrological
forces. It took some time and energy till the subject of action was
ascribed to individuals: the prophets, heroes, leaders, inventors and
geniuses. Only at the end of the twentieth century, finally, there was
“the realization of the fact that, although each individual is only a
tiny voice in the general chorus of social change, the latter
cumulative result is the work of everyone. For everyone it allocates
only a small, almost invisible part of the authority named as “ agent
”, but together they are all-powerful.209
Today, our efforts are focused on explaining the mechanisms of
generation of social reality (society), as individual and collective
actors. This “market metaphor” borrowed out of the economy helps
to understand how the “invisible hand” of the numerous and
scattered decisions made countless producers and consumers, buyers
and sellers. That, as a metaphor borrowed from linguistics, should
contribute to an understanding of how in daily practice, people
create, recreate and transform society in the same way as in
everyday speech they produce, reproduce and modify their
language.
Based on the fact that the process of objectification is exposed
to the same material, which underwent subjectication in the human
209Штомпка П. Социология социальных изменений / Пер. с англ. под ред.
В.А.Ядова. – М.: Аспект Пресс, 1996. – С.244.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
186
body, we are entitled to believe that this process is carried out,
according to the same algorithm forming. This means that the
objectification process must begin with the product that is the result
of individual subjectification of the first nature, that is, with the
mindset of people, but rather their social formation – the ethnic
groups. This objectification process, opposed to subjectification as it
“turns” and begins to move in the opposite direction. Out of the
potential world of social human beings is generated the objectified
social world. In other words, in a course of objectification the
subjective or individually manufactured products – the essential
powers, – should be transformed into a collective work or
objectified products such as elements of society. Products
themselves of this process are well known. The way of their
interrelation remains unknown. The latter is precisely the subject of
our attention.
So, as the starting point of the process of objectification is
alienation of the human person, to be exact those are all living
people on the planet, the potential content of the social world into
the environment. Here the alienated product of individual
production takes the form of a specific product, which is called the
mentality of the people.
The fact is that the self-generation of society begins with the
mindset of the people. “In the state of spirit of the people, such as
the manners and laws, that is the beginning of the dominant ’210 –
rightly wrote G. Gegel. He in his famous work “Philosophy of Law”
has convincingly shown that the mentality of the people should be
regarded as “something that can serve as a beginning for themselves
and arise from subjective perceptions and thoughts"211 of a separate
nation, 
ethnic 
group, 
or, 
finally, 
super-ethnos. 
And
underdevelopment of the Russian state, as we know, he connected
with the absence of the middle class – the spiritual mass producing
210Гегель Г. Энциклопедия философских наук. – М.: Мысль. – Т.3. – С.243.
211Гегель Г. Философия права. – М.: Мысль, 1990. – С.292.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
187
the material for the construction of public life. Here he writes about
the fact that the mentality of the people is that “in the normal state
and the ordinary conditions of life are accustomed to know the state
as a substantial basis and the purpose"212.
We ought to cite a few of the statements that clear up an issue
on the social world self-generating. G. Gegel, for example, writes
that “the mentality of the people, as well as the realization of its
principles is a significant moment in the real state.” 213 Elsewhere he
points directly to the genetic relationship of the mindset of the
people and the state apparatus. “As for the notion that the state
structure can be created then it cannot, unless the people stop being
themselves. The political system is the spirit of the people; being
such, it becomes established in the consciousness, aware of itself; it
is history, relates to history and is an external way of how the
spiritual is moved to the external reality. 214Let’s just note that the
state, as the most active functional body overshadows all other
elements of society.
In human groups or ethnic groups the superfluity of intellectual
power creates fluctuations, surges purposeful activity described by
L. Gumilev on rich historical material like passionaries’ tremors. By
the same order of phenomena, apparently, should include the idea of
Nietzsche’s “Faustian soul” and Henri Bergson’s “elan vital”. At the
moment of the intellectual energy superfluity, there is a special state
mentality of the people that forms a particular ethnic field. It is
because of that that then elements of local and planetary social
fields appear.
Creating the hypothesis of ethnic field L. Gumilev, as it is
known, based on more general notions of biological fields,
formulated by A.G. Gurvich, B.S. Kuzin for living organisms.
Ethnic systems are, as we have shown above, a special case of
212See the same source. – p 292
213See the same source. – p. 300
214Гумилев Л.Н. Этносфера: История людей и история природы. – М.: Экопрос,
1993. – С.526-532.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
188
groups of living organisms developing naturally and in interaction
with the environment.
The last is nothing more than a mechanism for running the self-
organization of the social world, which refers to a specific set of
relationships between the real figures of history, diverse dissected
within itself not only on the main opposition, but also on various
other parts and units, to local “bands” within the main and
territorial, up to a cell as a family, with its internal relations between
individuals. Gumilev discovered the process that determines the
course of any of ethnogenesis: at first passionaries number is
growing rapidly, which is accompanied by the creation of new
social structures and expansion, then their number fluctuates near
their maximum level, then comes a sharp decline and exit to a
certain gradually declining level, then passionary person is no
longer fixed by historical sources. Such is the general course of the
process of self-generating of the social world. In this passionate
impetus, as we know, in the course of self-unfolding it passes
through a series of phases such as: rise, tacme, that is the highest
peak, fracture, inertia, obscuration, regeneration and memorial.
L. Gumilev explains the passionary thrusts as the micro-
mutations having a cosmic origin. The conclusion was based on
identified historical patterns, according to which the new super-
ethnoses appear on the surface of the Earth simultaneously and
along the same line, for many thousands kilometers across any
landscape obstacles. For example, the 1st century AD push: Goths –
the Slavs – daki- Christians Abyssinians (Ethiopians), or push of the
6th century AD, the Arabs (Muslims) – radzhputy- bots (South
Tibet) – tabgachi- medieval Chinese – Koreans (Sylla) – Japanese
(Yamato). Such tremors are observed on the surface of the Earth in
the form of strips of a width merely 200-400 km/ and a length of
about 0.5 circle of the planet at different angles adjacent to the
meridian and width.
We ought to recall also in this context the above-mentioned
contact directed by the fluctuations of the Semantic Universe

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
189
towards the Physical Universe. L. Gumilev found that the
passionary fluctuations occur once in about 100 years. It is obvious
that on such huge in scope and geodetically correct bands could not
simultaneously 
begin
“class 
struggle”
or 
instantaneous
dissemination of genetic trait from one point (the existence of such
obstacles as Tibet, excluded very rapid interaction between people
in the 6th century).
L. Gumilev found that in the period immediately after the
passionate impulse in all affected by it regions one could observe a
rapid growth of new ethnic entities activity, changed patterns of
behavior, there were new ideological and religious movements. The
only hypothesis that explains the amazing synchronicity of these
phenomena in different parts of the world was the study of L.
Gumilev about the passionate thrusts as genetic mutations.
Now it’s time to analyze the transformation of the subjective
first nature at the moment when it entered the process of
objectification, in which subjectivity is finally complete. In other
words, a man can be happy only producing the social world,
because only in this case he fully realizes himself as a person.
In the theoretical study of the process of generating the content
of the social, we need to disengage from the already existing social
world. We have to show what it generally represents, its
morphology, and only then we have to reveal the mechanism of
formation and mutual transitions already on the stage of being.
For this we will consider shape formation rejected by
individuals the intelligent products under the free play of the cosmic
forces. The possibility of a synergistic way of the life origin, i.e. by
independent, spontaneous way, as points K.Marks and F. Engels
pointed out215.
The first stage of autogenesis of the social world, if to use the
common logic of forming, is composed of three secondary forming
processes and three specific products, namely: societal psyche, the
215Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т. 20. – С.611-612; Т.42. – С.125.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
190
collective conscious and generic product of the mentality of the
social unity. We have mentioned above that the modern psychology
views societal psyche as the relatively independent formation that
develops beyond the mind of a separate person. What is meant
under the no ion of societal psyche? “In the widest sense, – O.
Donchenko writes, – it is the substance of life of the socium that is
passed from generation to generation in the form of the product of
inheritance of history and culture of the society, which includes the
geographic, climatic and landscape conditions of life of people who
lived and who live on the given territory. So, using the Jung’s
terminology, the societal psyche is the distinctive archetype”.
Societal psyche is recognized as one of the most important
parameters like ethnos integrity that like the person has a special
body or the perception. This refers to the fact that one of the
hemispheres of the human brain is responsible for logical, rational
thinking, and the other is responsible for imaginative thinking,
Gestalt, irrational artistic and sensual perceptions.
During the centuries of the formation of this element of
social peace it had acquired certain circuits, a specific form,
which became a kind of information-energy patterns, deep
essential basis of social and individual dynamics. Let us leave the
development of more detailed characteristics of the societal
psyche to the specialists, and here we will only underline its
ability to save and to pass various information without the help of
depictive features of the matter (for example, the brain of a
person) from generation to generation. It will be wise to support
the notions of the psychological science with the notions of the
social science. It is important to mention the categories of
objectification and disobjectification discovered by K. Marx.
They have a fundamental meaning for the understanding of the
content of the social, not less than Jung’s archetypes216.
216Донченко Е.А. Социетальная психика. – К.: Наукова думка, 1994. – С.31-32.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
191
The nature of the societal psyche lies in the ability of both
material and immaterial varieties of the matter (energetic and
informational) to save the sum of the stages, characteristics,
abilities, forms of behavior, samples of reactions and other
processes of mental intravital realty even after the death of the
organism of a person, which provides the generic memory and the
succession of the intergenerational, specific to each particular
ethnos, code of collective psychic life.
The main product of this stage is the collective conscious. The
unity of consciousness, which is found in the history of
development of the social theories, is the best proof of the fact that
the unity and continuity exist both in collective and individual
consciousness. Finally, the collective mind, or the collective
conscious, which K. Marx called the “associative mind”, is formed
from them. We will return to this moment. The collective conscious
went through several stages of self-organization. Otherwise we
cannot explain the consequent change of form of the collective
conscious. Here, as it is known, we can talk about mythology, early
philosophy, theology, metaphysics, scientific philosophy and,
finally, science. Even today the formation of its several forms,
which are developed not enough for the full-scale extraction of the
planetary humanity, continues. Because of this reason various forms
of group, collective, class, national, mythological, religious,
scientific, legal, professional, political, ethical, esthetical and other
forms of social consciousness appear.
This process does not start suddenly, and unexpectedly. Even in
the fifth century B.C., history and philosophy, according to G.
Greef, continue to evolve: “their penetrating idea loses specific
national character and becomes wider, which is international and
cosmopolitan; in institutions of individual societies and events, it
searches the higher universal laws. Thucydides is not a simple
chronicler observer as Herodotus is; he sets the sociological
correlation, the grip of sociological facts. Thus, he noted that in
Greece the electoral principle everywhere followed the hereditary

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
192
monarchy, and that “the tyranny rooted itself as the state revenue
increased. 217
A view at the role and place of religion, metaphysics and
science of philosophy as a social consciousness integrators belong
to O.Cont. However, his merit is not that he discovered them; these
forms of collective consciousness had been well known before him.
They were formulated by Turgot. Cont’s contribution to the theory
of the social world is that he proposed to consider them as a raw
material for the creation of the social fabric.
So, at first the myths then philosophical system played the role
of the collective intelligence integrators. At a certain stage of human
development religion was trying to oust philosophy. Here it is
estimation of the role of Christianity in the formation of the social
world given by G. Greef. “Christian stood above the ancient
religions only because it was the center of vaster religious
coordination than the previous religions. It borrowed from the
philosophy the least scientific elements, but at the same time it
raised to a higher level people’s beliefs, purified them and united;
thus, by lowering the level of philosophical ideas and raising the
level of religious representations, it has created some average and
the overall level; it generated some common feelings, ideas and
institutions, making the Catholic world more extensive body; the
body that was more opened to further complex transformation than
those existed before”218. According to this, it has understanding of
the growing role of personality in history.
At later time, and more particularly in modern times,
metaphysics changed religion, which subordinated the individual
mind and interests to those of the collective. Metaphysics, becoming
independent from theology and defended in the face of the great
Italian thinker Dzh. Bruno even when its independence was at the
217Грееф Г. Общественный прогресс и регресс. – С-Петербург, Типография
Ю.Н.Эрлих, Садовая, № 9, 1896. – С. 31.
218Грееф Г. Общественный прогресс и регресс. – С-Петербург, Типография
Ю.Н.Эрлих, Садовая, № 9, 1896. – С. 64-65.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
193
stake; it acted as a legal successor of all previous theological
studying and philosophies. It is becoming more and more perfect
co-ordination center for mental beliefs of mankind; it reduces
everything to a smaller and smaller number of idols and
superstitions; it promises to the community thought much broader
than the one given by Catholicism and Protestantism. It directs the
churches; the world is divided into several great schools, and this
division does not coincide with the territorial division, regardless of
affiliation to a particular state, this or that tribe.
Today science performs this function. It does it, basing on the
attributive characteristics of the scientific knowledge. As V.
Vernadsky wrote, the scientific thought covered the whole planet,
all the nations on it. Numerous centers of scientific thought and
scientific research were created everywhere. It was also stated that
today the potency of the scientific knowledge is used not to the full
extent, because very often the “social underdevelopment prevents
the occurrence of breakthrough to develop in its real power”. 219
This means, that the historic moment has come to advance the
scientific thought as significant and deep foundations of self-
reflexive phenomena of planetary social world. On this occasion,
Vernadsky wrote: “The discovery of the idea of the social organism
of formation was the ignition of the explosion of the systemic
understanding of the reality. Understanding of the notion of the
social organism is the demonstration of organization of
noosphere”220.
In this regard, today is especially bitter to realize the intellectual
failure of Gorbachev’s advisers, coming out of the mouth of G.
Shahnazarov: “This audacious challenge (mastering the human
conditions of existence – VB), alas, not destined to be realized, as
the utopian (now obvious) idea of Vernadsky’s noosphere . The
development of science in the XX-th century brought it to
219Вернадский В.И. Философские мысли натуралиста. – М.: Наука, 1988. –
С.500-501.
220Вернадский В.И. Философские мысли натуралиста. – М.: Наука, 1988. – С.79.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
194
abandonment of the belief in “total ordering of the world,” inherent
in science of the XIX th century”221.
In terms of content against the collective consciousness, as
Durkheim wrote is “a set of beliefs and feelings common to the
members of the same society, forms a particular system with the life
of its own; it can be called the collective or general consciousness.
Undoubtedly, it does not have as a substrate a body; it is, by
definition, scattered throughout the community”222.
After this, from the collective conscious, the super functional
organs appear in noosociogenesis; they have the autonomic life in
the second nature. The sociologists directly point out to the
existence of such functional formations similar to the ones described
by us in the structure of a person. They write, “without doubt, its
substrate is not just a single organ. It, in its own way, is spread in
the whole society. Nevertheless, the specific features that detach it
as a separate reality are common to it. In reality it does not depend
on special conditions in which the individuals find themselves; they
go by and it stays. It is the same in the North and in the South, in big
cities and in small ones, in representatives of different professions.
Likewise, it does not change with each generation, but vice versa
connects the consequent generations. Therefore, it is something
different from separate consciousnesses even though it results only
in individuals. It is the psychic type of the society, the type that has
its own peculiarities, conditions of its existence, its means of
development similar to those for individual types, but different”223.
Our task is to discover this “different”, to point out the kinds of
functional organs, to show their place in the social body and to see
their specific functions within the whole.
221Коммунист. – 1991. – № 4. – С. 28.
222Дюркгейм Э. О разделении общественного труда. Метод социологии. – М.:
Наука, 1991. – С.80.
223Арон Р. Этапы развития социологической мысли. – М.: Издательская группа
“Прогресс” – “Политика”, 1992. – С.319.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
195
Therefore, the collective conscious of the social unity is the
final product of the subjectivity of the first nature, because it
appears on the basis of individual leptonic fields. Next, the
objectified social develops in accordance to its algorithm. Based on
the form of its existence, it is the force field. However, in itself it
differs from the stages of the individual conscious; this is the notion
of a different kind. The thinking of groups differs from the thinking
of separate people; it has its own laws. Indeed, the collective ideas
express the way based on which the group comprehends itself in its
relations with the objects that influence it.
The generic product of this stage is the specific ontological
basis of collective rational living substance that is called mentality.
Under this notion the structure, the content of the soul of the
collective person, of the ethnos, the correlation of its elements and
the stages of the latter are understood 224.
Lately, more and more researchers are willing to view the
mentality as the generic memory, which is based on the synthesis of
natural and social programs of inheritance. Mentality as the
morphological organ has in itself (in transformed or subjectified
form) all the ontological treasure of the first and the second nature.
In the functional aspect – it is the system of collective norms of
social reactions – of the group, ethnos, nation, people etc.
The category “mentality” was not always a part of the
sociological vocabulary. At the beginning of the XX-th century in
the daily usage this term named the more common collective
systems of world perception and behavior, the peculiar “forms of
spirit”; today, this notion is presented in the scientific vocabulary as
well. The mentality appears in the social environment due to such
attributive characteristic of the latter as the mindset. The mindset
means the contradictive wholeness of the picture of the world, the
pre-reflective layer of consciousness, the socio-cultural automatisms
of consciousnesses of individuals and groups, and “the global, all-
224Каныгин Ю.М. Основы когнитивного обществознания (Информационная
теория социальных систем). – К., 1993. – С.32.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
196
encompassing “ether” of culture, in which all the members of the
society are placed”.
According to the definition of L. Gumilyov, the mindset is the
peculiarity of the psychic configuration and worldview of people
who are the part of any given ethnic wholeness. Mindset appears in
the form of hierarchy of ideas, beliefs, conceptions about the world,
tastes, cultural canons, means of thought expression, and it is the
most essential part of the ethnical tradition. The mindset is formed
during the ethnogenesis from the natural and social material. In
order to understand thoroughly the mentality and the mindset, it is
necessary to turn to the monographic work of R. Dodonov Ethnic
mindset, where its descriptive, psychological, standard, structural,
genetic and historic definitions are analyzed in detail. Here we will
only quote the conclusion of the author about the fact that the
“mindset expresses the out-of-individual side of personality” 225
Mentality is known to be “materialized” in the lifestyle of
people, traditions, values, norms of behavior, in the language
(proverbs, common language and culture). Mentality
means
something more than the style of thinking; it lies in the basis of
conscious and unconscious, logical and emotional, it reflects the
deep and therefore complex for theoretical fixation source of
thinking and belief, senses and emotions. That is why the mindset
should be viewed as something more than consciousness. In this
sense it is possible to say that the mindset is the “sediment of
history”. Factually, the mentality is the generic memory that is
based on the synthesis of natural and social programs of inheritance,
and the mindset is the process of their manifestation and usage of
the kind.
With the increase in rank considered ethnic mentality of the
system is shown more clearly: if the level of the consortium
(convinces) the specifics of mentality are not always noticeable, it
comes to the fore in super-ethnic integrity. Moreover, super-ethnos,
225Додонов Р.А. Этническая ментальность: опыт социально философского
исследования. – Запорожье: РА “Тандем-У”, 1998. – С.75.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
197
where is a variety of behaviors, mentality is a major consolidating
factor. So, it is extremely colorful super-ethnos united orthodoxy
(not only as a religion but as a mentality) – as well as much later
caused Russian super-ethnos. The West, once known as
“Christendom”,
is 
integrated
“civilization”
and
“progress”
nowadays, which corresponds to the mental appearance of modern
Western man.
However, in general a closer look at super-ethnic mentality can
always highlight ethnic differences, such as “sharp Gallic sense”
and “gloomy German genius.” A more detailed analysis can also
identify super-ethnic nuances of mentality: for example, in Russian
XIX century they could observe between the nobility, plebeian
intellectuals, Old Believers, Orthodox clergy, distinguished not only
by its behavioral stereotypes (as sub-ethnos), but mentality226. At the
same time the concept of “ethnicity” characterizes the human
community with varying degrees of development of a single pattern,
which are formed as a result of the prolonged existence of the
community in specific geographical and socio-historical conditions.
Here the term is understood in this sense as it was used by the
author of the theory known L.N. Gumilyov ethnic group, that is, as a
community, are called a nation, or nations, or ethnos227. The
category of “ethnic” refers to not only the community, that is, ethnic
groups, but also the full range of connections and relationships that
arise between people regarding their ethnicity.
Therefore, on the first stage of the process of formation of the
social world the state of mind of the people is produced by three
specific spiritual products, which first of all mediate the transition
from the individual intellect to the collective one, and secondly open
up the chain of the transformation of the intelligent component on
its own collective basis. Thus the objectivized social world appears
on the planetary arena. From this moment the objectivized social
226Гумилев Л.Н. Этносфера: История людей и история природы. – М.: Экопрос,
1993. – С. 503.
227Гумилев Л.Н. География этноса в исторический период. – Л.: Наука, 1990.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
198
reality separates from its source – a separate person – and starts
developing according to its own laws. The individual that created it
loses his domination over it, and moreover it begins to dictate the
condition of life to him. The person begins to resist (oppose) it as
the hostile essence. The moment of complete spiritual alienation
(rejection) begins. At this, it is important to underline that from the
organizational point of view we deal with the social chaos. There is
a moment full of spiritual alienation. For a comprehensive
assessment of this phenomenon we will return.
The second stage of formation of the social world is due to
self-unfolding 
of 
the 
collective 
consciousness 
of 
social
communities, ethnic groups, people. It is a mediating factor in the
generation of objectified social world. The original product of this
stage is: civilization, the division of social labor and culture.228.
The first product, or the result, meant only for the intra-stage
usage is the civilization, under which we understand the way, with
the help of which people break the stream of natural development of
natural processes, creating the human way of interaction of a person
with the natural environment. In other words, the civilization is the
means of arrangement of the collective life.
Let us pay attention to the fact that in the existing literature there is
no univocal understanding of the meaning of the content of the notion
of civilization. It is common knowledge that under the term of
“civilization” people understand a) wide common philosophical notion,
the synonym of the notion “social form of matter or the society on the
whole” (F. Brodel, P. Ganchev, A. Molchanov, M. Mchedlov, A. Ursul
and others); b) the stage of historical process, the social organization of
civil life as the new form of sociality (classical philosophers,
T. Hobbes, thinkers of the age of Enlightenement, F. Gizo, G. Bokl,
M. Benediktov, V. Ilushechkin, V. Mishyn, L. Novikova, E. Sajko and
others); c) concrete social community (N. Danylevsky, O. Spengler,
228Климова Г.П. Образование как феномен цивилизации // Автореферат
диссертации на соискание ученой степени доктора философских наук. – Харьков,
1997. – С.6, 10.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
199
A. Toynbee, P. Sorokin, M. Barg, B. Evrasov, T. Myloslavsky,
F. Konechni and others). In the research, we think that the civilization
is the social organization, which appears in process of historical
development of a person and serves as the means and the way of
development of society and its wholeness in the process of production
and recreation of the social life and the person himself. This conclusion
is proved by the latest researches in the social philosophy, for example,
in the works of foreign researchers (O. Spengler, A. Toynbee,
F. Brodel, D. Bell, E. Toffler and others), Russian scientists
(G. Gudozhnik, I. Meisel, V. Marahov, M Mchedlov, L. Novikova,
V. Semenov and others), Ukrainian philosophers (V. Andrushchenko,
B. Gavrylishyn, M. Kyrychenko, M. Mychalchenko, V. Pazenok and
others).
There exists as it is known the infinite amount of definitions and
classifications of civilizations. We think that throughout the human
history three main types of civilization appeared: traditional,
industrial and informational, which just began to show. The
civilizations appear due to the combination of two factors: the
presence of creative minority and not very favorable environmental
conditions. The mechanism of appearance, as well as the further
dynamics of civilizations, is embodied in the idea of “challenge -
response”. The surrounding (initial natural and then social) always
tosses challenges to the society, which tries to overcome them with
the help of creative minority. As soon as the response is found, the
new challenge appears, and for it, in its turn, the new response is
given.
On the stage of development of civilization the responses are
successful, because people use the unprecedented efforts in order to
solve colossal problems and in such a way they undermine the
“habitual foundations”.
However, in a phase of disintegration and collapse of the
creativity dries up. Civilizations fall apart from the inside. Sorokin
pointed out three important circumstances determining the exit of
civilizations from the historical scene: the lack of creative power in

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
200
minority; as a response, weakening the majority support, and the
consequent weakening and loss of spiritual unity of the society. To
illustrate this thesis is sufficient to point out the self-destruction of
the USSR.
Civilization is, in fact, the social organization of public life,
characterized by a universal bond of individuals, or elementary, or
rather basic, social formations in order to ensure the progressive
development of mankind. Vernadsky wrote that civilization is
“cultural humanity” because it is a form to organize a new
geological force “...it can not be interrupted or destroyed, since it is
a great natural phenomenon fitting the historically rather
geologically established organization of the biosphere, creating a
noosphere, it roots itself into this mortal shell”.229
In the available scientific literature particularly written in the
late nineteenth – early XIX, the concept of “civilization” and
“culture” are often used synonymously. A common knowledge is
that a significant role the category of “civilization” is playing in a
materialistic direction of world philosophy. Karl Marks wrote that a
certain mode of production or a particular industrial stage is always
associated with a certain way of joint activities of people. In this
form of civilization is not always a positive effect on a person.
Criticism of civilization Rousseau was, for example, one of the
expressions of his protest against the transformation of a person in a
one-sided thing. The current crisis is the evidence too. For example,
the highest leadership of the USSR orthodoxy in relation to a
technogenic type of civilization, in a time when the objective course
of social development has demanded transition to its information
type, has become one of the major causes of death of the once
mighty country.
A method of converting the environment to every nation needs
is shaped by the ideology that works as a semantic filter. The history
of planetary humanity gives a lot of examples to prove the truth of
229Вернадский В.И. Начало и вечность жизни. – М.: Советская Россия, 1989. –
С.139.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
201
this thesis. For example, the highest growth
rates have
monoideology countries. Among them, Japan with the ideology of
collective responsibility, China with the idea of the communist
future, the United States with the idea of "organizational
humanism”, Sweden, with the idea of social protection, with the
idea of Pakistan Islamic fundamentalism.
The ideology carriers are those or other individual nations,
while other agents are adjacent to it to a certain time. This also
explains the fact that civilizations exhibit their creative essence only
in selected areas, they concentrate on some individual, unique to
these areas and themes such as: for Greek civilization – the beauty,
for the Semitic – religion for the Roman – law and the
administration, to the Chinese – the practice and benefits for the
Indian – imagination, fantasy and mysticism, for the German-
Romanesque – science and technology. Marks, as we know, the
term “ideology” used also in a very broad sense, investing in it the
whole philosophy, political, legal, artistic and other views.
Spengler identified eight “higher cultures”: the Egyptian,
Babylonian, Indian, Chinese, classical (Greco-Roman), Arab,
Mexican and Western (arisen about 1000 AD). Each of them had its
own dominant theme, or “primary” character, which is embodied in
all of its components, giving a particular shade of thinking and
action, defining the nature of science, art, customs, habits, etc. For
example, the “primary symbol” of Greco-Roman culture is the cult
of the sensual, Apollo topic. In Chinese culture that is “dao”,
indefinite wandering, multi-line “way” of life. For Western culture
“primary symbol” is “boundless space” and the concept of time,
stretching to infinity, as a destination, Faust theme230.
Toynbee also indicates the presence of a specific dominant
theme in every civilization. For example, in the civilization of the
Greeks it’s aesthetics, in Hindi it’s religion, in Western civilization
it’s science and mechanical technology.
230Штомпка П. Социология социальных изменений. – М.: Аспект Пресс, 1996. –
С.192-193.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
202
There is no such thing as better or more perfect civilization;
each has its own internal logic of development and goes through
various stages in only its peculiar sequence. “Every civilization
arises and develops its own morphological form, their own values,
thus 
enriching 
the 
common 
treasury 
of 
human 
cultural
achievements, and then goes away, did not continue in their specific
and essential form”231.
"There is, as indicated P. Shtompka, the typical cycle of
development observed in the fate of every great civilization first
period, sometimes very long. It is the period of occurrence and
crystallization, when civilization is born, it takes different forms and
an image, according to their cultural and political autonomy and a
common language. Then comes the phase of prosperity, when fully
developed civilization and revealed her creativity. This period is
usually relatively short (acc. Danilevsky it is 400-600 years) and
ends when the stock of his creative powers exhausted. Lack of
creative forces, stagnation and the gradual disintegration of
civilization is the final phase of the cycle"232.
As believed N. Danilevsky, European (German-Romanesque)
civilization entered a phase of degeneration, which resulted in
several symptoms: growing cynicism, secularism, weakening
innovation potential, the insatiable greed of power, and domination
in the world. The flourishing of the Russian-Slavic civilization is
still to be seen in the future. This is the final few ethnocentric
historiosophy of N. Danilevskyi. Current practice proves that
society leaves the stage of history, if it does not gain an ideological
perspective. The bitter experience of the USSR, which made an
attempt to pave its way into history ideologically unsecured, is a
clear confirmation. In fact, socialism in the USSR is the worst, as
the practice has confirmed, variant of the capitalist mode of the
world arrangement.To investigation of this issue is devoted a lot of
philosophical works.
231Штомпка П. Социология социальных изменений. – М.: Аспект Пресс, 1996. – С.191.
232See the same source. – p.191

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
203
The main product of the second stage of the formation of the
socium is the division of social labor. It appears on the basis of self-
evolution of civilization as the social organization of humanity
itself. The moment of conscious regulation of exchange of activity
within the community and the interaction of the latter with the
natural and social environment appears. That is why only from the
moment of creation of civilization the historical development of
humanity begins in the sense that the organization, the arrangement
of social life is realised in the process of the conscious activity of
people, which does not cancel its objective laws, but gives the
motivated and therefore the reflexive character to the social
development. The value of the division of the social labor, as E.
Durkheim wrote, is in the concentration of the social connections
between people. The latter is achieved thanks to the fact that the
collective consciousness becomes weak and undetermined in the
process of division enhancement. Due to this progressive
indetermination the division of labor becomes the main source of
solidarity. Indeed, the economic services that it can provide are
nothing compared to the moral action created by it; its real function
is to create the sense of solidarity between two or several people. 233
Thus, M. Weber thought that the division of labor can exist 1)
technically, in accordance with organization of labor and technique
requirements; 2) economically, depending on the organization of the
company (or depending on the budget and administrative principal,
or according to the principal of private enterprise for the production
of income); 3) socially, depending on the possession of the means of
production. “ Thus, M. Weber thought that the division of labor can
exist 1) technically, in accordance with organization of labor and
technique requirements;
2) economically, depending on the
organization of the company (or depending on the budget and
233 Дюркгейм Э. О разделении общественного труда. Метод социологии. – М.:
Наука, 1991. – С.58.
Веселов Ю. В. Экономическая социология: История идей. – СПб.: Издательство
С. – Петербургского университета, 1995. – С.41.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
204
administrative principal, or according to the principal of private
enterprise for the production of income);3) socially, depending on
the possession of the means of.234
The division of social labor as a notion is defined differently in
various sciences. We use it in the widest or general philosophical
sense as a social, professional division of labor or activities, which
differentiates into the society in accordance with the set of various
social functions, which are performed by certain groups of people
and which lead to separation of diverse spheres of society (industry,
agriculture, management, science, services, army etc). The
manifestation of division of social labor is the exchange of activity
in its qualitatively different and historically caused forms235.
In human dimension, the division of social labor looks like
human solidarity that the deepening of collectivism happens not
only between the members of closed labor process, but among the
subjects of the single life process that happens on Earth. The
exchange of activity motivates a person to view himself as a part of
organic unity: people depend on each other, because every person is
imperfect on his own, due to the fact that with division of labor the
person was divided also. The division of labor in economic sphere
provides the integration of individuals into the single social
organism that stipulates their solidarity. As E. Durkheim mentions,
it plays the role once performed by the common consciousness; it
mainly keeps together the social aggregates of the higher types. At
this, the sociologists found out that the more energetic and
determined the social consciousness would be the slower and more
difficult the progress of division of labor would develop. Division of
labor, according to E. Durkheim, is the “law of nature”, and the
division of social labor is its separate form. Enhancement of labor
division creates the system of interconnected social functions and
produces organic solidarity instead of mechanic solidarity of
234
235Дюркгейм Э. О разделении общественного труда. Метод социологии. – М.:
Наука, 1991. – С.58.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
205
altruistic society. It is important to underline that the morphogenic
function of division of labor lies in the fact that it substitutes the
collective consciousness in its role of the source of social solidarity
and of the basis of the moral order.
Thus, the economic aspect of labor division is connected with the
increase of manufacturing. The social aspect, according to R. Aron, is
connected with the possibility to live in new, created by us conditions.
In his turn, E. Durkheim saw the social aspect of this event. According
to him, if the labor division produces solidarity, it is not only because
it makes every individual the participant of the exchange, but because
it creates the whole system of rights and obligations between people,
which tie them to one another for a long time. Just like the social
similarities originate the right and morality, which protect them, the
labor division originates the rules that provide peaceful and regular
collaboration of the divided functions”236.
K. Marx described this process and its role in the self-
development of human life. The analysis of tendencies of labor
division, mainly in large industry, allowed K. Marx and F. Engels to
determine the patterns of the future society where the spontaneous
character of labor division is overcome and the submission of a person
to the labor division that enslaves him is destroyed.237. And the man
again becomes holistic. Here we leave aside the ideological
underpinnings of materialism.
The characteristic tendency of modern developed society is the
embodiment of new spheres necessary for its functioning and
development; the increase of number of departments in them and,
accordingly, the profiling of labor division. At the same time, in
every separate sphere the labor division has its peculiar and
contradictory character238. In order to figure out the order of
appearance of elements of the second nature we need to pay
236Философская энциклопедия. – Т.4. – С.454.
237Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.19. – С. 20.
238Дюркгейм Э. О разделении общественного труда. Методсоциологии. –
М.:Наука, 1991.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
206
attention to the quote of E. Durkheim about the fact that the need for
cooperation created the society. He underlines that it means that the
latter appeared for the labor to divide, and not that the labor was
divided due to social condition"239, – he wrote. Therefore, the society
genetically grows from the social division of labour. It is very
important for the understanding of the process of formation of the
social world. Enhancement of labor division happens, as E.
Durkheim wrote, therefore, because the social segments lose their
individuality, the partitions that separate them become more
permeable, they grow together and this makes the social matter
free for entrance into new combinations."240.
At the finishing stage the civilization and social labor division,
being the functional organs of socium, in the process of their self-
development, create a generic product-culture. Culture as a notion
and as an element of the social world is absolutely multiplex. It is not
an accident that in the world literature one can find hundreds of its
definitions, each of which reflects this or that, often essential, aspects
and characteristics of a given social phenomenon. Such situation
concerning the definition of essence and content of the culture has
developed because it is “a deep collective consciousness which gets to
the roots of the remote past and creates a dim mosaic of stereotypes,
which are given the function of distribution of probabilities”. 241
The concept of “culture” in its modern sense became applicable
in Europe in the XVIII century through the works of such thinkers
as D. Viko, I-G. Gerder, Montesquieu. The concept of “culture” is
one of the fundamental in the modern social sciences. American
cultural studies and A. Kreber, K. Klakhon in their joint study on
the definition of culture, noted the huge and growing interest in this
concept. So if, by their calculations, from 1871 to 1919 was given
239See the same source. – p.239
240See the same source. – p. 218
241Налимов В.В., Дрогалина Ж.А. Реальность нереального. Вероятностная
модель бессознательного. – М.: Издательство “МИР ИДЕЙ”, АО АКРОН, 1995. –
С.20.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
207
seven definitions of culture (first, they believe belongs to the
outstanding British ethnographer Edward Tylor), then from 1920 to
1950 by different authors, they totaled 157 definitions of the term.
In domestic (Russian – V.B.) literature willingness to compare
different definitions of culture allowed L.E. Kertman counted over
400 definitions. Now the number has four digits definitions242.
Since the second half of the nineteenth century, the concept of
“culture” gradually loses its estimated value and acquires scientific
status, and not just a philosophical category. It began to interfere
with such categories as “civilization”, “socio-economic system”,
“global regionalization.” There were those of its definition as
“biologically non-inherited memory of mankind” – through a
system of local behaviors and perceptions, through a set of
anthropological and “evolutionary” universals, etc. Science began to
intensively search for the answer to questions about the structure
and elements of culture, as well as to explore the cultural complexes
arising from the elements. Studying of culture sructure has begun
since 1949 when American researcher E. Hoebel has suggested
specifying the least unit of culture, which received the name of a
cultural element. According to Hoebel’s definition, a cultural
element is an indivisible unit of the behavioral sample or a material
product."243 Here, apparently, it is possible to offer a working
hypothesis that under a cultural element it is necessary to
understand a phenotype reaction norm of the human personality.
So, in this way the culture arises in integrity and interrelation of
its spiritual, subject and functional life. In the spiritual form the
culture is fixed at the whole diversity of stereotypes (impressions) of
surrounding world and person, in ideas, ideals, scientific theories,
ideology, and social psychology and so on. The subject form of
culture is represented by the instruments of labor, the production
technology, law, social institutes, works of literature and art, etc. So,
242Философия: учебник / Под ред. В.Д.Губина, Т.Ю.Сидориной, В.П.Филатова. –
М.: Русское слово, 1996. – С.287.
243Hoebel E. Man in the primitive world. – N.Y., 1949. – C.499.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
208
in the functional form the culture is shown in images of activity of
the person, social communities and institutes. Within the framework
of our present research we recognize that “culture, education,
formation, development – specific means of external stimulation of
the person to development and the organization of the highly
effective activity, presented in products of material and spiritual
work, in system of social norms and establishments, in cultural
wealth, in aggregate of people’s relations to the nature, among
themselves and to themselves “244 It is its function along with
interrelation with the subject of the historical action.
Perhaps the reader has doubts and objections regarding what the
categories ought to be identified with. Doubts are appropriate. They are
the engine of the thought. Therefore, we are forced to look for
additional evidence of their legitimacy in other grounds. Indirect
evidence that we’re not mistaken when determining the place of
discussed categories “civilization” and “culture” is the fact that the term
“civilization”, as stated in the philosophical literature, appeared in the
middle of the XVIII century, while the concept of “culture” was
introduced to science only in the middle of the nineteenth century245.
There is other evidence of a need of such referring to the data
concepts in the process of shaping the social environment. For
example, K.M. Kant states the following: “Civilization is not a
synonym for culture, even if Western civilization in contrast to the
barbarism is the totality consciously, “formalistically” constructed
types of communication that oppose the primary natural social
organization, protecting from it an individual. Elements of
civilization are in every culture”. 246
Here we also recognize that culture represents a continuity of
natural-historical process, its internal potential, however the
civilization determines the general and progressive character of its
244Философский энциклопедический словарь / Под ред. С.С. Аверинцева, Э.А.
Араб – Оглы, Л.Ф.Ильичева и др. – 2-е изд. – М.: Сов. энциклопедия, 1989. – С.293.
245Коган Л.Н. Цель и смысл жизни человека. – М.: Мысль, 1984. – С.197.
246Вопросы философии. – 1992. – № 6. – С.44.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
209
realization by changing social structures. The culture considers the
basic set of aspirations and values of civilization, which determine
its humanistic orientation in general. In its turn, civilization provides
socially-organizational and technological means of functioning and
development of culture, but owing to this, it is capable to determine
it, i.e., fixes the border of it, braking through which becomes a
powerful impulse of social progress, as soon as the culture exhausts
all reserve possibilities, granted to it by civilization. Here we
encounter the first social institution as an organizational form of
existence of social material.
However, we are aware of completely opposite points of view
on the concepts of “civilization” – “culture” correlation. To see this,
suffice to review the discussion of this problem in the works of
Berdyaev, O. Spengler, K. Levi-Strauss, A. Kreber, H. Ortega y
Gasset, M.P. Mchedlov, L.I. Novikovoy, Yu.V. Sachkov, A.N.
Sokolov, and others.
If through our proposed methodological prism to analyze the
content of the three famous historical theories, we are talking about
the concepts of historical development of Russian scientist N.
Danilevskyi, German scientist O. Spengler and English scientist
Arnold Toynbee, it would appear that the developing view on the
formation of the social environment receives full confirmation.
Organizationally, the second stage is the social environment,
understood as a total intellectual field, which is made of a number of
individual fields inherent in separate personalities. For the analysis
of problems under consideration, certainly the third stage of
formation of a society is the most significant, since it, contrary to
the previous two stages, is the most materialized part of objectified
world. The process of objectification of content of the social world
here seems to transcend from micro level towards macrolevel and
becomes more appreciable and conceivable for us. Elements of the
given stage concern: productive forces, labour and society.
Productive forces are the first element which arises on the
basis of transformation of all previous self-evolvement of the

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
210
social content; they consist of subjective (person) and objective
(systems of means of production) elements. Owing to vocational
training, the person is potentially capable of acting as unique means
of transformation of world for the sake of personal interests and
interests of others. Here the human body acts as a universal means
of production. In addition to this, the system of means of production
(the means of labor and objects of labor) intended to make human
life more convenient. The very process of its qualitative enrichment
is none other than scientific and technological advance, or when is
viewed through the lences of acting characteristics, – scientific-
technical revolution. In the material culture we should distinguish
the process of creation of instruments of labor.
In other words, at this stage of self-organization, the social world is
materialized in the products of collective human activity, and more
specifically in man as the main productive force, and systems of
instruments of labor for material and spiritual production. And the
similarity of their generation during the same self-organizing process
does not prevent them from being diametrically opposed, and perform
different functions in the self-unfolding of the social world.
In the material culture, it is necessary to distinguish the process
of creating instruments. The labour creating own instruments of
self-realization in its subjectivity becomes the self-perpetuating
process. For such a process, it is sufficient to establish its “exit” -
"input” positive feedback; and it (if resources are available) can
develop potentially indefinitely.
Besides, we should distinguish between two kinds of tools:
those, which are designed to create, and those, which are designed
to destroy. From here the bifurcation of the uniform and object-
mediated process of interaction into two qualitatively opposite
processes – creative, mediated by tools, and destructive, mediated
by the weapon, starts. Bifurcation, as history of further formation
and development of a society proves,
had far reaching
consequences. But on the eve of this bifurcation destructive
processes were ousted from the interior life of the communities,

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
211
taken out into the sphere of external interactions of these functional
systems as in the form of hunting and struggle against predators, and
in the form of armed conflicts with other (“alien”) communities247.
In addition, other sort of products of spiritual culture – sign
systems, i.e. the tools of information influence, appeared. It is
qualitatively different in form, and much more powerful in the force
of influence on the person, product. We will notice that reference of
language signs to the category of tools is not accidental. First of all,
“function, belonging to both and performing as mediator, undergirds
analogy between sign and tool”, as L.Vygotsky marks248 . These
both serve for the person as means of activity, “mechanism”, a
conductor of his/her influence on certain systems of world around”
“If in the process of labor”, B. Ananyev wrote, “the mechanism of
interaction between the person and the object of labor is the
instrument of labor, in the process of communication the sign, more
truly, the sign system, performs the function of such mechanism"249.
Thus, a language sign – is much more than just the means of
activity. Likewise the instrument of labor it is also its product. And
in this very sense, as created by people, not by nature, signs and
tools are social by the nature phenomena. The experience of
generations is fixed in them, and to employ it every person masters
not merely the tools but also appropriate sign systems. Further, the
sign language as an instrument of labor, it is a substantive product
of human activity, objectively existing material object. Marks and
Engels wrote that “spirit” is afflicted with the curse of being
“burdened” with matter, which here ... its appearance in the form of
agitated layers of air, sounds, in short, ... with it move.. sounds is in
a word, in the form of language” 250. Owing to their subjectivity,
sign systems like tools receive relatively independent of their
247Коммунистическая партия и научное управление. – К.: Политиздат Украины,
1984. – С.114.
248Выготский Л.С. Развитие высших психических функций. – М., 1960. – С. 123.
249Ананьев Б.Г. Человек как предмет познания. – Л, 1969. – С.319.
250Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. -Т.3. – С. 29.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
212
creators existence and function as components of their communities.
L. Vygotsky wrote: “sign that is outside the organism, similar to the
tool, is separated from an individual, and is, in its essence, a social
organ”. 251
Moreover, in certain fields of activity sign system is a
productive social organ, special means of production, first of all, in
the sense that sign systems are the most subtle tool of influence on
mentality, being the major means of its production and reproduction
as of human, societal mentality, as of systems of functional organs
of human brain, which is being formed during a life period. O.
Leontyev repeatedly specified this aspect of productivity of sign
systems.
There are also essential differences between material
instruments of labour and sign systems; as far as the instruments of
labor; are the means of subjective-energetic influence; however
signs are the means of energetic-informational influence. Thereof
effectiveness of signs is appreciably independent of their substantial
embodiment. Their “functional being, repeating K. Marx’s words,
absorbs, so to say, their material being”.252
The named above products interact between themselves owing
to process in which its source, namely, a human being, finds
him\herself involved in this new interaction as a means of
mediation. He strives to be released from it and, thus, he strives to
replace a mechanical part, i.e. the part, which provides functioning
of both parts of products, upon an artificial intellect, preferring by
himself instead to maintain a process of creation of new life.
Basic element of last stage of an objectification of subjectified
first nature – labor; it is understood as the expedient live activity of
the person directed towards modifications and the adaptation of
objects of the nature for satisfaction of individual needs. In present
research we precede from the fact that live labor, genetically
growing from social labor division, represents certain type of
251Выготский Л. С. Развитие высших психических функций. – М., 1960. – С. 198.
252Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.23. – С. 140.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
213
interaction of people and means of production (substantivized
person). It is that K. Marx in his work German Ideology named
intercourse. Interaction of people as a product of formation of
society becomes the factor of development of the second nature.
Besides, it is labor as the material form of communication that
is meant; moreover, communication, taking place during
interaction of people among themselves at an initial stage of
socium formation, is also present here. They should not be
confused. “They differ in the following”, as M.Kagan wrote: “in
material intercourse spiritual activity of a subject has for an object
only managements of his practical actions (italisized – V.B.),
while spiritual intercourse aims towards spiritual unification of
partners, attaining their togetherness, as for the practical actions, if
they are used in support, serve only to the given purpose; as a rule,
spiritual intercourse is carried out in a form of verbal, or by using
other sign devices, dialogue"253.
"All the more so, in practice there are cases when productive
form of intercourse restrains the development of spiritual
intercourse and owing to this freely or involuntarily “slows down
the sociality sails”. F. Engels wrote: “The existence of a dominative
class becomes the daily increasing obstacle for development of
productive force of industry as well as development of science , arts,
and in particular, cultural forms of intercourse” 254
So, labor as the basic product of the third stage of formation of
the social world, arises to give an individual the opportunity to
realize his\her nature out, and all changes he\she has gone through
have no other purpose than to make this realization easier and more
complete. In this context labor should be considered as realization
of a professional knowledge of the worker or man of liberal
profession. K. Marx wrote: in such a way “under the conditions of
253Каган М.С. Мир общения: Проблема межсубъектных отношений. – М.:
Политиздат, 1988 . – С.131.
254Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.18. – С. 216.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
214
actual (true) collectiveness individuals get freedom in their
association and by means of it” 255
Let’s turn our attention to the fact, that labor is a means of
maintenance of normal vital functions of a person and his\her
collective formations at horizontal level. In a vertical plane its
spiritual component that is being developed. Therefore, immortality
of a person is prepared at the highest levels of self-motion of
universum while all industrial success of people is collecting dust on
the shelves of planetary archive.
Society is a generic product at the third stage of formation of a
social world. It is not necessary to expatiate on the fact, that a
society is the product of human activity – of labor. It is a generally
recognized fact. Will remind only that G. Hegel defined a society as
“system of his (the person. – V.B.) general relations” ” 256According
to K. Marx’ definition, as it is known, a society is “a product of
interaction of people” 257 T. Parsons defines a society in a following
way, “A social system... which meets all important functional
requirements connected with long existence at the expense of own
resources, will be called a society.
For concept of a society it is important, that it should keep all
structural functional bases, in order to be an independently existing
system"258 Unfortunately, this approach appears ineffective at
society studying in development and in general in its dynamics. In
this sense T. Parsons’ theory, despite its symmetry and even known
refinement, nevertheless, remains one-sided.
In the native textbook on social philosophy in this connection
the following is written:” According to Plato, the society is the
association of people for satisfaction of their needs and is a means
of realization of people’s need of affiliation. For Aristotle it is an
255Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.27. – С. 75.
256Гегель Г. Энциклопедия философских наук. – М.: Мысль, 1977. – Т.3. – С.344
257Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.27. – С. 402.
258Парсонс Т. Система координат действия и общая теория систем действия //
Структурно-функциональный подход в социологии. Вып. 1. – М., 1968. – С. 35-58.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
215
embodiment of a social natural instinct of the person inherent in him
from 
birth. 
The 
religious 
philosophy 
considered 
it 
as
manifestation of 
God’s
creation. 
The 
representatives 
of
Enlightenment (T. Hobbes, J.J. Rousseau, Voltaire) and the French
materialists of the XVIIIth century interpreted a society as a form of
the social agreement. G. Hegel interpreted it as a real process of
vital activity of people that is carried out owing to an embodiment
of absolute idea into the life. I. Bentam recognizes a society as “a
fictitious body which consists of separate persons who are
considered as its functional constituent members”; G. Zimmel
revives Plato’s idea about a society as a tool of realization of
internal promptings, needs, and motives of individuals. M. Weber
supplements 
it 
with 
his 
thesis 
about 
“some 
minimum
interorientations”. E. Durkheim underlined the value of a division of
labor. T.Parsons treats a society as a social system, which functions
owing to interaction of people and social institutes. Within the
framework of Marxist social philosophy a society is defined as a
“set of historically conditioned forms of the general activity of
people".259
In the domestic philosophical thought hardly anyone puts this
fact into question.
However, the common fault of the majority of definitions of a
society, since it is a functional body of socium, is a static character
of a picture, which researchers fix. It is a photo, instead of process.
Its components, as a rule, are as follows: constant territory; self-
reproduction, basically for the account of childbearing; the
developed national culture and political independence. Even such
authoritative researcher as T. Parsons, who has turned so called
invariant set of “functional problems” in a kernel of his concept of a
society, has not avoided this shortcoming.
The functional problems T. Parsons understands as adaptation
of the goal achievement, reproduction of structures, stress relief, etc.
259Андрущенко В., Михальченко В. Сучаснасоціальнафілософія. Курс лекцій. В
2-х томах. – К.: Видавництво “Генеза”, 1993. – Т. 1. – С.148.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
216
Society, in his view, is a holistic, formation with a hierarchical
structure. And a number of sub-systems of this integrity are
designed to ensure the implementation of a function. Will focus the
reader’s attention at the processes designed to ensure, in the opinion
of the researchers, certain functions in society. Thus, the adaptation
function provides the economic sub-system, the goal-pursuing
function is political; integrative function is provided by the customs
and stereotypes, developed in the framework of a given culture, and
legal institutions; the structure of the reproduction is ensured by
moral norms and belief system, and are included here as factors of
socialization, including the institution of the family and education.
There are also a number of structures to remove the social tensions.
However, these structures are different depending on the nature of
society. All of these subsystems in the normal and efficient
functioning society should be balanced. The level of this balance is
largely determined by the degree of the integrity of society.
It is important to make a distinction between the socium and
society, because they are different “things”. Society is made up of
social institutions, relations between them and the mechanisms
governing the institutions in social interactions. Institutional
framework sets concrete historical dimension of society: at every
stage of its history, society exists in certain defined instrumental
dimensions known to us as the formation.
In turn, the socium is an ideal structure “of society in general”,
regardless of its specific structures and formed social dimension;
mutual, but not co-organised co-existence of people; the property of
the person as a social being, who may be called also the “societal”
that only means that people need each other for their own self-
identity. In other words, socium is a society in a virtual state, and
society is a socium in a steady motion.
The crisis observed today throughout the sociogenesis
demanded from researchers the application of synergistic means to
the analysis of social processes, and at once the essence of society’s
definition became different. For example, the following is a

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
217
definition of society given by a group of authors from St.
Petersburg, “Society is a specific (collective) subject with its goals,
the means of their achieving, the internal language, and self-
regulatory systems”260. This approach is much closer to us in spirit
and we are going as far as possible to elaborate and complement it.
At the same time, the generic product of this stage as the most
objectified product has some historical modifications, which have
received the specific name – a formation. We will remind that this
term is used to name the society, which is, according to K. Marx’s
known expression, at a certain step of historical development. For us
it is a specific product of the generic process at this stage of self-
organizing of the social content. Since the society as a generic
product is an interaction of means of production and social labor,
then, developing even under the influence of the same type of
division of social labor, they can interact between themselves on the
basis of different variants of connecting nexuses (the form of
property or intercourse forms). K. Marx, with characteristic of him
insight, noticed it and used as a base for distribution of local
products of the third stage of self evolvement of social content.
Having thoroughly scrutinized the types of links between a person
and society, he came to a following conclusion: there are five public
formations: primitive,
slaveholding, feudal, capitalistic and
communistic. A formation,
thus, as a product of historical
development is a category of phylogenesis. Later we will consider it
in more detail.
But, as it has been shown above, two kinds of instruments of
labor behave differently in the course of their functional application
by a person. A person can master the language sign system, turn it
into a tool of his activity, without appropriating it as a thing but only
recreating it in the functional structures of the brain. The
instruments of labor can be turned into the tools of the activity, only
260Самоорганизация: психо- и социогенез / Под редакцией В.Н. Келасьева. –
СПб.: Издательство С.-Петербургского университета, 1996. – С.175.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
218
under condition of having incorporated with it spatially as with a
thing.
Thereof the association (connection, coherence) of people with
the certain instrument of labor is potentially competitive, while the
same with sign systems is not. Therefore the person can turn a
language sign system, in contrast to the instrument, into property of
other person without losing it as means of his own activity; for the
same reason the same sign system made up by one person can
become means of activity of many people at the same time 261.
In this connection K. Marx, having noticed this difference,
assumed as a basis a form of ownership of the basic means in sphere
of material production, while explaining the differences between
historical ways of self-organization of social life.
From the aspect of organization the given stage of formation of
the social content is already the most structured and advantageously
differs from two previous stages, therefore here we deal with
severely structured socium which is called “sphere”. In this case, the
notion “sphere” is used by us as methodological means for reflexion
of the difference between the two previous stages.
At this stage the functions generated by the process of division
of social labor, are already personalized and assigned to particular
workers. The latter, owing to this, do not represent communities any
more, but form collectives. The given stage is known to us from the
scientific literature as noosphere.
Thus, we have finished the analysis of the content of socium, or
objectified social world, which is carried out at micro-and macro-
levels under the influence of the basis – the potential social worlds
of a particular subject of historical action.
The motion of the potential social worlds is caused by their
immanent aspiration to come outward and manifest itself, i.e. to
acquire finitness within the actual dimension of our planetary
system. But this is only one causal part of the social world, its other
261Коммунистическая партия и научное управление. – К.: Политиздат Украины,
1984. – С. 118.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
219
part, as has been underlined above, is connected with the conditions
of our planetary system. Thus, it is important to notice that if the
basis has provided rational character of the second nature, than
concrete conditions, within which the process of generating the
social content
takes place, have the mission to determine
parameters of social system. The latter have situational character,
since they are connected with the stage of development of planetary
mankind, for example, civilization type, the character of division of
the social labor, dominating form of ownership or the appearance of
society etc. Now it is time to consider the place and the role of
conditions as the second determinant of formation of the social
world content.
Conditions, as it is known, are that immediate with which the
basis correlates as with its essential precondition; therefore the real
basis inherently is conditioned by its nature. Determinacy it contains
is its other form of existence.
Conditions occupy in relation to the determined by the basis
social content as if an extraneous position. In this connection, they
(conditions) possess also a specific function within the given
process of formation. Its essence consists in quantification of social
content. They as if dose it out according to known to them principle
and promptly pack it in the various organizational packages. If the
dimension is wrong, then abnormalities occur and we deal with a
mutation of the social content. K. Marx writes convincingly about
it.262
Conditions have for this purpose an original executive organ
and mechanism. The nearest environment in which immediate
interaction between people takes place is the operating element of
conditions. As V. Afanasyev marks, that “owing to various
influences of environment on the system, usually the environment is
understood as both: in wide sense, as all reality, environmental
system, and in narrow sense, as important, necessary environment
262Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.3. – С.70-78.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
220
for a system, i.e. that very system, in interaction with which the
system reveals its properties, its integrity, determinacy, and not only
determines, but also forms certain properties – the properties which
will enable it not to merge into this environment but function and
develop rather independently"263.
From above stated the understanding follows that conditions
(environment) play in a process of self-organization of socium at
the micro-level the same role which in the first nature is carried
out by human (biological) organism, i.e. they become the
competent subject of geological process, generating objectified at
macro-level social reality.
With the only difference that in the first case all parameters of
social world are determined by a human body which changes all but
external parameter of the social and in the second case vice versa,
namely, the environment, which endows invariable social content with
richness of external manifestation, determines everything. In addition,
in this context it should especially be underlined that insignificant,
even the least deviations in the conditions of the social world content
initiation are capable of changing its appearance essentially.
The peculiar feature of the process of dosing of the social world
is the following: it is carried out by the forces which exist in
external to the social content environment. By origin these forces
are generated, on the one hand, by attributive properties of the social
content itself, on the other hand, by conditions in which it is
realized. Therefore the nearest environment is a product of the
content which is being based, and conditions, and as we have
marked earlier in a methodological part of our work, it is a field of
possible ways of self-evolvement of the social world. Thus, such
environment merely induces the social content to development. Its
basic function is to create conditions for an unlimited
individualization of the social content.
263Афанасьев В.Г. Системность и общество. – М.: Политиздат, 1980. – С.151.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
221
There is a reason hereinafter specially to investigate as the
forces of external compression such elements of environment, as the
law, values, morals, after all, national idea as the system of certain
stereotypes concerning accommodation of generic life. So, for
example, it is logically to imagine that at the first stage of
formation of socium collective feelings and experiences, archetypes
and customs of the people operate, at the second – most likely such
powerful social institutes as belief and knowledge, values and world
outlook systems are revealed, and at the third – ideological systems
and traditions as social technologies of forming the behavior of
people, morality and morals as developed regulatory systems of
proper and practical behavior of people. More than that, we do not
deny probability that every separately taken process of formation of
the social world arises as a result of operation of exclusively “own”
set of forces of compression.
The fact that there is a direct relationship between collective
values and the division of social labor, for example, can be traced on
the basis of the following fact established by science. Its essence lies
in the fact that an essential condition for social efficiency and the
success of the labor division of all forms of pluralism is the
unconditional recognition by all members of society a certain
minimum of uniting common values, forming, according to
Durkheim, the “collective consciousness.” There is a very valuable
interpretation by N. Smelzer Dorendorf’s idea that the system of
values is “the most stable element of society, which is also a society
framework”; valuable in terms of establishing the correlation
between categories under consideration – the elements of a process
of the social content self-generation.
The philosophical definition of values (the values of the object,
as opposed to its existence) was introduced, as you know, in the 60-
ies of the nineteenth century, by Lotze and Cohen. In sociology, the
term was granted the rights of a theoretical category thanks to
Thomas and Znanetski, who summed up the background of this
concept in bourgeois sociology (the normative aspect of “collective

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
222
consciousness” of E. Durkheim, “interest” and “accessory” of A.
Smoll et al.) And defined it in terms of social significance of the
object and social attitude (attitude).
Proceeding from the Kantian opposition between proper and
real, the “kingdom of values” and the “kingdom of life,” Weber
argued a priori values in relation to the activity. Values could not be
derived from the theory of activity, and therefore they could not be
rationally explained or rationally justified. Therefore, Weber, noting
the fact of expansion of the goal -rational activities in the domain of
values in Western society, captures this process as a “loss of values”
or “loss of meaning”, but not as the change in content of the value
itself that already appears in the form of worth. Since the theory of
activity 
cannot
explain 
the 
nature 
of 
values
and 
their
transformations.
Overcoming the shortcomings of Weber’s sociological
nominalism occurred in several ways; the most important of them
were the sociology of Emile Durkheim, interactionism of G. Mid,
and structural functionalism of T. Parsons. Yu. Habermass critically
reconstructs Emile Durkheim’s concept of collective consciousness
to determine the root of the non-language norm-formation and
exploring the ways to move to linguistic forms.
In a broader historical perspective, the value orientation serves as
a judgment of the “sense” of the historical process, the “properness”
of its direction; it serves as the basis for many utopian predictions of
the future, and social reconstruction programs. It is exactly where
Weber’s point of view is correct: the “superstructure” rather than
“base” (to use Marksist terminology), or a “soft” system of beliefs,
rather than “rigid” economics or technology are active and effective
forces of history. He especially elaborated this detail, as we know, in
his work “The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism”.
There is no doubt that one of the compression forces in the
formation of this segment of the social world is a spontaneously
occurring regulatory system, known to us as morality. The latter, as
we know, is one of the main ways of normative regulation of human

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
223
behavior. It regulates human behavior and consciousness in all
spheres of public life. The principles of morality are social and
universal values; they apply to all people, fixing something in
common, something original capable of making these special
requirements, forming the value basis of the society, creating the
culture of interpersonal relations. Now E. Durkheim’s thesis can be
better understood that “morality is a set of conditions of social
solidarity."264
The principles of morality authorize and support certain social
foundations, way of life and forms of communication (or,
alternatively, require them to change) in its most general form, in
contrast to the more detailed, traditional, ordinary ritual, is
etiquette, organizational, administrative and technical standards.
Morality is one of the main types of normative regulation of human
activities, such as law, rituals, traditions, and others, come in
contact with them, but is, at the same time, significantly different.
Morality is not only supported by the power of an established and
generally accepted procedure, the power of habit, and the total
pressure of others and their view of the individual, but receive
ideological expression in general fixed views (the commandments,
principles) of the must-to- behavior rules. The morality does not
have, as you know, a typical for institutional norms separation of
subject and object. The adequate form of moral regulation is self-
regulation.
Moral reflects the integral system of views on the social life,
which contain a particular understanding of the essence ("purpose”,
“sense”, “goal") of the company, history, man and his life. About
morality as a regulatory system that has arisen on the basis of the
practical life of the people, is said a lot; its principles and laws are
grounded and cultivated by ethics.
For us here it was important to establish the place and the role
of morality in self-generating of the socium. However, the literature
264Дюркгейм Э. О разделении общественного труда. Метод социологии. – М.:
Наука, 1991. – С.389.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
224
does not sufficiently clear distinguish between ethics as a normative
system, and values as a body, generated it. We agree with N.
Smelzer, that values include universal human desire for justice,
knowledge, democracy, freedom; hence, the rules are the means to
achieve these goals. The means are understood as “a set of objective
factors and way of human action, leading to the achievement of the
objectives"265. Such, for example, are discipline, education, work,
ambition, etc. At the same time, the standards are of more specific
character, in comparison to shared values, as they clarify certain
regulatory principles necessary for the implementation of values.
Because of subtleties in the delimitation of the concepts of
“value” and “rules” in practice, as a rule, these terms are used side
by side, and they are ascribed the same regulatory function. Let’s
turn to available literature. Values are known as objects, phenomena
and their properties, as well as abstract ideas that embody social
ideals and acting thereby as the must-to-be etalon.
Values are the standard of the subject at various levels of
activity of social community, the group and humanity as a whole.
These values as based on their subject can be determined as social.
Social values, refracted through the prism of individual lives, are
personal values, forming a personalized hierarchical structure, and
serve as one of the motivational factors.
At the same time, each individual type of values forms a type of
historical relations that arise between individuals and social
communities. This connection was noticed by V.S. Bakirov, but he
explained it differently. “Each historical type of social ties, – he
writes – is in need of particular value”; it is leading to the
development and expansion of a special system of value concepts,
projecting the “ready-made formulas “of such behavior, which
preserves the existing system of social dependence; this type of
social relations arranges these values accordingly, expresses them
265Яценко А.И. Целеполагание и идеалы. – К.: Наукова думка, 1977. – С.89.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
225
in 
respective 
terms, 
subject 
to 
special 
mechanisms 
of
functioning."266
So, along with withdrawal of produced social content from its
source, it will come across impact of various forces of external
compression which have rather limited ranges for independent
existence in an objective reality. In addition, the elements of
compression are getting more and more “rigid” character. Rigidity
in this context should be understood as necessity for generated
content of the social to follow logic, contained within compulsion
elements. Free causality is in action in this case.
This means that at the stage of social chaos this role can
perform archetypes, myths, beliefs, at the stage of the social
environment we can talk about values and morality, and at the stage
of the noosphere we find philosophy, ideology and all logic, that is
science. Of course, this working hypothesis requires separate
justification, but what we find on the subject in the scientific
literature, points out its fruitfulness.
To complete the analysis of the objectification process, we must
consider the social world, or second nature as an entity. Here, the
term “second” well-emphasizes its derivative character.
Identifying the relationships of shapeformation, even if they are
taken in their genesis, is the reflection of only one aspect of the essence.
If not to go beyond its boundaries, we will constricted by the structural
and genetic approach alone. Dialectics as a theory of development and
reproduction involves a holistic formation and development of the
content of the social world in its necessity, determinism by own base
and conditions of its formation and existence.
After all, the potential social worlds do not remain aloof from
the society generated by them, and continue to actively cooperate
with it. Thus, it is a fundamentally different situation, since the
content of the potential social world will inevitably interact with the
content of the actual social world. Under the new circumstances, the
266Бакиров В.С. Ценностное сознание и активизация человеческого фактора. –
Харьков: Выща школа, 1988. – C. 79-80.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
226
two parts of the social are now able to gain a new quality. This
requires a separate explanation. In this connection, it is necessary to
consider the substance of society as a totality, and then present it as
a totality; then to show its ability to upgrade or develop; and then
disclose the way it returns to its grounds. In other words, it is
necessary, by means of epistemological analysis, to show what
exactly happens when socium, acquiring independence, begins to
exert pressure on a person.
Generally speaking, philosophy associates with the notion of
“totality” the highest level of integrity. Of course, by nature the
processes of subjectication and objectification, contemplated herein,
are the totality. Therefore, we must approach the human field form,
and even more so the humanity field form, as revealed outward from
totality; and it requires the corresponding view of it from the inside
as the concrete that “ is unfolding in itself and preserves the unity,
that is the totality"267.
From the foregoing it follows that the “planetary consciousness”
in ontological terms is nothing but the energy-field of the Earth,
occurs on the basis of the integration of energy-power fields of
social communities. This enables researchers to claim that a person
can be and should be considered as a neuron in the “collective
brain”. At the same time, this means that in the process of social
self-organization of the world he is a separate person, carries out a
feedback function, without which it simply is not possible to comply
with the measure in the spontaneous production of social content.
This means that the mentality of the people is the same totality,
and it must be approached historically, from the point of view of its
systemic nature of formation, in order to understand the grounds for
its integrity as a stable totality. Therefore, in reality, these two
processes are integrated and act as a single totality is one (leptonic,
telluric, etc.) planetary force field.
267Гегель Г. Энциклопедия философских наук. – М.: Мысль, 1974. – Т.1. – С.100.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
227
Now we have to model the process of self-generation of
content of the social world as some independent totality. For this
purpose, it is necessary to consistently reproduce all three stages
of the above generic formative process and further, following the
chronology, to build all products of morphogenetic processes.
Heuristic modeling allows us to cope with the task without special
effort. (picture 2.4)
The “material”, which embodies integrity of the described
system, is, first of all, its internal and external relations. The
fundamental organization of the social world and the order of its
interaction with environment, with mechanisms of management and
development of the object of research is built on the basis of these
relations. In other words, the integrity of socium is considered by us
not as the hidden essence of the system, but as, determined by its
characteristic and by specific research goal, principle which sets the
appropriate program of development. Distinctive features of this
development can be summarized as the following points: firstly,
such system has quite clear and rigid definition of its borders, acting
as a base for its separation from the environment and differentiation
of its internal and external relations; secondly, the identification and
analysis of its systemic relations and ways to implement them;
thirdly, the establishment of the mechanism of life, the dynamics,
i.e. the way of its functioning and development, since in practice, it
is very important not only to get its general characteristics, but also
try to find the law of mutual change of its properties.
While considerating the algorithm of self-development of
socium, we clearly distinguish three levels of organizational
maturity of the content of social world: the social chaos, the
social environment and noosphere. The given three structural
elements of socium, since being generated in a course of the
integrated morphological process, represent integrity and make a
social body. It is an unusual form of rational living substance.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
228
the first stage the second stage the third stage
Pic.2.4. Algoritm of socium self-development or of objectified
social world
The ascertainment of the three elements as components of again
arisen rational living formation, which does not possess
morphologically accurately separated from environment structure
and is as if diffused in space, is an important conclusion. Its essence
consists in the fact, that, no matter what, here we deal with a
morphological object. It, in particular, can be seen as rational
(thinking) ether. In addition, at the same time socium as totality is
supposed to sustain the processes generated within the chaos
regime, go through the stage of self-organization in free social
environment proceeding after that to faze of severe rationality. Our
special interest is also provoked by the fact that as any living being
society is capable of giving increase at the stage of functioning, as it
has been with the person. In connection with stated above, we will
characterize them briefly.
The social chaos. The first stage is a domain of unstructured
accumulation and functioning of objectified material, in which
products of spiritual production, spontaneously rejected by a
separate person, are being found in a state of chaos, in its antique
sense of existing disorder, of disorder logos, of “the big abyss filled
with creative power and divine seed, as if integral chaotic mass,
Social
psyche
Civilization
Productive
forces
group
consciousn
Division of
labour
LABOUR
frame
of
mind
Mentality of
superethnos
Culture
Society

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
229
heavy and dark, a mix of earth, water, fire and air”. 268 Such chaos is
neither annihilation of the spiritual social content, nor its
transformations into Nothing, but balancing at some border between
life and a non-existence of objectivizing form of the universum.
Phantoms of the past are mixed with phantoms of the future.
Everything is as if in disperse state. Everythung is obscure,
indistinct and not clear. A separate person is a carrier of an
elementary particle of social chaos. Coming of a social content of
the given stage to the forefront of our everyday life earlier has
already received the name of the Distempered times, and presently
its splash is referred to as the New Distempered times. It is in the
secular history, however, and in the Bible it is pictured as the
Apocalypse. The current crisis of the social development has
attracted attention of native scientists to social chaos as the
relatively independent stage of social world formation. The stage of
a social chaos, for example, was specially investigated by Y. Surmin
269.
At this stage the sources of the future blossoming and declines
of empires are laid down. The border drawn between the elements
here, further on materializes and parts the adherents asunder and
reconciles unreconciling in the secular life. Split of ethnic fields also
dates back to this sphere. Fluctuations of free energy, which take
place here approximately 600 years later after the beginning of
formation of a super-ethnos, cause fracture processes in its
development. L. Gumilyov testifies the fact, that “the fracture phase
in Arabian-Muslim super-ethnos was under a hard way when in 945
the power was seized by Ahmed Buid – the leader of deilamid’s
ethnos – antisystems (karmats) appeared and Arabian caliphate
collapsed. Moreover the fraction became a crisis phase for other
known super-ethnoses: in Rome it was the period of civil wars of
100-30 BC, and revolt of Spartak and Katilinі; in Byzantium
іconoclasm (a type example of uniform mentality break) and ante-
268Парандовский Ян. Мифология. – М., 1971. – С.46.
269Новая парадигма. – 1997.- N3. – C. 10-20.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
230
system of paulicians (630–843 AD). In ancient China a break phase
– an epoch of seven “Belligerent kingdoms” (IV BC), and in
medieval China similar phase came after overthrow Tan’ empire
(907 AD) with the beginning of the period known as times of “five
dynasties and ten kingdoms”. In the West European super-ethnos
the break is connected, first of all, with Reformation and
Contrreformation which have split the Western world into parts –
Protestant and Catholic. Increase of the number of sub-passionists
(bearers of new values. – V.B.) allowed condottieres to create the
whole armies, which led to huge number of victims among the
population. Thus, in Germany thirty-year war took about three
quarters of the population. The break had lasted till XVII cent.,
when the transition to an inertial phase begun. In Russia the break
begun in the ХIХth cent.; bloody cataclysms of the beginning of the
XX-th cent.(especially the civil war) are considered to be its
brightest display".270
At this stage of self-generation or renovating of the content the
bearers of progressing values – elite – are attractors, i.e. initial
points of self-organization of the social world. How painfully and
how long the process of generation of new values and their approval
as the centers of crystallization of new social structures is going off,
can be clearly seen by visualizing the process of formation of early
Christianity as social movement which involved the most part of the
planet in later times.
The shifts in social chaos are always connected with the change
of values which cause reorientation of the individual, and then
collective and social consciousness. Thus, only the latter and only in
the final analysis, leads to shocks of the social world. P. Sorokin
investigated the question of change of values with all scientific
diligence, grounding upon enormous statistical base. In his four
volumes work Social and Cultural Dynamics he, equally with the
others, has clearly demonstrated, that sensual system of values
270Гумилев Л.Н. Этносфера: История людей и история природы. – М.: Экопрос,
1993. – С.528-529.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
231
which finishes the present cycle of development, is being in a state
of disintegration and self-destruction. There are all grounds to
consider that it originated after Neolithic revolution 6-5 thousand
years BC. From its depths, as the sprout from a rotten apple, the
“ideation” culture of a new cycle was born, a major principle and
main value of which is a pretersensual reality. – writes I.Kaganets271
At present moment the process of renovation of the social content
has been intensively taking place. It means that at the given stage
the universal values become attractors and fussing germs of the
future more materialized products of objectification disorderly have
already been gravitating toward them. This fact determines the
depth of modern crisis of social development. The change of
character of leading values has been taking place; it causes
restructuring of the existing social world. The planetary mankind
moves from aeon (eternity) of sensual values to aeon of prevailing
of spiritual values.
Thus, sensual values not only preserve their rich content, but
even add\increase some functional variety. Transition from one aeon
to another one will terminate at the very moment when essentially
new system of morals will be developed by the planetary mankind.
The leading role of human reason will constitute its main difference
from presently existing one. It will be a kingdom of the intellectual.
Ethnos in this context as unstructured social formation is the main
operating subject.
The social environment. We have already specified, that social
environment represents a set of individual intellectual fields. Such
plurality has not been structuralized yet; therefore it possesses poly_
variance of combinations of ways of intellectual energy potentials
involvement by quantities of compound potential, and also forms of
their realization. The second stage carrying out the function of
mediation as if puts the social content in order, and we deal with
rather stable and integral formation – the social environment. In this
271Финансовая Украина, 1996. – 29 октября

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
232
case by social environment we mean the same content that was
determined by E. Ilyenkov. “ It is always a concrete set of
interrelations between real individuals”,
E. Ilyenkov wrote:
“variously dismembered within itself, and not only into the basic
class oppositions, but also into other infinitely various knots and
links, into local “ensembles” inside of these basic oppositions, up to
such nucleus as a family with its internal relations between
individuals, always very alike in one, and completely different in the
other, if compared with another similar family”272
It is at this point that the stable boundaries of division of the
social content into objectified processes and products appear. Owing
to this stage the content of the social world acquires continuance
and orderliness. The concept of structural continuance which plays
an important role in self-organization theory, opens up a good deal
of possibilities for consideration of dissipative structures, to which
socium is included. The matter is that formation of the social world
as a dissipative structure depends neither on the differences in initial
conditions, nor on the value and frequencies of following
fluctuations (if any)273.
Having achieved a certain degree of maturation of the second
nature formation process, which passes according to synergy laws,
such environment acquires structure and turns into specific sphere in
which interaction of people among themselves is reflected, and
products, which had appeared in the course of this interaction, are
accumulated. The concept of whole, as it is known, presupposes
continuance, repeatability, reproduction of the process of
establishment.
The subject of historical action, which by this time has been
defined by the notion people, gets now characteristics of a nation.
The definition of a nation as a historical community of people which
is made in the course of formation of their common territory,
272Ильенков Э.В. Философия и культура. – М.: Политиздат, 1991. – С.409.
273Добронравова И. С. Синергетика: становление нелинейного мышления. – К.:
“Лыбидь”, 1990. – С. 64

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
233
economic relations, literature, language, ethnic features of culture
and character, is as if a view of it from the outside. Now, if to take a
look from
the inside of formation process, it should be
characterized, first of all, as social formation, which owns a certain
degree of the social maturity with ability to pass from community to
rational forms of living as the main property. In this case, the nation
performs as a subject of morphogenetic process.
Noosphere. To characterize the third component of socium, it is
necessary to state the difference between concepts “environment”
and “sphere”. For us environment is all that surrounds, penetrates,
and is involved in the orbit of activity of the subject, either as a
subject, or as means, or as a condition; and sphere is referred to as
some result of the environment arranged in a certain way. Therefore,
noosphere, which we understand similarly to V.Vernadsky’s
interpretation, is a summation of creativity of persons. Thus in
noosphere products, of both, material and spiritual origin, the world
evolutionary process acquires its special value owing to the fact,
that it has created a new geological force – scientific thought of
mankind. Here the objectification process reaches a maximum of its
objectivity.
Moreover, the mankind as the subject, endowed with activity,
becomes more powerful and starts to play the role of a creator and
reformer, distinct from all live substances. Laying emphasis on the
special character of this metamorphosis, V. Vernadsky wrote that
the mankind, taken as a whole, becomes powerful geological force.
Thus, before him, before his mind and work, the question on
biosphere reorganization in behalf of free thinking mankind as a
single whole is being raised. This new status of biosphere to which
we, without noticing it, approach, is “noosphere” 274.
The noosphere arises as a universal means of creation of the
basic product of the given stage. Therefore, the noosphere is a very
complicated formation, which involves all attributive riches of
274Вернадский В.И. Химическое строение биосферы Земли и ее окружения. – М.:
Наука, 1965. – С.328.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
234
terrestrial mankind. In this connection the definition of noosphere
“as an artificial informational structure created by purposeful
activity of the person”; is, in our opinion, a one-sided and inexact
definition. By nature it is the universum subjectified, and after that
again objectified within our planetary system framework. Therefore,
we rather agree with its following definition given by R. Abdeyev,
who writes: “In noosphere besides all objects of life, instruments of
labour, complex technical systems, also the information industry,
integrated communication networks, global TV are created and,
eventually, the processes of economic and cultural integration of the
states , which strive for finding new forms of interaction,
cooperation, self-improvement and the survival of a human society
by the way of adaptation to changing conditions, are deepening.
Because it becomes clear that only such global self-organization of
life opens up the possibility to mankind of optimization of
management of all ecosphere “275.
Example with noosphere proves that the basic substance of our
world not only preserves its double beginning, but also each time it
reveals it in the original form in all metamorphoses. Thus, for
example, in noosphere all content of the material beginning is
concentrated in productive forces of a society, and spiritual
beginning is concentrated in scientific outlook.
At this stage the subject of historical action is transformed from
a nation to collectives. The transformation of a nation to collectives
is caused by the fact that at this stage people attached themselves to
certain functions of workplaces; they became performers of certain
roles. At this very point T. Parsons discovers correspondence
between the objective process of formalization, codification and
consolidation of social norms and the subjective process of their
personal internalization as allochthonous (acquired) social samples
of behavior. Standards of behavior of the performer he regards to as
role expectations.
275Абдеев Р.Ф. Философия информационной цивилизации. – М.: “ВЛАДОС”,
1994. – С. 201-202.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
235
Institualization of a number of role expectations and
corresponding sanctions has a certain degree of its realization as, by
the way, also has its opposition
–
“anomia”.
Complete
institualization is opposed to complete “anomia”, the break of any
standard order. Anomia is manifestation of chaos at the stage of
functioning of a social body.
So, we have consecutively presented the processes of socium
formation having interpreted them as integrity. Young generation
finds it, a reappeared integrity, already finished, and hence it is no
less objective reality for them than the first nature. For the person
who only begins his life, socium is an external force, which will
subordinate 
him\her 
to 
itself 
and 
directs 
his\her 
further
development.
In other words, a person as a rational living being is opposed by
a society as by more powerful living integrity. At this point it is
necessary to tell more. The objectivized social world or socium
should be referred to as a huge organism, which, functioning as
integrity, acquires essentially new qualities, peculiar to a rational
living being. Here we observe the same picture as in the case of
formation of a human body. A human, as it is known, starting to act,
acquired qualities of a person. We have all grounds to state that
socium, having passed all three stages of formation, transforms into
integrity which has the same effect. In other words, socium should
be referred to as a subject – a nation, generating the effect of
functioning. It is a collective person that represents functional body.
Thus the organism of socium is arranged according to the same
principles as a human body is, but only the other way round. There
is an objectified spiritual part within it, the life of which runs in the
form of chaos, in contrast to exact order within this element of the
structure of human body. There is an objectified material part, the
life of which runs in an “exact order”, as far as it is a question of
noosphere. There is also a middle part, mediator of their interaction
– the social environment. The latter one is a deep aspect of life of
socium.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
236
The specific character of functioning of a social body of socium
as integrity consists in the fact, that in the sphere of public
consciousness chaos rules, however in the material component, on
the contrary, all is efficiently and is strictly organized as would be
natural in a noosphere. These features of the organic whole were
fixed very accurately by F. Scheling. In the connection with this the
philosopher says that change turned to itself, brought to rest, is what
is meant by organization. Rest is the expression of organic
formation (structure) though constant reproduction of such
tranquility is possible only due to the change that continuously
occurs inside.
The analysis proves that at this point a functional increase should
take place. And it idoes take place. Such gain of quality has a broad
band of reflection in the scientific literature. However, the researchers
refer to it in different ways. Most frequently the given functional
quality is mentioned as “a collective person”, “a group person”, “a
corporate person”, “a conditional person”, “a national person”, “a
sobornal person”, “a heterogeneous person”, “a collective “I”, “a living
All-Russia Person”, “a state person”, “a territorial person”, “all
mankind”
etc.
276.
V. Behterev, for example, considered “a
heterogeneous person” as a social body, as the integrity that consists of
parts, the role of which the separate individuals, all social formations
play. Even in the last degree conditional among them he considers to be
collectives. Any formations, which consist of individuals who have
something in common – from a crowd to a state – fall into this category
277. As it is known, K. Marx considered the mankind and the society to
be a subject also.
From the analysis it follows, that the person opposes the society,
which also might be right fully referred to as a collective
276 Шеллинг Ф. В. Й. Система трансцендентального идеализма. – М., 1936. – С.
209-210.
277Быченков В.М. Институты: Сверхколлективные образования и безличные
формы социальной субъективности. – М.: Российская академия социальных наук,
1996. – С. 159-160, 209, 228-229, 235-236, 243, 249, 290, 463 и др.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
237
personality. It means that a separate person opposes a collective
person. Here the interaction goes through “I” – “You” (sing.) or
“You” (pl.) concepts correspondingly. It is necessary to point out,
that it is still quite inappropriate to use the term “We”, in which any
separate person and the collective person have something in
common, that will allow them to be merged into some integrity.
At this very point the analysis of the formation of the social
world objectified content could be concluded. It is necessary to
draw some general conclusions, which naturally follow the facts
stated above. The first conclusion states, that in the course of our
research we have approached to the definition of the social world,
we have also specified its basic elements and have disintegrated the
morphology. It has been revealed to us as the objectification process
of the potential social world of a human personality, which had
appeared as a result of another total process of the first nature
subjectification. The potential social world, which used to be hidden
inside the personality, has eventually realized itself as a result of its
spontaneous self-organization. It has generated a society, which is
morphologically composed of some social substance, which is
knowledge. In other words, the self-development of any social
substance is the form of interaction of the potential worlds, which
function in the structure of a human personality. The macrocosm
and microcosm are in constant interrelation with each other.
Thus, the human personality has emerged as the absolute basis
of the social world in which the social essence is given as a basis in
general for the basis; or, to be more precise, the person defines
himself as a social form and a social substance and imparts himself
the social content. Besides, the person is a certain basis as the basis
of the certain, i.e. social content; as far as the relation of the basis,
in the course of its self-realization, becomes, in general, external to
itself, it transfers into conditioned mediation.
At last, it became clear, that an individual admits a specific
condition of life activity conceivable for the producting a social
world –a free exchange with the environment, with substance,

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
238
energy and information; but the condition of the life activity admits
it to the same extent as the basis do; the unconditioned is their unity,
the fact of the matter itself, which via mediation of the conditioned
relation changes to the existence. Here you cannot help but take a
great interest in the groundworks of the philosophers existentialists,
who persist on the concept of the transcedentness of the social world
from the inside content of the individual. Therein we have not only
examined the technological aspect of the process under
consideration, but also connected it with the existential school in
philosophy.
The second conclusion lies in the fact, that the genetic affinity
of the first nature and the second one is demonstrated. The content
of the social world as the exchange of the essential forces between
people is the second derivative from the human individuality. The
first derivative is the individuality itself as a product, in which the
first nature is withdrawn. Thus the term “the second nature” is an
exclusively apt name, when concerning the social phenomenon.
Besides, in the course of the study of the social the technological
connection between the two forms of the naturally-natural material
is shown. They are the two different phases of self-motion of the
same universum.
The third conclusion lies in the fact, that the mechanism of the
self-generation of the second nature from the first one is determined.
It is presented by us as the process of the human intellect products
formation. Then the intellect, in its turn, passes through the three
relatively independent phases in the planetary (local cosmic)
environment. Here it is important to lay emphasis again on the
unique character of the general function of the human individuality,
lying in the self-generation of the macrocosm, the importance and
the necessity of giving it the first-degree freedom for creative
accumulation of the individual and collective intellectual capaсity
(mental powers). The morphological processes obtain more freedom
only due to the beginning of the chaos. Therein it is important to
refer to the fact, that in the given case we deal with the chaos in

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
239
morphogenesis and, besides, one should distinguish also the chaos
in the phase of the morphological structures functioning (activity).
The fourth conclusion lies in the fact, that the objectified
social world is an independent live being, which has all basic
characteristics of a rational being. Its basic difference from a person
lies in the fact, that it is realised at the level of collective social
formations. Thus, the society, as well as the human individual, has
morphology and rich functional qualities, as it forms a collective
personality. Then, we might conclude, that in the structure of a
society one should search for a specific system of functional organs,
similar to those, which we have revealed in a human body. To bring
the gnoseological analysis of the problem of the philosophical study
of the social world to the end, we only need to consider the problem
of the form, which the hereinabove content obtains. This is the very
point we proceed to.
2.5. The social world form
The existence of the social essence and the appearance of the
social world content indicate the fact, that, herein we deal with the
social form. To prove the given thesis, it is sufficient to point out,
that all the concrete in general applies to the form. It is also known,
that the determination of the social world is at the same time the
determination of the social form, for it is something established and
due to this fact it is different from the thing, the form of which it
constitutes; the definiteness of the social as the quality is a single
whole with its being.
As far as in this case the second nature is under consideration,
we deal correspondingly not with the natural form, in which the first
nature exists, but with the form, which has been remade twice. The

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
240
social form is, firstly, changed, being reflected in the human’s mind.
And secondly it is changed in the social consciousness.
Thus, it should be mentioned, that a transformed form is already
familiar to us. As a rule, it is connected with the reflection of the
objective world phenomena or of some particular things stored in
the human memory. Of all the philosophers M. Mamardashvili was
definitely the one, who had the most delicate conscience of it, and in
his works he based upon not only K. Marx’s analysis of the
phenomena of economic fetishism and ideology, but also on
psychoanalysis, on the Jungian concept of “archetypes”, on modern
researches of mythology and symbolism. “The remade form of
existence, – M. Mamardashvili writes, – (it) is the product of
transformation of some inner relations of a complex system, which
takes place on its certain stage and conceals their real character and
direct interrelations via stray expressions. These last mentioned,
being the product and the accumulation of the transformation of the
system relations, at the same time exist independently in it in the
form of a separate, perfectly integral phenomenon, “a thing”,
equally with others”278.
In order to make an in-depth study of the phenomenon of the
double transformed form, in which the social world exists and
functions, we need to define the main attributive qualities of simple
transformed forms. It is necessary to point out, that the transformed
forms still possess their thingness, which was also present in initial
exterior forms. But the thingness, certainly, exists also not in its
initial forms, but in its transformed ones. M. Mamardashvili
characterizes the last mentioned in the structure of a person as
quasi-substantive objects, as quasi-subjects, subjects-phantoms. The
whole complexity of their research consists in the fact, that the
transformed forms are not simply appearance, but the internal form
of the appearance, i.e. a stable and reproducing kernel. He especially
emphasizes, that the transformation “is a particularly new discrete
278Мамардашвили М.К. Как я понимаю философию. – М., 1990. – C.269-270.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
241
phenomenon, 
in 
which 
the 
preceding 
intermediate 
cells
“compressed” into a special functional body, which has already its
special quasi-substantivity (and, accordingly, new sequence of
accidences, often reverse valid)”279.
This circumstance rather complicates the presentation of the
matter of the research, as far as we have to consider the complex
transformed form of the social life as the driving force of evolution
and involution. In other words, complex transformed forms –
neoformations, either being the result of the environmental
influence or the spontaneous changes of the basis (grounds, reason),
we consider to be a specific mechanism of the global mankind self-
development, which prevents its continuous stagnation in the
achieved forms of civilization (or lack of culture). In our further
disclousure of the problem we will look into it in more details.
Further we will point out, that in the course of study of natural
forms we deal with the goal-oriented activity of the person, to be
precise, with the work and the communication; in the course of
study of the simple transformed forms we face natural (social)
intrinsic forces of the person, in the course of study of the complex
transformed forms we deal with the social relations, and in the
course of study of the naturalized complex forms we face “the iron
person” of K. Marx.
It is much written on the problem of the interrelations between
activity, intrinsic forces and social relations, so we have nothing
new to add here. We only distribute the given concepts between the
levels of the phenomenon, being analyzed. At the same time there
are all reasons to consider, that the study of the given sequence of
the form transformations, probably more precisely, of the lives of
forms and their development, is capable not only to explain the
occurrence of the phenomena of irrationality, syncretism, which are
shown both in cognition, and in behaviour of the person, but also to
reveal metamorphoses, which are observed in the social world, to
279Problems of Philosophy. – 1977. – № 7. – p.275.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
242
establish the peculiarity of the interchanges of the form between the
first nature, the individual and the second nature more precisely.
On the basis of such interpretation of the double transformation
of the form, we shall successively describe, at least in general, the
correlation of the social form and the essence of “the social”, the
social form and the substrate (the subject) of the social world, the
social form and the content of the social world.
The essence of “the social” has a certain form and the
determination of the form. The essence, which we hereinabove
presented as the exchange of the activity between the participants of
the general vital process, possesses the stable spontaneity, or, in
other words, it is substratum, only as the basis of the social world.
The exchange of the activity between people as interrelated
substratum is the essence of the social world, which we have already
determined; owing to this positing, it inherently has in itself the
form of the social relation. If the essence of “the social”, i.e. the
kinds of activity or social relations, was not distinguished, the
exchange could not have place basically, as this process makes
sense only in the case, when its participants exchange such kinds of
activity, which supplement each other. Therefore, the form (the
social relations) determinations are, on the contrary, such
determinations, which exist in the very essence of “the social”; the
essence lays in their foundation (basis) as the undetermined,
indifferent to them in its determination; they have in it their
reflexion in themselves.
The reflected determinations of the kinds of activity, let us
assume, of material and spiritual (intellectual) or economic and
political activity remain in themselves and are independent
quantities (values); but their independence is their disintegration;
thus, they have this independence in the other; but this
disintegration itself is this identity with itself or the basis of
stability, which they give to themselves.
Thus, inherent in the essence of “the social” determinations of
the form as a reflected definiteness are the identity and the

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
243
difference (diversity), the identity as some featureless activity, and
the difference (diversity) as the variety of opposite kinds of activity,
which represent the essence or the subject of the process of
exchange.
But, besides, the base ratio also belongs to them, for this ratio,
despite being a withdrawn reflex determination, due to this ratio the
essense is given, at the same time, as something posited. The
identity, which has its basis in itself (the essential forces of the
human personality), is not related to the form, and particularly is not
related to the fact, that positing as withdrawn and positing per se,
the basis and the constituted is the same reflexion, that constitutes
the essence as the elementary basis, which is the retention of the
form. But this retention of the form of “the social” is underlying in a
personality as in the basis of the social being; in other words, this
essense itself inherently is given as a certain activity; eo ipso it is
again the moment of the base ratio and the moment of the form.
“The fact of the absolute is the relationship between form and
essence, – wrote G. Hegel, that essence is simple unity of founding
and founded, but in this unity it itself is defined, or there is negative
and distinguishes itself as a basis of the form, but thus, at the same
time it itself becomes the base and moment forms"280.
Consequently, the form of “the social” is a complete whole of
the reflexion; it also contains the determination of the reflexion to
be withdrawn; therefore, the form, being also the unity of its process
of determination, pari passu is correlated with its withdrawal, with
the other, i.e. with the exchange of activity as the activity of all
living things in general, which is not the form itself, but to which it
is related. As a substential, correlated with itself negativeness, the
form, in contrast to this simple negative, is what posits and
determines; but the simple essence of “the social” is undetermined
and inactive (inert) basis, in which the form definitions remain or
have the reflexion in themselves.
280 Hegel, G. Science of logic. – M.: Mysl, 1972. – T. 2. – P. 76.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
244
The external reflexion usually is satisfied with this distinction of
the essence and the form; this distinction is necessary, but this very
distinction is their unity, as well as this unity of the basis is the essence
of “the social”, which withdraws itself from itself and which becomes
positing. So, the form of “the social” is the absolute negativity itself,
or the negative absolute identity with itself, through which the essence
of “the social” is not the essence of the social world, but its content.
This identity, taken abstractly, is the essence, which is opposed to the
form, to the same extent, as the negativity, taken abstractly as positing,
is an individual determination of the form of “the social”.
Hence, the form of the social world has in its own identity the
essence (content) of the social world, the same, as the essence has
the absolute form in its negative character. So, it is impossible to
ask, in what way the form joins the essence: after all it is only the
appearance of the essence in itself, immanent to it its own reflexion.
The same as the form in itself is the self-reflexion or the identical
essence, which returns in itself; in the course of its determination the
form transforms the determination into positing as positing.
Therefore, the form is always essential (substantional), while the
essence is always formed.
The expression “the form determines the content” means,
therefore, that the form of the social world in its distinction
withdraws this very distinction and is the identity to itself, which is
the essence, that retains the determination. The social form is a
contradiction: it is withdrawn in its positing and in this withdrawal it
remains; due to this fact it is the basis as the essence, identical with
itself, when it is determined and subjected to sublation (denial,
contradiction, negation). These differences of the form of the social
world and its essence are for this reason only the moments of the
simplest ratio of the form. We are now going to describe them in
details and register them.
The definition itself of the essence of the social world as “an
exchange of activity between people” requires the presence of not
just a form, but its rational modification, as far as the given process

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
245
by its character is reasonable, it is necessarily attended with the
production of specific intellectual products. And the presence in the
content of the categories “process” and “product” also requires
different kinds of forms for its distinction, namely: the process form
and the morphological form. We will consider this question therein
after.
The determining form of the social world is correlated with
itself as some withdrawn positing; due to it, it is correlated with its
identity as with something different. It posits itself as withdrawn;
due to it it foresees its identity; the essence of the social world is,
according to this moment, that undetermined, for which the form is
the other.
Thus, the essence of the social world is not the one that is an
absolute reflexion in itself, but it is determined as the identity,
devoid (deprived) of the form; it is what in philosophy is used to be
named an intelligible substance, to be more exact, the field form of
the universe.
The essence becomes a subject, when its reflexion determines
itself so, that it relates to the essence (content) as to the concrete,
deprived of the form. Consequently, the substance is a simple,
devoid (deprived) of the differences identity, which is the essence,
determined to be the other of the form. That is why it and its own
basis is either the substrate of the form, for it constitutes the
reflection of the social form in itself, or that independent value,
which it correlates to as to the positive retention of itself.
The substance is, as it is known, something quite abstract. Its
field form is not an exception. And it is principal for us, that the
natural scientists made a conclusion, that “the living material must
be seen as a peculiar flow, merging of the material and energy
informational content” “281. Beyond such flows the terrestrial life
doesn’t exist.
281Казначеев В.П. Феномен человека:
космические и земные истоки.
–
Новосибирск: Новосибирское книжное издательство, 1991. – С.59

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
246
Following from that, the integral living material (monolith) may
be defined as a material integrity, specially organized. If we abstract
away from all the definitions of the social form. It is necessary to
remember, that the term “intelligible” (from Latin intellegibilis –
mental) denotes only, that the given kind of substance, or its field
form, is comprehended only by the mind or the intellectual intuition
282 on the basis of, as it is used to say today, the weak ecological, and
we say, intellectual, interactions of people with each other.
At the same time it denotes, that other stereotypes concerning
the social form depend only on the receptiveness of the human
organism, with which they identify themselves with the help of
electro-magnetic field (or weak intellectual ties), and depending on
the difference of this receptivity or sensitivity of, so called “spiritual
senses”283, first, the capability to differentiate the humanized nature,
and after this, to form its various forms purposefully. It is clear, that
the receptivity here is understood as physiologically realized by the
human receptors perception of the substantional and semantic
Universes and transformation of the energy of the irritants into the
nerve irritation284.
So, the intelligible substance is not perceived by the five outer
senses, which are the result of work of the entire history that
precedes the history of the world. For its perception the availability
of specific inner, or, according to K. Marx, spiritual (intellectual)
senses, practical senses (will, love etc.) is necessary (will, love,
etc.)285. The group of senses, which the scholars relate to the
capability to perceive the conciliar unity, which is based on the
inner, in-depth, not formulated rationally, inexpressible and
inexplicable relation, should also be referred to it. S. Frank, for
instance, saw the above mentioned capability in the sense of
282 See: Philosophical dictionary / edited by M. M. Rosenthal. Ed. 3-E. – M.:
Politizdat, 1975. - P. 149.
283 Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.42. – С. 122.
284 See: Dictionary of foreign words. – Moscow: RusskoeSlovo, 1988. – S. 434.
285 Marx K., Engels F. Soch. – 2nd ed. – Vol. 42. – P. 122.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
247
coindependence (mutual independence) concerning the unity “we”,
in confidence, appearing as a result of the direct eye contact. In all,
what is difficult and even impossible to express with the help of
words, but without what a single human contact is impossible,
neither on the basis of the involuntary concordance of individual
aspirations and deeds, nor according to any treaty, or submitted to
someone’s personal will. So the task of making feelings human, to
be more precise, the creation of proper human feelings, appropriate
to the variety of natural human spirit, is the cause of the oncoming
stage of the world history.
In such condition the interrelation of the human being with the
environment, and, first of all, with other people, becomes cardinally
different. It as though “leaves” habitual for us terrestrial, Newtonian
space. To the possible influence of this space the human being
responds to the least extent, the sensibility of its receptors, sensors
to these factors changes (decreases). But its life with the dominating
field form of the living matter intensifies, the sensitivity to the elec-
tro-magnetic (field) cosmoplanetary environement, the range of its
life activity in this form (type) of intellectual relations extends
considerably, runs to infinity: the organism functions as the fraction
(particle) of the unbounded cosmoplanetary electromagnetic
medium, space, its field organization. This conclusion follows the
organic unity of the world, which we have proved in the course of
the analysis of the social world nature.
Thus, we can assume that the electromagnetic interaction,
reflected in the various forms of life, represent one of common
principles of informational inter relations of functioning living
systems. This assumption resonates with the proposed in 1940s in
biophysics by A. G. Gurvich the concept of the biological field.
Back in 1960s and 1970s in his works A. S. Presman wrote
about 
the 
information 
value 
for 
biological 
systems 
of
electromagnetic fields in the overlying and submillimeter ranges.
Later B. S. Kuzin, as we know, defended this point of view. It can
be assumed that, as a result of natural selection in the course of

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
248
biological world evolution, the electromagnetic field has evolved
from the inevitable companions of all living things within a
reasonable living matter into a major information system and a
mandatory attribute of life.
Thus, the social form presupposes the intelligible substance,
with which it correlates on the basis of the weak intellectual
interactions of people with each other. But it doesn’t mean, that the
social form and the intelligible substance oppose each other
externally and randomly; neither substance nor form are self-
existent, in other words, eternal. The substance is indifferent to the
form, but this indifference is the determination of the identity with
itself, returns as to its foundation. The social form admits the
intelligible substance, because it considers itself to be withdrawn
and due to this it correlates with this identity as with something
different.
And vice versa, the social form is admitted by the intelligible
substance, for the substance is not mere essence, determined as
positive, just as something, that is given only as the withdrawn
sublation (denial).
But, on the other hand, as far as the social form posits itself to
be the substance, only because it withdraws itself and due to this
foresees the substance, the substance also is determined as the
deprived of the basis of retention of itself. So, intelligible substance
is not determined as the basis of the social form; for the substance
posits itself as the abstract identity of the withdrawn determination
of the form, but it is not identical as the basis, and thus, the form
relating to it is deprived of the basis.
Due to this the social form and the intelligible form are both
determined, not as the posited by each other, but as the basis of each
other. The intelligible substance is rather the identity of the basis
and of the founded as the basis, which opposes this relation of the
social form. This common for them determination of indifference is
the determination of the substance per se, and also forms the
interrelations of both of them. The same as the determination of the

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
249
social form to be their correlation as of separate (uncoordinated) is
another point of their interrelation.
The intelligible substance, what is determined as indifferent, is
passive, as opposed to the social form, as to what is active. The
social form as the self related with itself negative is the
contradiction inside itself, is what disintegrates, and rejects itself
from itself and thus determines itself. The social form is correlated
with the intelligible substance and is posited in order to correlate
with this retention of itself as with the other. The substance, on the
contrary, is posited in order to correlate only with itself and be
indifferent to the other; but in itself it correlates with the social
form, for it contains the withdrawn negativeness and is the
substance by means of this determination.
It correlates with the form as with the other, only because the
form in it is not posited, because it is the form only in itself. In it
implicitly the form is contained, and only it is absolute congeniality
to the form, which absolutely contains it inside in itself and what is
its content determination in itself. That is why the intelligible
substance is to take (adopt) the social form, and the social form is to
materialize, to impart itself in the substance the identity with itself
in other words, stability.
For this reason the social form determines the intelligible
substance, and the intelligible substance is determined by the social
form. It denotes, that, firstly, the social form and the intelligible
substance admit each other. This unity of form and content, opposite
to each other as the social form and the intelligible substance, is the
absolute basis, which determines itself.
Secondly, the social form, as an independent one, is, besides, the
contradiction, which withdraws itself. It is posited as the
contradiction from the very beginning, for it is independent and at
the same time substantially correlated with the other, due to this fact
it withdraws itself. And because it itself is duplex, this withdrawal
has two sides: first, it withdraws its independence, transforms itself
into something determined, something, what is in the other, and this

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
250
other is the intelligible substance. Second, it withdraws its
determination against the field form of the substance, its correlation
with it, due to this fact eliminates its postulation (positedness) and
thus induces itself stability.
Following from that, the activity of the social form, which
defines the intelligible substance, consists in the negative relation of
the form to itself. But also vice versa, it, due to this fact, relates to
the substance negatively too; though this determination of the
intelligible substance is to the same extent the intrinsic motion of
the social form itself. The form is free from of the substance, but it
withdraws its independence and is the substance itself, for in it the
social form has its essential identity. As far, as, thus, it transforms it
into the determined then it is similar to the fact, that it transforms
the subject into something definite.
But the described from the other point of view intrinsic identity
of the social form at the same time becomes external identity, the
intelligible substance is its other; for the substance becomes
altogether undetermined because
of the fact, that the form
withdraws its own independence. But the intelligible substance is
independent only against the social form; in case the negative
withdraws itself, the positive withdraws itself also. So, as far as the
form withdraws itself, the determination is dismissed, the
determination, which the intelligible substance has against the social
form, to be undetermined continuity.
What represents the activity of the social form, further is to the
same extent the intrinsic motion of the intelligible substance itself.
Thirdly, due to the movement of the social form and the
intelligible substance, their initial unity, on the one hand, is restored,
but on the other hand is now the posited unity. The intelligible
substance as much determines itself, as this process of determination
is an external action of the social form for it; and, vice versa, the
social form so much determines only itself or has the determined by
it intelligible form in itself, that in the course of its determination it
relates to the other; both of them, this and the other (the field form

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
251
effect and the motion of the field substance), are the same, with the
only difference: the first one is the action, i.e. negativeness as
posited, and the other is the motion or formation, negativeness as
the essential determination in itself. As a result there is the unity in
itself of the existence and postulation. The intelligible substance, per
se, is determined or, by all means, has some social form, and the
social form is a mere substantial (field) form, which is retained.
The social form, as far as it admits the intelligible substance as
intrinsic other, is finite. It is not the basis, but only what is active.
The same as the substance, as far as it admits the social form as its
non-existence, is the finite substance; it is not the reason of its unity
with the social form either, but it is just the reason for the social
form. But neither this finite (field) substance, nor the finite (field)
form has the truth; each one correlates with the other, in other
words, only their unity is their truth.
The field substance, which has taken the form, or the form of
the field, that is retained, is not only the above mentioned absolute
unity of the basis with itself, but also the posited in the existence
unity. Just in the motion under consideration the absolute basis, i.e.
the interacting humanity, represents its moments per se, which
withdraw themselves and due to this fact posit each other. In other
words, merging with itself, the restored unity rejects itself from
itself, and determines itself; for its unity as performed through the
sublation (denial) is also the negative unity. That is why it is the
unity of the social form and of the intelligible substance as their
basis, but as their definite electromagnetic basis, which is the
intelligible substance, that has gained the social form, is at the same
time indifferent to the form and the substance as to the withdrawn
and insignificant. This unity is the content of the social world.
The social form opposes, first, the essence of the social world;
in this case it is the ratio of the basis and its determination – this is
both: the basis and the established (founded). Second, it opposes the
intelligible substance; in this case it is the determining reflexion and
its determination – it is the same reflective determination and its

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
252
retention. Besides, it opposes the social content; in this case its
determination is again it itself and the substance. What was earlier
identical with itself (first the basis, then the retention per se and, at
last, the substance), gets under the domination of the form and again
is one of its determinations.
It is well known, that the social content, being the determining
side of the second nature as of some organic whole, represents the
unity of all main elements of the social world, its characteristics,
internal processes, connections, contradictions and tendencies, and
the social form is the mode of existence and the expression of this
content.
That is why the social content has, first, some form and some
(intelligible) substance, which it has and which are essential for it; it
itself is their unity. But as far as this unity is at the same time
definite or determined unity, the social content opposes the social
form; the form constitutes the postulation and against the content it
is not essential. That is why the content is indifferent to the form;
the social form includes both: the form per se, and the substance;
and, thus, the social content has also some form, and some
substance, the basis of which it constitutes and which are only the
postulation for it.
Second, the social content is the same what is identical to the
form and to the substance, for the social form and the intelligible
substance are seemingly only indifferent external determinations.
They are the postulation per se, which, though, has returned in its
content to its unity or to its basis.
Thus, the identity of the content of the social world with itself
is, on the one hand, the definite indifferent to the social form
identity, and, on the other hand, it is the identity of the reason. The
basis first vanishes in the content; but the content is at the time the
negative reflexion in itself of the determined form; its unity, which
previously is only indifferent to the form, is also a formal unity or
the ratio of the basis, per se. That is why the social content has this

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
253
ratio as its essential form and, vice versa, the basis has some content
(the potential social world).
Thus, the content of the basis is the basis, which has returned to
its unity with itself; the basis is first of all the essence, identical with
itself in its postulation; as different and indifferent to its postulation
essense is the undetermined substance; but as the content it, at the
same time, has obtained the form of identity, and this form becomes
the ratio of the basis, because the determinations of its contraries are
postulated in the content as such, that are unsublation able
(undeniable).
The content is determined further in itself not only similar to the
substance as indifferent in general, but also as the substance, which
has gained the form, so that the determinations of the form become
intrinsic substantional, indifferent stability. Due to this fact, the
basis in general became the definite basis, and the definiteness
(determinatcy) itself is of double nature: it is, first, the definiteness
of the content and, second, the definiteness of the form. The first
definiteness of the social content, which is immanent to the basis, is
the social life, taken as the combination of all kinds of activity or
social relations. The second definiteness of the social basis is to be
in general the external to the content, which is indifferent to this
ratio, – it is the social organism.
The moment of the definiteness in the determination of the content
of the social world arrives in connection with the actual appearance of
specific information of the knowledge, which is generated by the
human for the retention of the processes of the second nature. Due to
information in particular, the social world or the intelligible substance
begins to be mastered by the intellectual (spiritual) senses (feelings) of
the humanized human being. The complex of the feelings (senses)
composes the sensitive content of the object images of reality,
represents the source and the premise of the cognitive relation. In the
course of interrelation of the information with the organs of the sensible
substance, the complex of the feelings is caused by the action of the
external stimulus, and under the effect of the same signal in the other

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
254
plane – the image of the objective reality develops. By the level of
extention (development) of interference of the signals between the
planes, in our opinion, the words of K. Marx can be explained: “the
feelings of the social person are the feelings, different from the feelings
of the nonsocial person. Only due to the resources of the feature
thoroughness (diversity) of the human essence, the resources of the
subjective, human sensibility develop, and partly even for the first time
appear”"286.
The second nature, which before was perceived by the human
mainly through the device of intuition, now is presented as the
diverse social world, and it begins to master it, gradually passing
from its less complicated field elements of the social organs to the
system reflexion of the integral field form or of the social life,
which has, as is generally known, the characteristics of a process.
Thus the content of the social world, which we described before as
the organic unity of the intelligible substance and of the social form,
splits into two parts: the potential social world, hidden in the
structure of the human organism, from which it acts as from its
basis; and the actualized social world – social medium, generated on
the grounds of the independent activity (functioning) of the
collective intellectual energy, rejected by the participants of the
general life process into the environment.
The potential social world in the structure of the human
personality, i.e. in the self existence, represented by the essential
forces, which we can consider as the subjective form of the social
relations (personality). At the same time actualized, generated by
people social world acts as the based (founded) or as the objective
form of the social relations (society). The interference between
them, as between the subjective component (ingredient) and the
objective component (ingredient) of the organic entity (whole), is
realized, as was mentioned before, due to the functioning of
knowledge as a specific form of information. The availability of
286Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.42. – С.122.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
255
knowledge in the human structure is marked by its peculiar features,
known as the intelligence, and their presence in the structure of
society, it is possible to assume, is marked by the peculiar quality of
the weak interaction force – by the thinking environment (egregor).
The merging of the intelligence of the individual with the
intelligence of the collective personality or the egregor (thinking
environment) is a new quality, which particularly we can call
reason.
It is quite sensible here to suggest a current hypothesis,
concerning the idea, that the reason is the cultivated information, the
product of the Semantic Univers. The similarity we see in, for
example, technical equipment (machinery), which is nothing short
of cultivated substance – the product of the Physical Universe. The
given similarity follows from the fact that on the planetary level the
Semantic Universe is represented by the information, in much the
same way, as the substance in machinery represents the Physical
Universe. If we consider the substance and the information through
the lenses of the system of the special ideological directions
(instructions), so called semantic filters, it will become clear, that
they may be presented as the spirit (intellect) and the substance. In
this case the reason can be defined as the spirit, which has appeared
in a phenomenon.
Thus, the human personality as the basis is the identity,
negatively related to itself, which, resulting from this, becomes the
postulation; this identity negatively relates to itself, being in this
negativity identical to itself; this identity is the basis or the content
of the social, which in this way composes indifferent or positive
unity of the ratio of the basis and, what mediates it, the specific field
life, which systematically is reflected by the phenotypic
information.
In this content the definiteness of the basis (of the potential social
world) and the founded (actualized social world) against each other
vanish. But the mediated is, in addition, the negative unity. The
negative, which is contained in this indifferent basis, is its immediate

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
256
definiteness, due to which the individual (personality) as the basis has
its definite social content. But then the negative is the negative ratio of
the form with itself. The postulated, i.e. social being (existence), on
the one hand, withdraws itself and returns to its basis, i.e. personality;
the basis, in its turn, as a substantional independency relates
negatively to itself and becomes postulated. This negative mediation
of the basis and the founded is the characteristic mediation of the form
per se, i.e. the formal mediation.
So, both sides of the form now posit themselves together in one
identity as withdrawn, exactly because each of them passes into the
other, due to the phenotypic information; ipso facto they at the same
time posit this identity. It is a definite content, with which the
formal mediation correlates through itself as with the positive
mediator. This content is what is identical in both of them – it is the
field life or the social life, and, as far as they are diverse, but each of
them in its peculiarity is the correlation with the other, this content
is their maintenance retention, the retention of each of them as a
whole in itself. The way it functions we have described in the course
of the analysis of the content of the social world. Hence, everything
begins with the personality and everything finishes with it.
This versatility of human personality in production and
reproduction of social reality is structurally ensured by coordinated
functioning of two hemispheres of brain. It appears that the
transition from the individual to social environment is provided by
the one possessing the logical toolkit, while the reverse movement is
provided by the hemisphere with the irrational toolkit.
Thus, it becomes clear, that in the human, as the basis of the
social life in general, there are following items: first, some definite
social content, which should be considered from two points of view:
as far as it is posited as the basis (the potential social world) and as
far as it forms the basis (the actualized social world). The content
itself is indifferent to this form; in both cases it is in general only the
determination. Second, the basis itself (the potential social world) is
to the same extent the moment of the form, as the founded by it (the

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
257
actualized social world); it is their formal identity. It is the same
substance that exists in two different forms, and thus is destined to
interact with itself. This very interaction we observe as the social
life. The fact is that it is quite indifferent, which of these two
definitions they put first, i.e. it is indifferent, whether to pass from
one of them as from the based to the other, or from the one as the
base to the other as the based (founded). The based (the actualized
social world), considered separately, is the withdrawal of itself; due
to this it is, on the one hand, based (founded), and on the other hand,
as the positing of the base (the potential social world). The same
motion is the basis (the potential social world) per se; it transforms
itself into the based (the actualized social world) and due to this it
becomes the basis of something, i.e. it is in this motion both: as the
based (founded), and as, what is only now available (actual), as the
basis. The based (founded) is the base of what is the base itself, and,
vice versa, the basis thereby appears to be something based
(founded).
The mediation begins to the same extent with the one
(personality), as with the other (society); each side is to the same
extent the basis, as it is the based, and each side is the whole
mediation or the whole form. That is why the problem of what is
primordial – the personality or the society – has the same
characteristic as the well-known controversy on what appeared first
– an egg or a hen.
Further on, all this form, as something identical with itself, is
itself the basis of the determinations, which make up both sides of
the basis (person) and of the based (society); thus, the form and the
content are themselves the same identity – the social life. That is
why there is nothing in the basis (person) that would not be in the
based (society), as well as there is nothing in the based (society),
that is absent in the basis (person).
The determination of the basis, it appeared, is, on the one hand,
the determination of the basis or the determination of the content,
and on the other hand, it is the other (different) existence in the very

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
258
ratio of the basis, particularly the difference of its content and form:
the correlation of the basis and the based exists as the exterior form
against the content, indifferent to these determinations. But actually
the two mentioned items are not exterior to each other, for the
content is the identity of the basis with itself in the based and of the
based in the basis. It emerged, that the side of the base (person) is
itself something based, and the side of the based (society) is the
basis itself: each of the items of the integrity under analysis is in
itself the identity of the whole. But, as far as they at the same time
belong to the form and constitute its certain (definite) difference,
each one in its self-determination is the identity of the whole with
itself. Thus, each of them has the content, different from the other.
But, if considered from the view of the content, for the content is the
identity with itself as the identity of the ratio of the basis, it
inherently contains in itself this difference of the form and as the
basis it is different from the based.
But due to the fact, that the basis (the potential social world)
and the based (the actualized world) have different content, the ratio
of the basis ceased to be formal: the returning to the basis and the
returning from it to the based is no longer the tautology; the basis is
realized. This ratio (correlation) gives itself further determination.
But particularly as far as its both sides are different content, they are
indifferent to each other; each of them is the immediate, identical
with itself definiteness.
Further, being correlated with each other as the basis and the
based, the basis acts as the reflected in itself and in the other as in its
postulation; thus, the content, which the side of the basis contains,
will be present also in the based; the based as something, that is
postulated, has only in the basis its identity with itself and its
stability (determination, definiteness). But except this content of the
basis (individual) the based from this time on has also its own,
peculiar content (as the cumulative product of the collective
generation of the free energy), and so, is the unity of ambiguity.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
259
Due to this fact the basis, determining itself as something real
(actual), disintegrates into exterior definitenesses through the
differences of the content, that forms its reality. Both correlations –
the essential content as the simple direct identity of the basis and the
based, and subsequently of the correlation of now separate content
are two different basis; the identical with itself form of the basis
vanishes, the same as once as the essential and another time as the
based; thus, the correlation (ratio) of the basis became exterior to
itself.
That is why the exterior basis (actualized social world)
combines in it different contents and determines, which of them is
the basis, and which of them is what is posited by the basis; neither
of these contents has this determination. So, the real basis is the
correlation of the other: on the one hand, it is the correlation of the
content with the other content, and, on the other hand, it is the
correlation of the relation of the basis (the form) to its other, in
particular, to something immediate, posited to it.
When the social nature is treated as the basis of the social
world, what is called nature, is, on the one hand, the same as the
world, and the social world is no other than the nature itself. Though
they are at the same time different, for the nature is mostly
indeterminacy or, at least, the world essence, definite only in
general differences in laws and identical to itself; and in order that
the nature becomes the world, from without (from outside) the
variety of determinacies attach to it. But these determinacies have
their basis not in the nature per se; it is rather indifferent to them as
to the randomnesses.
The regression of the actual basis to its basis results in the
resumption of the identity of the basis and of the based in it or in the
resumption of the formal basis. The newly appeared ratio (relation)
of the basis is a complete relation, because it contains both: the
formal and the actual (real) basis and the mediating those
determinacies of the content, which in the actual basis are
immediate against each other.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
260
Thus, the ratio of the basis has determined itself more
completely and in this particular way. Firstly, something has some
basis; it contains the determination of the content, which is the
basis, and another determination as posited by the basis. But as the
indifferent content, the former is the basis not in itself, and the latter
is the based former also not in itself; this correlation is withdrawn
and posited in the immediacy of the content and, per se, has its basis
in other correlation. This second correlation as separate
(incomplete) only in the form has the same content, as the first one,
but the two determinacies of the content are their immediate
connection.
Thus, both of them, the potential and actualized social worlds,
proved to be two different ratios of the content. Against each other
they are in identical formal ratio of the basis; they are the same
content in the whole, namely: both determinations of the content
and their correlation; they differ only by the mode of this
correlation, which in one of them is immediate relation, and in the
other it is posited, as the result of which one of them differs from
the other only by the form as the basis and the based.
Secondly, this ratio of the basis is not only formal but also
actual (real). The formal basis transforms into the actual; the
moments of the form reflect into themselves; they are an
independent content, and the ratio of the basis also has its specific
content as the basis, as much as it is the subjective form of the social
relations and the specific content as the based, it is the objective
form of the social relation. The content constitutes first of all the
immediate identity of both sides of the formal basis; per se, they
have the similar social content, which is reflected in the collective
consciousness by the social relations.
But the social content has also the form in itself and, thus, it is a
double meaning, concerning both: as the basis and as the based.
That is why one of the two definite determinations of the content of
both social worlds is determined not only as general for them

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
261
according to the external confrontation, but as their identical
substratum and the basis of their correlation.
As opposed to the other determinacy of the content it is the
essential determinacy and the basis of this other determinacy as the
based; in particular, of the based in that something, the correlation
of which is the based correlation. In the first something, which is the
ratio of the basis, this second determinacy of the content also
immediately and in itself is connected with the first by the
determinacy of the content. The second something contains only one
determinacy in itself as in what it is immediately identical with the
first something, the other determinacy it contains as posited in it.
The first determinacy of the content is the basis of this posited
determinacy, for it in the first something is initially connected with
the other determinacy of the content.
In other words, the actual social world contains only one
determinacy in itself as something, in which it is immediately
identical with the potential social world, the other determinacy it
contains as the posited in it. The first determinacy of the content is
the basis of this posited determinacy, for it in the first something is
initially connected with the other determinacy of the content.
The actual basis is revealed as the exterior to itself reflection of
the basis; its complete mediation is the resumption of its identity
with itself.
The basis ratio in its “general totality” (parent universe), due to
this, inherently is, what the reflexion admits; the formal basis admits
immediate determination of the content, and this determination as the
actual basis admits the form. Thus, the basis is the form as the
immediate connection, but so, that it rejects itself from itself and rather
admits immediacy, correlates with itself in it as with something other.
Now it is impossible to present a social reality in its determinacies
as it is presented by us in the form of the summation of social
processes proceeding simultaneously, which exists without specific
social structure, that formalizes and retains in integrity its flows of
substance, energy and information, while they are in the social space

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
262
and actualizes in the dimension of the social time. In passing, we shall
mention, that the basing of the second nature as an energy-power field
puts the question concerning space, time and motion in quite different
way. This question needs separate consideration. We might notice that
such organizational form for maintenance of a normal behavior of
the social life is the social organism.
Here we have approached to considering the place and the role of
the form for the existence of the social world or the second nature.
From the material considered by us before it becomes clear, that the
content of the concrete social world as it is developed to the certain
degree of a maturity rational living matter, for the complete self-
realization of the organismal form, which, on the one hand, provides
the retention of the basic attributive qualities of the intelligible
substance, and on the other hand, it reaches (attains) the necessary and
sufficient potentiality to realize its specific general (phasic) function –to
generate the space form of life. As well as the biological form is
“withdrawn” by the social form, the social form now is necessarily
withdrawn by the cosmic form of life. Here the term “the space form of
life” is not absolutely exact. It will be certainly specified further.
F. Scheling was absolutely right, saying that the organism is not the
way of the material substance, which constantly varies; it is an organism
only by means of its image or of the form of its material life. The life
depends on the substance form, in other words, the form became
essential for the life. Therefore, the purpose of activity of an organism is
not the immediate retention of its substance, but the retention of the
substance in such form, in which it is the form of existence of higher
potentiality. The organism is called so, for, notwithstanding its existence
not for itself, as it seemed before, there are only the implements in it, the
apparatus (organ) of elevated (lofty) matters 287.
We have already shown, that according to its origin, the social
organism is an incessantly fluid flow of energy, generated by a man.
It is the integrative field of ethnics.
287 See Hegel G. Encyclopedia of Philosophy. – M .: Thought, 1975. – V.2. – S.561.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
263
It appears, that for an intelligible substance, i.e. such, that is
perceived on the receptive level, motion is the same attributive
quality, as massiveness for sensible (lat. sensus ) matter, i.e. it is
capable to be perceived by usual senses. An intelligible organism
has appeared in the process of the superorganic, though spontaneous
by nature behavior, of the organic synthesis of the physical and
spiritual principles (basis) of a man – of this subjective and finite
image of the objective and of the infinite universum. And what is
actual vitality? None other than an integral organism. Thus, the
reality of the social life consists in the fact, that it represents an
integral social organism ”288.
In other words, the social organism generated in the result of the
dialectic interaction of organisms of the phenomenological and
noumenological worlds. It is very important, because the organism
differs from the system by the fact, that it should be born
(generated) by the other organism or organisms. Therefore, the
philosophical idea of a social organism is this very identity of the
two times changed form of the phenomenal and noumenal worlds,
comprehended in the intellectual phenomenon.It is the herald
(messenger) of the Semantic Universe, and the sense of the concept
“organism” is revealed here, according to Hegel, as the big
architectonic construction, as the hieroglyph of mind which
expresses itself in really”289.
While considering the correlation of the form and the content in
the social world, we have already mentioned above the process of
the generation of the initial material for the organisation of the space
form of life. By this fact we have proved the presence in a social or-
ganism of the basic attributive property – the ability to generate life,
and consequently, other original organisms. Therefore the
appropriateness and correctness of usage with respect to the given
form of the self-determined social content of the term “organism” is
demonstrated (proved).
288Гегель Г. Философия права. – М.: Мысль, 1990. – С.322.
289Гегель Г. Философия права. – М.: Мысль, 1990. – С.55.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
264
The analysis shows, that all kinds of the general coexistence of
the material and spiritual worlds in the state of maturity gain
organismic forms. Such posture was at their primary interosculation
which has acted on a surface as a biological organism, now the same
takes place at their secondary interosculation when the social
organism is generated, and it is already clear, that the same thing
occurs at their tertiary interosculation. Here such live systems –
organisms are generated, to which we still cannot give the name.
For us they are still hidden behind terms the God, Space, etc.
The substantial essence of a social organism we understand as
the human mind which in its concrete value provides the unity of the
form and the content of the social world, “because the form in its
concrete value as G. Hegel writes that is a mind (reason) which
comprehends the world in concepts, and the content is a mind
(reason) as substantial essence of the moral and natural reality; the
realized identity of both of them is a philosophical idea”.
So, we have started to solve a problem of philosophical
comprehension of the second nature from a theoretical image of a
social organism as from the direct whole, the idea of which soared
before researchers of the social life throughout many centuries, and
which was studied in its necessity from the concept “the social
organism”. Here we understand image as the intellectual subject as
whole, taken exclusively in its correlation with itself. It was
necessary for us, in order we could get rid of everything
insignificant, introduced by the change of concrete conditions, in the
course of our philosophical research.
The given image became for us the beginning of the process of
theoretical cognition of the problem of a social organism and at
present has already played its positive, and it is necessary to note
directly – a considerable, heuristic role. With its help we were able
to approach to the condition, when a social organism arose before us
as already existing, i.e. which is realized from the real, easy to our
understanding and to the theoretical analysis of the specific process
– from an exchange of activity between people.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
265
2.6. The social world as a contradiction between a
person and a society
Now we have everything we need to, based on identified
content of the social world and the above understanding of the
relationship of content and form, proceed to investigation of the
social organism as both the process and object, woven from
intelligible matter. Only then we will be able to understand not only
what the intellectual mind may be as a totality in itself, but also that
it exists in the real world.
At the moment only one thing is clear. This process starts with
the need of the human body to bring itself up to fullness, that is that
a person, first of all, defines himself, thus considers himself as
subjected to denial, and by this relates to another indifferent
objectivity, but, secondly, he also does not loose himself in this loss,
retains himself within it, and remains as identity to the notion equal
to him; thus, he is the impulse to positing for himself the other,
specified in relation to him, intellectual world as an equal notion, to
withdrawal of this world, and to the objectification of himself.
Consequently, the human self-determination possesses a form of
objective appearance, and in view of the fact that at the same time it
is identical with itself, it is the absolute contradiction. This means
that the social organism based on the dialectical contradiction
between the individual and society, between human and collective
personality, between the potential and objectified social worlds.
To confirm the legitimacy of the contradictions, we turn to the
available scientific sources, through a prism of experience of human
history, for such global contradiction could not remain unnoticed in
history, at least for social philosophers and sociologists..
The analysis shows, that researchers consider a personality and
society to be such dialectical contradiction. The mankind “noticed”
this contradiction a long time ago and throughout the long historical

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
266
period tries to explain it. To description of this question are devoted
hundreds of thousands of works of scholars from different historical
periods, philosophical trends and methodological approaches. It has
matured for a long time. But our understanding of this contradiction
remained poor, due to the fact that, we tried to oppose the contrary,
rather of trying to understand them as parts of a whole.
The first mentions of it are found already in the works of
philosophers and scientists of an ancient Greece who have paid
attention to the change of a role of a person in the course of social
development. In the slave society, status and dignity was a privilege
only of free men. But the unity of a person with a society, specified
by Plato and Aristotle, was illusive in their epoch. In the philosophy
of sophists, of Socrates and in the Greek tragedy (Sophocles) the
fact of splitting of individual consciousness is reflected. The
formula of sophist Protagoras “the person is a measure of all things”
challenged not only old gods, but also traditions of community life.
At a later stage of development of human history
representatives of German classical philosophy address this
contradiction. Basing on the empirical reality of a bourgeois society
with its individualism and utility I. Kant recognizes a society as the
world of experience in which the person is only a tool. Hegel
considered a person not as isolated monade, but as the moment of
the general, genus. A person realizes not subjective, but objective
purposes: it is united not only with genus, but also with the entire
world, because the essence of all world is the same, as the essence
of a person – spirit. But even Hegel was not able to explain the
connection of a person and a society. And if at that time Hegel
panlogism had conservative political sense, in the scientific plane it
was ingenious, as far as the reality we observe, represents the self-
expression of Human Mind, or, according to Hegel it arises as
“realization of God’s mind”.
Since the difference between the individual as a person and a
random individual is not just a logical difference, but a historical
fact, that social science was trying to resolve it. For example, the

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
267
problem of integration of the individual a social group is the main
question of the sociological conception of E. Durkhgeim. In F.
Nietzche’s interpretation, the solving of this contradiction gained
the character of nonsence as far as his “superperson” is an image of
Leviathan as a monster, symbiosis of a person and a society. With
the development of activity as a phenomenon in time, the division of
social labour into separate functions, rejected from the person took
place. On this basis, the social aim of the individual’s activity
breaks off his activity and even is opposed to it as external force
making the person to carry out the functions, the sense of which is
lost for him.
As a result, the individual cannot identify himself with either of
his roles, which are perceived by him as imposed from outside, and
his self-affirmation gains forms of the conflict of a person and a
society, which actually grounds on the contradictions of the social
life itself. Inability to explain the unity of man and society in
bourgeois science leads to the emergence of many variant of future
options, usually, to sad ones.
Most correctly and scientifically accurately the given
contradiction was described by K. Marx and F. Engels. They
showed, that the abstract opposition of a person and a society and its
ethical expression, i.e. the contradiction between egoism and
altruism is just the illusory reflexion of social contradictions of a
capitalist society. “This opposition is only conceptual because one
of its sides, the so-called “general”, is constantly generated by the
other side – private interest, and is not at all in opposition with the
last one as an independent force which has independent history”. 290
Here they offered also the means of its withdrawal. They saw only
one solution of this contradiction: transformation of a bourgeois
“civil” society into “a human society or the socialized humanity” 291.
But this method of removing the dialectical contradictions is not
290Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.3. – C.236.
291See the same source. – p.4

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
268
sufficient, since it is more political and ideological pathos, than the
natural- way of the problem withdrawing.
This is what G. Greeyef writes concerning the problem in
consideration “Individuals and a society like cells of a human body
and like whole human organism, are connected by the common
(general) relations, identical interests and the certain correlation, due
to which only their union represents an organism”. 292
On this subject we have, besides a historical view at the essence
of the basic social contradiction of human history, at least, three
more arguments. The first argument consists in the fact, that a
person and a society are the products of the same process –
formation of the social world. Recall that in our algorithm this is a
complex entity, consisting of genotype, intelligence and super
(phenotype), that is, it is a social product that goes beyond the
human body. Marx even in
“Economic and Philosophical
Manuscripts of 1844 “ with the help of categories of objectification
and objectification showed how essential powers leave the human
body and start an independent existence in the external world in the
form of embodied human.
On the side of the objectified ingredient of the social world, too,
there is a specific social product that falls in the “precipitate” at the
third stage of the society formation. Recall that such ingredients
here are the mentality, culture and society. And the extremes, as is
known, can clamp with themselves. In other words, the generic
products of subjectivized and objectified kind are capable to form
integrity which should be called a generic social organism.
The second argument lies in the fact, that they have something
“general”, what makes them akin more than what separates them.
Will dwell upon this in detail, as in a course of history of
philosophical thought the issue of recognition of ontological
existence of society as something “general” regarding a person as
something “individual” has been a controversial subject for a long
292Грееф Г. Общественный прогресс и регресс. – С.-Петербург, Типография
Ю.Н. Эрлих, Садовая, N 9. – 1896. C.169.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
269
time. Does “general” exist as ontological reality, that is objectively
in the very reality of things, or in the strict sense of the word only
“individual” exists, while “general” is merely a subjective synthesis,
merely mental association produced by our thinking? This general
philosophical or, more precisely, logical problem of reality, and
objective significance of “general” and “individual” has been,
actually, already from Plato’s times, a subject of long dispute
between “nominalists” who object a reality of “general”, and
“realists” who confirm it.
But in this case, we need to consider the existence of the
“general” as an element of both the individual and society. Although
modern logic and the theory of science clearly shows that the
general as such is not deducible from the individual, and that, when
the objective significance and reality of the general is denied, it
becomes inexplicable neither the formation of concepts, nor their
importance for the knowledge development. Thus, in this case, to
know that we deal with fundamentally different members that have
the right to an independent existence is not enough; we have to
disclose their ontological basis.
The question on ontologic bases of a person and a society
retains scrupulous attention of two trends in world philosophical
thought – “individualism” and “collectivism”, which in social
science are hidden by means of pure abstract philosophical terms
“singularism” (“social atomism”) and “universalism”. S. Frank
wrote that they try to answer the question, “either the society is none
other than the name for the integrity and interaction of separate
individuals, none other than the created by us artificial, i.e. the
subjective, the reality epitome of separate people, or a society is
some certain objective reality, an inexhaustible group of individuals,
which are its constituents”293.
These two trends have been in constant conflict and have been
changing each other in the history of social and philosophical
293Франк С.Л. Духовные основы общества. – М.: Республика. – 1992. – C.38.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
270
thought. S. Frank, for example, solving this problem in pure
theoretical regard, came to the following conclusion: a society is” a
real integral reality, but not derivative associacion of separate
individuals; moreover it’s the only reality within which the person is
given for us exactly. Isolatedly thought individuality is only the
abstarciton; only in the sobornal being, within the unity of the
society actually real is what we call the person”294.
Finally, the third argument is naturally connected with the fact
that both society and an individual bear specific functions of their
controversial interaction mechanisms and this interactive mediation
means. This means that both concepts can easily retain each other
within the given collision. Hence the concepts of chronotop in the
individual structure and the habitus in the social structure are
implied. Evidently, the term habitus is more identical to the Russian
term “tradition” than a word-for-word “habit’” translation. Judging
from functions, habitus is more identical to the Russian term
“tradition”, than a literal “tradition” one .In this regard, we will use
these terms in this paper interchangeably, leaving themselves and
others the right to further clarify the boundaries of their authenticity.
Briefly will explain explain what is meant. Let’s start from the
notion “chronotop’ which supports to understand mutual crossings
between the sensible and intelligible flash. The notion “chronotop”,
as is known, was actively used in the humanities, first of all, by M.
Bahtin.
It is important to note that the concept of “chronotopos” applies
not only to the individual but also to the social community. The
peculiarity of chronotop lyes in uniting in itself as if nonunited
things e.g. space-time body limitations in the physical sense within
the eternity of time and space. Thus, with the eternity and
endlessness. That’s why simultaneously it comprises Physical and
Semantical Universe. According to M. Kagan it’s the organ of their
as if mutual inter-action295.
294See the same source. – p. 53
295Каган М.С. Мир общения. – М.: Политиздат, 1988. – С.114.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
271
K. Marx, explaining the crossings like that often used the
synthetical 
categories-notions: 
“practically-spiritual”
comprehension of reality, “feeling and overfeeling” pertaining to the
qualities of goods, “sense explaining unity of nature and society”
concerning the person.
The society itself has the mechanism of influence on the
personally. F. Giddins was writing about that fact this way: “the
society is the organization influencing its members”.296.Pondering
over it on analogy it may be stated that it is in a way a social
chronotop following which the evaluating sensible information is
functioning including the values of moral consciousness printed by
the imperative “to survive”. The mechanism of such influence got in
the contemporary social-philosophical literature the special name
habitus. This phenomenon is the central notion in the sociological P.
Burdje’s conception. The term itself is found already in G. Hegel
works by which he denotes “shedowy imagination about the whole
image” of gender. 297
All stated above, grants to us a right to say, that, thanking to the
chronotop persons and traditions (socialchronotop), borders between
subjective and objective the subjective do not exist. They freely pass
one into another, by means of special tools, so called mediators.
Following from the availability in the society of two mediating
systems of the material and spiritual nature, it makes sense to
mention two types of mediators: spiritual and physical. In other
words, we proceed from the fact, that in the social organism there
are specific means for the convening the sense from the collective
person to the person and vice versa. The contemporary psychology
reflected such products of the mediation in the concept “things-
mediators”
or the mediators of the spiritual (intellectual)
communication. They may be considered also as the resonators, to
the frequency of which the living beings tune. The last mentioned
296Американская социология: Тексты. – М.: Изд-во МГУ, 1994. – С. 313.
297Гегель Г. Наука логики. – М.: Мысль, 1972. -Т.3. – С.266.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
272
not only assimilate these frequencies, but also generate the new
ones, but recharge the mediator with their energy.
You should remember, that the procedure of the mediation in
the material world is described in the works of K. Marx. We just
have not looked at such methodological directions at the products of
labour, to be more precise, at the consumer goods at the market, but
because of this the mediating role of the last mentioned have not
vanished away. Now it is well-marked, and we have to study it as a
member of the social organism.
Thus, both sides of the whole, grounds and condition are the
same essential unity, as the content, and as the form. They inter -
pass due to themselves, in other words, being the reflections, they
consider themselves withdrawn, set themselves as withdrawn,
correlate themselves to this objection and assume each other.
Now it is time to move on to the study of the social organism as
a dialectical contradiction between the individual and society at the
macro-level, because we have already reproduced all that we needed
at the micro level. Here we no longer rely on the intuition, as that
region we mastered mostly in irrational way. Because of no
adequate conceptual toolkit, we presented the image of the social
world in macro-level terms. Today, the level of representations of
the social world is principally not verified. But we still hope that
proceeding processes are captured correctly, and the results of the
research are presented in a convincing manner.
Determination
of the social organism as a dialectical
contradiction between the individual and society is a logical step,
and today is unlikely to cause anyone serious objections,
particularly after what is shown above. In this dialectical
contradiction, personality is a negative opposite of revolutionary
character, as it seeks to destroy. Society, on the contrary, is a
positive contrast of conservative nature, as it seeks to preserve it.
Thus, it is necessary to pay attention to the fact, that the social
organism as the object and the process has some parametrical
characteristics. There are no contradictions between them, for the

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
273
logic categories pass one into another. It was vividly shown by
K.Marx, who defined the public relation as forms of activity of
people in the production process. These material relations are the
just necessary forms, in which their material and individual activity
is realized”298 At the same time it is known, that he considered
activity as the process of implementation of the essence forces of
the person in subject forms.
In this connection a social organism as the original content of
the second nature (the social world), has some forms of expression,
they are: essential – in the form of interaction of people among
themselves; functional – in the form of human activity; ontological
– in the form of the public relation; logical – in the form of
knowledge; substantive – in the form of intelligible substance;
noumenal – in the form of phenotype information; subjectivized – in
the form of natural or essence forces of the person; objectified – in
the form of society; physical – in the form of weak electromagnetic
radiation. It is natural, that in the course of the system analysis it is
advisable to use all its modifications, at the same time in the course
of specific analysis it is required to keep to that form, in which a
social phenomenon exists at the moment.
At the same time the vital activity of the social organism takes
place as a total system interaction of the original public bodies that
constitute the social world. Since social life is by nature an organic
process, the social organism is characterized by the fact that
everything coming to it from the outside, no matter of the
phenomenal or nominal worlds, is destroyed, infected and turned
into “its”, i.e. intellectualized and converted into a form field.
Based on this fundamental property of the social body to
convert into a suitable for itself shape, in the scientific literature
there is the identification of the categories of civilization and social
organism. The mechanism of civilizations, which are more like
individual social organisms, is described in detail, as is known, by
298Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.27. – C.403

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
274
P. Shtompka with reference to Arnold Toynbee’s works. This
happened due to the fact that the term “civilization” used to be
“understood as the organization, embracing several more or less
autonomous societies with almost identical, homogeneous structure
and vital functions"299.
Now we already have everything you need to move to the
macro-level and scrutinize the same processes through verified by
experience categories. But, first of all, will make some important,
certainly from the point of view of the general purpose of the
present study, theoretical conclusions drawn from the above
material. Their essence is the following.
Firstly, and most importantly, in the course of epistemological
analysis, we came to an explanation of the field form the social
world, which operates in the form of the social organism. The latter
one appeared before us as a form of functioning and development of
social life. We established the specificity of the content and form of
the social organism that reflects the phenotypic information, entirely
defined by the inter-phase state of the universum. Therefore, the
structure of the social organism, in our opinion, should include the
elements belonging to the phase of the materialization of the
universum, that is, be of familiar to us material sensible appearance
of matter, and elements belonging to the dematerialization phase,
i.e. take the form of intelligible existence. They coexist in a
converted form. At the same time the processes of materialization
and dematerialization should be presented as the sensible –
intelligible matter inter-transition.
Secondly, social body simultaneously represents, on the one
hand, the process of people’s inter-activities, fixed in a social form
as public relations, and on the other hand – as social object with its
original morphological body – the electromagnetic field. According
to its ontological base, the social organism is the intelligible product
for universum’s further self-unfolding. This vision of the content of
299Грееф Г. Общественный прогресс и регресс. – С-Петербург, Типография
Ю.Н.Эрлих, Садовая, № 9, 1896. – С. 297.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
275
the social body fits well the natural scientific picture of the world
we develop, and, hence, explains it well.
Thirdly, the epistemological analysis revealed the organic unity
of the social phenomenon base – the human person, and established
social world – socium. It became clear that the structure of social
relations can be subjective and objective. This means that the social
organism is a dialectical objective- subjective social content inter-
transition. Moreover, the subjective form of social relations is
presented as a potential social world, hidden within the structure of
the human body; the objective form of social relations is presented
as realized by the social world – socium.
Fourthly, it is reliably established that the social organism is a
product of two processes: self-organization, which is determined
by the basis of “social” , and the organization (self-regulation),
which is caused by factors that are part of the environment. “The
environment for the body – the inviting power. Not so much a
shell – but a challenge"(Mandelstam). In this case, its fullness or
portion is determined, as we have indicated above, by the logical
determinant, that is the meaning enclosed in the idea. If we judge
by analogy, the idea of the social organism for the environment
is a possibility, desirability and expectedness, and the
environment for the body – the compression force, which gives
to its content an external form – the organizational form. The
environment achieves it by imposing certain principles on
produced social content. In this way its function of social
content quantization is realized. The environment carries out this
operation thanks to the presence of external (space) compression
forces, which are also the elements of the compression mechanism.
We have no doubt that each individual stage of formation has
adequate “their” compression forces, transforming the content of
social world. Here, everything is going according to the laws of self-
organization, that is, without targeted intervention in the process of
man. These are the features of the micro-level.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
276
Fifthly, in general terms, the mechanism of the production of the
social organism is presented. Such it is: material for the construction
of the social organism comes from human psyche; then it is formed
in the social forms by thinking and by really existing at the moment
social 
reality 
or 
social 
environment. 
Depending 
on 
the
appropriateness of external conditions for forming social material,
and on the power the energy flow, generated by collective effort of
people, various types of social organisms are formed. If to
paraphrase Lenin’s well-known saying that the person lives “in a
variety of historically changing social organisms” 300, it is necessary
to say that: “Man throughout his life in historically changing
conditions creates different social organisms."
Sixth, to some degree we raised the veil of secrecy family social
organisms, which by its very nature – is reasonable, and as far as the
place of manifestations is related to the transition phase of the
universe from the phase of materialization into the phase of
dematerialization. This is very important, because the society, the
state and other social institutions in general in the theory of
knowledge must also be regarded as the products of the mega-
evolution process, that is, as the products of the universe self-
unfolding. Researchers sidestep the problem, as they believe that
social institutions are temporary entities, and necessary for normal
functioning of a person within the planetary boundaries.
From this directly follows a new for social philosophy problem
of exploring the dialectics of becoming the family of social
organisms of different types and purposes acting as the necessary
elements of the universum structure. There is no doubt that the
family of the social organism is the organ of self-development of the
Universe, and exploring it in a such way, we will get valuable
knowledge to optimize life organization on the Earth.
300See: Ленин В.И. Полн. собр. соч. – Т.1. – С.476.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
277
CHAPTER 3.
THE MAJOR OUTCOME OF THE
EPISTEMOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF
THE SOCIAL WORLD
3.1. The philosophical characteristic of the social
world
In the course of the present investigation the genesis of the social
world is being consecutively revealed. Simultaneously its quantum-
wave nature is shown, the essence is uncovered, and the content is
clearly demonstrated; at last, its organismic form is proved. Now it is
time to present the philosophical properties of its basic attributive
characteristics. For this purpose, it is necessary to discuss such major
properties of the social world as the causality determining its
behaviour, the coordinates or a plane in which its self-expansion takes
place, distinctive features of social space and time, substantiality and
substractiality, social metabolism, an axis of evolution of the social

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
278
phenomenon, transition into a state of a supra-sociality, margins of the
social world, interrelation of a product and process in the social world
self-expansion, and some others.
Further discussion, since it concerns the issue of philosophical
characteristic of the social world, allows us to return to the term “the
second nature”. It is related to the fact that
philosophical
characteristics of the social world are of general worldview
character and should adequately reflect its attributive properties
through the universum structure, regardless of a part of the Universe
or the Galaxy it has manifested itself in. In other words, further
discussion is about the most general characteristics of the
noosociogenesis products.
In the beginning, we will consider the determination of the
social world, as it explains its sustaining sources, and poly-
variability of its manifestations on the planetary stage. The process
of generation of real social world out of a person’s private world, on
what existentialism persistently insists, has a virtual character and
depends on environmental conditions. We have already discussed it
before. These are so-called two kinds of causality: natural and free
causalities. The idea of duality of determination of the social world
is suggested by the binary nature of the Universe substantial
foundation of the Universe and its producer, the human personality.
It is also quite in harmony with the world outlook and ideological
mainstay we use as the principle undergirding the present concept.
Natural causality rests on the fact that the intellectual energy
production by an individual and interactions of people is a logical
and natural process of physical origin. At the heart of the latter,
there is the weak interaction. As it is known, such type of interaction
is one of four constants of our planetary system. It has been in detail
described at definition of the quantum-wave nature of the social
world, and also in the course of explanation of how the mechanism
of an individual personality’s works.
The weak interaction, as the causality of social processes
activation and transformation at different stages of the society form-

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
279
shaping, starts with different sources and, therefore, acts with
different forces. At the initial stage, the society form-shaping is
determined by weak interaction of an individual. Upon its coming
into being, the social content exposes itself to collective thinking,
intellectual (energetic) potential of the social (collective)
environment. Now, in many respects, it depends on a vector of
public opinion which idea, and consequently, action will get support
and will receive a start in life.
The heterogeneity of the compression forces effect results from
two reasons. The first one is connected with a fact that the farther
the social content from its source – interacting persons – the more
objective character the social content acquires; the second, that it
occurs at the expense of action of the first nature factors, for
example, 
space 
and 
time, 
gravitation, 
weak 
and 
strong
electromagnetic 
interaction. 
A 
cooling 
of 
lava
flowed from a volcano
crater
can serve as analogue. Natural
connection of one state of a human body, within sensory perceivable
world, with a previous state, succeeded by the first one, due to
organic unity of an electromagnetic field, is governed by the
universum natural laws and regularities.
Given the intelligible matter exists in a form of field, the
evolution factors impact the social process as forces of compression,
and the orientation of transformations is defined by the dynamic
function of electromagnetic field not only at the cellular level (it has
already been mentioned above), but also at the subject-field level,
whether it be an organism of an individual or the community in an
organismic form. This issue is of special interest for development of
the effective technologies of influence on organization of social
energo-force fields, and also for explanation of the action
mechanism and principles of conduct of “cold war”; it will
doubtlessly become a subject of a special research in the future.
Free causality represents qualitatively different phenomenon
which emerges within a human body as an ingredient of the
Semantic Universe. It is being revealed, on the one hand, as

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
280
liberation of its will of the sensuality compulsion, for in general,
man has inherent capability to spontaneously determine himself
irrespective of sensory compulsion formed by the dynamic function
of electromagnetic field; on the other hand, – between individuals as
agents of social interaction characterized by high degree of liberty.
The semantic causality is not generally known to a modern
researcher. In our opinion, I. Kant meant it, when wrote that
“obligation serves as a special type of expression of necessity and
relation with the bases not found anywhere else in nature”301.
Moreover, we do not have any reason to shrug it off, as it acts today
on the foreground, and its influence is growing. Advent of the
information civilization proves it vividly.
To this type of causality we include people’s actions under the
influence of their functional bodies – sense, goals, ideals, images,
directives, motives and other units of semantic structure of both an
individual and a collective subject. Our own life provides the most
convincing examples. Suffice to remember those cases, when the idea
once flashed across our mind did push us beyond the boundaries of our
comfort zone leading us into the world of events not interesting, or
even antagonistic. Poets, writers, actors, designers, innovators, and
many other categories of people – the brightest representatives of
semantic determination. The desire to become, for example, a leader, a
commander, a cosmonaut, a businessman or a judge can determine the
behaviour of an individual for years.
However, there are examples of greater scale. For example, the
idea of national independence stirs to action millions of people. The
potential of national idea should be also included to causality of this
type. Influence of values, symbols, archetypes and many other
things from the area of societal psyche, including the collective
unconscious, supplement the picture.
A form itself is a determinant within this system of causality
too. Thus, for example, democracy or dictatorship, as a form of
301 Кант И. Критика чистого разума. – М.: Мысль, 1994. – С. 335.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
281
realization of imperious functions, automatically brings to life the
whole system of social institutes, about existence of which we do
not even suspect.
The second type of relation demands liberation of causality of
the first kind. It must be of a cosmologic character. It means that it
should have, as I. Kant wrote, “power to begin a state on its own,
·without help or stimulus from anything else·. So ·an exercise of·
the causality of freedom won’t result from a temporally prior cause
such as is required by the law of nature. ·The concept of· freedom in
this sense is a pure transcendental idea, ·its transcendental nature
being secured by two facts about it; first, there’s nothing in the
concept that is borrowed from experience, second, the freedom that
the concept refers to can’t be given in any experience; because the
very possibility of experience depends on its being a universal law
that every event has a cause that is itself an event and therefore also
has a cause. . . , and so on, so that the whole domain of experience,
however big it is, is transformed into a sum-total of the merely
natural. In this way, however, it isn’t possible to get an absolutely
complete causal chain, so reason creates for itself the idea of a
spontaneity that can begin to act on its own, without having to be
kicked into action by an antecedent cause in accordance with the
law of causality”302.
These two forces within the conditions of our planetary system
are unequal in potential, as processes and products of material origin
here concede on durability or strength to spiritually-oriented
processes. It also means that in other part of the Universe the
reverse is the case. For the indestructibility of universum’s matter,
which is attained due to the motion, the materiality must prevail.
Among modern researchers, it is I. Z. Tsekhmistro who based
on S. Bir’s works stresses that physical causality is the most simple
and most primitive form of relations between the elements within
the system and has a rather remote relation to processes of self-
302 Кант И. Критика чистого разума. – М.: Мысль, 1994. – С. 327-328.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
282
regulation in an organism and society. He introduces to a science the
hypothesis that at the heart of cognitive processes in natural intellect
not the causal schemes lie, but implicative connections and
dependences In fact, “a man completely dedicated to the moral goal
and duty will rather die, than deny actions implicatively following
of the content of his goal and duty, thus, inseparably linked with his
consciousness and his existence”303, – writes I. Z. Tsehmistro. For us
it means that in the grounding of causality of phenomena in
collective consciousness, we should proceed from the premise that
the implicativity of individual consciousness produces a sharp
increase in uncertainty about origin and direction of social processes
in society. Thus, in the social world free causality that is capable of
abrupt alteration of the course and direction of social processes,
dominates. This explains the social process peculiarity which
consists in spontaneity of origin of the process and its rapidity.
Manifestation of a social form of the universum’s movement is
not one moment act, even if of genius, creation; it the process which
is generated and is supported by every individual, the process
reaching stability and completeness of its manifestation only at joint
functioning of large groups of people, ethnos. According to
researchers of the given phenomenon, the constant increase in
number of producers of intellectual energy, steady increase of a
level of their natural maturity and degree of their individual and
collective activity inevitably leads to the noospheric explosion in the
future.
Further, we also should see the plane of self-expansion of the
social world and thoroughly characterize its coordinates. For its
visual representation, it is necessary to get down to the range of
parameters of the basis of the social world, that is to the person.
Proceeding from morphology of the human person it should be
303
Цехмистро
И.З.
Феномен
целостности
как
пристанище
духа:
о
невозможности множественных “механизмов” мышления // Дух і Космос: наука і
культура на шляху до нетрадиційного світосприймання / Кол. авторів під кер.
проф. І.З.Цехмістро. – Харків, 1995. – С.37.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
283
envolved, as we have demonstrated earlier, in two directions: logical
and pre-logical. The first one is characterized by coordinates “value
– sense”, and the second one – “need – action”. However, to use
strict approach to explanation of the parameters of a self-expansion
concept of the social world is impossible, but without such analogy
it is impossible to present any connection between the phenomena at
inaccessible for usual perception micro-level. It is known, that the
area of self-deployment of the social world, like any other, has,
conditionally speaking, horizontal and vertical components. These
components appear as the separate areas, then we can talk about the
conventional horizontal and vertical areas of self-deployment of the
social world. We will summarize the approach to their origin and
destination, particularly following the sense of proportion and care not
in the working hypothesis, but in the conclusions.
The self-deployment of the social world in a horizontal area
provides the production and reproduction of material goods and
services designed to meet the needs of individual rights. Hence,
there are the roots of the prevalence of physical factors in our lives
and the materialist conception of the history in general. This type of
interaction between the people is, of course, more close and clear to
us, because it is thoroughly described by K. Marx, F. Engels, V.
Lenin and their followers. Its functional purpose is to satisfy our
needs: vital and social, material and spiritual. As shows the analysis
of the available literature, here labor is the leading interaction both
in a sphere of production of goods, and in a sphere of manufacture
of spiritual products. “The labor of a separate individual, – K. Marks
wrote, – from the very beginning acts as the social labor”304.
There is no need to dwell in detail on the characteristics of this
aspect, since coverage of labor as a specific type of interaction
between people is, as it was already above mentioned, the core of
the Marxsist doctrine, which is well familiar to us. Thus, it is
enough to specify the labor also as a specific kind of the structural
304 Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.46. – Ч.1. – С.116.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
284
information exchange. Within the horizontal area the elements of
material origin intended for production and reproduction of the
person as a producer of the social world undergo transformation and
moving.
The present research made it clear that labour as a mechanism of
social world self-expansion appears only at the third stage of self-
expansion of a society. It means that in a materialistic aspect of
philosophical thought only final, external, but doubtlessly, the most
essential and matured element is presented – the labour and, based on
it, manufacture of means of production and satisfaction of people’s
needs. It reaches completeness mainly in materialized products, for
example, productive forces, industrial infrastructure of a society, and
objects of satisfaction of people’s vital needs. Proceeding from this, it
is possible to assert that co-ordinate axes of the given plane are the
needs of the person and actions directed to their satisfaction.
In a vertical plane, as it is known, the internal content of the
person develops within the coordinate system “values – sense”. On
the basis of it, we make an attempt to prove that “values – sense”
character remains also in a vertical development of the social world,
but only as the external process, proceeding in environment,
therefore, having slightly different content, and consequently, the
name. Here, as in the first nature, the transition of a universum from
more simple to more difficult forms of movement takes place.
Therefore 
the 
unconscious, 
perceptible 
consciousness,
consciousness, self-consciousness, subconsciousness, and, finally,
space consciousness (the pure reason) we are inclined to examine
and study in their interrelations – i.e. in the same way as once the
mechanical, the physical, the chemical, the biological and the social
forms of sensible matter motion were examined and studied.
If in a horizontal plane the labor acted as the transformation
mechanism, than in this case this function is carried out by person’s
intellect that gradually masters the above-named levels of an
ascension of a universum. At the level of objectified social world,

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
285
this movement is reached thanks to collective thinking and
collective reflexion.
The ascending product, its form and the speed of ascension
through structural levels of the universum differ totally from those
of a human organism. The mechanism of ascension or development
of the social world in a vertical plane is the attributive possibility of
substructures of such structural formation as the universe, to reflect,
i.e. to transmit their state to each other with the help of the special
signals. Thus these substructures, and more precisely their specific
constituents, are transmission organs. The difference between the
signals which are sent up, and those which are sent deep down into
the self-control structures, consists in the fact, that the lower interior
substructures are able to send signals about their state and to be
changed under the influence of the higher structural levels, and they,
in their turn, are able to receive signals from below and to correct
the state of the former ones.
The universum self-expansion in a vertical plane is carried out
in the information movement form. Materiality here is presented in
a form of a signal. The material subject or process can be a signal
only if its structure reflects the features of the structure it has been
sent by. At the same time between the reflected and reflecting
systems the information is transferred by means of a number of
signals; if there were no reflection between systems, that is there
were no gradual formation of conformity of structures, there would
be no interaction of the levels. Interaction of levels is provided
through the exchange of information products. In this case the
information metabolism takes place. In movement from the micro-
level toward the higher level – macro-level, and from the macro-
level toward the mega-level etc. the exchange is ensured by the
signal movement.
There is also the reverse transition. It also has the information
character, but proceeds in a latent form. We have already
represented this type of transition when discussed the dynamic
function of electromagnetic fields at the cellular and organismic

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
286
levels. Now we consider necessary to extend this process to a social
organism. In this case the specificity is that the field gets new
proportions, as self-expansion of the social world follows, in our
opinion, the Space electromagnetic streams. Researchers of the
present stage, such as V.V. Nalimov, M.I. Setrov, V. N. Kelasyev
and others have paid attention to this fact. Today for an explanation
of the mechanism of this transition the innovative functional theory
of a field is which highlights architectonics of the “unknown hand”,
performing wonders in life, and public life is not an exclusion.
The signal, as a material data carrier, functions only in a certain
nature and in a definitely organized system, because it – the
accordance between their nature and structure – is the only
condition under which it can interact with other elements of this
system to transfer to reflecting system the information it contains.
The existence of the structure unity in nature is connected also
with the circumstance that signals which carry the data from one
system to another in the process of reflection are the direct
regulating factor of the latter. Every signal is a material object or
social process that embodies in its structure (directly or indirectly)
the peculiarities of the system or organ that has sent it. Between the
structure of this system and the structure of a signal the specific
accordance is formed. The signal, having reached the system
exposed to influence, begins interaction. The relation of structural
accordance is formed between them. The structure of reflecting
system becomes similar to the structure of a signal, and through it to
the structure of the influencing system. It is in such change that the
essence of self-regulation consists in. So, movement in a vertical
plane provides to the social world, and in a broader sense, to a
universum, the fundamental property of self-control.
Thus, the “value – sense” plane takes extremely important place
not only in a destiny of an individual, but ethnos and society as well.
Here, even more should be said. The understanding of the social
world is possible only when its value-semantic characteristic is
presented. In practice, for self-expansion of the social world the

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
287
value-semantic characteristic appears to be more important, than the
spatial-temporary plane. Although, apparently, the national social
philosophy pays not enough attention to it.
To understand what will become of us, means to understand
what the ethnos, the people will value in the future, what will make
sense to them. In other words, it is what is called the value
projection of the future. As follows from the social world form-
shaping , it is the value saturation that exists only subjectively in
ethnos conception that defines the content of all three stages of self-
generation of the social world.
Eventually, the self-expansion of the social world has been
delineated as qualitatively isolated form of “objective process”
which, according to V.I. Lenin’s definition, is a “goal-oriented
activity of individuals ”305. The goal-oriented activity, in particular,
integrates simultaneously in different planes two essentially distinct
processes, such as the process of thinking, which provides internal
treatment of spiritual component of the Universe base, and labor,
which is aimed on the practical transformation of material nature in
behalf of the human, for it is connected with the satisfaction of his
needs.
As analysis shows, that the self-development of the society, as a
highly dynamic spontaneously flowing process, which is initiated in
the head of a particular man, forming what we call a constructive
chaos, whereupon the motion moves into value-semantic plane,
initiating a constructive environment as a field of the social world
future development, which differs in extraordinary variety of
possible variants of the content transformation, and, finally, attains
reconciliation in noosphere, congealing in material – utilitarian or
objectified form.
Here we have come to understanding that self-expansion of the
social world in planes inherent in the person is impossible, because
the substance of sociality demands totally different topology. Within
305 Ленин В.И. Полн. собр. соч. – Т.29. – С.170

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
288
human limits, it can exist only in a form of a potential social world.
When, for any reasons the substance of the social world, regularly
distributed between its agents, appears beyond a collective power
field, the very first thing it does with iron necessity, is returning to
the condition of original chaos, that is accompanied by intensive
“intellectual ferment”.
So, the social world, being a product of the individual’s self-
motion does not inherit co-ordinates of the source, but develops in a
totally different plane, incongruous with the coordinates of a
physical body and axes of a spiritual component of the person’s
structure. In other words, the social organism is compelled to have
its own, that is transformed and allocated from the first nature,
topology, or a specific plane of self-realisation.
In other words, above algorithm of the development of the
social organism as the removing of the contradiction between the
goal and the practical state leads us to the conclusion that the
permanent being of the subject in a state of duality is: firstly, its
normal state, because without it there would be no development of
the social integrity, and secondly, the social life of individuals and
even entire social world proceeds in coordinates “words and deeds”,
“theory and practice” because “the basis for the functioning of any
form of mental activity is the work of self-regulating complex, with
the incentive and executive components joined together”.306
The last statement is also justified by functioning of a person’s
self-realisation mechanism that, as we have shown, operates within
two planes: the vertical in which self-determination as movement of
a person’s theoretical component is a final step, and horizontal, in
which the movement of self-actualization of a physical body of a
person finds its completeness.
Recall that Hegel (Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences)
considered the knowledge and practices as the two sides of the idea.
“On the one hand Cognition supersedes the one-sidedness of the
306 Самоорганизация: психо- и социогенез / Под радакцией В.Н. Келасьева.
– СПб.: Издательство С. – Петербургского университета, 1996. – С.63.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
289
Idea’s subjectivity by receiving (der Aufnahme) the existing world
into itself, into subjective conception and thought; and with this
objectivity, which is thus taken to be real and true, for its content it
fills up the abstract certitude of itself. On the other hand, it
supersedes the one-sidedness of the objective world, which is now,
on the contrary, estimated as only a mere semblance, a collection of
contingencies and shapes at bottom visionary. It modifies and
informs that world by the inward nature of the subjective, which is
here taken to be the genuine objective. The former is the instinct of
science 
after 
Truth, 
Cognition 
properly 
so 
called
–
the theoretical action of the idea. The latter is the instinct of
the good to fulfil the same – the practical activity of the idea,
or volition”307. In this he saw the essence of a new social sociality.
So, you can consider it theoretically proved, that the social world
takes place in the coordinate system “theory” – “practice”. It is a
very important conclusion for understanding the topology of social
structure and algorithms of social movements in general. The
theoretical one contains all riches of the spiritual source – the
reason of a person; the practical one contains all his riches as a
practical laborer, possessing physical strength, and functioning
within the plane “need – action”. So, it is possible to present the
“value-sense” plane as a theoretical component or the potential
social world, and from the standpoint of needs – a utilitarian plane
or the actualized social world can replace what is called the practice.
From here directly follows the value of unity of the theory and
practice for human life.
Understanding the theory and practice as fundamental
coordinates, in which the social life runs, is crucial for
comprehension and explanation of the crisis of social systems in
general, and the Soviet Union in particular. Particular evidence that
there was a gap between word and deed in the former USSR, is not
required. It was seen from the quality of the five year planning, and
307 Гегель Г. Энциклопедия философских наук: В 3 т. – М.: Мысль, 1974. Т.1. –
С.410

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
290
from the level of orders and decisions taken by the Party and
Government, and the “fancy” reporting, and cultivation of double
morality in the society.
For the record, two types of causality are explained by the
Universe basis dualism; they operate in two above-named planes
overlapping and activating each other, but never replacing one
another completely; they only constrain or, on the contrary, induce
one another to activity. Presence of two planes explains the
difference in speeds of self-expansion of public processes, density
of connections between some of them, rightism and leftism in
archtectonics of social structures, and many other things.
The stated above explanation of the social organism genesis
results in understanding of its basic contradiction, i.e. the reason,
which make it to be in the state of tension and willingness to carry
out the infinite motion. It is a gap between the life of an individual
and the life
of a collective subject or a generation. This
contradiction matured within the womb of the biological life form of
the motion and can’t exist without it, but it finds its solution in the
social form of the Universe motion. In other words, splitting into the
individual and the collective is the inexhaustible source of the social
world self-motion.
The important characteristic of the social world is space and
time. However, as the analysis shows, here it is also impossible to
judge about, for example, processes and a substratum of the social
world, proceeding from analogies of the physical world, although
researchers usually do tend to do it. They seem to be ignoring the
warning of some scholars that the given categories, at least in the
sense they are applied to the first nature, are unfitting in this case.
Suffice to specify the distinctions between geometrical and social
space, reflected in the work of P. Sorokin308.
At self-expansion of social life in a horizontal plane, that is in
co-ordinates “need – action”, naturally, it is possible to use
308 См.: Сорокин П.А. Человек. Цивилизация. Общество. – М.: Политиздат,
1992. – С.297-300

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
291
existential units of measure of the proceeding processes. However,
it is necessary we always remember that in the social world, we deal
with qualitatively new properties of space and time which are
manifested not materially, but energetically.
In the end of the XX-th century, it became clear, for example,
that in thermodynamics of dissipative structures time ceases to be a
simple parameter; it appears as the concept expressing rate and
direction of events309. Very interesting thought about time in human
dimension was provided by V. V. Nalimov and Z. A. Drogalina in
the work “The Reality of Unreal”. V. I. Vernadsky warned about the
“strangenesses” of the social space; he wrote:” It seems to me,
among new general concepts caused by the fact of descriptive
natural sciences especially two of them should attract attention:
firstly, the condition of space; and secondly, the rightism and
leftism. They are closely connected, the core of them is the
condition of space"310. Back in his time Helmholtz underlined that
the physical space differs from geometrical as possessing own
characteristics – the rightism and leftism. So appearance and
functioning in our political life the right and left-wing parties is a
material expression of properties of the social space.
Thus, it is known that “geometrically rightism and leftism can
be observed only in space in which the vectors are polar and
enantiomorphous. Apparently, absence of straight lines and strongly
pronounced curvature of forms of life is connected with this
geometrical property”, – underlined V. I. Vernadsky311. And it
means that in social organisms we deal with the space which is
unfitting the space of Evklid, and fitting one of forms of space of
Riman.
In 1933 the Soviet physicist professor Friedman theoretically
proved that Einstein’s constructions suppose abrupt changes of
309 Добронравова И.С. Синергетика: становление нелинейного мышления. –
К.: “Лыбидь”, 1990. – c. 80
310 Вернадский В.И. Философские мысли натуралиста.- М.: Наука,1988. – С.257
311 Вернадский В.И. Философские мысли натуралиста.- М.: Наука,1988. – С.31.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
292
essence of understanding spaces, its pulsation, that is in other words
that such space can naturally be compressed and extend.
Surprising organizational properties are also manifested by the
social form of time. The difference between physical time and social
from of time is, as V. I. Vernadsky specified it, that “now
measurement of time in its deepest and interval is based not on
motion, but on change of properties of a body or phenomenon."312
It is necessary also to take into account the theory of the Soviet
astrophysics N. A. Kozyrev, that in this condition new properties of
the space environment reveal themselves; time becomes material
force (energetic flows of time), the organism perceives time flows,
the degree of their density, specificity of the organization. So-called
“Kozyrev’s condition” appears, that is that very manifestation of
weak intellectual connections and interactions.
When we consider the given issue, we ought to apprehend
specific 
spatial-temporary 
characteristics 
of 
modern 
social
organisms. V. N. Kostyuk correctly stresses that, at times their
information field goes beyond interstate borders. If at the first stage
of the information society development national information fields
emerge, then they afterwards are gradually integrated into the
uniform worldwide information field, in which the open information
circulates freely. The explanation seems evident: only in case of an
omnitude and absence of obstacles for information flow, the
information field can realize its latent possibilities completely.
We support this idea that the “information field de-facto is a
subspace of social space, and thus, it requires the characteristics of
the last to be understood”313.
The concept of social time is also fundamental. It is rather
individualized and very much different from astronomical time314.
312 Вернадский В.И. Философские мысли натуралиста.- М.: Наука,1988. – С.336
313 Костюк В.Н. Информация как социальный и экономический ресурс. –
М.: ИЧП “Издательство Магистр”, 1997. – С.32-33.
314 Хайдеггер М. Исследовательская работа В. Дильтея... 10 докладов //
Вопросы философии. – 1995. – №11. – С.90-112

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
293
There is also the qualitative distinction between short and long
intervals of social time. The behaviour of individuals, groups, states
and societies can considerably differ within the short and long time
intervals.
Summerizing it all, Kostyuk makes a suggestion that “there are
strong reasons for considering spatial, information and time
positions of social subjects together within the limits of the uniform
socioiformational space-time, or the SIST”315. To this idea, we are
also led by the properties of the mechanisms of the person – society
interinclusion, i.e. chronotops. We have spoken about them a little
bit earlier, when investigated possibility of existence of a social
organism as the dialectic contradiction.
The analysis of space and time as the SIST is especially
important for an information stage of development of social
organisms, when they disclose themselves to each other in a process
of creation of continental and intercontinental social structures. In
this case, the information becomes the basic social and economic
resource or the development factor.
Now it is possible to consider a way the so-called social life is
carried out. The essence of movement of the social world or social
life consists in the course of a global metabolism by objectified
processes and products. It appears that many of its properties can be
disclosed by such world philosophy of mind as functionalism.
However, the interactions are not alike. The analysis has shown that
in the social world, it is necessary to distinguish two directions of
exchange of the objectified products, and its four versions, that is,
by two in each direction. The exchange directions coincide with
vectors of the universum’s self-expansion. In other words, it is
possible to say that the exchange takes place in horizontal and
vertical planes.
In addition, we underline that a process of the social world self-
expansion in a horizontal plane is on a full scale reflected in works
315 Костюк В.Н. Информация как социальный и экономический ресурс. –
М.: ИЧП “Издательство Магистр”, 1997. – С.33.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
294
of representatives of the materialistic wing of philosophical thought
– K. Marks, F. Engels and V. I. Lenin, and in a vertical plane – in G.
Gegel’s works and works of other representatives of the so-called
idealistic wing of the world philosophical thought. As it becomes
obvious now, K. Marks and G. Gegel’s opposition is not justified,
not so much because of different methodological approaches to the
world explanation they used, but rather because of the planes of the
analysis of objects they studied.
Researchers of a modern period also specify the interaction
within different planes, however they interpret it differently. So, for
example, J.D. Pryliuk distinguishes a horizontal exchange
systematized by kinds of social interaction (material and spiritual
manufacture) and vertical – according to social levels of social
dialogue: the individual – group, the group – mass (class)316.
As practice proves, in a structure of the human person the
spiritual constituent prevails, and the material one is of a derivative
character. Simultaneously the known fact is understanding that on
the society part, on the contrary, prevails the material constituent,
while its spiritual opposite functions unstably and manifests itself
externally in a fragmentary way. This explains existing in practice
underestimation of culture and all that is connected with a content of
spirituality in a society. In everyday life the last one is materialized
through principles of management by means of cultivation of a
residual principle of financing the spiritual sphere.
Among four exchange processes, we distinguish two transitive
and two actually social ones. In a transition period two sub-
processes take place. The first of them is the reflexion, which
provides transformation of a universum from the lowest form to
actually space; the second – the management, which provides
transition from the higher one or space form to the lowest one. In
totality they represent the self-control of the social world.
316 Бойченко І.В., Куценко В.І., Табачковський В.Г. Соціальні закони та їх дія.
– К.: Наукова думка, 1995. – С.108

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
295
We relate labor and dialogue to social interaction, which
encloses the person into horizontal circulation of objectified
universum. All totaled they form what we call materially and
spiritually- oriented production. All together they form specific
process which we call the social metabolism, as within it the
exchange of objectified products takes place.
When contrasting those two metabolic flows, the leading role
appears to be played by the exchange proceeding in a vertical plane.
The attentive review of N. Berdyaev ’s works may prove especially
helpful in this context; he, in particular, wrote: “On the burning issue I
question myself.” whether this fallen world with eternally triumphing
evil, and with unreasonable sufferings sent to people can be possessed
of true, original reality ?... No tanks and destructive bombardments
could convince me of deep, primary and final reality taking place in
the world. For me it is only symbols of a different... I have a strong
feeling that this imposed given world does not settle a reality... that we
are surrounded by enigma... Our world, which is the only reality for
many, is settled, is represented to me as the derivative one ”317.
In addition, it appears that the form of the social world is
defined by latent structure of functional connections or interactions
of people, and actually is indistructible. It, the social form, is caused
by a need of interaction of people and disappears in case that
interaction stops. This explains identical forms of interaction in
different peoples, and in different historical periods of their life.
They are altered, as a rule, complicated and intellectualized by an
individual only. However, it cannot allow arbitrariness here. His
activity is directed by the dynamic function of an electromagnetic
field of the Earth. This is a kingdom of physics; therefore, it has the
power to provide an explanation of the given aspect of self-
expansion of a social world.
All this specifies the existence of a certain third reality, the
discussion of which we avoid today; otherwise, we should recognize
317 Бердяев Н.А. Самопознание. – М., 1991. – С.150 – 152.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
296
existence of either God, or existence of the third world in which the
electromagnetic nature or the strict logic form reigns. Earlier to the
description of processes of this highest level we successfully applied
a
category
“sense”
from the Semantic Universe, though
psychologists prefer to work with concept “the ideal form”,
sociologists – with concept “ideal”, philosophers – with the
Absolute. All it specifies the necessity to search the way leading to
the highest level which is obviously involved in macro level
processes.
All these are far not idle questions. Concerning last remark, for
example, opinions of researchers differ. In national literature the
point of view denying other stages in a universum’s self-expansion
is widespread. The basic argument here consists in considering “the
person, society to be the higher (highest) step of the matter
development” (V.V. Orlov), ”capable of infinite development,
without limits” (A.V. Lastochkin). At the same time A. D. Ursul, for
example, writes that “at a certain stage of development, there should
be a new form on the basis of the social one, which can be called
conditionally “supra -social” or “ post-social ”318. We should now
and we will try to clear up this dispute.
For this purpose in the further analysis, it is necessary to isolate
and separately to estimate a place and a role of each of following
four specific interactions: reflexions as exchange between people
and collectives, ethnos consciousness products; labor as exchange
of the structural information (products), dialogue as information
interchange in the course of spiritual production and management as
specific exchange of the administrative information in the course of
the organisation of social process. Thus, metabolic process in the
social world is carried out thanks to a substance and information
objectification. It means that in a social organism should exist two
original circles of exchange. One of them, which is based on a
circulation of objectified substances, is most likely to be the
318 Урсул А.Д. Человечество. Земля. Вселенная. – М., 1977. – С.205

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
297
commodity exchange, and another – the information one – is an
exchange of knowledge. Functioning together, they provide
morphogenesis, functioning and development of a social body.
However, in the scientific literature, there are also other
approaches to this question. So, for example, J. D. Pryliuk,
distinguishes three main, in his opinion, types of people’s universal
information interaction: autocommunication, or intrapersonal
process of the information exchange, parties of which are spiritual
formations of an individual – conscience, soul or “the second –
self”; interpersonal dialogue – intersubjective process of the
information exchange, parties of which are members of social group
act; mass dialogue – intersubjective process of the information
exchange of considerably large mass of people acting as remote
carriers of certain social statuses or roles319.
As the genetic analysis has shown, specificity of substantiality
of the social world is the level of self-movement of a universum,
which is based on universal material – spiritual interaction of the
people organised in social collectives. It should be clear, as any
level of a universum consists of material and spiritual components.
Only the form of the substance lying in the basis of the Universe is
undergoing changes. In this connection, it is also necessary to
distinguish the interaction of people based on material and
information substrata. This explains the existence of two various
systems of instruments of labour. In other words, in the social world
essentially, it is necessary to distinguish these two kinds of
fundamental interactions of people. One of them proceeds in a
horizontal plane, and another, as the subject is located at different
levels, – in a vertical plane.
Thus,
the basic problem of rational understanding and
description of the social world is that its elements are more similar
to energy or forces, than to substantial formations, but actually they
are realised as something capable of revealing itself as though it was
319 См.: Бойченко І.В., Куценко В.І., Табачковський В.Г. Соціальні закони та
їх дія. – К.: Наукова думка, 1995. – С.107-108.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
298
something of substantial character. “Energy” and “force” are never
shown separately, but only in interrelation, as if “synergies” or “co-
operating factors” (samskara).
The present investigation covers the issue of what substantive
form of a universum underlies the social world. The answer here is
unequivocal. The social world consists of the first nature twice
transformed by an individual which we have got used to accept for
the natural form. In the beginning the natural form is subjectified in
a human body in the form of the potential social world, and then is
objectified in the form of the valid social world.
However, in an everyday life the person, who is not aware of all
riches of self-movement of a universum, concentrates the attention
to its separate moments, and as a result we have absolutization of its
either noumenal fraction, or its phenomenal fraction of process of
efficiency. As V.Shmakov writes: “If the society is artificially
focused on noumenal only, we receive the church; if – only on
phenomenal – we receive an economic state. But both essences are
only utopias, abstract ideas,
for in life the noumenal and
phenomenal are always found in organic associativity"320.
Further he writes that “usually the church and the state are not
able to outline correctly a field of the activity and constantly
interfere with one another’s areas. The church tries to replace with
itself the state, and on the contrary, the state tries if not to replace,
anyway, to subordinate the church, to force it to serve particular
goals"321. Therefore, usually the “church” is called the noumenal-
phenomenal organism with the centre of gravity in the noumenal,
and the “state” – with the centre of gravity in the phenomenal. In the
first case, we naturally get the hypertrophicity of noumenal values
and full ignorance of the phenomenal ones. The most they can get is
to be left at purely office position. In the second case, at
320 Шмаков В. Закон синархии и учение о двойственной иерархии монад и
множеств. -К.: “София”, Ltd, 1994. – С.186.
321 Там же. – С.187.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
299
hypertrophicity of phenomenal values and ignorance of the
noumenal ones, absolutely similar picture turns out. It is rather easy
to provide a number of historical examples to illustrate two cases.
The fact is quite obvious that movement in a horizontal plane is
inter transfer of objectified material and spiritual components of the
social world. Expansion of the first one is represented by the
materialistic direction of philosophical thought, and the second – by
the idealistic one. By co-operating in this qualitatively new
condition, that is, objectified condition, the material and spiritual
components generate that it is called the cultural-historical process.
Interpreted in this way substantivity of the social world
predetermines more or less uivocal understanding, on the part of a
substratum of social movement in function of which act the person
and its organization. Thus, one of conditions of the social world
self-expansion is that the person should reach certain degree of
maturity. There are the parameters following from a biological
phase of his development, and despite how paradoxical it may
sound, from a condition of the social or public form as means of
self-expansion of the person mixed on a biological substratum.
Basic biological parameters of a substratum of the social motion
follow from the analysis of person’s intellectual aspect. As it has
appeared, he should possess all basic attributive qualities of
substance – a universum, the major among which are metabolism,
heredity, 
reflexion, 
reflexivity, 
receptiveness, 
thinking,
informativeness, power consumption and others. To the social
parameters, defining degree of maturity, are included functional
bodies, entropy, negentropy, activity, self-control, self-organising
and others. Biological and social qualities, operating together, have
provided a process of generation of unique in form and content
process of universum’s self-movement called by researchers the
social or second nature.
Originally social world gets the potential form and for the time
being it is hidden within the structure of the person. The mechanism of
this transformation we discovered thanks to becoming familiar with the

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
300
person’s shape-formation, and also with the person’s morphogenesis.
The mechanism of emerging and sustaining of the potential social
world within the person’s structure became clear thanks to construction
of a complete model of the person’s semantic structure. It is necessary
to admire T. Parsons discovery; he has specified exclusively fruitful
role of action in generation of the social world.
Theoretical analysis of essence of the social world has shown
that the creator of its valid form, that is of real social world can be
the collective subject only, because by its nature the sociality is the
realized corporate principle. We are left to add the only thing, it
should be an active subject.
Therefore, Toynbee is absolutely correct writing the following:
“The analysis we carried out has revealed the essential moment of great
value for the further research (history – V. B.). The analysis of “action
fields “and” action carriers “assumes not only that “the substance or the
Universe material “is” activity, not matter, but also that this activity is
strictly organized and directed. The micro-cosm brings goal-oriented
action in macro-cosm; the action, being the main theme, of human
history, represents the pressure of separate people upon the general
basis of corresponding action fields, the basis which we call a society.
The action field – and in addition, intersection of some sets of
fields – cannot be an action source itself. The society cannot be a
source of social action, but the separate individual or group of
individuals the fields of actions of who make a society can ....
A society is not and cannot be anything other, than the mediator
to help separate individuals to interact. It is individuals, not societies
that create human history"322.
In this connection we share the point of view of those
researchers who consider the subject, in this case, to be the groups,
collectives, ethnos, and peoples. The last one not only produces the
social form, but also split it in levels. So, public life, according to a
way of realization, generates a public organism which in literature is
322 Тойнби А. Дж. Постижение истории. – М.: Прогресс, 1991. – С.253-354

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
301
synonymic to the concept of a “social organism”. And, in a sense, it
is true.
In a reality a social form of movement of a universum contains
some hierarchical level. At each level it can get organismic form
thanks due to the fact that people are being organised in
microgroups and microcollectives for the decision of their vital
problems. On the basis of such cooperation of intellectual efforts,
the hierarchy of power flows emerge that eventually turn into a
specific form of a universum’s motion. In such a way we can
explain autonomism of kinds of intellectual energy on which the
esoteric philosophy insists. Being integrated, they form the organic
system termed us family of social organisms. If to consider N.
Berdiaev’s remark stated in his work “Russian idea” that “organicity
is hierarchism”, then the social world has structural levels, and it
means that the community of social organisms consists of social
individuals of different kinds and types. The historical background
we provided at the very beginning of the work has proved it to be
true.
The
general tendency of self-expansion of the social
phenomenon is also well revealed. It can be characterized today in
such parameters as globalisation of planetary life, escalating of its
capacity, intensification and focus on the Space. To understand it
more deeply, it is necessary by means of the theoretical analysis to
establish an axis of evolution of the social form of motion, its
border, vector and character.
The research clears up one of the deepest questions of
understanding of conditions of our life, namely, where are central or
intense points in which quantum leaps in universum’s self-
movement take place. We have all reasons to believe that the
universum possesses qualitative nodosity in places of the material
and spiritual interosculation. And it is observed in overall
circulation of a universum. The first time we have faced it at an
explanation of the origin of protein-nucleinic form of life. But we
observe the same qualitative shift also at interosculation of the

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
302
material and spiritual within the structure of a biological human
body. Now we have the right to expect the increment of a new
quality, and it takes place at interaction of the material and spiritual
production in the social world. It means that the axis of evolution of
a universum passes exactly where the material and spiritual, existing
in various conditions, is found in a condition of separation.
So, if the material and spiritual production is a split into two
parts universum, they must be integrated again into an organic unity.
However, the specified components have gone so far, that only a
unique force can bring them together, the force, enabling us to see
the whole where it is practically impossible to be seen with the help
of other means. We claim that the means able to unite them into an
organic unity is a theoretical construction which is logical or
reasonable link or mind. The link itself is a functional body.
Herefrom the fundamental conclusion directly follows: to the
logical within the social world should be included everything
unveiling fundamental, essential connections, and also tendencies,
realization of which provides for the evolution of social organism as
a form of reasonable life.
In addition, we should thus pay particular attention to the
bringing to the single basis the material and spiritual production,
which leads to the important consequence. Its essence is that the
movement of the logical within the structure of the social world
serves as a basis for the formation of a qualitatively new stage of
self-development of universum (See scheme 3.1.).
Based on the algorithm established in the process of exploration
of the social world, at the supra-social level the same components
are to be distinguished. We are now speaking of the third world, the
third nature and specific form of a universum’s self-motion. We
believe that in a way of predictive exploration, we can put forward
working hypotheses concerning the essence and the content of the
third level of a universum’s self-expansion. But in the beginning we
will try to make a collective portrait of the third world on the basis
of available information.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
303
Second
Nature
3.1  Heuristic model of the process of generation  of the third
world
Scheme. 3.1 Heuristic model of the process of generation of the
third world
Particular interest thereupon represents the well-known dialogue
in Platon’s “Timæus “; we remind that it is evidence from the IV-th
c. B.C.323 To begin with, as Timæus marks, we should distinguish
two things: “some things always are, without ever becoming” and
“some things become, without ever being”; the first – “If and only if
a thing always is, then it is grasped by understanding, involving a
rational account”; the second – it is grasped by opinion, involving
unreasoning sense perception, “never exists actually”. If as a
“prototype” as a tamlete, Demiurge fashions after the first one – “all
what is necessary becomes beautiful”, otherwise – “flawed”. Clearly
that the first is understood as transformation of semantic shape of a
universum on a vertical level; the second one is understood as its
physical modification at the horizontal level.
323 Платон. Тимей // Сочинения . В 3т. – М.: Мысль, 1971. – Т.3. – Ч.1. – С.445-
542, 647-676
MIND
System of self-
regulation of the
second nature
Spiritual
production
Material
production
HUMANITY
Social community
Human being
Scheme.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
304
We leave for researchers the right to make comments on issue
of origin of worlds in works of other authors and, in particular,
possibility to comment herein the well-known Trinity (Trinity of
God: the Father – the Son – the Holy Spirit) in the theological
doctrine. We will dwell shortly only on the origin of G. Skovoroda’s
“the world within the world”
324, conducted on methodological base
of pantheism. According to G. Skovoroda’s interpretation, there are
two natures (matter and form) that constitute all three worlds:
macrocosm (nature), microcosm (person), symbolical (Biblical);
thus, in the last one “gathering of creatures” represents matter, and
through the sign moves to the form, the divine nature; and in this
world there is life and death, flesh and spirit etc.325 The idea of
pantheism and the creative beginning of the person in their internal
connection finds also its reflexion in T. Shevchenko’s “Diary”,
1857-1858: the will and force of soul cannot be shown without
matter326.
In the XX-th century K. Popper put the contrast strokes on the
canvas, depicting the third level of a universum’s self-movement of.
The third world represents, in its opinion, a product of human
activity. It constantly grows. At the same time it is very important to
pay attention to its considerable autonomy. “The world of language,
assumptions, theories and reasonings (i.e. logical – V. B.) – is
shorter, the universum of objective knowledge (it is distinguished by
us) is one of the most important universum created by the
person”327.
We have direct evidence of human involvement in three
different worlds, described by Karl Marx, Karl Popper and other
324 Сковорода Г. Сочинения. В 2 т. – М.: Мысль, 1973. – Т.2. – С.16.
325 Шевченко Т. Дневник. 1857-1858 // Твори. В 5 т. – К.: Дніпро, 1979. -Т.5.-
С.22, 59.
326 Цит. по: Философия и методология науки: Учеб. Пособие для студентов
высших учебных заведений / Под ред. В.И. Купцова. – М.: Аспект Пресс, 1966. –
С.190.
327
Петрушенко
Л.А.
Единство
системности,
организованности
и
самодвижения. – М. Мысль, 1975. – С. 162

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
305
researchers. In contrast to Feuerbach, K. Marx, for example, the
human activities do not only “explain”, but “change”, that this
activity does not only belong to the spirit, but also to the nature and
material life of society. . The most important in K. Popper’s
construction is the accurate differentiation of three Worlds: the
World I – the world of physical objects; the World II – the world of
subjective experience; the World III – result of activity of the mind.
The latter world, as K. Popper says, can exist without being
materialized. Habermas, in turn, believes that “people live and rotate
in three different worlds, although these different worlds constantly
intersect in everyday life. Firstly, it is an objective world in which
the business relationships preside; secondly, it is the social world
with its standards and assessments, and finally the subjective world,
i.e., our feelings, hopes etc.”328
We have previously mentioned that the residents of the supra-
social level are meanings and products that contain logical
connections. This instance has already been indicated in the works
of other researches. It is necessary to mention the hypothesis of
N.M. Amosov that the mind should be viewed as an apparatus for
control of complex objects by criteria of optimality through the
activities with the models. The word “apparatus” thus includes both
the structure and algorithm"329
. All the elements of the mind are
material and structural. Relations between the elements (models) are
also structural. They may be permanent and temporary. Structures
are created from combinations of elements. Examples of structures –
“codes” – and elements: the genes of the nucleotides in a cell,
ensembles of neurons in the cerebral cortex, literacy in a society,
memory in a computer, meanings in Cosmos. In other words, thanks
to the social world (or social worlds!), our Universe is becoming of
a higher level of organizational structure. It thus becomes a non-
entropy object of Cosmos!
328
Монсон
П.
Современная
западная
социология:
теории,
традиции,
перспективы / Пер. с шв. – СПб: Издательство “Нотабене”, 1992. – С.327.
329 Вопросы философии. – 1992. – №6. – С. 51

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
306
According to K. Popper, the residents of the third (linguistic)
world are also represented by products of logic. He writes the
following in this regard: “The inhabitants of my third world are
primarily theoretical systems; other important residents here are
problems and problem situations. However, its most important
inhabitants... are critical reasoning and what might be called. the
state of discussions or the state of critical debate; of course, this
includes the contents of magazines, books and libraries”330
.
Let us imagine, K. Popper writes that all the products of human
activity and the memory about them has been illuminated, however,
libraries and our ability to perceive the content of the books has
been preserved. In this case the civilization will be restored
relatively quickly. But if the libraries are destroyed, it will take
millennia to restore civilization, i.e., everything will have to start
from the very beginning: “If someone had to start from that place,
where Adam started, he would be unable to go further than
Adam"331. These mental experiments show not only the importance
of the third world, but its autonomy. Certainly, the third world is
created by the person. However, he does not always give account of
his actions, and the results of his activity start to conduct their own
life, in unexpected ways. “Our theories, K. Popper writes, act just
like our children: they tend to become more and more independent
of their parents. Our theories can do to us what our children do: we
can acquire of them more knowledge, than we have initially
invested into them”.332
Of course, the natural numbers were created by a human, but
then he him becomes the object of study, which generates a vast
330 Цит. по: Философия и методология науки: Учеб. Пособие для студентов
высших учебных заведений / Под ред. В.И. Купцова. – М.: Аспект Пресс, 1996. –
С. 190
331 Философия и методология науки: Учеб. Пособие для студентов высших
учебных заведений / Под ред. В.И. Купцова. – М.: Аспект Пресс, 1996. – С. 190-
191
332 Философия и методология науки: Учеб. Пособие для студентов высших
учебных заведений / Под ред. В.И. Купцова. – М.: Аспект Пресс, 1996. – С. 191

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
307
amount of knowledge about the numbers. The same can be said
about any scientific theory. The objects of the third world are not
only their actual reality, but the potential of their development”333
It now becomes clear that in order to discover the essence,
content and form of supra-social level of motion of the universum, it
is necessary to master the category of self-development or self-
disorganization of the universum, which in function is opposed to
self-organization. Although its introduction to the research practice
is the task for the future, it is still possible with a high degree of
confidence to say that we are now dealing with the specific nature,
the logical. The products of the Semantic Universe, the meanings,
are created from it. At this particular level there emerge new
relationships and objects, which in science are called “quasi-
relationships” or “quasi-objects”.
“A contemporary philosopher, N. P. Pchelin writes, is interested
not only in the economic relations, which a human is a part of, but
the impact of their “image”, the model of these relationships on the
economic behaviour of the subject, or what is understood as “quasi-
object” and “quasi-objective” relationship. Therefore, if simulation
of the “social organism” as an intersection of the mass of ordered
“objectified” social connections both vertically and horizontally is
possible, then this scheme should be supplemented by “quasi-
objective” relations: between the exchange of goods and human
rationalization of this process, between the real implementation of
power and its rationalization, between human behaviour and its
motivation”334.
All above-stated convincingly testifies that object of steadfast
attention of the western schools of social thought not casually was
language (a “linguization” phenomenon of philosophy which is still
333 Философия и методология науки: Учеб. Пособие для студентов высших
учебных заведений / Под ред. В.И. Купцова. – М.: Аспект Пресс, 1996. – С. 190-
191
334 Пчелин Н.П. Социальная реальность как “квазиобъект” // Дух і Космос:
наука і культура на шляху до нетрадиційного світосприймання / Кол. авторів під
кер. проф. І.З. Цехмістро. – Харків, 1995. – С. 73.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
308
known as a linguistic bias in philosophy), even not so much
language, and quasiobjects of human life which are formed in
language horizon.
The issue of a form of universum’s self-motion is of a special
importance. We believe that the universum replaces the social form
of motion with the energetic form. The energetic form of movement
of the universum, integrally following from its social phase, is as
though its natural continuation.
The similarity of structures of the second and the third nature
emerges on the basis of the fact that in the process of universal
interaction with the necessity a process of mutual reflection occurs,
resulting into the establishment of structural correspondence
between the systems. It emerges due to the fact that reflection is the
basis where processes of self-regulation and reformation of
information occur as a universal means of interconnection of
various in nature subsystems of the universe.
The reflecting structure by means of information processes
impacts the surrounding, systems causing some structural changes
within them, that is controlling them. Hence appears the objectivity
of the third nature or God, Allah, Mahomet, and other persons
dictating us particular standards of life.
With reference to the considered above, we have every reason
to believe that
the social world does not complete the
transformation of the universe, but serves only as a basis for the
emergence of the logical nature, the third world, and energetic or
electromagnetic form of motion of the universe.
Now, due to a system of working hypotheses, we have set the
boundary of the social world, second nature, or social form of
motion of the universe.
The lower margin of the social world can be distinguished based
on several properties, namely, the nature, the type of energy or even
the indirect attribute. It seems to us reasonable, proceeding from the
semantic structure of the individual, to treat the emerging of the
sensations as the bottom border. It is starting with feelings, that a

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
309
human breaks with the first nature and then continues under the
influence of the subjectified first nature or the emerging potential
social world. The margin of first nature can be clearly seen here,
while the beginning of the second nature we perceive intuitively as
nothing else yet is visible.
In connection with this matter, it is appropriate to cite the
remark of V. I. Lenin regarding the causes of the processes
emerging in the organism, causing sensations. Are not these
“processes” related to the organism – outside world substances
exchange?, –V .I. Lenin asked. – Could be such exchange possible
without an objectively correct idea about the external world
provided by the sensations of the organism?335
The upper margin of the social world is fixed by the advent of
supra-collective formations and impersonal form of social
objectivity. We have already mentioned it above. Probably, the
organ of self-regulation of the social world, used as a criterion for
detecting and comparing the meanings contained in the signal
coming from its lower levels, already belongs to the logical nature,
i.e., to the third, supra-social level. Here the situation is similar to
the one with defining of an upper margin of the first nature, when a
human being its product actually controls its development and
contains the potential social world.
Thus, summarizing all above said, the social world begins
with human sensations and ends with a verge behind which begins
morphogenesis of quasi-structures of the organ of its self-
regulation.
Movement in the vertical plane is the self-
development of the universe on micro-, macro- and mega-levels. It
generates the energy and information field of Earth or produces
free energy, i.e., the force capable of doing the work outside the
Earth. It is probably intended for the generation of new life forms
in Cosmos.
335 Ленин В.И. Полн. собр. соч. – Т.18. – С.38.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
310
There is no doubt that this would happen again when the human
intelligence has reached the critical power in the phase of
neocosmogenesis. The last assertion does not only assume the
possibility of spreading of the collective consciousness beyond
Earth, but also the emergence of a qualitatively new phenomenon,
the monolith of the cosmic mind. There are different designations
for it, “Cosmic civilization (N.S. Kardashov),”Omega Point” (P.
Teilhard de Chardin), etc. This is most likely to happen if Earth’s
population reached 15–20 billions of people. In the work “Cosmo-
planetary phenomenon of a Human” V.P. Kaznacheev and E.A.
Spirin, for example, predict the Big noosphere bang, leading to the
emergence 
of 
the 
monolith 
of 
the 
cosmic 
mind 
and
noocosmogenesis336.
It is also likely that correlation between Physical and Semantic
Universes is maintained through it. Further reproduction of the
process of self-transformation of the universe is the task of the near
future of philosophical science.
All the above allows to finish the discussion of hypotheses on
prolongation of the social world and proceed to philosophic
portraits of the second nature. This is necessary in order to rise
above our observable social reality and present an algorithm of self-
development of a social phenomenon in other, distinct from the
earth’s conditions. This has been mentioned above. This is
necessary to be done to be able to observe practically and explain
theoretically all possible genetic, morphological and functional
variations of the embodied form of mind, wherever it emerges,
within the Earth, our universe or in other Galaxies.
In order to proceed from the social world to the second nature, it
is sufficient to imagine the phenomenon of the mind as an integrity,
which means not only a product, but as productivity at the same
time.
336 См.: Казначеев В. П., Спирин Е.А. Космопланетарный феномен человека:
Проблемы комплексного изучения. – Новосибирск: Наука, 1991. – С.14-36.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
311
Then this integrity rises to the nature, namely, this identity of
the product and the productivity is denoted by the concept of nature,
even in ordinary discourse.
Nature as a product (natura naturata, or the created nature) is
called an object (empery studies only it). The nature of the
productivity (natura naturans or the creative nature) is called the
subject (is studied by the theory of philosophy). It is commonly
understood that the product obscures the productivity, while in
philosophical, productivity, on the contrary, overshadows the
product.
Since the object is never absolute, then the essence of the
second nature should be something completely biased. In our case,
the role of such basis is performed by the original human
productivity, not only the source of activity, but the owner of the
produced products. However, in different conditions of Cosmos the
objectivator of the first nature or its analogues can be represented by
completely different entities, the producers of the mind. In this case,
they can produce products of the mind even more effectively than
the Earth’s humanity does.
But the common thing that classifies them as a part of the
second nature, is productivity, which we understand as a process of
the mind creation, and a product as a thing, which the mind is
materialized into. Therefore, it directly follows from the above that
we should consider this particular phase of the universe,
synthesizing the firstborn material and spiritual bases into the mind,
presenting them as productivity and product. The dualism of the
second nature on productivity and product should be presented as a
universal duality of the bases, which nature uses to be constantly
active, and which prevents it from dissolution in its product; a
universal dualism as a principle of any explanation second nature –
just as necessary, as the concept of nature itself. We combine it well
with the dual nature of the original substance.
Initially the second nature is the productivity alone, therefore,
there cannot be anything definite within it (as any definition is

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
312
negation), and the emergence of products by means of it, therefore,
cannot occur. In order for the products to emerge, productivity
should be transformed from the vague into the definite, and so
should be removed as the pure productivity. If the grounds for the
definite productivity were outside the nature, the nature would not
have originally been the absolute productivity. The non-definition is
removed and is restored each moment. Therefore, the mind acts
within both resting and moving social formations. Duality as a basis
of the world we observe enables us to assume that within the
structure of the planetary social organism, two kinds of processes
and two kinds of products should be found. One of them is material
in origin, and a thing will be its product, and another is spiritual in
origin, the meaning will be its product.
If a biological organism as an organic integrity is not only a
product of the dialectical interaction between physical and spiritual
family of organisms, which we are to analyze in terms of a specific
object, but also productivity, that is a specific process; consequently,
there can never be absolute identity within the above mentioned
integrity, as identity would lead to the absolute transition of the
productive nature into the nature as a product, i.e. to the absolute
calmness.
Social body as a productive product can exist only under the
influence of external forces, for only thus productivity is interrupted
and faces an obstacles, preventing it from disappearing within the
product. A special environment is a prerequisite for these external
powers. They are to exist in the unproductive world, i.e. in the basis.
However, this world should in all respects be fixed and invariable.
Such specific grounds for the reasonable phase of the universe is, as
showed above, is a reasonable living matter, a human, in particular.
In this case, it is reasonable living matter due to its attributive
qualities that provides for the pulsation of the second nature.
It is extremely important for development of the theory of the
social organism that we view the exchange of activity between
people as the productivity of the second nature. In the pure

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
313
productivity of the second nature there is nothing indiscernible
beyond the split, the productivity split within itself creates the
product. This means that in the process of exchange of activities, we
should distinguish two opposite types of activities stemming from
the impact of the two sources, which form the foundation of our
Universe. And we have two kinds of such activities. They are labor
and communication, directed by thinking of a person and using
physical human organism as an instrument for implementation of its
plans.
Since the absolute productivity is directed only at the
production itself, by itself, not at the production of something
definite, the trend of the second nature, through which the product
emerges, will be a negative trend of productivity.
In nature, to the extent that it is real, there cannot be exchange
of activity without a product, as well as there can be no product
without the exchange of activity. Nature can only approach to both
extremes. And we are further to illustrate the way it does it.
Productivity as such appears only at times when the margins are
placed. The bounders are defined by senses emerging in a latent
way, due to local dynamic functions of local sites of an
electromagnetic field of the Universe. Here takes place the process
similar to photosynthesis in the first nature with the only difference
that there it occurs in a range of visible radiation as the sun ray is
perceived by sense organs of the person; while here it occurs at the
expense of an invisible spectrum of space energy. We will remind,
how painful are for the person even insignificant fluctuations of
general electromagnetic field of the Earth, known as magnetic
storms.
What is everywhere and in everything, that is nowhere.
Productivity is only restricted by the limitation. In other words, only
limited by a subjective goal the activity serves as an approach to the
product. It is the sense enclosed in the goal that can limit and does
limit activity of the person practically. And here he cannot trans-
pass the limits of his biological organism development. It means

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
314
that, with the maturation other senses will become available to him.
It will be manifested in practice by setting inaccessible before goals
in practical activities, for example, free moving across Space.
What is everywhere and in everything, that is nowhere.
Productivity is only restricted by the limitation. In other words, only
limited by a subjective goal the activity serves as an approach to the
product. In nature, there can be neither pure productivity, nor pure
product. The first is the complete denial of any product and the
second is a denial of any productivity. Consequently, the second
nature should initially be something transitional between the first
and the second and we are therefore, arriving at the concept of
productivity, which is at the stage of its transition into a product, or
a product, productivity of which is infinite. If we attempted to find
productivity as a reasonable infinity within the second nature, it
would be society as it represents a set of dialectic interactions of
individuals as free producers of mind. They are in no way restricted
in terms of time or space. The following question is bound to arise
here – what should be understood as the product here?
Since the above stated is already a product, then, being
productive, it can only be itself in one possible way. However,
definite productivity is (an active) formation. Consequently, the
third should be at the stage of formation. Then the unique third
component, the noosphere, contains everything produced by thought
and activity of Homo sapiens.
The noosphere thus has at least three stories. The mind of living
organisms functioning in the emerging or pre-human shapes forms
the foundation. There is no necessity to prove the existence of
animal mind as there has already been much talked about it in
scientific literature, in works by M. Weber, I. Prigogin and others337.
Then there is a medium floor where the human mind presides. A
common concept that human possesses the most powerful mind
appears here quite controversial. This unique noosphere construction
337 См.: Вебер М. Избранные произведения. – М.: Прогресс, 1990; Пригожин
И., Стенгерс И. Порядок из хаоса. – М.: Прогресс, 1986. – С. 19

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
315
is completed by a cosmic or extraterrestrial mind. Russian cosmists
were the first to acknowledge the existence o f extraterrestrial mind K.
E. Tsіolkovskiy defines Cosmic mind and its reason as everything that
is not only beyond the endless consequentiality of reasons and actions,
but that completes the nature.
The noospheric product appears as constantly being in the
process of metamorphosis. From the perspective of reflection it is, if
illustrated using the example of the first nature, just a material that
is always ready for transformation from the liquid state into the hard
thus never achieving the perfect condition. We are now dealing with
two types of products, those of material production, or, fixed, and
those of spiritual production, or free. The concept of product (fixed)
is opposite with the productive product (free).
Since this phase of the universe has to be eternally productive,
this transition should never happen completely. Consequently, even
though the product is always productive to a certain extent, there
still remains productivity, but not the product. The renovation of the
universum thus occurs.
The change of the field of activity as well as production of
different kinds of products is caused by alternation of contraction
and expansion, i.e. by the pulsation of the quantum vacuum as its
attributive trait. This alternation is not a part of the universe. It is the
universe itself and the first stage of transition of productivity into
the product. The third component, as it has been already mentioned,
is the quantum vacuum, the universum, the human.
The product emergence can only be achieved by cessation of
alternation, i.e. by means of the third component that establishes this
alternation. Therefore, the universe at the lowest stage (first
potency) would be such an alternation, viewed in the state of peace
and balance, and, on the contrary, the universe could be risen to a
higher level if the third component was eliminated. There is a
possibility that the eliminated products could be at different stages
of materiality or transition, or that these stages could be more or less

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
316
distinguishable in one product compared to the order. Consequently,
the dynamic succession of products could be thus illustrated.
Though the universum has acquired specific (individual)
products, the matter and the meaning, productivity as such should
still be clearly distinguished here. Productivity as the process is
assumed to not have completely transited into the product. The
existence of the product a continuous self-reproduction. And if a
human strives to provide for the renovation of the Semantic
Universe, Cosmos – for Physical Universe. We attempt to prove the
first statement with the help of social science. The second one has
already been proved by natural sciences, quantum physics, in
particular.
We face the problem to explain what prevents this absolute
transition, what prevents the transition from happening completely,
in order that productivity dissolves in the product, or what turns the
existence of the product into its continuous self-reproduction. We
will remind that it is a question of activity of the person which is
materialised in a social organism. It means that ability to live of the
last is constant manufacture and reproduction of ensemble of the
public relations which have developed in this or that historical
period.
It appears complicated to understand how the activity which
constantly strives for the product, always faces impediments
preventing it from complete transition into the product, given there
are no external influences, and the product should not reproduce
itself to exist. The universum necessity to restore the integrity of
initial sources, the material and the spiritual, appears a barrier here.
The extent and continuance of the implemented power aimed at
splitting the original universum, can be expressed in the following
way: the masculine and the feminine halves of a human are in
endless strive after unification, that is to restoration destroyed.
Not only the second nature, but the universum as a unity, both
avoid emptiness and strictly observe the content of integrity of
original foundation. We have previously viewed the Universe as the

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
317
absolute identity of duality. Now we are facing the antipode that
should be present within this identity. This antipode should reveal
itself, if it is possible to do, in the most deduced product. The
deduced product is an outward-directed activity. It cannot be viewed
as such without the inward-going activity within the same product
(reflected to itself). The existence of this activity, in turn, is
impossible if it is not rejected (reflected) from the outside in the
opposite direction.
These mutual transitions in the second nature are known as
thinking and labor. Since it is a rule of the total order, it should also
be found within the first nature. So, a plan or a project of a structure
in the form of information is directed at an object from the outside.
The information concerning the structure or internal organization of
an object is directed into the external environment.
The opposite trends emerging in the course of this resistance
include the principle of construction of all phenomena not only of
the social life, but of its any form. If opposite trends are disregarded,
social life turns out to be either absolute activity, or absolute
receptivity, i.e. it is originally possible for it to exist as a mutual
designation of receptivity and activity. Receptivity is here regarded
as borrowing and adapting of sociological and cultural forms that
have emerged in different countries or in different epochs by a
certain ethnicity or community; for instance, implementation of the
Roman law by Western European countries in the Medieval
Period338.
We shall further find out why social organism is a product of a
higher level of constructions. We have already explained the
emergence of the product through the pressure of the universe aimed
at the initial point of inhibition, due to which this point raises to the
level of filed sphere and thus acquires constancy. Here, since we aim
at the pressure of external nature not at a point, but at nature’s product,
a human, the first construction raises to the second potency, resulting
338 См.: Словарь иностранных слов. – 17-е изд., испр. – М.: Рус. яз., 1988. –
С.434.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
318
in the emergence of the doubled product. It will further be clearly seen
that organic nature is just a higher potency of the non-organic, as well
as super-organic nature is only a higher stage of the organic nature. It
presides over the organic nature due to containing a thinking product,
which has now become a collectively thinking product. It transforms
into the original functional body of the Universe.
Generally, if to look at biological and social forms of
functioning of a universum, they in their organic unity are
surprisingly 
similar 
to 
psychophysical 
and 
psychological
substructures of a human body. This leads us to the thought that
they should play a distinctive role in the Universe structure. But
then the Universe should be not simply a form of spatial
organization, or simply saying, of a universum’s existence, but
should have the property of Rational Live Beings.
From the very beginning we accept as a principle the following:
as the organic product is the product in the second potential, the
organic construction of the product must be, at least, the symbol of
the original construction of any product in general339. In order to fix
productivity in one point, the boundaries must be given. As the
boundaries are the condition of the former phenomenon, the cause,
due to which the boundaries are created, cannot be any more, it
returns to the depth (profoundness) of nature or of each product. If
in organic nature this limitation of productivity is given through the
means, which we call perceptiveness, and which must be thought as
the first condition of the construction of the organic product, in the
living nature – it is irritability, but for social form of life this
limitation is conditioned by the level of communication of people
and social formations with each other.
At the point, where this interchange stops, the productivity
transforms into the product, but at the point, where it recreates, the
product transforms to the productivity, because as the product must
remain permanently productive, the three stages of productiveness
339 См.: Шеллинг Ф.В.Й. Сочинения в 2 т. – М. : Мысль, 1987. – Т.1. – С.212

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
319
should be distinguished in it; the absolute transition of the
productivity into the product is elimination of the product itself. The
same as these three stages are distinguished in the individual as the
higher product of organic nature, they must be distinguished in all
the second nature, in this as though “secondary constructed matter”,
and the sequence of the stages of organization is the sequence of the
stages of the productiveness itself. On the basis of this dynamic
sequence of the stages in the individual, as in all organic and
superorganic nature, the construction of all organic and
superorganic phenomena340.
Thus, finally, we have approached to the solving of our problem
– to bring to the general expression the construction of the organic,
neoorganic and superorganic nature! Nonorganic nature can begin
from simple factors, the organic nature can begin from the products,
but superorganic, such as intellectual nature can begin only from
thinking products! Perceptiveness, irritability and the intention to
formation and communication participate in the common process of
excitement. It is important to remember that in human organism all
collisions of Physical Universe and the most complicated logical
constructions of Semantic Universe are reproduced by the means of
excitement. But if the reason is only higher functions of magnetism,
electricity and so on, for the latter the higher synthesis must exist in
the universum, but to search for it, certainly, is possible only in the
second nature, which, having been considered as some totality, is
absolutely superorganic. This is social organism!
As any other organism, the social organism has integrated in its
body all kinds and types of people relations and their products, so it
should be considered as the organic unity of productivity and the
product, the proportion between which it states by means of self-
regulation, which appeared not at once. The natural course of
development of the social life as the second nature system was the
reason for it.
340 См.: Шеллинг Ф.В.Й. Сочинения в 2 т. – М. : Мысль, 1987. – Т.1. – С.213.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
320
There appeared the necessity in it alongside the accumulation of
the products of the process of exchange by the activity between
separate people and social communities. The stage of functioning of the
products and the interaction of auxiliary processes within the main
process of activity as independent subjects, stated the problem of its
regulation, which transformed into the main problem of philosophy,
because for regulation it is necessary to know the reason and
consequence links between the two kinds of intellectual product.
The original split of the universe in the first nature leads to the
fact that the second nature is initially its own object. We thus mean
that the reasonable should be regarded as a whole, capable of trans
forming from being a pure entity into an object for itself, which in
the earth conditions leads to unlimited amplification of its potential
on this basis, and reaching the eternal process of transition of the
first nature into the second. The reverse transition occurs in the anti
world, that is at the opposite end of the Universe. The cosmic
entities, known to us as nebulae and black holes, are apparently, of a
significant importance in this process.
The existence of antiworld is beyond doubt, as scientists have
succeeded in synthesizing the substance of the antiworld on Earth.
Forty years have passed since receiving of the first antielectron
(positron) and an antiproton. And only in autumn of the 1995 in the
International Centre for Nuclear Research, CERN (Geneva) they
managed to put them together for a moment. Eight atoms of
antihydrogen, the real substance of the antiworld, were obtained341.
The original evolution is inhibited (without which it would
occur with infinite velocity) by initial duality embedded in the
identity of the base. That duality of the foundation is a secret means
through which the second nature, and hence, the social world,
acquire durability. Consequently, the absolute continuity exists only
for contemplation, but not for reflection. Contemplation and
reflection are opposites.
341 См.: Комсомольская правда, 1996. – 6 июня

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
321
However, if the nature of the mind is initially dual, opposite
trend should already be incorporated in the initial productivity of the
second nature. A positive trend should be countered by a negative.
Therefore, the social life generated by the second nature within the
planetary boundaries should be a never ending struggle of the
products of material origin and those of spiritual origin.
The same struggle (due to the duality of the substantial
foundation of the Universe) should take place in all other cases, the
only difference being that in within our planet we are observing a
transition of the materialization phase into a phase of
dematerialization, to be more precise, of the sensible matter into the
intelligible matter, while in the other part of the universe it is the
transition of intelligible matter into the sensible.
For the product to appear in general, two tendencies should
collide. The forms of the process can differ: from collaboration to
mutual exclusion or even destruction. In due time F. Engels noticed
that “interaction of bodies in nature... includes both harmony and
collision, both struggle and cooperation"342. However, as they are
supposed to be equal, for there is no basis to believe in opposite,
then, having met, they destroy each other; hence, the product will be
equal to zero, that is in this case does not emerge.
This inevitable, though till now insufficiently realised
contradiction can be solved only in the following way. Steady
presence of a product is impossible without its constant
reproduction. Each moment the mind as a product should be
considered repeatedly destroyed and reproduced. We see, as a
matter of fact, not the presence of a reasonable product, but only
its constant reproduction. From here follows a critical need to
make this process steady, and for this purpose we need the
artificial intelligence. Here it would be possible to assume that,
thanks to the artificial intelligence, the second nature tends to
get independence of the first nature. However, interruption of
342 Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.34. – C. 134

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
322
natural transition of the first into the second one will lead to
negative consequences for a universum. It is its self-damage. As
the self-regulating system it will reject it; therefore, it is more
correct 
to 
connect 
artificial 
intelligence 
creation 
with
strengthening efficiency of a dematerialization phase in
circulation of a universum or with acceleration of the general
circulation of a universum within the Universe borders.
Finally, finishing the genetic analysis of self-expansion of the
social world, it is very important to establish its place and a role in a
universum’s self-motion.
3.2. The concept of noosociogenesis as an idea of
philosophical account for the social organism’s
life-sustaining activity
Forces operating within the second nature have the same power
and destruction as well as within the first one. It was already
emphasized in due time by F. Engels, who wrote that “public forces
act in the similar way the forces of nature do. They work blindly,
violently, destructively until we learned them, understand them,
their actions, the direction and influence, and it depends on us only
to subdue them to our will, and use them to achieve our
objectives"343. To bridle these forces is possible only through
coming to realization the logic of social forces self-expansion. For
this purpose, a special theory presenting a design of the social world
as a complete system is needed. However, without it, the initial step
on a road to its development ought to be the philosophical
conceptual idea.
343 Маркс К., Энгельс Ф. Соч. – 2-е изд. – Т.20. – С.290.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
323
In other words, it is time to present our philosophical research main
practical and theoretical conclusions. They will elucidate the concept or
idea of a noosociogenesis as the explanatory principle disclosing the
main plot lines of the social phenomenon self-expansion.
Thus, considering all mentioned above, we can conclude that
the social world possesses two kinds of forms: potential and real.
Potential form is of a virtual character, it is hidden within the
person, and can be created and manifested only when certain
external conditions are available. The real form, on the contrary, is
external, has
duration in time,
and it
is also exposed to
decomposition and gradually disappears from the face of the earth,
leaving a trace in historical memory of people.
Thus, basis or main source of the social phenomenon is the
biological form of a universum’s self-motion process, and the
actualized social world is a condition of its self-expansion, acting by
the principle of external addition. All definitions of the personality,
as sets of the public relationships, having played a positive role in
the social world study, ought to be considered in the narrow range,
as the basis plays certainly the leading role here.
The social form disappears by an overflowing in a logical form ,
continuing existence in the withdrawn mode within the third nature.
Thus, it obviously keeps the properties, and it is capable, as any
grain, of growing in any corner of the Universe, adapting to the
content of geological climate.
It is important that in a process of the research study we came to
realization that a human being, as a product of the social world,
lives and works in two, the “value sense” and “space time”, plans,
and social world also self-extends in two planes: the vertical and
horizontal. Moreover, the gnoseological analysis showed that
combination of horizontal and vertical movement of the social
world is possible only in system of coordinates – theoretical and
practical. From here, it could be directly made the conclusion about
the importance of the value of unity of the theory and practice for
human life.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
324
Thus, it became clear that the social form, though showing
spontaneity, nevertheless possesses property of causality. Besides,
we have already showed that here two sorts of causality – natural
causality and free causality work. It is clear, that the duality of
determination is predetermined by the binary nature of the substance
foundation of the Universe and of its producer – a human
personality. It is clear that, if in the phenomenon the causality is
established, it means that it is possible to disclose also logic of its
origin, formation, functioning and development.
Peculiarity of manifestation of causality in the social world is
that there is natural and free causality at the same time . On the side
of a human personality, the natural causality prevails; it gradually
passes into free causality, and on the part of society, on the contrary,
free causality gradually turns into the natural one.
It is clear from the foregoing that spontaneity is replaced by
regularity as social material moves away from its source, human.
For instance, at the stage of social chaos, spontaneity is the master
of situation. But on the second stage of self-development of social
content within
social environment
the antagonism between
spontaneity and regularity is observed. It is here, transforming the
possible into reality with its content, substance reveals itself as a
creative power, and turning the real into the possibility, it reveals
itself as destructive power. But both are identical, creation destroys,
destruction creates, as the negative and positive, possibility and
reality are completely united in substantial need as Hegel (Science
of Logic) write.”344 There is virtually no room for spontaneity at the
third stage, or noosphere. Regularity dominates there.
The idea of stage-by-stage consideration of proportions in the
ratio of spontaneity and regularity in the social world is also put
forward by other contemporary researchers. So, for example, I. V.
Boychenko writes that the result of self-damage of the USSR made
possible to consider very urgent need of the analysis of public laws
344 Гегель Г. Наука логики. – М.: Мысль, 1971. – С.206.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
325
not in one, as earlier, ideological, but in three main directions or
dimensions. “The first one – traditional, classical. Another one can
conditionally be labeled as nonclassical, connected with disclosure
of nonlinear nature of society laws. And, at last, the third approach,
we will routinely call the philosophical anthropological, directed on
determination of originality of society laws, starting out of not
social whole, but of personality"345. We can comment on these three
types of laws: the first one is aimed to explain the activity of a
person, which we will apply to neosphere; the second, which is
clearing up the essence of synergetic character of the social world,
we correlate to the social environment; the third one is connected
with sense generating in human life, and it can be related to a stage
of social chaos.
At the same time it means that based on this algorithm, we
ought to analyze the cause and effect relationships of the social
world as existence of the moment of determination doesn’t raise any
doubts. G. Hegel expressed this relationship in known saying that
“everything that is reasonable, has to be”.
After all, if the content of the social world as we have showed
above, is determined on the basis – the potential social worlds – and
environmental conditions, and in the course of formation of social
systems neither that, nor another one disappears, then it is in action.
Probably, here all matter is that on each of three above-named
stages social action has different time of self-implementation. Here
time displays its artful character.
In social chaos the action, generated by certain people during
short-term and casual inter-contacts, is so little that the philosophy
and science can’t fix them in a form of steadily repeating,
objectively carried out relationships. They are, but toolkit of modern
science is so inadequate that it doesn’t fix them. As B. V.
Raushenbakh rightly points out, “there are laws, which is impossible
345 Бойченко І.В., Куценко В.І., Табачковський В.Г. Соціальні закони та їх дія.
– К.: Наукова думка, 1995. – С.9.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
326
to imagine, they can only be formulated"346. In such way he, by the
way, explain incomprehensibility of God.
For an explanation of nature of morphogenetic process one
should be contented with the figurative example introduced to
science by Engels and known as “a parallelogram of forces” .
Logic of social life, because of imperfection of gnoseological
tools, at this stage of a shaping whole is possible to comprehend
only because the tendencies are exposed. Today, the leading
tendency of social development is globalization, which can be
defined as “a series of processes that make up the sole world”. It can
now be characterized by such parameters as increase of capacity,
intensification and aspiration to Cosmos.
In the social environment we already deal with social
interaction of people which is mediated by elements
–
intermediaries from environment. Thanks to this circumstance,
social processes are already slowing down, and the repeating
relations become more stable. The bigger number of figures
participates in them – people or social groups. Their action is
already fixed by synenergetics as the science about self-
organization, certainly operating also in the social world. However,
here the nature of social interactions isn’t rationalized to a limit yet,
the purposes of many are blurred, and meanings aren’t clear. In this
case we deal with tendencies in self-expansion of social process
which it is necessary to call regularities.
We can now indicate other regularities observed by researchers
at the present stage of self-development of the social world. One of
the main laws is that a modern human does a transition from being a
Homo sapiens to a Homo inteilligens through sociobiological
changes, or according to Charles J. Lamsden and Edward O.
Wilson, by means of “genetically-cultural coevolution”.
Their principal difference is that Homo sapiens organizes and
lives on the basis of material production and produces mainly
346 Вопросы философии. – 1990. – №11 – С.169.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
327
material goods, while a Homo inteiligens develops spiritual
production and produces “temporary values”. The shift of spiritual
feelings to the forefront necessarily generates a new system of
values based on the spiritual production. This, imperceptible at first
glance, shift will inevitably lead to fundamental changes in social
life. According to J. Masuda, “a new human, Homo inteilligens
should now create a civilization that is completely different from the
one built by Homo sapiens”.347
Thus, it is necessary to recognize transformation buildup and
build-up of spent power capacity. Given that human personality
only began to show the attributive properties. In other words, it is
still at a stage of a cocoon! It is truth that the personality – is the
factor of self-expansion of the Universe growing by leaps and
bounds. After all, it is only a few thousand years old, while the
organic nature continues to exist for millions of years. His/her age is
only a couple of thousands of years, while the organic nature has
existed for millions of years. According to Russian cosmists, the
mankind is definitely likely to have a brilliant future, if human
receives all the necessary things for their further development!
On the basis of development of this pattern other trends are
emerging and becoming visible in the social environment. Factors
contributing to their emergence are the increase of share of robotics,
releasing a person from working in the sphere of material
production, intensification of communication between people,
computers and global state and interstate, as well as autonomous,
civilian communication networks, coupled by strengthening of the
role of intelligence of the individual due to human genetic and
cultural evolution. We have every reason to suppose that the break
in will take place at the time of creation of artificial intelligence.
And we have yet to grasp the complexity and depth of the latter
thesis because the progress of global humanity totally depends on its
implementation. Thus, an idea that the information civilization will
347 Масуда Й. Гіпотеза про генезис Homo intelligens // Сучасна зарубіжна
соціальна філософія: Хрестоматія. – К.: Либідь, 1996. – С. 355

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
328
be followed by era of anthropogenous civilization is now being
confirmed.
In the noosphere, which evolves from action of huge mass of
people, social processes mature and are repeatedly repeating. Here,
it is already possible to purposefully distinguish essential, necessary,
steady and repeating relationships within the social world systems
and subsystems. Consequently, it is necessary to distinguish the
separate law or even types of systems of laws from the regularities
comprising the social world palette of paints. In such case, the law
appears as a monophonic fragment of social interaction.
In the course of the research another important effect of an
animated origin is gained. We mean that, at last, we come to better
realization why the world philosophical thought offers such a
variety of philosophical currents, schools and trends in social
science, especially in sociology. In this case, the versatility and
many-stage character of a social form of a universum’s self-motion
process directly added to it. All of them developed in order to joint
active efforts to explain origin and a mechanism of functioning and
development of social life. But, to establish a place and a role of
each of them represents a separate problem, the solution of which
will undoubtedly enrich the results of our research.
Thus, the key to understanding logic of the social world is
hidden within a mechanism of evolution of social interaction of
people and social communities. In the context of this conclusion, the
history of classes, the class struggle, as well as ownership of means
of production, type of tools, and a character of productive forces, at
last, the content of the production relationships are special cases of
of people’s interrelation. The historian, for example, while
exploring the artful designs of the social world, tries to figure out
the people’s interaction trace, which is lost in time in a process of
realization of specific goals, or under the pressure of sidetracking
people’s interests.
It is necessary to notice that if laws, regularities and tendencies
as determinants of behavior of social elements, are organized into a

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
329
uniform denominator, they ought to be called logical, reasonable
link of mind, or simply reason. We should now mention the words
of I. Kant that intelligence is the ability that gives us the principles
of a priori knowledge. 348 In contrast to the logical connection, in this
process, there is nonlogical or irrational relationship.
The fundamental conclusion is bound to arise that the logical
within the social world should include everything unveiling
fundamental, essential connections, and also tendencies, realization
of which provides for the evolution of social organism as a form of
reasonable life.
When unveiling the logic of self-development of the social
world, we made extensive use of three well-known laws of
dialectics, namely, the law of unity and struggle of the opposites, the
law of transition of quantitative changes into qualitative, the law of
denial of the denial. However, we cannot limit it to social form of
motion of the universe only because they obviously have a more
general character. Their explanatory potential extends to other forms
of self-motion of the universe.
It means that for an exhaustive explanation of the social world,
it is necessary to indicate, at least, three specific laws which would
open a mechanism of formation of morphology, functioning and
development of the social whole.
Thus, it is clear that the morphogenesis submits to laws of self-
organization. It means that in future research of the social reality
formation, it is necessary to apply its already known laws to an
explanation of a stage of formation of public life. However, it is
necessary to see that “subtlety” of the studied matter is similar to the
king’s illusive dress from known fairy tale; therefore, relying on
intuition the results should be carefully verified by logical toolkit.
Functioning has to be explained by the law akin to the second
law of thermodynamics, which indicates a ratio of entropy and
negentropy in a social body. It is also not a simple thing to do, as
348 Кант И. Критика чистого разума. – М.: Мысль, 1994. – С. 44

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
330
perception in practice of social processes is possible only due to
feelings of perception of an individual. The intelligible matter,
which makes identical impact on everybody, is estimated by us
differently. Hence we make an important conclusion that we have to
be ready both physically and psychologically to catch the slightest
fluctuations of spirituality. However, today we live in such roar of
guns and information “noise”, that even the thought to perceive the
spirituality movement with human feelings seems unreal. The
mankind should reduce cardinally the stress potential, if it wants to
pass to qualitatively new level of development, that is to begin move
intensively within the spirituality plane.
At last, it is possible to explain further development of human
population in cosmological scale only on the basis of the idea that
human life doesn’t end ridiculously on Earth, and has logical
continuation in the Semantic Universe. For this purpose it is necessary
to make an attempt to study a social form of the universum’s
movement not only on the basis of regularities of self-organization,
but also with the laws of self-disorganization. Here the absurd is less,
than it can seem at first sight. The dialectics, after all, proved that
destruction of the one, is, at the same time, creation of the other. Thus,
if to consider the social life be more perfect, than biological, it is
possible to assume that semantic life is richer than social. To probe the
available for our comprehension margin of a universe is a function of
philosophical knowledge. In it is our need for it, fascination of work
on the first line of the Truth comprehension, its complexity as the
research toolkit, and the charm of the results giving primary idea of
what is hidden behind the horizon of development, and will become
tomorrow available to social science.
So, the concept of a noosociogenes presented here should be
considered as the matured in the course of philosophical research
explanatory idea of a social organism’s life-sustaining activity. To
turn it into a harmonious theory of a noosociogenesis, it is necessary
to enrich considerably our knowledge about dialectic contradiction,
which is the cornerstone of a social organism.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
331
CONCLUSION
The outcome of the research of the social world philosophical
aspects consists in elaboration of a new conceptual approach to
explanation of genesis, nature, essence, contents and form of the
social world. It differs from the approaches which have existed for
an explanation of the second nature before. Need for it is dictated by
storming crisis in human race’s social development. Its novelty
consists in substantiating the holistic approach to explanation of
social reality based on the binary basis of the Universe; it allows us
to integrate all known forms of the universum’s movement in an
organic unity. The proof of the quantum-wave nature of social
relationships not only brought a social form of the movement into
line with physical and chemical forms, but also confirmed existence
of a field form of life on the planet.
This research, certainly, doesn’t make it possible, yet, to resolve
the topical problems of updating the social life within the existing
forms of its organization in a near future. It only focuses researchers
on a field form of social life, a leading role of the personality within
it, as a carrier of social chaos, spontaneous nature of ongoing
processes, and subtlety of the toolkit necessary for regulation of
public life. But its greatest effect is most likely to be evident as
realization of the place and role of the social world in the
universum’s self-movement.
Theoretical novelty and practical value of the research comes
out of the fact that it is the holistic philosophical study of the social
life of the planetary humanity which is realized on the qualitatively
new world outlook and ideological background assumption of
theoretical 
explanation 
of 
the 
universum’s 
self-expansion
mechanism.
It means that the philosophy is being enriched with qualitatively
new ideological and methodological approaches to reflection upon
new knowledge about the universum. The philosophical category

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
332
“organism” receives a significant increase, due to theoretical
development of the specific concept “social organism”. The
opportunity comes to theoretical justification of the general, special
and individual in organisms of different types: physical, biological,
social, logical and others.
Social philosophy is being enriched with the concept of self-
expansion of the social world, which at the same time is
philosophical basis of the theory of noosociogenesis. It brings
research thought closely to understanding the mechanisms of
ontogenesis and phylogeny of social organismal forms, and also to
development of social technologies of designing and elaborating of
social organisms.
Modern social science significantly comes closer to scientific
development of social and logical forms of a universum’s motion.
However, for science it is left to resolve one of the most complex
issues – the issue connected with an elementary particle of these
forms of a universum’s motion; without this it isn’t capable of
developing the world. The last statement is correct, despite the
existing views that its establishment is an equivalent to discovering
the “perpetuum mobile”.
Discovery of elementary particles carriers of social and logical
forms of movement will get the natural sciences and, first of all,
certainly, physics involved into research of a universum.
Practice activity, in its turn, is directed toward the developing
in the nearest future the effective technologies of optimization of
mechanisms of functioning and development of social organisms of
various type: the elementary, specific (idustrial), generic (state),
continental, intercontinental and, at last, complete planetary
organism, and also mechanisms of intra-formation and inter-
formation movements of social organisms.
Overall, the system of management, under appropriate program
and mathematic assistance, gains greater perspective and freedom to
accomplish the following: to imitate the systemic development of
economic, social, political, and ideological processes within the

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
333
framework of not only separate countries but regions as well; to lead
effective searching and regulatory forecasting of social progress of
commonwealth and its particular elements; to specify with the aid of
model of social organism of a state a system of laws, construct
models of different subsystems of such organism; to conduct the
operations of projection and construction of social processes; to
specify the objects of social science and lead the preparation of
personnel for the XXI-st century based on other, than current,
ideological and methodological foundation, etc.
In other words, the present research is still distant from solution
of today’s problem; it only creates a world outlook basis for
transition of mankind to the XXIst century. This is to be expected,
because a deductive way of research is always long; however, it is
reliable, because it is not the isolated facts but the nature of
phenomenon that serves as the proof.
The most perspective direction for further research of the social
world, which logically follows from the work we have done, is
studying of its organismal form. It is necessary, on the basis of
essentially new for domestic practice semantic filter – the
ideologema to comprehend a social organism as a field form of
existence of planetary mankind. It is, beyond doubts, a hard time
and efforts consuming task; however, today it is the most
perspective one for the breakthrough to a qualitatively new level of
understanding of our prospects of development in the third
millennium.
The fact of establishment of a field form of social life forces us to
take a fresh look at the solution of the environmental problems that are
gaining an appalling character for national and planetary security.
Therein the phenomenon of national security is understood as
creation of necessary and sufficient set of the economic, legal,
organizational, political, spiritual, ecological and other conditions
which are purposefully formed by a system of public administration
for optimization of position of the country on the world scene and
continuous growth of welfare of its citizens.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
334
Not so long ago it was a common wisdom that the main source
menacing to progress of this or that country were separate countries
or public systems confronting each other
as
“capitalism
–
socialism”. However, due to the collapse of the USSR and removal
of the “East – West” opposition this reason receded into the
background. Nowadays, after falling of “iron curtain” and self-
collapse of the USSR, on the foreground, based upon intensive
discussion of survival problems of individual countries and society
overall, we came to realization that the threat to national and human
interests is at the bottom of people’s practical consciousness that
continues to subject itself to the logic of an external order of things.
People lost contact with an inner world. They ceased to understand
its logic, and this inattention slammed a trap of ecology which
reflects the demand to observe regularities of cosmic character. In
other words, threat of national security began to be looked for
within the very social system.
However, conducted research shows that the causes that are
transforming modern social world lie even deeper. Ongoing crisis of
social 
development 
with 
clearly 
manifested 
theoretical,
methodological, ideological, and the world outlook characteristics, is a
consequence of the painful processes taking place within an organism
of a modern civilization. They arose because functions of its separate
ingredients aren’t adapted to each other, while regularities of evolution
of a universe demand from it absolutely different behavior. It is natural,
because the Universe as growing older, gains more and more
elaborated organization. As time passes, the level of the organization of
the Universe steadily increases, due to improvement of underlying
forms of the movement of a universum. Thus, the whole dictates terms
to the parts. Modern crisis or pathology in the social world, in the same
manner as physiology, – the valuable assistant for identification of
causes of a social organism illness, their subsequent elimination and
prevention. Situation is aggravated also that mankind, having internal
problems, at the same time passes from development, industrial to
information type.

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
335
In other words, public processes on the eve of the third
millennium approached such threshold of development when the
technical unity of social organisms of the certain countries, based
on random characteristics (for example, national, religious, class,
racial, etc.), is transformed in organic, that is such which answers
the substantiality of the social world nature.
Analysis proves that explication of bifurcational nature of
modern social processes should be sought for in the Universe
changes of modes of which are objective reason causing gigantic
collapses of cultural and historical world. Geological process is such
total reality within which both above mentioned tendencies of social
process have been removed; through it the very motive of the
second nature is being reconstructed. The humanity begins its own
development at its very own foundation.
Thus, the offered above paradigm has to tell the authoritative
word. The explanation of sense and nature of ongoing change
becomes its task, in order that subjects of historical action could
develop the adequate mental paradigm and behavior. The same
reason can identify the level of abstraction which is necessary for an
explanation of the process of optimization of public life. The
principles of such behavior ought to underpin the concept of
national security.
Our analysis shows that the idea of a social organism is that
cognitive means which allows to integrate two above mentioned
tendencies of social development into organic unity. To reaffirm, it
is enough to look at the development of a certain country as on
ontogenesis process, and joint development of the countries as a
part of the world community, as on the process of a phylogeny,
and everything becomes clear. Imperativeness of this idea is in that
it defines what, how and why ought to be secured, and also by what
means safety can be ensured.
So, the concept of national safety, as far as the social organism
is a huge, functional body, has to be built upon organizational
regularities that can provide concrete and elaborate “chanalization”

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
336
of public processes, specific functionality of spatial and temporary
correlations of its bodies. Essentially important is a creation of
conditions for self-expansion of a certain set of social processes
which constitute the organic system we call a social organism.
Thus, the concept of safety of any social system has to reflect
conditions under which the balance between its components and
environment is reached. This aspect, as we know, especially
intensively is developed by social ecologists. It is possible only at
fixed, relevant to it alone type of a configuration of field
components which expresses invariant parameters of an ethnosocial
organism. From this, a direct need to develop programs ensuring
national security for each particular country follows.
As the all planetary social organism represents a system of
functional correlations, it arises due to operating at present
functional structures–social organisms of certain countries. In
this regard, the concept of planetary safety is formed on the basis
of national conceptual ideas. Providing a co-evolution of national
social systems within laws and regularities of a phylogeny of social
forms is its leading function.
Such concept will be effective, if it provides favorable
conditions for process of self-reproduction of the constituting it
existential structure. In its course hierarchy of the relations of
coexistence “is developed” in hierarchy of forms of transformations
of the national social organisms being in certain phase correlations;
therefore, there is a repetition of the relations of coexistence and,
thereby, prerequisites for repetition of the temporary relations are
created, the self-repeating spatial time order (an existence cycle) is
formed. Set of such events forms structure of a social organism of
the planet.
The approach to the development of bases of the theory offered
in research of noosociogenesis is urged to challenge philosophers
and scientists’ thinking defining the character and organization of
spiritual production in an era of a formational phase of planetary
mankind development. The latter really enriches a complex of

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
337
means of philosophical and scientific search for realizing actual
problems of the present with more universal methodological means
for investigation of a field form of life.
It is necessary in order that, employing diverse theoretical
heritage, it would be possible to purposefully and rationally
reorganize the set of philosophical ideas accumulated by the
mankind. The application of the category “organism” to energy
informational (field) form of life means that social philosophers,
and, therefore, both political scientists and practical politicians
should not be afraid to include the terms, which have recently been
used in an arsenal of natural sciences, in an arsenal of
methodological means used for developing the concept of security .
It 
concerns 
such 
highly 
productive 
cognitive 
means 
of
transformation, as, for example: synergetics, spontaneity, chaos,
potential social worlds, virtuality, self-organization, morphogenesis,
phenotype, information metabolism, self-regulation, entropy,
organotsenos, homeostat, homeores, ontogenesis, phylogeny,
selection, heredity, continuity, poly alternativeness of development,
ecological 
equilibrium, 
cooperation, 
coordination, 
freedom,
democracy, creativity, scientific and business cooperation, arts
education, cultural exchange, free trade, joint activity, etc.
Thus, lexical language units of the concept idea turned to be
such specific substratum of a security system, which already “sets”
a class of possible morphological structures which can be realized
on this very substratum, and at the same time determines quality
of their functioning, as this is about live organisms.
At the same time, research shows how difficult and delicate is
intelligible matter for its regulation on the part of the person.
Therefore, the problem of multi-criteria optimization of social life of
planetary mankind, as well as individual countries, is a truly unique
and difficult object for both the modern theory of knowledge and
practical transformation of image of the social world by forces of
politicians. And, if not to predict a turn of researchers to the offered
paradigm, and even better, to development of an alternative

Vladimyr Bekh * The philosophy of social world
338
approach to it, and also a quantum leap in improvement of
methodology of principal research of public life, development of the
above mentioned problem by political scientists and politicians can
even go far beyond the XX-th century limits. Thus, it is quite
obvious that, the earlier philosophers, social scientists, scientists in
the field of esthetics and politicians of different countries, the staff
of the international organizations and ecologists begin moving
jointly in this direction, the more they will be able to reach on the
way of development of a field form of life.

Наукове видання
Vladimir Bekh
THE PHILOSOPHY OF SOCIAL WORLD
Підписано до друку 25.01.2017. Формат 60x84/16.
Папір офсетний. Гарнітура Таймс. Друк офсетний.
Ум. друк. арк. 20,6. Наклад 300. Зам. №387.
Надруковано в “МП Леся”.
Свідоцтво про внесення до Державного реєстру
суб’єктів видавничої справи серія ДК № 892 від 08.04.2002.
“МП Леся”
03148, Київ, а/с 115.
Тел./факс: + 38 050 469 7485, 068 340 8332
E-mail: lesya3000@ukr.net

