 
 
 
 
 
A HISTORY OF PSYCHOLOGICAL BOREDOM:  
THE UTILITY OF BOREDOM IN THE PRACTICE OF PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE 
 
DAVID BERMAN 
 
A THESIS SUBMITTED TO 
THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS 
FOR THE DEGREE OF 
 
MASTER OF ARTS 
 
 
GRADUATE PROGRAM IN PSYCHOLOGY 
YORK UNIVERSITY 
TORONTO, ONTARIO 
 
OCTOBER 2021 
© DAVID BERMAN, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
ii 
 
Abstract 
 
The 100-year plus history of psychologists attempting to establish boredom as a quantifiable construct 
provides insight into the problems associated with how psychology adopts its subject matter. By 
borrowing terms from the public and assuming they represent universal aspects of human nature, the 
discipline has spurred critical inquiry regarding the practice’s hidden assumptions and theory.  In 
particular, boredom, with its associations with both existential and trivial concerns, exposes the 
limitations of the practice of scientific psychology and reflects the discipline’s own conflicted identity. In 
order to facilitate an examination of these theoretical issues, this historical examination focuses on the 
failed attempts by 1970s personality psychology and 1990s positive psychology to domesticate the 
concept. With the inclusion of the public’s boredom discourse during these decades, the cultural 
influence on these disciplines’ theorizing is excavated. These influences complicate attempts by 
psychologists to practice as a science and provide a reason to take pause amid repeated calls to unify 
the discipline.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
iii 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Abstract...........................................................................................................................ii 
Table of Contents...........................................................................................................iii 
List of Figures………………………………………………………………………………………………….………….iv 
List of Tables…………………………………………………………………………………………………………….…v 
 
Chapter One: Introduction..............................................................................................1 
Introduction...............................................................................................................1 
Literature Review.......................................................................................................3 
Frameworks............................................................................................................. 11 
Methods.................................................................................................................. 17 
 
Chapter Two: Personality Psychology – Boredom as Trait............................................22 
Personality Psychology – Boredom as Trait............................................................ 22 
Qualitative Data.......................................................................................................39 
 
Chapter Three: Positive Psychology – Boredom as Motivation....................................55 
Personality Psychology – Boredom as Trait............................................................ 55 
Qualitative Data.......................................................................................................71 
 
Chapter Four: Boredoms Compared.............................................................................86 
 
Works Cited...................................................................................................................99 
 
Appendices .................................................................................................................134 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
iv 
 
 
 
List of Figures 
 
Figure 1. PsycINFO & Google Scholar search results for “boredom”……………………….….134 
Figure 2. Ngram search results for “boredom, ennui, acedia”………………………………….…134 
Figure 3. Ngram search results for “boredom, ennui, acedia, melancholy”…………..……135 
Figure 4. OLS/OLA……………………………………………………………………………………….…….……….135 
Figure 5. Flow and Optimal Experience…………………………………………………….…………..……136 
Figure 6. PsycINFO & NYT search results for “boredom”………………………….…………………136 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
v 
 
 
List of Tables 
 
Table 1. Category Count………………………………………………………………..……………….…….…21-22 
Table 2. Popular Comparative Usage………………………………………………………….……………91-92 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
 
 
Psychology’s divided identity, straddling the line between the sciences and humanities (Teo, 
2017), is revealed in its investigations of boredom. Two historical examples, Hans Eysenck’s personality 
psychology in the 1970s and the positive psychology movement in the 1990s, provide evidence of this 
divide as they attempted to domesticate boredom. As those investigations developed, the concept that 
emerged possessed little of the expected precision associated with conducting science, was inconsistent 
with the everyday use of the term, and was problematically utilized to help define the oppositional 
terms of stimulation, arousal, attention, and flow. In a backdrop of ascending neoliberalism, a 
comparison between how personality and positive psychologies were practiced and received by the 
public offers insights into the practice of psychology as embedded in a larger zeitgeist. These outcomes 
raise questions to the appropriateness of attempting to transform cultural concepts into quantifiable 
constructs and the repeated calls to unite psychology under a common scientific understanding—
something both these subdisciplines explicitly called for. This paper adds to the critical scholarship 
opposing such attempts by highlighting the epistemological and ontological confusion caused by some 
psychologists’ attempts to contain boredom. 
There is a tradition of critical scholars highlighting problems with how psychology adopts its 
subject matter. Many of these critiques are related to the hidden assumptions some experimental 
psychologists have made about the capacity of language to represent corresponding objects found in 
nature adequately. More specifically, concerns have been raised over how psychologists transform 
“everyday psychological language” into “professional psychological language” (Richards, 2002, p. 9) 
during the process of isolating and operationalizing concepts of interest. The history of psychology offers 
many examples of everyday language (intelligence, motivation, etc., as discussed by Danziger (1997)) 

 
 
2 
 
being utilized in psychological research with the assumption that they represent real-in-the-world 
unchanging aspects of human nature, akin to the correspondence between the term water and its 
chemical structure (Hacking, 1995; Danziger, 1997). However, Hacking (1995) argues there is a 
fundamental difference between the subject matter of disciplines like physics and that of psychology. He 
delineates the two by highlighting how the hard sciences study unresponsive objects (natural kinds) 
while psychology investigates reflexive human kinds. Several problems emerge when attempting to 
place aspects of human nature outside of their experience, starting with the supposition psychologists 
are able to step outside their cultural context. Additionally, psychologists must also assume that their 
particular professional psychological language, as performed in the 20th and 21st centuries, is perfectly 
structured to capture the essence of human nature, thus denying all alternative forms of psychology, 
different languages, and iterations of English this capacity (Danziger, 1997). This presentist and Western-
centric approach implies that earlier boredom-like concepts (melancholy, Langeweile, acedia, etc.) can 
be interpreted as failed attempts to represent ‘real’ boredom rather than legitimate representations of 
a psychological experience within a particular social and historical context (Brinkmann, 2005). Danziger 
(1997) believes psychologists would be better served accepting that categories rely on conventions and 
are “embedded in a particular professional sub-culture” (p. 4), rather than the result of “undistorted 
observation” (p. 3). If it is accepted that human kinds (Hacking, 1995) are fundamentally different from 
natural kinds (some refute this, see Cooper (2004)), then much of psychology’s subject matter must be 
culturally generated, which confounds psychologists’ hopes of practicing a Kuhnian normal science 
(Danziger, 1997).  
It is argued that in order to “excavate the hidden level of theory” that undergirds experimental 
psychology practices, researchers need to analyze existing discourses of which human kinds derive their 
“sense” (Danziger, 1997, p. 8). This approach has been pursued in the investigation of the concepts of 
intelligence, personality, and learning, where a looping effect, has been documented (Hacking, 1995). 

 
 
3 
 
Where a looping effect (Hacking, 1995) is recognized as a process where the classification of ‘types of 
people’ or behaviours by social scientists results in new ways of being as those classified react to these 
descriptions and understandings (e.g. schizophrenia, depression). Due to the reflexive nature of human 
kinds, success for psychological domestication projects is not found in the unmasking a concept’s hidden 
nature, but rather in the adoption by other psychologists and the public of their particular 
understanding of the term.  The psychologization of intelligence after World War I provides an example 
of this; as the public adopted psychological understandings of the concept, and psychologists 
established various measurement regimes, yet 100 years later, some psychologists admit there has 
never been a definitive definition for the term (Gaspard, 2017; Sternberg, 2018). With these practices in 
mind, boredom presents an opportunity to study a partial looping effect (Hacking, 1995), as the public 
has yet to adopt the psychological understanding of the term. Due to the lack of public adoption, two 
tracks of boredom discourse are identifiable, the technical psychological language and the everyday 
language found in the popular discourse. When comparing the two, it is productive to consider in what 
ways psychologists were informed about boredom through the public, what psychological concepts 
were not adopted by the public, why the psychologization project for boredom has persisted, why the 
psychological literature regarding boredom accelerated over time (see figure 1), and whether boredom 
in particular offer insights into how psychology and the public inform one another. With boredom’s 
identity remaining unresolved and its associations with the existential and trivial, it may occupy a unique 
position where the tension between the two reveals a concept resistant to psychologization. 
Literature Review 
While the Oxford English Dictionary’s entry for boredom states, “The state of being bored; 
tedium, ennui” with Charles Dicken’s Bleak House being credited as the first use in literature (1853) 
“[Her] chronic malady of boredom”, this attribution is contested. Dictionary.com points to the 1829 
August 8th issue of The Albion making the first recorded use of boredom in the English language (“You 

 
 
4 
 
didn’t”, n. d). Confusion over boredom's origins aside, its identity as a “chronic malady” would persist, 
possibly explaining the interest from some early German psychologists and its appearance in early 
textbooks (Waitz, 1863; Teo, 2007). There is a long history of conceptual overlap with the similar 
concepts of melancholy, ennui, Langeweile, tedium vitae, horror loci, and acedia, with the last two 
dating back to antiquity (Goodstein, 2005; Toohey, 2011; Gardiner & Haladyn, 2017). While conclusions 
drawn from the data found in Google’s Ngram are open to criticism, it does provide insight into how 
“boredom” increased as “ennui” decreased in the English language corpus in the 1910s, suggesting 
“boredom” had begun to establish itself as a distinct concept as WWI was raging (see figure 2; Pettit, 
2016). There is some dispute among historians and psychologists about whether these are early 
representations of boredom, loosely associated progenitors, or entirely distinct concepts (Toohey, 2011; 
Gardiner & Haladyn, 2017). These disagreements reflect the difficulties psychology has had in 
establishing a consensus definition for boredom, a problem that persists to the present day. As 
acknowledged in the introduction to a collection of multidisciplinary boredom essays in Boredom Is in 
Your Mind,  
Whether we pay attention to the individual or environmental causes of boredom, we all 
acknowledge that boredom is a reactive force whatever their consequences are, those 
positives or negatives. This common understanding will be decisive to learn to tolerate 
boredom and to deal with its products while, at the same time, we are reaching a more 
profound comprehension of the human phenomenon (Velasco, 2019, p. xix).  
These words, echoing the person-situation debates, a disagreement over the extent to which a person 
or a situation was more influential in dictating behaviours (Allport, 1927; Mischel, 1968), suggests 
boredom will be challenging to define psychologically. In an earlier collection of more philosophically 
minded essays on boredom, Goldstein (2005) wrote, “boredom isolates, individuates, even as it blurs 
the world gray. A confrontation with nothing, then, or Nothing, or something like it. Perhaps just a name 

 
 
5 
 
for what cannot be named, an encounter with the limits of language. An experience without qualities.” 
(p. 1). The evocation of the limits of language here is telling; while psychology successfully domesticated 
several concepts (e.g. intelligence, personality, etc.), boredom’s nebulous nature reveals the problems 
inherent in the practice of reifying everyday concepts through methodology.  
Various boredom scholars have begun their investigations in antiquity, using source material 
from the public, government officials, and philosophers (Svendsen, 1999; McDonald, 2009; Toohey, 
2011). For example, McDonald (2009), a proponent of embedded boredom, which is understood as 
historically and culturally situated, focused on the concept of taedium vitae as an ancient candidate for 
boredom where urbanization and the artificial administration of time created the environment from 
which it could emerge. It is hypothesized that to address this unpleasant experience associated with 
meaninglessness, emperors distracted the populace with the infamous Roman spectacles (McDonald, 
2009). This use of aesthetic answers by the powerful to address boredom and boredom-like phenomena 
is a tactic that would reoccur in the West, especially after the Industrial Revolution.  
The writings of the Christian church have been a popular source for boredom scholars, with 
theologians establishing it as a moral concept. Interpretations included boredom as an external force 
and an internal experience resembling a psychological state (Pezze & Salzani, 2009; Svendsen, 1999; 
Toohey, 2011). Earlier discussions highlight how the concept of acedia was a condition of restlessness 
that undermined people’s resolve and made them vulnerable to sin (Svendsen, 1999; Pezze & Salzani, 
2009). This ‘noon day demon’ was seen as an area of particular concern for monks during long days in 
seclusion (Toohey, 2011). Acedia would lend these concerns to future iterations of boredom with Soren 
Kierkegaard’s warning that boredom was the root of all evil since it undermined individual resolve and 
made other sins more likely (Kierkegaard, 1843/2004). Kierkegaard had himself become interested in 
boredom when considering how new secular freedoms came at the price of severing ties with spiritual 
meanings and guidance (McDonald, 2009). He believed these freedoms lead to the misuse of reflection 

 
 
6 
 
and self-determination for the pursuit of pleasure, and, having abandoned God, people would be 
incapable of finding a deeper meaning to life—only a series of fleeting distractions, again echoing the 
divide between the existential and the aesthetic (McDonald, 2009). While acedia and boredom would 
share significant definitional overlap, academics typically point to the concept of melancholy as the next 
step in the transition towards modern boredom. According to Svendsen (1999), the advancement of 
melancholy happened in the medieval period, a time of church dominance and apparent stability for 
boredom-associated terms. Perhaps due partly to this era of stability for boredom-like terms, the 
industrial revolution becomes the next period of study for many boredom scholars.  
During the Industrial Revolution, several philosophers turned their attention to how the 
promises of the Enlightenment had given way to the dehumanizing realities of factory life (Pezze & 
Salzani, 2009). These developments brought new ways of regimenting people’s lives, including “clock-
time”, whereby worker productivity could be measured with precision (Boss, 2009). This renewed focus 
on measurement and productivity would spur future psychological research and measurement regimes 
due to the implications for factories and military production (Fenichel, 1951; Svendsen, 1999; Eastwood 
et al., 2012, Vodanovich & Watt, 2016). Alternatively, boredom’s associations with meaninglessness led 
other more philosophically-minded academics to conclude the construct was representative of the age 
(Svendsen, 1999; Goodstein, 2005; Pezze & Salzani, 2009; Leeuwen, 2009), or, according to Gardiner and 
Haladyn (2017), the “quintessential experience” of modernity. 
Consistent with the concept of embedded boredom, Google’s Ngram Viewer for English-
language books reveals how melancholy had once dominated the discourse over ennui, acedia, and 
boredom in English-language books (see figure 3). The results depict a rapid decline in the use of 
melancholy in the 19th century while boredom experienced a modest increase. According to some 
researchers, the various terms possessed boredom's psychological and internal characteristics but were 
mainly missing its existential component (Svendsen, 1999; Goodstein, 2005; Gardiner & Haladyn, 2017). 

 
 
7 
 
Gardiner (2017) went on to suggest that Langeweile and ennui would eventually go on to adopt these 
existential themes after the concept of modern boredom had become popularized. In contrast, 
philosopher, literary critic, and language theorist Walter Benjamin thought ennui, Langeweile, and 
boredom manifested themselves differently in modern contexts, leaving the terms related but distinct 
(Pezze & Salzani, 2009).  
19th-century psychological textbooks document at least a passing interest on the subject of 
boredom (Waitz, 1863; Teo, 2007). This curiosity into boredom appears to have accelerated after World 
War I (Davies, 1926; Wyatt et al., 1929; Berman, 1939; Barmack, 1939a; Barmack 1939b) and especially 
during the early Cold War period with psychoanalysts and psychologists examining the construct in 
industrial and defense settings (Fenichel, 1951; Leuba, 1955; Greenson, 1953; Heron, 1957; Geiwitz, 
1966). These studies were spurred by an interest in finding operational efficiencies and the optimal 
conditions for human productivity, especially in monotonous work environments (e.g., assembly line 
work, radar surveillance). Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, there were disagreements over whether 
boredom was caused by a state of high arousal, a state of low arousal, environmental factors, or 
boredom susceptibility (Geiwitz, 1966). Various psychological studies attempting to address boredom 
were documented in James Geiwitz’s literature review in his 1966 paper “Structure of Boredom”, which 
itself was an attempt to examine the presumptions the psychological community held about boredom. 
Geiwitz conducted a case study to determine whether the frequently associated concepts of monotony, 
arousal, negative affect, and constraint were all necessary elements to elicit boredom. With his single 
participant, he found that while all four concepts contributed to boredom, only three of the four were 
necessary (Geiwitz, 1966). Monotony, arousal, negative affect, and constraint would all persist as 
themes associated with boredom, but the effort to turn them into constitutional aspects would not be 
pursued. 

 
 
8 
 
It was during these 1960-1980s scattershot attempts to understand boredom that personality 
psychology, armed with self-report, observational, and experimental methodologies, joined the inquiry 
in hopes of advancing understandings of how the human psyche is constituted (Tupes & Christal, 1992). 
Evidence for the growing interest in boredom could be found in the establishment of several subscales 
by Singer & Antrobus (1964), Zuckerman (1971), Grubb (1975), and Hamilton et al. (1984). While 
boredom was not the primary focus until the development of the Boredom Proneness Scale (Farmer & 
Sundberg, 1986), the popularity of these psychometric approaches speaks to the confidence that they 
were an effective way to categorize the mind scientifically. As boredom research progressed, new 
subdisciplines, including positive and neurocognitive psychologies, would turn to the mystery of 
boredom. 
Alongside the expanding psychological interest in boredom, philosophical inquiries continued. 
These discussions placed a new emphasis on how the acceleration of change and the transition to the 
digital age proliferated boredom, or the “experience without qualities,” in which isolation, alienation, 
and meaninglessness were common against the backdrop of neoliberalism (Goodstein, 2005). A 
manifestation of this modern experience can be found in Elizabeth Legge’s (2016) work discussing low-
grade boredom that lacks features and is largely inaccessible to the conscious mind. Legge documents 
how this boredom was explored by the “young British artist movement” or “yBas” in the 80s and 90s as 
both a serious endeavour while still appealing to the commercial market (p. 88). Frances Colpitt was 
another scholar interested in the connection between art and boredom as he followed its role in 
contemporary art, minimalist aesthetic, and the end of modernism (2017). Colpitt argued that when 
entertainment’s importance in art grew, and funding shifted from public to private sources in the 1980s, 
the distinction between elite and mass culture became irrelevant. This shift led museums to adopt an 
entertainment-first strategy rather than provide a place of quiet contemplation—suggesting that many 

 
 
9 
 
cultural institutions, which were best suited to confront existential boredom, were now appealing to the 
aesthetic wants of the market.  
Martin Hand furthered the idea of a leveling of culture into the 2000s by introducing the 
concept of digital boredom, or a shift from “clock-time” to “iTime” and how it intensified the emotional 
flatness of modern boredom (Hand, 2017). Hand went on to characterize contemporary life as 
“technologically mediated, repetitive, rushed and denying solitude, and in which multiple practices of 
presenting, tracking and connecting are at once efforts to alleviate boredom, contributing to 
experiences of boredom, and occluding the possibility of a more profound boredom” (Hand, 2017, p. 
122). These considerations of time, technology, and boredom built upon the earlier work of Martin 
Heidegger, who explored how experiences, including boredom, were produced by “clock-time” (Boss, 
2009, p. 85). While widely ignored, Heidegger believed he had revealed boredom as a metaphysical 
concern rather than an area for psychological research (Boss, 2009). Consistent with these themes and 
the tension between existential and trivial boredom was Kevin Aho’s (2017) work, which drew a parallel 
between people seeking distraction and the experience of online dating. In the digital dating arena, 
relationships are superficially constructed between heavily crafted avatars which are replaceable, 
undermining the ability of people to establish meaning outside of market demands. According to Aho, 
the act of searching provides an endless source of distraction, and since advanced algorithms filter 
prospective dates, there is never a need to make a “Kierkegaardian leap” with available choices being 
managed. This situation, where people no longer need to go beyond the available information for 
romantic decision-making, leads to a state of boredom where people are caught in a cycle of seeking 
ever more distraction. Ringmar (2017) added to this discussion, “modern boredom is a result of the way 
we were separated from tradition, forced to pay attention to our lives rather than to simply live them, 
and the way we were disciplined and made autonomous and self-directing” (p. 208). In light of this, 
Ringmar suggests ignoring the constant demands of news feeds and embracing boredom as a protest 

 
 
10 
 
against the conditions of capitalism. For him, the only way to be free in the modern world is to stop 
paying attention. As will be discussed below, it is of considerable interest how attention’s role in 
boredom was mainly in the background for personality psychology, yet for the psychologies formed 
after the implementation of neoliberal reforms, e. g. positive psychology and neurocognitive 
psychology, attention was at the absolute center. 
More recent psychological boredom research has been focused on understanding the construct 
through its associations with personality traits, pathologies, and subjective experiences. Boden (2009) 
documented psychological studies that found correlations between boredom and “criminal activity, 
violence, compulsive gambling, and sexual behaviors, as well as other maladaptive behaviors” (Boden, 
2009, p. 204). Further associations were found with extraversion, neuroticism, impulse control, 
regulation of internal states, maladaptive behavior, stimulus perception, time estimation, and attention 
(Boden, 2009). Following this line of thinking, Wijnand Tilburg and Eric Igou explored the “correlates and 
consequences” of boredom and how it can trigger “outgroup derogation, nostalgic reverie, hero 
adoration, prosocial tendencies and polarization of political ideology” (2019, p. xv). The numerous 
dangers associated with the inability to find or create meaning, which has been repeatedly connected to 
boredom, include impulsiveness, unhealthy consumption, and poor mental health (McDonald, 2019). 
Out of these concerning associations, critiques have emerged suggesting the connections are too quickly 
made, perhaps providing another example of the problems which arise when psychology treats a human 
kind as a natural one (Ringmar, 2017). 
While these investigations into the nature of boredom are extensive, in the end, they leave the 
concept either in a conflicted state or largely underdefined. They also largely fail to ask how or if 
psychology’s interpretations of boredom have influenced the everyday use of the term or in what ways 
the everyday use has influenced psychology’s investigations. Central to this paper, it is also 
undetermined how psychology’s problematization of boredom, through associations with adverse 

 
 
11 
 
outcomes, was impacted by a capitalist culture and the later neoliberal reforms in the 1980s. If 
understood within a capitalist framework, boredom becomes a catalyst for the expansion of 
entertainment into all aspects of life, serving as an indicator for new opportunities for aesthetic market 
solutions and points of intervention for constructing neoliberal subjectivity (Teo, 2018). The problem 
emerging for the two subdisciplines investigated for this thesis, personality psychology and positive 
psychology, is how culturally-influenced shifts in boredom’s identity are inconsistent with the 
unchanging, natural kind subject matter associated with conducting a science (Hacking, 1995) – with this 
discrepancy serving as the entry point for this inquiry. 
Frameworks  
 
In order to bring clarity to the forces influencing the various investigations of boredom, several 
frameworks are deployed. Lorraine Daston’s (2000) applied metaphysical approach into the biography 
of psychological constructs serving as a guide, especially her use of the concept of productivity, 
psychological studies of boredom are contextualized given its place in Western capitalist society. Daston 
contends that scientific objects, like boredom, come into being as they serve the needs of investigators 
and the wider public. For this examination, the needs of psychology, as represented by personality 
psychologists of the 1970s, are dominated by a system where governments are expected to intervene to 
prop up failing markets and prevent labour unrest. These expectations are contrasted with the positive 
psychology of the 1990s, where individual responsibility largely eclipsed government obligations due to 
neoliberal reforms of the 1980s. Given that both subdisciplines operate in a larger capitalist framework, 
their understanding of boredom is impacted by how existential concerns are widely addressed through 
aesthetic solutions, as discussed in detail by Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno (1947/2020). 
Here, boredom’s identity of being both trivial and existential places it at the nexus of business practices 
and people’s search for meaning.   

 
 
12 
 
Further, as discussed in the work of Kurt Danziger (1926-), Ian Hacking (1936-), Jerome Kagan 
(1929-2021), and John Benjafield (1941-), psychology’s attempts to practice the discipline as a science 
led to misunderstandings of the underlying concepts and limitations of the practice as a whole. Many of 
these concerns are focused on how some psychologists assumed language could accurately represent 
natural kinds and how the appearance of particular concepts across various languages provides 
evidence for their transcendental existence (as assumed in the Lexical Hypothesis (Goldberg, 1981)). 
These works also help clarify how boredom’s shifting identity for psychologists exposes how these 
subdisciplines are influenced by the broader culture, thus confounding their claims to be practicing a 
detached science. A more detailed discussion of these frameworks follows. 
Aesthetic Capitalism and Neoliberalism 
 
Post-World War II and before the onset of neoliberal reforms, Western capitalist states, 
particularly in the United States, experienced the acceleration of a Culture Industry, as described in The 
Dialectic of Enlightenment (Horkheimer & Adorno, 1947/2020). Following Marx’s theorizing, Horkheimer 
and Adorno argued advancements in manufacturing technologies had led workers to become 
interchangeable cogs in the more extensive industrial apparatus. This redefinition of labour undermined 
the need for their intellectual contributions, leaving workers alienated from the products of their labour. 
In the place of meaningful work, mass production offered workers tangible but ultimately meaningless 
differences between commercial products to derive meaning and fill their hollowed-out identities. These 
notions were extended into the realms of media and publications, “Culture today is infecting everything 
with sameness. Film, radio, and magazines form a system. Each branch of culture is unanimous within 
itself, and all are unanimous together (Horkheimer & Adorno, 1947/2020, p. 94). Further, modern 
media’s vast reach into the public was leveraged to sell products and enforce brand associations, as an 
oligarchy with control of many thousands of companies emerged to provide the illusion of choice. 
Horkheimer & Adorno (1947/2020) observed that “films and radio no longer need to present themselves 

 
 
13 
 
as art. The truth that they are nothing but business is used as an ideology to legitimize the trash they 
intentionally produce . . . all mass culture under monopoly is identical” (p. 95). This focus on the 
aesthetic provided an immediate reprieve from existential worries by paving them over with an endless 
array of consumer goods and forms of entertainment. This understanding of trivial boredom is 
corroborated by its appearance in The New York Times articles in the 1970s and 1990s sampled for this 
paper, where boredom is near uniformly associated with the aesthetic, even when appearing in 
existential dialogues. 
 
As Western capitalism matured, free-market solutions were promoted as the answer for 
government inefficiencies and ineffectiveness. These efforts would culminate in the neoliberal reforms 
of the 1980s, facilitating the comparison between the 1970s and the 1990s by providing an inflection 
point on the broader culture. Neoliberalism, whether a system, ideology, or cultural practice, is 
essentially an application of classic economic liberalism to all aspects of social life. This new way of 
organizing a society flourished in Western societies in the latter half of the 20th century thanks to the 
efforts of Friedrich Hayek (1944/2014), Milton Friedman (1962/2002), Murray Rothbard (1978), and 
others. Guided by the notion that expansion of free markets equated to greater personal autonomy and 
the strengthening of a restrictive form of democracy, these adherents promoted economic non-
interventionist policies as the way to harness human potential. Oddly, while neoliberalism has 
unquestionably influenced all manner of private and public institutions, as well as how people 
understood themselves and their interpersonal relationships, the concept itself remains without a 
concise definition (Mirowski & Plehwe, 2015; Jackson, 2014; Rajesh, 2015; Davies, 2016; Winston, 2018; 
Davies, 2019). This obscurity is likely due, in part, to neoliberalism’s internal contradictions and conflicts 
between differing schools of thought (Winston, 2018). Similarly, Mirowski (2014) remarked that due to 
constant theoretical revision and collaboration since its proposed origins in 1947, neoliberalism “is still a 
hydra-headed Gorgon to this very day” (p. 14). Confusing this further, the very same proponents of 

 
 
14 
 
neoliberal reforms in public and private spheres often deny they are neoliberals while claiming the 
dominant system is in fact, socialism (Mirowski, 2014). Nevertheless, some progress has been made in 
outlining the core principles of neoliberalism. As Jackson (2014) states, “the heart of neoliberal ideology 
is the belief that freedom and prosperity are best advanced by expanding the role of markets and are 
undermined by democratic collective action, especially (but not only) by the state and trade unions” (p. 
194). This promotes the “converting of society into a "marketplace" for ideas” where neoliberalism is 
generated not by power structures of class, but in the buying and selling of goods (Read, 2009, p. 26). As 
decision-making shifts from communities to the marketplace, personal autonomy is stripped in favor of 
the mysterious natural laws of economics, while disenchantment with politics further limits people’s 
ability to act outside of the marketplace (Jackson, 2014). Ultimately, as individuals enter the market as 
entrepreneurs, their successes and failures are understood as market functions, where exploitation 
becomes impossible or “invisible” (Read, 2009, p. 32). 
Neoliberalism is not a purely an economic system but “in effect an epistemological machine that 
produces new modes of subjectivity” (Cosgrove & Karter, 2018, p. 670). As mentioned in Teo (2018), the 
capacity of neoliberalism to generate subjectivity can be understood through Lucien Sève’s (1978) 
assertions that “particular societies produce forms for the personal expression of individuality (an idea 
expressed in psychological anthropology; see Hsu, 1971)” (p. 583). Individuality is no longer an 
expression of choice but the “result of objectively existing production relations” as understood by Marx 
(Teo, 2018, p. 582). Neoliberalism, and its focus on feelings over reasoning, has coincided with an 
“affective turn” in psychology, revealing another example of how the system has impacted society 
(Pettit, 2016). However, psychology has not been simply passive, as its reach into the public imagination 
has furthered neoliberal understandings of the self by promoting ideas consistent with the development 
of a personal brand, adoption of self-entrepreneurship, and its proximity to self-help publications 
(Baron, 2012; Frese & Gielnik, 2014; Manson, 2016). The stresses placed on facilitating the development 

 
 
15 
 
of the entrepreneur-self could be interpreted as an answer to the alienation experienced by workers as 
they became interchangeable. However, as the individual enters the marketplace, it also necessitates 
adopting associated risks and forgoing much of the stability associated with governmental and 
communal services. These shifts have coincided with the “erosion of manufacturing and the dominance 
of the service sector, the emergence of precarious work in all domains, the decline of the welfare state, 
the outsourcing of public services to the private sector”, and the development of the “neoliberal form of 
subjectivity” (Teo, 2018, p. 584). As a new way of being, “Neoliberalism is reformulating personhood, 
psychological life, moral and ethical responsibility, and what it means to have selfhood and identity” 
(Sugarman, 2015, p. 104). In addition, Sugarman (2015) stated that psychologists were contributing to 
this “ideological climate” where “persons are not obliged to consider, let alone take responsibility for, 
the welfare of others” (p. 103). The extent of this neoliberal indoctrination within the practice of 
psychology is debatable, with resistance appearing in several subdisciplines, including community 
psychology and critical social psychology, but, as the wider public adopts market-friendly practices, 
psychology becomes further informed by neoliberal understandings, where “looping effects” 
reformulate and reinforce concepts (Hacking, 1995).  
As mentioned, a key element of neoliberalism and how psychology is practiced is the concept of 
productivity.  In Biographies of Scientific Objects, Lorraine Daston (2000) explains why certain concepts, 
like boredom, become of interest to the field, “scientific objects attain their heightened ontological 
status by producing results, implications, surprises, connections, manipulations, explanations, 
applications” (p. 10). In this context, boredom provided researchers greater precision in defining its 
assumed oppositional concepts, e.g. arousal, stimulation (Zuckerman, 1979), anxiety, and flow 
(Csikszentmihalyi, 1975). The progress experienced by researchers tracks Daston’s understanding of how 
these concepts are formed and being formed, “It takes time to forge them, time to learn how to use 
them, and time to learn their strengths and limitations” (Daston, 2000, p. 11). While boredom’s porous 

 
 
16 
 
boundaries are reflected in how it is difficult to conceptualize as a distinct whole, “scientific objects flout 
the boundaries between scientific disciplines” (Daston, 2000, p. 12). Given these practices, the cultural 
influences, and how boredom became intellectual territory researchers competed over, the scientific 
claims of both personality psychology and positive psychology are worthy of skepticism.  
Psychological Categories and Vocabulary  
Another complication for the scientific claims of the psychologists who are the focus of this 
examination (Eysenck (1916-1997), Zuckerman (1928-2018), Seligman (1942-), and Csikszentmihalyi 
(1934-)) is how psychology establishes its subject matter. There have been many scholars (Daston 
(2000), Hacking (1995), Kagan (2001), Benjafield (2013), Danziger (1997)) to highlight the problems that 
arise when psychologists borrow from the public terms of everyday use (e.g., intelligence, willpower, 
boredom, etc.) and assume their status as natural kinds (Hacking, 1995) or indifferent kinds (Tsou, 2007) 
through methodology, operationalizations, and their psychological authority. This practice of borrowing 
from the public relies on the assumption that there is “a timeless ‘human nature’ independent of culture 
and history” (Hacking 1995, p. 129), that the terms offer accurate representations of concepts outside of 
language (Hacking, 1995; Benjafield, 2013), and that their subject matter is a universal part of ‘human 
nature’ (Kagan, 2001, Benjafield, 2013). These assumptions were primarily undermined by the 
categories’ evolving histories and the many cultural differences in their understanding and expression 
(Danziger, 1997; Benjafield, 2013; Kagan, 2001). Investigations like these present an explicit theoretical 
problem for the continued practice of scientific psychology that relies on colloquial language for its 
subject matter, something both personality psychology of the 1970s and positive psychology of the 
1990s practiced with theoretical backing from the Lexical Hypothesis (LH). Developed by Lewis Goldberg 
(1981), proponents of the LH argued that because all cultures develop vocabularies for consequential 
aspects and objects of experience, taxonomic methods can record equivalent expressions across 
cultures, which establishes personality traits as a natural expression of underlying biological and 

 
 
17 
 
evolutionary factors rather than a cultural product (Revelle & Oehlberg, 2008). While neither of the 
subdisciplines centralized the LH in their theories or discussions, it is informative due to their reliance on 
cross-cultural studies and their grounding of traits/states of interest (e.g., happiness, boredom, 
stimulation, etc.) in biological processes. Further, the LH informed the original assumptions of Eysenck’s 
psychometric methods, while Seligman co-authored a paper supporting the use of the theory (Schwartz 
et al., 2013). However, in failing to give boredom a standard definition, questions emerge regarding the 
assumptions of the LH and boredom’s natural identity. 
Methods 
This thesis possesses a comparative structure consisting of two chapters, each containing two 
subsections. The first subsection covers the technical psychological literature discussing the 
development of boredom, and the second subsection is dedicated to the popular discourse, with The 
New York Times (NYT) serving as a proxy. Specifically, chapter 1 covers the personality psychology of 
Hans Eysenck and Marvin Zuckerman and its development of boredom as a category of interest, with a 
particular focus on the 1970s. Chapter 1 also includes a discussion of 200 NYT articles containing the 
phrase “boredom” between 1970-1979. Similarly, chapter 2 covers the discussions and development of 
boredom by the subdiscipline of positive psychology but focuses on Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi’s work and 
his concept of flow. Chapter 2 also includes a discussion of 200 NYT articles containing the phrase 
“boredom” between the years 1990-1990. 
The over-arching strategy for the analysis is a comparison between each subsection, where the 
popular discourses are compared against each other and the psychological literature within its 
timeframe. Additionally, the two psychological bodies of literature of the 1970s and 1990s are 
documented for differences in methodologies and theory. This strategy was deployed to illuminate how 
the broader culture was influencing the discussions of boredom and whether the psychological 
understandings of the affective state were, in turn, influencing the popular discourse in a looping effect 

 
 
18 
 
(Hacking, 1995). Finally, the comparison also focuses on how the emergence of neoliberal reforms and 
the rapid growth of a complimentary public ideology influenced the practice of psychology, and 
ultimately, its understanding of boredom.  
The analysis for the NYT articles was informed by a Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke 2006 
paper on conducting thematic analysis. This approach involves the researcher's immersion by reading 
and rereading the data in several stages as general themes and patterns emerge. Beyond building a 
familiarity with the underlying data, this approach is highly flexible and can be applied across a range of 
theoretical approaches because it is independent of theory. According to the authors, “thematic analysis 
should be seen as a foundational method for qualitative analysis” (Braun & Clarke, 2006, p. 78). The 
exploratory nature of this investigation into boredom allowed the themes in the corpus to speak for 
themselves. 
 
Source Materials 
The New York Times was selected for the source material due to its large readership, longevity, 
and ease of archive search. It is also understood here as a surrogate for middle to upper-class American 
culture. This approach of performing a thematic analysis of the popular press as a methodology in the 
history of psychology in academic papers has been utilized by Robert Kugelmann (2013), Alexandera 
Rutherford (2000), and Jeffery Yen et al. (2018). Alexandra Rutherford states that “Journalists, as 
members of psychology’s popular audience . . . both mirror and interpret public attitudes. They 
influence these attitudes by choosing which stories, which angles and which criticisms to include in their 
coverage” (Rutherford, 2000, p. 374). In agreement, Yen remarked, “The news media reflect and 
strongly influence popular understanding of both science and prejudice” (Yen et al., 2018, p. 3). Yen also 
referenced earlier work by Katie Simmons and Amanda Lecouteur examining how the media shaped 
racist events and how that influenced how racism was understood and acted upon by the public 

 
 
19 
 
(Simmons & Lecouter 2008). This influencing of the readership is a well-established concept, and since 
psychologists also consume media, they too are influenced by the ideas in the popular press. Examples 
of the public influencing psychological concepts were found, yet, unexpectedly, instances of 
psychological ideas influencing the public discourse regarding boredom are limited, with the notable 
exception of editorials covering psychological findings in the 1990s, revealing its growing reach as a 
discipline. 
 
Procedure 
The source material for this project was collected using the ProQuest database of The New York 
Times archive, where “boredom” was utilized as the search term for the 1970s and 1990s. These two 
decades represent periods of formation and productivity for personality and positive psychology and 
some scholarship on boredom. These periods also mark the periods before and after the neoliberal 
reforms introduced by Ronald Reagan’s administration. For each decade, the first 200 articles appearing 
from the search result ordered by “relevance” were added to the corpus, with some duplicates 
substituted for the next relevant entry. 
 
Analysis and Category Construction 
As mentioned, using Braun and Clarke’s paper on thematic analysis as a guide, the data was 
subjected to many readings through which repeating themes associated with boredom were 
documented. These readings facilitated the comparison of themes and the construction of several 
overarching categories. These were established by identifying the primary subject matter and or context 
of the article. The categories for the two periods included: 
1970s 
1990s 
Art 
Art 

 
 
20 
 
Literature 
Literature 
Entertainment 
Entertainment 
Travel 
Travel 
Youth 
Youth 
Labour 
Labour 
Politics 
Politics 
Armed Forces 
Armed Forces 
Fashion 
Fashion 
Older Adults 
Older Adults 
Food 
Food 
 
Exercise 
 
Trials 
 
Boredom 
 
This categorization approach is imperfect as many categories possess porous boundaries; for instance, 
there are several examples where the Armed Forces, Youth, and Politics categories have considerable 
thematic overlap.  
An important consideration for how the categories were constructed was the differentiation 
between two of the most populated categories, Art and Entertainment. While a limited number of films 
and theater productions contain elements of both art and entertainment, generally speaking, articles 
designated as Art covered pieces or productions that were not primarily intended for mass distribution, 
had limited or no established popular associations, and were attempting to communicate existential 
ideas or meaning-making rather than engaging in capitalist practices. In contrast, articles in the 
Entertainment category were characterized as mass-produced, attention-seeking spectacle, derivative in 

 
 
21 
 
nature, commercial, and readily eliciting unintentional boredom. As mentioned above, these distinctions 
are primarily informed by Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno’s (1947/2020) work. In a similar 
vein, the Literature category possesses both elements of Art and Entertainment. As such, attempts to 
designate examples to either category are inexact, bordering on arbitrary. It is also necessary to 
highlight how some theorists, such as Colpitt (2017), argue that the distinction between art and 
entertainment has already been eliminated, with museums and galleries adopting entertainment as a 
tactic to increase attendance and revenues. It is noteworthy that the concepts forwarded by 
Horkheimer and Adorno can be found in several other categories, including Youth, Military, and 
especially Labour. However imperfect, these categories allow for the comparison of the most popular 
themes between periods. 
 
 

 
 
22 
 
Chapter 2 – Personality Psychology – Boredom as Trait 
 
Boredom did not begin the 20th century as a phenomenon of significant interest for Western 
governments or psychology, but as the century unfolded, the common but little-understood experience 
would gain attention from the psychological disciplines. This interest is documented in the growing 
number of articles attempting to define the term and identify associated negative states (Davies, 1926; 
Wyatt et al., 1929; Barmack, 1939a; Fenichel, 1951; Geiwitz, 1966). The extent to which the leaders of 
the United States Military were concerned with low morale among troops and the possible psychological 
distress of overseas deployments is reflected in the lengths they undertook to develop entertainment 
programs (Tibbettes, 1986/2010). For the personality psychologists in this chapter, namely Hans Eysenck 
(1916-1997) and Marvin Zuckerman (1928-2018), boredom would at first be a construct of utility as it 
facilitated advancements in their arousal theories of personality, only later becoming of interest with 
the development of boredom-focused testing and assessments. While there were several academic 
explorations into the identity of boredom before the closure of the first world war, it was with the 
development of individual difference testing regimes that the modern understanding of the experience 
and psychological testing of it that psychologists made progress in claiming the concept.  
The onset of the first world war saw several military developments that changed the nature of 
warfare, including the scale of battles, larger deployments of long-range artillery, and the wide use of 
trenches (Leese, 2002). These shifts in strategies and tactics exposed soldiers to an environment where 
psychological injuries were more prevalent, some of which manifested into mysterious ailments, 
including shell shock, battle fatigue, and war neurosis (MacCurdy, 1918; Leese, 2002; McDonald, 2016). 
Shell shock was singled out as a debilitating injury associated with mental disorders and behavioural 
abnormalities which challenged a soldier’s ability to carry out their duties. While the condition baffled 
many physicians, the sheer number of cases, 900,000 English, 900,000 French, and 15,000 American 
soldiers, made it impossible to ignore (Gibby & Zickar, 2008). In time, psychologists and governments 

 
 
23 
 
became convinced that its expression was due to natural susceptibilities and, a growing interest 
emerged in findings ways to pre-emptively identify citizens who were at greater risk. This interest 
materialized in the development of the Robert Woodworth Personal Data Sheet, which “identify soldiers 
prone to nervous breakdowns during enemy bombardment in [WWI]” (Gibby & Zickar, 2008, p. 164). 
These growing demands for ways of identifying individual differences accelerated the ongoing research 
being conducted by a host of psychologists who were not only interested in intelligence but were 
notable eugenicists, an association that would persist in the following decades (Goddard, 1920; Terman, 
1921; Cattell, 1924; Thorndike, 1924; Yerkes, 1917; 1923). While these efforts to construct new testing 
regimes largely came too late for screening WWI soldiers, the idea that certain people suffered from 
measurable mental vulnerabilities was of great interest to interwar governments and industry. 
Consistent with this, Woodworth’s Personal Data Sheet was revised in 1924 to test industrial personnel 
so that managers could identify unstable workers or applicants (Gibby & Zickar, 2008). As anxieties grew 
over the threat posed by communist ideologies and the rise of unions and labour unrest, capitalist 
leaders eagerly looked to these same psychological tests to help identify and neutralize potentially 
disruptive workers, facilitate efficient placement of labour, and control and manage citizenry (Gibby & 
Zickar, 2008; Westad, 2013). The extent to which psychological approaches, in general, grew in 
popularity can be partially gleaned from the founding of psychotechnical institutes in many countries, 
including England, France, Germany, Poland, Russia, and Japan (Rabinbach, 1992). It is also evidenced by 
the appearance of behaviourism (Schneider & Morris, 1987), articles regarding temperament 
measurement in “popular articles, trade magazines, and academic journals” (Lussier, 2018, p. 80), and 
the practice of characterology in the 1920s, which attempted to classify workers’ temperament, 
reliability, “devotion to duty, and other dimensions of “the working personality”” (Rabinbach, 1992, p. 
281). Ultimately, during the interwar reconstruction period, there were concerns, real and fabricated, 
that the accelerated growth of industrial production in the USSR’s command economy and considerable 

 
 
24 
 
military capacity would pose a near-term threat to Western Europe and beyond if the West’s economic 
advantage was not maintained (Ferguson & Koslowski, 2001). Attempts to advance testing 
methodologies persisted through the interwar period; efforts included factor analysis, the identification 
of various intelligences (Thurstone, 1938), and the Wechsler Adults Intelligence Scale cognitive 
intelligence test (Wechsler, 1939). With the introduction of complicated statistical practices, theoretical 
backing from notions of language which would eventually culminate into the Lexical Hypothesis, and 
rigorous experimental methods, the hope that psychology could be practiced as a hard science appeared 
to be nearing realization. Due to these developments, future boredom research could approach the 
experience as just another trait waiting to be revealed as the practice of psychology entered into a 
phase of normal science (Kuhn, 1962).  
It is important to note how the public’s awareness and periodic adoption of psychological 
concepts in the post-war period altered English Western discourses and understandings of themselves. 
People would come to interpret identities with tangible results of intelligence and personality testing, 
and for many, this spurred concern over the impact of psychological testing and the wide adoption by 
businesses. The reaction to this was seen in 1956 with William H. Whyte Jr.’s (2013) best-selling book, 
The Organization Man, which offered a 
scathing analysis of corporate America’s managerial bureaucracy. According to the Fortune 
magazine editor, modern enterprise abhorred individuality and creativity and fostered instead 
persons whose identity consisted primarily of belonging to an organization. He laid much of 
the blame on the science of human relations—especially psychology—for this sorry state of 
affairs (Pettit, 2013, p. 194).  
The book also offered readers approaches to answering personality tests in acceptable ways to business 
interests (Pettit, 2013). However, anxieties over how to navigate systematic testing and their 

 
 
25 
 
implications for workers persisted as continued cooperation between business, governments, and 
academia accelerated into the post-war period. The discipline that found itself at ground zero for these 
post-war developments was personality psychology as practiced in Britain. 
 
One center for postwar personality psychology was at the University of College London (UCL), 
which had benefited from a tradition of and proximity to evolutionary and statistical thinking. One of the 
first major influences on this institution came with Charles Darwin’s (1809-1882) work discussing the 
evolutionary pressures on behaviours in his Descent of Man (1871/2008), “both animals and humans 
had inheritable traits that shaped their moods and temperaments” (Horowitz, 2017, pp. 2-3). This stance 
highlighted how temperament, a concept similar to personality, was influenced by inheritable traits, 
which some psychologists later interpreted as a biological basis for personality and behaviours. Building 
on this work, Darwin’s half-cousin, Francis Galton (1822-1911), who dedicated his career to the 
development of the “science of eugenics”, established a eugenics laboratory at UCL and the journal the 
Eugenic Review, which was “designed to promote good breeding patterns. Galton opened the 
imagination to the possibility of managing human resource for improving society by improving human 
stocks” (Buchanan, 2010, pp. 48-49). The notion that society could improve its gene pool revealed a 
history of colonial and racists practices, and it depended upon a systematic way of sorting the 
genetically superior from the genetically inferior. The task of developing these measurement methods 
was taken up by the same people who pioneered this fundamentally racist interpretation of human 
nature and who, predictably, interpreted themselves as the apex of human development. While the 
terminology and overtly racist practices became less blatant over the decades, perhaps partially due to 
the atrocities of WWII, the problematic practice of categorizing people, as informed by biological and 
eugenic interpretations, persisted at UCL. Advancing to the interwar period at UCL, the psychologist Cyril 
Burt (1883-1971) also followed this tradition by examining the evolutionary differences between 
peoples while establishing an intelligence testing lab at the psychology department at UCL (Buchanan, 

 
 
26 
 
2010). Equally crucial to the later establishment of the personality psychology of individual differences 
at UCL was the statistical work of Charles Spearman (1863-1945), who pioneered the approach of factor 
analysis. This approach allowed researchers to quantify their descriptive research in ways that had not 
yet been possible, and in the process, clad their work in the appearance of scientific rigor. These 
influences helped form a highly influential academic tradition that substantially informed personality 
psychology as it was constituted at UCL in the postwar era. Tellingly, the preeminent theorist of this 
brand of personality psychology, Hans Eysenck, named all these academics as his largest influences, with 
Burt being his advisor and “chief intellectual influence” (Buchanan, 2010, p. 53).  
Included in this constitutive history of personality psychology is Eysenck’s work in the 1940s and 
1950s, where he utilized questionaries to measure the basic dimensions of personality by comparing 
neurotic with ordinary soldiers and fraternal with identical twins (Buchanan, 2010). One of the 
motivations for examining underlying biological causes stemmed from his experiences as a psychologist 
at Maudsley Psychiatric Hospital in London, England, where psychiatrists were treating the patients as if 
they all had the same relative potential to manifest disorders due to environmental or social causes 
(Zuckerman, 1979/2015). While at first practicing under these prevailing assumptions, Eysenck came to 
believe this approach was flawed since, for him, the primary underlying cause of mental disorders was 
the same as it was for different temperaments or personalities, an individual’s particular biology 
(Revelle & Oehlberg, 2008). This theorizing was not solely focused on discounting the role of 
environment, but more generally motivated by his hope to merge experimental (more commonly 
understood as cognitive psychology) and correlational methodologies, since “he did not believe that 
pure observational approaches could be anything more than mere descriptions and sources of hunches 
in a preparadigmatic science” (Revelle & Oehlberg, 2008, p. 1396). Further, Eysenck argued that a 
merger would allow individual differences to be scientifically established, paving the way for a biological 
basis for personalities. To this end, Eysenck and his colleagues joined other researchers by revisiting and 

 
 
27 
 
updating the stimulus research conducted by Austrian psychoanalyst Otto Gross (1902), Robert Yerkes, 
and John Dodson (1908). The main topic of interest was the Optimal Level of Stimulation (OLS) theory, 
which suggested that tasks were more efficiently completed at a mid-level of stimulation. As stimulation 
increased beyond the OLS, participants would experience overstimulation, leading to distraction and 
inefficiencies during task completion. The mirror of this effect was observed at lower levels of 
stimulation, which led to subjects becoming disengaged or falling asleep. This understanding of the OLS 
maps onto Yerkes and Dodson’s (1908) inverted “U” concept of arousal (Eysenck & Wilson, 1976). 
Among the other researchers involved in this work were Daniel Berlyne (1960), Donald Fiske and 
Salvatore Maddi (1961), Donald Hebb (1955), Robert Malmo (1957), and Harold Schlosberg (1954). 
Zuckerman would later highlight how Schlosberg “suggested that the idea of an optimal level of arousal 
(OLA) could be substituted for OLS since the arousal construct could accommodate stimulus parameters 
such as novelty versus constancy, and complexity” (Zuckerman et al., 1978, p. 139). This increased 
flexibility also allowed researchers, including personality psychologists, to adopt the underlying 
theoretical mechanism to explain personality types and individual motivations as natural selection 
differences in the preferred level of arousal between people (Zuckerman, 1979/2014, p. 28).  
With the OLA undergirding the contention that personalities can be understood in terms of 
biological differences, Eysenck, in his opinion, was then able to experimentally tests his theories since 
arousal could be “manipulated, physiologically indexed, or behaviorally observed” (Eysenck, 1987, p. 
30). For personality psychology, this meant that the long-existing categories of introversion and 
extraversions could be explained by the OLA, which would, in turn, connect his work to well-established 
science. Eysenck would come to believe that “extraverts are characterized by chronically lower levels of 
arousal in the ascending reticular activating system”, while introverts’ natural tendency was to be more 
“physiologically aroused” (Strelau & Eysenck, 1987, p. 137). As mentioned above, this effectively meant 
that when extraverts experienced arousal levels below their relatively high optimal level of arousal, they 

 
 
28 
 
would seek out increasing levels of arousal or stimulation to match their OLA, with the introverts 
adopting avoidance of stimulation if above their OLA. Eysenck believed these chronic lower levels of 
arousal motivated certain behaviours, including smoking, risky sex, and general social stimulation 
(Eysenck, 1963). Because Eysenck had founded his reasoning for individual differences in biology, he 
believed the OLA, through its connections to introversion and extraversion, was universally 
generalizable, “in many parts of the world, using many different instruments and methods of analysis, 
[researchers] have demonstrated that, descriptively, a dimension of personality closely resembling 
extraversion-introversion can be found universally and is of considerable help in the description of 
personality” (Strelau & Eysenck, 1987, p. 1). Due to this universality and his interests in genetic 
determinants, Eysenck, in what could be interpreted as a not-too-distant echo of Galton’s “good 
breeding habits”, saw the potential utility for his practices in categorizing and singling out “exceptional 
children” since, “We already know that E and N are implicated in school success" (Eysenck et al., 1970, p. 
266).  
According to biographer Roderick Buchanan (2010), Eysenck “developed a distinctive science of 
personality psychology that married descriptive statistics with physiological experimentation and 
collapsed any firm distinction between pure and applied science” (p. 3). This commitment to the 
assumption that the biological differences between people manifested into measurable and durable 
differences in personality is seen in the title of one of Eysenck’s best-known works, The Biological Basis 
of Personality (1963). While Eysenck was not dogmatic about the role of biology, he was still reasonably 
deterministic, arguing that “biology is not destiny but in influencing our basic appetite for stimulation it 
takes us down some strange byways” (Strelau & Eysenck, 1987, p. 229). According to Zuckerman, 
Eysenck theorized that each person had a preference for more or less arousal, and this could be 
explained straightforwardly, “a polygenic type of inheritance can account for much of the dimensional 
variance in personality. Just as we tend to inherit dispositions toward relative shortness or tallness or 

 
 
29 
 
certain body types, we also inherit differences in biological systems that dispose us toward various 
temperaments” (Zuckerman, 1979, p. 45). These ideas represented one side of the broader 
person/situation debate in psychology, where behaviourist-inspired Walter Mischel (1968), argued that 
behaviours are too unpredictable from one situation to the next to conclude underlying traits influence 
them. In this environment, where the majority adopted correlational approaches, Eysenck differentiated 
his brand of personality psychology by pioneering the “factor analytic psychometric approach to 
personality traits” while “making extensive use of both experimental and correlational methods” 
(Davidson, 2017, p. 321). More specifically, Eysenck theorized that personality types were constituted 
from a constellation of traits, and traits were derived from a constellation of an individual’s behaviours 
and tendencies, ultimately meaning personality could be experimentally investigated (Eysenck, 
1947/1998). With this theoretical framework and methodology in place, Eysenck furthered the idea of a 
biologically grounded personality, which would have implications for how boredom was understood and 
utilized. It is also worth noting that in the following decades, when most researchers distanced 
themselves from the trait approach, Eysenck held firm, stating that Mischel (1969) had misread the 
evidence, again claiming that “hereditary factors are important in explaining individual differences in 
personality” and “trait-state approach is almost the only major theory of personality that acknowledges 
that fact” (Eysenck & Eysenck, 1985, p. 95) 
The concerns stemming from these understandings of personality and arousal placed the 
“sensation seeker”, or extravert, as a personality type that was susceptible to the motivation to engage 
in risky behaviours, which could be expressed in antisocial activities and moral failings. Although, in 
understanding these factors, boredom, while not a central focus of Eysenck’s, did possess definitional 
utility for arousal as an opposed state, “the conditions of measurement have varied from “very boring” 
through “slightly arousing” to “very arousing” (Strelau & Eysenck, 1987, p. 8). He also noted boredom as 
an equivalent to a low arousal state and observed how it played a role in increasing cigarette smoking in 

 
 
30 
 
extraverts in situations of both over and under-stimulation (Strelau & Eysenck, 1987; Eysenck & 
Gudjonsson, 1989). These findings increased the interest in utilizing boredom as a method of 
categorization and the labeling of people as a potential concern. One apparent conflict running through 
these personality studies is the depiction of arousal as easily manipulated, yet its counterpart, boredom, 
suffers from being hard to elicit, poorly defined, and yet bestows oppositional characteristics. For 
Eysenck, boredom remained in the background, but for his close colleague, Marvin Zuckerman, 
boredom would become of keen interest as his investigative process revealed some concerning 
associations. This work would catch the interest of fellow psychologists, and as boredom received more 
attention in the coming decades, its underdetermined identity would persist, even as it continued to 
provide categorizing utility and theoretical productivity. 
 
Using Eysenck’s theories and methodologies, Marvin Zuckerman identified the biological factors 
of personality as understood by the roles of stimulation and arousal. Similarly, he took up Eysenck’s 
interest in transitioning away from Freud’s primary drives to what he believed was a more scientifically 
grounded concept of the OLS and later OLA (Zuckerman, 1979, p. 17). These theories governing 
behaviour offered psychologists a more direct way to psychobiologically test the variations in 
personality by manipulating arousal levels. In acknowledging the ongoing research being conducted 
regarding levels of stimulation and his work on the Sensation-Seeking Scale (SSS), Zuckerman remarked, 
“The concept of an optimal level of stimulation, excitation, or activation has been offered by Hebb and 
Thompson (1954), Leuba (1955), Berlyne (1960), and Fiske and Maddi (1961) as a substitute for the 
unsatisfactory concept of drive reduction which assumes the common goal of all primary motivation is 
to reduce stimulation to a minimum” (Zuckerman et al., 1963, p. 477). Zuckerman was hopeful the SSS 
would provide a more complex model with the capacity to account for individual differences, as well as 
how different sensations can possess different optimal levels, culminating in a general factor for the 
OLS/OLA, “we hypothesized that a general factor would emerge from responses to diverse items” 

 
 
31 
 
(Zuckerman et al., 1964, p. 477). As Zuckerman pursued his interests in exploring individual differences 
for sensation seeking, he would come to identify boredom as a helpful concept to contextualize the 
sensation seeker’s behaviours.  
 
Before the SSS was fully developed, Zuckerman, much like Eysenck, found inspiration in the 
work of Hebb (1904-1985), Berlyne (1924-1976), Heron (1928-), and others who explored the use of 
sensory deprivation as a way to experimentally manipulate participants’ levels of stimulation or arousal. 
With its apparent associations with boredom, this work provided insight and inspiration for Zuckerman 
as he developed the SSS, “The first form of this test was devised in 1961 as an incidental part of my 
experimental research in sensory deprivation” (Zuckerman, 1979, p. 1). It was also hoped that sensory 
deprivation research could provide clear evidence that people did indeed possess individual differences 
in innate preferences for arousal or stimulation, “The results made some sense in terms of an optimal 
level of arousal theory if we assume that the sensory variety program produced arousal only slightly 
above normal levels, whereas the sensory deprivation produced arousal below normal levels” 
(Zuckerman, 1979, p. 62). One particular observation about the problematic history of sensory 
deprivation studies made the connection between population management, sensory deprivation, and 
biological underpinnings, 
The research area of sensory deprivation owes a peculiar debt to the Chinese “brainwashers” of 
the Korean War. The Canadian government’s interest in brainwashing led to a grant to the McGill 
University group, directed by Hebb, to study the effects of perceptual deprivations in humans. 
Although susceptibility to propaganda was one of the effects studied, the interests of Hebb and 
his students went far beyond brainwashing. Measures of cortical activation and cognitive 
perceptual, and motor performance were included in order to test Hebb’s evolving physiological 
theory of behavior (Zuckerman, 1979, p. 62).  

 
 
32 
 
By and large, Zuckerman interpreted much of the inconsistent results produced by the sensory 
deprivation studies as evidence of biological differences, expressed as individual differences in 
personality traits. It is also of interest how Zuckerman characterized some of the experiences of 
participants in these studies, “the subjects disliked sensory deprivation more, found it more boring, and 
reported that it made them feel more drowsy, anxious, and depressed than the sensory variety 
condition” (Zuckerman et al., 1978, p. 76). By describing the experience of low arousal as one marked by 
boredom, Zuckerman was making use of the explanatory power of the concept and its position of 
importance for the OLA and the SSS. 
 
As mentioned, one of Zuckerman’s main accomplishments was in the development of his 
Sensation Seeking Scale, where he defined the central construct of interest as, “a trait defined by the 
need for varied, novel, and complex sensations and experiences and the willingness to take physical and 
social risks for the sake of such experience” (Zuckerman, 1979, p. 14). He had earlier connected this 
concept to the OLA through personal tendencies for a need for sensations and experiences “to maintain 
an optimal level of arousal” (Zuckerman, 1979 et al., p. 308). Sensation seeking had previously been 
theorized to be an aspect of traits, including extraversion, hypomania, and field independence by Quay 
(1965), while Zuckerman found it was “related to an uninhibited, non-conforming, impulsive, dominant 
type of extraversion” (Zuckerman, 1979 et al., p. 319). Echoing Eysenck’s concerns, one of Zuckerman’s 
hopes for the SSS was to provide a counter to the commonly held notion that the environment was 
primarily responsible for personality and disorders, “Many [readers] may want to re-examine their 
social-environmental assumptions of causation to allow for the interactive influences of biological 
systems” (Zuckerman, 1979, p. 2). With biological explanations being consistent with a focus on 
individual differences, Zuckerman believed that the SSS and other efforts could account for the majority 
of the between-subjects error term found in personality studies at the time by attributing it to individual 
differences (Zuckerman, 1979). Zuckerman further believed that these variations between people made 

 
 
33 
 
sense in evolutionary terms, where high and low default levels for the OLA/OLS could be advantageous 
in different environments. This framework also potentially identified the source of various mental 
disorders associated with anti-social and overactive tendencies by explaining how default levels being 
too high or too low could be maladaptive rather than the result of social influences (Zuckerman, 1979). 
Beyond the concerns of mental health diagnoses, Zuckerman believed the SSS had the potential to 
identify and ultimately define people in terms of how well they integrated into a managed social 
environment, “the low-sensation seekers will “burrow into” whatever forms of security and stability are 
provided by the social order. Since most social structures are built on impulse inhibition, there are 
usually more opportunities for low-sensation seekers to find a satisfactory way of life than there are for 
highs” (Zuckerman, 1979, p. 374). The SSS was positioned here as a nearly all-purpose psychological 
categorization tool with the OLA situated at the core of understanding human motivation, which had 
obvious utility for government, the military, and industry.  
To operationalize the construct of sensation seeking, Zuckerman relied on his own expert 
opinion to construct items that constituted valid self-report items. This approach included questions 
about risky activities like skiing, scuba diving, unprotected sex, alcohol, and drugs with the underlying 
assumption that people who were predisposed to engage in these activities did so because they were 
experiencing a deficit in stimulation or arousal (Zuckerman, 1979; Eysenck & Gudjonsson, 1989). 
Zuckerman earlier discussed some of the problematic associations, “found greater drug usage, alcohol 
drinking, and greater variety of sexual experience among high sensation seekers of both sexes than in 
lows” (Zuckerman, 1979, p. 310). It is here that boredom surfaces as an important consideration, as a 
number of these items situated boredom as the opposite of arousal, “I get bored seeing the same old 
faces”, “I have no patience with dull or boring persons”, “Most adultery happens because of sheer 
boredom” (Zuckerman, 1979, pp. 398, 394, 390). While boredom was being depicted as an experience of 
negative valence, it is unclear if it is being recognized as a trait, a state, a motivator, or something else 

 
 
34 
 
entirely, but it is something to be avoided or reconciled. Beyond facilitating meaning in other constructs, 
Zuckerman also found utility in the concept of boredom when he deployed it in attempts to frame 
sensation seeking as universal, as well as a mechanism for explaining the need for variety, “Just as rats 
will vary the paths they take to a goal, high-sensation seekers will vary their routines to avoid boredom, 
in contrast to the lows who are less distressed by an unvarying routine” (Zuckerman, 1979, p. 15).  
As the construct of boredom became associated with high sensation seekers and recognized as 
an essential catalyst for problematic behaviours, Zuckerman investigated his earlier assumptions that 
during repetitive experiences, sensation seekers become bored more quickly than most other people 
(Zuckerman, 1972). In his attempts to understand the motivational aspects at work, Zuckerman revealed 
a problematic understanding of socioeconomic causes by essentially stating that the poor could not 
afford to be healthy sensation seekers (or extraverts),  
Sensation seekers among lower socioeconomic groups are almost inevitably drawn into 
antisocial sensation seeking. Skiing and scuba diving do not provide the weekend relief from a 
monotonous job for them. Crime, drugs, and alcohol are often the only answers to the 
problem of monotony (Zuckerman, 1979, p. 251).  
The conclusion that people of a lower socioeconomic status “almost inevitably” engage in antisocial 
behaviours categorizes them as problematic elements of society rather than fellow citizens who have 
limited options due to a lack of resources. It also either presents a contradiction to the argument that 
biology trumps environment or that those most genetically likely to be sensation seekers are also at the 
lower rungs of society due to genetics. Perhaps in the first case, it would simply be too expensive to 
address the problems of lower-income sensation seekers adequately.  
 
Expanding on the utility of the SSS, Zuckerman also highlighted how a particular data set (Fisher, 
1973) revealed 

 
 
35 
 
high-sensation-seeking women tend to: prefer a high frequency of intercourse, maintain interest 
in sex during pregnancy, believe that sexual freedom should be increased in society, frequently 
have multiple orgasms, have copious vaginal lubrication during intercourse, frequently sleep in 
the nude, and become sexually excited during a laboratory session with no explicitly erotic 
stimulation (Zuckerman, 1979, p. 274).  
Zuckerman further singled out the problems associated with sensation seeking females by questioning 
the morality and decision-making skills of women so categorized, “high-sensation seeking women have a 
high degree of interest in clothes and are not economical in their buying of clothes. Apparently, the 
desire to dress attractively, whatever its motivation (and I suspect it is not primarily a sexual one), is 
another characteristic of sensation-seeking women” (Zuckerman, 1979, p. 274). Overall, the SSS was not 
only positioned as a way to detect these problematized people but also to detect them early in life, “The 
hope was that a nonverbal sensation-seeking measure could be developed which might be useful with 
children” (Zuckerman, 1979, p. 316). However, it is unclear if Zuckerman believed measures could be 
taken to correct for high-sensation seeking tendencies if detected at an early age or if society would 
benefit from labeling these people earlier. 
 
In 1971, after the SSS was updated in an “attempt to develop new scales representative of 
hypothesized dimensions of sensation seeking, Zuckerman identified the Boredom Susceptibility (BS) 
factor for the first time (p. 45). This factor, which Zuckerman referred to as “The fourth factor . . . 
represented an aversion to repetition, routine, and dull people, and restlessness when things are 
unchanging”, met with some early inconsistent results (Zuckerman et al., 1978, p. 140). For example, a 
Temple University sample found a clearly defined factor for males but not for females, while other 
results showed “hard[er] to explain” racial differences (Zuckerman et al., 1978; Zuckerman, 1979, p. 
141). However, the BS found a measure of validation when a United Kingdom study found Boredom 
Susceptibility in both males and females (Zuckerman, 1979). These mixed results, common in boredom 

 
 
36 
 
studies, might be explained by the lack of a widely used definition and or the inability of researchers to 
experimentally manipulate it, “One of the primary obstacles to research on boredom and subjective 
time experience is seen to be the lack of techniques which permit quick, precise boredom 
manipulations” (Geiwitz, 1964). Zuckerman noted the history of disagreement over boredom’s identity 
when discussing contextual considerations of the OLA, where he adopted boredom as a low arousal 
state. In contrast, others, like Berlyne (1960), viewed “boredom as a high arousal state” (Zuckerman et 
al., 1978, p. 76). However, this lingering disagreement over boredom’s nature and its continued 
unruliness did not prevent it from being used as a negative definitional aid to arousal. Providing 
theoretical support for Zuckerman’s overall understanding of the stimulus seeker and boredom was how 
“the stimulant score also correlated significantly with the Boredom Susceptibility subscale” (Carrol & 
Zuckerman, 1977, p. 598). Because of this and its growing associations with adverse outcomes, 
Zuckerman explored the construct of boredom as a low arousal state in future research with keen 
interest. 
Boredom’s productivity for researchers continued as its undefined character made it readily 
amenable to the shifting understandings of the OLS and the OLA. If boredom could be measured and 
understood as a trait that dislikes sameness, then it could help explain the complication of how there 
are theorized mechanisms to not only seek out appropriate levels of stimulation but also an avoidance 
or displeasure in repeated stimulations, as seen in the above-mentioned rat study (Zuckerman, 1979). 
Another explanation for the increasing interest in boredom was how the BS corroborated earlier work 
that found associations between boredom with psychoticism and problematic behaviour (Hare & 
Thorvaldson, 1970; Zuckerman, 1979). The list of negative associations continued to grow through the 
1970s, including drug abuse, eating disorders, depression, dropping out of school, low achievement, job 
dissatisfaction, vocational accident rates, excessive cigarette smoking, and others (Samuels & Samuels, 
1974; Giambra & Traynor, 1978; Abramson & Stinson, 1977; Leon & Chamberlain, 1973; Fogelman, 

 
 
37 
 
1976; Robinson, 1975; Broadbent, 1979; Gardell, 1971; Drory, 1982; Ferguson, 1973; Vodanovich & Kass, 
1990). These and other links between boredom and negative behaviours would continue to be 
investigated in the coming decades (Zuckerman, 1979; Farmer & Sundberg, 1986; Mikulas, 1993; 
Csikszentmihalyi, 2000; Danckert & Allman, 2005, Eastwood et al., 2007; Raffaelli et al., 2018). 
 
When viewed in a societal context, Eysenck’s and Zuckerman’s efforts to explain behavioral and 
personality differences between people by assuming representative differences in individuals’ biology 
have enormous implications for the debates over the role of government and the efficacy of social 
programs. If people are ‘stamped at birth,’ then remediation efforts by governments to correct for the 
perceived determinants of specific biological processes become difficult to justify. With biological 
causation aligning with more politically conservative voices, the political fault line between the social 
and the biological became starker. One of the focal points of these controversies was the publishing of 
the former Eysenck student Arthur Jensen’s 1969 article regarding efforts to boost IQ and scholastic 
achievement (Eysenck, 1971). Jensen openly questioned the efficacy of the United States government’s 
universal schooling program by highlighting the causality of heredity factors in the development of 
intelligence, as represented by IQ tests. By citing IQ data which showed a discrepancy in performance 
between Whites and Blacks, Jensen was criticizing school reforms so that “schools and society must 
provide a range and diversity of educational methods, programs, and goals, and of occupational 
opportunities, just as wide as the range of human abilities” (1969, p. 117). What this amounted to was a 
justification for separate educational and occupational tracks according to race, which by its very 
definition is racist. By supporting these arguments, Eysenck was not only courting controversy but 
aligning himself with far-right conservatives in the United States (Buchanan, 2010). The debates over the 
extent to heredity’s influence on performance and race would reoccur throughout the 20th century, with 
The Bell Curve (Herrnstien & Murray, 1994) connecting race and intelligence, serving as an example. 
These arguments essentially culminated into a “call for government policies to alter social 

 
 
38 
 
environments, based on a conviction that growing minds are plastic and capable of change, and on the 
other, an insistence that biological inheritance will inevitably trump most ameliorative efforts and that 
these efforts are in any event a waste of federal funds” (Staub, 2018, p. 6). The nature of these debates 
regarding the proper role of government was shaped by the fact that neoliberal policies had not been 
implemented in the 1970s. Meaning, rather than corrective efforts being an individual’s responsibility, 
government intervention was still assumed and expected, leaving conservative voices seeking a way to 
brand government efforts to correct for inequality as a waste of resources due to heritable determinacy.     
 
These political concerns were also present when considering the purpose and interpretation of 
measurement tools like the SSS. When understood as grounded in difficult-to-change biology, 
psychologists could interpret vocational propensities and mental health outcomes as essentially 
predetermined. Eysenck himself tied extraversion to vocational preferences, noting extraverts displayed 
“greater 'social intelligence' than introverts” but “waste more time talking . . . seeking diversion from 
the routine” while the introvert was able to, “resist boredom and persist with a task for a long period of 
time is also valuable in other occupational contexts” and were “more reliable and conscientious, they 
are more punctual” (Eysenck, 1981, p. 266). These instruments place enormous power in the hands of 
psychologists as they systematically reveal people’s true nature and probable life outcomes. Zuckerman 
went further, tying political leanings themselves to biological makeup, “I would like to suggest that 
conservatism and liberalism may also reflect a basic personality trait, rather than merely one’s learned 
attitudes toward social issues” (Zuckerman, 1979, p. 259). The introvert-extravert dimension could be 
theorized to measure all manner of traits and tendencies, with each interpretation stripping more 
personal agency from the general population.  
 

 
 
39 
 
Qualitative Data - Boredom in the Popular Press 1970-1979 
The Western popular discourse regarding boredom in the 1970s, as represented by 200 NYT 
articles, covers a period of productivity and influence for personality psychology. It is also a decade of 
uncertainty with continued Cold War tensions, the end of American involvement in the Vietnam War 
(1955-1975), heightened inflation (Federal Reserve, 2021a), and the continued expansion of the 
American capitalist economy (Federal Reserve, 2021b). As mentioned in the methods section, the 
following discourses containing boredom are categorized by the overarching theme of which they take 
part in which they are situated, which can provide insight into how the term was being utilized, as found 
in the NYT. 
Art 
Boredom appeared in discussions of the arts, including dance, fine art, theatre, and other forms 
not purely dedicated to distraction and entertainment. As mentioned above, the distinction between 
the arts and entertainment here loosely follows Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer’s (1947) 
understandings in The Culture Industry. Here, Art is represented by works that have not been mass-
produced, are not primarily commercial, and do not explicitly contribute to notions of false choice. 
Given that this is situated in a capitalist culture where commodification is ubiquitous, the borders 
between art and entertainment are porous, where works of art can be accused of “entertaining”. Within 
this category, boredom was characterized in various ways, sometimes as a trivial experience, a critique, 
and, at times, a device to make cultural commentaries. In total, there were 26 ‘Art’ articles out of the 
200 for this period that made some mention of boredom. One example details how actors had 
successfully embodied the boredom gripping a decaying ruling class, “The time is 1952 and these 
corrupt remnants of an empty aristocracy are bored beyond relief, stewing in their own validity” 
(Gussow, 1976, p. 37). There were critiques about productions that centered on boring characters, as 
well as warnings to audiences of mixed performances, “expect boredom and excitement with “The 

 
 
40 
 
Hashish Club”” (Barnes, 1975, p. 12). There was a rare example of an acknowledgment, if tacit that there 
are individual differences in people’s reactions, varying from “enthusiasm high, criticism sharp and 
boredom occasionally” (“Some were”, 1972, p. 43). An exhibition at the Guggenheim Museum proved to 
be a “source of initiation, bafflement or boredom” (Kramer, 1971, p. D21). In contrast, some elicitations 
of boredom were said to be intentional on behalf of the artists, “many younger composers of the Cage 
and Stockhausen persuasions were writing music that aimed at raising boredom to an esthetic principle” 
(Henanhan, 1976, p. 59). One playwright was said to use boredom as a method to force the audience to 
consider an uncomfortable state, “He is a great believer in the art of boredom and the craft of 
reiteration” (Barnes, 1976, p. 33). Another performance adopted the same approach when it used 
boredom to make a commentary about the drudgery of contemporary work, “Six performers peer at the 
audience from behind a high counter. They wear expressions of utter boredom as they stamp papers. 
Call out “Next!” and crane around to stare at a large clock behind them” (Eder, 1978, p. 16). This 
particular use of boredom reflects some of the discourses occurring in the 1970s regarding unrest 
between businesses and unions. In what might be considered an “art film” with its limited release and 
lack of promotion, “Retour d’Afique” was inspired by poetry the producer read as a child, was also said 
to be an investigation of boredom (Canby, 1973, p. 41). A film similar in its lack of wide distribution, the 
“English Soporific”, explored the boredom of a directionless young man, where he appears as bored as 
the audience is made to feel (Sayre, 1974, p. 32). The lines between entertainment and art with these 
films are not clear cut, but their lack of “mass production” and the risk they adopted by focusing on 
boredom as a central topic leaves these two offerings as decidedly non-commercial enterprises. Beyond 
film and productions, the arts were also depicted as an inoculation against boredom, “But if one has art 
one can never be bored. I don't mean art as in the artsy craftsy kinds of things, but fine art” (Snyder, 
1973, 42). Furthermore, for a writer who would have perhaps scored high on the SSS, art proved a 

 
 
41 
 
distraction from a mundane sermon while at church, “My earliest appreciation of stained glass was as a 
glorious escape from boredom during church services” (Lyon, 1975, p. D41).  
Literature 
 
Articles discussing literature that included the term boredom counted 14 and unsurprisingly had 
some commonalities with the category of Art, as some examples explore the existential aspects of the 
construct. The author of The Sporting Club, Thomas McGuane, was said to have touched on some trivial 
aspects and meaninglessness in upper-class life, “shown some unnerving aspects of male rivalry and 
affluent boredom” (Clemons, 1971, p. 33). While book reviewer Anatole Broyard remarked how The Eye 
of the Beholder made use of a particularly unwise boredom reduction strategy, “To choose an 
unpredictable partner is one of the antidotes to the boredom that so often seems to set in between the 
sexes” (1976, p. C17). A children’s book appeared to capture the growing fears of parents during this 
time, “Out of boredom and a sense of futility, a teen-age girl drops out of high school for no loftier 
purpose than to sit around the house in pink plastic curlers, stare endlessly at the tube” (Maloff, 1977, p. 
29). Another book was said to have been unnecessarily pedantic, “But the dialogues go on forever. As if 
boredom were an essential adjunct of learning the real truth of how intelligence operations are set up” 
(Burgess, 1977, p. 266). There was also a discussion of Fyodor Dostoyevsky’s depiction of a small boy 
breaking up the monotony while surrounded by the sick and dying “out of boredom he purposely blew 
this steam from his mouth” (“The little”, 1974, p. 27). A literary critic used the term to mock the 
stereotype of the bored existentialist writer as well as possibly making a connection between French 
writers and sensation seekers, “revulsion, boredom and distaste for the “mediocrity” of life in Paris. 
What would French writers do without boredom and mediocrity to inveigh against?” (Broyard, 1974, p. 
29). Both here and in the previous section, boredom is expressed in a way consistent with the OLS/OLA, 
with people being driven to find stimulation.  

 
 
42 
 
Entertainment 
 
Mass consumed entertainment was repeatedly singled out as both a way to relieve boredom by 
distracting from the unpleasant vacancy of leisure time while also as a way of inducing it by failing to 
meet that expectation. Entertainment also represented the most populated category for this period, 
with 31 articles discussing movies, sports, television, and popular music. Common themes in this 
discourse present it as a curative, elicited through repetition, and as a critical evaluation. Included in this 
robust category was an example of a movie reviewer who utilized it for comic effect, “The Blue Bird isn’t 
a movie. It’s a covenant with boredom” (Canby, 1976, p. 77). Five months later, the same reviewer also 
observed that it is the people who seldom see movies who are the ones that complain about how boring 
they are, stating that they are not “a fool-proof defense against boredom” (Canby, 1976, p. 73). A music 
reviewer wanted to “scream from boredom” as he endured songs from Dion DiMucci’s new album, the 
longest of which was four minutes, which “seemed to last forever” even though the musician was 
known for having varied influences of rock, R&B and blues (Laterman, 1972, p. D34). Here it seems that 
the novelty typically associated with variation was absent; whether this is because Dion DiMucci had 
grown repetitive or presents a counterexample to notions of the SSS and OLA is unclear. Television was 
another medium that suffered from a lack of novelty, with a comedy series featuring James Stewart 
being at once “heavy with warm integrity” and “even heavier with banality and boredom” (O’Connor, 
1973, p. 149). As some commentators experienced “utter boredom” with cable television for the 
unimaginative programming, with even moon landings quickly becoming a repetitive bore, “the third 
landing on the moon was received here yesterday with enthusiasm by a few, polite interest by many and 
boredom and hostility by some” (Cohen, 1972, p. D19; Montgomery, 1971, p. 13). While boredom was 
also present in sports articles, boredom was more often understood as a motivator to engage in sports 
or even create new ones. One professional tennis player credited the experience, “My habit was born-
out of youthful boredom” (Stillman, 1977, p. S2). Boredom was also credited with the development of 

 
 
43 
 
the sport “Hot Dog” as, “People are getting bored just going up and down the mountain” (Wallace, 
1973, p. 235). Intriguingly, some participants were depicted as bored with competition in general, “With 
a look of triumphant boredom and a gesture of good will” (Katz, 1972, p. 21). While others expressed a 
failure to get engaged with a sport central to their larger community, “my husband and I missed every 
football game the University of Texas played. Call it character. Call it boredom” (Pennebaker, 1979, p. 
S2). Boredom’s frequent use in these conversations could be partially attributed to the fact that people 
expect entertainment to address boredom, not instill it. These uses could also be interpreted as the 
middle brow or pretentious NYT making a cultural commentary akin to the arguments found in the 
Culture Industry.  
Travel 
 
In the 1970s NYT sample, boredom appeared in seven discussions about the various stages of 
traveling long distances. Of considerable concern to these commentators were the efforts by businesses 
to introduce distractions, novelty and address the sense of confinement that plagued travel. Typically 
travel for leisure is envisioned as a way to introduce novelty, which aligns with some assumptions made 
by Zuckerman regarding sensation and experience seeking, but the act of traveling itself was commonly 
associated with its apparent opposite, boredom. In one instance, a reporter remarked how people dealt 
with waiting at a Tokyo airport, “Travelers passing through Tokyo’s International Airport at Haneda 
often experience the emotions common to passengers at most other busy airports: boredom, 
exasperation” (Shabecoff, 1970, p. 82). A U.S. bus terminal attempted to profit from traveler’s boredom 
through new coin-operated TVs (“For a price”, 1970, p. 152). In one instance, an airline attempted to 
introduce novelty by allowing bored customers to “eavesdrop” on conversations between ground crews 
and pilots during long flights (Albright, 1972, p. XX4). Another writer commented on the unpleasant 
state of living in motels for any length of time, “That is when boredom and the monotony of motel living 
sickens you” (Jacklin, 1970, p. 66). These examples are more trivial and uniformly discuss states over 

 
 
44 
 
traits, yet boredom was a serious enough concern that businesses devoted resources to address it while 
also attempting to profit from it. 
Youth 
Relevant to this section, a version of the SSS was never established for children, even though 
Martin Zuckerman expressed interest in developing one (Zuckerman, 1971). The creation of such a scale 
would have added to the already numerous developmental theories, Sigmund Freud’s Psychosexual 
Developmental Theory (1905), Piaget’s Cognitive Developmental Theory (1952), Lev Vygotsky’s 
Sociocultural Theory (1962), Erik Erikson’s Psychosocial Developmental Theory (1963), and Albert 
Bandura’s Social Learning Theory (1977), to name a few. These efforts reveal a long history of 
theoretical interest and success in capturing the public’s imagination in framing youth as a time of 
vulnerability that required professional guidance. However, the extent to which psychologists focused 
on childhood brought charges of profiteering from the problematization of childhood from critics 
(Rosier, 2009). While Zuckerman did not author a SSS for children, it could have been fertile ground for 
his theories of seeking stimulation, as the articles below depict a public preoccupation with children and 
young adults acting in anti-social ways. Ultimately, the 29 articles from this period reveal youth as a time 
rife with boredom.  
These discussions featured antisocial behaviours, drug use, consumerism, and stunted 
educational development among younger populations. One writer, who displayed a comfort with sexist 
assumptions perhaps not uncommon in the 1970s, highlighted the appearance of a female who had 
returned to school after being truant for 50 days, “her frosted hairdo, snug blouse and sloe-eyed look of 
boredom” (Clines, 1979, p. B2). An advertisement for a Jewish youth organization highlighted the 
dangers of bored youth, “Boredom gets kids to do some pretty wild things to get noticed. Like 
shoplifting. Joyriding. Using drugs. Destroying themselves” (“People do”, 1972, p. 7). Perhaps 

 
 
45 
 
manifesting these concerns, one article detailed how a teen was arrested in a suspected bombing “many 
young people [stated] it stems from the boredom of being young and having nothing to do” (Goodman, 
1975, p. 49). Another article commented on how the profession of teaching was changing since teachers 
now needed to be entertaining as students have learned to “change the channel” and went further to 
suggest that this attitude and boredom were the cause of violence and drug addiction (Kreisberg, 1977, 
p. 537). Related to this, the senior year of high school was an ongoing concern as a “yawning stretch of 
anticlimax and boredom” (Peterson, 1973, p. 43). These entries are juxtaposed with the few 
documenting how strong communities fostered a carefree childhood, “boredom is not one of the 
problems of poor city kids”, or how children “enjoyed innocence and never knew boredom” (Levenson, 
1971, p. A1; Baker, 1979, p. 58). Other examples had students overcome boredom by the excitement of 
getting a high school class ring or going on a field trip to a recycling plant or bakery, but these more 
trivial uses were less common (“Time does”, 1978, p. A14; Adelman, 1978, p. NJ1). As previously 
mentioned, drug use in young people was repeatedly associated with boredom, with some unemployed 
youth in Long Island experimenting with drugs, “And boredom is the main muse” (Molotsky, 1978, p. 
B2). These examples of attempting to introduce stimulation or novelty, as varied as they were, are all 
consistent with how people would typically behave if they scored high on the SSS, but again, there is no 
known research exploring if children are more likely to be high sensations seekers. Boredom was also 
seen as playing a role in drug use transforming into drug abuse, “Earlier Dr. Arbuzzi had said that 
frustration and boredom . . . were responsible for the heavy use of drugs. The youths “had nothing else 
to do” (“Drug peril”, 1970, p. 58).In contrast, other examples pointed to de-escalation in drug use 
coinciding with boredom, “Youth, students, college, switching from heavier drugs to pot and alcohol 
(wine) out of boredom and knowing what they can safely do” (Darnton, 1971, p. 52). While the 
connection between drug use and boredom will be discussed in more detail in the Military section, this 
last example complicates understandings of motivations, the SSS, and drug use, as Zuckerman did not 

 
 
46 
 
discuss the idea of drug users switching drug types out of boredom, only the propensity for high and low 
SSS scorers to gravitate towards either amphetamines or depressants (Zuckerman, 1977). It is 
interesting how boredom facilitated less risky behaviours when such acts became boring, as this appears 
to contradict the OLS/OLA and Zuckerman’s understanding of the role of stimulants (1977). The 
concerns of boredom and drug use were increased when violence became part of the mix, “the violence 
had been caused less by fear than by boredom” (Semple, 1976, p. 3). These problematic associations 
caught the attention of the national government, with Richard Nixon declaring, “The aim should be to 
make a child “immune” to the need or the lure of drugs, regardless of poverty, the persuasion of 
pushers, a child’s curiosity, his boredom, unhappiness, his rebellion or his feelings of deprivation” 
(Hutschenecker, 1972, p. 47). Nixon’s opinions here reveal his neoliberal understandings of individual 
responsibility and overcoming one’s environment. In contrast, local governments endorsed a community 
approach to addressing the problem, “Meaningful involvement in community action projects is an 
effective way of combating the boredom that 'often’ leads to drug abuse” (“Oyster bay”, 1971, p. BQ74). 
These anxieties stretched beyond Western countries, at least in one instance in Moscow, “a gang of 
teenagers beginning with petty thefts and ending with murder, escaping boredom and getting their kicks 
out of violence” (Smith, 1972, p. 9). Newspapers fed into the overall fear regarding drugs as they 
published stories about Satanists, drugs, and death cults, with boredom playing a motivating role in 
finding alternative religions “If it was just the fad of a few conceived in boredom and fanned by drug-
taking” (Burks, 1971, p. 35). Boredom was of obvious concern in this period, with unemployed or idle 
youth turning to expressions of violence and antisocial behaviours. These examples are partially 
consistent with how the OLS/OLA envisioned how certain behaviours would manifest as people become 
motivated to seek out stimulation to avoid the uncomfortable state of boredom. The alarm conveyed 
throughout this discourse was likely facilitated by the expansion of psychological studies focusing on the 
connection between disorder and boredom, as well as the historical problematization of childhood 

 
 
47 
 
(Rosier, 2009). The themes found here and in the next section capture Carl Roger’s concerns with 
increased reliance on technology, specialization, having basic needs met, and overcrowding of urban 
areas.  
Labour 
 
Boredom’s role in NYT articles discussing labour concerns captured the national anxiety 
occurring over the state of the economy, the conflict between business and unions, and what the future 
held for the “average worker” at an assembly plant. This section included many articles, 31, which 
discussed boredom’s various roles in undermining efficiencies, morale, and workplace harmony. In the 
context of the ongoing Cold War, some of the references to workplace violence take on a political 
identity and heighten existent anxieties. Some I/O psychologists attempted to address elevated 
concerns about the boredom and alienation associated with assembly line work, “The workers at the 
Topeka plant are part of an experimental attack on the boredom and alienation that in recent years 
have led to increasingly high turnover rates and even random acts of sabotage in American industry” 
(Salpukas, 1973, p. 1). While one company’s approach to addressing boredom could have been directly 
informed by the OLA, as they increased the stimulation level of employees by doubling the capacity of 
the assembly line, “Yet the question remains, does doubling up lead to an equal, or even better, degree 
of quality because it lessens boredom?” (Kremen, 1973, p. 159). Unions also recognized the negative 
impact boredom was having, not on productivity, but on the well-being of workers, by promoting a 4-
day work week and banking work hours (“Auto union”, 1972, p. 28). The issue was of significant enough 
concern that governments began to study it, “Surveys have shown that good wages and benefits alone 
are no longer enough to motivate workers in jobs that they consider boring and in which they have little 
chance to move ahead” (Salpukas, 1972, p. 38). Another survey revealed that “the cross section of office 
employees studied were producing only 55 percent of their potential.  The reasons for this included:  
Boredom with repetitive jobs, uneven workflow” (Stetson, 1972, p. F3). The discussion of boredom also 

 
 
48 
 
reached the wider public, “Worker boredom, job alienation, the blue-collar blues and the white-collar 
blahs have been the subjects of cover stories in national magazines. A senate sub committee is 
examining the problem and the ford foundation will spend half a million dollars to see what is being 
done about it” (Sirota, 1973, p. 208). The drudgery of assembly work left many “feeling that there is no 
future, that the work is boring, that the only solution is to get out of the plant or wait for retirement has 
become widespread among many of the hourly workers who man the nation's industrial plants” 
(Salpukas, 1972, p. 34). Similarly, some office and administrative work was plagued with monotony, “It 
can be boring, particularly for the “operations” workers on the graveyard shift, because if nothing goes 
wrong they have very little to do except look at a panel of dials every so often” (Flint, 1979, p. 6). The U. 
S. government followed these concerns by attempting to mitigate the inefficiencies associated with 
boredom for 18,000 social security employees by playing music “throughout the buildings with 
occasional interruptions for announcements on the weather, union meetings, features at the cafeteria” 
(Malcom, 1972, p. 53). At the same time, bridge operators were seen as having both largely 
consequential yet very boring responsibilities, which complicated the relationship between meaningless 
work and boredom (Ferretti, 1971, p. 20). Some long-haul truck drivers attempted to navigate the 
“loneliness, boredom and fear of jackknifing her tractor-trailer” with the citizen’s band radio or by 
visiting small towns along the route (Klemesrud, 1971, p. 44; Harwood, 1976, p. 200). Amid these 
elevated concerns, Social Psychologist Eric Fromm captured the problems with the modern workplace: 
There are good reasons to assume that the increase in boredom is one of the factors responsible 
for the increase in aggression. The increase of boredom is brought about by the structure and 
functioning of contemporary industrial society. It is by now widely recognized that most manual 
work is boring because of its monotony and repetitiveness:  much white-collar work is boring 
because of its bureaucratic character, which leaves little responsibility and initiative to the 

 
 
49 
 
individual. But leisure, meant to be the reward for boring work, has become boring too (Fromm, 
1972, p. SM74) 
Fromm’s sentiment reflects the trends and events occurring in the United States work environments 
through the 1970s, which would become a significant area of interest for psychologists. In particular, 
personality psychologists wanted to understand the efficient placement of labour resources and which 
personalities were best suited for what positions, as informed by the OLA and the 
introversion/extraversion dichotomy. Zuckerman’s interpretation of boredom is readily deployed in 
many examples, as the experience can be understood as a clear need to increase stimulation. However, 
it becomes more complicated when introducing Csikszentmihalyi’s flow concept, as many of these 
instances appear to record a skill/challenge mismatch, speaking to the vague theorizing both 
subdisciplines utilized for their concepts of boredom. 
Politics 
 
Another area where boredom repeatedly appeared was the discourse of political campaigns, 
governance, and democracy. No less than 21 political articles included boredom, with themes of 
sameness, lack of excitement, meaninglessness, and futility. While the language used is sometimes 
comical, it does not conceal the implication of a disconnect between citizens and their governments. 
One politician who was commonly considered boring was Jimmy Carter, but this apparently stemmed 
from the contrast between his subdued nature and the political turmoil of the Nixon years. This kind of 
comparative boredom, as highlighted above, was familiar to politics and raised the question of whether 
boredom would have otherwise been elicited (Safire, 1975, p. 25; Wooten, 1976, p. 19; Clymer, 1979, p. 
B18). Carter was, however, far from the only politician considered boring. Vice Presidential Agnew was 
accused of running a boring campaign, “What began as one man's prankish antidote to boredom — an 
occasional, impulsive toot on a police whistle—has now become one of the hallmarks of Vice President 

 
 
50 
 
Agnew’s re-election campaign” (Wooten, 1972, p. 53). An apparent remedy for all this campaign 
boredom was the appearance of a contentious issue, “New Hampshire's early bird Presidential primary 
campaign might well have bogged down in boredom this year had not a heated side issue arisen just as 
the candidates were beginning their treks through the snows in search of voters” (Herbers, 1976, E1). 
Boredom in politics was not restricted to North America; the Prime Minister of Spain, Adolfo Suarez, was 
also vulnerable, “There is no doubt that the credit of the Government has dropped a lot, and that the 
constitutional campaign bored a lot of people” (Markham, 1978, A8). Boredom was generally used with 
less alarm in this category, belying the serious implications politics can have on the citizenry. This levity 
can be partially attributed to the general focus on individuals or campaigns in this section rather than 
larger movements or political actions. 
Armed Forces  
 
Two related concerns which emerged in this sample of NYT articles were the negative influence 
of boredom on military readiness and its role in facilitating drug use among soldiers. It is not surprising 
for a country engaged in military deployments in Korea and Vietnam to be preoccupied with these 
worries, especially considering their overwhelming military superiority had failed to bring them to a 
quick end. There were instances where the contrast between the intensity of conflict and the lull of 
inaction and waiting was commented on, “the hours of boredom and the seconds of terror and the daily 
entrances by jet and nightly exits by aluminum box” and “hours of boredom, seconds of terror” one pilot 
described his job (“Close up”, 1970, p. 216; Wallace, 1970, p. 164). Similarly, the conflict in Northern 
Ireland invoked some of the same imagery and anxieties; 18,000 English soldiers and police experienced 
“Boredom and terror” (Weinraud, 1970, p. 7). Female spies were also documented as living in this 
dichotomous state, “The trouble with being a woman Secret Service agent is that while there are 
moments of fun and glamour, there are hours and hours of boredom and drudgery, the young women 
have told friends” (Harkison, 1972, p. 60). Most of the articles, however, only highlighted the drudgery 

 
 
51 
 
of military life. For example, members of the USS Elden had to deal with “boredom as vast as the Pacific 
itself—day after day, same watches and drills, same food and smells, same heat and shipmates” 
(Leggett, 1976, p. 245). Similarly, the “declining action in Vietnam” and “isolation” of military bases lead 
to increases in boredom (Schmidt, 1971, p. 5). At the same time, others in Vietnam could mitigate the 
monotony and boredom of a jungle patrol by taking a “simple swim” (Butterfield, 1972, p. 1). These 
observations led to concerns about the armed forces losing effectiveness, “Peace has its own perils, and 
in our time, as before, peace breeds boredom” with General Emerson addressing it by introducing 
“Spartan Games and flavorful language” (Stern, 1977, p. A25; “General put”, 1974, p. 6). Many of these 
instances are consistent with how personality psychologists interpreted people’s natural preferences for 
a certain amount of stimulation or arousal.  
For people in military service, boredom also became associated with drug use which had been 
widely tied to moral failings and undermining soldiers’ ability to perform their duties. It is of 
considerable interest that Zuckerman dedicated a study to personality, sensation seeking, and the 
preference for particular drugs (Carrol & Zuckerman, 1977). Questions that emerge in this section 
include what influence the extreme environment of being in an active warzone in a foreign country had 
on people’s level of stimulation and whether that influenced their OLA. Given the prevalence of 
boredom along with reports of “moments of terror”, Zuckerman's notions regarding drug use would 
seem to predict soldiers self-medicating in order to match their moods and environments. This 
behaviour might result in a pattern of amphetamine intake during the bulk of their days and perhaps 
depressants, like heroin, when they were subjected to a moment of terror. Such information is not 
available, but since there are negligible references to amphetamines here, the veracity of Zuckerman’s 
reasoning becomes suspect (Carrol & Zuckerman, 1977). Though they were provided access to 
alternatives, the lure of drug use was too much for some soldiers. As Emerson (1971) reported, “despite 
enormous amenities (pool, basketball courts, baseball, dry cleaning, good food), they are bored. Bored 

 
 
52 
 
enough to be disappointed when an attack on them doesn't materialize. Lack of a “frontline” 
discernable enemy, waiting. But the pilots worry about why kids back home take drugs, and why soldiers 
take heroin” (p. 11). It also did not appear to matter which theatre soldiers were stationed to, “for US 
troops on the West German border with the Soviet bloc the “major enemy” is boredom. It touches 
privates to commanding officers. It comes in dozens of variations - the “most extreme” of which is drug 
abuse and alcoholism. Infidelity is also an issue” (Binder, 1972, p. 7). Drug use was reported to be a way 
to address issues common in the armed forces, “The drug use may be the result of boredom or 
loneliness or peer pressure or anger at the Navy or simply a yearning for quick gratification” (Weinraud, 
1978, A10). One case of insubordination revealed how boredom could undermine the chain of 
command, as one soldier threw “a chocolate cream pie in his company commander’s face to relieve the 
battalion’s boredom and “raise morale” went on trial here today on charges of assault and battery” 
(“Trial of”, 1974, p. 83). Interestingly, as the level of boredom increased, the number of reported fights 
between servicemen declined, yet it also left bored pilots incapable of completing their work (Clarity, 
1974, p. 2). Boredom was also framed as having the capacity to motivate mass murder, “a former SS 
doctor was convicted here in absentia today of having murdered scores of concentration camp inmates 
in 1941 and 1942, “sometimes out of pure boredom”” (“Ex-SS”, 1979, p. A9). By observing the resources 
directed at the issue, it is apparent that the U. S. military was taking the problems associated with 
boredom seriously, even if their efforts to mitigate boredom appeared to have a limited impact on 
soldiers’ behaviours. While positive psychology would not be founded until the 1990s, it is significant 
that Csikszentmihalyi’s work on flow had already begun at this period, with his notions of the 
skill/challenge mismatch as a cause of anxiety and boredom. This work maps onto the often-mentioned 
juxtaposition in the military of periods of terror and boredom. Additionally, it is also an open question if 
the self-selection of soldiers meant that personality psychology had relevant insights into the rate of 
boredom among soldiers. 

 
 
53 
 
Miscellaneous – Fashion, Food, and Older Adults 
 
Beyond the major themes discussed, several lesser populated categories emerged in the 
discussion of boredom, including fashion, food, and older adults. By 1972 there were predictions that 
the fashion of wearing long hair had run its course, “for one thing, sheer boredom with looking the same 
way for years is making women restless” (Taylor, p. 31). And despite the lack of suitability of using fabric 
in a bathroom, it became an answer for “boredom with wallpaper” (Kron, 1977, p. 23). The expansion of 
food companies’ market share was met with a complaint of sterility or lack of novelty from the article 
titled, “If Bread Boredom Sets In”, in which the author argued, “bread has suffered more than any other 
food product as a result of mass-production techniques. Each year more and more loaves become 
blander, softer, sweeter, and more insipid to the taste” (Sheraton, 1976, p. 22). One “diet food” 
company attempted to address the public’s conception of mass-produced food as boring, “Watching 
your weight doesn’t mean you have to deprive yourself of tasty, nutritious, and interesting foods, the 
battle of the bulge has also become a battle against boredom” (“A dieter’s”, 1975, p. 57). These entries 
provide some examples of the prevalence of the culture industry, made evident by the push towards 
mass production, the providing of false choice, and the establishment of identity or self-brand through 
products (Adorno & Horkheimer, 1947). Older adults and retirement were also themes associated with a 
period where one would be confronted with boredom. Isolated retirees looked for distractions or 
meaning when organizing church groups, building a greenhouse, and were urged by former President 
Nixon to “Never slow down” (Thomas, 1972, p. A6; Marks, 1973, p. 181; “Nixon”, 1973, p. 1).  
Discussion – Boredom in the Popular Press 1970-1979 
While a more detailed accounting of representations of boredom is found in the comparative 
results section below, by in large, the boredom found in this corpus diverges with personality 
psychology’s understandings in several ways. The most fundamental difference was Eysenck and 

 
 
54 
 
Zuckerman’s attempts to define boredom as a trait or propensity, while the public overwhelming used 
the term to describe a state free of individual differences. This discrepancy reveals a limitation on the 
discipline’s ability to influence the public discourse and a failure to claim it as a psychological construct. 
Other discrepancies included the public possessing a near-consensus definition and how boredom was 
not used to define other concepts. Of note, a repeating theme appears where boredom is seemingly 
elicited in situations where there are periods of high arousal, as in a military setting, even though there 
are plenty of amenities available that would typically combat boredom. Although boredom in this 
sample was versatile, described as a trivial experience, a moderately depressed state, a motivator, and 
associated with anti-social behaviours, these differences appear to be grounded in degree rather than 
type. Boredom also appears in some artistic settings where existential considerations are apparent, but 
the boredom detailed is still overwhelmingly consistent with a fleeting state, even when present in some 
existential discourses. Finally, the fact that there is a disconnect between the public and academia 
provides an example of a partial looping effect (Hacking, 1995), where the only evident influence was 
that of the public to psychology in a failed attempt to domesticate the concept. 
 
 

 
 
55 
 
Chapter 3 – Positive Psychology – Boredom as Motivation 
Moving on from the personality psychology of the 1970s, this chapter explores the development 
and rapid rise of positive psychology in the 1990s. Motivated by the conviction that the discipline of 
psychology had failed to articulate why life was worth living, positive psychologists promoted science-
based approaches to understanding and increasing happiness, Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi’s meditation-like 
practice of flow being chief among them. Through flow, boredom presents itself as a major 
consideration in discourses of happiness, where it served as an oppositional definitional tool and an 
indicator that positive psychological corrective measures were required. Undeterred by criticisms of 
fostering individualism (Horowitz, 2017), the leaders of the new discipline enacted aggressive growth 
strategies which echoed broader competitive commercial practices encouraged by ascendant neoliberal 
policies and politics. These connections to neoliberal-consistent theorizing are compared with the 
biologically informed personality psychology, which was essentially free of these influences. Some of the 
definitional themes which reappear in this section are boredom’s nebulosity, a concept of secondary 
interest, psychological measurement as a science, and reliance on biological underpinnings. 
In 1998 Martin Seligman, head of the APA, used his inaugural address to declare the new 
psychological subdiscipline of positive psychology. Having first established himself as a learned 
helplessness scholar, Seligman branded himself a renewed man, now on a quest to promote happiness 
and influence broader psychology through “the growth of the new science and profession of positive 
psychology” (Seligman, 1999, p. 559). Seligman wanted this new science to confront the ingrained 
negativity within psychology, as it was practiced as a discipline of disorders. Seligman believed 
psychology’s focus on negative emotions was promoting a “victimology” rather than promoting 
resilience and happiness, a situation that was only made worse by the construction and adoption of the 
DSM-III (Seligman, 2004). While Seligman was hardly the first to voice a complaint about the DSM-III 
(Nelson, 1987; Whitaker & Cosgrove, 2015; Davies, 2017), these other critics were not in the process of 

 
 
56 
 
developing a ‘new science’. By differentiating themselves through identifying how psychology had lost 
its way, positive psychology’s leaders were conducting important “boundary-work” (Gieryn, 1983), 
which included identifying a problem (psychology as a discipline of pathology), which their practice was 
uniquely qualified to address. As part of an ongoing process, positive psychologists established a domain 
of interest and identified their primary objectives. These included addressing the perception that 
psychology had failed to advance the “two fundamental missions of psychology: making the lives of all 
people better and nurturing genius” (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2000, p. 6). It is noteworthy that 
personality psychology also highlighted the importance of this second “mission”. Seligman also 
contributed to these efforts by articulating the three foundational areas of focus, “First is the study of 
positive emotion. Second is the study of the positive traits, foremost among them the strengths and 
virtues, but also the “abilities” such as intelligence and athleticism. The third is the study of the positive 
institutions, such as democracy, strong families, and free inquiry, that support the virtues, which in turn 
support the positive emotions” (Seligman, 2004, p. 11).  
Another of the explicit goals for the new discipline was an expansion by aggressively promoting 
working in “positive psychology ways” while transcending “traditional dichotomies and divisions within 
psychology and offers ways of working that are genuinely integrative and applicable across settings” 
(Linely & Joseph, 2004, p. 4, 6). Seligman believed that “a new science of positive psychology can be the 
‘Manhattan Project’ for the social sciences” (Horowitz, p. 16). Facilitating the adoption of positive 
psychology was how it,  
(1) tread a very narrow line between the requirements of scientiﬁc or expert jargon, and 
popular discourse; (2) position positive psychology as simultaneously rooted in ancient 
philosophical sensibilities and yet eminently relevant to contemporary concerns; and in a 
similar vein, (3) construct positive psychology as both revolutionary, and yet at the same time, 
moderate and scientiﬁcally conservative” (Yen, 2010, p. 10) 

 
 
57 
 
These conflicting characteristics were of considerable productivity in the construction of the narrative 
and branding efforts, as they could highlight certain aspects depending upon the intended audience and 
goal at the time.  
Having staked their claims, Seligman and Csikszentmihalyi presented themselves as semi-
religious messengers whose arrival marked a turning point, where reason and authentic happiness could 
overcome harmful dogma, “our message is to remind our field that psychology is not just the study of 
pathology, weakness, and damage; it is also the study of strength and virtue” and it how the “time has 
arrived for a positive psychology” (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2000, p. 7). The establishment of the 
discipline meant professional recognition and its eventual incorporation into all corners of psychology. 
Horowitz (2017) noted that “over time, Seligman came to seek nothing short of transforming 
psychology, and doing so with the ample backing from the government, foundation, and private funds” 
(p. 25). Outside of academia, they sought ways to apply their research to all aspects of life, “the good life 
is using your signature strengths every day to produce authentic happiness and abundant gratification. 
This is something you can learn to do in each of the main realms of your life: work, love, and raising 
children” (Seligman, 2004, p. 24). 
 
While the causes for positive psychology’s rise can be debated, it is unquestionable that the 
expansionary goals of its founders were met. Writing in 2010, Jeffery Yen highlighted how positive 
psychology had “record enrollment rates in undergraduate psychology courses across North America 
and around the world, and attracting a considerable amount of media attention, positive psychology has 
become positively faddish” (p. 67). Yen (2010) also made note of at least four graduate programs on 
offer, while in August 2021, according to positivepsychology.com, there were over 13 programs 
available in the U.S., Canada, New Zealand, Australia, Spain, United Kingdom, South Africa, and with 
many offering online access to worldwide students. Similarly capturing this interest in the new 
discipline, a 2018 NYT article documented how the positive psychology-inspired course, Psychology and 

 
 
58 
 
the Good Life, became the most popular class in Yale’s history with 1,200 enrolling, or one-quarter of all 
Yale students (Shimer, 2018). Curiously, the attendance for the International Positive Psychology 
Association World Congress, while impressively attended from the outset, experienced a static number 
of estimated delegates, in 2009 there were 1,500, and in 2019, 1,600 delegates, with another 1,500 
expected at the 2021 congress, perhaps being a commentary on venue capacities more than anything 
else (“First World”, 2009; Smith, 2019; “International Positive”, n.d.). Positive psychology’s popularity is 
also apparent in the inspiration for thousands of research papers, hundreds of popular books, and an 
industry of therapists, coaches, and mentors (Smith, 2019). Much of this growth came from the 
concerted efforts of Seligman and other leaders who, despite criticism of moving “too quickly from 
scholarship to popularization” (Horowitz, 2017, p. 21), created networks of positive psychologists, 
targeted young professionals, and held regular meetings to discuss growth strategies and goals for the 
discipline (Seligman, 1999; Seligman, 2003). These efforts appeared to have the desired effect, as 
“research into psychological well-being increased by a factor of 35 (from 93 publications by 1978 to 
3,231 by September 2003)” (Seligman, 2004, p. 6). 
 
Happening simultaneously with this expansion were efforts by positive psychology’s leaders to 
seek funding for projects and scholarships. While there is likely a feedback loop between the discipline’s 
popularity and funding, there is also an ideological overlap with business interests, as revealed in their 
donations. Of the various forms of funding secured by Seligman and others was a two-million-dollar 
investment by the Mellon Foundation, the National Institute of Mental Health, and other private donors 
for postdoctoral fellowships on ethnopolitical conflict (Horowitz, 2017). Seligman was also able to secure 
a grant from the John Templeton Foundation, of Wall Street and religious science fame, for an annual 
Templeton Positive Psychology Prize, recognized as the largest award ever given in psychology. Other 
funding included support from numerous private donors, governments, as well as over $1.5 million from 
Atlantic Philanthropies funded by Charles Feeney, who had amassed a fortune of over a billion dollars 

 
 
59 
 
developing duty-free shops (Horowitz, 2017). This keen interest by businesses, foundations, and private 
donors pointed to a synergy between the monetary goals of business leaders and positive psychologists’ 
goal of instilling happiness. Given the Easterlin paradox (1974/2020), which states that long-term rates 
of happiness and income are not positively correlated, businesses could claim legitimate concerns over 
inevitable worker discontent regardless of the levels of compensation. While this hypothesis has been 
criticized (Stevenson & Wolfers, 2008), it justifies corporations to find nonmonetary ways of instilling 
happiness in workers while fighting for lower levels of compensation. Seligman showed himself to be 
aware of these relationships when he quoted the U.S.’s GDP, “overall national purchasing power and 
average life satisfaction go strongly in the same general direction. Once the gross national product 
exceeds $8,000 per person, however, the correlation disappears, and added wealth brings no further life 
satisfaction” (Seligman, 2004, p. 65). Related concerns are detailed in the Labour section of the 1970s 
NYT qualitative analysis in this paper, where worker discontent was commonly associated with 
boredom. While it was never a central concept of concern for positive psychology, it commonly 
informed their concerns and remediations.  
 
Helping to situate the rise of positive psychology, a brief look at the political environment in the 
Western world during the discipline’s formative years is informative. During the 1980s, an ushering in of 
neoliberal policies led to an erosion of labour unions, stagnation of wages for many millions, the off-
shoring of manufacturing, defunding of social programs, the introduction of precarious work and 
marriages, while the wealthy benefited from equity inflation and an increase in executive compensation 
(Horowitz, 2017; Satter, 2019). Some of these changes were themselves the result of policies enacted by 
the Reagan Administration, who, while riding a crest of optimism, implemented market-based 
governance which effectively upended “the earlier Fordist vision, one in which cooperation of labor 
unions, the federal government, and major corporations was perceived to provide social stability” 
(Horowitz, 2014, p. 5). These practices were embraced by subsequent American administrations into the 

 
 
60 
 
1990s, with George H. W. Bush (1924-2018) and William Clinton (1946-) “promoting conservative and 
neoliberal policies that eroded the social safety net and exposed people to market forces in a world 
shaped by globalization and technological change” (Horowitz, 2017, p. 94). In the aftermath of these 
changes, positive psychology would establish itself as a business-friendly, individualistic practice 
(Cabanas, 2018), that did not so much critique collective action as ignore research related to 
government, welfare, or protest movements (Horowitz, 2017). The early connections between business 
leaders and the new discipline were further revealed in a keynote address at the first International 
Positive Psychology Association Congress (2009), given by Professor David Cooperrider from the 
Weatherhead School of Management. A school where “future leaders are built for the advancement of 
business and society through an innovative curriculum that infuses business with analytics, technology 
and design thinking” (Weatherhead, n.d.). Weatherhead later strengthened these ties by being the first 
school to offer a Masters of Positive Organization Development. These connections to the business 
community were one of the defining features of the new discipline, a connection that reappears 
throughout their work and will be explored in more detail in the discussion of Csikszentmihalyi’s flow.   
A driving force for the new practice was its establishment as a psychological science and its 
branding as a new way to practice the discipline. If business connections were to be maintained and 
strengthened, it needed to present actionable practices that appeared objective and distance itself from 
previous happiness studies due to accusations of pseudo-science, even though positive psychology’s 
theories were largely derivative of happiness research (Horowitz, 2017). Facilitating the creation of a 
scientific positive psychology was the construction of a legitimizing narrative, where positive 
psychologists claimed a long history through links to the philosophical traditions of happiness inquiry, 
“the Aristotelian tradition is a core root of positive psychology” (Seligman, 2004, p. 16), while at the 
same time branding themselves as modern experimental psychologists (Peterson & Seligman, 2004). As 
mentioned above, this “Boundary-work” (Gieryn, 1983), was useful for positive psychologists in claiming 

 
 
61 
 
intellectual authority and resources over previous happiness scholars, who were labeled as skeptics of 
the scientific method (Yen, 2010). They also distanced themselves by accusing previous scholars of 
facilitating the appearance of self-help movements that promoted crystal healing and aromatherapy, 
whose books were so plentiful they threatened the entire discipline by their sheer volume (Grogan, 
2012). These perceived weaknesses of humanistic and happiness studies led Seligman and others to 
“distance themselves from the emphasis on self-esteem that grew out of the work of humanistic 
psychology” (Horowitz, 2017, p. 22), which they sanctimoniously believed “emphasized the self and 
encouraged a self-centeredness that played down concerns for collective well-being” (Seligman & 
Csikszentmihalyi, 2000, p. 7). 
Positive psychologists further marketed themselves as a radical departure from psychology’s 
past by leveling attacks, much like Hans Eysenck had previously done, on Freudian understandings 
motivations and the mechanistic theories of behaviourism. Csikszentmihalyi argued that if we accept 
Freud’s theories, “then life must be inherently painful because scarce resources of enjoyment lead to 
competition, and only a few can get more than intermittent satisfaction. For Freud, the libido is the 
source of all pleasure, but since the requirements of social life conflict with libidinal desires, discontent 
is the lot of civilized man” (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975, p. x). Seligman also criticized Freud by challenging the 
effect of childhood experiences in later life, while also revealing an unrepentant belief in the primacy of 
individual responsibility, “There is no justification in these studies for blaming your adult depression, 
anxiety, bad marriage, drug use, sexual problems, unemployment, aggression against your children, 
alcoholism, or anger on what happened to you as a child” (Seligman, 2004, p. 80). During their 
promotion of positive psychology as the third way, which again echoes Eysenck’s brand of personality 
psychology, Csikszentmihalyi also levied harsh criticism against the trend toward over-simplistic thinking 
that widely assumed it is of more importance to know what a person does, rather than what they think 
or feel. The problem for Csikszentmihalyi was, “what we need to know about others is their actions, but 

 
 
62 
 
what counts about ourselves is our feelings. We are all behaviorists when facing outwards but turn 
phenomenologists as soon as we reﬂect” (Csikszentmihalyi, 1982/2014, p. 209). Believing these 
practices were still influencing psychological research, positive psychologists struck a concerned note 
with the direction of contemporaneous researchers, “There has been an explosion in research on 
psychological disorders and the negative effects of environmental stressors, such as parental divorce, 
the deaths of loved ones, and physical and sexual abuse” (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2000, p. 6). For 
them, this research was proof of the need for positive psychology, since, “No longer do the dominant 
theories view the individual as a passive vessel responding to stimuli; rather, individuals are now seen as 
decision makers, with choices, preferences, and the possibility of becoming masterful, efficacious, or in 
malignant circumstances, helpless and hopeless” (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2000, p. 8). They 
believed the way to reconcile this was through less dogmatic adherence to these outdated approaches 
and the embrace of science, which promoted an understanding of human nature consistent with 
neoliberal ideas. 
To establish positive psychology as a science, its leaders highlighted their proximity to previous 
experimental and heredity research (again, echoing Eysenck’s brand of personality psychology). These 
included the work of Daniel Berlyne (1960, 1966) and Richard De Charms (1968), who attempted to 
understand what made particular stimuli enjoyable (Csikszentmihalyi & Larson, 2014). Csikszentmihalyi 
(2003) also cited the twin research by David Lykken and Auke Tellegen, who “concluded that 
demographic factors such as religion, education, marital status, or income accounted for no more than 3 
percent of people's sense of well-being”, even though Lykken later stated that the happiness set point 
could be raised outside of genetic considerations (Horowitz, 2017, p 113). Unlike the humanistic 
psychologists, who were accused of “wishful thinking, faith, self-deception, fads, or hand-waving”, 
positive psychologists focused their energies on operationalizing virtues, values and developing a 
measurement regime for authentic happiness and strengths (Grogan, 2012, p. 256). Of interest to this 

 
 
63 
 
paper was the explicit praise Martin Seligman heaped upon personality psychology as the only area of 
study that kept the “flame of character and the idea of human nature flickering” in a period of Freudian 
and behavioural dominance (Seligman, 2004, p. 145). This reverence perhaps stemmed from their use of 
structurally similar and genetically informed concepts of the happiness set point, flow, and the OLS/OLA. 
 
Confounding the intent to practice positive psychology as a science was the consistent lack of 
precision in their definitions of concepts under study. Beginning with the considerable inconsistencies 
regarding their understandings of happiness, as they theorized that happiness was both “a personal 
trait, or relatively permanent disposition to experience well-being regardless of external conditions” as 
well as “a state, or a transitory subjective experience responsive to momentary events or conditions in 
the environment” (Csikszentmihalyi & Wong, 1991/2014, p. 70). Straining the definition further, 
Csikszentmihalyi also stated that participant’s ratings of moment-to-moment happiness, which they 
were ultimately responsible for, could be averaged into what could be considered trait-like happiness 
(Csikszentmihalyi & Wong, 1991/2014). In addition, when considering neoliberal influences, 
Csikszentmihalyi’s notion that there are no “universal external generators” of happiness becomes 
individuated when integrated into the solitary flow practice. These ideas further feed into the notion 
that people have an individual responsibility to pursue ways to make themselves happier 
(Csikszentmihalyi & Wong, 1991/2014, p. 70). In agreement, Seligman articulated similar concepts in 
language that would not be out of place in a self-help book, “authentic happiness comes from 
identifying and cultivating your most fundamental strengths and using them every day in work, love, 
play, and parenting” (Seligman, 2004, p. 11). While the definition of happiness was still somewhat 
vague, positive psychologists agreed, with few notable exceptions, that people were responsible for 
developing their own happiness, regardless of heritable considerations. 
 
Driven by their revolutionary rhetoric, the leaders of positive psychology adopted the 
“happiness set point” as an explanation for the trait or a prolonged state of happiness. This concept, 

 
 
64 
 
possessing some similarities to personality psychology’s use of the OLA, forwarded the idea that people 
are born with a default level of happiness to which they naturally revert. Some positive psychologists, 
including Sonja Lyubomirksy, had so much confidence in this approach that a precise formula was 
constructed in which, “genetically determined happiness set point [was] responsible for 50 percent of 
positivity, external circumstances for 10 percent, and intentional activity for 40 percent” (Horowitz, 
2017, p. 166). Other positive psychologists endorsed this understanding, including Csikszentmihalyi, who 
took the opportunity to associate their practice with genetics, “It is not unlikely that, as behavioral 
geneticists insist, a ‘‘set level’’ coded in our chromosomes accounts for perhaps as much as half of the 
variance in self-reported happiness” (Hunter & Csikszentmihalyi, 2003, p. 185). It was the 40% that was 
said to be influenced by intentional activity that positive psychologists were most interested in, with 
Csikszentmihalyi arguing that “Hope, optimism and the ability to experience ﬂow can be learned and 
thus moderate one’s level of happiness (Csikszentmihalyi, 1997; Seligman, 2004; Hunter & 
Csikszentmihalyi, 2003, p. 186). Interestingly, Seligman was not as enthusiastic about the happiness set 
point or flow’s moderating capacities to elevate a person’s happiness level, “Yet the scientific evidence 
makes it seem unlikely that you can change your level of happiness in any sustainable way. It suggests 
that we each have a fixed range for happiness, just as we do for weight. And just as dieters almost 
always regain the weight they lose, sad people don’t become lastingly happy, and happy people don’t 
become lastingly sad.” (Seligman, 2004, p. 9). It is unknown if this fundamental disagreement was ever 
reconciled or why Seligman would have promoted efforts to increase happiness if he believed it was 
largely genetically determined. 
In order to facilitate the discussion of boredom’s role in the discourses surrounding positive 
psychology and its central location in the lived experience of neoliberal subjectivities (Teo, 2018), I will 
now turn to an examination of Csikszentmihalyi’s flow. Csikszentmihalyi’s journey to becoming a 
pioneering positive psychologist started in the late 1960s as he began to explore why certain people 

 
 
65 
 
were willing to ignore material concerns to “risk their lives climbing rocks . . . devote their lives to art, 
who spend their energies playing chess” (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975, p. 1). He questioned how such 
experiences were more highly valued than tangible rewards and what this meant for how people create 
meaning in their lives. During these inquiries, Csikszentmihalyi came to understand intrinsic motivation 
as an “autotelic”, or an activity whose goal is its own experience (Getzels & Csikszentmihalyi, 1969; 
Csikszentmihalyi & Larson, 2014). For Csikszentmihalyi, this concept addressed the old question of why 
people play, the answer being to enter a state of optimal experience, or flow, as it came to be known 
(Csikszentmihalyi, 2014). After an analysis of reported experiences of various types of play from 
participants, Csikszentmihalyi identified what made these experiences pleasurable and codified the 
parameters of Flow:  
(a) a person is able to concentrate on a limited stimulus ﬁeld, (b) in which he or she can use his 
or her skills to meet clear demands, (c) thereby forgetting his or her own problems, and (d) his 
or her own separate identity, (e) at the same time obtaining a feeling of control over the 
environment, (f) which may result in a transcendence of ego-boundaries and consequent 
psychic integration with meta personal systems” (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975, p. 41) 
Csikszentmihalyi would later articulate how attention and freedom of choice were necessary elements 
for entering flow, as he believed “forced” attention would strip experience of its intrinsic quality. One 
can easily imagine how an otherwise pleasureful activity could elicit feelings of boredom or anxiety if 
forced to engage in them. The importance of freedom and attention to Csikszentmihalyi’s 
understandings can be seen in how he updated his 1975 work to include freedom, “Subjectively valued 
experiences depend on the voluntary focusing of attention on a limited stimulus ﬁeld” (Csikszentmihalyi, 
1978, p. 337). This distinction between voluntary and mandatory was also explored in a study involving a 
group of students, where none of the teenagers identified their favorite academic subjects as belonging 
to the activities they enjoyed, “their spontaneous choices seem to reﬂect an implicit distinction between 

 
 
66 
 
work and leisure as contexts for enjoyment and therefore as domains in relation to which the idea of 
being intrinsically motivated even makes sense” (Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi, 2002, p. 90).  
 
As much as flow was framed as an interactionist approach to increase happiness and well-being 
(Nakamura et al., 2002), where people’s experiences and behaviours are stripped of context, the central 
role of attention in the evocation of flow places much of the responsibility on the individual. When skills 
lag behind the level of challenge, then an increase in skills is necessary, and if skills are above the level of 
challenge, then a more complex challenge needs to be sought out. Csikszentmihalyi went further when 
describing the importance of attention “What to pay attention to, how intensely and for how long, are 
choices that will determine the content of consciousness, and therefore the experiential information 
available to the organism” (Csikszentmihalyi 1978, p. 339). The fact that boredom’s role in attention 
elicited by monotony is absent from the discussion is surprising, but perhaps its inclusion would 
unnecessarily complicate the approach. Beyond its connection with boredom, flow is seen here as an 
individual practice that facilitates the construction of subjectivities complementary to the broader 
neoliberal system. While flow was once seen as an emancipatory practice that fostered happiness 
regardless of material wealth, its support and adoption by the business sector raise questions about 
what value it was generating for investors. 
Boredom enters the discussion of flow as a negatively valenced state caused by a mismatch 
between an individual’s level of skill and the difficulty of a task (Csikszentmihalyi & Wong, 1991/2014). 
As Csikszentmihalyi detailed in 1975, “If, however, skills are greater than the opportunities for using 
them, boredom will follow” (p. 50). Csikszentmihalyi theorized that when people engaged in a challenge 
of appropriate difficulty with “clear proximal goals,” they would receive immediate feedback that 
progress was being made and enter into the flow state (Nakamura et al., 2002, p. 93). The model 
received some updates when Carli (1986) and Massimini et al. (1987) found that the level of skill and 
challenge must be relatively high for the flow experience to materialize (Csikszentmihalyi & Wong, 

 
 
67 
 
1991/2014). This understanding of flow suggests a base level of resources needs to be deployed for the 
task to become the sole concern and awareness of the participant, which could explain why the level of 
challenge needs to be increased with the level of skill in order to avoid boredom (Csikszentmihalyi & 
Wong, 1991/2014). Csikszentmihalyi generally believed that boredom was a condition that plagued 
highly skilled individuals, as there tended to be a lack of challenges for them to engage with 
(Csikszentmihalyi & Larson, 2014). Unfortunately, this framework inadvertently allows for 
epistemologically violent (Teo, 2010) interpretations, as those suffering anxiety (or apathy) could be 
classified as less skilled, less educated, and likely of lower socioeconomic standing. At the same time, 
those suffering boredom could be assumed to be of more educated and affluent populations, which is 
problematic for treatment, education and possibly leading to discrimination.  
Nevertheless, for all this theorizing of how boredom manifests due to a skill/challenge 
mismatch, the construct itself remained poorly defined. Csikszentmihalyi (2000) cited the earlier work of 
Berlyne (1960), which presented boredom as the opposite of interest and surprise and the result of 
redundant stimulation, where attention on the stimulus is no longer maintained. In these discussions, 
the well-worn state or trait problem resurfaced, “boredom should be seen as having both trait-like and 
state-like components. However, very little is known of boredom as a trait. Even though it is part of our 
tacit knowledge that some individuals are often bored and others never are” (Csikszentmihalyi, 2000, p. 
443). Csikszentmihalyi also slightly reformulated his concept of boredom as the result of a “specific 
ratio” between opportunities to act and a person’s ability to act, which echoed his notion of a mismatch 
between skills and challenges, “where people tend to feel dissatisfied, passive, lonely, sad, and low in 
self-esteem . . . as one aspect of psychic entropy, or the state of mind in which consciousness is 
disordered and unable to accomplish work” (Csikszentmihalyi, 2000, p. 443). Boredom likely received 
more attention from positive psychology, as it was associated with attention problems, mental health 
issues, workplace inefficiencies while also providing definitional clarity to flow (Farmer & Sundberg, 

 
 
68 
 
1986; Martin, 2012). Much of this echoes Csikszentmihalyi’s earlier theorizing about how boredom 
manifests in the alienation during meaninglessness daily tasks and their extrinsic rewards 
(Csikszentmihalyi, 1975). In this capacity, boredom serves as an indicator regarding the quality of life 
and is of “central importance to parents, educators, clinicians, researchers, and laypersons interested in 
enhancing the quality of life” (Csikszentmihalyi, 2000, p. 444). Exploring boredom further, 
Csikszentmihalyi (2000) looked to Riperre’s 1977 commentary regarding the experience, where he 
referred to it as a “general state of listlessness or apathy” during periods of disinterest, lack of control or 
engaged in meaningless tasks, and was “considered to be one of the least desirable conditions of daily 
life and is often associated with psychopathology” (p. 442). Csikszentmihalyi concluded from this that 
the “ability to avoid boredom is an essential component of well-being” (Csikszentmihalyi, 2000, p. 443). 
While boredom had received increasing interest from broader psychology, positive psychology 
continued to explore its characteristics, as it made appearances in various studies and as an entry into 
The Encyclopedia of Positive Psychology (2009),  
People also differ in their willingness to take risks to obtain moments of novelty and uncertainty 
or to avoid the pain of boredom. This mode of curiosity, termed sensation-seeking, includes 
socially desirable actions such as enjoying unusual art forms, meeting new people, and trying 
new entrées at restaurants, as well as less socially desirable actions such as drug use, gambling, 
risky sexual activities, and aggression (Kashdana & Silvia, p. 271).  
It is worth highlighting that the language found here is borrowed from personality psychologists' 
sensation-seeking literature.  
Illustrating how Csikszentmihalyi’s work could have emerged as liberative, where personal 
meaning and happiness could eclipse material wants, to becoming endorsed by wealthy companies and 
individuals as a way to bolster employee morale, is the parallel found in Abraham Maslow’s work. 

 
 
69 
 
Maslow’s concept of peak experiences shares enough theoretical overlap with Csikszentmihalyi’s flow 
that he equated the two in 1978, “‘‘peak experiences,’’ or ﬂow experiences as we have called them” 
(Csikszentmihalyi, p. 342). Strengthening the ties between the Csikszentmihalyi and humanistic research 
was how numerous scholars in the humanistic tradition incorporated flow research into their work (Deci 
& Ryan 1985; McAdams, 1990; Renninger et al. 1992). Mirroring the transformation of 
Csikszentmihalyi’s flow into a tool promoted by business interests (as well as self-promotion, e.g. FLIGBY 
Leader Simulation Game, Ted Talks, Good Business – Flow and Leadership (2004)), Maslow’s hierarchy of 
needs (1943; 1954) also began as a concept which defined personal meaning and growth as 
unresponsive to consumer-based solutions, only to be adopted by business and management schools 
(Bridgman et al., 2019). Exemplifying how these concepts can be interpreted to suit the marketplace's 
needs, Maslow’s hierarchy was transformed into a pyramid structure rather than the ladder he had 
personally illustrated (Bridgman et al., 2019). With each layer needing a broader base to support the 
one above, the pyramid structure inherently depicts a classed concept, suggesting that self-actualization 
is only available for upper management and justifying managerial power (Bridgman et al., 2019; Cullen, 
1997). The pyramid was widely disseminated through management schools until it became one of the 
most recognizable products of psychology (Bridgman et al., 2019). Maslow promoted how his theories 
could be incorporated into companies and personnel (Maslow, 1965/1998; 2000), where workers are 
transformed into entrepreneurs, limiting the corporate obligations, again leading to the invisibility of 
exploitation (Read, 2009). While Maslow passed away in 1970, Csikszentmihalyi would live through the 
political transformation of neoliberal policies in the 1980s and would seemingly distance himself from 
humanistic psychology as “peak experience” appears only four times in his 2014 313-page chronicle of 
his work.  
 
While Csikszentmihalyi’s work was dedicated to understanding how people generated meaning 
and sought out happiness, he was also influenced by his belief in an individual’s ability to overcome their 

 
 
70 
 
environment, a line of thinking that was primed for neoliberal reinterpretation. The tension between 
liberation and isolation can be found in some of his earlier work, “[a person] can be in solitary 
confinement or in a boring job; but as long as he knows how to respond to the few stimuli around—
through fantasy, scientific analysis, or intervention—he will still be enjoying himself” (Csikszentmihalyi, 
1975, p. 206). Again, it is the individual’s responsibility to rise above their environment, regardless of the 
circumstances. Twenty-five years later, this line of thinking was applied to self-construction and self-
reliance to promote mental illness prevention, “Prevention researchers have discovered that there are 
human strengths that act as buffers against mental illness:  courage, future mindedness, optimism, 
interpersonal skill, faith, work ethic, hope, honesty, perseverance, and the capacity for flow and insight, 
to name several” (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2000, p. 7). Referencing Hamilton (1981), 
Csikszentmihalyi believed these notions of the solitary person extended to how creative people 
apparently “rarely experience boredom” and have “no time to be bored . . . the ability to self-regulate 
mood and avoid boredom is one of the most important skills to learn in order to achieve a satisfying life” 
(Csikszentmihalyi, 2000, p. 443). These materialistic approaches provide another example of how 
boredom and or anxiety could be utilized to categorize people in problematic ways. According to Grogan 
(2012), due to increasing critiques of positive psychology’s associations with promoting individualism, 
the discipline began promoting positive thinking as a way to encourage harmonious social action, with 
proponents stating, “When individualism is taken to an extreme, individual well-being can become its 
ironic casualty” (Myers, 2004, p. 650). However, given that the theories and remediations of positive 
psychology depend on individual action and their research has shown little interest in social concerns, 
these comments appear to be an empty acknowledgment. Historian Daniel Horowitz went further, “In 
the new century, positive psychologists seemed to be embracing a corporate system that others saw as 
exploitative selfish and a social order that others saw as increasingly insecure and unequal” (Horowitz, 

 
 
71 
 
2017, p. 166). Seligman also attempted to deflect some criticisms by labeling Maslow and Norman 
Vincent Peale as the real bootstrappers (Horowitz, 2017). 
Qualitative Data - Boredom in the Popular Press 1990-1999 
 
During the 1990s, as the positive psychology leaders were constituting the subdiscipline, the 
American economy was experiencing continued growth (Federal Reserve, 2021b), neoliberal reforms of 
the 1980s were expanded upon, and America entered into the First Gulf War (1990-1991). The popular 
discourse regarding boredom is again represented by 200 articles from the NYT, which contain the term. 
As mentioned in the methods section, the categories for this period are very similar to the 1970s, with a 
few exceptions, perhaps speaking to the stability of the popular usage.   
Art 
The Art category again included fine art, photography, stage performances, and dance. In these 
articles, boredom was widely used to denote a disengaged audience or highlight a piece of art’s failure 
to convey an exciting or challenging message. However, there are also examples of boredom being 
intentionally elicited in audiences to consider deeper personal meaning. Associations between boredom 
and the arts were again well represented, with 14 entries out of the 200 included in this analysis.  
One photography exhibit attempted to reveal the art present in boring everyday scenes, “The 
artistic value of boring scenes by stating there was, “the artistic value of boring scenes, and boredom 
itself” (Goldberg, 1994, p. H33). Another commentator suggested the most interesting aspect of 
galleries was the expressions of the patrons, “But it is more fun if time is also spent looking at the 
people looking at the art. Writ large on their faces is an array of emotions: amusement, perplexity, 
excitement, annoyance, boredom, delight, wariness” (Haberman, 1999, p. 317). Away from the gallery, 
stage performances were sometimes seen as boring, where one prospective audience was cautioned 
about attending, “Be forewarned about a play that confronts — no, entraps — an audience with “the 

 
 
72 
 
boredom, the boredom, the bloody' boredom” (Klein, 1994, p. WC9). Boredom could also be 
experienced by both the audience and the actors themselves, with an audience properly expressing it 
through coughing and whiles actors revealed it in their faces as they became bored with a production 
(Koblent, 1997, p. 159; “Not about”, 1999, p. E2). However, boredom’s appearance on the stage was not 
always considered unintentional, “Critics have found his performance noteworthy for a number of 
reasons, but one that stands out is how much he is able to convey through silence: anger, boredom and 
tenderness” (Harris, 1991, P. 5). In another example, a dance troupe purposefully explored the 
boundaries of the art form, “Jonathan Burrows proceeded to test the outer limits of boredom and 
exhaustion on Thursday night at The Kitchen” (Dunning, 1997, p. E3). These references and uses of 
boredom do not differ markedly from those made about the arts in the 1970s. Art also appears to be 
one of the few areas where boredom is not a universal negative, as long as it was deployed deliberately. 
Literature 
 
Literature was once again a well-represented category, with 15 articles discussing literature and 
boredom in some way. The author Frederick Barthelme had made a career out of writing similar novels, 
“the hero is a middle-aged fellow, in the middle of a middle-age crisis; the setting is Florida or Texas or 
some other place along the Gulf . . . the subject is boredom or spiritual malaise, the meaninglessness of 
contemporary life” (Kakutani, 1993, p. C2). This was not the only case where a novelist repeatedly 
utilized the theme of boredom, as documented in Larry McMurtry’s work, “Lonesome Dove” of 1985 “an 
anti-mythical, melancholy landscape where frail and truculent characters struggle with smallness, 
boredom and the loutishness of others” (Bernstein, 1995, p. C19). Some authors, especially new 
novelists, inadvertently introduced boredom into their work when utilizing vagueness for effect, 
“Vagueness is another specialty of the author, as of many other first novelists, who find that quality so 
much more evocative than specificity. Boredom often accompanies vagueness” (Disch, 1990, p. BR16). 
Depression and boredom also emerged as related themes in the writings of some authors, with Simon’s 

 
 
73 
 
Corrigan’s brooding hero suffering from “despairing boredom”, or Iris Murdoch’s protagonist similarly 
struggling, “I’m not mad. l suffer from depression. It's not like ordinary misery, it's like dying of 
boredom. It’s black” (Sonenberg, 1995, p. BR20; Simon, 1995, p. BR7). Literature was another category 
where boredom was acceptable if evoked for a reason but suffered criticism when elicited through 
unimaginative repetition of the same themes and stories. 
Entertainment  
 
The Entertainment category was in some ways the opposite of Art, where there were few 
allowances for the appearance of boredom. This likely has to do with the purpose of entertainment, that 
is, to distract and engage. Entertainment primarily included the same subcategories as the 
Entertainment category of the 1970s, with movies, music, sports, and television, all showing 
considerable increases. Overall, the category made up 52 of the total 200 articles sampled for a 
considerable representation of boredom’s use in this period. 
First, movies were seen as a way to address boredom, especially in children. For instance, the 
children’s movies Pippi, Aladdin (as long as the actor Robin Williams was “on screen”), and The Seventh 
Continent were all presented as ways to relieve or pre-emptively address boredom (Gelder, 1997, p. 
C22; James, 1992, p. H11; James, 1990, p. C15). Other productions were said to instill boredom in their 
audiences, for example, Eddie Murphy’s Holy Man would have young children “die of boredom”, while 
The Lay of the Land was said to have induced “the sludge of boredom” (“Holy man”, 1998, p. E12; 
Gelder, 1997, p. E18). Diverging from unintentionally instilling boredom in audiences, some movies, like 
Clockwatchers, purposefully utilized a “particular blend of boredom and paranoia” as a plot device 
(Holden, 1998, p. E23). Reflecting a larger discourse emerging in the public, the movie The Delta 
attempted to address same-sex relationships by capturing boredom and frustration experienced in 
these and other relationships (Holden, 1997, P. C14). A letter to the editor encouraged movie-goers to 

 
 
74 
 
avoid becoming quickly bored with “girl-meets-girl” movies since it took decades for lesbian romances 
to be realistically depicted (Mistal, 1996, p. H9).   
 
Boredom was not often directly associated with music during this period, but due to a punk rock 
band’s name being The Boredoms, many references to them can be found (Ross, 1993, p. 15; Ratliff, 
1999, p. E22; Ratliff, 1999, p. E1; Pareles, 1995, p. C15; Strauss, 1994, C9). According to Alternative Press 
Magazine, the Boredoms enjoyed a certain amount of popularity as suggested by the award of the 72nd 
greatest album of the 90s and playing on the main stage at Lollapalooza in 1994 (Brady, 2006). However, 
perhaps it is more interesting to consider what the band was communicating with their choice in name 
and its reception. The band renamed itself the Boredoms after a song by the 1970s punk rock band the 
Buzzcocks, entitled Boredom. The song’s first two choruses describe someone predictable, familiar, 
devoid of emotion, struggling with a lack of meaning, a detached entity being swept along, who does 
not engage in life but waits for something to happen: 
Yeah - well - I say what I mean  
I say what comes to my mind  
Because I never get around to things  
I live a straight - straight line   
You know me - I'm acting dumb  
You know the scene - very humdrum  
Boredom, boredom, boredom   
I'm living in this movie  
But it doesn't move me  

 
 
75 
 
I'm the man that's waiting for the phone to ring  
Hear it ring-a-ding-a-fucking-ding (Buzzcocks, 1977) 
This song captured the imagination of the Boredoms, perhaps revealing something about the experience 
of boredom as a constant in capitalist societies. It also speaks to the common connection between 
youth and boredom in the West as the cultural threads connect the 1970s and 1990s. Further 
supporting the notion of youthful boredom was the band Nirvana, which according to a NYT writer, 
captured “the particular desperation of its day. While having a handle on the perennial teen-age 
obsessions with boredom, claustrophobia and sex” (Reynolds, 1991, p. H24). Otherwise, the sparse 
commentary regarding boredom was more related to practical concerns and how veterans of touring 
can become rundown over time, with Eric Clapton finding that when routine “settles in, means 
boredom” (Pareles, 1998, p. E5). 
 
Surprisingly, articles discussing television were not overly populated with associations of 
boredom. Several instances appeared where there were complaints about how inserting “advocacy 
messages” into the scripts detracted from the show and made it boring (Ackerman, 1990, p. H3), while 
another stated, “if, as soldiers say, war consists of endless boredom punctuated by moments of stark 
terror, “Martial Law” boils down to an hour of tedium punctuated by frenzied bouts of kung fu fighting” 
(McDonald, 1998, p. B14). It is possible that with the growth in competition, video games, movies, news, 
and televised sports, that television viewership had begun to decline, “American television is already 
caught in a technological cross-fire that may alter not only the way programs enter our homes, but also 
change forever the function of our TV sets” (Millar, 1989).  
There were many examples of people becoming bored with sporting events, regardless of what 
sport it was. Due to its long season, baseball’s spring training was singled out as a particularly 
challenging time, “Pitchers stretch, throw, field some grounders, run and sweat before stretching again. 

 
 
76 
 
Within a day or two, some veterans will openly profess their boredom” (Olney, 1998, p. C5). This 
boredom extended into the regular season, as sitting on the bench became a motivator for one player to 
start playing another professional sport, “Boredom, not ego, motivated Deion Sanders”, while a 
manager for a different team stated that he would keep players busy, so they will not “fall asleep from 
boredom” (“Sanders cites”, 1992, p. B13; Curry, 1992, p. C7). Boredom was also a partial motivator for 
pitchers to try new pitches, “The inspiration for pitching experimentation is varied: insecurity, injury, 
boredom, arrogance” (Sexton, 1993, p. S3). Boxers were also susceptible, with Roy Jones Jr. being more 
interested in “fighting boredom than opponents” while Mike Tyson “hung his head in boredom” 
(Eskenazi, 1996, p. 32; Sterngold, 1990, p. A25).  With each boxer being considered the most skilled in 
their weight class at the time, this example maps onto Csikszentmihalyi’s understanding of boredom 
particularly well, as high skill and low challenge tend to elicit boredom. Football suffered not necessarily 
from being inherently boring, but from how modern broadcasters were monetizing the game, 
“explanation of the deteriorating interest of fans in TV football can be summed up in one word: 
Boredom . . . the networks expose us to more and more commercials, so that it now takes upward of 
three and a half hours to see a 60-minute game” (Kushner, 1997, p. SM14). This category may possess a 
relatively high number of references to boredom due to intolerance with its elicitation since sports are 
often understood as a cure rather than its cause.  
Travel 
 
Travel was again an experience singled out for provoking a state of boredom in people. One 
documentary company attempted to capitalize on the perception that traveling along interstate 
highways was a less-than-exciting experience by producing audio tapes which documented the history 
and folklore “behind the scenery you're rushing past”, and further contended that “Boredom represents 
our lack of understanding of what's around us” (Hershey, 1993, p. XX24). This understanding of 
boredom’s mechanics reveals how activities are not often boring by nature but how they are perceived. 

 
 
77 
 
This subjective interpretation is consistent with positive psychology’s understanding of the role of 
attention and skill regarding flow. Airports were also seen as boredom-inducing, evident in the retelling 
of being snowed-in or the introduction of shops for people with long layovers (Finder, 1996, p. 36; 
Verhovek, 1993, p. 353). Technology’s ability to distract people’s attention was leveraged on long flights 
as airlines began to understand the importance of introducing connectivity while in the air (Specter, 
1993, p. E3). 
Youth 
Youth boredom was again a common topic, with 31 articles discussing the connection between the 
two, with drugs, violence, education, and summer break commonly appearing as themes. Repeated 
references to lack of supervision or direction appeared alongside straightforward remedies, including 
engaging in simple activities, including starting a garden to occupy the downtime, “But after the snow 
melts, boredom tends to set in, and with it, bad tempers” (Faust, 1996, p. WC14). A museum in 
Denmark catered primarily to children as they are “usually bored in museums” (Russell, 1994, p. H39). 
While one student expressed her challenges with summertime, “I want to get back to school . . . you 
have fun for like two weeks and then you start getting bored” (“Eager to”, 1993, p. E38).  Hinting at the 
futility of addressing summer boredom, an article cited how development experts warned that while 
taking a summer job can be a solution, it too can “quickly lead to boredom” (“First-time”, 1993, p. C12). 
Some concerns about summer boredom for students were of a far more severe nature “Seeking to head 
off a summer of boredom and potential violence as children are caught in gunfire and their parents face 
the economic pressures of a recession” (Lee, 1991, p. 27). With police also drawing a disturbing 
connection, “The youths . . . have lived a tenuous existence of their own, culminating what the police 
said was murder motivated solely by boredom” (Richardson, 1995, p. B1). Not everyone was convinced 
this combination was sufficient motivation for this murder, as a letter to the editor questioned, “If 
tedium indeed incites such violence, we can sit back confident that any proposed interventions with 

 
 
78 
 
aggressive juveniles are bound to be fruitless. We are effectively relieved of our responsibility” (Stein, 
1995, p. A14). However, this stance is put in question in an incident where “Several members of a street 
gang set out to look for a party on Halloween night but instead ended up beating, raping and stabbing a 
woman 132 times before leaving her in afield to die. The motive, one of them told the police, was 
boredom” (“Boston”, 1991, p. 6). In the end, these debates over the motivational capacity of boredom 
for violence could be attributed to those looking for straightforward answers rather than spending the 
resources to investigate the social and economic factors facilitating these crimes properly. For one 
reader, this simplistic approach of attribution fed the concerns of parents and opened the door to 
enterprising psychologists: 
Today parents are terrified of boredom because they are convinced it will lead to drug use, 
sexual experimentation and low S.A.T. scores. So children go to camps, drama camps, 
computer camps, gymnastic camps, sleepaway and day camps. Sweaty school substitutes. 
They must be stimulated. My parents’ idea of stimulation was a trip to the Dairy Queen. But 
today we talk about stimulating children as though we were going to hook them up to a 
machine and administer mild electric shocks (Quindlen, 1991, E17). 
The repeated use of the word “stimulation” echoes the personality psychologists and is consistent with 
some of the work of positive psychologists, in that a child should spend as much time as possible 
engaged, or in flow, as possible. 
Labour 
 
The category with the most significant decrease in uses of boredom was labour, with 31 articles 
in the 1970s and only 7 in the 1990s. What is striking is the almost complete lack of references to the 
boredom of working on assembly lines or job-related boredom in general; this is likely due to American 
companies moving to manufacture overseas, improvements made to lessen boredom on the job, as well 

 
 
79 
 
as the declining power of the labour movement. Articles did include references to service industry jobs, 
for instance, with blackjack dealers, “the hardest part of the job can/be boredom. Most casino workers 
say that blackjack dealers face the most acute problem of keeping focused on repetitive action and the 
changing faces of players, even with a 20-minute break for every hour worked” (Nordheimer, 1994, p. 
B1). While stock traders were experiencing “the boredom factor” during a down market, “The result is 
that many jobs whose fast pace and big dollar transactions once made them the very definition of 
“exciting” and “dynamic” have become increasingly dull and boring . . . “I'm bored. I’m not making 
money”” (Eichenwald, 1990, p. D1). Here boredom appears again in the context of a contrast, where 
exciting times make otherwise average experiences seem more boring than they otherwise would. 
Similar to this was the experience of a photographer, “The job is made of endless days of loneliness and 
boredom . . . the competition is rough, a dangerous game of who can push himself to the limit and take 
more risks” (Lorch, 1996, p. NJ10). One writer detailed the experiences of an engineer who was not 
given any work for long stretches, “Going out of his mind with boredom, my friend took to arriving at 9 
A.M., turning on his drafting lamp and then going home for the rest of the day” (Ravo, 1997, p. F11). 
Psychology was still engaged with the labour issue of boredom, with the consulting company, Personnel 
Decisions Inc. of Minneapolis, reframing the concept of work, “By stressing the play aspects at work, he 
thinks, morale can be improved and boredom lessened” (Fowler, 1991, p. D17). It should be noted that 
these psychologists are not promoting making tangible differences in the workplace; instead, it is the 
workers who should ultimately integrate more fully with the work. The idea that the individual is 
responsible for their own experience is consistent with some neoliberal dogma and Csikszentmihalyi’s 
belief that we are responsible for the content of our minds. 
Politics 
 
Politics were again widely considered boring but compared to the 21 articles appearing in the 
1970s, only 10 instances were present in the 200 reviewed for the 1990s. While exciting politics was 

 
 
80 
 
associated with novelty or conflict, boredom does not necessarily reflect the opposite. Instead, it can 
also capture how people are separated from their representatives and or the process. If politics 
addressed people’s concerns, it is not immediately clear why this would be considered boring unless it 
had been successfully doing it for an extended period. However, that level of competence and 
effectiveness is not something typically associated with politics. One article raised the alarm of the 
importance of people meeting their representatives to eliminate the distance between themselves and 
their democracy, which was seemingly imposed by professional political operatives, “Everyone should 
meet their mayor, even, or especially, in New York City. It just might save our cities from bankruptcy, 
terminal boredom, or a premature death inflicted by the modern drone of pollsters, consultants and 
“experts” (O’Conner, 1991, p. A17). To consider that boredom might cause the death of democracy 
certainly raises its profile above a trivial experience. This elevated impact of boredom played out in 
Egypt with Hosni Mubarak, who, in 1993, won a third six-year term and would remain in power until 
2011, “despite growing opposition demands for political changes and mounting discontent. “There is no 
renewal . . . and a lot of boredom. A cloud of boredom hangs over Cairo” (“Mubarak”, 1993, p. A3). A 
similar sentiment was conveyed when an author pointed to the notion that boredom can keep people in 
power and undermine democracy, “decries the public boredom and apathy in response to continuous 
reports of scandals in the White House” (Covington, 1996, p. E14). Another example of this political 
boredom discussed how since there was little excitement, the established candidate was leveraging his 
name recognition for victory, “Messinger, leading in polls, hopes to avoid a runoff, but boredom plagues 
race” (Nagourney, 1997, p. A1). Others deployed boredom as an insult; in a letter to the editor, a reader 
utilized language that circulates in conservative opinion, “There is no backlash, only boredom with 
feminism’s radicals; boredom with a fringe that serves up victimology breakfast, lunch and dinner. 
Perhaps if feminists spent more time in the kitchens they've been so diligently remodeling on the 
gender-neutral ﬂoor plan, they would learn the basic rules of menu planning” (Ledeen, 1996, p. E8). This 

 
 
81 
 
grotesque attempt at humour also reveals an all-too-common comfort with discriminatory ideas and 
their use to provoke others. Boredom and citizen distance from government appear to be the dominant 
thread for this category, with the lack of novelty and lack of responsible government contributing to 
both.   
Armed Forces 
 
For military conflict and training, boredom was again seen as a threat to combat readiness in 
dialogues that highlighted the juxtaposition of combat and downtime experienced by service people. At 
times boredom was characterized as a deadly adversary, “Next to the Iraqi Army, perhaps the biggest 
enemy facing American troops in the Persian Gulf is boredom” or “The boredom is intense, broken only 
by digging ditches, lugging chopped thorn bushes and listening to music on the armed forces radio 
network” (“Airlift”, 1990, p. B9; Lorch, 1993, p. 4). While in Iraq, apparent concerns were not only about 
the desert landscape inducing boredom but how some soldiers seemed less adaptable to their 
surroundings, “The worst thing to have is any kind of boredom . . . We try to keep them as busy as 
possible. But some marines say they are having a hard time adjusting. There are a couple of guys who 
are really stressed” (Gordon, 1990, p. A10). While personality psychologists might have seen such an 
observation as consistent with individual differences in coping with varying amounts of arousal, positive 
psychologists would likely view it as an indication that more flow is needed. For Israeli soldiers, 
“Boredom and terror are the stuff of life at an outpost in Yaron” where they could be strumming guitars 
to amuse themselves one minute and, in a firefight the next (Sontag, 1998, p. A8). In a different conflict, 
commanders in Somalia were concerned with the dangers of letting one’s guard down, “Boredom and 
low morale are the biggest challenges for commanding officers, who fear that they can make soldiers 
vulnerable to rock throwers and snipers. Many soldiers are also concerned that they are in Somalia for 
the long haul” (Lorch, 1993, p. A4). These experiences reflected those of military personnel stationed in 
very different roles, “Boredom and terror work inside the missile control capsules has been described as 

 
 
82 
 
hours of boredom that could be broken by moments of sheer terror. And for those who have been 
trained to unleash nuclear weapons, always vigilant for “the unspeakable”, as Lieutenant Farfour called 
it” (Johnson, 1991, p. A8). The need to keep soldiers busy in order to avoid boredom and the contrast 
between the heightened state of terror and boredom make numerous appearances. Perhaps due to the 
experience of the heightened state, other activities then become more likely to induce boredom, which 
is consistent with Csikszentmihalyi’s notion of needing to increase skills to avoid the sliding scale of 
boredom. 
Trials  
 
With the heightened public interest in the trials of O. J. Simpson and Whitewater, several 
references to boredom were made regarding the process followed by the courts. One article was 
sympathetic towards executives who were selected for jury trials while still needing to complete their 
work and endure “the same noisy jury room trying to fend off boredom” (Fanning, 1991, p. F23). In an 
article entitled “At Happy Land mass-murder trial, days of tears, humor and boredom”, the author noted 
how even the most heinous details could become boring through repetition, which is consistent with 
stimulus-based understandings of boredom (Stanley, 1991, p. 26). The Whitewater trial was considered 
boring enough that two separate articles mentioned how monotonous it was, with one noting that in 
the 10th hour, the broadcast inadvertently switched to Mister Rogers’ Neighborhood, while PBS, CNN, 
and PBS all changed their programming (Wines, 1994, p. 26; Rich, 1994, p. C15). The O. J. Simpson trial, 
for all its publicity and public interest, was mocked in a NYT letter to the editor, “Next thing we know, 
boredom will be elevated to an official-osis. And then a legal defense; “dying of boredom” will cease to 
be hyperbole” (Ciraolo, 1995, p. A30). Given that these trials included people who were varying degrees 
of celebrity, were editorialized in popular magazines, and presented through the entertainment 
dominated medium of television, it is unsurprising that boredom would not be tolerated by the 
audience.  

 
 
83 
 
Miscellaneous – Food, Exercise, Fashion, and Older Adults 
 
Other less frequent categories also emerged, with food, exercise, fashion, and older adults 
appearing, largely overlapping with the miscellaneous themes found in the 1970s. Novelty was a central 
theme to articles that discussed boring food or restaurants. Both Bobby Flay and Steven DePletro’s 
menus were lauded for their food, which “explode[d] off the plate” or “reinvents” Italian cuisine, where 
it was “impossible to be bored” (Reed, 1997, p. WC13; Reichl, 1997, p. A25). Culinary expert William 
Grimes attempted to help people with their turkey stuffing, which was “synonymous with dry, 
volumetric bore” with some novel approaches (1992, p. F11). Exercise, which was not associated with 
boredom in the 1970s, appeared here as monotony was associated with exercise regimes. These 
feelings were said to undermine people’s ability to stick with a program, “Consumers acknowledge that 
they spend so much on home fitness equipment mainly because they keep trying to find something that 
not only works but also keeps their interest. Boredom seems to be a big problem. Motivation is another” 
(Dignan, 1996, p. F9). However, one instructor realized the challenge was greater than the lack of 
novelty, “Valerie Green knows all too well the boredom that can set in with even the most varied 
exercise program” (Hurley, 1991, p. 44). Others still placed the blame on the slow pace of results, “The 
lack of visible progress (washboard abs, etc.) is fueling the boredom in exercising and its attendant 
equipment” (Macey, 1996, p. F34). Fashion saw its share of references to boredom with novelty again 
playing a prominent role. The boredom with living room furniture was addressed by introducing a 
mismatching sofa, in what “may have started out of sheer boredom” (Slesin, 1991, p. C8). While the 
larger clothing designer world was facing a crisis of boredom of sorts, with the designers themselves 
inspired by it to the point of a feedback loop, “Boredom was a more frequent topic of conversation at 
shows this season in Milan, Paris, London, and New York than the clothes, so much so that even the 
audience's boredom was getting boring” (Spindler, 1995, p. B7). Lastly, four articles discussed boredom 
in older adults and were related to themes of loss of freedom and lack of stimulation. One reporter 

 
 
84 
 
documented one woman’s daily struggles with aging, “Ninety-seven years old and partly blind, she 
spends her day wandering through a dark apartment in Queens, fending off illness, boredom and 
depression” (Goodnough, 1994, p. 1). With the closing of a nursing home, some former residents found 
it difficult to adjust since they “had grown accustomed to a life peppered with daily activity, are simply 
bored” (Steinhauer, 1998, p. 37). Technology was seen as a possible way to address the problem of 
older adult boredom, “To help her avoid boredom, her older son. Marty, set her up with WebTV so she 
could surf the internet on her television set” (Brock, 1999, p. C20). Much of this is consistent with 
Csikszentmihalyi’s notions of how boredom can manifest in people with a skill/challenge mismatch. 
Here, older adults’ isolation can limit chances to engage in activities that promote flow, exercisers’ 
increasing skill levels can turn once challenging activities boring, while lack of novelty in food also 
promoted boredom.  
Boredom 
 
One notable difference from the earlier period was the appearance of eight articles that 
examined published works devoted to the history and etymology of boredom itself. The books reviewed 
included The vocation of a teacher: Rhetorical occasions, 1967-1988 by Wayne C. Booth (1991), On 
kissing, tickling, and being bored: Psychoanalytic essays on the unexamined life by Adam Phillips (1994), 
and no less than four articles covering Patricia Spacks’ Boredom: The literary history of a state of mind 
(1995). Related to these works were two articles covering Csikszentmihalyi’s publications, The evolving 
self and flow the psychology at optimal experience, which discussed flow and boredom,  
When the mind isn’t focused on a task, he observes, it veers naturally toward boredom or 
anxiety. The tendency may aid survival, since boredom prods us out into the world to better 
our lot . . . contentment comes from confronting challenges, he says, not mindless leisure . . .  

 
 
85 
 
the author may know the secret to a better Sunday afternoon, but the prose in this book can 
spoil one (Cowley, 1993, p. BR 24; Tavris, 1990, p. BR7). 
With boredom appearing as a topic of central concern, it speaks to the growing interest by academics, 
as seen by the publications making associations with adverse mental health outcomes and psychological 
disorders in this period (Leong & Schneller, 1993; Wink & Donahue, 1997; Vodanovich & Rupp, 1999). 
However, this increase in scholarly articles discussing boredom came at a time of apparent disinterest by 
the public, as seen in the decreasing number of NYT articles (see figure 6).  
Discussion – Boredom in the Popular Press 1990-1999 
 
Boredom’s use in the NYT during the 1990s was remarkably comparable to its use in the 1970s. 
In both periods, boredom was broadly depicted in ways consistent with a state, with the only references 
to a boredom trait found in articles covering the work of psychologists. Similarly, boredom was again not 
suffering from definitional confusion among the public, not used to define other concepts, and was not 
commonly understood in the context of individual differences. Due to positive psychology’s widely 
applicable definition of boredom as an uncomfortable state elicited by high skill and low challenge 
scenarios, this understanding can be readily identified in the articles of the NYT. Most notable was how 
boredom captured neoliberal sentiments, with the expansion of use in Entertainment, decrease in Art, 
and near disappearance in Labour.  Strengthening these connections is positive psychology’s theorizing 
on attention’s role in boredom and how it overlapped with individual or isolated action. Boredom was 
again a versatile concept, being utilized to convey frustration, confinement, disinterest, and discomfort 
while also understood as a motivator. It was again repeatedly depicted in juxtapositions, where 
scenarios with highly contrasting states of alarm and indifference elicited the emotional state, including 
cases where stressful jobs also had significant periods of inaction. The only categories that differed from 
the 1970s were exercise, jury trials, and boredom. 

 
 
86 
 
Boredoms Compared 
 
The attempts to domesticate boredom by personality psychology and positive psychology have 
mainly proven unsuccessful, as seen in recent admissions by psychologists that boredom remains elusive 
to the present day (Danckert et al., 2018; McDonald, 2019; Milea et al., 2021), even while such attempts 
continue (Yang et al., 2017; Baratta et al., 2018; Seo et al., 2019). Due to this confusion, the use of 
boredom to provide definitional clarity to oppositional concepts of interest is problematic. Personality 
psychologists attempted to ground a boredom-like trait in biology, understanding it through a lens of 
stimulation or arousal (OLS/OLA), and then associated it with adverse outcomes. This biological 
interpretation bestows enormous power to those who develop and interpret the measurement scales, 
and due to its assumed hereditary nature, the boredom-prone could be permanently typified as less 
than desirable, and within a capitalist society, unmarketable.  
For positive psychologists, boredom entered the discussion through the concept of flow as a 
mismatch between high skill and low challenge, yet, the concept remained underdefined. At the same 
time, the centralizing of attention’s role in boredom positioned the subdiscipline in a complementary 
position with neoliberal practices and subjectivities (Teo, 2018), as did their prescriptions for how to 
obtain happiness and well-being. Moreover, the claims to a scientific or essentialist boredom need to be 
reconciled with the shifts found between the two periods of NYT articles since a natural kind boredom 
should remain static. These changes in boredom complicate notions of biologically based boredom and 
frustrate claims made by these two subdisciplines to be practicing as a science. Daston’s commentary on 
how psychologists identify their subject matter and the critical work of Danziger, Benjafield, Kagan, and 
others questioning the reification efforts of psychologists highlights the perhaps unresolvable problems 
attempting to unify psychology causes. 
 

 
 
87 
 
Continuity in the Popular Discourse 
 
The fact that about half of the categories maintained a very similar number of references to 
boredom over the two time periods speaks to some stability in how the term was utilized, at least within 
the popular context. Literature increased from 14 articles to 15, with the topics ranging from the 
mundane to the consequential for both periods. It was not unusual for authors to deploy boredom as a 
motivator for certain behaviours, with fewer examples of a state that captured a character’s struggle 
with meaninglessness in several instances, especially in the 1990s. Boredom appears to have been a 
constant concern for Western militaries, with 15 and 13 references made in the two samples. Boredom 
was primarily recognized as a danger to troop readiness, morale, and the chain of command. In both 
periods, great lengths were taken by governments to address it by providing extensive amenities to 
distract troops who were far from home. Boredom was also a constant for travel, with 7 and 6 uses, and 
maintained the same themes of inconvenience, the slow passage of time, and being constricted in time 
or place. Finally, and perhaps most consequentially, the category of Youth not only contained a similar 
number of references to boredom but possessed a continuity of themes across the two time periods. 
Many of the articles expressed concerns about youthful summer boredom and alarm over drug use, 
while other anti-social behaviours were common to both periods as boredom maintained its 
associations with poor outcomes. The only other categories that reached this heightened concern over 
boredom were the military and labour (specifically in the 1970s). There appears to be a mixture of 
concerns here, with parents and other authorities concerned about idle youth, which is also consistent 
with conservative viewpoints of how downtime can lead to rebellious acts and challenging the status 
quo. 
 
 

 
 
88 
 
Differences in Depth the 1970s vs. 1990s 
 
While the continuity between the two periods regarding boredom use is impressively stable, 
several shifts merit a closer look. Perhaps unexpectedly, Entertainment was the only category that 
experienced a sizable increase in the number of uses of boredom. In the 1970s, there were 33 articles 
covering sports, movies, and music, while in the 1990s, there were 52. This frequency meant that over 
25% of the uses could be attributed to some form of entertainment within this sample. While this could 
be a product of people spending more of their time away from work engaged in entertainment, it could 
also suggest an increased focus on the part of the NYT in general. It is also likely attributable to the 
expansion of technology where cable television was broadening its reach, and sports and other forms of 
entertainment became widely available 24 hours a day for the first time (Toto, 2000). Overall, the 
themes related to entertainment were primarily the same, most of them being of a trivial nature, where 
there appeared to be a low tolerance for entertainment which elicited boredom.  
 
The first of the categories to see a noticeable decline in the use of boredom was Art – from 24 
cases to 14. Interestingly, this thread is only tangentially connected to two highly related categories that 
also saw notable decreases, Labour, and Politics. Boredom’s use in articles covering art productions was 
consistently varied in both periods. Some critics would use boredom to highlight unrelatable art or 
create confusion, while others noted the boredom of art patrons. In other articles, artists deployed 
boredom to establish a theme or make commentary about society, which accounted for nearly all the 
discourses of existential boredom. Boredom was also a motivator for some people to produce art and an 
escape for those in the grips of boredom. Overall, this category, more than any other, utilized boredom 
in all its capacity, which could reflect art itself and its ability to reimagine the world and challenge 
boundaries. There does not appear to be an apparent reason as to why it would have experienced a 
decline, except galleries were introducing more entertainment-like elements. 

 
 
89 
 
 
The next category, Politics, experienced a drop of over 50%, with 21 articles in the 1970s and 10 
in the 1990s. The uses are largely consistent between periods with people experiencing trivial boredom 
when discussing government, especially political campaigns. Moreover, while a higher percentage of 
articles in the 1990s utilized a more insidious type of boredom associated with apathy and disintegration 
of government institutions, the sample is too small to draw conclusions. That said, the shift is consistent 
with the juxtaposition theme, as contrasted with the turmoil of the 1960s, the 1970s (especially the late 
1970s), were relatively boring. In 1975 the commentator Russell Baker articulated the contrast in an 
800+ word diatribe, of which this passage captures his present day,  
The nineteen-seventies are boring. The decade is already half over and its chief legacy is an 
engulfing swamp of boredom. Americans are bored by Watergate. bored by Richard Nixon and 
bored by the endless tale of skulduggery in the C. l. A, the F. B. l. and the l. R. S. President Ford 
is boring, which is his chief political strength. Henry Kissinger's brilliance is boring. The 
President's economists are boring, but not nearly so boring as their incessant, boring 
predictions that prosperity is just around the comer. Playboy. Penthouse. Viva. Lui. Oui. Gent. 
Hustler and Screw are boring. So are Hugh Hefner and Xavicra Hollander. Unless somebody 
stops them soon, they will make even sex boring . . . In the nineteen-sixties. of course, 
Americans hungered for boredom. A sleepy Government, some peace in the streets, a release 
from passions and phonograph noises (Baker, 1975, p. SM2). 
It is revealing that while this predominately discusses trivial boredom, in its totality, it is existential in 
nature. It is also worthwhile considering the blurring of the lines between politics and entertainment. 
While Presidents John Kennedy (1917-1963) and Richard Nixon (1913-1994) were celebrities in their 
own right, it was with the election of General Electric salesman Ronald Reagan (1911-2004) that it 
became apparent the messenger was more important than the message. In light of this, it is surprising 

 
 
90 
 
that boredom decreased in political discourses when considering this was a period of 
entertainmentization, as discussed above. 
 
Of all the categories, it was labour that experienced the most profound shift in both numbers, 
from 31 to 7, and themes. The 1970s were rife with examples of labour unrest, business, and 
governmental interventions, workplace mundanity, isolation, and meaninglessness. The boredom 
associated with assembly line work was also depicted as a cause for alcohol and drug abuse and a 
national security issue. All manner of suggestion was considered to address the issue, from workplace 
enrichment of free milk, to rehearsing a company song, to go-go girls and dancing men (Farnsworth, 
1973, p. 601; Shabecoff, 1973, p. 14). Contrasting this alarm with the relative tranquility emanating from 
the 1990s reveals the shift over this period, including the gutting of social programs, the destruction of 
union membership, and the rise of corporate personhood in the US. It also marks a cultural shift, where 
government institutions were no longer seen as sources of security or expressions of community but 
rather as wasteful institutions that were a fundamental threat to individual freedoms. This perception 
amounted to a state where people became solely responsible for their successes and failures. There was 
also a more tangible shift in labour, as service work outpaced assembly line work, as many 
manufacturers moved their productions to countries that did not possess the same worker protections. 
These shifts are well documented and give fairly concrete reasoning for the drastic change seen in the 
use of boredom.   
 
Lastly, observing uses of boredom throughout all editions of the NYT in the 1970s and 1990s, 
there was a substantial drop in the number of uses. For example, in the 1970s, 2635 articles contained 
the term boredom, while in the 1990s, there were 1676. This 36% decrease in uses is difficult to 
reconcile with the expansion of entertainment and its association with easily elicited boredom, as well 
as the increasing interest from psychologists, as seen in the number of results for “boredom” in the 
PsycINFO search engine as compared with the number of entries for the NYT. 

 
 
91 
 
Juxtaposition  
A reoccurring theme throughout the popular discourse is the juxtaposition, where boredom 
commonly appears in the wake of a heightened state or period of excitement or anxiety. This 
contrasting state characteristic spurs questions if boredom would have been otherwise experienced, 
meaning that at either extreme, boredom or excitement are both brought into subjective existence by 
their opposite. There is an abundance of examples of people in the military and politics who detail 
experiences that possess moments of terror and hours of boredom. Further, many appearances are not 
temporally bound in the immediate term, as examples of more extended chaotic periods, e. g. American 
political turmoil in the 1960 and early 1970s contrasted with the “boring” years of the Carter 
administration. While boredom can pre-stage excitement, and there are examples of boredom besetting 
people on long drives, during work hours, and being a motivator for distraction seeking, it was far more 
common to find excitement first and boredom second, which is consistent with the notion of boredom 
as a reaction (Velasco, 2019). If boredom is typically experienced in reaction to excitement, this could 
explain why it appeared as a concept of secondary concern for psychologists. With a prime characteristic 
of language being comparative, boredom as a secondary experience might not be overly surprising, but, 
interestingly, this typical pattern of elicitation of boredom received little attention from researchers. 
Popular Comparative Usage 
 
In addition to the categorical analysis, an attempt was made to document and compare how 
themes related to boredom were utilized in the NYT. This approach included boredom as a descriptor of 
behaviour, motivation, and situations for its likely elicitation.  
 Theme 
1970s 
1990s 
Antisocial descriptor of behaviour 
35 
23 

 
 
92 
 
Motivation for consumeristic behaviour  
28 
44 
Artistic manipulation of patron 
14 
6 
As a motivator 
50 
38 
Lack of novelty 
72 
47 
Trait* 
0 
4 
*The four times boredom was utilized as a trait were all examples of articles discussing the work of 
psychologists. 
Antisocial descriptor of behaviour  
The decreasing associations between boredom and antisocial behaviours ran counter to the findings and 
interests of psychology as many researchers would go on to highlight the connection. This finding 
becomes more perplexing when considering the well-documented influence psychology has on public 
discourses. 
Motivation for consumeristic behaviour  
The sharp increase in associations between consumerism and boredom was represented by articles 
exploring material cures for boredom. The reliance on the marketplace for solutions is consistent with 
observations about the advancement of neoliberalism and the reliance on aesthetics. 
Artistic manipulation of patron 
The corpus essentially corroborates Colpitt’s (2017) observations that galleries have moved towards an 
entertainment model in galleries and theatre productions. As a result, artists no longer attempted to 
utilize boredom’s existential properties to challenge patrons to construct or explore deeper meaning 
within the corpus.  
As a motivator 

 
 
93 
 
The decrease in boredom as a motivator could be partially explained by the decrease in articles 
discussing manufacturing work. These typically discussed concerns over worker productivity and tactics 
deployed to keep them motivated. However, this is does run counter to the increases of interest by 
psychology. 
Lack of novelty 
Much like the previous theme, this decline can partially be attributed to the declining coverage of 
manufacturing work, but with novelty commonly associated with consumer goods, this decrease would 
not have been predicted. 
Trait 
Lastly, a highly informative finding from this analysis is how nearly every example from the NYT 
deployed boredom as a state. While some cases could be interpreted as a boredom-propensity, the 
language usage suggested a transitionary, unstable, and fleeting experience. This common usage 
provides evidence that there was broad definitional agreement amongst the public. It is also of interest 
that only four cases of boredom being understood as a trait were found in articles referencing the work 
of psychologists and histories of boredom.  
OLS/OLA and Flow 
After a series of attempts to document if boredom was used in ways consistent with either the OLS/OLA 
or flow, it became apparent that the exercise was so subjective and arbitrary that it was not providing 
any useful information. Frustrating these efforts was the lack of descriptive information provided in the 
NYT and a poorly defined concept of boredom in both subdisciplines. Generally, examples in the NYT 
could be interpreted as an experience of low arousal and low challenge. This is consistent with notions 

 
 
94 
 
of nebulous boredom, the failure of these psychologies to domesticate it, and the over applicability of 
these concepts. 
Total “Boredom” Appearances 
For a longer historical perspective of boredom’s use in the NYT, the total usage for the 20th century by 
decade below gives some insight into the growth and eventual decline of the term. As boredom reached 
its zenith in the 1970s, it is difficult to reconcile with both the increase in psychological studies of the 
topic (see figure 3) and the designation of boredom as the experience of modernity by some 
philosophers (though some would argue it has become invisible due to its ubiquity) (McDonough, 2017). 
There are a host of possible explanations for this discrepancy. It is possible psychologists had 
successfully created a negative stigma around boredom to the point that it became a concern for 
demands on self-branding at a time of precarious work where references to boredom would need to be 
avoided.  
 
Technical Literature Comparison - OLA vs. HSP  
In comparing the two psychologies’ literature, a similarity was identified in depicting subjective 
states along a continuum. The theoretical mechanisms they deployed to illustrate, explain, measure, and 
operationalize the concepts of primary interest for personality and positive psychology (e.g., arousal, 
stimulation, and happiness) possessed similarities in their structure and elements. Starting with 
personality psychology, as biologically-grounded trait psychology, utilized the Optimal Level of 
Stimulation at first but eventually discarded it favoring the Optimal Level of Arousal (OLA), as it allowed 
for individual differences, which were central to their subdiscipline’s theories. This framework imagined 
a continuum where stimulation/arousal and disengagement/sleep/boredom represented the two 
extremes of human experience (see figure 4) (Eysenck, 1963; Strelau & Eysenck, 1987). It was theorized 

 
 
95 
 
that between these two poles of subjective experience sat an individual’s genetically determined set 
point that represented their particular optimal level of stimulation or arousal, where optimal cognitive 
functioning took place. This framework was of enormous productivity for researchers as they deployed 
it to explain personality expressions of extraversion and introversion, which was determined through 
self-report, twin studies, observations, and cognitive experiments (Strelau & Eysenck, 1987). Essentially, 
trait-based personality researchers attempted to explain behaviour as motivated by a person’s attempt 
to return to their OLS/OLA, whether through sensation seeking (e.g. risky behaviours), or avoidance (e. 
g. seeking quiet). 
 
In the 1990s, proto-positive psychologists adopted the Happiness Set Point (HSP), as developed 
by David Lykken and Auke Tellegen, who also utilized twin studies (Tellegen et al., 1988; Lykken & 
Tellegen, 1996). Understood as a genetically influenced level of happiness whereby individuals would 
naturally return to after experiencing joy or sadness, the HSP was theorized to ultimately be responsible 
for “half of the variance in self-reported happiness” (Csikszentmihalyi, 2003, p. 89), while demographic 
influences including, religion, education, marital status, and income, were only responsible for three 
percent of a person’s well-being (Horowitz, 2017). Complicating matters, Csikszentmihalyi believed 
behaviours and experiences (moderated by genetically influenced traits) made up the bulk of the 
remaining influence on the HSP, leaving one to question whether he was purposefully theorizing the 
existence of a happiness feedback loop (Csikszentmihalyi, 2003). The web of influences here are 
impossible to pull apart in any quantifiable way, yet the potential productivity associated with 
establishing natural rules for happiness’ expression would be too difficult for some to resist. The founder 
of positive psychology Martin Seligman attempted to do just that by authoring a “Happiness Equation”, 
whereby, “H = S + C + V where H is your enduring level of happiness, S is your set range, C is the 
circumstances of your life, and V represents factors under your voluntary control” (Seligman, 2004, p. 
xiii). If not taken literally, this might provide readers a helpful heuristic, but the real point of interest 

 
 
96 
 
here is the high degree of influence individuals were given over their HSP. This interpretation led to two 
important findings for positive psychology. First, the individual was loosely responsible for their level of 
happiness, "authentic happiness comes from identifying and cultivating your most fundamental 
strengths and using them every day”, which is consistent with neoliberal interpretations of the self and 
is a departure from personality psychology which argued the OLS was static (Seligman, 2004, p. xiii). And 
second, the meditation-like technique that Csikszentmihalyi had been working on since the late 1960s 
could be deployed as a corrective for people who were struggling to ‘cultivate their most fundamental 
strengths’ (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975). Csikszentmihalyi spelled out how the HSP could be influenced by 
“the frequency or intensity of momentary experiences of happiness would add will have more frequent 
and intense momentary experiences of happiness” (Csikszentmihalyi, 1991, p. 70). While offering a 
straightforward means of happiness measurement through averaging a person’s moment-to-moment 
self-reported level of happiness, whereby a “person whose average score is higher than another’s will be 
considered to be generally more happy” (Csikszentmihalyi, 1991, p. 70). With the combination of flow 
(as depicted by Csikszentmihalyi) and the HSP, the theoretical similarities between the two disciplines 
are revealed (see figure 5). However, boredom for these two frameworks is not immediately 
reconcilable, as the boredom caused by low stimulation is not the same as that caused by lack of 
attention due to a skill/challenge mismatch. This conflict between disciplines presents further problems 
for establishing a natural type of boredom and practicing psychology as a science. 
 
Conclusion  
This historical examination of how two subdisciplines of psychology attempted to domesticate 
boredom exposed the theoretical problems associated with how psychology adopts its subject matter. 
Some of these problems can be traced back to psychology’s practice of adopting a “hidden level of 
theory” (Danziger, 1997, p. 8), which presumes the ahistorical nature of the categories and concepts 

 
 
97 
 
under study. This assumption appears particularly flawed with the rich history of culturally embedded 
progenitors available regarding boredom (Langeweile, melancholy, acedia, etc.). Instead, personality 
psychologists stripped boredom of its history and existential associations and transformed it into a more 
easily operationalized concept.  While consistent with the larger capitalist culture and the shift towards 
aesthetics, personality psychologists’ understanding of boredom as a trait no longer reflected how the 
public was using the term. This left boredom appearing in two distinct discourses, the technical 
psychological literature and the popular. The lack of adoption of boredom as a trait represented a partial 
looping effect, with psychology borrowing from the public but the public resisting psychology’s 
interpretation. Problematically, the psychologists assumed possession of both the ability to accurately 
identify the nature of boredom and the language to represent it adequately while never addressing the 
layers of hidden theory these assumptions bring. However, by examining their use of an underdefined 
boredom to bring clarity to their central concepts of interest, the problems associated with their 
assumptions are given clarity. 
While positive psychology placed less emphasis on examining the concept of boredom itself, it 
was still of considerable utility for Csikszentmihalyi in establishing a definition for his happiness-
generating practice of flow. Positive psychology mirrored personality psychology in utilizing the common 
understanding of boredom to help define a concept of interest, yet also left the term underdefined. 
Considering the importance positive psychology leaders placed on practicing as a science, borrowing 
public understandings to establish objective reality is difficult to reconcile. Further complicating their 
goals is the influence the broader culture of neoliberalism had on the popularity of their theorizing, 
including the role of attention and flow as an individualistic practice. This understanding ignores 
associations between boredom and the struggle to find meaning, as well as boredom as a cultural 
artifact. Supposing positive psychology can be understood as a historically situated practice rather than 

 
 
98 
 
a science, then explaining why psychological interventions that stressed individual responsibility became 
popular reflects the popular discourse, rather than a truth whose ‘time has come’.  
 
In the years following the emergence of positive psychology, the number of psychological 
studies involving boredom has continued to grow over time. This interest in boredom marks a deviation 
from the public’s usage of the term, which continued to decrease according to the number of boredom 
references made in NYT articles (see figure 6). Moreover, this decline in use has occurred while some 
philosophers identified boredom as the ubiquitous state of modern life. The reasons for this decline are 
too numerous to mention here, but it may have become the ‘air’ modern people breathe, rarely 
reaching the level of conscious thought while signifying a failure on the part of these psychologists to 
domesticate boredom. The decline might also be related to the stigmatization of boredom, as presented 
as a failure to control attention, seek challenges, and the host of negative associations being made in 
subsequent research. As this research reveals, boredom and psychology’s identities are both in tension. 
When attempts are made to strip away cultural considerations, it is a disservice to the practice, the 
term, and the wider populace.  
 
 
 

 
 
99 
 
References 
A dieter’s dream comes true. (1975, September 17). The New York Times, 57. 
Abramson, E. E., & Stinson, S. G. (1977). Boredom and eating in obese and non-obese individuals. 
Addictive behaviors, 2(4), 181-185. 
Ackerman, F. (1990, June 17). TV messages: Prescription for boredom. The New York Times, H3. 
Adelman, E. (1978, December 24). Where to take the children if boredom sets in. The New York Times, 
NJ1. 
Aho, K. (2017). 9 Kierkegaard on boredom and self-loss in the age of online dating. In M. Gardiner, & J. J. 
Haladyn (Eds.). Boredom Studies Reader (pp. 142-154). Routledge. 
Airlift to gulf: Homework and pencils. (1990, November 28). The New York Times, B9. 
Albright, J. (1972, October 8). Notes: Diversion aloft. The New York Times, XX4. 
Allport, G. W. (1927). Concepts of trait and personality. Psychological Bulletin, 24(5), 284-293. 
doi:10.1037/h0073629   
Auto union official gives plan to reduce boredom. (1972, December 27). The New York Times, 28. 
Baker, R. (1975, July 20). Sigh! The New York Times, SM2. 
Baker, R. (1979, April 22). Summer beyond wish. The New York Times, 58. 
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Prentice Hall. 

 
 
100 
 
Baratta, P. L., & Spence, J. R. (2018). Capturing the noonday demon: Development and validation of the 
State Boredom Inventory. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 27(4), 477-
492. 
Barmack, J. E. (1939a). Studies on the psychophysiology of boredom: Part I. The effect of 15 mgs. of 
Benzedrine sulfate and 60 mgs. of ephedrine hydrochloride on blood pressure, report of 
boredom and other factors. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 25(5), 494. 
Barmack, J. E. (1939b). Studies on the psychophysiology of boredom: Part 2. The effect of a lowered 
room temperature and an added incentive on blood pressure, report of boredom, and other 
factors. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 25(6), 634. 
Barnes, C. (1975, January 4). Stage: Insights in the hashish club. The New York Times, 12. 
Barnes, C. (1976, November 23). Einstein on the beach transforms boredom into memorable theatre. 
The New York Times, 33. 
Baron, R. A. (2012). Entrepreneurship: An evidence-based guide. Edward Elgar Publishing. 
Benjafield, J. G. (2013). The vocabulary of anglophone psychology in the context of other subjects. 
History of Psychology, 16(1), 36. 
Berlyne, D. E. (1960). Conflict, arousal, and curiosity. McGraw-Hill. 
Berlyne, D. E. (1966). Curiosity and exploration. Science, 153(3731), 25-33. 
Berman, A. (1939). Satiation or boredom? A rejoinder to Dr. Barmack. The American Journal of 
Psychology, 52(3), 471-473. 
Bernstein, R. (1995, June 28). A road novel’s trip through darkness. The New York Times, C19. 

 
 
101 
 
Binder, D. (1972, May 14). A dangerous foe: Boredom of G. I.’s. The New York Times, 7. 
Boden, J. (2009). The devil inside: Boredom proneness and impulsive behaviour. In D. Pezze & C. Salzani 
(Eds.), Essays on boredom and modernity (pp. 203-226). Brill. 
Booth, W. C. (1988). The vocation of a teacher: Rhetorical occasions, 1967-1988. University of Chicago 
Press. 
Boss, M. (2009). Metaphysics and the mood of deep boredom: Heidegger’s phenomenology of mood. In 
D. Pezze & C. Salzani (Eds.), Essays on boredom and modernity (pp. 85-107). Brill. 
Boston teen-anger gives motive for a rape and a slaying: Boredom. (1991, May 3). The New York Times, 
6. 
Brady, G. (2006, April 4). Alternative Press Magazine's "The 90 Greatest Albums of the 90s". List of bests. 
Alternative Press Magazine.  
https://web.archive.org/web/20070926230228/http://www.listsofbests.com/list/4377?page=2 
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 
3(2), 77–101. https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa 
Bridgman, T., Cummings, S., & Ballard, J. (2019). Who built Maslow’s pyramid? A history of the creation 
of management studies’ most famous symbol and its implications for management education. 
Academy of Management Learning & Education, 18(1), 81-98. 
Brinkmann, S. (2005). Human kinds and looping effects in psychology: Foucauldian and hermeneutic 
perspectives. Theory & Psychology, 15(6), 769-791. 

 
 
102 
 
Broadbent, D. E. (1979). Chronic effects of repetitive and nonrepetitive work. In C. J. Mackay & T. Cox 
(Eds.), Response to stress: Occupational aspects. International Publishers Corporation.  
Brock, F. (1999, September 5). Grandma’s guide to the web. The New York Times, C20. 
Broyard, A. (1974, April 15). Ou es la sgan d’antan? The New York Times, 29. 
Broyard, A. (1976, August 6). Books of the times. The New York Times, C17. 
Buchanan, R. D. (2010). Playing with fire: The controversial career of Hans J. Eysenck. Oxford University 
Press. 
Burgess, A. (1977, September 25).  Peking drugs, Moscow gold. The New York Times, 266. 
Burks, E. (1971, July 6). Satan cult death, drugs jolt peaceful Vineland, NJ. The New York Times, 35. 
Butterfield, F. (1972, March 6). Seven days in Vietnam. The New York Times, 1. 
Buzzcocks. (1977). Boredom. Spiral Scratch. New Hormones. 
Cabanas, E. (2018). Positive psychology and the legitimation of individualism. Theory & Psychology, 
28(1), 3-19. 
Canby, V. (1973, September 17). Film: Retour d’Afrique. The New York Times, 41. 
Canby, V. (1976, May 16). Film view: ‘This blue bird’ has a right to sing the blues. The New York Times, 
77. 
Canby, V. (1976, October 24). Film view: Vincent Canby who says there aren’t any good movies around. 
The New York Times, 73. 

 
 
103 
 
Carli, M. (1986). Selezione psicologica e qualita dell’esperienza. In F. Massimini & P. Inghilleri (Eds.), 
L’esperienza Quotidiana. Franco Angeli. 
Carrol, E. N., & Zuckerman, M. (1977). Psychopathology and sensation seeking in “downers,”“speeders,” 
and “trippers”: A study of the relationship between personality and drug choice. International 
Journal of the Addictions, 12(4), 591-601. 
Cattell, J. M. (1924). The interpretation of intelligence tests. The Scientific Monthly, 18(5), 508-516. 
Ciraolo, S. (1995, June 15). Simpson jury members – bored, maybe, undisciplined, surely. The New York 
Times, A30. 
Clarity, J.  (1974, March 5). Inactivity a mixed blessing for B-52 pilots in Thailand. The New York Times, 2. 
Clemons, W. (1971, March 12). A tip on a growth novelist. The New York Times, 33. 
Clines, F. (1979, January 23). About New York. The New York Times, B2. 
Close up of the grunt. (1970, February 8). The New York Times, 216. 
Clymer, A. (1979, September 13). Move grows at capitol to urge Carter to shun race. The New York 
Times, B18. 
Cohen, H. (1972, October 1). Prepare for snow. The New York Times, D19. 
Colpitt, F. (2017). Entertainment: Contemporary art’s cure for boredom. In Gardiner, M., & Haladyn, J. J. 
(Eds.) Boredom Studies Reader (pp. 79-92). Routledge. 

 
 
104 
 
Cooper, R. (2004). Why Hacking is wrong about human kinds. Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 
55(1), 73-85. 
Cosgrove, L., & Karter, J. M. (2018). The poison in the cure: Neoliberalism and contemporary movements 
in mental health. Theory & Psychology, 28(5), 669-683. 
Covington, J. (1996, June 30). Tired of the game, voters long for substance. The New York Times, E14. 
Cowley, G. (1993, November 21). The evolving self. The New York Times, BR24. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975). Beyond boredom and anxiety. Jossey-Bass Publishers. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1978). The stream of consciousness. In K. S. Pope, & J. L. Singer, (Eds.). The stream 
of consciousness: Scientific investigations into the flow of human experience (pp. 335-358). 
Plenum. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1982/2014). Toward a psychology of optimal experience. In M. Csikszentmihalyi, 
Flow and the foundations of positive psychology (pp. 209-226). Springer. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1997). Flow and education. NAMTA Journal, 22(2), 2-35. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000). Boredom. In A. E. Kazdin (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Psychology, Vol. 1 (pp. 442–
444). 
Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Larson, R. (2014). Flow and the foundations of positive psychology. Springer. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Wong, M. M. H. (1991/2014). The situational and personal correlates of 
happiness: A cross-national comparison. In M. Csikszentmihalyi & R. Larson (Eds.), Flow and the 
Foundations of Positive Psychology (pp. 69-88). Springer. 

 
 
105 
 
Cullen, D. (1997). Maslow, monkeys and motivation theory. Organization, 4(3), 355-373. 
Curry. J. (1992, April 27). Scrubs clean up against orioles. The New York Times, C7. 
Danckert, J. A., & Allman, A. A. A. (2005). Time flies when you’re having fun: Temporal estimation and 
the experience of boredom. Brain and Cognition, 59(3), 236-245. 
Danckert, J. A., & Eastwood, J. D. (2020). Out of my skull. Harvard University Press. 
Danckert, J. A., Hammerschmidt, T., Marty-Dugas, J., & Smilek, D. (2018). Boredom: Under-aroused and 
restless. Consciousness and Cognition, 61, 24-37. 
Danziger, K. (1997). Naming the mind: How psychology found its language. Sage. 
Darnton, J. (1971, January 17). Many on campus shifting to softer drugs and alcohol. The New York 
Times, 52. 
Darwin, C. (2008). The descent of man, and selection in relation to sex. Princeton University Press. 
Daston, L. (Ed.). (2000). Biographies of scientific objects. University of Chicago Press. 
Davidson, I. J. (2017). The ambivert: A failed attempt at a normal personality. Journal of the History of 
the Behavioral Sciences, 53(4), 313-331. 
Davies, H. (1926). Discussion on the physical and mental effects of monotony in modern industry. British 
Medical Journal, 2(3427), 472–479. 
Davies, J. (2017). How voting and consensus created the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders (DSM-III). Anthropology & Medicine, 24(1), 32-46. 

 
 
106 
 
Davies, W. (2016). The limits of neoliberalism: Authority, sovereignty and the logic of competition. Sage. 
Davies, W. (2019). Nervous states: Democracy and the decline of reason. WW Norton & Company. 
De Charms, R. (1968). The internal affective determinants of behavior. Academic Press. 
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985). Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human behavior. Plenum 
Dignan, L. (1996, August 25). A fear of boredom, if not flab, is fueling the fitness industry. The New York 
Times, F9. 
Disch, T. (1990, March 18). Niagara Falls gothic. The New York Times, BR16. 
Drory, A. (1982) Individual differences in boredom proneness and task effectiveness at work. Personnel 
Psychology, 35, 141–151. 
Drug peril eases at powder ridge. (1970, February 2). The New York Times, 58. 
Dunning, J. (1997, November 03). Testing the limits of boredom, intelligently. The New York Times, E3. 
Eager to return to math and plays. (1993, September 6). The New York Times, 18. 
Easterlin, R. A. (1974). Does economic growth improve the human lot? Some empirical evidence. In 
Nations and households in economic growth (pp. 89-125). Academic Press. 
Easterlin, R. A., & O’Connor, K. (2020). The Easterlin Paradox. Institute For the Study of Labor, 13923. 
Eastwood, J. D., Cavaliere, C., Fahlman, S. A., & Eastwood, A. E. (2007). A desire for desires: Boredom 
and its relation to alexithymia. Personality and Individual Differences, 42(6), 1035-1045. 

 
 
107 
 
Eastwood, J., Frischen, A., Fenske, M. J., & Smilek, D. (2012). The unengaged mind: Defining boredom in 
terms of attention. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(5), 482–495. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691612456044 
Eder, R. (1978, February 25). The talking band presents work song at the new city. The New York Times, 
16. 
Eichenwald, K. (1990, April 24). Eerie quiet on Wall St. as business tumbles. The New York Times, D1. 
Emerson, G. (1971, June 8). At a U. S. airbase, ‘yellow alert’ – and boredom. The New York Times, 11. 
Erikson, E. H. (1963). Youth: Change and challenge. Basic books. 
Eskenazi, G. (1996, September 5). Brannon charges, straight into Jones’s punishing left hook. The New 
York Times, 32. 
Ex-SS doctor is fined 255,000 in Germany for the killing of Jews. (1979, June 14). The New York Times, 
A9. 
Eysenck, H. J. (1947/1998).  Dimensions of personality. Transaction Publishing.  
Eysenck, H. J. (1963). Biological basis of personality. Nature, 199(4898), 1031-1034. 
Eysenck, H. J. (1981). General features of the model. In H. J. Eysenck (Eds.) A model for personality (pp. 
1-37). Springer. 
Eysenck, H. J. (1987). Arousal and personality. In J. Strelau & H. J. Eysenck (Eds.), Personality dimensions 
and arousal (pp. 1-13). Springer. 

 
 
108 
 
Eysenck, H. J., Easting, G., & Eysenck, S. B. G. (1970). Personality measurement in children: A 
dimensional approach. The Journal of Special Education, 4(3), 261-268. 
Eysenck, H. J., & Eysenck, M. W. (1985). Personality and individual differences: A natural science 
approach. Plenum Press. 
Eysenck, H. J., & Gudjonsson, G. H. (1989). Crime and personality. In R. J. Deckers, H. J. Eysenck, & G. H. 
Gudjonsson (Eds.), The causes and cures of criminality (pp. 43-89). Springer. 
Eysenck, H. J., & Wilson, G. (1976). A Textbook of Human Psychology. The Journal of Nervous and Mental 
Disease, 165(5), 365. 
Fanning, D. (1991, April 28). The whimpering litany of the jury set. The New York Times, F23. 
Farmer, R., & Sundberg, N. D. (1986). Boredom proneness--the development and correlates of a new 
scale. Journal of Personality Assessment, 50(1), 4-17. 
Farnsworth, C. (1973, April 8). Job monotony a problem in Europe: One-seventh in reserve specialized 
work many fringe benefits. The New York Times, 601. 
Faust, J. (1996, February 11). Chasing winter blahs with seeds at hand. The New York Times, WC14. 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. (2021a, September). Economic Research: Gross Domestic Product. 
Economic Research Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/FPCPITOTLZGUSA 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. (2021b, September). Economic Research: Gross Domestic Product. 
Economic Research Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/GDP/ 

 
 
109 
 
Fenichel, O. (1951). On the psychology of boredom. In D. Rapaport (Eds.), Organization and pathology of 
thought: Selected sources (pp. 349–361). Columbia University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/10584-018      
Ferguson, D. (1973) A study of occupational stress and health. Ergonomics, 16, 649–663. 
Ferguson, Y., & Koslowski, R. (2001). Culture, international relations theory, and cold war history. In O. 
A. Westad (Eds.), Reviewing the Cold War: Approaches, interpretations, theory (pp. 149-179), 
Routledge. 
Ferretti, F. (1971, June 8). For bridge operator. The New York Times, 20. 
Finder, A. (1996, January 9). Stranded travelers find ways to beat boredom. The New York Times, 36. 
First-time workers have a lot to learn: Before the first paycheck, come up with a budget. (1993, February 
11). The New York Times, C12. 
First world congress on positive psychology kicks off today. (2009, June 18). 
https://weatherhead.case.edu/news/2009/06/18/first-world-congress-on-positive-psychology-
kicks-off-today 
Fisher, S. (1973). Personal communication. Basic Books. 
Fiske, D. W., & Maddi, S. R. (1961). Functions of varied experience. Dorsey. 
Flint, J. (1979, January 6). One day in an oil refinery. The New York Times, 6. 
Fogelman, K. (1976). Bored eleven-year-olds. The British Journal of Social Work, 6(2), 201-211. 

 
 
110 
 
For a price, new TV-chairs in bus terminals take boredom out of waiting. (1970, July). The New York 
Times, 152. 
Foucault, M. (2005). The order of things. Routledge. 
Fowler, E. M. (1991). Improving employee satisfaction. The New York Times, D17. 
Frese, M., & Gielnik, M. M. (2014). The psychology of entrepreneurship. Annual review. Industrial and 
European. Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 9(1), 45-62.  
Freud, S. (1905). Three essays on the theory of sexuality. Standard Edition, 7, 123- 246. 
Friedman, M. (2002). Capitalism and freedom. University of Chicago Press. 
Fromm, E. (1972, February 27). Fromms theory of aggression. The New York Times, SM72. 
Galton, F. (1884). Measurement of character. Fortnightly Review, 36, 179-185. 
Gardell, B. (1971) Alienation and mental health in the modern industrial environment. In L. Levi (Ed.), 
Society, stress, and disease. (pp. 148-180). Oxford University Press. 
Gardiner, M., & Haladyn, J. J. (Eds.). (2017). Boredom studies reader. Routledge. 
Gaspard, J. J. (2017). Intelligence without essence: rejecting the classical theory of definition. 
International Journal of Intelligence and CounterIntelligence, 30(3), 557-582. 
Geiwitz, P. J. (1964). Hypnotically induced boredom and time estimation. Psychonomic Science, 1(1), 
277-278. 
Gelder, L. (1997, August 22). A little girl so perky and powerful. The New York Times, C22. 

 
 
111 
 
Gelder, L. (1997, September 26). From boredom to broken dreams, nothing but trouble in academic 
family. The New York Times, E18. 
General put zest in Ford tour. (1974, November 23). The New York Times, 6. 
Getzels, J. W., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1969). Aesthetic opinion: An empirical study. Public Opinion 
Quarterly, 33(1), 34-45. 
Giambra, L. M., & Traynor, T. D. (1978). Depression and daydreaming: An analysis based on self‐ratings. 
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 34(1), 14-25. 
Gibby, R. E., & Zickar, M. J. (2008). A history of the early days of personality testing in American industry: 
An obsession with adjustment. History of Psychology, 11(3), 164-184. 
Gieryn, T. F. (1983). Boundary-work and the demarcation of science from non-science: Strains and 
interests in professional ideologies of scientists. American Sociological Review, 781-795. 
Goddard, H.H. (1920). Human efficiency and levels of intelligence. Princeton University Press. 
Goldberg, L. R. (1981). Language and individual differences: The search for universals in personality 
lexicons. In L. Wheeler (Ed.), Review of Personality and Social Psychology (pp. 141-165). Sage 
Publication. 
Goldberg, V. (1994, January 16). He looms large, yet remains invisible. The New York Times, H33. 
Goodman, G. (1975, September 8). Allendale youth’s tension rises over lack of recreation outlets. The 
New York Times, 49. 

 
 
112 
 
Goodnough, A. (1994, December 4). Old in New York, and struggling: City an array of troubles afflicts the 
elderly poor. The New York Times, 1. 
Goodstein, E. (2005). Experience without qualities: Boredom and modernity. Stanford University Press. 
Gordon, M. (1990, September 7). On patrol in the desert, marines fight boredom. The New York Times, 
A10. 
Greenson, R. R. (1953). On Boredom. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 1(1), 7-21. 
Grogan, J. (2012). Encountering America: Sixties psychology, counterculture and the movement that 
shaped the modern self. Harper Collins. 
Grubb, E. A. (1975). Assembly line boredom and individual differences in recreation participation. 
Journal of Leisure Research, 7(4), 256-269. 
Gussow, M. (1976, November 15). Stage: Reviving the rehearsal. The New York Times, 37. 
Haberman, C. (1999, September 26). The world’s cheapest spectator sport. The New York Times, 317. 
Hacking, I. (1995). The looping effects of human kinds. In D. Sperber, D. Premack, & A. J. Premack (Eds.), 
Causal cognition: A multidisciplinary debate (pp. 351–394). Clarendon Press/Oxford University 
Press. 
Hamilton, J. A. (1981). Attention, personality, and self-regulation of mood: Absorbing interest and 
boredom. Progress in Experimental Personality Research, 282-315. 

 
 
113 
 
Hamilton, J. A., Haier, R. J., & Buchsbaum, M. S. (1984). Intrinsic enjoyment and boredom coping scales: 
Validation with personality, evoked potential and attention measures. Personality and individual 
differences, 5(2), 183-193. 
Hand, M. (2017). Boredom: technology, acceleration, and connected presence in the social media age. In 
Gardiner, M., & Haladyn, J. J. (Eds.) Boredom studies reader (pp. 127-141). Routledge. 
Hare, R. D., & Thorvaldson, S. A. (1970). Psychopathy and response to electrical stimulation. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 76(3) 1, 370-379. 
Harkison, J. (1972, January 23). It’s not all fun and glamour, women secret service agents. The New York 
Times, 60. 
Harris, W. (1991, December 22). An actor with an intriguing sense of mystery. The New York Times, 5. 
Harwood, M. (1976, April 25). America with its ears. The New York Times, 200. 
Hayek, F. A., & Caldwell, B. (2014). The road to serfdom: Text and documents: The definitive edition. 
Routledge. 
Hebb, D. O., & Thompson, W. R. (1954). The social significance of animal studies. A Handbook of Social 
Psychology, 1, 534-561. 
Hebb, D. O. (1955). Drives and the CNS (conceptual nervous system). Psychological review, 62(4), 243. 
Henanhan, D. (1976, October 7). Concert: Boring. The New York Times, 59. 
Herbers, J. (1976, February 22). First primary state is typical and untypical. The New York Times, E1. 

 
 
114 
 
Heron, W. (1957). The pathology of boredom. Scientific American, 196(1), 52-57. 
Hershey, R. (1993, March 7). Playing a drive by ear. The New York Times, XX24. 
Herrnstein, R. J., & Murray, C. (1994). The bell curve: Intelligence and class structure in American life. 
Free Press. 
Holden, S. (1997, August 15). Unlikely companions fleeing down river. The New York Times, C14.  
Holden, S. (1998, May 15). Working 9 to 5. The New York Times, E23. 
Holy man: Eddie Murphy, Jeff Holdblum, Kelly Preston. (1998, October 23). The New York Times, E12. 
Horkheimer, M., & Adorno, T. W. (2020). Dialectic of enlightenment. Stanford University Press. 
Horowitz, D. (2017). Happier? The history of a cultural movement that aspired to transform America. 
Oxford University Press. 
Hunter, J. P., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2003). The positive psychology of interested adolescents. Journal 
of Youth and Adolescence, 32(1), 27-35. 
Hutschenecker, A. (1972, March 22). A plan for preventing abuse of drugs. The New York Times, 47. 
International Positive Psychology Association 7th IPPA World Congress. (n.d.) 
https://www.ippaworldcongress.org/about-worldcongress 
Jacklin, A. (1970, June 22). Gold his cup of tea. The New York Times, 66. 
Jackson, B. (2014). Neoliberalism: wanted, dead or alive. Historical Studies in Industrial Relations, 35, 
193-201. 

 
 
115 
 
James, C. (1990, March 26). The anguish and banality of boredom. The New York Times, C15. 
James, C. (1992, November 29). Keeping grown-ups pacified. The New York Times, H11. 
Jensen, A. (1969). How much can we boost I.Q. and scholastic achievement? Harvard Educational 
Review, 39, 1-123. 
Johnson, D. (1991, September 30). The gun uncocked at bases. The New York Times, A8. 
Kagan, J. (2001). Biological constraint, cultural variety, and psychological structures. Annals of the New 
York Academy of Sciences, 935(1), 177-190. 
Kakutani, M. (1993, January 12). Beyond generic in junk-food land. The New York Times, C21. 
Kashdana T. B. & Silvia, P. J. (2009). Curiosity. In S. J. Lopez (Ed.), The Encyclopedia of Positive 
Psychology. (pp. 270-274). John Wiley & Sons. 
Katz, M. (1972, July 24). Merckx wins cycling 4th time. The New York Times, 21. 
Kierkegaard, S. (1843/2004). Either/or: A fragment of life. Penguin. 
Klein, A. (1994, June 12). Facing a survival dilemma. The New York Times, WC9. 
Klemesrud, J. (1971, April 26). A woman who’s learning to drive her own truck. The New York Times, 44. 
Koblent, E. (1997, December 14). When audiences are louder than concerts. The New York Times, 159. 
Kramer, H. (1971, March 7). Playing the gracious host – but to what? The New York Times, D21. 
Kreisberg, L. (1977, May 22). Beating student boredom. The New York Times, 537. 

 
 
116 
 
Kremen, B. (1973, September 9). Lordstown – searching for a better way of work. The New York Times, 
159. 
Kron, J. (1977, September 1). The shirred look: Soft edges in the bathroom. The New York Times, 23. 
Kugelmann, R. (2013). Willpower. Theory & Psychology, 23(4), 479–498. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0959354313490244 
Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. University of Chicago Press. 
Kushner, S. (1997, February 2). Letter to the editor. The New York Times, SM14. 
Laterman, l. (1972, December 17). Where’s Dion’s zing? The New York Times, D34. 
Ledeen, B. (1996, December 22). What women want is a lot of less victimology. The New York Times, E8. 
Lee, F. (1991, April 20). Slimmer goal is keeping youth safe. The New York Times, 27. 
Leese, P. (2002). Shell shock: traumatic neurosis and the British soldiers of the First World War. Springer. 
Leeuwen, M. (2009). The Digital Void: e-NNUI and experience. In D. Pezze, B. Salzani, & C. Salzani (Eds.) 
Essays on Boredom and Modernity (pp. 177-201). Brill. 
Legge, E. (2016). Boring cool people: Some cases of British boredom. In Gardiner, M., & Haladyn, J. J. 
(Eds.) Boredom Studies Reader (pp. 93-110). Routledge. 
Leggett, J. (1976, December 5). Tokyo Rose: Traitor or scapegoat. The New York Times, 245. 
Lehmann-Haupt, C. (1994, December 15). Ennui as inspiration in the history of fiction. The New York 
Times, C20. 

 
 
117 
 
Leon, G. R., & Chamberlain, K. (1973). Comparison of daily eating habits and emotional states of 
overweight persons successful or unsuccessful in maintaining a weight loss. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 41(1), 108. 
Leong, F. T., & Schneller, G. R. (1993). Boredom proneness: Temperamental and cognitive components. 
Personality and individual differences, 14(1), 233-239. 
Levenson, S. (1971, December 12). The games children played. The New York Times, A1. 
Leuba, C. (1955). Toward some integration of learning theories: The concept of optimal stimulation. 
Psychological Reports, 1, 27-33. 
Lorch, D. (1993, March 12). G. I.’s storm the beach to get away from it all. The New York Times, A4. 
Lorch, D. (1993, November 6). In desert camp, G. I.’s fight tedium. The New York Times, 4. 
Lorch, D. (1996, January 21). Life in the war zone: Boredom and terror, bullets and hepatitis. The New 
York Times, NJ10. 
Lussier, K. (2018). Temperamental workers: Psychology, business, and the Humm-Wadsworth 
Temperament Scale in interwar America. History of psychology, 21(2), 79-99. 
Lykken, D., & Tellegen, A. (1996) Happiness is a stochastic phenomenon. Psychological Science, 7, 186–
189. 
Lyon, N. (1975, May 18). Colorful creation in stained glass. The New York Times, D41. 
MacCurdy, J. T. (1918). War neurosis. Cambridge University Press. 
Macey, J. (1996, September 29). Suspending the search for washboard abs. The New York Times, F34. 

 
 
118 
 
Malcom, A. (1972, May 12). More US companies reducing boredom of workers. The New York Times, 53. 
Malmo, R. B. (1957). Anxiety and behavioral arousal. Psychological review, 64(5), 276-287. 
Maloff, S. (1977, December 18). Children’s books. The New York Times, 255. 
Manson, M. (2016). The subtle art of not giving a fuck: A counterintuitive approach to living a good life. 
HarperOne. 
Marks, J. (1973, November 11). After retirement, a plunge into growing activity: Home green houses. 
The New York Times, 181. 
Maslow, A. H. 1943. A theory of human motivation. Psychological Review, 50(4), 370–396.  
Maslow, A. H. 1954. Motivation and personality. Harper & Row. 
Maslow, A. H. (2000). The Maslow business reader. John Wiley & Sons. 
Maslow, A. H., Stephens, D. C., & Heil, G. (1965/1998). Maslow on management. John Wiley. 
Massimini, F., Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Carli, M. (1987). The monitoring of optimal experience: A tool for 
psychiatric rehabilitation. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 175, 545–549.  
Markham, J. (1978, December 8). Vote cheers Spain but apathy is peril. The New York Times, A8. 
McAdams, D. P. (1990). The person. Harcourt brace. 
McDonald W. (1998, September 26). Body slams illumined by aphorisms. The New York Times, B14. 
McDonald, W. (2009). Kierkegaard’s demonic boredom. In B. Pezze, & C. Salzani, Essays on boredom and 
modernity (pp. 61-84), Rodopi. 

 
 
119 
 
McDonald, J. E. (2016). Combat stress and post-traumatic stress disorder. Air University Press. 
McDonald, W. (2019). The transformative potential of boredom. In J. R. Velasco (Ed.), Boredom Is in Your 
Mind (pp. 91-110). Springer, Cham. 
McDonough, T. (2017). Boredom: Documents of contemporary art. The MIT Press. 
Mikulas, W. L., & Vodanovich, S. J. (1993). The essence of boredom. The Psychological Record, 43(1), 3-
12. 
Milea, I., Cardoş, R. A., & David, D. (2021). The map of cognitive processes in boredom: multiple 
mediation models. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 49(4), 441-453. 
Millar. R. (1989). The ‘80s were big for tv. The Washington Post. 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/lifestyle/tv/1989/12/24/the-80s-were-big-for-
tv/fce422b1-9857-4335-a1f6-ecb2461ac8c6/ 
Mirowski, P. (2014). The political movement that dared not speak its own name: The neoliberal thought 
collective under erasure. Institute for New Economic Thinking Working Paper Series, No. 23. 
Mirowski, P., & Plehwe, D. (Eds.). (2015). The road from Mont Pèlerin: The making of the neoliberal 
thought collective, with a new preface. Harvard University Press. 
Mischel, W. (1968). Personality and assessment. John Wiley & Sons Inc. 
Mischel, W. (1969). Continuity and change in personality. American Psychologist, 24, 1012-1018. 
Mistal, B. (1996, November 24). Be assured: Boredom will not set in. The New York Times, H9. 

 
 
120 
 
Molotsky, I. (1978, December 1). L. I. finds tremendous increase in its youngsters abuse of drugs. The 
New York Times, B2. 
Montgomery, P. (1971, February 6). Moon landing excites few New Yorkers. The New York Times, 13. 
Mubarak is nominated again amid mouthing discontent. (1993, June 22). The New York Times, A3. 
Myers, D. G. (2004). Human connections and the good life: Balancing individuality and community in 
public policy. In A. Linley & S. Joseph (Eds.), Positive psychology in practice (pp. 641–657). Wiley. 
Nagourney, A. (1997, September 9). In primary today, democrats select Giuliani opponent. The New York 
Times, A1. 
Nakamura, J., Csikszentmihalyi, M., Snyder, C. R., & Lopez, S. J. (2002). The concept of flow. In M.  
Csikszentmihalyi (Ed.) Handbook of positive psychology. (pp. 89-105). Oxford University Press. 
Nelson R. O. (1987). DSM-III and Behavioral Assessment. In: C.G. Last & M. Hersen (Eds.) Issues in 
Diagnostic Research (pp. 303-327). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4684-1265-9_12 
Nixon, at 60, gives formula for living, never slow down. (1973, January 9). The New York Times, 1. 
Nordheimer, J. (1994, August 05). Behind the lights, casino burnout. The New York Times, B1. 
Not about hair. (1999, March 05). The New York Times, E2. 
O’Connor, J. (1973, October 14). Aw, shucks, do we finally have a hit series here? The New York Times, 
149. 

 
 
121 
 
O’Connor, M. (1991, August 6). Mayors should spend more time meeting the people. The New York 
Times, A17. 
Olney, B. (1998, February 17). Fleming finds boring stretching is a bit of heaven. The New York Times, C5. 
Oyster Bay to hire teenagers to step up fight against drugs. (1971, August). The New York Times, BQ74. 
Pareles, J. (1995, July 20). Japanese group keeps noise forever young. The New York Times, C15. 
Pareles, J. (1998, April 20). In orderly segments, a bluesy wail of loss and rage. The New York Times, E5. 
Pennebaker, R. (1979, October 21). Hooked on hook’em horns. The New York Times, S2. 
People do die of boredom. (1972, December 15). The New York Times, 7. 
Peterson, C., & Seligman, M. E. (2004). Character strengths and virtues: A handbook and classification 
(Vol. 1). Oxford University Press. 
Peterson, I. (1973, June 5). High schools try to ease boredom of the final term. The New York Times, 43. 
Pettit, M. (2013). The science of deception. University of Chicago Press. 
Pettit, M. (2016). Historical time in the age of big data: Cultural psychology, historical change, and the 
Google Books Ngram Viewer. History of Psychology, 19(2), 141-153. 
Pezze, B., & Salzani, C. (2009). The delicate monster: Modernity and boredom. Critical Studies, 31(1), 5–
33. 
Phillips, A. (1994, December 18). The joy of boredom. The New York Times, BR13. 

 
 
122 
 
Piaget, J., & Cook, M. T. (1952). The origins of intelligence in children. International University Press. 
Quay, H. C. (1965). Psychopathic personality as pathological stimulation seeking. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 722, 180–183. 
Quindlen, A. (1991, June 16). Suddenly no summer. The New York Times, E17. 
Rabinbach, A. (1992). The human motor: Energy, fatigue, and the origins of modernity. University of 
California Press. 
Raffaelli, Q., Mills, C., & Christoff, K. (2018). The knowns and unknowns of boredom: a review of the 
literature. Experimental brain research, 236(9), 2451-2462. 
Ratliff, B. (1999, June 11). Boredom try repetition and get a gospel effect. The New York Times, E22. 
Ratliff, B. (1999, June 30). Less would be more: Jazz festival blues. The New York Times, E1. 
Ravo, N. (1997, August 10). Missing worker mysteries. The New York Times, F11. 
Read, J. (2009). A genealogy of homo-economicus: Neoliberalism and the production of subjectivity. In S. 
Binkley & J. Capetillo-Ponce (Eds.) A Foucault for the 21st Century: governmentality, biopolitics 
and discipline in the new millennium (pp. 2-15). Cambridge Scholars Publishing. 
Reed, M. (1997, July 6). In Scarsdale, seasonal Italian dishes. The New York Times, WC13. 
Reichl, R. (1997, January 17). Restaurants: Exuberant combination of ingredients that permit no 
boredom. The New York Times, A25. 
Renninger, J. A., Hidi, S., & Krapp, A. (1992). The role of interest in learning and development. Erlbaum. 

 
 
123 
 
Revelle, W., & Oehlberg, K. (2008). Integrating experimental and observational personality research—
The contributions of Hans Eysenck. Journal of Personality, 76(6), 1387-1414. 
Reynolds, S. (1991, November 24). Boredom + claustrophobia + sex = punk Nirvana. The New York 
Times, H24. 
Rich, F. (1994, July 31). Boredom without tears. The New York Times, C15. 
Richards, G. (2002). The psychology of psychology: A historically grounded sketch. Theory & Psychology, 
12(1), 7-36. 
Richardson, L. (1995, August 15). When boredom turns to murder. The New York Times, B1. 
Ringmar, E. (2017). Attention and the cause of modern boredom. In Gardiner, M., & Haladyn, J. J. (Eds.) 
Boredom Studies Reader (pp. 205-214). Routledge. 
Riperre, V. (1977). Common sense beliefs about depression and anti depressive behaviour: A study of 
social consensus. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 15(4) 65-473. 
Robinson, W. P. (1975). Boredom at school. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 45(2), 141-152. 
Rosier K.B. (2009). Children as problems, problems of children. In J. Qvortrup, W. A. Corsaro, & M. S. 
Honig (Eds.) The palgrave handbook of childhood studies. Palgrave Macmillan. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-230-27468-6_18 
Ross, A. (1993, July 24). A blend of influences, with dissonance. The New York Times, 15. 
Rothbard, M. N. (1978). For a new liberty: The libertarian manifesto. Ludwig von Mises Institute. 

 
 
124 
 
Russell, J. (1994, October 6). In Denmark, a boredom-proof museum for children. The New York Times, 
H39. 
Rutherford, A. (2000). Radical behaviorism and psychology’s public: B. F. Skinner in the popular press, 
1934-1990. History of Psychology, 3(4), 371–395. doi:10.1037//1093-4510.3.4.371 
Safire, W. (1975, October 13). The second comeback? The New York Times, 25. 
Salpukas, A. (1972, April 2). Workers increasingly rebel against boredom. The New York Times, 34. 
Salpukas, A. (1972, September 3). U. A. W. seeks end of job boredom. The New York Times, 38 
Salpukas, A. (1973, February 5). Jobs rotated to fight boredom. The New York Times, 1. 
Samuels, D. J., & Samuels, M. (1974). Low self-concept as a cause of drug abuse. Journal of Drug 
Education, 4(4), 421-438. 
Sanders cites boredom. (1992, October 14). The New York Times, B13. 
Satter, M. (2019). CEO pay up 940 percent over 40 years, compared to workers 12 percent. BenefitsPro. 
ALM Media Properties.  
Sayre, N. (1974, December 23). Film: English soporific. The New York Times, 32. 
Schlosberg, H. (1954). Three dimensions of emotion. Psychological Review, 61(2), 81. 
Schmidt, D. (1971, October 13). Drug dependency of servicemen in Vietnam is said to level off. The New 
York Times, 5. 

 
 
125 
 
Schneider, S. M., & Morris, E. K. (1987). A history of the term radical behaviorism: From Watson to 
Skinner. The Behavior Analyst, 10(1), 27-39. 
Schwartz, H. A., Eichstaedt, J. C., Kern, M. L., Dziurzynski, L., Ramones, S. M., Agrawal, M., Shah, A., 
Kosinski, M., Stillwell, D., Seligman, M. E. P., & Ungar L. H. (2013). Personality, gender, and age in 
the language of social media: The open-vocabulary approach. PloS one, 8(9), e73791. 
Seligman, M. E. (1999). The APA 1998 annual report: The President’s address. American Psychologist, 
54(8), 559-562. 
Seligman, M. E. (2004). Authentic happiness: Using the new positive psychology to realize your potential 
for lasting fulfillment. Simon and Schuster.  
Seligman, M. E. & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000). Positive psychology: An introduction. American 
Psychologist, 55(1), 5-14. 
Semple, R. (1976, September 1). Police accused of having helped provoke bloody London riot. The New 
York Times, 3. 
Seo, J., Laine, T. H., & Sohn, K. A. (2019). Machine learning approaches for boredom classification using 
EEG. Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing, 10(10), 3831-3846. 
Sève, L. (1978). Man in Marxist theory and the psychology of personality (J. McGreal, Trans). Humanities 
Press. 
Sexton, J. (1993, February 28). Pitchers hope for breaks and slides under the sun. The New York Times, 
S3. 

 
 
126 
 
Shabecoff, P. (1970, February 8). Tokyo airports troubles are mainly on the ground. The New York Times, 
82. 
Shabecoff, P. (1973, January 19). Brennan differs with Nixon views. The New York Times, 14. 
Sheraton, M. (1976, February 25). If bread boredom sets in. The New York Times, 22. 
Shimer, D. (2018, January 26). Yale’s most popular class ever: Happiness. The New York Times. 
Simmons, K., & Lecouteur, A. (2008). Modern racism in the media: Constructions of 'the possibility of 
change' in accounts of two Australian 'riots'. Discourse & Society, 19(5), 667–687. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0957926508092248 
Singer, J. L., & Antrobus, J. S. (1963). A factor-analytic study of daydreaming and conceptually-related 
cognitive and personality variables. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 17(1), 187-209.  
Simon, L. (1995, January 9). The mugger who came back from the dead. The New York Times, BR7. 
Sirota, D. (1973, May 6). Job enrichment. The New York Times, 208. 
Slesin, S. (1991, July 18). Mismatching the sofa as a calculated art. The New York Times, C8. 
Smith, H. (1972, February 13). Soviet troubled by teen-age crime. The New York Times, 9. 
Smith, J. (2019). Is positive psychology all it’s cracked up to be? VOX. https://www.vox.com/the-
highlight/2019/11/13/20955328/positive-psychology-martin-seligman-happiness-religion-
secularism 

 
 
127 
 
Snyder, C. (1973, May 19). From beach strolls to kitchen stints artists family likes being. The New York 
Times, 42. 
Some were excited, some bored. (1972, May 26). The New York Times, 43. 
Sonenberg, N. (1995, March 9). Sweets from strangers. The New York Times, BR20. 
Sontag, D. (1998, December 4). For Israeli soldiers, pride and dread in Lebanon. The New York Times, A8. 
Spacks, P. M. (1995). Boredom: The literary history of a state of mind. University of Chicago Press. 
Specter, M. (1993, January 3). High technology for air boredom. The New York Times, E3. 
Spindler, A. (1995, November 7). Showcase tents, not circus tents. The New York Times, B7. 
Stanley A. (1991, July 28). At Happyland mass-murder trial, days of tears, humor and boredom. The New 
York Times, 26. 
Staub, M. E. (2018). The mismeasure of minds: Debating race and intelligence between Brown and The 
Bell Curve. UNC Press Books. 
Stein, A. (1995, August 21). Why he did it. The New York Times, A14. 
Steinhauer, J. (1998 November 1). A troubled place, but it was theirs. The New York Times, 37. 
Stern, F. (1977, December 30). The pressures of liberalism and terrorism in West Germany. The New 
York Times, A25.  

 
 
128 
 
Sternberg, R. J. (2018). Theories of intelligence. In S. I. Pfeiffer, E. Shaunessy-Dedrick & M. Foley-Nicpon 
(Eds.), APA handbook of giftedness and talent (pp. 145–161). American Psychological 
Association. https://doi.org/10.1037/0000038-010 
Sterngold, J. (1990, February 9). Tyson is no longer a novelty. A25. 
Stetson, D. (1972, April 14). For many concerns. The New York Times, F3. 
Stevenson, B., & Wolfers, J. (2008). Economic growth and subjective well-being: Reassessing the 
Easterlin paradox (No. w14282). National Bureau of Economic Research. 
Stillman, M. (1977, September 18). A man’s addiction and hold on him. The New York Times, S2. 
Strelau, J., & Eysenck, H. J. (Eds.). (1987/2013). Personality dimensions and arousal. Springer Science & 
Business Media. 
Sugarman, J. (2015). Neoliberalism and psychological ethics. Journal of theoretical and Philosophical 
Psychology, 35(2), 103. 
Svendsen, L. (1999). A Philosophy of Boredom. Reaktion Books. 
Tavris, C. (1990, March 18). Contentment is hard work. The New York Times, BR7. 
Taylor, A. (1972, August 10). Pendulum swings back to short hair. The New York Times, 31. 
Tellegen, A., Lykken, D. T., Bouchard, T. J., Wilcox, K. J., Segal, N. L., & Rich, S. (1988). Personality 
similarity in twins reared apart and together. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54(6), 
1031-1039. doi:http://dx.doi.org.ezproxy.library.yorku.ca/10.1037/0022-3514.54.6.1031 

 
 
129 
 
Teo, T. (2007). Local institutionalization, discontinuity, and German textbooks of psychology, 1816–
1854. Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences, 43(2), 135–157. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/jhbs.20220 
Teo, T. (2017). From psychological science to the psychological humanities: Building a general theory of 
subjectivity. Review of General Psychology, 21(4), 281-291. 
Teo, T. (2018). Homo neoliberalus: From personality to forms of subjectivity. Theory & Psychology, 28(5), 
581-599. 
Terman, L. M. (1921). Intelligence and its measurement: A symposium--II. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 12(3), 127–133. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0064940 
The little boy at Christ’s Christmas tree. (1974, December 25). The New York Times, 27. 
Thomas, R. (1972, May 14). At Magill house, the elderly find no time for boredom. The New York Times, 
A6. 
Thorndike, E. L. (1924). Measurement of Intelligence. Psychological Review, 31(3), 219–252. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0073975  
Thurstone, L. L. (1938). Primary mental abilities. University Chicago Press. 
Tibbetts, E. R. (1986/2010). Financial Management of Morale, Welfare and Recreation: A Guide for 
Commanders. Air Command and Staff Coll Maxwell AFB AL. 
Tilburg, W. A., & Igou, E. R. (2019). The unbearable lightness of boredom: A pragmatic meaning-
regulation hypothesis. In R. Velasco (Ed.) Boredom is in your mind (pp. 11-35). Springer. 
Time does not dim the high school rings charm. (1978, February 20). The New York Times, A14. 

 
 
130 
 
Toohey, P. (2011). Boredom: A lively history. Yale University Press. 
Toto, D. (2000). Job growth in television: Cable versus broadcast, 1958-99. Monthly Labor Review, 123, 
3-14. 
Trial of Seabee who tossed a pie hears soupy sales. (1974, December 6). The New York Times, 83. 
Tsou, J. Y. (2007). Hacking on the looping effects of psychiatric classifications: what is an interactive and 
indifferent kind? International Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 21(3), 329-344. 
Tupes, E., & Christal, R. (1992). Recurrent personality factors based on trait ratings. Journal of 
Personality, 60(2), 225–251. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6494.1992.tb00973.x 
Velasco, R., & Dorko. (2019). Boredom Is in Your Mind. Springer International Publishing. 
Rajesh, V. 2015, “Neoliberalism as Concept”, Economy and Society, 44(2), 165–187. 
doi:10.1080/03085147.2015.1013356 
Verhovek, S. (1993, September 12). Times correspondents tell you how to avoid terminal boredom in 
airport. The New York Times, 353. 
Vodanovich, S. J., & Kass, S. J. (1990). A factor analytic study of the boredom proneness scale. Journal of 
Personality Assessment, 55(1-2), 115-123. 
Vodanovich, S. J., & Rupp, D. E. (1999). Are procrastinators prone to boredom? Social Behavior and 
Personality, 27(1), 11. 
Vodanovich, S. J., & Watt, J. D. (2016). Self-Report measures of boredom: An updated review of the 
literature. The Journal of Psychology, 150(2), 196–228. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00223980.2015.1074531 

 
 
131 
 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1962). Thought and language. MIT Press. 
Waitz, T. (1863). Introduction to anthropology. Anthropological Society of London. 
Wallace, W. (1970, June 21). Sports of the times. The New York Times, 164. 
Wallace, W. (1973, March 25). Hot-dog skiing. The New York Times, 235. 
Weatherhead School of Management. Case Western Reserve University. https://weatherhead.case.edu/ 
Wechsler, D. (1939). The measurement of adult intelligence. Williams & Wilkins Co. 
Weinraud, B. (1970, July 19). Kindness, boredom and terror mark British patrols in Ulster. The New York 
Times, 7. 
Weinraud, B. (1978, August 1). Navy making drugs abusers face reality. The New York Times, A10. 
Westad, O. A. (2013). Reviewing the Cold War: Approaches, interpretations, theory. Routledge. 
Whitaker, R., & Cosgrove, L. (2015). Psychiatry under the influence: Institutional corruption social injury, 
and prescriptions for reform. Palgrave Macmillan. 
Whyte, W. H. (2013). The organization man. University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Wines, M. (1994, August 7). Boredom mixed with danger. The New York Times, 26. 
Wink, P., & Donahue, K. (1997). The relation between two types of narcissism and boredom. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 31(1), 136-140. 
Winston, A. S. (2018). Neoliberalism and IQ: Naturalizing economic and racial inequality. Theory & 
Psychology, 28(5), 600-618. 

 
 
132 
 
Wooten, J. (1972, November 5). Whistle is now Agnew symbol. The New York Times, 53. 
Wooten, J. (1976, November 2). Boredom on campaign trail brings search for comedy. The New York 
Times, 19. 
Wyatt, S., Langdon, J. N., & Stock, F. G. L. (1929). Fatigue and boredom in repetitive work. (Report No. 
77), Industrial Health Research Board, London. 
Yang, H., Zheng, S., Wei, Q., Xiang, S., & Li, B. (2017). Development of the social boredom scale for 
college students. China Journal of Health Psychology, 25(4), 555-560. 
Yen, J. (2010). Authorizing happiness: Rhetorical demarcation of science and society in historical 
narratives of positive psychology. Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology, 30(2), 67-
78. 
Yen, J., Durrheim, K., & Tafarodi, R. W. (2018). 'I'm happy to own my implicit biases’: Public encounters 
with the implicit association test. British Journal of Social Psychology, 1, 1–19. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjso.12245 
Yerkes, R. M. (1917). The Binet versus the point scale method of measuring intelligence. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 1(2), 111–122. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0070364 
Yerkes, R. M. (1923). Eugenic bearing of measurements of intelligence. The Eugenics Review, 14(4), 225. 
Yerkes, R. M., & Dodson, J. D. (1908). The relation of strength of stimulus to rapidity of habit-formation. 
Journal of Comparative and Neurological Psychology, 18, 459-482. 
You Didn’t Invent That: Charles Dickens and Boredom. (n.d.). Dictionary.com. 
https://www.dictionary.com/e/charles-dickens-boredom/ 

 
 
133 
 
Zuckerman, M. (1971). Dimensions of sensation seeking. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
36(1), 45-52. 
Zuckerman, M. (2014). Sensation seeking (psychology revivals): Beyond the optimal level of arousal. 
Psychology Press. 
Zuckerman, M., Bone, R. N., Neary, R., Mangelsdorff, D., & Brustman, B. (1972). What is the sensation 
seeker? Personality trait and experience correlates of the Sensation-Seeking Scales. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 39(2), 308. 
Zuckerman, M., Eysenck, S. B., & Eysenck, H. J. (1978). Sensation seeking in England and America: cross-
cultural, age, and sex comparisons. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 46(1), 139. 
Zuckerman, M., Kolin, E. A., Price, L., & Zoob, I. (1964). Development of a sensation-seeking scale. 
Journal of Consulting Psychology, 28(6), 477. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
134 
 
Appendix 
Figure 1. PsycINFO & Google Scholar search results for “boredom” 
 
Figure 2. Ngram search results for “boredom, ennui, acedia” 
 
 
 
 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1970-1979
1980-1989
1990-1999
2000-2009
2010-2019
Boredom Growth - APA PsycInfo & Google Scholar
PsycINFO
Google Scholar *100

 
 
135 
 
Figure 3. Ngram search results for “boredom, ennui, acedia, melancholy” 
 
 
Figure 4. OLS/OLA
 

 
 
136 
 
Figure 5. Flow and Optimal Experience (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990, p. 74) 
 
Figure 6. PsycINFO & NYT search results for “boredom” 
 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
1910-1919
1920-1929
1930-1939
1940-1949
1950-1959
1960-1969
1970-1979
1980-1989
1990-1999
Boredom Results - NYT & PsychINFO
NYT
PsycINFO

