Radical Orthodoxy: Theology, Philosophy, Politics, Vol. 1, Numbers 1 & 2 (August 2012): 357-73. 
ISSN 2050-392X 
 
 
 
 
 
Between God and Metaphysics: 
An Interview with William Desmond  
 
Christopher Ben Simpson 
 
 
 
 
Christopher Ben Simpson [CS]: How would you characterize the broad shape, 
the trajectory of your thought over the 25 years that have passed between your 
first books (Art and the Absolute and Desire, Dialectic, and Otherness) in the 
mid-1980s and today? 
 
William Desmond [WD]: This is a question I would prefer were answered by 
someone else studying my work. In the main I see a deepening of certain 
insights, not least bearing on the fourfold sense of being I developed first in my 
doctoral work, published as Desire, Dialectic and Otherness (1986). There is a 
deepening of my understanding of the significance of this fourfold sense, as well 
as an extension of the range of considerations taken into account. The 
development is both more intensive and extensive, though the focus of it all is to 
give a logos of the metaxu, to understand what it might mean to say that “to be is 
metaxological.” The sense of “being between” is not confined to the human 
being as an intermediate being, though in the human being it finds something of 
the acme of its immanence singularization. The deepening of the immanent 
sense of the between is coupled with the realization that immanence is porous to 
what exceeds immanent determination. Thus the space of the between is also 
between immanence and transcendence as other, and in this space the urgent 

358 
                                 Simpson: An Interview with William Desmond
 
need to think the significance of religion makes itself more and more felt in my 
work. Though this culminates in God and the Between, in a sense, this concern 
has always been with me. The last part or chapter of Desire, Dialectic and 
Otherness was entitled “The Absolute Original,” and this was the final chapter of 
my doctoral dissertation. In that sense, there is a continuity of concerns over 
many years.  
I have also found that in one book there might be something in germ that 
grows into a more flourishing bloom in a later book. I am thinking about how 
chapters in Philosophy and its Others (1990), such as “Being Ethical,” or “Being 
Religious” become full length books with integrity in their own right in, say, 
Ethics and the Between (2001), or God and the Between (2008). The chapters on 
“Selves” and “Communities” in Being and the Between (1995) open into what 
became Part II and Part III of Ethics and the Between, each of which have 
something of the character of a monograph unto itself.  
I will just mention just a few new concepts that come to the fore over the 
years: the primal ethos and the reconfigured ethos; the potencies of the ethical; 
the senses of selving and being in community as fourfold; the importance of 
what I call the porosity of being, and the passio essendi; the move to a givenness 
and receptivity more primal than determinate and self-determinate being; the 
overdeterminacy of being; the hyperboles of being and their importance for the 
philosophical renewal of the question of God, beyond the postulatory finitism of 
much post-Hegelian thought.  
I have always had the ambition to philosophize in a plurivocal manner, and in 
my practice of philosophizing one can find more systematic work, more 
meditative, more interpretative, and indeed visitations from more poetic and 
religious voices. Finishing the trilogy, Being and the Between, Ethics and the 
Between and God and the Between brought a systematic undertaking of many 
years to a kind of completion. In more recent writings I am trying to find 
something of a balance between more meditative thinking and more systematic, 
with allowance for the more singing voices of the poetic and the religious. 
 
CS: Your work has been admired as presenting something of an original 
constructive philosophical system. How do you describe your philosophical 

Radical Orthodoxy, Vol. 1, Numbers 1 & 2 (August 2012).                                           359 
 
 
 
system? Do you see any conspicuous conjunctions or disjunctions between other 
philosophical systems or perspectives today and your own? 
 
WD: First I should say that always with me there is study of the longer tradition 
of philosophy, and respect for it, as well as more recent developments. In that 
study I do not aim to be just an echo of an echo of an echo, or to offer 
commentary on commentary on commentary…Nor am I primarily concerned 
with giving “readings.” I am thinking about things. 
     I would say that I try to develop a post-Hegelian systematic form of thinking 
that takes due notice of what is at issue in his system without becoming captive 
to the form of mediation he finally privileges, namely, self-mediation in and 
through its own other. I defend system as metaxological: as articulating passages 
between univocal determinacy and equivocal indeterminacy; as opening to 
excesses beyond the circling of modern dialectic back to itself; as renewing an 
ontological porosity to being beyond ourselves, and beyond the claim of 
Hegelian dialectic to absolute knowing where thought asserts itself as 
unsurpassably self-determining. In all of this, I give due regard to the longer 
tradition’s tendency to define being and intelligibility in terms of univocal 
determinacy (a claim which contemporary deconstruction tries to dismantle). I 
try to take the measure of the skeptical turn of reason against itself in the feel for 
equivocity that we find in a good number of post-Hegelian philosophers. I try to 
point towards a trans-dialectical form of thinking, which recuperates the 
openness of earlier forms of dialectic, while dissenting from the often accepted 
view that Hegelian dialectic represents the consummation and nec plus ultra of 
dialectical thinking. To the contrary, a more metaxological orientation is truer to 
dialectic in so far as the latter’s attentive mindfulness of the other as such always 
exceeds any self-determining form of thought.  
The term “system” and what it seems to imply is not in good odor with many 
philosophers in the Continental tradition these days and generally this is a 
carryover from Hegel’s influence and its repudiation by many post-Hegelian 
thinkers. There is not a lot in philosophy today that wants to call itself by the 
name “system.” “System” seems to be a catchword for Laputan constructions of 
abstract concepts which have to be treated suspiciously or deconstructed. I 

360 
                                 Simpson: An Interview with William Desmond
 
would agree with Hegel that some sense of system is unavoidable, without 
subscribing to the view that there is the system which Hegel claims to bring to 
completion. If there is a systematic side to philosophy it has to do with the 
fundamental interrelations of being and mindfulness. When we think of one 
thing, or think it through, we find ourselves driven to think of another thing 
fundamentally related to the first, and further again. This is not only true of the 
processes of thought. The happening of being is intelligibly articulated, and to 
attend to the articulations of that happening is to see the dynamic of a certain 
systematic unfolding occurring in happening. The growth of a tree, for example, 
is the becoming of a botanical system, and our thinking is to stay in faithful 
attunement with that systematic unfolding when it is true to it. In such a view, 
what is systematic is dynamic, while articulate and intelligible, it is not static 
simply, though there can be systems that are less dynamic and that tilt towards 
the more static end of the spectrum. Rhetorical assaults on “system” do not help 
mindful attention to the intricate, immanent richness of the happening of being, 
nor to the call of a certain fidelity that is asked of us in mindful attention of that 
intricacy. 
If system is essential, I have also tried to pay attention to the trans-systematic. 
Hence the concern with thinking between system and poetics (see the book, 
Between System and Poetics edited by Thomas Kelly). Poetics I take as referring to 
a more original coming to be, and as witnessing to energies of being that cannot 
be exhausted in this or that determinate formation, or systematic articulation. 
There is not so much an immanent whole as open wholes: open wholes that, in 
the first instance, are opened to a process of their own becoming, and that 
always shimmer with energies of being that exceed every finite determinate and 
systematic whole. A system, in the sense of an open whole, is metaxological, as 
exceeding its own self-relation, and always marked by an other-relatedness that 
cannot be completely enclosed in its own immanence. Poetics pays attention to 
sources of origination preceding a system, to energies of becoming that move a 
system, to energies moving in and through a system, and also to energies of 
transcending that open to what is beyond this or that determinate system, open 
to what exceeds system. One way I speak of this surplus to system is in terms of 
the overdeterminacy of being. For a theologically minded person, this 
overdeterminacy comes to expression in what I call the hyperboles of being 

Radical Orthodoxy, Vol. 1, Numbers 1 & 2 (August 2012).                                           361 
 
 
 
which are happening in immanence which exceed the terms of immanence. 
They allow porosity to thinking the divine as transcendence irreducible just to 
immanent transcending.  
In some strands of philosophy I see poetics as turned against system, as if the 
point was to live down the ghost of Hegel, and by imputation the longer 
tradition of philosophy he is said to bring to an end. I share with the post-
Hegelians a concern for otherness. I hold we need finesse for equivocities beyond 
system, but worry that we are often left with too simple an oscillation between 
univocity and equivocity – often in a very unthematized way at that. This is why 
a continued wrestling with the Hegelian possibilities of dialectic is important – 
that is, as a thinking in the between that yet is not properly metaxological in its 
circling of the overdeterminacy of being in terms of the self-determining of 
immanent thought. 
 
CS: As former president of the Hegel Society of America and author of 
numerous books and essays on Hegel, how has your reading of Hegel changed 
over the years—say between Art and the Absolute (1986) and Hegel’s God 
(2003)? 
 
WD: As a graduate student I wrote a first paper on Hegel’s Phenomenology of 
Spirit in which I argued that Hegel did not do justice to knowledge of the other. 
The professor was not entirely happy with it, though I did manage to persuade 
him to come a little closer to my concerns. True, there are critiques of Hegel that 
verge on caricature. And yet in a caricature there is always a touch of the truth – 
albeit exaggerated or overstated. One of the reasons I wrote Art and the Absolute 
(1986) was to try to give Hegel a sympathetic run for his money. I was always 
interested in the relation of art and philosophy. I was also impressed by Hegel’s 
aesthetics, and desirous to give him a more sympathetic interpretation. The book 
was liked by the Hegelians, though I now think I was sometimes ventriloquizing 
through Hegel – making him say things one would like him to say. The 
Hegelian confraternity liked Art and the Absolute since it seemed to offer a more 
open Hegel, and I was welcomed as a Hegelian sympathizer. Then in time I 
become a critical sympathizer, then a sympathetic critic, then a critic, and then 

362 
                                 Simpson: An Interview with William Desmond
 
with Hegel’s God (2003) the door at the back of the church was pointed out to 
me and I took the message that for the pious Hegelians I was now anathema. So 
be it. I have been increasingly more critical of Hegel in thinking there is a 
systematic bias at work in his practice of dialectic. The issue came to a head for 
me in relation to God whose unsurpassable transcendence is systematically 
reconfigured by Hegel, producing a counterfeit double of God, as I have argued 
in Hegel’s God. I think many read Hegel much too innocently – this is especially 
true of those who want to make religious use of him. He is far more dialectically 
slippery and equivocal than they seem to realize or want to grant. That said, he 
is an essential thinker with whom one must come to terms. I’m afraid many of 
those who think they are beyond Hegel and dialectic are not quite where they 
claim to be. That is another reason why a recuperation of dialectic, both in its 
Hegelian and non-Hegelian forms is a continuing task. Dialectic is not univocal. 
Does Hegel represent the end of metaphysics? No. Does Hegel stand for the 
consummation of the philosophical tradition? No. Does Hegel bring about the 
completion of dialectical thinking? No. Many anti-Hegelians answer yes to the 
above questions. I say no and engage the metaphysical tradition and dialectic 
differently.  
There are some who today want a more pluralistic Hegel, one who mirabile 
dictu is one of us in the postmodern Zeitgeist. I often find commentators 
ventriloquizing through Hegel – he becomes the plastic dummy through whom 
we can say what we think Hegel would say, if Hegel were us. I find Hegel 
himself more interesting, and more challenging and more to be challenged. As 
for myself, as a teacher I continue to offer courses where Hegel figures but I have 
reached a point where I do not find Hegel helping me see things I am trying to 
see. And I do think I have seen things Hegel was unable to see. The reason I 
continue to teach Hegel is because the struggle with Hegel is worth it 
philosophically. I do see green readers fall under his bewitchment. I try to offer 
some philosophical inoculations against false conceptual enchantments. But 
what can one do when someone is infatuated? The spell will run its course. Or 
do we need to develop a need area of expertise for treating conceptual 
possession: philosophical exorcism? 
 

Radical Orthodoxy, Vol. 1, Numbers 1 & 2 (August 2012).                                           363 
 
 
 
CS: This question has some set-up before getting to an actual question, so bear 
with me: You have always been something of an outsider in continental 
philosophy. You have specialized in once pariah-status domains such as Hegel 
(seen as ur-totalizer), Metaphysics (seen as what-is-wrong-with-thinking-hitherto 
and that-which-is-to-be-avoided-at-all-costs), and Religion or God (when a 
certain atheism was de rigueur). However, the continental academy, more 
recently, has seemed to turn toward these domains anew.  
Hegel has had something of a rebirth of late, whether it be in newer (perhaps 
“safer”?) re-readings of Hegel such as that of Pinkard and Pippin or in more 
“radical” appropriations such as that of Žižek. Metaphysics has returned in 
various 
incarnations 
in 
the 
work 
of 
Alain 
Badiou, 
Speculative 
Realism/Materialism (thinkers like Quentin Meillassoux and Graham Harman), 
the resounding influence of Deleuze, and in the theological metaphysics of 
Radical Orthodoxy. Religion has again taken the stage—be it in the more 
Levinasian mode of Derrida and Caputo after him, in the various meditations on 
political theology (Agamben), in the atheist appropriations (“laicization”) of 
Christian theology (Badiou and Žižek), in the mode of the return of a “radical” 
secular theology, or in the more confessional Radically Orthodox. 
The continental world has turned and you have found yourself recently in a 
certain proximity to the rumblings of the philosophical Zeitgeist. Thinkers today 
may come to discover this Irish gadfly who has been addressing their pet issues 
all along. How would you situate your own thinking relative to these areas and 
these “returns”? 
 
WD: There are lots of issues in your question and much might be said. Here are 
a few things.  
I have noticed that there is a plethora of books in which the word “after” 
appears – After God, After Christianity, After the Death of God, and so on. 
What could “after” mean? Did religion ever go away? Did God ever go away? Or 
were we just astray? Of course, properly in postmodern idiom, there should be 
no returns, since there is nothing to return, and hence no “after” also, since 
nothing finally seems really to arrive at all, being infinitely deferred. After infinite 
deferral there is no “after,” and one wonders what there is before it also. Did 

364 
                                 Simpson: An Interview with William Desmond
 
religion go away, or was it was it just so with the clerks? Did God ever go away, 
or was it just so with the clerks? What the clerks think, of course, eventually can 
take to the streets, and sometimes the results are riotous. 
It is true that there is a kind of default atheism with quite a number of 
contemporary intellectuals. A default position is something for which a particular 
system is primed – the result of a certain configuration of being. We should be 
reflecting on that configuration. What are the configurations of thought and 
being that hinder even the arising of the question of God? This is related to a 
theme I consider important, namely, the given ethos of being, and our diverse 
reconfigurations of it, and how the latter can recess something essential, as well 
as reveal something essential. The question of God today means reflection on 
our reconfiguration of the ethos of being and a fuller understanding of its 
ontological and metaphysical promise, a promise never a matter simply of our 
reconfiguration or reconstruction. I find most discussions of God to be caught in 
the foregrounds of determinate configurations, without finesse for the more 
primal ethos of being and its ontological promise. A philosophy of the between 
tries to articulate something of the significance of the primal ethos. By 
understanding the latter better philosophy itself might reopen its familial relation 
with religion and with theology.  
I do have some memory of a time when in Continental philosophy one met 
with disdain for religion, and if one sought to retain some fidelity to its call, one 
was looked at as some strange creature who had not heard what “everyone” 
knew, namely, that God was dead. Some of those disdainers now seem to see 
academic opportunity in the return of religion. Homo academicus is a herd animal. 
I sometimes wonder if with the academic professionalization of philosophy we 
all are scholastics now? I see a kind of hermeneutical scholasticism in 
Continental philosophy, a kind of technician scholastic in analytic philosophy. I 
would like a kind of deschooling of professional philosophy in which we re-learn 
the virtues of school, in the old sense of skolē – a kind of contemplative leisure in 
thinking the things themselves. While being an outsider may be part of being 
philosophical, being at school in the sense of skolē is also part of the paideia of 
the spirit, both religious and philosophical. In our hyper-active, hyper-
performative times this spirit is lost.  

Radical Orthodoxy, Vol. 1, Numbers 1 & 2 (August 2012).                                           365 
 
 
 
On the return of metaphysics: I never bowed before the language of the “end 
of metaphysics,” or that of “the overcoming of metaphysics.” I can understand 
“overcoming” a kind of scholastic rationalism in metaphysics, but the practices of 
metaphysics are more plurivocal, as indeed are the senses of being. I looked 
around me for practicing metaphysicians answering the job description and did 
not find many. I suspected there was some shadow boxing going on. Called up 
were spooks from a past of scholasticism long quietly resting in the grave. Why 
disturb such spooks, when the great metaphysical questions still are alive and 
facing us constantly as querying companions? One of the things I liked about 
Radical Orthodoxy was that, while on the surface it seemed critical of 
“metaphysics,” it was alive to the spirit of genuine metaphysical astonishment 
and perplexity. In terms of the return of metaphysics I hope the philosophical 
Zeitgeist is waking up from its obsession with spooks of “metaphysics.”  
The practices of metaphysics are plurivocal and this plurivocity I have tried to 
exemplify in my own work. Of course, one of the voices is that of univocity, and 
in modernity one could especially say that an excessively ascendant 
univocalizing project has come to the fore. This project may have recessed roots 
in some premodern practices of metaphysics, though I think the porosity 
between philosophy and religion in premodernity prevented philosophy from 
closing in on itself and claiming absolute rights to self-determination. Relative to 
this plurivocity of the tradition, those who totalize the same tradition ironically 
exhibit the same univocalization, albeit in meta-reflective form. 
I admire many things in Heidegger, especially his efforts to re-raise the 
question of being. Are we now suffering from a further, a second forgetfulness of 
being, and not without the influence of Heidegger himself? The language of the 
“overcoming of metaphysics” does not fertilize the soil of thought with seeds of 
metaphysical astonishment, always new and always old. Heidegger himself was 
the recipient of that astonishment, but blaming the cure (metaphysics) for the ill 
(“metaphysics”) reveals a symptomatic equivocation.   
Am I wrong in noting in some French admirers of Heidegger that they spend 
the first third of their book loading themselves up with Heideggerian chains, the 
second third taking off these chains again, and the last third trying to say 
something interesting? Putting on and taking off chains involves heavy lifting, 
and it sometimes seems to leave one exactly where one started, but the 

366 
                                 Simpson: An Interview with William Desmond
 
expenditure of energy can tire and weaken one. Perhaps there are chains that are 
part of the protocols of scholastic professionalism.  
What about claims for “post-metaphysical” thinking? This is another instance 
of the power of the “after.” It might be that certain forms of metaphysics are 
behind us but there is no post–metaphysical thinking, since all thinking is 
informed by fundamental senses of being which are at work whether we think 
about them or not. Being post-metaphysical without attention to these is being a 
poor metaphysician, not a post- metaphysician.  
And Hegel again? In the work of John McDowell and Robert Brandom the 
spirit of a kind of idealism is resurrecting itself in analytic philosophy where 
Hegel remains still a bit of a bogeyman. This spirit is closer to an objective 
idealism and not at all an absolute idealism in Hegel’s sense. This is a more 
pragmatically tinged idealism, calling to mind (I think earlier of Dewey) an 
“Hegelianism” without the absolute.  
What of commentators like Pippin and Pinkard? They are fine scholars, but I 
think they have made a Hegel conformable to, more comfortable to academic 
colleagues at home in the contemporary liberal Zeitgeist in Anglo-American 
philosophy. They make Hegel too Kantian in the end, which is not to deny that 
Hegel is nothing without Kant, but he is much more. This reconfigured Hegel is 
evacuated of his metaphysical and theological power.  
In some quarters there is a kind of Hegel lite which does seem to make him 
more relevant, but it also makes him less interesting. I sometimes take the 
attitude to religion as a kind of test case of genuine openness to otherness. If 
there is nothing but silence here, or a reconfiguration that makes religion 
inoffensively humanistic, then I check the exits. While Hegel tried to 
speculatively overcome the God-man, we now do not even have the man-God 
but the last man – desperately trying to make Hegel as metaphysically 
inoffensive as possible. Hegel is just like ourselves so we can relax, there is 
nothing scandalous to the Zeitgeist, nothing alarming. This last man has read 
Hegel and Nietzsche on the death of God and is reconciled with this. He is 
asleep to the dark clouds gathering round him, ominous with something like 
Vico’s “barbarism of reflection.”  

Radical Orthodoxy, Vol. 1, Numbers 1 & 2 (August 2012).                                           367 
 
 
 
What of someone like Žižek? He has struggled with Hegel, but he shares a 
tendency to tell us that now at last, with Lacan’s help, say, or even Schelling’s, 
we are in a position to understand the real Hegel, covered over by stupid 
scholars for almost two centuries. Marx talked about Hegel’s mystification of 
Geist in terms of the divine spirit and Marx wanted to demystify Hegel in terms 
of the human spirit. I sometimes think Marx is more honest, and Žižek is in the 
business of a re-mystification of Hegel, and he is not alone in this. He tends to 
exhibit one of the major tendencies in using Hegel since Hegel, namely, 
uncoupling the power of dialectical negativity from Hegel’s strong claim to 
systematic completeness. (As recent examples with something of this, Catherine 
Malabou and Karin de Boer, under some influence from Derrida, come to mind.) 
The energy of negativity rides over the systematic claim, and Hegel as a 
speculative philosopher, with intimate ties with metaphysical and theological 
traditions, is relegated from the premier league. I find that Hegel can be seen as 
conceptually colonizing Christianity, and even in those not sympathetic to 
Hegel, I find analogous appropriations of Christianity. I think of Badiou on St. 
Paul. The risk of colonizing the religious is perhaps more insidious in more 
recent appropriations than in Hegel who, after all, wore his dialectical heart on 
his sleeve. The taking over of Christianity turns it to ends that are neither 
religious nor Christian. Theologically one must be concerned about the 
production of counterfeit doubles of a post-Hegelian sort. True, along the way 
striking insights can be offered. I sometimes shake my head at the way some 
thinkers claiming to be religious can quote like sacred scriptures words of the 
post-Hegelian atheistic colonizers, when for them there is nothing in the end 
that is truly sacred or holy. 
I am happy that thinkers like Badiou and Deleuze make no apology for their 
commitment to metaphysics. It is interesting for me to ask if they have passed 
through dialectic in a fruitful way and to what extent they are genuinely trans-
dialectical thinkers in a manner that would allow communication with 
metaxological possibilities of thought. Generally, in the last part of the twentieth 
century in France dialectic seems to have fallen into deep silence. It is traduced 
by Deleuze in his book on Nietzsche and philosophy. If dialectic itself harbors 
plurivocal promise, we must resist what one might call agenda-driven 
philosophy which has a project, say, carrying through the Nietzschean inversion 

368 
                                 Simpson: An Interview with William Desmond
 
of Platonism. For me philosophy is not a project, shaped and driven by an 
agenda. Let the matter itself take thought where it will, even towards the 
philosophical friendship of “Plato.” There is a deep patience to truer thinking. 
The word “materialism” also evokes for me something agenda-driven, something 
programmatic.  
I did write about deconstruction in earlier books, in Art and the Absolute 
(1986) and Beyond Hegel and Dialectic (1992), but fell into silence after the Paul de 
Man affair, for reasons explained briefly in a forthcoming book, The Intimate 
Strangeness of Being: Metaphysics After Dialectic (2012). (Even I can’t escape the 
word “after”!) One reason is related to the very apt phase you coined in your 
book Religion, Metaphysics, and the Postmodern: the “LeviNietschean vision.” I was 
always perplexed how one got from Nietzsche to Levinas, from Rome to Judea. I 
did note the mutation of tonality (in the late 1980s, early 1990s) in concerns 
from a more Nietzschean to more Levinasian register. The virile phase of 
transgressive deconstruction seemed to give way to an almost hyperbolic 
concern for the other. (“Transgression”: Am I mistaken in the impression that 
this word now seemed less used, or used less virulently?) Deconstruction 
revealed itself as justice. The “thou” is older than the “I,” Zarathustra intoned. 
Now it seems as if the older “thou” had made a big comeback. Many seemed to 
have become flagellants of the self in penitence before the excessive other, the 
“thou” they previously marginalized as the servile other. “Rome versus Judea,” 
Nietzsche exclaimed, but Judea seemed to have stepped out of the desert and 
back onto center stage, even among erstwhile Nietzscheans. For the Levinasian 
penitents, the pagan Zarathustra has been dispatched back to his cave to 
languish for now in exile. How does Rome become a convert to Judea or revert 
to it? That is never explained. Indeed the issue is passed over, since harping on 
such an awkward transition might hinder “keeping the conversation going,” as a 
Rortyian might insist. 
 
CS: From the vantage point of your career in continental philosophy how would 
you characterize the “present age”? What comes after the “postmodern”? Were 
we ever “postmodern”? Were we ever “modern”? 
 

Radical Orthodoxy, Vol. 1, Numbers 1 & 2 (August 2012).                                           369 
 
 
 
WD: Are we are living in the end times of the narcissism of autonomy – even 
when we deconstruct autonomy? Many uses of the word “postmodern” set my 
teeth on edge because in trying to mean too much the word can end up meaning 
nothing at all. We are postmodern in the sense that modernity is in question to 
itself, modernity as the epoch in which freedom as autonomy has hugely shaped 
our reconfiguration of being. You might say: such being in question is part of 
modernity, but it is part of modernity that can be turned against modernity. I 
should say that modernity as the epoch of autonomy is twinned with modernity 
as the epoch of the unprecedented project of univocalizing all being, so far as 
this is possible. Massive objectification goes with huge subjectification. In that 
light one can also agree with some who say postmodernism is more a form of 
hypermodernism than anything else. If so, it is blithely sawing the branch on 
which it is sitting, happy to sing about the groundlessness of being, in chirpy 
disregard of its own fated downfall. I admit there is much of equivocity to the 
situation. There is much critique of autonomy but I would say there is also much 
of lacerated autonomy or self-lacerating autonomy in this critique of autonomy.  
I sense we are like swimmers trying to get out into clear water, but we are 
always driven back by the waves. Being out beyond: genuine openings to 
otherness entail a new porosity to transcendence. This means being beyond the 
idolization of immanence as that greater than which nothing can be thought. 
Such postulatory finitism, as I call it, is a position impossible to sustain – even as 
it offers a pragmatic impersonation of the ontological argument for the necessity 
of finitude as such. Being out beyond: and I don’t mean the easier immanent 
transcendence but a more robust other transcendence. The two thinkers who 
come to mind who had an intrepid sense of this are Kierkegaard and Levinas. If 
Levinas sometimes strikes one as tending to a somewhat dualistic frame, with 
hints of something like the dialectic of mastery and servitude, Kierkegaard is a 
genius of dialectical strategy – a dialectical master mastering dialectic of the 
Hegelian type and bringing it to the point of its porosity to what exceeds it. 
Interestingly, he said “the dialectical algebra works better,” when considering if 
Sickness unto Death might also ask for a rhetorical treatment.  
If the equivocal ground of postmodernity does open to transcendence as 
other, the opening is promised through the mindfulness of what is hyperbolic to 
immanence in immanence itself. These hyperboles of being, as I call them in God 

370 
                                 Simpson: An Interview with William Desmond
 
and the Between, are signs communicating of God’s own wording of the between 
– to speak theologically. Perhaps modernity is an interim: before it there was a 
more living porosity between philosophy and religion/theology, and after it 
perhaps a renewed porosity is opening up. Perhaps the first porosity was too 
much taken for granted, whereas the second porosity cannot be taken for 
granted. And yet it is only open for us, given our readiness to receive it 
thoughtfully again as granted. The first porosity enabled thought but perhaps 
was not always thought through. The second porosity comes to thought at the 
end of its tether, so to say, enabling thought again about the elemental and 
ultimate things that, in truth, have never left us, and hence can never return, 
since it is rather for us to turn towards them as always turned towards us.  
Who can honestly make epochal claims about modernity, postmodernity? 
We can be too intoxicated with the dubious grandeur of such claims. We need 
to turn to the elemental if we are to get a sense of the epochal. Here I speak of 
the intimacy or idiocy of being, and in the end I think only the personal God a 
genuine theism can reconcile the singular and the universal in terms of what I 
call the intimate universal. If postmodernism is still not free enough of the 
narcissism of autonomy, or is not yet more than autonomy’s self-laceration, the 
full promise of both the intimacy and the universal have not been understood. I 
think the latter leads to a sense of freedom beyond autonomy (see Ethics and the 
Between) in which we are released truly to what is, released too from our own 
self-encirclement. I am not particularly optimistic on an epochal scale, since we 
are still trying to encircle the earth in our own self-encirclement. From the glory 
of God’s creation we are reconfiguring it, in accord with serviceable disposability, 
as something closer to a toxic wasteland. 
 
CS: This interview appears in the inaugural issue of Radical Orthodoxy: 
Theology, Philosophy, Politics. How do you understand the distinction and the 
relation between theology and philosophy? Where do you see your work in the 
midst of this relation (perhaps thinking about the role that the Christian tradition 
plays in your work, explicitly or implicitly)? How is your largely philosophical 
work related to the fundamentally theological perspective of Radical Orthodoxy? 
 

Radical Orthodoxy, Vol. 1, Numbers 1 & 2 (August 2012).                                           371 
 
 
 
WD: The metaxological philosophy I have been developing is hospitable to a 
variety of intermediations between philosophy and its others, and this applies 
most intimately when the others are religion and theology. There is a dialogue 
between reason and faith that is not dualistic or dialectical but metaxological in a 
familial way. If there is faith seeking understanding, there is also understanding 
seeking faith, at the limit of the understanding’s power to be entirely self-
determining. I hope something of the intimate intermediation is at work all 
throughout God and the Between. Certainly members of Radical Orthodoxy have 
shown serious hospitality to my work for which I am grateful. It is a plurivocal 
movement impossible to summarize in any univocal formulation. It has the 
nature of a certain communivocity, hence witnesses to multiple interplays of 
likeness and unlikeness. In the interplays something of an intellectual and 
spiritual dynamic is in motion. I came to know of Radical Orthodoxy initially 
through reading John Milbank’s Theology and Social Theory, and Catherine 
Pickstock’s, After Writing. I was very impressed by both works, by an intellectual 
robustness in matters philosophical and theological, by a certain fearlessness in 
giving utterance to a point of view in which no apology was given for being 
concerned with God. Later I got to know the work of Conor Cunningham and 
Graham Ward and continued to be both engaged and illuminated by their 
courage in taking up issues extremely contemporary and yet with a perspective 
that opened to vistas of longer and larger traditions. I continue to be engaged 
and illuminated.  
I came to Radical Orthodoxy from outside theology as an academic discipline 
and have sometimes been taken aback by the ire of the theologians as they 
engage in friendly fire with each other. When talking about the relation of 
philosophy and theology I hesitate about the academic distinction of the 
faculties. Kant talked about the conflict of the faculties but one wonders to what 
degree the entire existential dimension of philosophy and theology gets lost sight 
of in these internecine conflicts between academics. Kant is representative of 
something that happens in all academic circumstances. The challenge to intellect 
and spirit in philosophy and theology cannot be contained in any faculty – albeit 
I know such organizations are needed pragmatically. Theology is not just a 
science, not a regional science (Heidegger), but rooted in a community of belief 
and watered by the reverence of true piety. Without the latter it becomes 

372 
                                 Simpson: An Interview with William Desmond
 
sounding brass and tinkling cymbal. Analogously in philosophy there is an 
academic side, but without the spirit of metaphysical astonishment it easily 
becomes a scholastic technique, leading to the barbarism of reflection. Keeping 
the spirit of astonishment alive is not unlike opening oneself to the divine 
porosity of prayer. Theology and philosophy are siblings in the same family. I 
sense something of that familial relation with regard to Radical Orthodoxy. 
One of the reasons I have admired Augustine, an admiration I share with 
many in Radical Orthodoxy, is precisely the lack of fixation of such academic 
territorialities, on porosity between thinking and worship, philosophy and 
theology, on fine attunement to the fluid intermediacy of our metaxological 
being. This means being both inside and outside at the same time. This is 
another way of me being an outsider, even when I am an insider. In most of 
current professional practices of philosophy, I don’t see a lot of openings either 
to religion or the divine. I read recently that in the US close to the least number 
of philosophy positions on offer were those in philosophy of art and philosophy 
of religion. In all honor to Hegel, art and religion are included with philosophy 
in absolute spirit. But that philosophy of art and religion should be close to the 
bottom of teaching possibilities says something about our time in which finesse 
for the question of the absolute has weakened, if not vanished. It used to be all 
but essential to the self-definition of a philosopher that he or she would make 
some effort to address the ultimate question of God. Now among many 
intellectuals atheism is the default position and operative in a relatively 
thoughtless way. Obviously in theology, one meets with more openness, though 
theologians are sometimes too timid. One thing the representatives of Radical 
Orthodoxy are not is timid. If there is to be a dialogue between philosophy and 
theology, it is important who serves as representative of philosophy. Some 
philosophical positions are Trojan horses for default atheism.  
Radical orthodoxy is not a great respecter of academic walls. This, of course, 
risks treading on toes in the eyes of some. What impressed me was an 
intellectual and what I took to be a spiritual seriousness in its representatives. I 
felt here were theologians with fire in their bellies. Of course, fire is dangerous: it 
can burn up, though it also vivifies, revivifies, lights us up. Am I wrong in the 
impression that often theologians were comfortable talking to themselves but 
uncomfortable with outsiders, not least in confrontation with the pervasiveness 

Radical Orthodoxy, Vol. 1, Numbers 1 & 2 (August 2012).                                           373 
 
 
 
of default atheism? I referred above to the new scholasticism in philosophy, 
whether hermeneutic or technical, and here too we need fire. For all its critics 
Radical Orthodoxy has given new fire to the life of theology.  
Modernity sometimes shows a stupidly antagonistic attitude to the longer 
intellectual and spiritual traditions of the West – in theology and philosophy. 
This leads to the invention of new wheels, but these wheels are not necessarily 
better helpers to motility of spirit. Bad wheels bring motion to a standstill and 
we cannot move forward. Sometimes we need to rock backwards to get out of a 
rut and budge the jam and then roll with release into the future. I would say 
Radical Orthodoxy has something of this rocking motion – and with its releasing 
promise. Rocking back allows forward release.  
 

