BEYOND REASON 

BOSTON STUDIES IN THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE 
Editor 
ROBERT S. COHEN, Boston University 
Editorial Advisory Board 
ADOLF GRONBAUM, University of Pittsburgh 
SYLVAN S. SCHWEBER, Brandeis University 
JOHN J. STACHEL, Boston University 
MARX W. WARTOFSKY, Baruch College of 
the City University of New York 
VOLUME 132 

BEYOND REASON 
Essays on the Philosophy of 
Paul Feyerabend 
Edited by 
GONZALO MUNEV AR 
The Evergreen State College, Washington, U.SA. 
SPRINGER-SCIENCE+BUSINESS MEDIA, B.V. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Beyond reason : essays an the philosophy of Pau; Feyerabend I edited 
by Gonzalo Munevar. 
p. 
cm. -- (Boston studies in the philosophy of science ; v. 
132) 
"Most of the essays in this festschrift were originally published 
in German in Hans Peter Duerr's ed., Versuchungen Aufsătze zur 
Phi losophie Paul Feyerabends, Shurkamp Verlag, Frankfurt am Main, 
1980"--P. 
ISBN 978-94-010-5406-5 
ISBN 978-94-011-3188-9 (eBook) 
DOI 10.1007/978-94-011-3188-9 
1. Feyerabend, Paul K., 1924-
1. Feyerabend, Paul K., 1924-
II. Munevar, Gonzalo. 
III. Versuchungen Aufsătze zur Philosophie 
Paul Feyerabends. 
IV. Ser ies. 
B3240.F484B49 
1991 
193--dc20 
91-17470 
ISBN 978-94-010-5406-5 
printed on acid-free paper 
AlI Rights Reserved 
© 1991 by Springer-Science+Business Media Dordrecht 
Originally published by Kluwer Academic Publishers in 1991 
Softcover reprint ofthe hardcover Ist edition 1991 
No part of the material protected by this copyright notice may be reproduced or 
utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording or by any information storage and 
retrieval system, without written permission from the copyright owner. 

"What I really am, a dishwasher", 

Table of Contents 
GONZALO MONEV AR / Introduction 
ix 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
xxi 
1. PAULM. CHURCHLAND / A Deeper Unity: Some 
Feyerabendian Themes in Neurocomputational Form 
1 
2. MARX W. W ARTOFSKY / How to Be a Good Realist 
25 
3. C.A. HOOKER / Between Formalism and Anarchism: A 
Reasonable Middle Way 
41 
4. ALASTAIR HANNAY / Free of Prejudice and Wholly 
Critical 
109 
5. IAN HACKING / Speculation, Calculation and the Creation 
of Phenomena 
131 
6. JOHN KEKES / Reason and Practice 
159 
7. GONZALO MONEV AR / Science in Feyerabend's Free 
Society 
179 
8. MARGHERIT A VON BRENT ANO / Letter to an Anti-
Liberal Liberal 
199 
9. WERNER DIEDERICH / Obituary on the "Anarchist" Paul 
Feyerabend 
213 
10. NORETTA KOERTGE / Ideology, Science and a Free 
Society 
225 
11. ALAN MUSGRA VB / The Myth of Astronomical Instrumen-
talism 
243 
12. GUNNAR ANDERSSON / Feyerabend on Falsifications, 
Galileo, and Lady Reason 
281 
Vll 

viii 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
13. FREDERICK SUPPE / The Observational Origins of 
Feyerabend's Anarchistic Epistemology 
297 
14. ANTHONY N. PEROVICH, Jr. / Incommensurability, its 
Varieties and its Ontological Consequences 
313 
15. JOHN WORRALL / Feyerabend and the Facts 
329 
16. JEROME R. RA YETZ / Ideological Commitments in the 
Philosophy of Science 
355 
17. JOSEPH AGASSI / As You Like It 
379 
18. VINE DELORIA / Perceptions and Maturity: Reflections on 
Feyerabend's Point of View 
389 
19. ARNE NAESS / Paul Feyerabend - a Green Hero? 
403 
20. HERBERT HORZ / Ecology as a Challenge to Philosophy 
417 
21. HERBERT SCHNADELBACH / Against Feyerabend 
433 
22. DWIGHT V AN DE VA TE, JR. / A New Slant on the Tower 
Experiment 
449 
23. GROVER MAXWELL / Feyerabend's Materialism 
453 
24. JOSEPH MARGOLIS / Scientific Methods and Feyerabend's 
Advocacy of Anarchism 
465 
25. PAUL K. FEYERABEND / Concluding Unphilosophical 
Conversation 
487 
INDEX 
529 

GONZALO MUNEV AR 
Introduction 
Some philosophers think that Paul Feyerabend is a clown, a great many 
others think that he is one of the most exciting philosophers of science of 
this century. For me the truth does not lie somewhere in between, for I am 
decidedly of the second opinion, an opinion that is becoming general 
around the world as this century comes to an end and history begins to 
cast its appraising eye upon the intellectual harvest of our era. 
A good example of this opinion may be found in the admiration for 
Feyerabend's philosophy of science expressed by Grover Maxwell in his 
contribution to this volume. Maxwell, recalling his own intellectual 
transformation, says also that it was Feyerabend who "confirmed my then 
incipient suspicions that most of the foundations of currently fashionable 
philosophy and even a great deal of the methodology to which many 
scientists pay enthusiastic lip service are based on simple mistakes -
assumptions whose absurdity becomes obvious once attention is directed 
at them". And lest the reader thinks, as many still do, that however sharp 
Feyerabend's attacks upon the philosophical establishment may have 
been, he does not offer a positive philosophy (a complain made by C.A. 
Hooker and some of the other contributors), Paul Churchland argues 
otherwise. 
Churchland points out several claims extracted from Feyerabend' s 
philosophy of science and views on materialism which violated many of 
the crucial tenets of the dominant philosophy in the 60's: that perceptual 
knowledge is never ideologically neutral, that the commonsense 
framework of our mental lives could be replaced by a materialist 
framework, that competing views occasionally are incommensurable, that 
scientific progress occasionally requires the proliferation of alternative 
G. Munevar (ed.), Beyond Reason, ix-xx. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
IX 

x 
INTRODUCfION 
theories, as well as of alternative methodologies. Indeed, Churchland 
says, most analytic philosophers "still find these claims to be individually 
repugnant and collectively confusing". Nevertheless recent developments 
in experimental neuroscience incorporate and make very plausible all of 
those claims by Peyerabend. What may have looked like a negative 
philosophy from a certain vantage point, now serves as part of the 
conceptual foundation of a new and exciting understanding of the mind 
(Churchland is particularly interested in the connectionist approach to the 
nature of the brain - an approach that has risen, incidentally, as a serious 
challenger to traditional Artificial Intelligence, a field closely allied with 
analytic philosophy). The reader may wish to contrast Churchland's 
contribution with Maxwell's more traditional appraisal of Peyerabend's 
materialism. 
Controversial figures like Peyerabend often elicit strong responses and 
their work provokes no end of misunderstandings, just as it also provides 
opportunities for new developments. In the essays collected in these pages 
the reader will find ample evidence for these remarks. As examples of 
very strong responses I can point to, among others, the essays by Joseph 
Agassi and Vine Deloria. The first goes beyond the customary bounds of 
academic essays into what may be fairly called a sustained and very 
strong personal attack against Peyerabend (Agassi argues that 
Peyerabend's philosophy could give comfort to a Nazi ideology, and he 
believes, given his acquaintance with Peyerabend, that such result is no 
accident). The second, by contrast, argues that Peyerabend is one of the 
few thinkers who make a serious case for treating all the peoples of the 
planet with respect. This is so, at least in part, because Peyerabend, as 
Deloria says, sees that the contributions of non-Western cultures should 
not be limited merely to adding to an "already constructed edifice of 
Western knowledge". The content of human knowledge should instead be 
"a discontinuous arrangement of smaller bodies of knowledge derived 
from the many traditions represented in planetary history". 
When I was an undergraduate social concerns were not topics fit for 
discussion in the philosophy of science. Some decry this transformation 
of the field, others feel intellectually liberated by it. But they can all 
recognize that Peyerabend had a good part in bringing it about. Of course, 
that certain topics were not brought up does not imply that philosophy of 
science never made (implicit?) ideological commitments of a moral, 
social, or political nature. Jerome Ravetz argues that philosophy of 
science did make such commitments and tries to expose them in his 

INlRODUCTION 
xi 
account of the history of the Vienna Circle, Popper, Kuhn, Lakatos, and 
finally Feyerabend. 
The first, decisive step in the transformation of the field came when 
Feyerabend (and Thomas Kuhn) showed, by a series of analyses of 
crucial episodes in the history of the physical sciences, that the "facts" 
used by scientists to pass judgement upon scientific theories are them-
selves based on theoretical assumptions, and are thus also theoretical. 
And here I include "facts" apparently as straightforward as the vertical 
motion of a stone as it is dropped from a tower (a fact which was long 
considered as a refutation of the rotation of the earth). From Feyerabend' s 
analysis of the Tower Argument it became clear that such fact assumed, 
among other things, an operationist concept of motion (motion as 
observable displacement), that is, a properly empiricist concept, whereas 
Galileo introduced unobservable, theoretical components into the motions 
of bodies. I place emphasis on this assumption rather than on the assump-
tion that space was absolute, although the relation is close, because it 
serves to remind us that in that particular episode the Aristotelians, the 
losers, were on the side of methodological propriety. For this has been 
one of Feyerabend's main themes: that on occasion scientific method 
must be violated if progress is to result (progress as determined by today' s 
science). 
This limitation on method, on any method conceived according to the 
canons of traditional empiricism, was an unavoidable consequence of the 
breakdown of the distinction between theory and "fact" (as given by 
experience). For at the very heart of empiricism was the belief that 
experience had epistemological priority over theory. But if "facts" are 
theoretical too, instead of a clash between theory and fact (to be resolved 
in favor of fact) we ultimately have a clash between theory and theory. 
Thus it is possible that on occasion the theory under trial should overturn 
the verdict of the facts. Indeed many of the great developments in the 
history of science could not have come about otherwise. 
Many philosophers of science have come to accept a position along 
these lines to the degree that Feyerabend's work must seem to them full 
of truisms (although, it seems to me, rather in the manner that 
Shakespeare's is full of cliches). But others will resist. John Worrall, in 
this volume, resurrects Poincare's distinction between scientific and crude 
facts, and argues that this is all it takes to rescue empiricism from 
Feyerabend. Once we accept this distinction there remains a core of 
sensible things that Feyerabend has said, but those can be better accom-

xii 
IN1RODUCfION 
modated within Duhem's theory of science. So where Feyerabend is 
original he is wrong, and where he is right he is not original. According to 
Worrall. 
Gunnar Andersson also gives a reading of Feyerabend a la Duhem but, 
unlike Worrall, Andersson uses the fallibalism implicit in the breakdown 
of the fact-theory distinction to save what he calls "critical fal-
sificationism". If he is right, Kuhn, Feyerabend, and Lakatos have all 
attacked a straw-man version of falsificationism (although his critical 
falsificationism 
reminds 
me 
much 
of what 
Lakatos 
called 
"methodological falsificationism"). Andersson argues that typically 
scientists make no ad hoc moves to save theories, for all statements and 
hypotheses are open to criticism, and thus we simply come to criticize a 
hypothesis that we had been kind to before (what Feyerabend would 
describe as assuming uncritically) and to replace it with a more plausible 
statement or hypothesis. This critical falsificationism will then 
presumably avoid the distressing epistemological anarchy proclaimed by 
Feyerabend. 
Worrall and Andersson aside, the breakdown of the fact-theory 
distinction led to a second and notorious step in the transformation of the 
field: the issue of incommensurability. If facts were presumed to be the 
standard by which empirical theories would be ultimately judged, to 
remove their authority was to remove that common standard, that 
common measure. Thus in the simplest interpretation, to say that two 
theories are incommensurable is just to say that they have no common 
measure. That such a situation may occur brings about two unpleasant 
consequences. The first is epistemological: without a common standard or 
measure to which we may appeal, determining which of two theories is 
better becomes very complicated, perhaps arbitrary. This consequence is 
unpleasant because philosophy was supposed to be in the business of 
justification, i.e., of showing that science progresses, that scientific 
change is for the better (philosophy as apologetics). The second reflects 
the field's tendency (fortunately declining now) to treat philosophical 
problems as problems of language: during periods of scientific change 
theories may preserve the terms used by their predecessors, but those 
terms may now mean something different. Since philosophers tended to 
connect the truth value of observation sentences with their meanings, 
change in meaning seemed to imply that the truth values of the observa-
tion sentences might have changed too - in which case we could not say 
that the old and the new theory dealt with the same empirical basis after 

INTRODUCTION 
xiii 
all, and thus we would no longer have a means for comparing them: the 
two theories would be incommensurable. This by itself should have been 
an unpleasant consequence only to those who had a reductionist and 
semantic account of the growth of knowledge (which much of the field 
actually did), but it has been resisted most strongly by those who cannot 
stomach a further suggestion made by Feyerabend (and Kuhn): that when 
our theories change it is as if the world changed too. This suggestion was 
interpreted to mean that when theoretical meaning changes, reference 
changes too. 
Although hundreds, perhaps thousands of commentaries have been 
written on this problem, I would dare simplify matters by mentioning 
only the two main kinds of objections: that Feyerabend assumes some 
indefensible holistic theory of meaning, and that Frege already showed 
that meaning and reference are different things - so when the first 
changes the second one doesn't have to change also. I do not believe, 
however, that Feyerabend needs to commit himself to anyone theory of 
meaning, except perhaps to some vague connection between use and 
meaning. A scientific view of the world is more than a picture: it is a set 
of theoretical, experimental, and methodological commitments that allows 
us to interact with that part of the world (or, in a more guarded fashion, to 
make sense of that area of experience). Now, there are, or used to be, two 
main views on the meaning of scientific terms: that the meaning was 
given by observational and experimental operations, or that it' was given 
by the relations of those terms to the other terms of the theory in question 
(Hempel's "theoretic import"). Let us grant that either view is correct, or 
even that there is a spectrum with each view representing an end of that 
spectrum, or a mixing of the two (or perhaps even a "lattice" view of the 
meaning of scientific terms). When we change our scientific views we 
may well change the relevant theoretical, experimental, and methodologi-
cal commitments. That is, we may change our observational and ex-
perimental operations, just as we may change the relations between the 
terms of the theory. Thus whatever our theory of meaning, the possibility 
of this kind of incommensurability always lurks in the background 
whenever we change our views of the world. Of course, perhaps there is a 
compelling semantic theory that divorces the meaning of scientific terms 
from both experimental and theoretical scientific practice. Or if not, 
perhaps someone will invent one soon. 
As for the second objection, the realization that meaning and reference 
are different things should not force us to conclude that the meaning of a 

xiv 
INlRODUCfION 
tenn cannot, on occasion, be the only guide to detennining what that tenn 
refers to, even if there are also occasions in which tenns with different 
meanings may refer to the same object. It could happen, for example, that 
in certain fields, e.g., particle physics, the procedures by which we learn 
what the tenns of the relevant theories "mean" are the same by which we 
learn to "fix" the reference of those tenns. Were those procedures to 
change (because of change in theoretical orientation), then both meaning 
and reference would change. Change in meaning would not bring about 
change in reference, they would both happen as a result of the change in 
procedures. And there is at least another possibility. In this volume Anton 
Perovich makes the very interesting suggestion that there is a different 
kind of incommensurability which most critics have not considered: that 
changes in world view introduce changes in ontology, and that such 
changes in ontology produce changes in meaning. Perovich argues that 
this fonn of incommensurability escapes the objections advanced by 
Hilary Putnam and other critics of Feyerabend. He also argues that it is 
compatible with realism, at least insofar as it leaves the real objects of the 
world, the noumena, intact. 
Many readers will be surprised to read that Feyerabend, the notorious 
relativist, has begun to look with sympathy upon realism. This should 
please Marx Wartofsky, who in his essay confronts himself and finds out 
that deep in his heart he is, after all, an honest-to-goodness realist. 
Wartofsky has little patience for many of the sophisticated contemporary 
versions of realism (e.g., internal realism), for they do not do justice to the 
rationale for our almost metaphysical need for realism. Nevertheless his 
vigorous critique falls short of providing a justification of realism, 
although he offers a hint for a good place to begin. The reader may also 
consult Feyerabend' s amusing dialogue for some hints of his own. 
This shift in Feyerabend's attitude about realism should also please 
C.A. Hooker, who uses evolutionary considerations in his attempts to 
justify realism. In an analysis that I find very perceptive, Hooker shows 
how the problem of realism is best approached along the lines drawn by 
Einstein and Bohr over the interpretation of quantum mechanics. Hooker 
draws from Einstein the lesson that the job of science is to find in-
variances in nature. This lesson he places in an evolutionary context, with 
the result that diverse points of view bring to the surface phenomena that 
may point to deeper invariances in nature. Thus pluralism is not the basis 
for relativism but for a deeper, evolutionary realism. Hooker realizes 
nevertheless that he has not undennined sufficiently the plausibility of a 

INTRODUCTION 
xv 
Bohrian approach in which the search for invariances cannot justify 
realism. Incidentally, if I may be permitted a personal note, Feyerabend 
himself had a similar insight many years ago, as part of a conversation in 
which he drew analogies between my evolutionary relativism and Bohr's 
epistemology. Alan Musgrave also puts in a kind word for realism. He 
proceeds indirectly, attacking what he calls the "myth of instrumentalism" 
in the history of astronomy. He argues, against the now traditional view 
of history, that neither Plato, nor Eudoxos, nor Ptolemy were instrumen-
talists. Musgrave's target is global instrumentalism, i.e., instrumentalism 
as a philosophical approach to science, not the occasional local instrumen-
talism that may serve scientists well in uncertain situations. 
The issue of incommensurability has dominated many discussions in 
the epistemology of science for almost thirty years now. But Feyerabend 
no longer finds incommensurability that important in the practice of 
science. (The linguistic turn to it he has ridiculed for as long as I can 
remember). Nor is he such an ardent proponent of relativism anymore, 
and not only because he is tired of reading relativistic graffiti in university 
bathrooms all over the world. As he points out, he has changed as a 
person, why should his views remain the same? As people grow older, 
they become wiser, or senile. 
In his essay Maxwell speaks of the fundamental importance of the 
epistemological and metaphysical positions Feyerabend has developed 
(although Feyerabend does not like to think that he has "positions"). One 
of the most important in the transformation of the field was his position 
on pluralism, and the infamous "anything goes" corollary so often drawn 
from that position and his remarks on method. Feyerabend argued, against 
Kuhn, that science would not be best served by a commitment of the 
entire discipline to a single point of view (a "paradigm" in Kuhn's early 
formulation). The greatest progress presumably comes about in periods of 
extraordinary science, when a crisis of confidence in the reigning 
paradigm motivates scientists to look for alternative ways of looking at 
the world. Now, a mere failure to account for some feature of the world or 
other (a "falsification") by itself does not bring about such a crisis, for 
failures are normally taken as anomalies. A persistent failure, however, 
particularly in a crucial aspect of the paradigm, can bring about the crisis 
of confidence. For a paradigm is accepted largely on the promise, based 
on a rather limited initial performance, that it is the most fruitful way to 
view the world; thus an anomaly that can be easily explained within a 
competing would-be paradigm can be very threatening, precisely because 

xvi 
INTRODUCTION 
it may indicate that the promise is not being kept, that the reigning 
paradigm may not be the most fruitful way to investigate nature. That is, 
some anomalies whose solutions may be postponed, or that are just 
ignored, will be given prominence, or unearthed in the fIrst place, only 
with the help of a competing point of view. That is a great benefIt of 
pluralism. And we can see Why. Either that troublesome anomaly will be 
assimilated into the reigning, though weakening paradigm - which will be 
regarded as progress - or not, in which case a crisis may be precipitated 
and the practitioners may switch over to the competing view, or perhaps 
to a third one, that is, to a new paradigm in any event - which, again, will 
be regarded as progress. 
Feyerabend makes similar arguments for pluralism against the 
methodological single-mindedness of falsifIcationists and empiricists of 
all stripes. As he points out, we need a dream world in order to discover 
the features of the world we inhabit (which may turn out to be a dream 
world upon examination). In this, Feyerabend is extending J.S. Mill's 
epistemology (from On Liberty) to the philosophy of science. Where are 
the alternatives going to come from? From legends, from dreams, or from 
views long discredited. The case for pluralism and the remarks on the 
limits of method indicate that no view can be decisively excluded, even if 
it conflicts with the facts (or with what are taken to be the facts by all the 
relevant established authorities). From the traditional rationalist's point of 
view, that is, from the point of view of someone who equates rationality 
with adherence to methodological rules, anarchy is the result: anything 
goes! 
Nevertheless Feyerabend does not say that there are never fruitful 
procedures, that no views ever meet the exigencies of research in those 
historical circumstances better than any others. Quite the contrary. Thus 
"anything goes" is defInitely not Feyerabend's motto. It is only a 
description of how a despairing rationalist sees the situation once the 
nature of science has been examined closely. 
Joseph Margolis emphasizes this historicity of scientifIc theories and 
methods while suggesting that reason can be preserved as long as it is not 
timeless; as long, that is, as it can be criticized when the historical 
circumstances change. Historicized method, informed by a reflexive, 
historicized critique, will yield a more informed account of scientifIc 
reason. 
While Margolis still is concerned with the dangers of epistemological 
anarchism, Alastair Hannay fInds that Feyerabend's pluralism makes 

INTRODUcnON 
xvii 
instead for a good critical rationalism. What Popperians call "critical 
rationalism" actually undermines the ideals of a true critical rationalism, 
whereas Feyerabend's philosophy supports those ideals. This is so 
because Feyerabend' s anarchistic or dadaistic epistemology has a built in 
tolerance that permits us to observe the principle that "the elimination of 
certain conflicts is worse for society than their persistence". The self-
appointed guardians of rationality attempt to eliminate conflict by 
providing a method that favors an alternative over all others, thus 
reducing the sources of criticism, and thus lowering the critical level of 
science (though this is much too simplistic to do justice to Hannay's 
essay). We have seen above, in the discussion of Feyerabend's objection 
to Kuhn, how the tolerance of alternatives, and consequently of more 
clashes between world views, increases the critical level of science. In his 
postscript, however, Hannay comes to realize why Feyerabend attacks 
rationalists: because the word "reason" has too long been associated with 
a shallow intellectualism that cannot produce the depth and breadth that 
true reason deserves. Instead of that intellectualist approach to knowledge 
we may consider the offer of "democratic relativism" (Feyerabend's 
view) as a piece of constructive epistemology. 
Hannay has put his finger on a subject very dear to Feyerabend's heart: 
that people should not have their lives distorted by the imposition of 
abstract rules devised by others. In the past those abstract rules might 
have come from theologians, but today they come from intellectuals who 
think they know what is best for everyone: what Reason tells us. And 
science as the presumed standard bearer of reason is used to judge the 
merits of traditions and ways of life. It is not surprising that non-Western 
traditions fare badly in that judgement: they are not built around science. 
But why should we think that reason is best? There is room for doubt. 
First, reason (understood as the adherence to methodological rules) 
actually gets in the way of scientific progress - so much for the identifica-
tion of reason with science. Second, even if we have a more sophisticated 
account of reason, one that fits well the practice of science, it is clear that 
reason depends on that practice. In that case, on which fair basis are we to 
decide a conflict between science and a non-scientific tradition (such as 
that of a non-Western society)? It should not be decided by applying the 
standards of rationality, for reason is not an impartial arbiter in the 
conflict between traditions: by being dependent on science it is prejudiced 
in science's favor. We reject other traditions, thus, not because we have 
shown that they are inferior, but because they are different. 

xviii 
INTRODUCl10N 
This and other lines of argument have led Feyerabend to propose 
equality of rights for all traditions and the separation of science and state 
(otherwise we do not have a truly free society, since the state would favor 
one ideology or tradition, science, over all others). Although Noretta 
Koertge does not approve of some of the epistemological moves that take 
Feyerabend to these proposals, she believes that we are stuck with 
Feyerabend's political conclusions, and offers arguments of her own in 
their support. Several other contributors to this volume, however, have 
taken issue with Feyerabend over these proposals. Margherita von 
Brentano points out that traditions cannot all be taken as neutral with 
respect to other traditions. Indeed some of them victimize those who do 
not share in their ideology, or people who are precluded from belonging 
to that tradition (e.g., the Jews and their tonnenting anti-Semites), or 
others who may belong to the society in question but are unwilling to 
have themselves burned at the stake for the purification of their souls. 
Feyerabend seems to agree with her on this point now. I question the 
proposed separation of science and state. I argue that Feyerabend may 
have shown that science is not inherently superior to other traditions (in 
his sense of tradition), but that science is better adapted to our historical 
circumstances than the alternatives and thus should be given preference 
over them. Feyerabend seems to agree with this point also, although 
grudgingly. Werner Diederich thinks that just as anarchism would be a 
good medicine for epistemology, as Feyerabend has claimed, it would 
also be a good medicine for Feyerabend's political ideas, which Diederich 
finds to be only half-way anarchistic. He also argues that Feyerabend's 
vision of a free society needs support from some materialist political 
philosophy. 
John Kekes argues instead that there is an external standard by which 
traditions (or theories for that matter) can be judged. Although he agrees 
with a good part of Feyerabend' s epistemology, Kekes thinks that 
problem solving should keep us from following Feyerabend into a 
Protagorean relativism. Not the problem solving of Popper or Laudan, 
mind you, for we first need to make a distinction between problems of 
reflection, which typically involve theoretical assumptions, and problems 
of life that have to be solved by every individual. Those problems involve 
our relations to our environment, to other people and society at large, as 
well as our attitudes toward ourselves. We confront these problems 
ultimately not because of the theories we hold but because of our human 
nature. 

INTRODUCTION 
xix 
One contributor has concentrated on the issue of the environment. Arne 
Naess argues that Feyerabend's philosophy is quite compatible with 
Green philosophy, particularly where respect for the environment is 
concerned. And Herbert Harz defends the Marxist approach to the 
environment. He argues that in principle Marxism, unlike capitalism, 
leads to good ecological management, even though in the short-term 
practice shortcuts may have to be taken because of social emergencies. 
Some of the contributors concern themselves with Feyerabend's place 
in the philosophical tradition. C.A. Hooker, in a very extensive analysis, 
tries to place him in the Western intellectual tradition as a whole, and 
finds him of great interest and value, although with strong limitations as 
well. Frederick Suppe traces Feyerabend' s views back to the fifties and 
claims that they have remained remarkably consistent (which is not the 
same as being correct). Suppe also sees great continuity between 
Feyerabend's views and those of Bishop Berkeley - which leads Suppe to 
conclude eventually that Feyerabend' s epistemology is essentially 
reactionary. 
Ian Hacking's essay, of which Feyerabend approves highly, chides 
Feyerabend for being still too abstract, for not getting down to the nitty-
gritty of science: experimentation. As he says, his essay was an early 
contribution to an "experimental liberation movement" (intended to 
liberate philosophically not only experiments but theory as well). Dwight 
Van de Vate's little gem of an essay, and the subsequent correspondence 
with Feyerabend, represents an important contribution to Galilean 
scholarship, in Feyerabend' s opinion. And in case that traditional 
Feyerabend bashers do not find their opinions adequately represented in 
the other essays, they should be delighted by Herbert Schnadelbach' s 
essay, where they can find those derisive opinions expressed with great 
gusto. 
For the many others who find themselves in Feyerabend's debt the final 
issue is one of irony: Feyerabend would hate to be praised for his 
contributions to a" field of endeavor that he has disowned time and again. 
That he makes clear in his "Concluding Unphilosophical Conversation", 
surely the most unusual response to critics that I have ever seen in 
philosophy. 
The Evergreen State College 
Olympia 
Washington, USA 

xx 
INTRODUCTION 
Editor's Note. Most of the essays in this Festschrift were originally 
published in Gennan in Hans Peter Duerr's, ed., Versuchungen: Aufsiitze 
zur Philosophie Paul Feyerabends, Suhrkamp Verlag, Frankfurt-am-
Main, 1980. This project was Hans Peter's idea from the beginning, and 
so much of the credit for it should go to him. Some of the essays were 
revised for this volume, and in others the views of the author were 
updated by means of a postscript. Difficulties in contacting a few of the 
authors made it impractical for them to either revise their essays or add a 
postscript while trying to meet the deadline. The following authors 
contributed new essays to this collection: Paul Churcl.land, C.A. Hooker, 
Herbert Horz, Frederick Suppe, and Marx Wartofsky. 

Acknowledgements 
I wish to thank Dean Margaret Gessaman of the University of Nebraska at 
Omaha and Dean Michael Beug of The Evergreen State College for their 
great help in bringing about the completion of this project. I am grateful 
to Kiki Walker and Bonita Evans for their expert typing, and to my 
students Leslie Zenz and Christopher Farmer, and especially to Mark 
McKechnie and Kevin Yorke, for their generous help with the editing. I 
am also grateful to Robert Cohen, the general editor of the Boston Studies 
in the Philosophy of Science series and to Mrs. J.e. Kuipers of Kluwer 
Academic Publishers for their patience. 
lowe a special debt of gratitude to Wade Savage for his help in 
locating the contribution of his friend Grover Maxwell, a good man I wish 
I had had the opportunity to know. 
G. Munevar (ed.), Beyond Reason, xxi. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
xxi 

PAUL M. CHURCHLAND 
A Deeper Unity: Some Feyerabendian 
Themes in Neurocomputational Form 
I. INTRODUCfION 
By the late 60s, every good materialist expected that epistemological 
theory would one day make explanatory contact, perhaps even a reductive 
contact, with a proper theory of brain function. Not even the most 
optimistic of us, however, expected this to happen in less than fifty years, 
and most would have guessed a great deal longer. And yet the time has 
arrived. Experimental neuroscience has revealed enough of the brain's 
microphysical organization, and mathematical analysis and computer 
simulation have revealed enough of its functional significance, that we 
can now address epistemological issues directly. Indeed, we are in a 
position to reconstruct, in neurocomputational terms, issues in the 
philosophy of science specifically. This is my aim in what follows. 
A general accounting of the significance of neural network theory for 
the philosophy of science has been published elsewhere (Churchland 
1989a, 1989b). My aim here is to focus more particularly on five theses 
central to the philosophy of Paul Feyerabend. Those five theses are as 
follows. 
1) 
Perceptual knowledge, without exception, is always an expression 
of some speCUlative framework, some theory: it is never ideologi-
cally neutral (Feyerabend 1958, 1962). 
2) 
The commonsense (but still speculative) categorial framework with 
which we all understand our mental lives may not express the true 
nature of mind, nor capture its causally important aspects. This 
commonsense framework is in principle displace able by a matured 
G. Munevar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 1-23. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
1 

2 
PAUL M. CHVRCHLAND 
materialist framework, even as the vehicle of one's spontaneous, 
fIrst-person psychological judgments (Feyerabend 1963a). 
3) 
Competing theories can be, and occasionally are, incommensurable, 
in the double sense that a) the terms and doctrines of the one theory 
fInd no adequate translation within the conceptual resources of the 
other theory, and b) they have no logical connections to a common 
observational vocabulary whose accepted sentences might be used 
to make a reasoned empirical choice between them (Feyerabend 
1962). 
4) 
ScientifIc progress is at least occasionally contingent on the 
proliferation and exploration of mutually exclusive, large-scale 
conceptual alternatives to the dominant theory, and such alternative 
avenues of exploration are most needed precisely when the 
dominant theory has shown itself to be "empirically adequate" 
(Feyerabend 1963b). 
5) 
The long-term best interests of intellectual progress require that we 
proliferate not only theories, but research methodologies as well 
(Feyerabend 1970). 
In my experience, most philosophers still fInd these claims to be 
individually repugnant and collectively confusing. This is not particularly 
surprising. Each claim is in conflict with common sense, and with a 
respectable epistemological tradition as well. Taken in isolation, and 
against that background, each one is bound to seem implausible, even 
reckless. But taken together, they form the nucleus of an alternative 
conception of knowledge, a serious and far-reaching conception with 
major virtues of its own. 
Those virtues have been explored by a number of writers, most 
originally and most extensively by Feyerabend himself, but it is not my 
purpose here to review the existing arguments in support of these fIve 
themes. My purpose is to outline an entirely new line of argument, one 
drawn from computational neuroscience and connectionist AI. Research 
in these fIelds has recently made possible a novel conception of such 
notions as mental representation, knowledge, learning, conceptual 
framework, perceptual recognition, and explanatory understanding. Its 
portrayal of the kinematics and dynamics of cognitive activity differs 
sharply from the commonsense conception that underlies orthodox 
approaches to epistemology. The mere existence of such an alternative 
conception, one grounded in the brain's microanatomy, is sufficient to 
capture one's general interest. But this novel conception is of especial 

FEYERABENDIAN THEMES IN NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL FORM 
3 
interest in the present context, because it strongly supports all five of the 
Feyerabendian themes listed above. It provides a unitary explanation of 
why all five of them are jointly correct. 
The claim being made here is a fairly strong one. Just as Newtonian 
mechanics successfully reduced Keplerian astronomy, so does a connec-
tionist account of cognition reduce a Feyerabendian philosophy of 
science. Not everything in Kepler's account survived its Newtonian 
reduction, and not everything in Feyerabend' s account survives its 
neurocomputational reduction. But in both examples the parallel of 
principle is sufficiently striking to make the claim of intertheoretic 
reduction and explanatory unification appropriate. And as with the case of 
Kepler and Newton, the cross-theoretic parallels serve to vindicate the 
principles reduced, at least in their rough outlines. I begin with a sum-
mary account of the kinematical and dynamical ideas that support this 
explanatory reduction. 
II. NEURAL NETS: AN ELEMENTARY ACCOUNT 
A primary feature of neuronal organization is schematically depicted in 
the "neural network" of Figure la. The circles in the bottom row of the 
network represent a population of sensory neurons, such as might be 
found in the retin~. Each of these units projects a proprietary axonal fiber 
toward a second population of neuron-like units, such as might be found 
in the lateral geniculate nucleus (LON), a mid-brain structure that is the 
immediate target of the optic nerve. Each axon there divides into a fan of 
terminal branches, so as to make a synaptic connection with every unit in 
the second population. Real brains are not quite so exhaustive in their 
connectivity, but a typical axon can make many thousands or even 
hundreds of thousands of connections. 
This arrangement allows any unit at the input layer to have an impact 
on the activation levels of all, or a great many, of the units at the second 
or "hidden" layer. An input stimulus such as light produces some 
activation level in a given input unit, which then conveys a signal of 
proportional strength along its axon and out the end branches to the many 
synaptic connections onto the hidden units. These connections stimu-
latermhibit the hidden units, as a function of (a) the strength of the signal, 
(b) the size or "weight" of each synaptic connection, and (c) its polarity. 
A given hidden unit simply sums the effects incident from its many input 

Synaptic Connections 
(various weights) 
Synaptic connections 
(various weights) 
a) 
OUTPUT 
UNITS 
HIDDEN 
UNITS 
INPUT 
UNITS 
Path of weight vector 
during training 
o or 
L--
co: o 
co: 
co: 
~ 
if' 
° 
Axes are shown for 
only 2 of 24 synaptic weights 
b) 
position 
Error minimum 
Figure 1. a) A simple feedforward network. b) Weight/error space: the network's journey during learning. 
~ 
~ 
F 
~ 
Q 
~ 
~ 

b'l'~~~~~~~'~'~ 
INPUT 
UNITS 
( .14 
.23.26 .57 .46 .96 .75 .S7 .61 
.SS 
.50 .32 .04) 
.~ 
ECHO 
:~i 
FREQUENCY 
a) 
Region of prototypical 
mine-like vectors 
::t: 
6 
c 
'" z 
c: z 
=i 
::t: 
.... 
b) 
Region of prototypical 
rock-like vectors 
Axes are shown for only 3 of 
7 hidden-unit activation levels 
Figure 2. a) Perceptual recognition with a larger network: presentation of the sonar 
echo. b) Learned partitions on the activation-vector space of the hidden units. Note the 
prototypical hot spots within each. 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
el 
Z I 
I 
2l 
;o;l ::: 
Ul 

6 
PAULM. CHURCHLAND 
synapses. The global effect is that a pattern of activations across the set of 
input units produces a distinct pattern of activations across the set of 
hidden units. Which pattern gets produced, for a given input, is strictly 
detennined by the configuration of synaptic weights meeting the hidden 
units. 
The units in the second layer project in turn to a third population of 
units, such as might be found in the visual cortex at the back of the brain, 
there to make another set of synaptic connections. (In real brains this 
pattern typically branches, and is iterated through many layers - roughly, 
5 < n < 50 - before the chain concludes in some population of motor or 
other "output" neurons. Real brains also display recurrent or "feedback" 
pathways not shown in Figure la. But for purposes of illustration here, a 
non-branching feed-forward network of just three layers will suffice). In 
this upper half of the network also, the global effect is that an activation 
pattern across the hidden units produces a distinct activation pattern 
across the output units. As before, exactly what pattern-to-pattern 
transfonnation takes place is fixed by the configuration of synaptic 
weights meeting the output units. 
All told, this network is a device for transfonning anyone of a great 
many possible input vectors (i.e., activation patterns) into a uniquely 
corresponding output vector. It is a device for computing a specific 
function, and exactly which function it computes is fixed by the global 
configuration of its synaptic weights. 
Now for the payoff. There are various procedures for adjusting the 
weights so as to yield a network that computes almost any function - that 
is, any general vector-to-vector transfonnation - that we might desire. In 
fact, we can even impose on it a function we are unable to specify, so long 
as we can supply a modestly large set of examples of the desired 
input/output pairs. This process is called "training up the network". 
In artificial networks, training typically proceeds by entering a sample 
input vector at the lowest layer, letting it propagate upwards through the 
network, noting the (usually erroneous) vector this produces at the 
topmost layer, calculating the difference between this actual output and 
the desired output, and then feeding this error measure into a special rule 
called the generalized delta rule (Rumelhart, et al.,1986a, 1986b). That 
rule then dictates a small adjustment in the antecedent configuration of all 
of the synaptic weights in the network. This particular learning procedure 
is the popular "back-propagation" algorithm. Repeating this procedure 
many times, over the many input-output examples in the training set, 

FEYERABENDIAN THEMES IN NEUROCOMPUTA TIONAL FORM 
7 
forces the network to slide down an error gradient in the abstract space 
that represents its possible synaptic weights (Figure 1 b). The adjustments 
continue until the network has finally assumed a configuration of weights 
that does yield the appropriate outputs for all of the inputs in the training 
set. 
To illustrate this technique with a real example, suppose we want the 
network to discriminate sonar echoes of large metallic objects, such as 
explosive mines, from sonar echoes of large submarine rocks. The 
discrimination of such echoes poses a serious problem because they are 
effectively indistinguishable by the human ear, and they vary widely in 
character even within each class. We begin by recording fifty different 
mine echoes and fifty different rock echoes, a fair sample of each. We 
then digitize the power profile of each echo with a frequency analyzer, 
and feed the resulting vector into the bank of input units (Figure 2a). We 
want the output units to respond with appropriate activation levels 
(specifically, {I, O} for a mine; {O, I} for a rock) when fed an echo of 
either kind. 
The network's initial verdicts are confused and meaningless, since its 
synaptic weights were set at random values. But under the pressure of the 
weight-nudging algorithm, it gradually learns to make the desired 
distinction among the initial examples. Its output behavior progressively 
approximates the correct output vectors. Most gratifyingly, after it has 
mastered the echoes in the training set, it will generalize: it will reliably 
identify mine and rock echoes from outside its training set, echoes it has 
never heard before. Mine echoes, it turns out, are indeed united by some 
subtle weave of features, to which weave the network has become tuned 
during the training process. The same is true for rock echoes. (See 
Gorman and Sejnowski 1988). 
Here we have a binary discrimination between a pair of diffuse and 
very hard-to-define acoustic properties. Indeed, we never did define them! 
It is the network that has generated an appropriate internal characteriza-
tion of each type of sound, fueled only by examples. If we now examine 
the behavior of the hidden units during discriminatory acts in the trained 
network, we discover that the training process has partitioned the space of 
possible activation vectors across the hidden units (Figure 2b). (Note that 
this space is not the space of Figure 1 b. Figure 1 b depicts the space of 
possible synaptic weights. Figure 2b depicts the space of possible 
activation vectors across the middle layer.) The training process has 
generated a similarity gradient that culminates in two "hot spots" - two 

8 
PAUL M. CHURCHLAND 
rough regions that represent the range of hidden-unit vector codings for a 
prototypical mine and a prototypical rock. The job of the top half of the 
network is then just the relatively simple one of discriminating these two 
subvolumes of that vector space. 
Some salient features of such networks beg emphasis. First, the output 
verdict for any input is produced very swiftly, for the computation occurs 
in parallel. The global computation at each layer of units is distributed 
among many simultaneously active processing elements: the weighted 
synapses and the summative cell bodies. Hence the expression, "parallel 
distributed processing". Most strikingly, the speed of processing is 
entirely independent of both the number of units involved and the 
complexity of the function executed. Each layer could have ten units, or a 
hundred million;· and its configuration of synaptic weights could be 
computing simple sums, or second-order differential equations. It would 
make no difference. Speed is determined solely by the number of distinct 
layers in the network. This makes for very swift processing indeed. In a 
living brain, where a typical information-processing pathway has 
something between five and fifty layers, and each pass through that 
hierarchy takes something between ten and twenty milliseconds per layer, 
we are looking at overall processing times, even for complex recogni-
tional problems, of between 1/20th of a second and one second. As both 
experiment and common knowledge attest, this is the right range for 
living creatures. 
Second, such networks are functionally persistent. They degrade 
gracefully under the scattered failure of synapses or even entire units. 
Since each synapse contributes such a tiny part to any computation, its 
demise makes an almost undetectable difference. In living creatures, the 
computational activity at any layer is essentially a case of multiplying an 
input vector by a very large matrix, where each synaptic weight 
represents one coefficient of that matrix (Figure 3). Since the matrix is so 
large - typically in excess of UP x 103 elements - it might have hundreds 
of thousands of positive and negative coefficients revert to zero and its 
transformational character would change only slightly. That loss 
represents less than one tenth of one percent of its functional coefficients. 
Additionally, since networks learn, they can compensate for such minor 
losses by adjusting the weights of the surviving synapses. 
Third, the network will regularly render correct verdicts given only a 
degraded version or a smallish part of a familiar input vector. This is 
because the degraded or partial vector is relevantly similar to a prototypi-

FEYERABENDIAN THEMES IN NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL FORM 
9 
cal input, and the internal coding strategy generated in the course of 
training is exquisitely sensitive to such similarities among possible inputs. 
R 
PARALLEL FIBRE 
INPUT 
~--------~--------~~------~-a 
r, 
x 
y 
z 
PURKINJE CELL OUTPUT 
Figure 3. Schematic emphasizing the matrix-like array of synaptic connections 
between distinct cell populations. The input vector (a, b, c, t1') is transformed into the 
output vector (x, y, z). 
And exactly which similarities are those? They are whichever 
similarities meet the joint condition that (a) they unite some significant 
portion of the examples in the training set, and (b) the network managed 
to become tuned to them in the course of training. The point is that there 
are often many overlapping dimensions of similarity being individually 
monitored by the trained network: individually they may be modest in 
their effects, but if several are detected together their impact can be 
decisive. Here we may recall Ludwig Wittgenstein's famous description 
of how humans can learn, by ostension, to detect "family resemblances" 
that defy easy definition. Artificial neural networks recreate exactly this 
phenomenon. 

10 
PAUL M. CHURCHLAND 
HIERARCHY OF PARTITIONS 
ON HIDDEN-UNIT 
r-----r--;z;i;_;=z = ::: 
VECTOR SPACE 
I'----C= t-t 
CONSONANTS 
VOWELS 
d-d k-k 
L_-,--C= c-k 
'---__ --{== j-J 
'----c= i--
J""--C== :== 
.----c= ~== 
s-- h--
L----r---::<:::::= h-h 
r------r--:-:-£:== n-G 
r-R 
'----------"c= i=i 
.----c== ~=~ 
s-s 
'---------{== ~=~ 
'------c= ~=~ 
r----C== ;=; 
L---r--~= ::=:: 
q-Q 
r----r--::-:-c::= u-y 
0-' 
'-----c== ~=~ 
In ..: 
MEASURE OF DISSIMILARITY 
(DISTANCE BETWEEN VECTORS) 
Figure 4. Root and branch representation of the phonetic similarity structure that 
develops across the activation-vector space of Rosenberg and Sejnowski's NETtalk 
during learning (after Rosenberg and Sejnowski 1987). 

FEYERABENDIAN TIIEMES IN NEUROCOMPUTA nONAL FORM 
11 
Finally, such networks can learn functions far more complex than the 
one illustrated, and make discriminations far beyond the binary example 
portrayed. In the course of learning to produce correctly pronounced 
speech (as output) in response to printed English text (as input), Rosen-
berg and Sejnowski's NETtalk (1987) partitioned its hidden-unit vector 
space into fully 79 subspaces, one for each of the 79 letter-to-phoneme 
transformations that characterize the phonetic significance of English 
spelling. Since there are 79 distinct phonemes in English speech, but only 
26 letters in the alphabet, each letter clearly admits of several different 
phonetic interpretations, the correct one being determined by context. 
Despite this ambiguity, the network learned to detect which of several 
possible transforms is the appropriate one, by being sensitive to the 
contextual matter of which other letters flank the target letter inside the 
word. All of this is a notoriously irregular matter for English spelling, but 
a close approximation to the correct function was learned by the network 
even so. 
As in the mine-rock network, an analysis of the behavior of the hidden 
units during each of the 79 learned transformations reveals an important 
organization. For each letter-to-phoneme transformation, of course, the 
hidden layer displays a unique activation vector: a total of 79 vectors in 
all. If one examines the similarity relations between these vectors in the 
trained network, as judged by their Euclidean proximity in the abstract 
activation vector space (see again Figure 2b), one discovers that the 
learning process has produced a tree-like hierarchy of types (Figure 4). 
Similar sounds are grouped together and a global structure has emerged in 
which the deepest division is that between the consonants and the vowels. 
The network has spontaneously recovered, from the text on which it was 
trained, the phonetic structure of English speech! 
Such revealing organization across the hidden-unit vector space is 
typical of trained networks in a great many contexts, and is a provocative 
feature of these machines. They partition that space into useful and well-
organized categories relative to the functional task that they are required 
to perform. 
Other networks have learned to identify the three-dimensional con-
figuration and orientation of curved surfaces, given only flat gray-scale 
pictures of those surfaces as input. That is, they solve a version of the 
classic shape-from-shading problem in visual psychology (Lehky and 
Sejnowski I 988a, 1988b). Still others learn to divine the grammatical 
elements of sentences fed as input, or to predict the molecular folding of 

12 
PAUL M. CHURCHLAND 
proteins given amino acid sequences as input, or to categorize olfactory 
stimuli into a hierarchical taxonomy, or to guide a jointed limb to grasp 
perceived objects, or to predict payment behavior from loan-application 
profiles. These networks perform their sUIprising feats of learned 
categorization and perceptual discrimination with only the smallest of 
"neuronal" resources - usually much less than 103 units. This is less than 
one hundred millionth of the resources available in the human brain. With 
such powerful cognitive effects being displayed in such modest artificial 
models, it is plausible that they represent a major insight into the func-
tional significance of our own brain's microstructure. 
Let us briefly contrast this approach with the rule-governed symbol-
manipulation approach of classical artificial intelligence (AI). Unlike 
standard serial-processing, programmable computers, neural nets 
typically have no representation of any rules, and they do not achieve 
their function-computing abilities by following any rules. They simply 
"embody" the desired function, as opposed to calculating it by recursive 
application of a set of rules listed in an externally imposed program. 
Moreover, since neural nets perform massively parallel processing, they 
can be many millions or even billions of times faster than serial machines 
on a wide range of problems, even though they are constructed of vastly 
slower physical components. 
A further contrast concerns the manner of information storage. In 
neural networks, acquired knowledge is stored in a distributed fashion: 
specifically, in the intricate permutational structure of the global con-
figuration of synaptic weights, which number at least 1014 in a human 
brain. The relevant aspects of that vast store are instantly accessed by the 
input vectors themselves, since the weights have been configured by the 
learning process precisely so as to produce the appropriate activation 
patterns in the layer receiving that input vector. This constitutes a form of 
"content-addressable" memory. Given the very high-dimensional 
representations employed by neural nets (namely, activation vectors 
across large cell populations), even smallish nets can be exquisitely 
sensitive to subtle and hard-to-express similarities among their perceptual 
inputs, and to the intricate contextual features that they may contain. 
This welcome feature allows a network to activate the appropriate 
prototype vector at the hidden layer even when the input vector is only a 
partial or degraded version of a typical input. The prototypical "hot spots" 
in the activation space of the trained hidden layer function as "attractors" 
into which a wide variety of partial or degraded inputs will "fall". This 

FEYERABENDIAN THEMES IN NEUROCOMPUT A TIONAL FORM 
13 
phenomenon allows a well-trained network to recognize instances of its 
categorial system even in novel or noisy circumstances, and given only 
partial information. In the language of philosophical theory, this means 
that a trained network will regularly make an ampliative "inference" to 
the best available "explanation" of the input phenomena. And it will do so 
in milliseconds. 
Finally, neural nets can learn a desired function and generate a 
categorial system adequate to compute it, even where its makers and 
trainers are ignorant of both. All it needs is sufficient examples of the 
relevant function. These are some of the more striking rewards we gain 
from our modest attention to the brain's empirical architecture. 
III. EPISTEMOLOGICAL ISSUES IN NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL GUISE 
Let us now turn away from smallish artificial networks and refocus our 
attention on a large-scale biological network: the human brain. The 
suggestion to be explored below is that cognitive activity in the brain 
follows the same pattern displayed in the artificial networks. Knowledge 
is stored in the global configuration of the brain's synaptic weights. 
Learning consists in the modification of those synaptic weights according 
to some adjustment procedure that is somehow sensitive to successful or 
erroneous performance by the network. Successful configuration of the 
weights yields a complex and hierarchically organized set of partitions 
across the various subpopulations of "hidden units" scattered throughout 
the brain. That is, it yields one of many possible categorial or conceptual 
frameworks. Conceptual change consists in reconfiguring the synaptic 
weights so as to produce a new set of partitions across the relevant 
population(s) of neurons. 
In humans, such categorial frameworks can clearly be of remarkable 
complexity, since the human brain boasts something like 103 neural 
subpopulations ("layers of hidden units") at a minimum, each of which 
has something like 108 distinct neurons. A coding vector with 108 
elements in it can code the contents of a very large book, so we may 
expect the prototypes involved to characterize intricate things such as 
"stellar collapse" and "economic depression", as well as simple things 
like "raven" and "black". 
Perceptual recognition consists in the activation of an appropriate 
prototype vector across some appropriate population of post-sensory 

14 
PAUL M. CHURCHLAND 
neurons. The achievement of explanatory understanding consists in 
exactly the same thing, although here the occasion that activates the 
vector need not always be sensory in character. Perceptual recognition is 
thus just a special case of explanatory understanding. 
The preceding begins to evoke the range of epistemological material 
we can reconstruct in neurocomputational terms. (A more detailed and far 
reaching account can be found in Churchland 1989b). We are now 
prepared to address the claim that motivated this paper, the claim that five 
salient themes of Paul Feyerabend's philosophy of science are a natural 
consequence of the neurocomputational perspective. 
1. On the theory ladenness of all perception. The argument here is about 
as brief and as decisive as it could be. Perception is of course more than 
mere peripheral transduction: it is a cognitive achievement. But on the 
model of cognition outlined above, no cognitive activity whatever takes 
place without the relevant input vectors passing through the complex 
filter of a large set of synaptic weights (see again Figure la). Most 
importantly, any configuration of synaptic weights dictates a specific set 
of partitions on the activation space of the post-sensory neurons to which 
they connect. And that set of partitions constitutes a specific conceptual 
framework or theory, one of many millions of possible alternative 
frameworks. 
Any activation pattern produced across the relevant population of 
hidden units is thus a point in an antecedently existing space, a space with 
antecedently prepared similarity gradients and antecedently prepared 
partitions having an antecedently prepared significance for subsequent 
popUlations of neurons in the processing hierarchy. That antecedent 
framework and the configuration of weights that dictates it represent 
whatever "knowledge" the network has accumulated during past training. 
That framework may be well trained and finely tuned, or it may be 
uninstructed and inchoate. But whichever it is, no cognitive activity takes 
place save as the input vectors pass through that speculative configuration 
of synaptic connections, that theory. Theory-Iadenness thus emerges not 
as an unwelcome and accidental blight on what would otherwise be a 
neutral cognitive achievement, but rather as that which makes processing 
activity genuinely cognitive in the first place. 
From this perspective it is evident that the process of learning about the 
world is not just the process of learning which general beliefs to embrace, 
as guided by our neutral perceptual judgments. It is also a process of 

FEYERABENDIAN THEMES IN NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL FORM 
15 
learning how most usefully and penetratingly to perceive the world, for 
there is just as much room for conceptual variation and conceptual 
exploration at the perceptual level as there is at any other level of 
knowledge. 
2. On displacing folk psychology. Given the model of cognition outlined 
above, any conceptual framework whatever is a speCUlative attempt to 
process incoming vectors in a way that is useful to the network, and it is 
subject to modification or replacement as a function of whatever pres-
sures are exerted by the network's learning algorithm. The system of 
partitions that constitutes one's "folk" conception of mental reality is no 
exception. It is a learned framework whose purpose is to render intel-
ligible both the introspectible reality of one's own case and the continuing 
behavior of people in general. A suitable regime of training should be 
able to produce anyone of a large variety of alternative conceptions 
(indeed, even the "folk" conception is nonuniform across cultures, and 
across individuals). 
The idea of embracing an alternative to folk psychology was never very 
compelling so long as we could not even point toward a plausible 
alternative conception. But now we can. The neurocomputational 
framework of the preceding pages portrays cognitive representations as 
high-dimensional activation vectors, rather than as sentential or proposi-
tional attitudes. And it portrays cognitive activity as the synapse-driven 
transformation of vectors into other vectors, rather than as the rule-
governed drawing of inferences from one proposition to another. It 
presents a fundamentally novel kinematics and dynamics of cognitive 
activity. It is not yet sufficiently developed for a general transfer of 
allegiance to take place. But it does hold promise of being descriptively 
and explanatorily superior to current folk psychology, by a wide margin, 
and it already presents real opportunities for first-person use. 
One class of such opportunities concerns the various subjective sensory 
qualia which have so often been held up as paradigm examples of what 
materialism can never hope to explicate. A specific color quale emerges 
as a specific activation vector in a three (or four) dimensional space 
whose axes correspond to the three types of retinal cones (and perhaps 
also the rods). A taste quale emerges as a four-element activation vector 
in a four dimensional space whose axes correspond to the four types of 
taste sensors in the mouth. Auditory qualia emerge as more variable 
vectors whose elements correspond to the places on the cochlea whose 

16 
PAUL M. OOURCHLAND 
natural frequency corresponds to one element in the complex incoming 
sound. The dimensionality of these qualia is relatively low, and thus their 
internal structure is potentially learnable and reportable in detail, just as 
the structure of musical chords is learnable and reportable. As in the 
musical case, there is also an increased insight into the structure of and 
the relations within the apprehended domain. One has therefore mastered 
more than just an esoteric set of labels: one has increased one's under-
standing of the phenomena. 
Qualia are peripheral phenomena, to be sure, and complexity goes up 
as we ascend the processing hierarchy. It remains to be seen how the story 
will go in the case of cognitive processing at the level of systematic 
linguistic activity. Perhaps the familiar propositional attitudes will be 
smoothly reduced by the computational structures we find there, and 
perhaps they will simply be eliminated from our scientific ontology 
because nothing of dynamical importance in the brain answers to them. 
But whichever is their fate -
reduction by something superior, or 
elimination by something superior - the categories of folk psychology 
remain displaceab/e in favor of some more penetrating categorial 
framework. The only real question is how large the doctrinal and 
ontological gap will turn out to be, between the triumphant new 
framework and its poorly-informed historical predecessor. 
3. On incommensurable alternatives. Consider a typical brain subpopula-
tion of something like 108 neurons. Its abstract activation space will have 
108 dimensions. Clearly a space of such high dimensionality can support 
an extraordinarily intricate hierarchical system of similarity gradients and 
partitions across that space. Equally clear is the commensurately great 
variety of such partitional configurations possible with such generous 
resources. Now the demand that all possible conceptual frameworks must 
be somehow translatable into our current conceptual framework is just the 
demand that each and every one of the billions of possible configurations 
just alluded to must stand in some equivalence relation to our current 
configuration. But there is not a reason in the world to think that there is 
any such relation that unites this vast diversity of frameworks: not in their 
internal structure, nor in their relations to the external world, nor in the 
input/output functions they sustain. On the contrary, they are all in 
competition with one another, in the sense that they are mutually 
incompatible configurations of the same activation vector space. 
The prospect of widespread incommensurability is unsettling to many 

FEYERABENDIAN TIlEMES IN NEUROCOMPUTA TIONAL FORM 
17 
philosophers because it threatens to make a reasoned empirical choice 
between competing theoretical frameworks impossible. The real threat, 
however, is not to the possibility of rational empirical choice, but to a 
deeply-entrenched theory of what rational empirical choice consists in. 
That superannuated theory requires a relevantly neutral observation 
vocabulary among whose sentences the competing theories at issue have 
different logical consequences. So long as one embraces that superan-
nuated theory, one will perceive incommensurability as a threat to reason 
and objectivity. But once one puts that theory aside, one can get down to 
the serious business of exploring how empirical data really steer our 
theoretical commitments. 
The fIrst point to emphasize is that, since there are almost endlessly 
many different possible observational frameworks (that is, hidden-layer 
weight confIgurations), where the choice between them is also an 
epistemic decision, there can be no question of grounding all epistemic 
decisions in some neutral observation framework. There is no such 
framework, and epistemic decisions are not made by reference to its 
contents in any case. One can certainly regard the unprocessed activation 
vectors at the sensory input layer as theoretically neutral, but those 
epithelial activation vectors are not themselves propositional attitudes, 
they are not truth-valuable, and they stand in no logical relations to 
anything. Their impact on subsequent activity is causal, not logical. 
On the model of cognition here being explored, ongoing learning 
consists in the continual readjustment of the value-confIguration of one's 
myriad synaptic weights. Exactly what factors drive such readjustments in 
the human brain is currently the focus of much research, but the familiar 
philosophers' stories about sets of sentences being accepted or rejected as 
a function of their logical relations with other sentences plays no detec-
table role in that research, and no detectable role in the brain's activity 
either. Instead, synaptic change appears to be driven by such factors as 
local increases in pre-synaptic or post-synaptic activity (post-tetanic 
potentiation), by temporal correlations or anti-correlations between the 
activity reaching a given synapse and the activity reaching other synaptic 
connections onto the same post-synaptic neuron (Hebbean learning), by 
the mutual accommodation of synaptic values under specific global 
constraints (Boltzmann learning), perhaps by the return distribution of 
conflict messages (back propagation), and by other decidedly pre-
conceptual or sub-conceptual processes. 
None of this precludes the possible relevance of sentential and logical 

18 
PAUL M. CHURCHLAND 
factors for some cases of learning at some high level of processing, but it 
does undermine the parochial view that all or even most of human 
learning must be captured in those terms. And it therefore frees us forever 
from the short-sighted objection that incommensurable alternatives would 
make objective learning impossible. Learning then proceeds, as it usually 
does, by other than "classical" means. This is good, because incommen-
surable alternatives are both possible and actual. They are also welcome, 
since "commensurability" is just a measure of the similarity between 
alternative frameworks, and sometimes what the epistemic situation 
requires is a profoundly different perspective on the world. Which brings 
us to the next theme. 
4. On proliferating theories. 
Feyerabend's argument (1963) for the 
wisdom of proliferating theories is a very striking one. He points out that 
important empirical facts can often be quite properly dismissed, as 
unrevealing noise or intractable chaos, when viewed from within one 
conceptual framework, while those "same" empirical facts appear as 
tractable, revealing, and as decisively incompatible with the fIrst 
framework, when they are viewed from within a second conceptual 
framework. His illustrative example is the empirical phenomenon of 
Brownian motion, which constitutes a perpetual motion machine of the 
second kind and is thus incompatible with the second law of classical 
thermodynamics. However, its status as such was not appreciated, and 
could not be fully appreciated, until the relevant details of Brownian 
motion were brought into clear focus by the new and very different 
kinetic theory of heat. What had been an exceedingly minor and opaque 
curiosity then emerged as a major and unusually revealing experimental 
phenomenon, one that refuted the classical second law. 
Feyerabend has been criticized for overstating the case here. Laymon 
(1977) insists that Brownian motion could have been, and to some extent 
actually was, recognized as a problem for classical thermodynamics in 
advance of its successful analysis by the kinetic theory. Laymon may 
have a point, but I think his resistance here is a quibble (see also Couvalis 
1988). Whatever minor worries might have been brewing in a few 
isolated breasts, the fact remains that the kinetic theory transformed our 
conception of Brownian motion, and made salient certain of its experimen-
tally accessible features that otherwise might never have risen to con-
sciousness. It is not true that all empirical facts are equally accessible, nor 
that their signifIcance is equally evident, independently of the conceptual 

FEYERABENDIAN THEMES IN NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL FORM 
19 
framework one brings to the experimental situation. This is all one needs 
to justify the proliferation of theories. And the case of Brownian motion 
remains a striking example of this important lesson. 
From a neurocomputational perspective, this lesson is doubly clear. 
Anyone who has spent idle time watching a Hinton diagram evolve 
during the training of a neural network will have noticed that networks 
often persist in ignoring or in outright misinterpreting salient data until 
they have escaped the early and relatively benighted conceptual configura-
tion into which the learning algorithm initially pushed them. They persist 
in such behavior until they have assumed .a more penetrating conceptual 
configuration, one that responds properly to the ambiguous data. (A 
Hinton diagram is a raster-like display of all of the synaptic-weight values 
of the network being trained. These displayed values are updated after 
each presentation of a training example and consequent modification of 
the weights. Accordingly, one can watch the weights evolve under the 
steady pressure of the training examples). H the proper final configuration 
of weights happens already to be known from prior training runs, one can 
even watch the "progress" of the weights as they collectively inch toward 
their optimal configuration. 
What is striking is that for some problems (the exclusive OR function, 
for example), some specific weights regularly start off by evolving in 
exactly the wrong direction - they become more and more strongly 
negative, for example, when their proper final value should be strongly 
positive. One may find oneself yelling at the screen "No! This way! Over 
this way!", as the early network persists in giving erroneous outputs, and 
the wayward weights persist in evolving in the wrong direction. These 
frustrations abate only when the other weights in the network have 
evolved to a configuration that fmally allows the network's learning 
algorithm to appreciate the various examples it has been "mishandling", 
and to pull the miscreant weights toward more useful values. The proper 
appreciation of some of the training data, to summarize the point, is 
sometimes impossible without a move to a different conceptual configura-
tion. 
This example illustrates that the moving point in weight/error space 
(see again Figure Ib) is often obliged to take a highly circuitous path in 
following the local error gradient downwards in hopes of fmding a global 
error minimum. That path may well go through points that preclude both 
a decent output from the network and a proper lesson from the learning 
algorithm for at least some of the student weights. Only when the network 

20 
PAUL M. CHURCHLAND 
reaches a subsequent point can these defects be repaired. 
A more dramatic example of this empirical blindness occurs when, as 
occasionally happens, the evolving weight-space point gets caught in a 
purely "local minimum", that is, in a cul-de-sac in weight/error space in 
which the network is still producing somewhat erroneous outputs, but 
where every relatively small change in the synaptic weights produces an 
increase in the error measured at the network's output layer. For any 
learning algorithm that moves the weight-space point in small increments 
only, the network will be permanently stuck at that point. So far as it is 
concerned, it has achieved the "best possible" theory. 
In order to escape such an epistemic predicament (and occasional 
entrapments are inevitable), we need a learning algorithm that at least 
occasionally requires the network to make a relatively large jump: a jump 
to a significantly different portion of synaptic weight space, to a sig-
nificantly different conceptual configuration. From that new weight-space 
point, the network may then evolve quickly toward new achievements in 
error reduction. 
It is evident that, for some global minima and some starting points, you 
can't get there from here, at least not by small increments of instruction. 
This is a clear argument for the wisdom of a learning strategy that at least 
occasionally exploits multiple starting points, or discontinuous shifts, in 
the attempt to find a descending path toward a genuinely global error 
minimum. It may be difficult to achieve such diversity in a single 
individual (but it is certainly not impossible: see Churchland 1989b, 
Chapter 11). But it can readily be done with different individuals in the 
same scientific community. And of course it is done. That is the point of 
different "schools". 
These considerations do not resolve the essentially political conflict 
between Feyerabend and Thomas Kuhn concerning how much of our 
resources to put into proliferation and how much into pursuing a single 
but highly progressive "paradigm". But it does mean that a wise research 
policy must recognize the need for striking, and endlessly restriking, a 
useful balance between these two opposing tensions. Proliferation is a 
desideratum that will never go away, because the prospect of a false but 
compelling local error minimum is a threat that will never go away, and 
because complacency is endemic to the human soul. 
5. On proliferating methodologies. The Feyerabend I have in mind here 
is of course the Feyerabend of Against Method (1970), in which he 

FEYERABENDIAN THEMES IN NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL FORM 
21 
recommends an opportunistic anarchism, constrained only by the innate 
organization of the human nervous system, as a more promising policy in 
guiding our scientific behavior than is any of the methodological 
straitjackets so far articulated by scientists and philosophers of science. In 
a climate of methodological stories benighted by their formulation in 
logico-linguistic terms, this is certainly good advice. ·But it need not 
always be good advice: someday, perhaps, our acquired methodological 
wisdom may equal or surpass the innate wisdom of a healthy nervous 
system, because we have figured out how the nervous system works, and 
can see how to make it work even better. 
This is not a vain hope. Guided by a variety of non-classical learning 
algorithms, artificial neural networks have recently proved capable of 
some astonishing feats of knowledge acquisition, feats that represent a 
quantum leap over any of the classical logico-linguistic achievements. A 
new door has opened in normative epistemology, and it concerns the 
comparative virtues and capabilities of alternative learning algorithms, 
algorithms aimed not at adjusting sets of propositions so as to meet 
certain criteria of consistency or coherence, but aimed rather at adjusting 
iterated populations of synaptic weights so as to approximate certain 
input/output functions and/or certain dynamical behaviors. What is 
striking, even at this early stage of exploration, is that the space of 
possible learning algorithms is enormous. In the newly developed 
research program called "connectionist AI", almost as much research time 
is spent on critically exploring the diverse properties of various existing 
learning algorithms, and on devising and exploring new ones, as is spent 
on the properties of trained networks themselves (see Hinton 1989). 
This is a healthy situation, and such proliferation should be en-
couraged. There are at least two major reasons for this. The first concerns 
the relatively limited aim of trying to understand how the human brain 
conducts its epistemic affairs. We need to explore the space of possible 
learning algorithms until we discover which specific place in it cor-
responds to the brain's mode of operation. 
The second reason is deeper. Even supposing we succeed in identifying 
the brain's place in that space, there is no reason to suppose that our 
biologically innate learning algorithm is the best possible algorithm, or 
even that there exists a uniquely best learning algorithm. Perhaps they just 
get better and better, ad infmitum, which means that we must explore 
them indefinitely. Or perhaps they radiate, along diverse dimensions of 
distinct virtue, to be explored as our changing needs dictate. The prolifera-

22 
PAUL M. CHURCHLAND 
tion of learning algorithms is a virtuous policy of long-tenn science for 
much the same reasons that proliferation is a virtue in the case of theories. 
The alternatives are certainly there, and we will not appreciate their 
virtues unless we explore them. 
This may place unreasonable demands on the human' nervous system, 
since presumably it is insufficiently plastic to participate directly in this 
exploration. Its learning algorithms may be hopelessly hard-wired into its 
structure. Methodological proliferation may therefore show itself only in 
artificially constructed brains designed specifically to do novel kinds of 
scientific exploration on our behalf. But this changes the philosophical 
point not at all. 
The preceding defense of the proliferation of methodologies does not 
justify exactly the position that Feyerabend outlined in Against Method. 
He is there reacting to the shortcomings of an old tradition in methodologi-
cal research, rather than anticipating the possible virtues of a new 
tradition. But that is all right. The bottom line is that proliferating 
methodologies is a still a very good idea, and for reasons beyond those 
urged by Feyerabend. 
CONCLUSION 
Philosophers are not always so fortunate as Feyerabend appears to be, in 
the respect of finding a systematic vindication of their ideas through an 
intertheoretic reduction by a later and more penetrating theoretical 
framework. One must be intrigued by the convergence of principle here, 
and one must be impressed by the insight that motivated Feyerabend's 
original articulation and defense of the five theses listed. It seems likely 
that each one of these important theses will live on, and grow, now in a 
neurocomputational guise. 
University of California 
San Diego, CA 
USA 
BffiLIOGRAPHY 
Churchland, P.M. (1989a), "On the Nature of Theories: A Neurocomputational 

FEYERABENDIAN mEMES IN NEUROCOMPUTATIONAL FORM 
23 
Perspective", in W. Savage, ed., Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science: 
Vol. 14 (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press). 
-
(1989b), A Neurocomputational Perspective: The Nature of Mind and the 
Structure of Science (Cambridge: MIT Press). 
Couvalis, S.G. (1988), "Feyerabend and Laymon on Brownian Motion", Philosophy 
of Science 55: 415-421. 
Feyerabend, P.K. (1958), "An Attempt at a Realistic Interpretation of Experience", 
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, new series. Reprinted in Feyerabend, P.K., 
Realism, Rationalism, and Scientific Method: Philosophical Papers, Vol. 1 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981). 
-
(1962), "Explanation, Reduction, and Empiricism", in Feigl, H. and Maxwell, G., 
eds., Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science (Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press). 
-
(1963a), "Materialism and the Mind-Body Problem", Review of Metaphysics, 17: 
49-66. Reprinted in The Mind/Brain Identity Theory, C.V. Borst, ed. (Toronto: 
Macmillan, 1970): 142-156. Also reprinted in Feyerabend, P.K., Realism, 
Rationalism, and Scientific Method: Philosophical Papers, Vol. 1 (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1981). 
-
(1963b), "How to be a Good Empiricist", in B. Baumrin, ed., Philosophy of 
Science: The Delaware Seminar, Vol. 2 (New York, N.Y.: Interscience Publica-
tions): 3-19. Reprinted in H. Morick, ed., Challenges to Empiricism (Belmont, 
California: Wadsworth, 1972). 
-
(1970), "Against Method: Outline of an Anarchistic Theory of Knowledge", in 
Radner and Winokur, eds., Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 4 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press). 
Gorman, R.P. and Sejnowski, TJ. (1988), "Learned Classification of Sonar Targets 
Using a Massively-Parallel Network", IEEE Transactions: Acoustics, Speech, and 
Signal Processing (forthcoming). 
Hinton, G.E. (1989), "Connectionist Learning Procedures", Artificial Intelligence, 40, 
no. 1-3: 185-234. 
Laymon, R. (1977), "Feyerabend, Brownian Motion, and the Hiddenness of Refuting 
Facts", Philosophy of Science 44: 225-247. 
Lehky, S. and Sejnowski, T.I. (1988a), "Computing Shape from Shading with a 
Neural Network Model", in Schwartz, E., ed., Computational Neuroscience 
(Cambridge: MIT Press). 
-
(1988b), "Network model of shape-from-shading: neural function arises from 
both receptive and projective fields", Nature 333 (June 2): 452-454. 
Rosenberg, C.R., and Sejnowski, T.I. (1987), "Parallel Networks That Learn To 
Pronounce English Text", Complex Systems,I: 145-168. 
Rumelhart, D.E., Hinton, G.E. and Williams, R.I. (1986a), "Learning representations 
by back-propagating errors", Nature, 323. 
-
(1986b), "Learning Internal Representations by Error Propagation", in Rumel-
hart, D.E., and McClelland, J.L., eds., Parallel Distributed Processing: explora-
tions in the Microstructure of Cognition, Vol. 1 (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1986): 
318-362. 

MARX W. W ARTOFSKY 
How to Be a Good Realist 
1. IS REALISM WITHOUT ESSENTIALISM POSSIBLE? 
The real problem in philosophy is how to be a realist without being an 
essentialist. Given the indefinitely many ways of representing the world 
that are available to us, limited only by our ingenuity, or by canons of 
consistency, or relevance, or simplicity, or beauty, or utility, essentialism 
would have little claim on us, if it were not for the conviction (or 
prejudice or instinct) that there is one right way to represent it, namely the 
way it really is. We rid ourselves of this conviction in a number of ways, 
the most radical of which is to disclaim the very project of representation; 
or at least, to disclaim "representation" as being any sort of correlate, 
depiction, account, that stands in any "correspondence" to the "real", as 
its object; moreover, to discredit the notion of the "real" as anything more 
than a claim made by one or another representation, hence, as inevitably 
"representation-laden" (whether "theory"- or "framework"- or "style"- or 
"picture"- or "belief'- laden). Reality recapitulates ontology, we might 
say; and ontology recapitulates philology (Quine) or recapitulates 
methodology (me) or recapitulates anthropology (Feuerbach), adding 
(with Marx) "and the root is human being". But even if the ''root'' - to be 
radical - is human, one could start all over again, disclaiming human 
''reality'' - human ontology - as anything more than a recapitulation of a 
recapitulation of .... Full circle (or full circularity) would rid us of 
essentialism to be sure, but also of reference (as anything more than an 
accident of choice, or a whim) and, a/ortiori, of realism. 
That might be enough for conversationalists, philosophical chit-
G. Munevar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 25-w. 
@ 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
25 

26 
MARX W. W ARTOFSKY 
chatters, skeptics, amoral and agnostic pragmatists; but it won't do for us 
realists, even the constructivists among us, even the historical construc-
tivists among us. The question is: how to be a good realist? 
First, consider the snares and temptations of essentialism, and the 
confusions surrounding it. There would be no problem for realism, were 
essentialism more easily shed. For, in order to be a realist in the flrst 
place, one must hold that the what of "what we know" is ontologically 
independent and prior to our knowledge of it; hence, that it exists apart 
from our knowing it, and is, as such, not constituted by our act of cogni-
tion. Esse is notpercipi, then, in any sense, (including God's knowing, or 
any of the dispositional modalities into which Berkeley's percipient God 
is translated by secular minds like our own in order to evade theology, or 
to demythologize it: Mill's "permanent possibilities of sensation"; 
Peirce's "limit at which all scientiflc investigators are fated to agree"; 
Dewey's (or Putnam's) "warranted assertibility", etc. Dispositionals all: 
knowledge on the installment plan, truth (if at all) at the limit, with an 
inflnite pay-off time - on the "never-never", as our British cousins call it). 
Given the demands of a robust realism, then, it is hard to flgure out 
how not to conclude that the "what" is what it is in itself, by itself, quite 
apart from whether it is known, or how it is known, or indeed, quite apart 
from whether it is knowable at all. The damn Ding (an sich) is no 
confession of failure, or of cognitive impotence on Kant's part; it is the 
guarantor against the claim that the world "out there" is nothing but a 
mental construct, not even objectively, i.e., not even a universal and 
necessary construct of 'objective' mind. A real realism seems incom-
patible with any sort of constructivism. 
Realism's pull, therefore, tends to imply a way things are (as against a 
way they are not), hence, a right representation, and the possibility of a 
wrong one, or of many wrong ones. Ergo: essentialism (esse being just 
what the right or true representation represents). Whether "right" or "true" 
is the appropriate adjective matters little here. Right, Recht, Gerecht, 
rectitude, correct, Gerechtigkeit, all possess etymological resonances just 
as apposite and no more univocal than true, Wahr, Wahrscheinlich, or 
Treu, Treuhaft, or vrai, verified, verity, veracious, verisimilar, verite) 
Esse preserved, <;>r shown, or represented, or expressed in thought or 
language or some other symbolic form, correctly, rightly, truly, 
verisimilarly, is still Esse; and if, without it, reference fails, or becomes 
capricious or arbitrary, then realism seems to go too. So far, then, no 
realism without essentialism. 

HOW TO BE A GOOD REALIST 
2. HOW SOME PHILOSOPHERS - ''REALISTS'' 
AMONG THEM - GET RID OF ESSENTIALISM 
27 
Some philosophers think the problem dissolves if we stop using abstract, 
universal terms, like esse, real, or even true, that is, stop pretending that 
there is a metapQysical issue here, and cut back to "natural ontological 
attitudes)" about thises and thats, or about the specific, concrete (or even 
abstract) terms that are used to designate entities, processes, events in 
some applied scientific or other practice. "Reality" doesn't exist, but 
atoms, stars and DNA molecules do, or prospectively do, on terms we can 
sort out and agree on in our practices, theoretical and applied; little "r" 
realism stays, Big "R" Realism is out. Happy days are here again! 
Other philosophers think the pseudo-problem stems from the pseudo-
notion of representation, with its baggage of correspondence, or of 
isomorphism with a reality we can't get to thoughtlessly or dumbly, i.e., 
without mental or linguistic representation, hence, without reference to 
other representations. "What is an F? An F is a G",l is the refrain of the 
linguocentric predicament, (the "Quine line", one might say). No one, it 
seems, wants to be a "metaphysical realist", since correspondence 
between statement and world is indeed a murky affair. Tarski cut the 
Gordian knot with the semantic theory of truth, and 'convention T', 
making it a matter of semantic reference between levels of language, 
leaving the metaphysical reality out in the cold (or out in the rain, where 
"it is raining" is true iff ... etc., but where the rain itself is neither true or 
false; it just falls or doesn't, since it isn't a statement). Persistently, some 
people -
philosophers among them -
mistake the object-language 
statement for the rain, even though the object-language statement isn't 
wet, but is eleven letters long. The "correspondence" theory of truth, in 
Tarski's semantic version, is no language-to-world correspondence, in 
any case, but rather a language-to-Ianguage correspondence. 
One way out of essentialism with its one-way street from representa-
tion to the real, is to improve the neighborhood, afford some freedom of 
motion, facilitate the traffic flow, turn the narrow track from truth to 
reality into a network of trails and byways and sunny avenues. ''There are 
many paths to salvation, but only one which is fit for an English 
gentleman, and that is the Anglican Church". I cannot recall who said this 
but it bespeaks a liberalization: there are many "right" ways, right for 
different reasons, or purposes or tastes but no less right, because all lead 
to the same referential (or eschatological) summit: the "real" which is the 

28 
MARX W. WARTOFSKY 
epistemologists' heaven, wherein cognitive salvation lies and truth is 
attained. (It would seem that eschatology and epistemology have much in 
common. "I am the truth" says Jesus. For a reading of eschatology as 
esoteric epistemology, see Ludwig Feuerbach, Gesammelte Werke, 
passim). 
A variant of realism, one with a liberalized essentialism, could then 
admit that while reality is one, access to it is many. Alternatively, 
however, one could go even further in modifying the essentialist claim to 
a reality as such, and claim that there are as many aspects of the real (or 
as many realities) as there are modes of access, provided that these are 
modes of access and not dead ends. Reality may be multiplex, rather than 
unitary, and no less "real" and independent of cognition for all that. Many 
essences, rather than One Essence. Why not? Reference is preserved; so is 
truth, and correspondence too. There are just lots of Dinge-an-sich instead 
of one Big Ding. Relativism is kept at bay, and subjectivism doesn't stand 
a chance. After all, liberal pluralism, in ontology and epistemology, as in 
politics, doesn't say "Anything goes", but only that lots of things do, (and 
lots, of course, don't). 
Strangely enough, anarchist pluralism is not much different. It says 
''Try anything, see if it goes". This is sometimes confused by those 
anarchists - philosophers among them - who adopt the nihilist slogan 
"Anything goes", but don't intend it in that unqualified nihilistic sense, 
that is, in the sense that it doesn't matter, it makes no difference, one 
thing's as good or as bad as any other. Take that paradigmatic "I don't 
care" 1920's anarchist-pluralist, Josephine Baker: for her, "I don't care" 
didn't mean she'd accept anything that came along, but only that she 
would try anything to see if it went. It meant freedom from conventions, 
from uptight constraints, all for the sake of fun. In this sense, Paul 
Feyerabend may be the Josephine Baker of philosophy - the "I don't 
care" philosopher. To the self-proclaimed anarchist, it does make a 
difference, since there is something to be attained, - scientific progress, a 
better life, or improved beer. Counterinduction is a recommendation for 
success, not a counsel of despair, after all. It presupposes the progress of 
knowledge as better served by anarchist revolutionaries than by conserva-
tive reconstructionists, Hegelian owls content to reflect in thought, at 
dusk, what has already been achieved in daytime deeds. Still, a pluralistic 
ontology is not necessarily realistic, and a liberalized essentialism is still 
essentialist. So where are we? 
Thus far, we've got a realism whose esse is approachable by many 

HOW TO BE A GOOD REALIST 
29 
alternative paths. But there are two ways, at least, to understand this: (1) 
All the different ways are extensionally isomorphic, so that a meta-
essentialism can be preserved by the invariance through transformation of 
the alternative (true, good, right) representations. The one God of Being 
has many names. Or (2) Esse itself is only aspectively constituted: there is 
no "Reality" as such, no one "way the world is" but there are world-
versions, Goodman-fashion, the union of which (or the integration over 
which) does not itself constitute "the" world. Therefore, if counterfac-
tually, Goodman were a realist (epistemologically) and not just a 
nominalist (ontologically), appearances would be all there need be, and 
qualia would suffice to constitute a happily pluralist realism: as many 
essences as there are appearances, and no "appearance" of something as 
mere phenomenon. Appearances (aspects, ways, modes, versions) are, 
they exist. ''They are what is", one could say (ungrammatically). We 
discover them, in our cognitive ventures, but don't invent or construct 
them. Every representation explicates - lifts the plic or veil - on some 
hitherto hidden appearance of the real. ["Of the real" is redundant here; 
"real appearance" would be too, if appearance is taken as referent for 
some referring representation.] Was ist, scheint; moreover, erscheint, 
makes itself known, becomes public (to those who know how to look, 
where to look). The many gods reveal themselves to the seekers of the 
truth. 
The critic of traditional "metaphysicizing" ontology might object: "The 
difference between this latter polytheistic ontology and the former 
monotheistic one is the same as that between old-time nominalists and 
platonic realists, the fIrst with a taste and preference for the ultimately 
particular thises and thats; the second, reveling in the existence (and even 
generative power) of the 'ideal' (i.e., real) forms of Being, whose 
appearances are many but whose esse is one. As to a choice between 
polymorphic and monomorphic ontologies", (the critic would argue) 
"what does it matter? Shouldn't ontologies be as liberally indulged as are 
ways of knowing? Indeed, isn't an ontology just a choice of world-
version suited to some temperament, some project, some taste - a style of 
knowing, no more to be eschewed on grounds of 'truth' or 'rightness' 
than a style of painting, or a mode of dress? 'Modes of Being' may be no 
more than an elliptical expression for 'fashions of ontological commit-
ment', changing, therefore, as fashions do. (Irrationally, by leaps of taste, 
or of faith, on some views; historically, or even in dialectically emerging 
sequence, on some others). So, if fashions have a history, as more than 

30 
MARX W. WARTOFSKY 
mere chronicle, so do ontologies; and if ontologies, then also modes of 
cognition, epistemes, as we say". Thus, the liberal ontologist multiplies 
ontologies liberally. If universes are as plentiful as blackberries, then any 
number can play. 
3. THROWING OUT THE REALIST BABY WITH THE DIRTY 
ESSENTIALIST BA THW A TER 
"Wrong! This is all wrong!" cries out my realist conscience. (You see, I 
have my conscience to cope with, which makes it hard to be a construc-
tivist!) "Wrong, because it gives away the obdurate independence of the 
real, making it instead a function of choices of cognitive mode, ultimately 
subjectivizing it, even if the subjectivism is social and historical, rather 
than psychological and individual. Or, worse yet, selling the realist 
birthright for a mess of pragmatist potage, ending up, so to speak, in the 
soup! What realism demands as an objective world ontologically 
independent of cognition or of consciousness turns out to be totally 
dependent on the cognitive choice of one or another ontology, one or 
another linguistic or logical-theoretical framework with its particular 
ontological commitments. But then, the 'real' is nothing but what is taken 
to be real in this way; hence, not independent of cognition and conscious-
ness. Shamefaced realism, at best!" 
The obdurate realist would argue that this way of getting rid of 
essentialism, mono- or polymorphic, is achieved at the cost of the realism, 
i.e., by reducing what we mean by "real" - or indeed, what we take to be 
real - to nothing but whatever is taken to be real, to nothing but the 
entities that happen to be named in our favorite theories, letting our 
ontological commitments (and therefore, the "construction of reality") 
follow from our particular theoretical-practical needs. As these latter 
change, historically - as science progresses - so do our ontologies. 
"Reality" is now used as a constructive term. "Reality-in-itself' is no 
longer at issue in that case. Not "what there is", but only "what we say 
there is". "Realism" without the real! No paradox, perhaps. But no 
realism either, in this vacuous formulation - at least, not in the sense that 
a good realist would require. 

HOW TO BE A GOOD REALIST 
31 
4. REALISM AND TRUTH: COMPLICATIONS AND A POSSIBLE WAY OUT 
Perhaps we can avoid the vacuity, and also save the realism by careful 
reformulation. After all, the entities named in our theories do not depend 
for their existence on being named there. What is at issue is whether the 
theories which name them are true. When we commit ourselves ontologi-
cally, i.e., assert a theory, we do so in the belief that what the theory 
describes is the case; and if it is, then the entities "really" exist; and if it is 
false, then they don't, at least not as the theory describes them. Thus, 
"ontological relativity", or "pragmatic realism" or a semanticized 
ontology are not concerned with what is "real". Rather, they concern our 
beliefs, or conjectures, or proffered truths, or hypotheses, or what we 
entertain, or countenance, or feel warranted in asserting - in short, these 
relativized "realisms" concern what we are willing to say there is, or what 
we would be ready to consider as existing. They concern what would be 
the case, if we are right. But clearly, we couldn't then say, what exists 
does so because we have chosen the "right" (correct, true) ontology but 
rather that it is right (or our assertions are true) because the named entities 
or described states of affairs really do exist. Furthermore, what exists isn't 
"right", or "true" or "correct". It just is. What is "right", etc. is our 
assertion that it does, (if it does), or that it doesn't (if it doesn't); what 
makes our statement true is that it corresponds to what is the case. That 
sounds familiar! Unfortunately, it doesn't solve our problem, but simply 
restates the traditional realism which is precisely in question. For "what is 
the case" being what it is in itself, as the reference of our true statements, 
is just the esse of essentialism allover again. And so, we are at the 
beginning again, looking for a non-essentialist answer to the question: 
How to be a good realist. 
5. RECAPITULATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE FIRST THEME 
Let's look at the way the argument goes once again: Essentialism is 
untenable - all the essences of old, all the essential meanings, ideal and 
unchanging forms, "real" universals having gone by the board under the 
criticisms of nominalists, historicists, pragmatists, ontological relativists, 
anarchists, irrealists - what is left is an etiolated realism, whose "reals" 
are either the mind-dependent (or theory- or praxis- dependent) constructs 
that we introduce - the "hypothetical entities" entertained because of their 

32 
MARX W. WARTOFSKY 
pragmatic utility,. or because they fit our well-entrenched metaphysical 
habits of thought, or because they are computationally effective - or else 
they are simply the ontic posits implicated by the grammar of our 
referential discourse; hence, objects of commitment, contingent on acts of 
faith, or on the ostensibly universal and necessary conditions of any 
possible cognition whatever, or on our grammatical habits. 
Such a "reality", dependent upon our cognitive acts or choices or habits 
- whether individual, social, or historical - is not the reality a robust 
realism requires. It smacks of idealism, or even of solipsism. Schopen-
hauer, writing about solipsism, or what he calls "theoretical egoism", says 
that "it is more in need of a cure than a refutation". This is like Dr. 
Johnson's curbstone-kicking refutation of Berkeley's idealism. But this is 
hardly an argument for realism; it is simply a rhetorical assertion of it. 
Suppose one said, "Isn't it readily apparent that the denial of the independ-
ent existence of the (a, some) world as the (ultimate, distal, presupposed) 
object of our cognitive activity is, finally, pathological?" This sort of 
appeal to good, healthy, common-sense realism is not unknown even 
among philosophers. One or another version of it is used by realists as 
diverse as Diderot, Reid, Moore, Lenin. (An odd list, to be sure!) But an 
appeal to right-mindedness against pathology will convince only those 
already secure in their convictions. Realism ought to be able to do better 
than simply cheering on the home team. Suppose, instead, that we appeal 
to a reasonably scientific view of consciousness (and thus, of knowledge) 
that situates it as already enworlded, as itself an emergent property of a 
natural world temporally prior to this emergence and therefore ontologi-
cally preliminary to, and independent of cognition? But that simply begs 
the question, presupposing what it is supposed to prove. 
How then to break out of the predicament? How to be a good realist 
with good arguments? 
6. BACK TO THE DINOSAURS 
One realist argument - essentially an argument from economy and from 
common sense - is that the suppositions necessary for an anti-realist 
position are so complex, so patently unacceptable to our common sense, 
so exotic and extravagant in the multiplication of entities and presupposi-
tions, so contradictory to the most systematic and critical body of 
knowledge that we possess - (the natural sciences) - that anti-realism 

HOW TO BE A GOOD REALIST 
33 
falls of the weight of its own implausibility. Take, for example, the 
"dinosaur-argument" (my favorite): If the dinosaurs did exist prior to the 
emergence ("evolution" if you prefer) of our own cognitive species, then 
something existed independently of any possible knowledge of it, and 
thus, as the "real" of a robust realism. Any argument to the contrary -
e.g., that the existence of the dinosaurs was dependent on the pragmatic 
value of our present belief that they existed, or on the warranted asser-
tibility of the scientific theory which alleges their existence - would 
violate our common sense so utterly, and would require such fanciful 
presuppositions and revisions in the rest of our scientific knowledge that 
it would be out of the range of any serious consideration. For one thing, 
both common-sensically and scientifically, things in the past don't go into 
existence or out of existence as a result of our present ontological 
commitments. And if we were to come to agree in the future that the 
dinosaur theory was a hoax; that fake "Piltdown" -type fossils had been 
planted around the world to deceive us into believing the dinosaur-story 
etc., etc. - (please bear with me; this is one of those philosophical 
counterexamples that depart from plausibility entirely, in order to make a 
point) - we would not then say: "The dinosaurs 'existed', while the theory 
was warrantedly assertible, but blipped out of existence, when it was seen 
to be false. Instead, we would say, (in that implausible case) that they had 
never existed at all. Otherwise, what sense would it make to say that we 
had been deceived by fake fossils? We surely would not say that they 
became fake when we discovered that we were deceived, but were 
authentic before then! (Shades of grue and bleen ... ) 
Think also of the complicated story that would have to be substituted 
for the dinosaur account, as an alternative; and how much of science and 
common belief would have to be adjusted systematically, or abandoned as 
anomalous, in that case. Therefore - so this realist argument would go -
on grounds of common sense and parsimony, we would preserve a realist 
account of the independent existence of the dinosaurs against all the anti-
realist alternatives. 
One might argue against such a common-sense-or-parsimony-based 
realism, that it suffers from the same paradox as do the "realisms" without 
realism that we previously described. That is, it too is simply another 
form of ontological relativity, or of "internal" (or "pragmatic") realism. In 
this case, a robust ontology would itself turn out to be no more than 
another option relativized to certain of those "realist" cognitive practices 
that have attained currency, or have become culturally or epistemologi-

34 
MARX W. WARTOFSKY 
cally dominant, i.e., "succeed". For here, the basis for the choice becomes 
some preferred "common-sense" framework, or some preferred 
methodological principle, (i.e., Ockham's Razor, or Mach's "economy of 
thought", or a generalization of Maupertuis' Principle of Least Action). 
And once again, "real" comes to mean "real" from the point of view of 
our choices, our preferences (on whatever grounds). Robust realism, with 
its cognitively independent existents, becomes a matter of (cognitive, 
philosophical) choice, a "preferred manner of speaking", and therefore 
open to all the objections realists themselves have raised against relativiza-
tion of the real, or to "realism" without the real. 
7. SALVAGING REALISM FROM ONTOLOGICAL RELATIVITY 
Perhaps we may avoid the paradox and save the realism by reformulating 
the issue and by moving one level up, semantically. There is something 
wrong with the previous arguments (and counterarguments) and part of 
the devilment in the realism-anti-realism debate lies in that confusion, I 
think. Let's see how that would work: 
The move one level up would be from assertions concerning which 
entities are taken to exist to assertions about such assertions. Let us call 
the former "fIrst level ontological assertions" and let them remain as 
relativized, etiolated, ontologically vacuous and as metaphysically 
hannless as one likes. Thus, for example, we could take something as 
(presently) ontologically robust as electrons, or introduce something as 
computationally hypothetical as "hydrons", as theoretical particles which 
travel with the mean velocity of water waves (Synge's example by 
analogy to gravitons). In either case, we might argue that "real" here 
means no more than what it is that we quantify over, in using the 
variables, or what we are ontologically committed to in using these 
names. The assertion "electrons (or hydrons) exist" would mean nothing 
more metaphysically complicated than that our theory countenances such 
entities. Or we could make the distinction that, in the case of electrons, 
we have a well-established entity, whereas in the case of hydrons, we are 
only inventing a computational fIction. 
Now, what would it mean to say that one of these fIrst-level ontological 
assertions is "true" ("to apply the truth-predicate to it", as they say in the 
schools)? It would mean that the entities named by the true assertion exist, 
that is to say, that true statements correspond to what exists, and that 

HOW TO BE A GOOD REALIST 
35 
''true'' is predicated of such statements because they so correspond. The 
statement "x's exist" (e.g., "There were dinosaurs", "there are atoms", 
"there are electrons") or the theory which entails or includes such 
ontological commitments, is, on this account, a first-level ontological 
assertion, then, Let's call such an assertion "A". Then the assertion about 
"A" - "'A" is true' - is a meta-assertion, or a meta-ontological assertion. 
This second-level ontological assertion doesn't state that something 
exists, nor does it assert some theory which has this as its ontological 
consequence, but rather that if the statement 'A' is a true statement, then 
what "A" is about or refers to, or asserts to exist does in fact exist 
independently of our knowledge of it. 
There is nothing new here. This is just a statement of the (old) cor-
respondence theory of truth, and therefore also an assertion of a robust 
realism. For if we accept this notion of truth, then we are asserting 
(holding true, believing) that when we make true statements (if we ever 
do!), what it is that these statements are true of exists as what it is, prior to 
and completely independent of our statements; and conversely, what it is 
that makes true statements true, is that what they assert, or what they refer 
to, is the case, exists, in just such an ontologically independent way. 
Realism conceived in this way - meta-ontologically, so to speak - says 
nothing about what exists. That's what first-level assertions do. Rather, it 
asserts that true statements will be interpreted in a certain way - i.e., 
realistically. Realism is not a theory about reality, but rather a theory 
about our knowledge of reality, or a theory about what would constitute 
something as such knowledge. Therefore, it is a theory of truth, or a 
theory of a certain relation between statements and their reference: a 
semantic theory of truth, to be sure; but interpreted also as an epis-
temological and ontological theory. In short, realism may be seen as a 
proposal as to how to use the predicate "true". As such a proposal, it may 
be accepted or rejected, depending on the arguments for and against it. 
The force of this view is that it takes first-level ontological assertions to 
be truth-functional, i.e., to be either true or false, and the truth or falsity of 
the assertions to depend on the ontologically independent existence of the 
entities or states of affairs named or denoted referentially in such 
assertions. In effect, this is the statement of a norm, or a rule for using the 
truth-predicate; or, in short, a definition of truth. It is not yet a rule or a 
norm for the application of this rule; that is to say, it doesn't yet state the 
conditions under which it will be appropriate, correct, right to make the 
assertion, or to claim the truth of a statement. The realist rule, then, does 

36 
MARX W. WARTOFSKY 
not specify the conditions under which some fIrst-level ontological 
assertion "A", will be said to "correspond with reality", but only that if 
"A" is true, then it is so by virtue of such a correspondence. 
Here, the bedevilment and the bewilderment enter. The usual critique 
of "metaphysical realism" is 
that the very notion of such 
"correspondence" of statement to world, of language to reality, of what is 
within language to what lies outside it, is operationally meaningless, 
unsalvageable, opaque; therefore, the conclusion that we choose one or 
another ontology - if ontologize we must - simply on the grounds of its 
systemic adequacy, its utility, its aesthetic or logical elegance, making no 
claims beyond what can be handled referentially within such qualified 
ontological commitments, i.e., within the framework of a choice of 
language or logic. If we are to salvage the realism, then the notion of a 
realist conception or defmition of truth needs to be enlarged in such a way 
that it makes a difference whether one holds it or not. For if such a 
realism is no more than an expression of philosophical faith, or a form of 
cheering for one side against the other in the epistemological world series, 
then, in effect, alternative truth theories are extensionally indifferent; and 
their intensional differences simply explicate different senses, but none 
which can be rationally preferred over any others; or if so, only as matters 
of taste or prejudice. (This is not nothing, of course: but we would then 
need theories of taste and prejudice to establish norms of good judgement 
even here. What difference would it make to hold a realist theory of truth 
as against, say, conventionalist or instrumentalist or pragmatic theories? 
What arguments would support such a position? 
For one thing, it would save us from the silliness or the trivialization of 
truth that other views inevitably entail. For example, it would avoid all 
the funny business about whether a statement was once true but is now 
false. If one adopts a consistent pragmatist theory of truth (as what is 
better to believe, or as what yields the most fruitful consequences as a 
belief, or what our scientific practice up to time t (the present) offers the 
best evidence for, then "truths" about the same thing change; yesterday'S 
truth can become today's falsehood - (not in the trivial sense of time-
indexed statements, or token-reflexive statements like "It is raining now", 
or "My name is Aram" or "Here we are in Disneyworld!" which are 
unproblematically resolvable, in this sense) - but rather in the sense of 
theories like pre-relativistic mechanics, which it was better to believe, in 
1660, than any other available theory. If pragmatism cheats, as it often 
does, with hidden transcendental or dispositional presuppositions - (like 

HOW TO BE A GOOD REALIST 
37 
James' "What it is better to believe in the long run and on the whole ... " 
or "what would support a subjunctive conditional" in Nagel's view of 
laws in science) - then, of course, it contains a tacit appeal to realism, as a 
limit-notion of truth. 
Conventionalism has a stronger suit: if what we will mean by "true" is 
what we agree to mean by "true", i.e., if "true" is not an intrinsic property 
of certain things in the world ("true statements") but is rather a con-
structed notion, then it is we who determine what we shall take as "true 
statements", or construe as "truth"; and alternative conventions may come 
to be adopted for various reasons. Hence, no univocal or essential or 
"real" truth independent of the derming or constitutive conventions. In 
fact, realism, as a theory of truth, may be understood, (metatheoretically, 
with respect to theories of truth) as one such convention. But then, we 
have to distinguish between two kinds of conventionalism: the first, 
which is itself a theory of truth, in the fIrst sense (and at the level) that 
realism is, i.e., a theory about the use of the truth-predicate for fIrst-level 
ontological assertions. Conventionalism would then simply deny the 
realist view that such assertions are true because they "correspond to 
reality", i.e., if the entities they assert to exist actually do exist; and 
instead take the view that such assertions are true if they satisfy a certain 
convention for demarcating true statements (e.g., are either analytic, or 
are themselves deducible from true statements - another way of saying 
that they are not inconsistent with any other true statements). The second 
kind of conventionalism, (up one level, semantically) is about the choice 
among alternative truth-theories, e.g., realist, pragmatist, conventionalist. 
Here, it is the view that such a choice itself is to be made in accordance 
with some convention, (e.g., "choose the theory most people have 
rejected", or "choose the theory which makes the fewest assumptions" or 
"choose any theory you please, and fais ce que voudras". (Rabelaisian 
conventionalism) or "choose the latest theory" ("Conventionalist Chic"?). 
There is a more radical alternative, of course: The theory of no-truth, or 
that theories of truth are mythologies devised to keep us from facing the 
abyss, that there is no truth or untruth, that there is only will, or animal 
instinct, or power, or absurdity; that language is a babbling in the dark; 
that we are a species which systematically deceives itself with the 
pretense of knowledge. This is not skepticism, but nihilism, irrationalism, 
absurdism. To regard it as therapeutic, already denies it; for it presup-
poses some good effect it can have on current views, and therefore, that 
there is some preferred view which it is better to hold. But if the preferred 

38 
MARX W. WARTOFSKY 
view is the "no-truth" theory, then this collapses into one or another 
version of pragmatism: either that there is no truth, but that it is better to 
believe that there is; or that there is no truth, and we are better off 
accepting the sad fact that there isn't. 
It might be argued (pragmatically) that even if adopting a realist theory 
of truth will do no more than save us from the incoherence of "true at 
time t and false thereafter" (for non-trivial cases); or from making truth a 
matter of what conventions we happen to choose for applying the truth 
predicate; or from "truth" as a matter of mythical self-deception, then this 
may be reason enough to be a realist. Such realismfaute de mieux would 
be a modest stance, a reasonable realism. One could maintain it, even in 
the absence of any knockdown arguments for realism. After all, there are 
many things it is reasonable to believe in the absence of decisive, 
justificatory arguments. But this sounds like a counsel of despair. Being a 
good realist cannot mean no more than hanging on to realism because it 
does not harm, or because the alternatives are worse. How, then, to be a 
good realist? 
Are we left then with the poignant conclusion that Larry Laudan arrives 
at (in his "Confutation of Convergent Realism")? He writes, 
"Nothing I have said here refutes the possibility, in principle, of a realistic philosophy 
of science. To conclude as much would be to fall prey to the same inferential 
prematurity with which many realists have rejected in principle the possibility of 
explaining science in a nonrealist way. My task here is, rather, that of reminding 
ourselves that there is a difference between wanting to believe something and having 
good reasons for believing it. All of us would like realism to be true; we would like to 
think that science works because it has got a grip on how things really are. But such 
claims have yet to be made out. Given the present state of the art, it can only be wish 
fulfillment that fives rise to the claim that realism, and realism alone, explains why 
science works". 
"All of us would like realism to be true". Indeed! One hears this plaintive 
cry often. But why would we "like it to be true" or "wish it were true?" 
Why should even the critics of realism take such a generous attitude to a 
view so often refuted, or shown to be without "good reasons"? 
8. THE ARROW FLIES 
Let me get at this another way. On one interpretation, Parmenides was 
ready to forgo the Way of Belief for the Way of Truth. Even if changes 

HOW TO BE A GOOD REALIST 
39 
were obvious to all appearances, if reason dictated that change was an 
illusion, that it was logically self-contradictory, then the Way of Truth 
had to prevail. Now his follower, Zeno of Elea, invented some cute 
paradoxes ostensibly to show that arrows can't fly, and that Apollo 
couldn't even begin to catch up with the tortoise in that famous ''race'' 
(non-race, strictly speaking). But suppose, instead, we take Zeno to be a 
perfectly reasonable Greek who knew (as we all do) that arrows fly and 
races are run and won. What's wrong, then, must be something in the 
conception (in this case, of space, time, motion, and infinite divisibility) 
or in the very language in which the mathematical and physical ideas are 
expressed, that leads to the paradoxes of infinity. They are not like the 
"Barber" or "Liar" paradoxes, since there can be no town in which there 
is a barber who shaves all those who do not shave themselves (if "all" 
includes the barber); and no Cretan can assert that all Cretans are liars (if 
assertions are true or false). We fix these up by blocking self-reference in 
paradox-generating cases. But since arrows fly, the paradox depends on 
the contradiction generated by the joint assertion of two ostensibly true 
statements: ''The arrow flies" and "It is impossible for the arrow to fly". 
And this cannot be, since the conjunction of two true statements is a true 
statement, and not a contradiction. We cannot resolve this with anything 
as trivial as ''The arrow must then only appear to fly, but doesn't because 
it is impossible; therefore, the arrow's flight is an illusion". That doesn't 
yield a paradox, but only the standard business about how the senses are 
(often? always?) deceptive. The conclusion to the mathematical argument 
from the infmite divisibility of time and space ("Therefore, arrows can't 
fly") counterposes a deductive consequence to a fact of life. (Not a mere 
"appearance to the senses", or some two-dimensional image or sense-
datum or shadow on a cave wall passively observed by a visual spectator. 
The Greeks shot arrows from bows, which they made from well-chosen 
woods. They killed enemies and prey with arrows. Th~y smelted metal 
ores, and forged them to make arrowheads. (No spectator sports or sense-
datum theorists here). Therefore, the force of Zeno's paradox, it seems to 
me, is that something must be wrong with our "rational" account, with the 
language in which motion through space and time is described, if it yields 
a flightless arrow. I like to think this was Zeno's point. He was no dope. 
Something like this is, I think, the case with arguments about realism. 
Arrows fly, and the world which is the (ultimate) object of our 
knowledge, of our cognitive activity, exists independently of whether we 
know it, or how we know it, or whether it can be known at all. The 

40 
MARXW. WARTOFSKY 
problems begin there, to be sure: we know that some things (intentional 
objects) exist only as objects of our consciousness, since we define them 
in this way. The problem is how to pick out which things are like this. We 
know, also, that many of the objects of our knowledge, the ''things 
known", are affected by the very process of our coming to know them 
(e.g., our friends, lovers, children, students, and also the data of our 
instrumental and experimental inquiry: those objects which come into 
being as artifacts of our experimental or practical or creative activities 
such as laboratory measurements, works of art, theoretical constructs, 
hypothetical entities whose existence we entertain as part of our world-
constructions or world-construals, whose "reality" we propose, or bracket, 
or deny, depending on our epistemological tastes). But we also know that 
what there is doesn't always depend for its existence on being known, just 
as we know that arrows fly. Arrows don't fly because we know that they 
fly. They fly because we shoot them from bows to hit a mark. That's what 
it is to be an arrow. 
How, then, to be a good realist? Well, let's begin again from the 
beginning .... 
The City University of New York 
Baruch College and the Graduate Center 
NewYork,NY 
USA 
NOTES 
1 w. V. o. Quine. Ontological Relativity and Other Essays. New York: Columbia 
University Press. 1969. p. 53. The full statement is: "What makes ontological 
questions meaningless when taken absolutely is not universality but circularity. A 
question of the form 'What is an F?' can be answered only by recourse to a further 
term: 'An F is a G'. The answer makes only relative sense: sense relative to the 
uncritical acceptance of 'G· ... 
2 Larry Laudan. "A Confutation of Convergent Realism". in 1. Leplin. ed .• Scientific 
Realism. Berkeley: University of California Press. 1984. p. 245. 

C.A.HOOKER 
Between Formalism and Anarchism: 
A Reasonable Middle Wayl 
I. THE WESTERN RATIONAL PROJECf 
Locate Feyerabend within a theory o/Western traditions. [What follows 
is my current conjectural fOTInulation of the core western philosophical 
project, not a pronouncement ex cathedra]. 
The essential idea of Western intellectual culture is that man is a 
rational animal, i.e., reason is what distinguishes men from animals. The 
essential project of reason is transcendence, transcendence of the 
limitations of animal life: ignorance, prejudice, bias, egocentrism, 
anthropocentrism, projection (anthropomorphism). Beyond that there lies 
transcendence of this world, of finitude, decay and time itself. 
But evolved animals are focussed down on their own biological life 
agendas. How then can an animal possibly transcend its own cir-
cumstances? Answer: By contact with an external reality that thereby 
conveys truth to that animal. What is the mark of such a contact? Answer: 
The involuntariness of the contact. It is precisely the involuntariness of 
the conveying of content to us which convinces us that we are not here 
fooling ourselves with anthropocentric and egocentric projections, wish 
fulfillment, distorting the truth with bias and prejudice etc. The fact that 
the content is pressed upon us at all ensures that it is alleviating our 
ignorance. For the rationalist contact is with the external world of abstract 
fOTIns, for the empiricist contact is with the external material world. 
The Platonic world of fOTIns transcends this world and thereby confers 
on rational men the opportunity to transcend their animal existence. (Of 
course in Plato's case it is more a question of the transcendent soul 
G. Munevar (ed.). Beyond Reason. 41-107. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
41 

42 
C.A.HOOKER 
regaining its erstwhile status, liberated from its fleshly prison of fmitude 
and imperfection, than it is a case of redeeming this bodily existence.) For 
the empiricist it is the autonomy of the natural world from our psychologi-
cal machinations which offers us release from grubbing around with our 
noses to the dirt. (The transcendence is closer to the battle for clarity and 
efficiency within nature than to any transcendence of nature - though 
there is ambiguity on this point, see below.) Rationalism and empiricism 
between them mark the poles of the distinctively philosophical approach 
to the human condition within Western culture. 
Another major pole in Western culture is the religious response. This 
pole also recognizes the external and involuntary as the mark of truth. 
And it too recognizes as the essential impulse of the human spirit that of 
self-transcendence. But in this case the transcendent reality is anchored in 
the deity and the involuntary contact is mediated through the soul. The 
religious pole is set off from the rationalism-empiricism axis, thereby 
fonning a "triangular" two-dimensional space of possible positions. 
Though there are attempts to marry the two traditions, essentially religion 
breaks away from the distinctively philosophical enterprise of Western 
culture by affmning the capacity of the human soul to grasp truth outside 
of the limits of the exercise of reason as it is understood by empiricism 
and rationalism. 
To complete the space of possibilities a pole dual to the religious pole 
has also to be recognized. Call this pole the anarchist pole. It represents 
an a-religious, naturalist metaphysics of free creation by the human spirit, 
unfettered by the constraints of reason (at least as any position on the 
rationalism-empiricism axis would understand the term reason). In this 
way anarchism, like religion, breaks away from the distinctively 
philosophical tradition of Western culture. But where religion transcends 
reason with authority of another kind anarchism denies all authorities 
which would constrain human freedom. The anarchic position denies that 
there is any (more weakly: any privileged) collective or communal or 
species transcendence project, religious or philosophical. Though at any 
one time various cultural practices will be flourishing and various of them 
fading, there are no winners, there are only practices which are engaged 
in or not. 
For those within the Western tradition of reason, a further issue needs 
to be resolved: how is the content or information derived from external 
contact to be organized by us humans as objective understanding? If the 
understanding of the information is infected with animal limits then the 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
43 
project will still fail. What is required is a system of understanding which 
essentially has three features: 
(i) 
It is normative, i.e., capable of separating legitimate understanding 
from all the others (truth from falsehood, right from wrong, beauty 
from ugliness). 
(ii) 
It should somehow be guaranteed not to introduce animal limita-
tions in its operation. 
(iii) That conditions (i) and (ii) are met should itself be transparently 
recognizable by us. 
The dominant non-religious answer has been that this system is logic. At 
least, logic lies at the central focus of such systems, which may be held 
more or less extended, e.g., to mathematics or to other synthetic-a priori 
truths supported by demonstration. Rationalists hold that these broadly 
logical truths are informative but necessary and hence contain no errors. 
Empiricists hold that logical truths are necessary but vacuous and hence 
contain no errors. 
The religious person must also be inwardly prepared to understand the 
revelation. This state is called grace or enlightenment. (Or perhaps it is a 
delicate mixture of grace and reason). Because grace is from God, it is 
readily assumed to meet the three conditions parallel to those laid down 
above for reason. Grace transforms as the life of religious discipline is 
led. Reason transforms as the life of reason is led. Unless reason and 
grace be unified in some way (as in Plato's unity of the True and the 
Good?) then, like the opposition between rationalism and empiricism, the 
opposition between religion and philosophy is that of two competitors for 
the same role. 
Anarchism is in some sense the negative of all three, and so certainly 
their competitor for human allegiance. Especially given the anarchists's 
denial of any project in transcendence, the anarchist owes us some 
response to their equivalent problem: What are the inner conditions for 
freedom and creativity? Given the absence of any external prodding of the 
natural animal along, what, at bottom, is freedom and creativity? 
It is the anarchial pole which captures something of the central outlook 
of Feyerabend's position. In the course of his public writing Feyerabend 
has moved from a critique of empiricism ("What's so great about facts?") 
to a roughly Popperian critical position; thence from a critique of Popper 
("What's so great about method?") to a more broadly based critical theory 
of science; thence from the critique of science ("What's so great about 
truth?") to a critical examination of the Western tradition of reason itself 

44 
C.A.HOOKER 
("What's so great about reason?"). I accept that Feyerabend is essentially 
correct in his insistence that the Western project for reason, as it is 
encapsulated along the rationalism-empiricism axis, is in serious dif-
ficulty and requires some superseding conception or other. But while 
Feyerabend's response has been to question, in an increasingly radical 
way, the transcendence project which it theorizes I shall argue that there 
is an alternative: accept the transcendence project and re-theorize the 
nature of reason and the life of reason. A reasonable and promising way 
to do this is provided by an augmented evolutionary naturalist realist 
approach. Among other things, this leads to a decision theoretic epistemol-
ogy which can accommodate Feyerabend' s critiques of science without at 
the same time rejecting science as rational. 
11. FORMALISM AND THE WESTERN RATIONAL PROJEcr 
Develop the standard conception of reason within the western philosophi-
cal tradition. 
Logic is central to the Western project for reason, for the reasons given 
in Section I. The central characteristic of logic in this role is that it is 
purely formal (form-al), e.g. the deductive validity of an argument is a 
function of the form of the argument alone, irrespective of its specific 
content. 
In a recent book Brown (1988) summarizes this conception of reason as 
the rule-governed evaluation of evidence. Brown goes on to discuss three 
features of rational decisions as they emerge from this conception. 
Mathematics and logic provide a paradigm in each case. (1) Rational 
solutions should be universal. All rational thinkers must arrive at the same 
solution to a rational decision problem, provided that they all begin with 
the same problem and the same information about it. Given a particular 
argument form, there is no room for various opinions as to whether or not 
it is valid, there is simply a correct answer. This places reasoning in sharp 
contrast with matters of value, custom or taste. (2) A rationally acceptable 
conclusion must follow with necessity from the information given. The 
conclusion of a valid deductive argument follows necessarily from the 
premises, and any deductive argument is necessarily valid or necessarily 
invalid. Brown notes, the requirement of necessity will itself necessitate 
universality, since only those who are ignorant or who have made errors 
will fail to draw the conclusion given the initial information. (3) The 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
45 
rationality of any conclusion is to be detennined by whether or not it 
confonns to appropriate rules. Brown considers that the fundamental 
reason for this requirement is the elimination of arbitrariness and 
ambiguity. In the absence of rules we would all have to rely on our own 
intuitions as to what the correct rational solution to a problem was. 
Moreover, for finite beings reason must be represented recursively and 
recursion depends centrally on transfonnation rules. 
Incidentally, it further follows from our finitude that all solvable 
rational problems must be characterized by a fmite sequence of applica-
tions of fonnal rules. In this case there must exist algorithms for their 
solution. Again, logic and mathematics provide the primary examples. As 
Brown notes, ''The rules for the various arithmetic procedures ... Venn 
diagrams, the truth-table test for validity, and most computer programs 
are examples of algorithms". (p.20) Algorithms can be applied by 
machines, they apparently do not have any steps in them that require 
intuitive human judgement as an essential component. (But someone had 
to design the machine - a small cloud on the horizon). It is the existence 
of such rules which guarantee that there is a universal and necessary 
solution to rational problems which is accessible to us fmite humans. 
Indeed, without these rules, the claim for the necessity and universality of 
reason would reduce to no more than a claim for the strongest intuitive 
conviction. 
So we arrive then at a basic picture of how rational analysis works. 
Reason is characterized by finitely stateable, simple rules, fmite se-
quences of which yield algorithms for the generation of rational solutions 
to problems, solutions therefore characterized by necessity and hence 
universality. And behind all of this we have noted the fundamental notion 
of reason as purely fonnally characterizable. 
III. STANDARD SCIENTIFIC RATIONALITY AND FORMAL REASON 
Apply the formalist conception of reason to the theory of science. 
To illustrate the Western programme of fonnal reasoning the theory of 
science will be briefly examined through a simple example: twentieth 
century logical empiricism. The emphasis here will not be on developing 
the empiricist theory of science in any detail, since so much of this work 
has been done elsewhere already (see especially Feyerabend 1975, 
Hooker 1987, and Brown 1979), but on presenting empiricism as an 

46 
C.A.HOOKER 
example of the development of the fonnalist programme for reason. 
Empiricists distinguish sharply between reason and experience and 
regard the latter as the primary (indeed usually the only) source of 
knowledge. Recalling the discussion of section I, the basic idea motivat-
ing empiricism is the view that science can be objective only if it is 
dictated by observation and logic, hence independent of all other human 
normative or evaluative judgements in general. Fundamentally, the 
empiricist programme is to employ reason to develop a general 
knowledge of the world out of the collection of particular experiences 
which humans have of it. Empiricists then need to defend an account of 
observation as providing a proper foundation for knowledge and an 
account of reason as providing the means to pass from the particularity of 
observation to the generality of scientific knowledge. 
It is the latter account which will concern us here, but in passing I 
pause to note that empiricism is in deep difficulty with its account of 
observation. One way to express the essential source of the problem is 
this: all the scientific evidence we have points to the view that perception 
is itself an activity essentially cognitively similar to theory construction; 
the mind forms the "best" model it can of the scene before it on the basis 
of memory, stored information processing methods and current informa-
tion input. But in that case, observations, which are the end-products of 
this process, cannot have any privileged epistemic status vis-a.-vis the 
foundations of ~owledge. This is a highly destructive line of criticism 
which, pursued far enough, would lead us far away from not only an 
empiricist conception of knowledge (though not of course away from the 
view that experience must play an important role in knowledge forma-
tion) but also away from a formalist conception of reason.2 But I shall 
pursue this critique no further here. 
The fundamental beginning point for logical empiricism is the require-
ment that science be expressible within a formal language; that is, a 
language whose structure is specified by a system of logic. The place 
holders in this language are allowed to be filled only by descriptors which 
can be applied on the basis of simple observation, e.g. "_ is glass", "_ 
is a black box". If we agree to add to these descriptors proper names for 
directly observable things, and indexicals similarly, then we can form a 
simple observation claim like "this is made of glass". The severest logical 
empiricist position would restrict the expression of science to a formal 
language which consists in adding to these descriptive resources just the 
syntactical resources of fmite strings of truth functions. Call this position 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
47 
positivism. IT the logical structure is now enriched by the addition of the 
quantifiers "all", "some" then empirical generalizations can be expressed, 
such as "all galahs are grey-winged". For the standard version of logical 
empiricism this is the language of science and within its expressive 
resources all science that is to be acceptable must be written down. It is 
the business of reason to select the remaining content of science which is 
to be accepted given the observational evidence and this is to be specified 
in terms of the structure of valid arguments in the language. In this way 
the structure of science becomes the structure of formal reason.3 
Now there are three meta-theorems which can be proven about the 
positivist language which show, and between them sum up, the austere 
positivist conception of scientific knowledge. 
Theorem 1: every assertion in the language is either a tautology, the 
negation of a tautology or is synthetic. In short, the language exhibits a 
sharp analytic/synthetic distinction. The claims of science of course 
belong among the synthetic sentences. Analytic sentences, being subject-
matter free, are empty of empirical content. This is a powerful expression 
of the empiricist doctrine that knowledge comes only from experience 
(Le., on the basis of observation), reason contributing no content. Logical 
empiricists refer to the collection of synthetic sentences as the empirically 
or cognitivelymeaningful claims. Principles which are both informative 
and strongly true, such as Kantian synthetic a priori principles, cannot 
even be expressed within the language. The empiricist rejection of 
rationalist theories of knowledge, which rest on the defense of principles 
of this kind, is complete and of the strictest kind. (They don't even come 
up for denial). 
Theorem 2: every synthetic sentence has a finite set of truth conditions 
and hence can be determined to be either true or false by a finite number 
of observations. Every sentence in the language is of finite length and is 
comprised of only truth-function-free observational claims (evidence) and 
the logical truth functional connectives. Thus every synthetic sentence is 
finitely verifiable, and so we have the severest version of the logical 
empiricist verifiability principle. 
Theorem 3: every scientific theory is equivalent to its own evidence base. 
Define a scientific theory to be the set of all synthetic claims to which one 
may validly argue from a given body of evidence. But then no sentence in 

48 
C.A.HOOKER 
a scientific theory is logically stronger than the conjunction of the 
evidence claims themselves. On the one hand this theorem is a reminder 
of how very elementary is the structure of this positivist language, 
nothing of any logical complexity can be expressed in it. For not even a 
simple empirical generalization, such as "all swans are white", is logically 
equivalent to any finite conjunction of statements about the colour of 
particular swans. On the other hand, this theorem vividly expresses the 
empiricist commitment to the priority of observational evidence over 
theory for rational science. The evidence is the rational beginning of 
science, indeed whatever else there is of science is only that which 
follows by reason alone from the evidence. The only way to be free of 
biases, anthropomorphisms, etc., according to the logical empiricist view, 
is to stick strictly to the evidence before us. 
These three theorems capture a powerful and elegant position. Powerful 
because thereby defined is a very strictly empiricist position. Elegant 
because the characterization of that position is itself captured by formal 
meta-theorems. In this way the characterization of positivism itself 
becomes an exercise in pure reason. Generalizing, formalist reason 
operates at two levels for logical empiricism, on the one hand capturing 
the structure of reason within science (as the structure of valid argument -
inductive plus de~uctive - within the object language) and on the other 
hand capturing the structure of reason within philosophy (as the set of 
formal meta-theorems about the object language). Reason not only 
normatively winnows out the set of rational beliefs in a purely formal, 
subject matter-free manner, but reason is used to understand and charac-
terize rational intelligence. Logical empiricism is an expression par 
excellence of the Western tradition of formal reason. 
As noted elsewhere (Hooker 1987, Chapter 3) this positivist position 
has a tacit meta-philosophy backing it. This meta-philosophy may be 
uncovered by asking "What assertions would logical empiricists make in 
order to effectively defend their philosophical doctrines?" Among these 
there is of course the empiricist attachment to foundationalism, to 
providing some indubitable basis from which to construct knowledge, and 
also the attachment to the view that philosophical doctrines themselves 
belong to a First Philosophy which is logically and epistemologically 
prior to, and normative for, philosophy, in turn rendering philosophy prior 
to, and normative for, science.4 But the key doctrine for the present 
discussion is the assumption that all the major concepts of philosophical 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
49 
analysis are ultimately to be reduced to specifications of logical structure. 
This doctrine is dominant and ubiquitous throughout the development of 
logical empiricism. It has just been illustrated for positivist epistemology. 
The traditional empiricist literature is replete with efforts to show how 
such notions as those of laws, explanation, induction, reduction, deter-
minism and all of the other fundamental notions of a rational theory of 
science are similarly expressible in terms of logical constructions 
available in the formal empiricist language for science. 
The empiricist programme leads in turn to a sharp distinction between 
the cognitive enterprise of science and all evaluative or normative 
enterprises, from politics and public policy through to private action. 
According to this account the character of scientists as persons is 
irrelevant to their cognitive position as scientists and indeed all scientists 
become interchangeable in the sense that given the same information they 
would (must rationally) all reach the same conclusions. The social 
structure of science becomes irrelevant to the rational structure of science, 
being concerned only with its mere social implementation. Practical 
action, insofar as it is judged rational at all, falls under a completely 
different conception of formal reason: utility maximization. Its inputs (the 
utilities) are non-rationally chosen. These dichotomies express vividly the 
approach to the ,world which the Western formalist theory of reason 
engenders. 
The hold of the Western formalist programme for reason runs very 
deep. Often philosophers who are otherwise fiercely opposed to one 
another in fact share this programme as a common foundation. A good 
example of this is Popper's position vis-a-vis logical empiricism. Popper 
disagreed fundamentally with the goal of empiricist knowledge, namely 
logically secured general truths based on an indubitable foundation of 
observation. He not only rejected the empiricist account of observation, 
arguing that observations were theory laden, but he rejected inductive 
logic outright as the rational structure of science. In the place of security 
Popper substituted informativeness combined with problem solving 
capacity. He argued that this aim was in fact not only different from the 
aim of security but quite incompatible with it, the more informative the 
hypothesis the less likely it is to be true. Where the empiricists em-
phasized the establishment of secure truth, Popper emphasized criticism 
as the method for uncovering errors. Viewed at this level Popper and the 
empiricists are directly at loggerheads.5 
The fact is, though, that Popper's disagreements with empiricism do 

50 
C.A.HOOKER 
not really touch the deeper doctrine of the nature of rationality. Popper 
opens his early Logik der Forschung (1934) by (tacitly) identifying 
reason with deductive logic. He asserts the consequent "irrationality" of 
scientific discovery and the "conventionality" of all philosophical 
doctrine and of the value judgements which support the choice of his 
position. And he attempts to offer explications of scientific method solely 
in terms of logical criteria. Consider, e.g., his attempt to explicate content, 
scope, precision, depth, simplicity, falsifiability and verisimilitude in 
these terms. 
This theory of rationality is but reinforced in the later transition to the 
"3 worlds" model of Popper's Objective Knowledge (1973). The norma-
tive status of philosophic theory is now transparent because enshrined in a 
transcendent, purely logically structured world of its own. Actual minds, 
where the ''facts'' and psychology reside, are confmed to another world 
entirely (world 2). There are internal advantages in this manoeuvre for 
Popper: he can drop the conventional status for everything above fact and 
call it transcendentally necessary (or equivalent) qua objectively true in 
world 3. And he can incorporate an evolutionary strategy into the 
philosophy (where it otherwise sits ill) by including it in world 3, which 
lends a specious sense of historicity to the doctrine. But beyond this 
nothing has changed, we are faced essentially with the same formalist 
theory of rationality. 
Yet note on the other hand how much the empiricist and Popperian 
world views share with the rationalist approach. In each case reason 
characterizes the whole significant organizational structure of mind, and 
that organizational structure is fixed independently of empirical subject 
matter and with a kind of transcendental or strong truth. Rationalists, 
empiricists and Popperians are all working out variants of the great 
Western theme of formalist reason. 
IV. DIFFICULTIES WITH STANDARD SCIENTIFIC RATIONALITY 
Develop a systematic critique of formalist scientific rationality in terms 
related to the analysis of reason in Sections II, III, incorporating 
Feyerabend's principal criticisms. 
Positivism, for all its power and elegance, is not a persuasive theory of 
science. A large critical literature, to which Feyerabend was an important 
contributor, can be summarized as follows: (1) theories are not definition-

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
51 
ally reducible to fmitely, observationally verifiable assertions; (2) 
scientific method is not rationally confmable to entailment from the facts; 
(3) observation is not a fundamental, transparent category but a complex, 
anthropomorphic process, itself investigated by science; (4) historical 
inter-theory relations do not fit the accumulative model; (5) accepted 
observationally-based facts do not belong to an eternal, theory-free 
category but are theory-laden and subject to theoretical criticism; (6, 7) 
science is not isolated from the human individual and from society in the 
manner presupposed by positivism; (8) method is not rationally universal 
either across scientists at a time or across history; (9) logic does not have 
the privileged status given it by positivism but is itself open to broadly 
empirical investigation and (10) there is not the gulf between the norma-
tive and the descriptive presupposed by positivism.6 
The first five of these criticisms have overwhelming support and are 
now broadly agreed to by all sides. They forced an initial retreat to a 
richer logic, simple quantificational logic, which allowed richer, less 
direct and partial definitions of theoretical terms and of inter-theory 
relations. Ingenious logical constructions, such as Carnap' s reduction 
sentences, were much manipulated. This did something to ease objections 
1, 4 and 5, though it never really blunted them; removed objection 2, 
replacing it with a confirmationistlinductivist programme; but left 
objection 3 untouched. It also added two more traditional objections to 
replace 2: (2') inductive logic is impossible (inadequate, incomplete) and 
(2") it is impossible to distinguish true laws of nature from accidentally 
true generalizations. 
These objections essentially received two kinds of response from those 
calling themselves empiricists (= positivists using quantificationallogic): 
first, introduce pragmatic considerations, as empirically non-cognitive, to 
settle questions left unsettled by the resources of quantificational logic 
and second, introduce still richer logical structures, such as Carnap's 
inductive calculi, modalities, probabilities. The virtue of this twin 
response was this: as long as the only accretions made could be argued to 
be either empirically non-cognitive or purely logical, empiricists could 
claim to hang onto the basic positivist philosophical and meta-philosophi-
cal position. Van Fraassen 1980, e.g., falls squarely in this tradition. 
The official focus of these criticisms has been the epistemology, but the 
commonalities among rationalists, empiricists and Popperians should 
make us wary of the sufficiency, and the depth, of this assumption. By 
contrast, I focus here on the theory of reason as the source of difficulty. 

52 
C.A.HOOKER 
Empiricism has a radically incomplete characterization of scientific 
rationality. The empiricist analysis distracts us from the fact that scien-
tists, being finite and ignorant, must therefore make decisions about 
which aspects of reality are worth observing. Such decisions can be 
foolish or reasonable, depending upon the circumstances obtaining. 
Empiricists have not been able to give any satisfactory formal account of 
this range of important decisions. Nor, given the fundamental role of 
theories in the design of measuring instruments and experimental 
methods, is it at all likely that a purely formal account could be given of 
them.? Further, which evidence claims should be accepted as true? The 
human senses are dogged by various kinds of error. It is a fundamental 
exercise of scientific reasonableness to judge the conditions under which 
the observations emerging from scientific activity should be accepted as 
reliable. Once again, those judgements are made in the light of our best 
current theories about the nature of our perceptual systems and the nature 
of the perceivable world and they vary from circumstance to circumstance 
within this understanding. But in view of this it is again unlikely that any 
purely formal account of the exercise of these judgements can be given. 
Finally, to the extent that perception itself is a theory-forming process, to 
that extent an account of the reliability of its deliverances will depend 
upon an account of the relevant theory-forming capacities and these are 
going to be no more likely to be purely formal processes than is the 
formation of scientific theories at large. 
The incompleteness of the empiricist's account of reason stems, I 
believe, from the restriction to a formalist programme. As well as 
incompleteness, this programme also faces deep difficulties. It is now 
well understood that a purely formalist programme for inductive logic 
poses grave problems. The fundamental reason for this is that rational 
inductive inference is context-dependent, the context being primarily 
fixed by theory. The essential point is nicely illustrated by Bertrand 
Russell's chicken. Suppose a young chick born in January and fed each 
day until December 22 of that year. This feeding evidence has no 
exceptions and thus, when combined with Reichenbach's straight rule of 
induction, yields the conclusion that the fowl will be fed on the morning 
of December 23. But insert the very same evidence into a wider theory of 
cultural practices and we may deduce with at least as high a probability 
that on the morning of December 23 this bird will be slaughtered for the 
dinner table. Note that the very evidence which one may take in one 
context to support continued feeding is in itself evidence, in another 

BE1WEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
53 
context, that feeding will not continue (the better the feeding, the fatter 
the chicken, the more attractive it is as dinner). Method then is a function 
not only of logic but of substantive theory. 
Even setting these fundamental difficulties aside, note that we have 
nowhere explicitly addressed the question of how theories proper are to 
enter the inductive picture. But theories typically involve descriptors 
designating unobservable properties and events, no single instance of 
them appears among the evidence. Thus there seems to be a logical 
barrier to extending inductive inference to theories. One way out of this 
would be to claim that there are special principles of inference from 
empirical generalizations to theoretical entities focussed, e.g., on 
inferences to unobservable causes. There are at least two difficulties with 
this approach. The frrst is to provide any plausible principles for the 
introduction of new theoretical concepts - after all, the history of science 
is replete with the introduction of surprising and counter-intuitive 
theoretical notions which no one immersed in the preceding data an-
ticipated. The second problem, at least for a formalist programme in 
reason, is to argue that these principles of inference to theoretical 
concepts and theoretical principles are purely formal. An alternative way 
out of the difficulty is to eschew theoretical terms as having any substan-
tive content and to regard them instead as place holders in a formal 
logical structure. Rationality is confined to the organization of that logical 
structure and the only novelty called for is formal. In one form or another 
this has been the classic empiricist response (see e.g., Suppe 1974). A 
major problem with this alternative, besides that of induction itself, is to 
give a plausible account of the semantics of theory. 
Both alternatives face two further problems. First they face the 
Theoretician's Dilemma: the only justification for theory under em-
piricism is that it organizes the observable level (i.e., empirical generaliza-
tions and evidence statements); if it fails to do this it is irrelevant, but if it 
succeeds then the resulting organization, being purely formal, can be 
described independently of reference to the theoretical level and so that 
level is otiose; therefore the theoretical level is either irrelevant or otiose 
and has no independent justification. Its use is at best a pragmatic 
convenience. Second, the formalist is committed to holding that from the 
evidence and (inductive) logic alone one is able to infer new theories. 
These new theories will be all those which are the most inductively 
supported given the evidence. Then rational theory creation would 
coincide with rational theory justification. This sort of consequence 

54 
C.A.HOOKER 
applies quite generally for any purely formal theory of reason (cf. Hooker 
1972). In the light of the surprising course of scientific history, however, 
there is a widespread assessment that no simple rule governed account of 
scientific discovery/creation/invention can be given. Faced with this 
assessment, many empiricists drew a sharp distinction between the 
"context of discovery" and the "context of justification" and insisted that 
inductive logic applied only in the latter. This position is only accessible, 
when it is, because there is no algorithm for proving theoremhood 
available - a curious basis for allowing fundamental creativity. On either 
response to the inductive problem raised by theoretical terms, therefore, 
the formalist has no adequate position available. Plausibly, it is the 
formalist programme for reason which places the difficulties in its own 
path. 
Finally, we must note Popper's argument that inductive support is in 
any case not the support which one should rationally seek in science. The 
argument stems from the antagonism between security of truth and 
informativeness already alluded to when discussing Popper's position 
earlier.s But, argues Popper, it is rational for scientists to aim at informa-
tive statements. Hence it is irrational for them to aim at secure statements. 
In particular, it is irrational for them to aim at maximizing the probability 
of truth of their theories. The pursuit of that goal would logically require 
them to stick to analytic truths and to observation statements, but this is 
unreasonable. The point to be taken here is that there are at least two 
legitimate epistemic values driving science and the choice of balance 
between them, perhaps even from occasion to occasion, is a basic exercise 
of reasonableness which is very unlikely to reduce to purely formal 
considerations. 
For himself, Popper seems not to have taken this lesson to heart. He 
rejected inductive logic outright and substituted instead a methodology of 
free, non-rational' creation of scientific theories followed by the applica-
tion of strictly deductive logic to deduce testable consequences; 
rationality consisted in the commitment to subject theories to the most 
severe testing available and to discard all those which were falsified as a 
result. But now the problem of only partially characterizing the rational 
structure of science in logic intensifies with the passage from empiricism 
to Popper's views. Popper also certainly excludes from the realm of 
rationality all of the decisions concerning the generation and acceptance 
of observation claims. Like empiricists, he relegates the acceptance of 
observation claims by the scientific community to the realm of conven-

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
55 
tional decisions. But while empiricists essentially totally exclude the 
problem by (usually tacitly) supposing that observation is epistemically 
secure, Popper is in a more difficult position. He is prepared to admit that 
all evidence statements or observation claims are themselves on an 
epistemic par with theories and so need themselves to be tested, and that 
the scientific community is constantly revising its decisions about which 
claims to accept. But he also insists that logical relations only connect 
propositions. In consequence, he ends up with no formal epistemic role at 
all for observations. Somehow observations motivate basic statements, 
but that motivation - whatever it is - lies outside of logic and so lies 
outside of Popper's sphere of rationality. However, it is more plausible to 
hold that all of these decisions also belong to the exercise of reason but 
fall outside of the scope of formal logic. Indeed, Popperian theory is 
riddled with yet additional ineliminable appeals to human judgements: to 
choose tests of theories, and theoretical conjectures themselves to test; 
where to lay the error when theory and experimental result clash; when 
sufficient testing has been done for the moment; even the decision to 
cooperate in pursuing the rational life. After Popper, through Kuhn, 
Feyerabend and all the others, the appeal to community widens rapidly -
so rapidly, that all of these latter have been accused of abandoning reason. 
Many theorists, having noticed this hidden dependency of scientific 
procedure on community decision making, have leapt to the conclusion 
that science cannot be a rational process, or is at most a very limited 
rational process. (This latter is, e.g., Popper's conclusion while the former 
conclusion comes close to Feyerabend's position). Many have leapt to the 
conclusion that science is to be understood not on the basis of reason at 
all, but on the basis of those social forces which causally shape it.9 These 
inferences have the formalist programme of reason as a suppressed 
premise. Indeed, if it is judged unlikely that a purely formal account of 
scientific reason can be given, and if it is assumed that no other account 
of reason is available, then science is partially or completely characterized 
by non-rational, merely causally specified, processes. It is my conjecture 
that most theorists make this inference unaware of the suppressed 
premise. 
The empiricists and Popper provide the most prominent illustrations of 
the difficulties in the way of using a purely formal theory of reason to 
theorize science. Before leaving this topic a brief review of the critique of 
formal reason by Brown (1988) will complete the case. Following 
through the consequences of his own characterization of formal reason 

56 
C.A.HOOKER 
(see section ill above), Brown lists four fundamentally unacceptable 
consequences of this approach, consequences well illustrated by em-
piricists. (A) The fIrst criticism is that it leads to foundationalism, and that 
twice over. First, it leads to a foundationalism of evidence as the only way 
to stop a threatening infmite regress. If reason consists in the systematic 
application of formal rules, then some statements must be accepted on the 
basis of others, namely those to which the rules are applied. But on what 
basis then are these latter statements accepted? If there is none, or if an 
infInite regress ensues, then no specifIc content is attached to rational 
acceptance. Certainly the formal rules themselves are incapable of 
providing the required foundation. If the regress is to be prevented then 
some statements must provide a foundation for knowledge, they must in 
some way be rationally self-justifIed. But, especially in the light of 
modem scientifIc understanding of ourselves, it is implausible to believe 
that there are any such foundational statements, certainly none with the 
kind of content on which an interesting rational science could be based. 
The application of this conception of reason not only requires what is not 
possible, and sends us off on a wild goose chase after sense data and the 
like, it also encourages dogmatism about the foundational statements. 
But there is also foundationalism of a second kind required, namely 
rule foundations. We are equally in need of a foundational set of rules 
which are in some way self-justifyingly transparent to the rational 
intellect. After all, there has been rational conflict over these very rules. 
Within the domain of logic itself, e.g., the rule of subalternation was once 
widely accepted as a valid rule in logical reasoning and is now just as 
widely rejected by contemporary logical systems. At the present time 
there is currently growing diversity of approach to the law of excluded 
middle across various alternative logical systems, contrast to classical 
logic e.g., intuitionist, n-valued, relevance, super-valuation and quantum 
logics. These latter logical systems have all burst upon the scene just this 
century, after a preceding 2500 years of logical theorizing in the Aris-
totelian mode. Their arrival followed the coupling of logic to algebra and 
geometry and the proliferation of mathematics consequent upon the 
discovery of non-Euclidean geometries and other non-standard mathemati-
cal systems. These circumstances rather strongly suggest that there is no 
more hope of discovering foundational rules than there is of discovering 
foundational evidence. 
(B) Secondly, Brown points out that reason as the application of formal 
rules is really committed to analyzing every case of rational behaviour in 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
57 
this manner. Hence it is equally committed to analyzing all those cases 
where the agents themselves profess not to be aware of the relevant rules 
as cases of subconscious or unconscious rule following. Indeed, this must 
be so even where agents are inclined to deny that there are any such rules. 
This would be so, e.g., in cases of arguments in science from new data to 
new theoretical conjectures, the choice of strategy and specific moves by 
a chess grand master and so on. It must also apply when choosing among 
competing systems of rules, e.g., when a logician is designing an elegant 
and powerful proof procedure. Indeed, it must even apply tQ the creation 
of systems of rules themselves: again the logician will serve as example. 
Unless, of course, all of these activities are to be dismissed as non-
rational. Though it is possible to take this latter route, as Popper is 
inclined to, if we dismiss all these activities as non-rational then we enter 
a division into the theory of mind without any fundamental rationale itself 
and without any fundamental supporting evidence from neuropsychology 
or cognitive psychology. On the other hand, it is no more plausible to 
regard these activities as secret rule following than it was to model the 
earlier ones in this way. 
(C) Third, the representation of rationality as encapsulated in a set of 
formal rules requires that there be a universal and unchanging methodol-
ogy for science. This methodology is expressed by the collection of 
formal rules for moving from evidence (and perhaps existing theory) to 
theory. But it is now widely recognized - not least due to the efforts of 
Feyerabend - that such a model of science is wholly implausible. Indeed, 
it is one of the chief characteristics of science that its method evolves 
along with its content. Again, essentially the only alternative available to 
this model of rationality is to postulate the a posteriori discovery of a 
priori rules. But this entails an accumulative model of scientific method 
(matching the accumulative empiricist model of scientific theory) and 
there is no evidence for this. As noted, formal rules by themselves simply 
do not suffice even to characterize the basic choices made by scientists. 
(D) Fourth, formal rules place the emphasis in understanding rational 
decision making on proposition-proposition relations in abstraction from 
the cognitive agents involved and their circumstances. This immediately 
generates two unacceptable results. (i) It fails to take seriously how 
difficult it often is to discover relations between propositions with the 
result that we would be committed to surprising denials of rationality in 
retrospect. If we consider just consistency alone as a necessary condition 
of rationality then, e.g., after many years work one has to conclude that 

58 
C.A.HOOKER 
modern quantum field theory in its standard formulation is not rational 
and neither is modern naive set theory. Presumably by derivation, all of 
the activities which are involved in the construction and exploration of 
para-consistent logics, logical antimonies and like formal systems are 
equally not rational. But this is a grossly uninsightful account of 
reasonable activity. (ii) Science is modeled as an abstract activity in 
which the diversity of scientists in ability, institutional role and historical 
location and so on is essentially ignored. This leads to the divorce 
between the history of science and the theory of science as a rational 
activity - the notorious schizophrenia of "internal" and "external" science 
theory. It leads ultimately to a dualistic representation of logical and 
causal descriptions of complex systems. (popper's Worlds 2/3 is the 
glaring example.1O) Rather than provide any insight at all into how to 
understand the interrelationship between our emerging scientific 
knowledge of our own minds and our theories of rationality, and other 
normative-factual interactions now developing apace, such an approach 
cements a dualism of intentionality-rationality!fact-cause dogmatically.ll 
These are by no means the only difficulties facing the Western 
formalist programme for reason, but they must suffice here. 
v. TAKING STOCK: WHAT WAY AHEAD? 
Argue that there is at least one promising alternative to F eyerabend's 
anarchist response to the critique of reason and that it is reasonable and 
desirable that it be developed. 
So far what has been said has been grist to Feyerabend' s mill, but I 
thought it important that these criticisms be developed with as sharp a 
systematicity as possible, rather than assembled from examples and 
diatribes, so that an alternative may be developed (if one is possible) 
which has something of the same clarity and precision and substantive 
content. The obvious question that arises at this juncture is this: in the 
light of the foregoing discussion, is there any reasonable alternative to 
following Feyerabend into anarchism? I hope so, for reasons which will 
emerge in section IX below. In fact, the investigation of an alternative has 
been central to my agenda since I read Feyerabend as a student. (He was 
never my Dada, though often my mentor). In 1974 (see Hooker 1987, 
Chapter 2) I drew attention to three revolutions in science. The first 
concerned the recognition that a theory of epistemology is always situated 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
59 
in a larger world view, including an implied (if tacit) theory of the 
constitution of hUmans, the relation of science to philosophy, etc.. The 
second revolution concerned the rejection of a wholly abstract specifica-
tion of science for just the reasons discussed in the text above. And a third 
revolution concerned the shift from such an abstract conception to a 
naturalistic epistemology and theory of rationality. Subsequent papers 
(see subsequent chapters in Hooker 1987) follow out the implications of 
these revolutions. 
Certainly, an evolutionary naturalist realism will reject each of the four 
consequences of a formalist theory of reason discussed in section IV. For 
creatures evolving from evolutionary ignorance, and individually learning 
through interaction with the natural world, there are no grounds for 
entering either evidential or rule foundations. Indeed, the history of 
science is, in these respects, a thoroughly natural one, showing a con-
tinued evolutionary development in both respects.12 As already remarked, 
there is no evidence from within our current knowledge of our psychologi-
cal and neurological functioning to suggest hidden rule following or to 
suggest a well founded dichotomy between rational and non-rational 
behaviour. And from an evolutionary naturalist point of view, method 
should be theorized as part of comprehensive scientific development, just 
as much a conjectural extension of our regulatory or control hierarchies as 
is theory itself and, for that matter, our perceptual strategies. So let us, 
with Feyerabend, abandon the constraints of the Western formalist project 
for reason, in particular as an account of scientific rationality. But unlike 
Feyerabend, let us explore this alternative naturalist conception both for 
its promise at large, and also to see how it might recapture the useful core 
insights of the formalist tradition. Then we shall be in a position to make 
some preliminary assessment of Feyerabend' s own response to the 
limitations of science under formalist reason. 
Feyerabend himself is at least partially still in the Western tradition. 
Although one reading of Feyerabend, one that he has himself fostered, 
sees him as having abandoned the project of reason, there is another 
reading available. On this latter reading, Feyerabend has foreseen the 
collapse of a purely formalist reason and attempted to salvage what he 
sees as remaining of the western tradition, namely the critical function of 
intelligence. One might call this the Popperian Rump. Without any further 
fetters derived from formalist reason, Feyerabend can be seen, from 
Against Method onward, to be extending the notion of criticism to an ever 
widening range of life features. And as he himself made clear more than 

60 
C.A.HOOKER 
two decades ago (Feyerabend 1974) the path by which he has been led 
moves from the Popperian Rump through fIrst its extension to yet wider 
scientifIc community dependence via the work of Lakatos and thence via 
Lenin and the global Marxist critique of Western institutions to the 
unfettered critical life at large. Of course, Feyerabend has been led by this 
route, not to doctrinaire Marxism, but to anarchism, an anarchism of all 
life activities. There is something important in what Feyerabend says. Not 
only has the Popperian Rump of criticism been preserved, but the life of 
reason (at least in this restricted notion) has been extended to all life 
aspects. Furthermore, in Feyerabend's anarchism is certainly found wide 
scope for human creativity. And whereas for Popper, like the empiricists 
before him, creativity is opposed to reason, once a formalist theory of 
reason is abandoned the opposition is less obvious. (Feyerabend himself 
offers a vague and ambivalent collection of relations between the two, but 
it is outside the scope of this paper to investigate the matter further). 
Nonetheless, it is my own view that human history teaches a bitter 
lesson: if the values which are most distinctive of human life are not 
institutionalized through the application of reason, then human life is left 
to be resolved on the basis of power and the dogmatically prejudiced. It is 
through reason that we seek to transcend our animal limitations and 
imperfections, otherwise our lives become the outcomes of power 
struggles of various kinds, and power and dogmatic prejudice are blind to 
intelligence. The application of criticism is not enough for the life of 
reason. The life of reason must see the institutionalization of not only 
criticism, but of a wide range of other human values as well, in an 
intelligent manner. It must be a matter which is itself stable against 
undermining by power mongers and also one which reinforces the public, 
social development of human goals despite the limitations and imperfec-
tions of the individuals whose lives are played out through those institu-
tions. 
Feyerabend's own anarchism, I suspect, is too fragile a creature to be 
stable against undermining, or even against the sheer random noise 
created by individual limitations and imperfections. By thus abandoning 
the project of theorizing the larger life of reason, Feyerabend will, I 
believe, ultimately betray his own insights. (Fifteen years ago I once put 
this point to him, as I recall, during a car ride across an American city; the 
conversation stopped abruptly). 
It is an equally. deep and frustrating truth about human life, I concede, 
that the institutionalization of a life of reason will lead to constraints on 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
61 
human creativity. This is but one of several deep and puzzling tensions 
which increasingly seem to me to lie at the foundation of all human 
understanding and human life experience.13 
The overall programme is a huge one, nothing less than to show how it 
is possible to apply intelligence to the construction of a shape to human 
life in all its aspects, a shape which exhibits the reasonableness centrally 
characteristic of intelligence. This is of course nothing less than the age-
old project of Western philosophy, but in the present context it is stripped 
of its rigid adherence to a formalist conception of reason. It is quite 
impossible to carry out, or even sketch, such a venture within the scope of 
a single paper (or a single lifetime). My own sketches have focused on 
two issues, the nature of science as reasonable and the development of a 
reasonable theory of public policy. In fact, the two are intimately 
interconnected for the kind of evolutionary naturalist realism I have been 
developing, but I shall perforce confine my attention here to some few 
ideas concerning science.14 
VI. CONSTRUCfION OF AN ALTERNATIVE I: 
NATURALISM AND ITS CONSEQUENCES 
Sketch the chief concepts and theoretical consequences of naturalism 
relevant to the critique offormal reason. 
From a naturalist and evolutionary viewpoint human knowledge and 
human reason are natural phenomena, complexes of individual and 
species capacities with particular origins and related distinctive charac-
ters, to be studied as any other natural phenomenon. It follows that 
epistemology (indeed philosophy at large) should form a coherent unity 
with science, a single self-consistent conception of us and our cosmos. 
From this realism follows. For science presents a well-confrrmed 
conception of an independent external world and of ourselves as a 
relatively recently evolved species in it, learning through causal interac-
tions with it. This is the basic metaphysics for realism. Moreover, 
according to the scientific image cognition involves the active construc-
tion of some kind of representational map in the head, beginning with 
elementary sensory-motor coordinations and elaborating on these. 
However the correct account of meaning goes, precisely, the basic 
referents of these constructions are situations in our external world 
causally mediated to us. This is the basic metaphysics for the correspon-

62 
C.A.HOOKER 
dence theory of truth. To put the matter argumentatively: either one 
adopts a coherence or a correspondence theory of truth, but coherence 
truth for science yields correspondence truth metaphysics, so adopt 
correspondence truth. 
Another argument for correspondence truth comes from the open-
endedness of the evolving cognitive process. The whole evolutionary 
process is 
an 
open-ended ascent of regulatory control (see 
Hahlweg/Hooker 1988a, Sections N.2,3). As an extension of this process 
cognition is, and should be, open-ended also. But all coherence defini-
tions of truth close off open-endedness. They do this because the 
coherence criteria themselves, whatever they are, cannot in tum be 
examined for adequacy, cannot be opened up to learning. So coherence 
definitions of truth are inadequate. Precisely because correspondence 
truth transcends the epistemic, it can act as an ideal for an open-ended 
cognitive process.IS 
According to the evolutionary viewpoint our entire cognitive capacity 
evolved from ignorance, not just our knowledge but even knowing itself, 
not just our latest theoretical concepts but even conceiving itself. Our 
senses provide epistemically limited, partially biased and moderately 
unreliable inform.ation channels, and we start in ignorance of both our 
world and of our own perceptual access to it. The point generalizes to 
cognition at large. These circumstances underwrite systematic fallibilism, 
applying at all levels of substantive conjecture, from perception through 
science to philosophy and meta-philosophy. Indeed, they underwrite a 
systematic foundationless fallibilism. There are no foundations because 
there are no guaranteed information channels that could act in this 
capacity. Not perception, certainly, and not reason either since however a 
priori it may seem to the individual it is a posteriori for the species (and 
that even over historical times).16 
This setting invites the reflection that there is evidently no more to a 
traditional claim for normative status than that the normative theory be 
capable of making critical assessments in some argued manner. 
(Historically, there has been an additional claim to some special authority 
for normative judgements deriving from a "higher" - i.e., external -
source of knowledge, but naturalism would reject this claim). The 
requirement "in some argued manner" remains faithful to the philosophi-
cal tradition while not reducing to the straightjacket of context-independ-
ent formal rules. A theory satisfies the first requirement and so is properly 
taken as normative for its domain of application. Thus philosophical 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
63 
theories retain their normative status. But the gulf between normative and 
descriptive is removed - they are two sides of the same coin - though 
nevertheless the normative function is retained. 
The old epistemic paradigm of privileged source of information plus 
logic as structuring principle must go. We have just noted that there are 
no privileged sources. And logic is the wrong kind of basic structure, for 
the reasons noted in Section IV. Moreover, logic alone offers only 
acceptance criteria which are independent of consequences, viz. on the 
basis of antecedent accepted premises, thereby removing acceptance 
strategies themselves (though not their results) from shaping via selection 
pressures. By contrast, a shift to an alternative paradigm of acceptance as 
an act of practical commitment leads to a decision theoretic epistemology 
where consequences playa key role, acceptance strategies can be subject 
to selective development, and there is no requirement for foundations. 
There is neither pro-linguistic nor anthropomorphic bias in this concep-
tion of rationality and no specific barrier to reflexive evaluation of both 
sources of knowledge and logical structures, though the latter can be re-
captured as effective practices in appropriate circumstances (e.g., 
whenever truth preservation is the dominant value). 17 
Moreover, attention now shifts to risk-taking strategies (including 
reliance on perceptual and other judgements) which stand at the heart of 
the evolution of intelligent behaviour. (Judgement, risk-taking and utility-
optimalization are three capacities which do "grade off down" the 
evolutionary hierarchy of complexity and can be subject to selection). 
Methods are theorized as conjectural, risk-taking, epistemic utility 
optimizing, resource distributing strategies. Rational action is properly a 
function of factual knowledge of the action situation, hence the hierarchy 
of methods is intimately tied to the content of theories at every level. The 
focus in the theory of science shifts to the evolution of methods and to 
theories as primarily specifications of possibility structures, tested 
derivatively via their instantiation in facts. 
Cognition evolved because adaptive control of behaviour was rein-
forced. Cognition is therefore theorized as a regulatory system, with 
hierarchically organized and parallel distributed information processing 
structures (at least in significant measure). Science is an extension of that 
regulatory system, encompassing similarly organized groups of in-
dividuals. Reason is theorized as a set of regulatory ideals characterizing 
the organization of cognitive/epistemic systems. These ideals are treated 
as theoretical terms in an evolving naturalistic theory of reason. We are 

64 
C.A.HOOKER 
exploring their character at the same time as we are developing science 
itself. They are not defined in advance in some other terms, but are sui 
generis, just as are other fundamental theoretical concepts. Momentary 
formulations are transcended in an open-ended development of our 
cognitive processes. (None of this is surprising in our world where 
organism-environment interactions involve a transfer of information from 
environment to organism - see e.g., Ward 1989). 
Central to our learning process is anticipative intervention to disturb 
the environment in order to learn by its response and, subsequently, to 
modify the environment so as to reduce risk and increase benefit. From 
this flows the central role of technology in the scientific process. Our 
earliest technologies were provided by our bodies. Subsequently they 
evolved in delicate and increasingly intimate interactions with both 
practice and theory. Technologies are essentially amplifiers. With respect 
to science they (i) extend its information base through instrumentation, 
e.g., electron microscopes, (ii) extend accessible methodologies, e.g. 
through numerical approximation techniques and automated data 
processing, (iii) generate new concepts (a process which generalizes the 
Piagetian abstraction from somatic sensory-motor schemes, with tech-
nologies as somatic extensions), e.g., computer models of cognition, (iv) 
extend epistemic institutions, e.g., through supporting global communica-
tions, and (v) provide the basic resource base for scientific activity, from 
economic surplus generally to rare earth metals and other specific 
resources. Conversely, the development of technology is directly 
impacted by science through new conceptions, new theory-driven designs 
and through performance evaluation and re-design learning. This co-
evolution of method, theory and technology is of the essence of science 
and a vivid demonstration of its open-endedness. 
The mutual interaction of method, theory and technology, as 
represented in the regulatory systems conception of science, is nicely 
illustrated by the evolving role of the senses in science. We see in the 
historical development of science two great interactive feedback cycles 
connecting sensory observation and theory/method development. On the 
one side there has been an increasingly refined critique of natural sensory 
perception for its limitations, biases and imperfections (illusions, etc.). 
Technology and theory were essential here, e.g., the camera and optics for 
detecting perspectival bias, infra-red and x-ray technologies and backing 
theory for the use of the non-visible electromagnetic spectrum, the 
development of theoretical specifications of the conditions for illusion 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
65 
and hallucination in unaided observation and the still more widespread 
conditions for the stochastic appearance of observational error, and so on. 
Thus it is that scientists increasingly restrict themselves to the observation 
of simple pointer readings and the like. All the remainder of the theoreti-
cally important features of systematic observation are then literally built 
into the theoretical design and engineered implementation of the observ-
ing instruments themselves. On the other side there is the development of 
extensions to, and substitutions for, the senses, e.g., telescopes, micro-
scopes, micrometers, x-ray photography. In this way the senses come to 
be increasingly deeply embedded in the complex evolving collection of 
theories and instruments which comprise science and come to play an 
increasingly restricted and specialized set of roles within that complex. IS 
The limitations of individuals leads directly to science as a collective, 
species activity and thence to the importance of epistemic institutional 
design for determining the cognitive capacity of the scientific process. It 
is by no means obvious that Homo sapiens can successfully institutional-
ize a cognitive activity in this world, nor obvious what would be the 
appropriate institutional designs for this task. Rather, like everything else, 
these latter must be cognitively theorized. This provides a normative 
cognitive dimension to the social structure of science and with that a 
realist foil to conventionalist or political- or even dadanarchic - analyses 
of science as social.I9 
It also marks a contemporary crystallization of human organization 
around cognition-driven institutions, itself a major transformation in 
historical, ecological and evolutionary conditions. Central to this 
transformation is the science-technology led transformation of the planet, 
including the conditions for science itself. Such effects are common to all 
species, but amplified for us. The resulting complex of feedback relations 
leads to a fusing of science policy and science methodology into a single 
strategic issue. If we are not to undermine our own survival (and that of 
many other species as well) with a resulting chaos, these developments 
must constitute the emergence of a new level of stable planetary 
regulatory structure. Designing such an integrated system is now our most 
urgent task. 
Everyone familiar with conventional philosophy of science, even 
conventional realism, will recognize the radicalness of this re-thinking of 
philosophy and meta-philosophy, science and social practice. Yet it is 
only within such a radical evolutionary naturalist setting, I believe, that a 
thoroughgoing epistemology - not to mention appropriate social and 

66 
C.A.HOOKER 
science policy - can be adequately theorized. 
For the remainder of this essay I choose to focus on just two issues out 
of the many that should be addressed: the construction of objectivity and 
the construction of the institutional designs to achieve objectivity. I 
choose to focus on objectivity because it so clearly flies in the face of 
Feyerabend's anarchism and this should bring it under critical scrutiny 
and so test its mettle. It also flies in the face of the rash of sociological 
determinisms and relativisms, internal realist relativisms. etc., etc. which 
are currently the fashion. By contrast, I want to emphasize the historical 
labour that must go into the achievement of objectivity, it cannot be had 
at a mere academic's decision - nor will its possibility vanish as a feature 
of our world through a mere academic's (or anyone's) rejection of it. 
The best that fallible creatures evolving from ignorance can do is to 
interact in a directed but open and vigorous way with their world and 
cross-check their subsequent beliefs among themselves and against as 
many situations and instrumental practices as possible. Thus the account 
of objectivity I shall give in the following three sections is united by the 
notion of invariance, invariance across reference frames, methods, 
laboratories, scientists. Invariance ensures that no "local" quirks are 
responsible for distorted judgements and critically institutionalized 
invariance is aimed at making the local distortion-free region as large as 
possible, including at least some species features. 
VII. CONsmUCfION OF AN ALTERNATIVE II: 
FRAGMENT OF OBJECfIVITY IN THEORy20 
Develop the theory form for objectivity in the basic theory, physics, as 
step 1 in the theorizing of this aspect of naturalized reason and as 
showing a historical development transcending the momentary shifts on 
which F eyerabend focuses. 
The history of physics is marked by the discovery that what humans 
had taken as central features of the world around them were in fact 
projections of their own condition. The passage from Ptolemaic to 
Copernican astronomy provides a simple case in point. Under the 
Ptolemaic system, our point of view as earth-bound observers was 
assumed unconsciously in this precise sense: it had no explicit representa-
tion in the theory. Yet there was one tell-tale sign that an unconscious 
homocentric point of view was being projected on the cosmos, namely the 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
67 
appearance of a mysterious non-causal harmony among the planetary 
orbits. For every planetary orbit, when represented in terms of epicycles, 
turned out to have exactly one motion in common and that coincided with 
the earth's seasonal period. From the mediaeval point of view such 
celestial harmonic agreement might appropriately be the work of God, 
i.e., (more naturalistically) result from a common cause. Significantly, we 
know today that it would in fact be a non-local non-causal harmony, a 
fact which could be demonstrated by changing the motion of the earth and 
observing that all celestial bodies changed their corresponding component 
of motion simultaneously and in harmony. This peculiarity might 
strengthen the evidence of God's intervention did we not understand its 
origin in ourselves. 
The transition from Aristotelian to Newtonian physics marks other, 
similar transitions in the explicit representation of our hitherto uncon-
scious homocentric projections. The Aristotelian notion of a well defmed 
up/down direction, e.g., is a homocentric projection of our gravitational 
and atmospheric circumstances (the one for rocks and other massive 
objects, the other for fire and other lighter-than-air phenomena). All 
Aristotelian motions were referred to the earth, but the earth itself was 
neither given nor denied a motion, it lay outside that category. The shift to 
a heliocentric cosmology, completed only in the development of New-
ton's mechanics, is a shift to a system of physics in which all objects fall 
under the category of motion, even those which may be held to be 
absolutely at rest (motion = 0). In this system we can recover our 
homocentric point of view by taking any true description and transform-
ing it into a frame moving with the earth. In this way we may both learn 
to recognize explicitly that we have a point of view, and learn to 
transcend it so as to achieve a more objective assessment. In the larger 
framework, our homocentric point of view becomes but one perspective 
among many. 
Indeed, from this point of view we may see the cognitive use of spatio-
temporal frameworks themselves as fundamental to the process of 
transcending our own egocentric and, ultimately, homocentric point of 
view. A general agreement among developmental psychologists is to the 
effect that notions of object constancy and dimensionality do not emerge 
in the young child's conceptual operations immediately at birth but are 
acquired over the first few years of post-natal experience. Significantly, 
they emerge in tandem with the developing notion of a separate self, 
initially centred in an awareness of an individual body. We may under-

68 
C.A.HOOKER 
stand this cognitive achievement as the representation in the brain of a 3-
dimensional spatial framework which transcends any momentary 
egocentric point of view, and in which all of those points of view are 
represented as so many 2-dimensional perspective projections. In this way 
the young child is able to organize and unify experiences. At the same 
time that very conceptual apparatus provides the basic means for 
distinguishing one's own body from other things, and hence for represent-
ing the fact that one has an egocentric point of view. Prior to that time 
such a point of view was not explicitly representable, but it can now be 
represented as one point of view among others.21 
Thus within both physics and cognition more generally we may think 
of our fundamental process for escaping unconscious egocentric! 
homocentric viewpoints as the construction of a higher dimensional space 
of possibilities within which each particular viewpoint is embedded as a 
possible lower-dimensional projection, a projection from that point of 
view. The appropriate criterion for what is fundamentally real will then be 
what is invariant across all points of view. Thus cognitively we regard 3-
dimensional physical objects as real and this is replicated in classical 
physics for the species as a whole. 
We move to cases of contemporary relevance when we note that the 
transition from classical to relativistic mechanics provides a parallel 
construction. We may understand the principle of relativity as beginning 
from the demonstration that our classical notion of simultaneity is in fact 
an unconscious projection of our own local space-time coordination, a 
coordination which has itself no explicit representation within the theory. 
Within relativistic mechanics, however, this coordination is explicitly 
represented, as one among many, and we are no longer unconsciously 
bound to its seeming characteristics. Moreover, relativity theory provides 
the means to construct the description of the universe from within anyone 
of infmitely many inertial frames of reference (all frames in the case of 
the general theory), given a description within anyone specified frame. 
We are then able to represent the sum total of all such relationships 
among frame-dependent descriptions by embedding the representative of 
each frame of reference in a single geometry, the Minkowski (or more 
generally a Riemannian) geometry. Minkowski space-time functions as a 
representation which unifies all the individual points of view for the 
description of physical phenomena. 
Quantum mechanics can also be thought of as offering a specification 
of physical systems from anyone of a number of alternative frames of 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
69 
reference. These are roughly the "measurement" frames. We are able to 
represent the set of all such possible relationships among "measurement" 
points of view abstractly by embedding each of them in a single 
geometry, Hilbert space. Each "measurement" reference frame then 
represents a particular frame-projection of this abstract space, namely the 
speciflCation of an orthonormal basis for it, just as in relativity theory a 
reference frame determines a particular kind of coordinatization of the 
representation space. In both cases these coordinatizations are competing 
alternative coverings of the representation space. The actual measurement 
result itself then represents a further restriction, a further confmement of 
the set of possibilities, just as it does in relativity theory. 
Thus far we see the development of physics as representing the slow 
achievement of a particular kind of objectivity, viz. the representation of a 
world which successively eliminates homocentric projections through the 
construction of more adequate invariance spaces within which to locate 
events etc. from each individual point of view. At each historical stage 
progress in objectivity was hard won. And even what objectivity requires 
was not understood initially but is itself a slowly emerging achievement 
of essentially the same kind. 
To emphasize the specific, concrete character of these achievements, 
and the open-ended character of reasoned understanding, note that there 
are two fundamentally divergent responses to the problems remaining in 
the understanding of Minkowski and Hilbert spaces, and especially 
concerning the unification of these diverse but fundamental representa-
tions. The first response would be to look for some deeper characteriza-
tion of matter in its relationship to both radiation and space-time such that 
both the nature of the frame-projections determined by material systems 
and the nature of measurement processes as some interactions among 
many are simultaneously specified. This is the approach required by 
Einstein's ideal of intelligibility. (It accounts, e.g., for Einstein's own 
disinterest in a simple hidden variables approach to the measurement 
problem in quantum mechanics). On the other hand, one may seek to 
understand the problem as primarily a conceptual one having to do with 
the limits on the coherent construction of unified possibility structures. 
From this point of view the measurement problem would simply be seen 
as yet a further expression of our inability to transcend the conceptual 
limitations of self-representation. This is the path dictated by Bohr's ideal 
of intelligibility. 
Bohr and Einstein chose utterly different ideals of physical intel-

70 
C.A.HOOKER 
ligibility. Bohr could see no way to intuitively understand the world of 
quantum phenomena in the kind of way which we evidently intuitively 
understand our human-sized world of classical phenomena. For him, 
therefore, all knowledge of the quantum world was knowledge by 
(indirect) description, employing abstract mathematical models for the 
purpose. Under these circumstances one requires a purely formal control 
over the interpolation of purely formal abstract mathematical construc-
tions into intuitive physical specifications. Therefore Bohr's ideal of 
intelligibility focused on the logical control of mathematical models vis-a-
vis intuitive classical descriptions so as to ensure internal consistency and 
unity, empirical adequacy and minimal non-intuitive disruption of the 
applicability of intuitive (classical) concepts. Bohr referred to a concep-
tion meeting these conditions as a "rational generalization" of classical 
physics. 
Einstein, by contrast, wanted to retain the essential ideal of classical 
physical intelligibility, namely that our physical theories should directly 
correctly capture the intrinsic structure and character of the physical 
world. The world does not have to be classical in nature, but if it is to be 
intelligible it should be directly and correctly representable in our 
theories. Einstein was brief and somewhat ambiguous on these matters, 
but it seems very clear when reading him overall that this correctly 
captures his position. It underlies Einstein's continual search until his 
death for a theory that would replace both quantum theory and relativity 
theory with some deeper underlying physical picture which would contain 
this kind of intelligibility and see both of these very different extant 
theories as but approximations. Einstein's ideal of intelligibility can be 
summarized as follows: 
ECll: 
Physical reality is divisible into conceptually distinguishable 
elements of equal ontological status and all complex objects 
consist in defmite structures of these elements. 
ECI2: 
There is a clear distinction between elements of the theory 
representing physical reality and others (which are the 
"idealizations") and each of the former elements uniquely and 
precisely characterizes the reality it represents. In a complete 
physical theory every element of reality and physical attribute in 
the domain of the theory has a corresponding counterpart in the 
theory. 
ECI3: 
A complete description of a physical system S during a time 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
71 
interval T is one for which every attribute possessed by S during 
T is uniquely specified. Statistical theories represent the average 
behaviour and fluctuation characteristics of physical magnitudes 
over ensembles of otherwise completely describable systems and 
hence characterize a state of partial information only. 
ECI4: 
Measurements are straightforward physical processes of 
interaction between a measuring instrument and a measured 
system as specified in some complete theory or theories. 
Physical systems exist and evolve independently of the presence 
of observers, qua observers. 
In like fashion we may define an ideal of Bohr intelligibility: 
BCII: Every descriptive concept C employed by a physical theory has a 
set of well-defined and epistemically accessible conditions CA 
under which it is unambiguously applicable. 
BCI2: 
The set of descriptive concepts C employed by a complete 
physical theory between them exhaust the epistemically 
accessible features of the phenomena in the domain of the 
theory. 
BCI3: 
There is a well-defmed, unified and essentially unique formal 
symbolic structure to each complete physical theory which 
structures and coordinates its descriptions of phenomena such 
that each description is well-defmed, the theory is formally 
complete and the set of descriptions exhaust the phenomena (use 
all applicable descriptive concepts). 
BCI4: 
The concepts of classical physics are the fundamental descriptive 
concepts for the foregoing. 
To the divergence of these ideals of intelligibility and their corresponding 
research paths into the future there corresponds also their retrospective 
divergent conceptions of the history of science. Einstein intelligibility 
enjoins us to understand the history of science as the successive transcen-
dence of old conceptual schemes, each achieving increased representa-
tional accuracy over its predecessor with the concomitant removal of 
homocentric viewpoints as we go. Bohr intelligibility enjoins us to 
understand that history as the successive refinement and rational 
generalization of commonsense physical concepts and experiences, 
revealing ever subtler layers of the involvement of humans as knowers in 
the form which science takes. Both conceptions are worth pursuing and 

72 
C.A.HOOKER 
both have been pursued in part by their great progenitors. It would be 
illuminating to see these programmes for the history of science carried 
through in detail and compared. 
To this divergence in ideals of intelligibility belongs also a divergence 
in the fundamental conception of scientific objectivity. For Bohr-objec-
tivity cannot consist in removing the knowing subject from the representa-
tion of reality - precisely to the contrary. The drive for Bohrian intel-
ligibility requires achieving the widest unified ("harmonious") rational 
generalization available. And by its nature, the very width of applicability 
of this generalization combined with its empirical adequacy reveals the 
most complete pattern of specification of physical phenomena accessible 
to knowers of our kind in our kind of world. And just this is what it is to 
be Bohr-objective, to achieve simultaneously both an empirically 
adequate, exhaustive and symbolically unified description of the 
phenomena we can produce and an accurate portrayal of the conditions 
under which such phenomena are accessible to us. In coming to know 
nature we come to know also ourselves as knowers, not fundamentally by 
being modelled in the theory as objects (although this also happens), but 
by the way the very form of the rational generalization itself reflects our 
being as knowing subjects. 
In sharp contrast to this ideal of Bohr-objectivity lies the ideal of 
Einstein-objectivity. Here increasing objectivity requires the successive 
elimination of the knowing subject from the form of the theory and its 
representation instead in terms of the structure of objects modelled in the 
theory. For the ideal of Einstein intelligibility requires that we strive to 
understand the knower as but one system among many and the knowing 
(read: measuring) relation as but one interaction among many. Increasing 
Einstein intelligibility is not aimed at reflecting the knowing subject but at 
achieving a representation of nature, including ourselves, in terms of 
invariances that precisely do away with reference to any subject's point of 
view. (These latter may then be constructed from it). To become Einstein-
objective is to be able to put ourselves into the models as objects in such a 
way as to take ourselves out of the picture as subjects. 
For Bohr objectivity and subjectivity are jointly achieved. For Einstein 
they are contraries. Both, however, attempt to understand the history of 
science as a history of increasingly adequate and objective representation 
of nature. The issues between them are unresolved as yet. They may take 
a millennium to resolve - after all, it has taken us two millennia to 
characterize sharply the plenum (field) and atomic metaphysics that have 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
73 
dominated science to date. They may never be resolved. That won't make 
them pseudo issues. And if they are resolved - even if resolved in Bohr's 
favour - that too will have represented a triumph of reason, the reasoned 
examination of the deepest portrayal of ourselves as natural knowers. 
Notice too the high level at which there is flexibility in our developing 
conception of reasoned understanding, even our basic relations to our 
ego-transcending self-representations are open to reasoned exploration. 
Here indeed is the exercise of a capacity well beyond the mere running of 
formal algorithms, a capacity of the essence of intelligence. It is also seen 
here as something more focused than the flashes of cranky irrational 
genius Feyerabend tends to paint, there is a larger and more disciplined 
conception of the knowing quest behind the momentary oppositions and 
conflicts. 
For evolved mammals quite clearly intimately part of the natural order, 
these are I suggest sustained achievements of an extra-ordinary kind. 
They are not be had on whim, are not devoted to merely technical control, 
and cannot be dismissed as a mere cultural trinket among a plethora of 
trinkets thrown up by assorted traditions. The achievement of objectivity 
is by no means the only valuable human achievement, and it does stem 
from a particular institutionalized kind of sustained historical effort, but 
this cannot detract from its reality or its character. 
VII. CONSlRUCfION OF AN ALTERNATIVE III: 
EXPLANATION AND UNDERSTANDING 
Connect the extended quest for objective representation with the fun-
damental goals of science, to deepen the account and to provide a 
frameworkfor (pace Feyerabend) rational methodological dynamics. 
The construction of invariance spaces within which to represent 
ourselves in our world is only one aspect of objectivity, but it is in-
timately connected to another, a primary goal of science: understanding. 
Exploring selected components of a contemporary understanding of this 
connection will illustrate how our methodological understanding is 
evolving as science evolves. This in turn illustrates how we are able to 
explore a conception of reasoned understanding. 
Empiricism reduces explanation to a form of logical organization: 
deduction.22 But this account offers no insight into explanatory under-
standing. It cannot, e.g., distinguish explanation from mere prediction, 

74 
C.A.HOOKER 
they are both deduction and differ at most in some non-logical pragmatic 
factor. Thus so-called "indicator laws" are countenanced as the basis of 
genuine explanations. But occurrences of symptoms do not explain the 
subsequent courses of disease, however invariable the connections; 
barometers falling do not explain the occurrence of storms. 
The examples of indicator law explanations are also a demonstration 
that mere increase in generality is not sufficient for increase in depth of 
understanding. Indeed increase in generality may not even be conceded a 
necessary condition for increase in depth of understanding. For an 
increase in generality per se will not capture either an increase in 
precision, i.e., in quantitative accuracy, nor will it capture an increase in 
coherency of organization, i.e., a decrease in independent parameters, 
within an existing domain, though both moves intuitively contribute 
increased understanding. There is a distinction between spread of 
understanding (generality), precision of understanding and depth of 
understanding. Each may occur in the absence of the others, though (as 
we shall see below) typically increasing depth brings with it increasing 
spread and refmement while the reverse is not true. All are valuable. But 
it is depth which is central. 
The account of explanation as deduction by itself, then, takes us almost 
no distance in understanding the cognitive organization of science -
another facet of the difficulties faced by formalist reason. From that point 
of view explanatory structure becomes, as it were, an afterthought that 
emerges once empirical experience and logic have done their work. But 
this is quite foreign to the essential drive of actual scientists, which is 
focused on the achievement of increasingly deep explanatory insight into 
diverse and puzzling phenomena. If we are to say something of sig-
nificance about the place of explanation in science, we must connect it 
more thoroughly with the drive of science to understand the underlying 
structure of reality through which our diverse surface contact with it can 
be explained. This account will form part of an emerging, more encom-
passing understanding of the reasoned life. 
Following the intuition that explanations should bring us closer to 
underlying universal laws, Friedman (1974) proposed that depth of 
understanding should be measured by the smallness of the number of 
independent basic laws and/or independent parameters within the basic 
laws which are required to explain a domain of phenomena. Newton, e.g., 
showed that the inverse square force on the moon, which he calculated 
from the centrifugal acceleration of its orbit, would equal the force of 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
75 
terrestrial gravity as measured at the surface of the earth by Huygen' s 
pendulum. In proposition IV of the Principia, Newton appealed to his 
first two rules of reasoning: Rule I: We are to admit no more causes of 
natural things than such as are both true and sufficient to explain their 
appearance. Rule IT: Therefore, to the same natural effects we must, as far 
as possible, assign the same causes. On the basis of these rules Newton 
argued that the agreement in force values underwrote the claim that the 
centrifugal force on the moon is identical with terrestrial gravity. As 
Harper (1989) has argued, this identification step is the crux of Newton's 
argument, opening the way for the unified treatment of terrestrial and 
celestial motions as phenomena of the same natural kind. Such a unifica-
tion offers just the kind of reduction in independent parameters of laws as 
Friedman's principle requires. And indeed, some such drive has been a 
central characteristic of science throughout its history. 
Notice that this Newtonian example illustrates how achieving a 
reduction in laws and parameters simultaneously represents an increase in 
generality for the surviving laws. The scope of the laws of mechanics and 
gravitation now comprehend both terrestrial and celestial phenomena. 
Presumably this increases their degree of generality. This has been 
achieved by unifying the two previously separate fields of terrestrial and 
celestial physics, precisely by the kinds of identifications which reduced 
the number of independent laws and parameters. Intuitively, these 
connections generalize faithfully across science. 
Friedman's proposal, as he himself makes clear, is an instance of a still 
more general principle, namely that increases in depth of understanding 
are measured by increases in unification. And the Newtonian example 
above does exhibit all three features simultaneously: an increase in scope 
and hence generality for the basic laws of mechanics, a decrease in the 
number of independent laws and parameters, both achieved by an increase 
in unification of theory. This is a powerful set of connections and does 
seem to capture something central to our intuitions about depth of 
understanding. 
But consider now the case of explaining the course of a disease, say 
measles, in patient P by reference to the symptoms, say hives on P's skin. 
At this phenomenological level one might have as a general rule for the 
disease something like this: People with measles will display a marked 
decrease in temperature in ten days following the first appearance of 
hives. We intuitively reject the appeal to this rule as the basis for a 
satisfying explanation because it marks no increase in depth in understand-

76 
C.A.HOOKER 
ing since the law itself operates at the same "surface" level of disease 
symptoms as does the explanandurn. By contrast, the bacteriological 
theory of disease, following its successful testing, was welcomed by 
medical scientists precisely because both fever and hives could be 
understood as effects of a common underlying causal process. And this 
same causal process can be extended to all the symptoms of the disease. 
Moreover, these underlying processes and their ontological components 
(bacteria, cells, etc.). can be shown to play much wider roles than in any 
one specific disease. Note that in all these roles, theoretical unification is 
achieved through reduction, and reduction goes via identification. Disease 
symptoms are identified with biochemical conditions and so the disease 
process reduced to an underlying biochemical process. Here an increase 
in generality will typically be a consequence of an increase in depth of 
understanding. For one cannot obtain a deeper ontology without obtaining 
some general laws for it, and these laws will typically cover a wider 
domain than those for the derivative ontology.23 
The world of bacteria, viruses and cellular biochemistry is however 
much more complex than the world of symptoms. A cell, e.g., is the site 
of some 3000+ simultaneous biochemical reactions. In fact, the number of 
independent parameters currently required to give an adequate biochemi-
cal account of disease processes far exceeds the independent parameters 
required to specify the symptoms of these diseases. (And we could easily 
imagine a possible world in which the surface appearance of diseases was 
really quite constrained and simplified in its symptoms whilst yet being 
the joint effect of extremely complex causes). Despite the bewildering 
increases in complexity involved, scientists have unequivocally preferred 
the underlying microbiological theories of human bodily function to 
remaining at the symptom level. While deeper microscopic ontologies 
may not always' offer an opportunity for increased precision at the 
macroscopic level, this is always sought as a compensating reward for 
accepting increased complexity. 
The recognition of the underlying biological structure of humans has its 
merits in the deeper ontological grasp of the nature and organization of 
human bodies thereby provided. It is through the elaboration of this 
ontology rather than the ontology of symptoms that scientists have been 
able to explanatorily account for the apparent simplicity of human body-
state perceptions as well as for the huge diversity of body malfunctions, 
many hitherto unnoticed. This way of stating the matter provides the clue 
to what is going on: explanatory depth of understanding is two dimen-

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
77 
sional, not one dimensional. One of these dimensions is that of coherent 
simplification of the Friedman sort. The other, independent dimension is 
that of penetration to an ontologically deeper level with wider explanatory 
scope.24 
But as the measles example illustrates, pursuit of ontological depth is 
often attractive even at the expense of increasing complexity. Once one 
grasps this perspective many examples spring to mind. The barometer and 
storm example mentioned briefly above yields to a common-cause 
treatment at the level of statistical mechanics. Here we understand the 
fundamental mechanics of molecules, together with their interactions with 
the structure of the barometer, as explaining both why falling barometers 
precede storms and why the molecular processes that cause such falls in 
pressure are typically followed by the molecular turbulence characterized 
macroscopically as a storm. Despite the enormous complexity of the 
molecular description of barometers and storms - one needs around 1029 
independent parameters! - it is the achievement of a systematic underly-
ing ontology which has attracted physics to this explanatory strategy. And 
the point of such an ontology is precisely that it enables us to discover a 
wider range of cross-situational invariances, it provides the key 
parameters which allow us to transcend our unconscious points of view 
and represent ourselves objectively in our world. 
Requiring increased ontological depth for increased understanding 
rules out the indicator-law cases, giving a plausible account of why they 
are found unsatisfactory. And note that this requirement does not 
prejudice understanding in favour of increasingly micro models, i.e., in 
favour of the part-whole relation. For the transition to a plenum ontology, 
e.g., may well require the recognition of all macro objects as approximate 
demarcations in a single universal field sta.te with properties determined 
by the global whole. And while it encompasses the cases of Friedman's 
coherent simplification, it also supports the important alternatives just 
discussed which require increased complexity. 
The two dimensions to depth of understanding, coherent simplicity and 
ontological depth, are intimately interrelated. Improvements along both 
dimensions go via ontological identifications which achieve unifications: 
identifications within a given ontology which allow coherent simplifica-
tion (e.g., that illustrated in the Newton example above) and identifica-
tions across ontologies which allow anew, more systematic underlying 
ontology to be introduced (e.g., the reductive identifications involved in 
the symptoms-cause examples above). Achieving ontological depth 

78 
C.A.HOOKER 
typically provides the basis for unification across domains as well. This 
latter happens when the underlying ontology is already, or can then be, 
related to the laws of other domains, e.g., the microbiological theory of 
disease relates medicine to various biological domains such as molecular 
genetics. When this happens, partial coherent simplifications are then 
made possible. Thus the relation between the two dimensions may be 
summarized in this way: ultimately the achievement of a deeper ontology 
is more important than the achievement of coherent simplification; 
however, it is desirable to increase the sytematicity and widen the scope 
of any particular ontology as far as possible and this is done through 
increases in coherent simplification. 
The theory form of objectivity in physics is invariance spaces. Transi-
tions from one space to the next characterize the greatest historical 
achievements of deeper ontologies and so increased depth of understand-
ing. But deeper ontologies may also be achieved within a given in-
variance representation scheme, as the measles and other indicator law 
examples show. And so may increase in spread and precision of under-
standing. Objectivity is the expression of that transcendence of the self 
and species limitations which is brought about by reason. Representation 
in invariance spaces is the theory form which objectivity takes in our 
world at the basic leve1.25 Explanatory depth, measured by ontological 
depth and coherent simplicity, together with explanatory spread and 
precision, forms a complex of epistemic values whose pursuit expresses 
the drive for objectivity in our world. 
IX. CONS1RUCTION OF AN ALTERNATIVE IV: 
INDIVIDUAL RATIONALITY AND RATIONAL EPISTEMIC INSTITUTIONS 
Extend the theory of reason to institutional design and decision making so 
as to obtain a unified theory complementary to the theory of objectivity 
and preparatory to 
encompassing Feyerabend's methodological 
criticisms within it. 
The constructions of the last three sections offer only fragments of a 
theory of reason in science. The shape of objective theory in other 
sciences remains to be completed and the open issues within objective 
physics itself remain to be explored. There are other epistemic values 
which it is also reasonable to pursue, e.g., empirical adequacy, scope and 
precision, technological applicability, mathematical completeness, and 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
79 
their structure needs equal exploration. Since any pair of these values 
may. in appropriate circumstances. compete there is the further explora-
tion of their reasonable joint pursuit. This latter requires a social alloca-
tion of resources and thus forces the introduction of another facet of 
objectivity: the processes through which objectivity is pursued. These are 
processes designed to eliminate accidental errors. bias. projection. etc. 
They are essentially concerned with achieving invariance of acceptance 
both across methods and across persons. Such invariances then express 
themselves in the invariant representations of ourselves in our world 
discussed earlier. They apply to both individuals and epistemic groups 
and both applications are essential. 
To begin exploration of this abstract conception let us consider a 
particular example of how invariance across methods and across situa-
tions and scientists works. a fragment of plasma physics research.26 
Laboratory plasmas are ionized gases of moderate temperature (1Q4-1Q6 
0c) confmed in containers with strong magnetic fields. During the small 
time interval over which plasmas exist (l or 2 milliseconds). their 
characteristics have to be determined and all subsequent experiments on 
their behaviour carried out. It is not easy to obtain information about the 
interior of a plasma at these temperatures. all normal measuring instru-
ments cease to function (and their disintegration would in any case pollute 
the plasma!). Like all contemporary physical research a diversity of goals 
are involved: understanding the plasma state and the multifarious plasma 
processes in the upper atmosphere and astronomically. and the useful 
terrestrial harnessing of thermonuclear fusion to produce energy. 
Consider one relatively low level piece of method. the use of Langmuir 
probes to measure plasma density and temperature. The central idea 
behind the Langmuir probe is simple: one pokes into the plasma a small 
piece of wire connected to some electrical circuitry; by measuring voltage 
and current in the wire one hopes to deduce the state of the plasma 
surrounding the wire. Even at this stage one requires the use of 
electromagnetic theory to understand plasma/wire interactions. the use of 
solid state theory to understand the transmission characteristics of the 
wire. the use of electromagnetic circuit theory to understand the accurate 
measurement of the wire responses and so on. Moreover. the presence of 
the probe in the plasma systematically distorts the value of the probe 
responses as a measure of intrinsic plasma characteristics. The really hard 
constructive work that has gone into developing the Langmuir probe as a 
useful instrumental methodology in plasma physics research has focused 

80 
C.A.HOOKER 
around the development of theory and experimental practice to under-
stand and correct for these two distorting effects. The resulting practices 
include the use of multiple probes of various sizes and with various 
electrical biases on them, the extraction of information from transient as 
well as average probe responses and so on. These practical and theoretical 
methods for obtaining useful plasma information have in turn required the 
extensive further application of the theories noted above.27 
It should be noted that it is these very same theories which are in 
principle testable through plasma physics experiments, e.g., electromag-
netic theory through its application to ion-electron collision characteris-
tics. The application of electromagnetic theory to ion-electron collisions 
will specify the conditions under which those collisions are significantly 
inelastic and the contribution of inelastic collision processes of various 
kinds - e.g., single ion-electron, multiple electron-single ion, etc. - to the 
resulting characteristics of the plasma can be calculated and then 
measured using devices such as Langmuir probes. This fundamental 
interdependence between theory under test and test methodology is a 
commonplace throughout 20th century physics. 
It took many years to develop the theory and practice of Langmuir 
probes to the point where a consistent and useful experimental methodol-
ogy was available. During this time theory, theoretical methods and 
instrumental practices developed in delicate interaction with one another. 
New specific applications of electromagnetic theory to the probe sheath 
were developed. New statistical methods were developed for the extrac-
tion of data from probe responses. And of course new engineering 
procedures and experimental probing procedures were developed to meet 
the conditions laid down by the foregoing pairs of specialized theories. If 
fundamental electrodynamics had been seriously questioned, e.g., had it 
predicted seriously wrong collision cross-sections for plasma processes, 
then a fourth element would have been opened up for interactive adjust-
ment as plasma information evolved. 
Further, the development of appropriate applied theory requires in itself 
a set of theoretical methods concerned with the formation of systematic 
approximations, the consistent joint application of theories and so on. To 
take a different example, the full theoretical specification of 
plasma/microwave interactions leads to an equation which contains 
several millions of terms; it is impossible in practice to extract any 
meaningful theoretical understanding from the equation until most of the 
terms have been eliminated through a judicious systematic approximative 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
81 
simplification. Only then is it possible, e.g., to isolate the dominant 
resonant structure for microwave transmission from the myriad smaller 
perturbative effects which complicate it. Moreover, the instrumental 
methodology for microwave transmission probing and the mathematical 
methods for extracting information from those probes must be such as to 
cohere with the approximations made, i.e., such as to capture and reveal 
just the dominant mode transmission characteristics. 
It is only when feedback stability has been achieved among these 
components that a scientist will say that he really understands the specific 
laboratory situation concerned (probe plasma measurements, microwave 
transmission etc.). The idea that there is some neat distinction between 
method, theory and observation/information/data and that the former 
evolves by free conjecture and is then simply tested against the latter -
this idea provides no useful illumination of the development of Langmuir 
probes and like episodes at the heart of modern physics. Instead, one must 
understand theories at various levels (e.g., basic electrodynamics and 
applied probe sheath theory), theoretical methods (e.g., approximations, 
statistical methods of probe response comparison) and instrumental 
practices as a mutually interacting evolving system. 
The development of Langmuir probes is only one small component in 
the overall development of plasma physics. A whole range of like 
instrumental methods are required, e.g., by spectroscopic analysis of 
plasma radiation, laser scattering, microwave transmission probes. The 
development of each of these in turn requires a similar complex, interlock-
ing set of applied theories, theoretical data processing methods and a 
supporting set of engineering and instrumental practices. It is only when 
feedback stability of this kind has been achieved across the full range of 
reasonably accessible instrumental methodologies that a scientist will 
accept that an objective understanding of plasma physics has been 
achieved.28 And notice that the achievement of explanatory depth to 
which this methodology leads in turn reinforces the method: ontological 
unification provides many more ways in which a given theoretical 
quantity can be measured. Thus, recalling the discussion of Newton on 
gravity, gravitational force many be measured by pendula, satellite 
motions, tides, spring extensions, etc., etc .. 
The overall goal is to arrive at a set of theories, theoretical methods and 
instrumental practices which satisfy certain values, central among them 
that specific instrumental practices can be cross-checked by a diversity of 
related instrumental practices and that the several groups of derived 

82 
C.A.HOOKER 
theoretical data will show cross-situational invariance. This central value, 
like the others involved, is a whole-system property of the science of 
plasma physics, it cannot be attached simply to this theory or that 
instrument. Thus we should think of the domain of plasma physics as a 
complex, interacting hierarchy of practices, methods and theories, ranging 
all the way from detailed experimental techniques such as the use of 
Langmuir probes through methods of applied theory formation, ex-
perimental design and statistical information extraction, to generalized 
theoretical methods of Hamiltonian mechanics, perturbation expansions 
and the like, then finally to the most general methods, e.g., the use of 
logic for tests of consistency, exercise of rational choice in defense of the 
valuable goals of scientific research sketched above and so on. The 
regulatory systems model of science illustrated by plasma physics 
research generalizes to other levels and timescales, a nice illustration 
being provided by the nature and status of observation in science 
discussed in Section VI. 
Much of the activity described above can be carried out by an in-
dividual scientist, but for the problem of resource limitations (time, 
energy, attention, etc.). The individual's cognitive development is of a 
piece with that of science both in the construction of invariants and the 
correlative developing use of the senses. Yet the problem of resources is 
not trivial. As noted in earlier sections, the limitations of individuals leads 
to science as a collective enterprise in which the division of labour 
extends cognitive capacity (even while the correlation of labour extends 
objectivity). 
The epistemic capacities of a group of scientists in principle exceeds 
that of anyone of them taken individually, since the epistemic resources 
of a group co-operating through division of labour exceeds the resources 
of anyone member. Beyond this, there is a 'second order' augmentation 
of epistemic capacity flowing from interaction among researchers, 
because the exchange of imaginative ideas and criticism may substantially 
improve the epistemic value of particular theoretical or empirical 
investigations. This kind of epistemic cooperation makes sense only in an 
appropriate institutional setting. Like any form of cooperation, the human 
beings involved need: (i) some method of coordinating their activities, (ii) 
some means of communicating what they are doing and its results, (iii) 
some agreed procedures for modifying their individual activities in the 
light of the ongoing communications of others and (iv) some assurance 
that the other members of the group will indeed carry out the respon-

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
83 
sibilities assigned to them. These four basic requirements are insured by 
various features of scientific institutions. Epistemic institutions are then 
able to provide for the achievement of a collective epistemic gain through 
the distribution of epistemic risk across individuals. The investigation of 
the plausible lines of research can then be parcelled out among in-
dividuals so that the most likely possibilities are covered, with each 
researcher having an individually manageable task, and one whose value 
is recognized even should the results prove negative. 
In fact this structure arises out of our deepest biological situation. 
Humans are phenotypes with large genetic investment in general adap-
tability rather than specific, fixed adaptations. We are general problem 
solvers, born with few specific abilities and relying on an extended 
cognitive neoteny to acquire specific life skills; in order to survive we 
need to co-operate to co-ordinate individual learning, share knowledge 
and practices across the group, transform these as interests demand and 
transmit successful ideas and practices to the next generation. In short, 
adaptable creatures need an external nervous system. Our institutions are 
that nervous system. (Their intelligent development is as yet at a rela-
tively primitive stage, unsurprising given the relatively short and 
unconscious history of our species). Epistemic institutions form the 
external nervous sub-system organizing science. (This is most obvious in 
the case of the computer, which is like a simple ganglion cluster in a 
distributed nervous system).29 Out of this larger system's activities grows 
a larger objective knowledge, but in essentially the same way as it is does 
within individual nervous systems. Indeed, for creatures subject to 
systematic fallibilism there is no epistemic option but to institutionalize 
the critical exploration of cross-situational invariances through systematic 
inter-subjective comparisons, at whatever level of nervous system 
activity. Thus institutions are both our necessity and our strength. Nor is 
the systemic interaction between science and society· either trivial or 
cognitively accidental. Technologies, e.g., are essentially somatic 
extensions and they link science directly into the larger societal system 
(cf. the discussion in Section VI). Our basic learning method through 
probing is itself linked in a deep way to the exploitation of change (see 
Section X below) and this has led to the construction of a huge societal 
change engine, running and expanding since the Renaissance, as our 
species crystalizes its organization around information generation, 
processing and application. 
Thus science is an intrinsically social, institutionalized activity. This 

84 
C.A.HOOKER 
isn't a surprising discovery sociologists made, nor is it so because a 
political philosophy or ethnomethodology insisted on including science 
among cultural traditions; it is so for deeply embedded epistemic and 
organizational reasons. More generally, there is a complex hierarchial 
regulatory system which incorporates information from the environment 
as regulatory structure; this system extends from sub-system components 
of individual humans (e.g., immune system) to individual scientists, 
institutionalized groups of scientists of various sizes, the sub-ecology of 
epistemic institutions and the full societal environment. Within this 
regulatory complex there is no principled sub-system boundary which can 
be drawn based solely on intrinsic sub-system properties which would 
mark out the scientific parts from the rest. Every level of the hierarchy 
can exhibit information processes ranging from rational through non-
rational to irrational. Rather, the rational cognitive processes need to be 
demarcated by their functional consequences, specifically by their 
contributions to transcending limitations. 
It follows that both individual and various institutional rationalities 
should be recognized. But what model of reason to choose for these? The 
formalist model, whatever its specific merits, leads to widespread internal 
difficulties when pressed and suppresses any individual/institutional 
distinctions beneath its context-free algorithms. But just as various 
epistemic values may compete, even for an individual scientist, so 
individual and institutional rationalities may enjoin conflicting actions. 
These differences are real and important. In any case formalist reason is 
an unsatisfactory model for an evolutionary naturalist approach (Sections 
IV, VI). The decision-theoretic model of rational action, however, is well 
able to model the variety of institutional situations involved. Indeed, it 
provides a natural setting in which to theorize rational institutionalized 
action because of its specific recognition of context-dependent beliefs and 
values entering rational action. 
In sharp contrast to the formalist conception, the interleaved patterns of 
consensus and dis sensus which emerge naturally within a decision-
theoretic representation of epistemic institutions can be, and typically are, 
complex. The achievement of collective epistemic gain does require the 
formation of a consensus, but it is a very specific consensus, and is 
compatible with a very large amount of epistemic disagreement. Specifi-
cally, the participating scientists need to agree: (i) that it is worthwhile to 
investigate alternatives to a given theory, (ii) that among all of the 
logically possible alternatives to the theory a finite set of investigative 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
85 
paths are those which are to be followed first, (iii) that certain general 
methodologies (or certain general constraints on specific methodologies) 
are to apply to formal and experimental exploration and the mutual 
communication of results, and (iv) that certain general procedures are to 
constrain the ways in which each of the members of the group will change 
their own research strategies in the light of the results communicated to 
them. 
Notice, however, that the scientists need not agree on any particular 
alternative theory as the one most worthy of investigation. Indeed, they 
need not agree on any ranking of the alternatives in terms of either 
likelihood of truth or preferability of pursuit. Even more fundamentally, 
they need not agree on what precisely is at fault with the present theory, 
or even that it definitely has some major flaw. Finally, they need not 
agree exactly on particular experimental methodologies, on methods of 
statistical inference, or on the heuristics of theoretical research 
programmes. Indeed, they need not even agree on what the relevant 
experimental data are at any given point. Despite all of these possible 
sources of disagreement, it is still reasonable that the scientists conclude, 
both individually and collectively, that there is a net epistemic gain, even 
a large net epistemic gain, to be had from a co-operative investigation of 
alternatives. It is precisely the purpose of an intelligent epistemic 
institutional design that it encourages co-operation to proceed, even while 
also encouraging appropriate critical dissent. 
A schematic example will serve to present some of the possibilities, 
possibilities whose relevance can be appreciated if taken in the light of 
the earlier discussion of plasma physics methodology. Consider a group 
of three scientists A, B and C. Scientist A believes that the present theory, 
T, is fundamentally correct but agrees that it is worthwhile testing this 
belief further by attempting to construct alternative theories and testing 
them. Scientists B and C, on the other hand, disagree with A, and believe 
that T is defective and that there is an urgent need to construct more 
adequate alternatives. As it happens, A doubts that the experimental data 
on which B and C partly base their disbelief in T has the epistemic force 
which B and C take it to have, because he has some important doubts 
about the theories of the experimental arrangements involved in collecting 
that data, doubts which Band C do not share. Moreover, scientist B also 
believes that the specific experimental defects in the existing theory stem 
from its failure to satisfy certain very high level theoretical principles, 
principles of symmetry. Scientist C, though, is sceptical of reliance on 

86 
C.A.HOOKER 
any such principles and believes that the defects in the existing theory are 
to be traced to its inadequacy to cope with certain quite specific features 
of the disconfmning experimental situations. 
Now, as it happens, A agrees with B that the most fruitful alternative 
theories to pursue are a class of theories very similar to T except that they 
are reformulated so as to satisfy the preferred symmetry requirements. 
Scientists A and B agree that A is to attempt to develop experimental 
designs which will be sensitive to the satisfaction of such symmetries and 
to examine the experimental results, while B is to attempt the formal 
mathematical development of a theory of the required sort. Scientist C, on 
the other hand, believes it to be more epistemically valuable to examine 
experimentally a class of theories which are known to be more accurate in 
experimental situations of the sort which provided the original disconfmn-
ing evidence for T, even though the best formulated theories in this group 
happen not to have any deep theoretical relationship to the theories being 
investigated by A and B. All three are agreed, however, that the two 
proposed lines of research jointly present the greatest likelihood of 
epistemic payoff. 
At the individual level the scientists demonstrate their rationality by 
arranging things so that each individual follows his own commitments, 
within institutional constraints, while collectively they exhaust the 
plausible research strategies. Collectively, the remarkable interdepen-
dence of individual epistemic preferences that such arrangements demand 
requires an institutional explanation focussing on the way in which 
scientists search for, and adapt to, the institutional roles they perceive 
themselves to play and the way in which these roles are designed in 
relation to the overall epistemic enterprise.30 
The designs of these epistemic institutions becomes crucial to our 
evaluation of their rationality. One key question is whether, and how, 
these institutionalized processes lead to open-ended enquiry. How is the 
Popperian Rump instantiated within them? Clearly this has to do with the 
design for the interactions between consensus and dissensus patterns. I 
shall not pursue this crucial matter further here - but see section X below. 
In the present context a second key question is: Will the institutionalized 
processes they support generate objective knowledge? (Derivatively: Will 
they do so efficiently?) In theorizing such processes two notions are 
central: (i) The causal relations between the entities in fact in some given 
domain and the generation of theoretical representations of objects in that 
domain. (ii) The patterns of dissensus and consensus needed to energize 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
87 
but stabilize the system. Rational epistemic institutions are ones that so 
arrange their processes that the entities in some domain must, if know-
able, play an appropriate causal role in the generation of our representa-
tions of them. Experimentation is the arena of causal contact. But 
experimental design, we have observed, is a complex affair and it is the 
design of this process which is crucial. There is much more to be said 
about the institutionally reinforced values, practices, etc., which are 
appropriate to this requirement than can been said here but the principles 
laid bare in preceding sections concerning the achievement of feedback 
stability are, in our kind of world, evidently typical of the institutionalized 
processes required. Whether these complex designs can be achieved 
depends on complex consensus among various specialists; whether those 
designs are insightful and free of gratuitous errors depends on the level of 
critical scrutiny they receive and this in tum depends on the dissensus 
surrounding them. 
Rational scientific acceptance requires at least the following: (1) The 
process of acceptance is one for which the relevant features of the world 
play a causal role in actively bringing about consensus concerning the 
accepted proposals (e.g., Brown 1987, 1988; Campbell 1986). That is, 
those deliberating are genuinely open to the truth (in the surrogate form of 
our best conjectures thereon). The reason why we object to the intrusion 
of politics into science is because that intrusion cuts scientists off from 
causally relevant sensitivity to reality, substituting the ideological ideas 
and political goals of other people as the causally dominant factors in the 
acceptance of theory. We require a critical process in which proposed 
theories, laboratories, etc., are confronted with imaginative alternatives 
and all are subject to critical appraisal. Nonetheless, while this condition 
is the key causal condition, our epistemic access to its obtaining is via 
objectively theorizing it. (Truth criteria go by correspondence, acceptance 
criteria by coherence). Thus the remaining clauses below are equally 
important. 
(2) The process of acceptance is one where public, shared epistemic 
values emerge as a clear counterweight to sectional interests and in which 
the former are critically but fairly assessed. This leads naturally into 
requirement (3): The relevant community which is to choose is clearly 
specified and their role in the choice process is clearly specified. In 
science we exclude mental incompetents and the relevantly immoral from 
the community, and this already requires careful reflection; beyond that 
the case becomes even more complex. The community for science is 

88 
C.A.HOOKER 
increasingly "soft": very few people can really dispute nuclear physics 
reasonably, e.g., so science is not in this sense a public enterprise, and this 
despite the impact of nuclear science on the wider community. Moreover, 
the competent scientific community is shrinking steadily as scientific 
complexity increases. Only epistemic institutional design holds the 
scientific process together, otherwise it would fragment into a thousand 
specialties, each too small to sustain an objective process of scientific 
acceptance. One has the sense of some difficult epistemic regulatory 
problems emerging here for the human species. 
(4) The acceptance process is continually (in practice: regularly) open 
to correction. This process should be capable of fundamental re-concep-
tualization as well as fine tuning in the light of learning, and in response 
to changing reality. So much is merely prudent in view of the subtleties 
already raised. But each review has a cost, so that there needs to be an 
institutional design also for the process of initiating reviews, and this too 
should satisfy the foregoing clauses. (5) If acceptance is to be a rational 
process, then a minimum requirement is that the institutional design 
solutions intended to satisfy the first four of these clauses should them-
selves be argued critically against competing alternatives. That is, these 
clauses should be meta-consistently applied to their own process of 
institutional design which they defme. 
There are two systematic complementary reasons for developing a 
theory of epistemic institutional design. The first is to complete the 
characterization of science as a regulatory system, a regulatory sub-
system of the total regulatory system characterizing this planet. This 
provides a unifying perspective from within which to understand the roles 
of individuals vis-a-vis their institutional groupings, the evolution of 
observational methods vis-a-vis technology and that of technology vis-a-
vis theory and practice, the relationships between science and society and 
so on. The second reason for developing institutional theory is to provide 
a theorizing of the implementation of reason within the scientific 
regulatory sub-system through theorizing objective processes. Here the 
result to be emphasized is that both individual and institutional 
rationalities play their roles and that no consistent theorizing of science 
would be possible without both. Further, that no understanding of the 
dynamics of science is possible without an appreciation of the patterns of 
mutual conflict and reinforcement which these various rationalities 
display, engendering complex patterns of consensus and dissensus across 
scientific institutions. This entire perspective is subverted and suppressed 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
89 
by a logic-centred formalist theory of reason. A decision-theoretic 
theorizing of reason as strategic action, by contrast, provides a rich and 
promising framework for capturing these complex features of science. 
More positively still, the decision theoretic framework actively en-
courages an appreciation of the complexity of individual and institutional 
reason which has been uncovered here. 
To these strengths another can be added: the decision-theoretic 
framework provides the opportunity to unify the treatment of science 
methodology and public policies, including science policy, as various 
cases of institutionalized strategic action. This is not only cognitively 
valuable but of practical importance in contemporary circumstances. For 
the practical consequences of science have lead to a growing debate about 
its social control which has struggled with the incoherence generated by 
the dichotomy between theoretical and practical reason emerging from the 
formalist conception of reason (Hooker 1987, Section 7.9). The 5 
conditions for public policy sketched above, e.g., have precise counter-
parts in a theory of objective public policy contents (see Hooker 1989a). 
This section completes a sketch of the key components of a theorizing 
of objectivity in science and in so doing it completes the sketch of the 
fragments of the life of reason in science which I offer here. To develop a 
fully complete and detailed account of reason in science we would require 
much more than could be presented here - various hints have been given 
to the attentive reader on the way through as to how other facets might be 
developed. 
X. EXTENSIONS AND BRIEF POLEMICS 
Show how this naturalist realist theorizing of reason encompasses 
Feyerabend's major criticisms, and improves on anarchism's ability to 
theorize beyond them. 
The account of reason developed over the last three sections was 
undertaken in order to demonstrate that a positive account of reason in 
science can emerge from the wreckage of the formalist programme for 
reason. Moreover, what emerges is not merely a weaker account strug-
gling to arise from that wreckage, but a much richer, much more promis-
ing account than the formalist programme could offer. The formalist 
project for reason looks very like a degenerating research programme 
within philosophy. Certainly, the empiricist version of it is, as empiricists 

90 
C.A.HOOKER 
become entangled ever more deeply in the morass of formal logical 
constructions (Brown 1979). But the same is true, it would seem, across 
an ever widening front as formal game theory, artificial intelligence and 
even meta-mathematics become embroiled in paradoxes which show the 
limitations of the formalist programme. Feyerabend correctly labelled 
Popper's introduction of his three Worlds as marking the degenerating 
phase of his research programme, for World 3 simply freezes all of the 
difficulties and limitations of formalist reason within it, enshrining them 
within an abstract authoritarianism rather than providing any new means 
to extend that project (Feyerabend 1974). By contrast, the account of 
reason provided here leads to a wide range of research programmes for its 
further development. Many of these have been mentioned in the preced-
ing three sections, e.g., the relating of understanding to other fundamental 
goals of science, the exploration of the detailed patterns of conflict and 
reinforcement 
between 
individual 
and 
various 
institutionalized 
rationalities, the detailed development of scientific methods at various 
regulatory levels and in relation to theoretical development, and so on. 
First polemic. Feyerabend never really tackles this conception of reason. 
So far as I can see, he leaps from a critique of the formalist theory of 
reason directly into his anarchism. This leap won't carry much conviction 
for the rest of us unless it is a reasoned one (I) but clearly the argument 
for that requires an additional premise, to wit that there is no alternative 
conception of reason available. One purpose of the last three sections has 
been to argue the falsity of this premise. 
The only argument which I can fmd in Feyerabend against the concep-
tion of reason proposed here is to the effect that no other conception of 
reason except the formalist one has any content. The argument is that any 
other conception, e.g., that individuals always act efficiently in the 
circumstances, will simply tum out to be vacuous because it will rational-
ize any action whatever. But of course this is just the very kind of vague 
and general criticism in the absence of detailed investigation for which 
Feyerabend slams his critics on other occasions. The foregoing account 
does not provide a generalized notion of efficiency as the only, or even 
the central, notion of reason. And the general notion it does provide, that 
of transcendence of limitations and imperfections, requires the specific 
grasping of the notions of truth, understanding, objectivity and so on 
which give to reason a quite specific content. Before we follow 
Feyerabend into anarchism it would be reasonable for us to be sure that 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
91 
this conception of reason is inadequate to the fundamental purposes of 
human life. [End polemic] 
In the conception of science put forward here the evolution of method 
takes a central place. Roughly, methods are regulatory recipes for 
developing theories, making instruments, transforming data and so on. 
Methodology forms the control or regulatory hierarchy for science, pre-
supposing the contents of science and regulating their expression in turn. 
Progress in science is progress in ascending this regulatory hierarchy, in 
developing new regulatory layers which increase the regulatory scope and 
effectiveness of the system as a whole. In this, Popper is surely correct: 
just as the key problem in understanding the biology of life on this planet 
is understanding how biological regulatory complexity has been built up 
over the ages beginning from very simple chemical auto-regulation, so the 
key problem for understanding science is understanding how it progresses 
in a precisely parallel sense. (Unhappily, Popper is so wedded to the 
formalist tradition in reason that he never develops a regulatory systems 
conception of science nor a unified conception of theoretical and practical 
reason that could be situated within such a regulatory conception, so his 
project remains frozen within his formal World 3).31 
Feyerabend's own study of examples provides convincing evidence 
that method has evolved over the course of the history of science and that 
its evolution has been critical to the development of science. Of course, 
this is a surprising and damaging result to those in the formalist tradition 
of reason. But from the point of view of the theonzing of reason 
presented here it is instead the most obvious and most important feature 
of science. 
Second polemic. 
It will, therefore, be ineffective for Feyerabend to 
simply claim that circumstances may arise where cognitive progress 
requires, e.g., flying in the face of the pursuit of objectivity as I have 
sketched it and that this refutes my philosophical approach. Of course 
circumstances of this kind might arise at any stage. I have already 
presented one possibility in some detail: Bohr versus Einstein. And others 
can already be anticipated. Neither do such cases refute the philosophical 
approach, since normative ideas are treated as fallible theories always 
open to revision. Only philosophers whose meta-philosophy takes 
philosophy to consist in eternally fixed, necessary truths or equivalent are 
hit by criticisms of this kind. Instead there is anew, much more specific 
and interesting issue left between Feyerabend and evolutionary naturalist 

92 
C.A.HOOKER 
realism: can every specific instance of methodological change be 
arguably represented as a rational innovation? And note that in addressing 
that question we need to keep in mind not only individual rationality but 
the differing institutional rationalities as well. Now pretty clearly not 
every change is rational simplicitur. However, my contention would be 
that most cognitively significant individual and institutional actions 
carried out by individuals in epistemically institutionalized roles are 
rational when understood in their full institutional and historical contexts, 
modulo the imperfections of the designs of our epistemic institutions. 
These institutions are very recent in our cognitive history, have never 
been seriously consciously designed and are only just beginning to be 
seriously studied. If we fail as a species it will not be the bangs that do it 
but the whimper of our inability at institutional design. This is a problem 
Feyerabend never really tackles. As the examples sketched in preceding 
sections illustrate, each case needs arguing in detail. [End polemic] 
This discussion does raise the general question of how self-organizing 
regulatory systems do develop. Regulatory control systems of any sort 
may show two importantly different exfoliations, what we may call 
'horizontal' and 'vertical' exfoliations. Horizontal exfoliation concerns 
the development of refined regulatory control within the existing 
regulatory architecture available to a system. Its correlates in science 
include increasing precision, increasing scope of -generalizations about 
stably characterized classes of entities, increasing technological ap-
plicability and diversity of laboratory procedure and so on. In short, 
roughly what Kuhn refers to as normal science. 
Vertical exfoliation concerns the development of new regulatory layers 
to the system, imbedding down in the system those regulatory layers 
which were previously uppermost. A simple example is provided by 
Einstein's distinctive contribution to the development of dynamics. 
Einstein was not the first to explore the idea of modifying classical 
mechanics in the light of electromagnetic theory, nor even the first to 
discuss the idea of some kind of relativity principle. He was the one who 
clearly grasped that the modifications required reached as deep in the 
regulatory structure of physics as kinematics and were not to be confined 
to dynamics alone. This proved to be the crucial regulatory insight. The 
Einsteinian shift stimulated the development of generalized theories of 
space-time structures and the abstract representations of dynamics on 
them as configuration spaces (Lagrangians) and on their Hamiltonian co-
spaces, which ultimately led to still further generalizations of dynamics, 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
93 
e.g., to symplectic flows on abstract differentiable manifolds. Vertical 
exfoliation corresponds roughly to Kuhn's notion of revolutionary 
science. 
The conditions for vertical exfoliation are not well understood in any 
domain of complex regulatory systems. One process, which occurs in 
both the biological and cognitive domains, is that of the neotenous 
response to regulatory failure. As the attempt to achieve regulation fails, 
commitment to specific regulatory processes may be suspended in an 
effort to free up resources to develop alternative, more adequate 
regulatory structures. Biologically, the species may arrest the rate of 
sexual maturation (increased neoteny) thereby freeing up genetic 
resources for the exploration of alternative phenotypic structures. The 
development of our own brains seems to be a case in point. The example 
of relativity theory just discussed provides a parallel "backing up the 
regulatory hierarchy" in the cognitive domain. These are cases of positive 
feedback between failure of horizontal exfoliation and exploration of 
vertical exfoliation. A related process is evidently Whewellian consilience 
of inductions: several instances of a higher level regulatory structure (e.g., 
of generalized Hamiltonian dynamics) which have emerged during the 
course of horizontal exfoliation (i.e., from specific Hamiltonians) may 
then be compared in order to extract explicitly the higher level structure 
instantiated in them. Here is a case where success in horizontal exfolia-
tion leads to success in vertical exfoliation. 
There is also negative feedback between the two exfoliations. Success-
ful horizontal exfoliation will also tend to attract resources to it, for both 
cognitive and socio-economic reasons, thereby tending to distract from 
focussing on vertical exfoliation. Conversely, vertical exfoliation may 
lead to theoretical representations which make the development of 
laboratory practices and social technologies extremely laborious and 
expensive, which may detract from the latter, or even from both 
processes. Again, horizontal exfoliation may so alter the larger cir-
cumstances in which the system of science is embedded that further 
vertical exfoliation becomes impossible. (This will be sadly the case, e.g., 
if we succeed in destroying our socio-economic systems through ecologi-
cal disruption, nuclear warfare, medical pandemic of any other of the 
many destabilizations of the planetary regulatory system made possible 
by our technologies). 
Thus the relationships between the achievement of objectivity and the 
achievement of progress are complex, no simple-minded identification of 

94 
C.A.HOOKER 
the two, or other relation of the sort one finds in conventional fonnalist 
philosophy of science, will capture that complexity. Rather it must be 
theorized within a regulatory systems context of the sort provided here. 
The point is to see that this setting provides the right framework for 
theorizing the role and dynamics of methodology within rational science. 
Kuhn's distinction between nonnal and revolutionary science, e.g., is seen 
for the first order approximation which it is. If you want to understand the 
history of science then we must begin by understanding it as a complex 
series of regulatory shifts, both vertical and horizontal, rather than as 
some simple oscillation between nonnal science and revolutions or (at the 
other Popperian extreme) as pennanent revolution. Feyerabend is right, 
no specific transition in the history of science will be quite like any other, 
any more than any specific change in the evolutionary history of genetic 
regulatory systems is quite like any other. But this does not prevent our 
understanding them through theorizing them - to the contrary. 32 
Third polemic. From this perspective Feyerabend's various studies of 
method amount to the following: (1) lllustrations of the obvious truth that, 
according to reason as theorized here, the cognitively reasonable course 
of action is a function of the historical circumstances under which the 
action is being taken. (2) lllustrations of the deeper truth that rational 
methods are partial functions of the rational knowledge gained to date. (3) 
Demonstrations of the still deeper truth that the evolution of methodology 
is itself central to understanding the nature of science. But none of these 
three features in themselves carry any relativist implications nor do they 
in themselves provide any basis for an argument to any fonn of anar-
chism. Indeed, Feyerabend seems to have mistaken the open-endedness of 
regulatory systems, which is a crucial feature of them, for the necessity of 
an anarchist foundation for their processes. This latter could arise, I think, 
only from a crude fonn of individualist political theory, in which it is the 
liberty of individuals (and by extension, of cultural traditions) which is 
the only, or the chief, guarantor of the generation of new ideas, etc .. The 
politics will be the subject of brief comment later, here I only wish to 
stress the fact that to the crudity of leaping from fonnalist reason to 
epistemic anarchy there corresponds the systems crudity of leaping from 
narrowly mechanically detennined systems to thennodynamic relaxation 
processes, skipping the whole domain of complex regulatory systems in 
between. [End polemic] 

· BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
95 
Fourth polemic. Showing the same crudity, Feyerabend also leaps from 
the empiricist account of scientific revolutions as species of reduction to 
the view that there is a gulf of incommensurability - not merely dif-
ference but semantic incommensurability - separating the two sides. 
There are two defects with this view, I suggest. The first has already been 
noted, that it gives an excessively crude representation of the changes 
involved. But the second defect is that it employs a crude conception of 
meaning, and even that it takes meanings as a serious tool for meta-
scientific analysis at all. Feyerabend leaps from meaning as ostension (i.e. 
given in direct observation) to meaning as implicit definition (i.e. 
meaning as determined wholly by the formal structures within which the 
terms occur). Ironically, these are the two poles of meaning to which 
formalist theories of reason seem confined. (Ayer, e.g., adopted 
Feyerabend's implicit defmitions under the label "definitions in use" in 
his hilariously empiricist tract of 1931 - see Ayer 1946). The empiricists 
focused on ostension as the source of semantic content because the only 
thing else available to them was logic and logic had no content. 
Feyerabend makes logic generate content by supposing that the formalist 
scaffolding of formal theoretical principles filled only by empty place-
holders - itself an empiricist conception - could be taken as true by 
definition of those place-holders. But whereas the empiricist account 
reduced all meaning to observations, Feyerabend's account would - arm-
waving aside - reduce all theories to tautologies. That neither is a very 
satisfactory account of semantic content is pretty obvious. 
Indeed, in my view we have at the present time no satisfying account of 
the nature of language in general, let alone of its semantic content. This 
makes reliance on semantics a poor place to begin doing philosophy of 
any sort. Recently, e.g., Putnam and Dummett have again been inviting us 
to draw wide-ranging philosophical conclusions from crude semantic 
arguments, and with correspondingly disastrous results.33 Whatever 
meaning is, it presumably has something to do with the total regulatory 
significance of concepts, conceived as units of information-processing 
regulation. But how this is to be developed in the context of the 
regulatory systems conception of our nervous systems remains obscure at 
the present time.34 [End polemic] 
What these criticisms show, I suggest, is that Feyerabend is a good 
critic but a poor constructive theorist. In each of these cases Feyerabend 
has taken the tools accessible to the formalist tradition and used them to 
criticize that tradition on its own terms. Feyerabend's criticisms are 

96 
C.A.HOOKER 
insightful and effective and I have indicated how much of them I would 
accept. Moreover, as Feyerabend has stressed, the deployer of a reductio 
ad absurdum is not committed to believing its premises. So then, I cannot 
convict Feyerabend of tacit formalist presuppositions merely by noting 
the crudity of his formulations. But then reasonable people are entitled to 
ask for the positive account which is to replace that which has been 
rejected. The very fact that Feyerabend offers none, and that what he does 
offer stays within the crude formulations employed in his own reductios, 
suggests that he is in fact confined by their tacit presuppositions. By 
developing an alternative, positive account of reason within science I 
have not only tried to defend the life of reason but to make explicit those 
presuppositions. 
Feyerabend can be constructively viewed, I suggest, as the sceptic to 
the naturalist realist, just as Hume played the sceptic to the empiricist. 
Humean scepticism about causes, e.g., is so damaging because it leads to 
scepticism about so many other issues in the theory of science. The reason 
that they all arise together is that they are all metaphysically intercon-
nected. The real properties are the ones which support the real causes and 
the real causes are what determine which are the real laws (as opposed to 
the correlations generated by a common cause and the accidental 
generalizations). The real properties determine which are the real 
dispositions (they are real because of the real causal relations those 
properties support), and the real laws determine which are the real 
explanations (namely those with real laws in their premises). Finally, the 
correct inductions are only those which move from evidence to laws in 
those cases where it is the real causes behind those laws which are 
causally responsible for the production of the evidence. (This determines 
when either the consequence or the converse consequence confirmation 
conditions will generate paradoxes of confIrmation, it removes the grue 
problem, it specifIes a condition of total causal relevance instead of the 
total evidence condition for inductive inference, etc.). The problem of 
reason centrally includes the problem of how rationally to distinguish 
answers to these six questions. 
Empiricists try to accomplish this while sticking strictly to observation 
as the only supplier of content and logic as the only supplier of reason. As 
we have noted, there are many arguments to show that the project cannot 
be carried out. There is no logical form for laws that will distinguish true 
causal connections from common-caused correlations and accidental 
generalizations. There is no inductive logic that will pick out the rational 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
97 
inductive inferences to use as a function of their causal context. Logic 
cannot pick out the real properties (Hempel's ferple problem, anticipating 
Goodman's grue problem) and so on. Hume can now be seen as the 
sceptic to the empiricist. Hume' s general argument is, quite simply put, 
that causes are not observable and neither can they be selected on the 
basis of logical form. Hence they cannot be rationally selected at all. But 
whatever is rational about science is reducible to what can be rationally 
selected. Hence there is nothing rational about science. 
Naturalist realists, by contrast, can be seen as those who begin by 
accepting that reason is a natural phenomenon manifested across the 
whole of life and attempt to theorize it on that basis. From this point of 
view it is a mutually reinforcing conclusion that science is a particularly 
striking (if certainly imperfect) manifestation of reason. They then wish to 
engage in the task of trying to reconstruct why it is that science is rational. 
A primary problem here is to evince a further factor besides logical form 
which would provide clear cut grounds for rationality claims, be acces-
sible to precise testing of consequences, etc .. Feyerabend can then be seen 
as the sceptic to the realist. He denies that there is any such further factor. 
And then given the failure of both the empiricist programme and its 
Popperian extensions it follows once again that there is no defence of 
science as rational. Hence the Feyerabendian flight into universal 
anarchism. 
Fifth polemic. Hume extended his scepticism from science to ethics and 
social and political philosophy generally. Feyerabend does the same, 
becoming increasingly preoccupied with scepticism about traditions in his 
later work. But Hume provided an alternative positive account of the 
bases for a humane society in his theory of empathy. Feyerabend to date 
has offered only an extension to traditions of his semantic and systems 
crudity: let arbitrary traditions bloom arbitrarily. To the crudity of the 
leap from machine to anarchy there is the leap from authoritarianism to 
liberal individualism. In between there lie all those conceptions of social 
and political structures which view them as kinds of complex quasi-
regulatory systems, developing under the impact of historical experience 
and evolving conditions and facing the basic issue of how to organize so 
as to be permanently open to the possibility of further development. [End 
polemic] 
Here one could start to sketch a story of civilization from a regulatory 
systems viewpoint. To each major transition in human civilization there 

98 
C.A.HOOKER 
has corresponded a major transition, indeed an increase, in energy 
throughput, driving in turn the accumulation of population, urban 
agglomeration and role specialization, just as happens in the transition 
from a temperate to a tropical ecology. At the same time, these changes 
have been the encoding of increasing information densities in the human 
population. Whenever these densities exceeded the capacities of the 
existing information processing channels, it stimulated the development 
of new channels: from body gesture to language, from language to 
writing, writing to printing, and now to electronics. These transitions are 
not the incidental by-products of a particular cultural tradition or 
prejudice, as currently fashionable writings of anthropological relativists 
or Feyerabend might suggest, but rather fundamental features in the 
evolution of complex regulatory systems generally. On the other hand, 
Feyerabend is surely right that every culture is an experiment in 
regulatory order and, from this point of view, it is a catastrophe equiv-
alent to the destruction of genetic diversity to destroy human cultures at 
the rate at which we are currently doing. But this is not moral high ground 
which can be adopted only by Feyerabend; it follows, I suggest, with even 
greater urgency from the present perspective. We are in the epistemologi-
cal bind of any exfoliating control system: we need enough information to 
produce effective regulation to support open-ended development, but that 
information itself is only generated by producing that development. We 
are indeed in danger of destroying our ecological and cultural diversity, of 
implementing dangerously simple-minded institutional structures which 
will bury us in either chaotic, or in self-stultifying authoritarian, dead 
ends. And as our access to energy and information mounts so too do the 
costs of failure. And so on. But the proper response to these dangers is to 
attempt to understand the process we are caught up in, not to employ 
yesterday's crude dichotomies in an effort to arrest the process. 
Is science a tradition? The formalist theorizing of reason would, as 
Feyerabend points out, answer no. The "strong programme" sociologists, 
relativist anthropologists, Feyerabend and others would take the view that 
it is merely another tradition. As usual, I think these are crude alternatives 
and that the truth lies elsewhere: science is a central part of the fundamen-
tal process of evolution of complex regulatory systems, but its historical 
manifestations are always within specific traditions and these traditions 
can, within the limits of that central process, be criticized. 
This perspective can be used to provide the beginnings of an approach 
to cross-cultural appreciation. Briefly, there are societies whose institu-

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
99 
tions are designed so as to exploit ecological stability and develop 
horizontal exfoliation. These are traditional societies focused around 
adaptation to the local ecology and cultural reproductive stability. On the 
other hand, there are societies whose institutions are focused more 
strongly around the increasing exploitation of new information to produce 
change, i.e., around vertical exfoliation. This is our particular Western 
society in its free-market economic form. Societies with relatively little 
access to energy and information are perfectly reasonable in their 
orientation to fmesse of adaptation, this orientation has its roots in the 
primacy of adaptation for species in a stable environment. But for the 
species in a variegated environment (whether spatial or temporal) there is 
advantage to adaptability. And since a fundamental learning mode 
involves disturbing (probing) the environment to explore response, it will 
be seen that adaptable creatures can further enhance their effectiveness 
and advantage by increasingly exploiting change to produce a still more 
variegated environment. These are the dynamics which Western culture 
has institutionalized, in the deficiently narrow way characteristic of 
economic market dominance and liberal institutional structure. Thus it is 
that Western culture destroys native cultures by destabilizing their 
environment, it but not they being able to cope with the changes.35 
We have been able to create this change machine, unhappily, only by 
eschewing many detailed commitments to values in our public institu-
tions, relegating them to "private life". Just for this reason, though, the 
designs of our public institutions, however much they may pretend to 
value neutrality, in fact instantiate a set of higher-order value judge-
ments.36 It seems reasonable to agree that this has impoverished both our 
public and private lives in specific ways. But an intelligent response 
requires rethinking human values to see how they are to be made 
compatible with the continued development of regulatory complexity. 
Similarly, the beginnings of loving native peoples lie in understanding the 
tragedy in which they are caught up: both reasonably wanting to retain 
their cultures and being unable to do so, in the deepest sense, whilst 
joining the process of being increasingly open to new information and 
regulatory change.37 
Polemic 5. By contrast, Feyerabend offers us no approach to positive 
understanding. He offers us instead an adolescent cry from the heart: we 
need to respect peoplel Such cries make one feel good at the time, and it 
is even important that our culture continuously hear such cries in public. 

100 
C.A.HOOKER 
But they can easily degenerate into mere sentimentality and (worse) hide 
crudely unworkable solutions behind them. I fear that Feyerabend's cries 
offer us the latter. Without understanding the life of love and reason there 
is only power (economic, political, military or whatever). In the power 
process love and reason are the frrst victims. The very crudity of 
Feyerabend's positive conceptions stand in the way of theorizing a 
constructive alternative. [End polemic] 
Feyerabend would accuse me of Western cultural imperialism, seeking 
once again to absorb all alternative traditions within a transcendent 
traditionless Western understanding. Perhaps so. In any event I do not at 
present have any understanding which really satisfies me of the current 
exceptional circumstances which face our species and our planet. 
However that is, I derive joy in this: it is necessary, valuable and utterly 
refreshing to have Feyerabend the iconoclast as foil. 
The University o/Newcastle 
Newcastle 
Australia 
BffiLIOGRAPHY 
Achinstein, P. and Barker, S. (eds). (1969) The Legacy of Logical Positivism, Johns 
Hopkins Press, Baltimore. 
Ayer, AJ. (1946), Language, Truth and Logic, Gollancz, London. 
Bechtel, W. (1989) 'An Evolutionary Perspective on the Re-emergence of Cell 
Biology' in Hahlweg/Hooker 1989b. 
Bjerring, A.K. and Hooker, C.A. (1979) 'Process and Progress: The Nature of 
Systematic Inquiry' in Barmark, J. (ed). Perspectives in Metascience, Berlings, 
Lund. 
Bjerring, A.K. and Hooker, C.A. (1980) 'The Implications of Philosophy of Science 
for Science Policy' in Hooker, C.A. and Schrecker, T. (ed8) The Human Context 
for Science and Technology, 2 vols, Social Sciences & Humanities Research 
Council, Ottawa, 1980, 1981. 
Bjerring, A.K. and Hooker, C.A. (1981) 'Lehrer, Consensus and Science: The 
Empiricist Watershed' in Bogdan, R.J. (ed). Profiles: Keith Lehrer, Reidel, 
Dordrecht. 
Bohm, D. (1965) The Special Theory of Relativity, New York, W.A. Benjamin. 
Brown, H.I. (1979), Perception, Theory and Commitment: The New Philosophy of 
Science, University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
Brown, H.I. (1987) Observation and Objectivity, Oxford, Oxford University Press. 
Brown, H.I. (1988) Rationality, London, Routledge. 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
101 
Campbell, D.T. (1986), 'Science's Social System of Validity-Enhancing Collective 
Belief Change and the Problems of the Social Sciences' in Fiske, D.W. and 
Shwader, R.A. (eds). Pluralisms and Subjectivities, Chicago, University of 
Chicago Press. 
Churchland, P.M. (1979) Scientific Realism and the Plasticity of Mind, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
Churchland, P.M. (1989), The Neurocomputational Perspective: Philosophical Essays 
on the Mind, Brain, and Science, Boston, MIT Press. 
Easlea, B. (1973) Liberation and the Aims of Science, Chatto and Windus for Sussex 
University Press, London. 
Feyerabend, P.K. (1961) Knowledge without Foundations, Oberlin College 
(mimeographed). 
Feyerabend, P.K. (1962) 'Explanation, Reduction and Empiricism', in Minnesota 
Studies in the Philosophy of Science Vol. III, ed. by H. Feigl and G. Maxwell, 
University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis. 
Feyerabend, P.K. (1965a) 'Problems of Empiricism', in Pittsburgh Studies in the 
Philosophy of Science, Vol. II (ed. by R. Colodny), Prentice-Hall, New Jersey. 
Feyerabend, P.K. (1965b) 'Reply to Criticism' in Cohen, R.S. and Wartofsky, M.W. 
(eds), Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science Vol. II, Humanities Press, New 
York. 
Feyerabend, P.K. (1969) 'Problems of Empiricism II', in R. Colodny (ed). Pittsburgh 
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. IV, University of Pittsburgh Press, 
Pittsburgh. 
Feyerabend, P.K. (1970) 'Against Method' in Radner, M. and Winokur, S. (eds) 
Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. IV, University of Minnesota 
Press, Minneapolis. 
Feyerabend, P.K. (1974) 'Popper's Objective Knowledge', Inquiry 17, 475-507. 
Feyerabend, P.K. (1975) Against Method, London, Verso. 
Feyerabend, P.K. (1978) Science in a Free Society, New Left Books, London. 
Feyerabend, P.K. (1987) Farewell to Reason, London, Verso. 
Friedman, M. (1974) 'Explanation and Scientific Understanding', The Journal of 
Philosophy LXXI, 5-19. 
Glastone, S. and Lovberg, R.H. (1960) Controlled Thermonuclear Reactions. New 
York: Van Nostrand. 
Hahlweg, K. and Hooker, C.A. (1989a) 'Evolutionary Epistemology and Philosophy 
of Science', in Hahl weg/Hooker 1989b. 
Hahlweg, K. and Hooker, C.A. (eds) (1989b) Issues in Evolutionary Epistemology, 
New York, State University of New York Press. 
Harper, W. (1989) 'Consilience and Natural Kinds Reasoning (in Newton's Argument 
for Universal Gravitation)' in Brown J.R. and Mittelstrass O. (eds). An Intimate 
Relation, Kluwer. 
Hooker, C.A. (1972) 'Critical Notice: Against Method, P.K. Feyerabend', Canadian 
Journal of Philosophy I, 489-509. 
Hooker, C.A. (1973) 'Empiricism, Perception and Conceptual Change', Canadian 
Journal of Philosophy 3,59-75. 
Hooker, C.A. (1975) 'The Philosophical Ramifications of the Information-Processing 
Approach to the Brain-Mind', Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 36, 

102 
C.A.HOOKER 
1-15. 
Hooker, C.A. (1978), 'An Evolutionary Naturalist Realist Doctrine of Perception and 
a Nihilist Doctrine of the Secondary Qualities' in Savage, C.W. (ed). Perception 
and Cognition: Issues in the Foundations of Psychology, Minnesota Studies in the 
Philosophy of Science, Vol. IX, University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis. 
Hooker, C.A. et al. (1980a) Energy and the Quality of Life: Understanding Energy 
Policy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 
Hooker, C.A. and van Hulst, R. (1980b), 'Institutionalising a High Quality Conserver 
Society', Alternatives (Journal of Friends of the Earth, Canada) 9 (Winter 1980). 
Hooker, C.A. (198Oc), 'Explanation, Generality and Understanding', Australasian 
Journal of Philosophy 58,284-290. 
Hooker, C.A. (1981a), 'Formalist Rationality: The Limitations of Popper's Theory of 
Reason', Metaphilosophy 12, 247-266. 
Hooker, C.A. (1981b), 'Towards a General Theory of Reduction, Dialogue XX, Part I, 
Historical Framework, 38-59, Part II, Identity and Reduction, 201-36, Part III, 
Cross-Categorial Reduction, 496-529. 
Hooker, C.A. (1983), 'The Future Must be a Fantasy' in Chapman, R.J.K. (ed). The 
Future, Public Policy Monograph, University of Tasmania. 
Hooker, C.A. (1987), A Realistic Theory of Science, Albany, State University of New 
York Press. 
Hooker, C.A. (1989a), 'Towards a Philosophy and Practice of Energy Policy Making', 
Journal of the McMaster Institute for Energy Studies, 1 (#2), 130-42. 
Hooker, C.A. (1989b), 'From Formalism to Control System' (in) Fine, A. and Leplin, 
J. (eds) PSA 1988, East Lansing, Michigan, Philosophy of Science Association. 
Hooker, C.A. (1991), 'Physical Intelligibility, Projection and Objectivity', British 
Journalfor the Philosophy of Science, 42. 
Kuhn, T.S. (1962), The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago. 
Popper, K.R. (1934), Logik der Forschung, Wien. (Translated as The Logic of 
Scientific Discovery, Hutchinson, London, 1962). 
Popper, K.R. (1973), Objective Knowledge, Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Suppe, F. (1974), 'The Search for Philosophic Understanding of Scientific Theories' 
in Suppe, F. (ed). The Structure of Scientific Theories, University of Dlinois Press, 
Urbana, Dl. 
Trigg, R. (1980), Reality at Risk: A Defense of Realism in Philosophy and the 
Sciences, Brighton Sussex, Harvester Press. 
van Fraassen, B.C. (1980), The Scientific Image, Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
Vickers, G. (1968), Value Systems and Social Process, Penguin, London. 
Vickers, Sir G. (1983), Human Systems are Different, Harper and Row, London. 
Ward, P.l (1989), 'A Model ofEnd-Directedness' in Hablweg/Hooker 1989b. 
NOTES 
1 I have long been a student of Feyerabend' s arguments (cf. my critical but supportive 
review, Hooker 1972). So despite the short notice given to contribute this essay, I 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
103 
accepted that otherwise kind invitation. Suppressed here is my analysis of the origins 
of Feyerabend's views in those of Popper and of Popper's in tum in those of 
empiricism, but some hints are given. (For partial analysis see Hooker 1972 and 1987, 
chapter 3). 
I am grateful for critical comments on an earlier draft of this essay by Hal Brown 
which improved its formulations at several places. 
2 See the path e.g. from Brown 1979 to 1987 and thence to 1988, and the passage 
from Hooker 1987, chapters 2 and 3 (written in 1973/4) to Bjerring/Hooker 1979, 
Hooker 1981a and Hooker 1987 chapter 7 (written 1982). In Hooker 1973 I criticize 
Feyerabend's particular account of perception and in Hooker 1978 try to provide my 
own. There are in fact several factors other than the critique of observation leading to 
this progression, intersecting and mutually reinforcing, including difficulties with 
formalist reason (see below). A similar, preceding biography is that exhibited by 
Feyerabend, e.g. the passage from 1961, 1962 to 1965a,b and 1969, thence to 1970, 
1974, 1975 and so to 1978 and 1987. 
3 Historically, positivism and various versions of empiricism co-existed, but it is 
helpful to analytic clarity to array the positions in order of increasing logical strength 
of the formal language employed. 
Empiricism argues that the choice of formal language within which to express 
cognition is itself "external" and pragmatic, rather than cognitive. Cognitive questions 
are "internal" questions which can arise only after the language for expressing them 
has been constructed. But, contrary to Kant and the rationalist tradition generally, 
these external choices are held to be a set of cognitively contentless conventions 
which merely specify the framework within which cognitive intelligence is to be 
described. Indeed, it may be argued that so long as a sufficiently rich language is 
chosen, everything that can be said in one such language can, in some sense, also be 
said in each other language - so that the choice is merely one of formal pattern. All 
logical truths of a formal system are logically equivalent (this is a formal expression 
of the idea that logic is independent of subject matter); in some sense the cognitive 
contentlessness of the choice among formal languages is an extension of the same 
idea. 
4 One should also note here the claim that all philosophy is empirically contentless 
and a matter of logical convention - see note 2. Some version of a meta-philosophical 
doctrine of this kind is forced on logical empiricism by the claim that the analytic 
sentences are subject-mauer-free combined with the claim that philosophy can be 
reduced to formal meta-theorems of logic. A doctrine of this sort took many forms 
among logical empiricists, just as did the choice of the preferred language itself. Often 
it was disguised and tacit, but revealed clearly by empiricist methods. The overall 
conception of empiricism given in the text lies, e.g., behind every major move made 
in Ayer 1946, though Ayer himself tries to confme philosophy merely to translation 
into the formal language, thereby missing the main arena: choosing and formally 
characterizing that language. (This latter choice is another small cloud on the 
horizon). In particular, the conventionalist doctrine took a particularly sharp form in 
the writings of Wittgenstein, where philosophical enquiry was held to be primarily 
clarificatory or therapeutic, i.e. once having exhibited or laid bare the logical 
structures involved (by translation into the formal language) there was no more to be 
done, no meaningful empirical content to be asserted. Again the powerfulness of the 

104 
C.A.HOOKER 
position is evident: one does not argue with one's philosophical opponents, one 
declares them conceptually confused and in need of therapy. Unfortunately, if one has 
any kind of uncertainty about attaining philosophical truth through clarity alone, then 
the reasonableness of this procedure becomes highly dubious - as examples of the 
equivalent problem in politics have made us vividly aware. (Here we have another 
small cloud on the horizon). 
5 See Hooker 1987. As noted, the empiricist distinction between analytic and 
synthetic truths marks a decisive weakening of the rationalist goal of providing 
foundational truths which were as strongly true as logic and yet as informative as 
empirical claims. The insistence that the choice of a formal language as the structure 
of mind is a contentless choice is what essentially distinguishes empiricism from 
Kantianism. Kant aims to achieve strong truth for the formal structure of rational mind 
through transcendental proof rather than through the vacuity of logical truth and 
formal convention. Empiricists then weaken the position further by substituting at 
most probable truth (or more generally, inductively supported truth estimator) for 
strong truth of informative or synthetic claims. Popper went on to weaken the position 
still further, by arguing that the goals of strong truth and informativeness were not 
simply independent but actually antagonistic. 
6 Besides Feyerabend 1965a,b, 1969, see Achinstein/Barker 1969, Bjerring/Hooker 
1979, 1980, 1981, Easlea 1973, Hooker 1987, and Suppe 1974 for these criticisms. 
7 This point, like many others, is found in Popper 1934, but now see e.g. Feyerabend 
1975, Hooker 1987 and below. 
8 Briefly, the most secure truths are the analytic truths, but these are also vacuous. 
The most insecure truths are the analytic falsehoods and these contain maximal 
content (since from an analytic falsehood all conclusions follow). In between these 
extremes lie the range of synthetic statements and the more informative they are the 
less likely they are, 'Q priori, to be true. (This is so because the more informative a 
statement the more possibilities it rules out and hence the more opportunities there are 
for it to tum out false). In particular, the probability of a conjunction is less than or 
equal to either of the probabilities of its conjuncts p(x 1\ y) < p(x), p(y). 
9 There are various variants of this position depending on whether one does one's 
sociology from a structuralist, Marxist, etc., point of view. For a review and 
references see e.g. Trigg 1980 or Hooker 1987, chapter 8. 
10 See especially Popper 1973. For a discussion of Popper's Platonist schizophrenia 
see Hooker 1981, which has its roots in the discussion of Popper vis-a-vis empiricism 
in Hooker 1987, chapter 3. For further discussion of these issues see Hooker 1981b on 
cause/logic and Hooker 1987, chapter 7 on normative/descriptive interaction. 
11 These four consequences of a formalist rationality have of course been known for a 
long time. They are, e.g., already clear in Brown's earlier work of 1979. The classic 
attacks on simple-minded foundationalism and universal method date back to Kuhn's 
classic 1962 and Feyerabend's delightful 1961 and like comments can be pointed out 
in many other places. 
12 Whether an evolutionary model is precisely the right one is of course a further, 
more refmed issue. A naturalist approach would look for some kind of systems 
theoretic unification of the processes on this planet, but that is not guaranteed Q priori. 
For my own current efforts in this direction see Hahlweg/Hooker 1989a. 
13 These tensions are problems which cannot be solved directly nor by transcending 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
105 
the conditions in which they were originally stated, as many problems can. Thus 
reason must work within them instead of dissolving them. For some preliminary 
discussion see Hooker 1987, sections 8.3.11 and 8.4.4 and cf. section 7.13. 
14 For a discussion of the interconnection see e.g. Hooker 1987, chapters 7 and 8. For 
the theory of public policy itself see e.g. Hooker 1980a, 1980b, 1983, 1989a. 
IS The false path to coherence truth is made more attractive and less avoidable if one 
adopts the currently fashionable assumptions that truth is to be restricted to semantic 
theory and even to the notion of reference within that. Rather, truth is a fundamental 
theoretical posit of cognitive theory in general, having manifold roles to play. See 
Hooker 1987, section 8.3.1. 
16 The explosions in both logic and decision theory this century, and their increas-
ingly intimate interaction with mathematics, economics and other scientific theories 
are vivid examples of our learning historically about reason. 
17 From a naturalistic perspective this is in turn to be linked to an account of effective 
neural information processing, cf. (with reservations) Hooker 1975 and 1987, chapters 
7,8. 
18 This systems conception is, I believe, the appropriate context in which to under-
stand and evaluate Feyerabend's various forays into the place of observation in 
science. I leave the reader to follow the matter through from Hooker 1972, pp. 506-7, 
and 1973 to 1987, section 8.3.2. 
19 In short, from the point of view of naturalistic realism and correspondence truth, 
relativist sociologies of knowledge and the like, while presenting useful information, 
fail to make a principled distinction between epistemic and other social institutions 
and thereby fail to do justice to the distinctive cognitive features of science. Cf. 
Hooker 1987,7.3,8.4.2. 
20 Material in this section has been extracted from a longer treatment in Hooker 1991. 
I am indebted to Malcolm Forster, David Holdsworth and Martin Leckey for 
emphasizing, in their different ways, the relevance of invariance. 
21 This was beautifully expressed many years ago by Bohm 1965, Appendix. 
22 For a general discussion of empiricism from this point of view see e.g. Hooker 
1987. Material in this section is derived in part from, and refines and corrects, Hooker 
1980c and Hooker 1987, section 8.3.5. 
23 For a relevant account of the identificatory complexities involved see Hooker 
1981b. At any rate the latter claim must be so for justified ontic commitment, but it 
will be a requirement of coherent formulation if one follows a common line, namely 
that properties are identified through their nomic roles - see e.g. Hooker 1981b, Part 
ll. 
24 So now we have a two tier structure: understanding is three-dimensional (spread, 
precision, depth) and depth of understanding is itself two-dimensional (coherent 
simplicity, ontological depth). 
2S The basic level is that of physics because physics studies the properties and laws of 
nature, if any, which are invariant across all natural systems. It is an important feature 
of our world that a substantive physics is possible. To what extent reduction of other 
sciences to physics is possible is also a feature of our world - a feature to be 
discovered. The answer will have a major impact on rational methodology. On 
reduction see Hooker 1981b, on theory and rational method see Hooker 1987, sections 
4.5 and 8.3.3. 

106 
C.A.HOOKER 
26 This example is adapted from Hooker 1989b. 
27 For a brief review of plasma diagnostic techniques see e.g. Glasstone/Lovberg 
1960. A working through of the many theories involved in one other well-known 
scientific instrument, the cloud chamber, is presented in Hooker 1987, chapter 4, 
Appendix 2. (N.B. Interchange C4 and Cs in the diagram). 
28 For the parallel case of the electron microscope see e.g. the discussion in Bechtel 
1988 and references. Incidentally, what is to count as "reasonably accessible" and 
what reasonably to do when stability fails in the various ways it can, are important 
methodological issues whose resolution is a function of theory, resources etc., not 
simply Popperian "decisions". These issues cannot be pursued here. 
29 See Hooker 1987, sections 7.8, 8.8.7, 8.3.9 and Hahlweg/Hooker 1989a, section 
IV.2. 
30 This example was drawn from Bjerring/Hooker 1979. On the mutual shaping of 
individual and institutional roles of relevance here see e.g. Vickers 1968, 1983 and of 
course much of the sociology of science literature (e.g. references in Hooker 1987). 
The consensus/dissensus structure is a sub-class of the class of positive and negative 
feedback structures which characterize dynamic complex systems generally. While 
this conception fits the naturalistic picture, it is too large a subject to explore here. 
One aspect of its treatment is given in some detail in Hahlweg/Hooker 1989a. 
31 For this approach to Popper see Feyerabend 1974 and Hooker 1981a, and 1987, 
section 8.3.8 at note 126. The idea that a decision theoretic approach to reason allows 
one to escape from the constraints of Popper's account and the concomitant skep-
ticism of Feyerabend, and more, is an old one with me, see e.g. Hooker 1972,1975. 
32 To illustrate the point I have elsewhere presented Feyerabend's favorite revolution, 
the transition from Arisotelian to Galilean science, in regulatory systems terms - see 
Hahlweg/Hooker 1989a, section IV.3. It is only a crude first sketch of that transition 
which I present, lacking many of the fme details which Feyerabend so affectionately 
(but on occasions so controversially) develops. Nonetheless, it exhibits across six 
regulatory layers of science a complex set of samenesses and differences which 
indicates that any simple picture of abrupt change is quite out of place. 
33 The crudity consists partly in the confmement of meaning to truth conditions and 
truth conditions to reference which is currently popular and partly, especially in 
Dummett's case, to the tacit reintroduction of empiricism. These crudities prevent the 
development of an adequately complex theory of either meaning or truth. For 
discussion see Hooker 1987, secs 8.3.1 and 8.4.3.10. 
34 For this conception of concepts see Hooker 1975 and for some interesting ideas on 
semantics in this setting see Churchland 1979, chapter 2 and Churchland 1989. My 
own current view is that intelligence is primarily and fundamentally non-linguistic -
for a brief discussion see Hooker 1987, sec. 8.4.3.10 and references. 
3S lowe the connection to biological dynamics to Hahlweg, see Hahlweg/Hooker 
1989a, section II. 
36 These are value judgements to the effect that adaptability is more important than 
adaptation, that restriction of public life to the exchange of goods and services etc. is 
compensated in value by the gains from both economic and scientific development, 
etc. Thus the economic market officially pretends to accommodate any set of values -
reflected only in t'erms of supply and demand provided by individuals in a market -
but in fact is also committed to value judgements expressing the limitations of moral 

BETWEEN FORMALISM AND ANARCHISM 
107 
obligations among individuals to constraints of market propriety, etc. For discussion 
see Hooker 1983, 1989a and references. 
37 Life is fllied with such irresolvable "tensions" (cf. note 13). In this essay I have 
systematically confmed myself to issues within the theory of science. But there have 
been hints along the way as to how the same approach could be extended - indeed 
must be extended - to a theory of society as a whole. Very briefly, one needs to 
theorize reason as bringing about transcendence in matters of personal relationships 
and personal development, yielding ethics, and· in matters of social and political 
institutional design generally so as to promote human flourishing and open-ended 
human development, yielding social and political theory. And I suggest that the key to 
doing this appropriately is to theorize it in terms of the development of love. Love, not 
in the cheap North American trivialities of sex and other useful exchanges, but in the 
free and reflective cherishing of all being for its own sake and potential. Even within 
the most narrow of epistemic activities it is love which grounds the possibility of 
objectivity. Epistemic institutions only flourish by institutionalizing processes of open 
criticism and consensus formation based on epistemic considerations and not 
egocentric considerations of self-promotion, power and the like. The same holds true 
psychologically for the individual. And love in the wider sense for another only 
begins when we are able to set aside projections and wish fulfillment, etc., to perceive 
the other clearly as they are. This point has its roots for Feyerabend and me in Popper, 
see e.g. his 1934, p. 37, note *5, Feyerabend 1961. Theorizing this in ethics, social 
and political philosophy requires the same detailed, positive effort which I have barely 
been able to sketch for the specific case of scientifically organized cognition. It is a 
task well beyond the scope of this paper. 

ALASTAIR HANNAY 
Free of Prejudice and Wholly Critical? 
Dada. A European movement of violent revolt 
against smugness, in which the forces of artistic 
creation were diverted to the service of anti-art. It 
arose from a mood of disillusionment at the 
conditions of the First World War, to which some 
artists 
reacted 
with 
irony, 
cynicism, 
and 
anarchical nihilism. Emphasis was given to the 
illogical or absurd and the importance of chance 
in artistic creation was exaggerated. According to 
one of several accounts, the name itself - which 
in French means "hobby-horse" - was obtained 
by inserting a penknife at random in the pages of 
a dictionary. The movement went to extremes in 
the use of buffoonery and provocative behaviour 
in order to shock and disrupt the complacency of 
a public which lived by traditional values . 
... The Oxford Companion of Art 
In an article on Eugene Ionesco' s theatre of the absurd Feyerabend once 
complained that Ionesco had failed to live up to his own ideal of freedom 
of Mind: "Ionesco is irritated only by ideologies of his opponents ... His 
own ideas, his works and the sections he approves of in the work of others 
he regards as established facts beyond the fluctuation of interpretations". 
But for this, however, his "art would indeed represent that "liberation" 
G. Munevar (ed.J, Beyond Reason, 109-129. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
109 

110 
ALASTAIR HANNAY 
which he claims for art, 'that apprenticeship to a free mind to which we 
are no longer accustomed, which we have forgotten, but whose loss is felt 
as much by those who believe themselves to be free without being so 
(being prevented by prejudice) as by those who believe they are not or 
cannot be free"'} 
There are several interesting points about this. First, Feyerabend also 
says that, but for the mentioned qualification, lonesco is "a critical 
rationalist".2 The implication is that at that time, in the 'sixties, 
Feyerabend believed he was one himself. Second, in his attempt to free 
lonesco of his residual dogmas, Feyerabend says that he is trying "to 
utilize to the full [Ionesco' s] contributions to a theatre that is free of 
prejudice, and fully critical".3 We may conclude, then, that in believing 
himself to be a critical rationalist Feyerabend believed also that this ideal 
of freedom from prejudice was his own ideal - that to be a critical 
rationalist is to be wholly critical, to root out all prejudice (by whatever 
effective means). Third, Feyerabend finds in lonesco's theatre of the 
absurd the 'fragments' of the method of unlearning which turns the self-
conscious destructiveness of Dadaism, to which Feyerabend also 
subscribes, into something like a critical tool, "to help make our auto-
matic thinking and behavior amenable to conscious criticism". 4 
Free of prejudice and wholly critical! Is that possible? Can a critique of 
knowledge (the field in which Feyerabend tries to render our automatic 
thinking and behavior amenable to conscious criticism) divest itself of all 
prejudice? Can one criticize without taking at least some unargued 
assumption for granted? More important, can the criticism be constructive 
without assuming the value of some positive goal, an ideology, some 
nonnative facts beyond the fluctuation of interpretations? Just how 
critical can one expect a critical rationalist to be? I try to answer these 
questions here by hitching them to a bold hypothesis, together with 
supporting arguments, to the effect that Feyerabend not only was, but 
perhaps to his surprise and dismay still is, some sort of critical rationalist. 
I appeal in the first instance to the account given of what critical 
rationalism is supposed to be by its founding father. The questions about 
freedom and lack of prejudice receive their shape and something like 
answers on the way. 

WHOLLY CRITICAL 
111 
2 
In his "Intellectual Autobiography" Popper says of the origin of the name 
"critical rationalism" that it was first applied, at his own suggestion, to a 
generalization of the critical method of trial and error-elimination 
expounded in Logik der Forschung. Actually, not just a generalization, 
but an ideal extension of the generalized method. That is to say, the 
method is first "generalized into ... the critical or rational attitude 
advocated in The Open Society. an attitude which can in principle apply 
beyond the possibility of critical tests characteristic of science", though it 
will use tests wherever possible, and preferably practical tests': and 
Critical Rationalism (CR) then becomes "the demand that we extend /this/ 
critical attitude as far as possible".5 
This account is interesting in two ways. First, though this will concern 
us only indirectly, people who argue the merits or weaknesses of CR have 
typically confmed themselves to the ungeneralized method of trial and 
error-elimination in the context of science, ignoring the fact that CR was 
conceived as a critical theory of human society. Second, Popper presents 
CR as embodying an important and socially valuable clash of values. I 
wish to suggest that Popper's account of this clash of values is itself an 
expression of another, related clash of values, a clash in which Popper 
and Feyerabend are involved, but which is still contained within the broad 
framework within which CR, at least according to Popper's own account 
of its origin, is to be applied. Further suggestions linked to this will 
emerge in due course. 
3 
On the one hand, according to Popper, "implicit in [the] attitude [of CR] 
is the realization that we shall always have to live in an imperfect society 
... not only because even very good people are very imperfect, nor ... 
because ... we often make mistakes because we do not know enough. 
Even more important than either of these ... is the fact that there always 
exist irresolvable clashes of value: there are many moral problems which 
are insoluble because moral principles may conflict".6 Since to eliminate 
conflict would require us to destroy "human values of the greatest 
importance ... there can be no [properly] human society without conflict". 
These human values should therefore "prevent us from attempting to 

112 
ALASTAIR HANNAY 
bring [a society without conflict] about". But then, on the other hand, and 
as itself an illustration not only of the presence of such clashes but also of 
the fact that they "may be valuable, and indeed essential for an open 
society", there is the value that conflicts with these, namely the need to 
"bring about a reduction of conflict". 7 
My ftrst suggestion or hypothesis is now this: Feyerabend's criticism of 
CR can be summarized in the charge that Popper has not applied to 
science the liberal virtues he says he has built into CR as an ideally 
generalized attitude to be applied to society as a whole. In effect the 
accusation is that CR in practice is not the generalization of the critical 
method (the "search for difficulties or contradictions and their tentative 
resolution")8 Popper claims it to be, and even that the liberal "realization" 
(that society must be imperfect) said to be implicit in CR and which 
clashes with the need to reduce conflict, is an essential addition to 
whatever was implicit in the critical method itself. Popper can of course 
claim that the liberal realization is already implicit in the critical method 
by virtue of the admission that all resolutions of problems are "tentative". 
Nevertheless, the criticism remains that the tolerant attitude which the 
critical method of trial and error-elimination evinces in its tentativeness 
with regard to its own resolutions of problems in science is belied by the 
absoluteness with which it dismisses what it takes to be error (this despite 
Popper's admission that "the acceptance of a refutation is nearly as risky 
as the tentative adoption of a hypothesis").9 In short, given Popper's own 
account of the origins of CR, together with his claim that "one of the best 
senses of "reason" and "reasonableness" [is] openness to criticism -
readiness to be criticized, and eagerness to criticize oneself',IO the charge 
is that what Popper and Popperians have called "critical rationalism" in 
respect of science is not critical rationalism at all. 
A merit of this construal of Feyerabend' s criticism of CR is that it 
makes it easier to see how a former proponent of CR should have become 
its most vociferous critic. We can now understand how someone might 
accept the ideals embodied in CR but deny that those who call themselves 
critical rationalists in fact live up to them, and even claim that in practice 
they actually tend to undermine these ideals.ll We might even see some 
point in allowing that while critical rationalists tend to undermine the 
ideals of critical rationalism, a professed pluralist, epistemological 
anarchist, and democratic relativist could in principle see himself as 
supporting them. We might see, in other words, how the CR-Iabel might 
be applied more reasonably to Feyerabend than to those to whom it is 

WHOLLY CRITICAL 
113 
usually applied. A doubly paradoxical conclusion (both that a Dadaist can 
be a rationalist and that critical rationalists are not critical rationalists) 
which an insufficiently critical rationalist (one who is not a critical 
rationalist) might regard as sufficient proof of the mistakenness of our 
(bold) hypothesis, which nevertheless and in a Lakatosian spirit (it is clear 
from the above that our hypothesis involves content increase) we may 
find it fruitful to keep alive for a while yet. 
In order to keep it breathing longer, I will advance a further suggestion, 
related to the first in the way Lakatos prescribes for research programmes, 
that is to say as a theory that is in some informal way a modification of 
the fIrst. We saw that, in his account of the origins of CR, Popper talks as 
if the irresolvable clashes of value which a society must preserve were 
exclusively of a moral character. This might indicate that in Popper's 
view the clashes that occur in science, or more generally in epistemology, 
are not of a kind that it is vital, with regard to "human values of the 
greatest importance", to preserve. If so, we can simply proceed in science 
and epistemology with the reduction of conflict, unhampered by the 
consideration that some important conflicts must be preserved for the 
good of society. This would explain Popper's relative illiberal attitude in 
matters of science compared with his avowed liberalism in matters of 
politics and society, and his apparent failure to interpret the critical 
method of science in the light of the critical attitude reputedly generalized 
from it. But if that has in fact been Popper's view, there is reason to say 
that it is not only false but also inconsistent with Popper's long-standing 
belief that "our often unconscious view on the theory of knowledge and 
its central problems ('What can we know?', 'How certain is our 
knowledge?') are decisive for our attitude towards ourselves and towards 
politics".12 For one who sees a connection between epistemology, self-
understanding, and politics, the fact that there is some connection 
between questions about knowledge and moral matters should be self-
evident. As also, then, should be the possibility that some clashes of value 
are precisely conflicts of opinion on the central problems of epistemol-
ogy, "What can we know?", "How certain is our knowledge?", "What 
forms of understanding or reason count as science?", and so on. My 
second suggestion, or hypothesis, then, is that even if Popper's relatively 
illiberal stance in respect of science can be construed as arising from one 
legitimate way of answering questions of this basic kind, and in particular 
the very broad question, "What can count as a worthwhile scientifIc 
theory?", he should, if he had seriously adopted the generalized critical 

114 
ALASTAIR HANNAY 
attitude which he calls "critical rationalism", have (1) treated this way of 
answering the question as "tentative", and therefore (2) been prepared to 
envisage other, including more liberal, ways of answering it, and (3) at 
the very least accepted the legitimacy of these, and hence the existence of 
some "clash" of epistemological "values or principles", so long as it was 
not evident that this conflict was of the kind that should be "reduced" out 
of consideration for society. Even if it was evident, of course, it would 
still be an open question on what side (or sides) the conflict should be 
resolved. 
The point of these remarks should now be clear. Feyerabend's defense 
of his own pluralism and anarchism is to a large extent based on the claim 
that the Popperian answer is in fact personally and socially destructive. 
What I am suggesting is that this claim is one of the issues which CR 
must itself evaluate according to its own professedly liberal and self-
critical standards of reason or reasonableness. One expects, as part of the 
CR-programme, serious attempts to deduce and evaluate the political and 
personal consequences of its own, as well as others', theory or theories of 
science and scientific growth, and also of the tolerance of clashes 
between these theories. Why, after all, should clashes of value be allowed 
to remain in morals but not in epistemology? In view of the fact that the 
professed adherents of CR have not seriously undertaken such attempts, 
while Feyerabend has, there is reason to say that he has followed the CR-
programme more conscientiously than they have. This is not, of course, to 
say that Feyerabend's negative conclusions about the official CR-theory 
of scientific growth (even in its least formalistic version in Lakatos's 
Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes), or his adherence to 
democratic relativism are well judged. It is only to observe that if CR 
applies its own standards of tolerance - the principle that the elimination 
of certain conflicts is worse for society than their persistence - then 
unless one of the following two conditions is satisfied it should tolerate 
Feyerabend's more tolerant epistemology. The conditions are: (1) 
Feyerabend's epistemology is epistemologically indefensible, which I 
suggest can only mean that it contains irremediable contradictions, which 
would only be 'proved' according to liberal CR-criteria after a long and 
testing experience with the view and its programmatically related 
modifications, and (2) Feyerabend's epistemology is socially (and 
personally) indefensible because, unlike clashes of moral principle, 
preserving the conflicts of epistemological principle which are tolerated 

WHOLLY CRITICAL 
115 
in Peyerabend's theory is less desirable from a social point of view than 
reducing them.13 
There is, however, a possible confusion here. Although Peyerabend's 
theory is more tolerant than Popper's or the various developments of the 
CR-theory, it is not so tolerant that it tolerates these latter; it is presented 
as an alternative in a conflict that Peyerabend obviously thinks should be 
resolved and in his own favor. Similarly, from the point of view of his 
opponents, if, in the event of their being unable to show that either (1) or 
(2) can be satisfied, they came (tentatively, tolerantly) to the conclusion 
that they must accept Peyerabend's tolerance, they would take it that they 
had abandoned their Popperian position and gone over to Peyerabend's, 
or perhaps advanced some intermediate position, hoping that one day 
Peyerabend would mellow and join them. Now although one can see why 
they (being initially intolerant) should regard this as a defeat, why does 
Peyerabend think this conflict should be resolved when in other cases 
"anything goes"? 
The answer, I suggest, is that the dispute is not about where to end but 
about where to begin. Peyerabend's dedication to that "apprenticeship to a 
free mind" of which lonesco spoke is that of a critic, of one who wants to 
bring all of our automatic thinking and behavior into critical focus. It is 
not what is going to happen as a result of the criticism, but where it 
should begin, that is his issue with Popper. Perhaps the traditional values 
will survive. Maybe Popperian, or even classical, rationalism will prove 
fruitful, will give better results than grass-roots permissiveness. Perhaps 
Popperian gardeners will have to be employed to impose order ''from 
above" on the unruly proliferation of grasses, or on the impending 
takeover of grasses by weeds. But first the alternatives to gardening must 
be given a chance. Peyerabend's criticism of Popperian rationalism is that 
it gives untested (ideological) grounds for not testing pluralism. Why does 
it do that? I suggest that there is a theoretical answer and that it lies in a 
basic difference of opinion on two articles of undeclared Popperian faith, 
two claims which imply that conditions (1) and (2) are satisfied. 
4 
The first of these articles of faith is an aspect of the assumption already 
mentioned, that matters of morals and epistemology should be treated 
differently. The special significance of that assumption in the present 

116 
ALASTAIR HANNAY 
context is that the notion of scientific growth lies outside the area of 
tolerance. We tolerate conflicts in morals because there is no clear 
measure of moral progress, or rather, of what count as progressively 
moral principles. Any "theory" of moral progress will therefore be 
arbitrary. Moreover, and this is an important point, any attempt to induce 
uniformity (or resolution of conflict) in morals is itself morally destruc-
tive, because it is a moral truth (which can be supported by appeal to 
generally accepted criteria of personal and social well-being) that people 
ought to achieve their moral growth on their own, within their own 
traditions, and with the aid of their traditionally (in)formed insights. To 
call this a moral truth is not, however, to advance a "theory" of morals in 
the sense in which the advancing of such theories is rejected. It is better 
understood as an expression of an initial, a primary, moral insight. It is 
above all a tolerant insight which does not compete with the views it 
tolerates (except where these essentially imply the negation of the 
insight). But in science there is progress. Consequently, it is indeed 
possible to advance a theory of the growth of science which effectively 
dismisses whole ranges of research programmes, research forms, and 
research results. 
Second, Popper's use of the word "conflict" to describe the varieties of 
opinion which he says ought to be preserved in society, because it is 
worse to impose uniformity than to go without it, testifies to the assump-
tion that such variety is, after all, an evil which one tolerates only because 
the cure is more harmful than the illness (the existence of conflict). It is 
therefore a standing presumption that differences should as far as possible 
be resolved. One does not resolve them in moral matters for the very 
reason that doing so tends to destroy an essential element in human 
society, a negatively defined element, namely the absence of 
authoritarianism, of totalitarian rule, of "dirigism"I4 of a cast-iron control 
over human action which obliterates friendship and freedom. IS But in 
science the overriding principle, that the cure should be withheld where it 
is worse than the disease, does not come into play. Consequently, all 
conflicts of epistemological or scientific principle should be resolved 
(though of course tentatively). 
These two articles of undeclared faith, first the assumption that 
epistemological differences can be resolved by a theory backed by 
objective criteria, and secondly that they should be resolved, lead by 
something approaching logical necessity to the rejection of a theory like 
Feyerabend's, a theory which positively rejects the "objective" criteria to 

WHOLLY CRITICAL 
117 
which Popperians appeal and encourages the proliferation of standards of 
scientific growth - i.e., of epistemological principles. 
Prom this it will now be clear that what I am proposing is that 
Peyerabend's own view of science and knowledge consists essentially in 
the negation of these two articles of faith, and which for the sake of the 
survival of our hypothesis we are not taking to be essential to CR itself. 
That is to say, my claim here is that Peyerabend's view is, fIrst, that 
theories of scientifIc growth are just as arbitrary as are, according to the 
fIrst article of faith, theories of moral growth - or theories of the growth 
of moral theories; and second, that difference and variety in matters of 
epistemology are not evils but growth-points to be encouraged and 
cultivated in the service of the eventual, but still always provisional, 
answers to the fundamental questions of epistemology. 
But perhaps one can go further. Drawing again on the analogy of (the 
arbitrariness of) theories of the growth of moral theories, I would suggest 
that Peyerabend's view is in essence an epistemological parallel to the 
view of the fIrst article of faith, which said that there is an initial and 
tolerant moral truth or insight to the effect that people ought to achieve 
their moral growth on their own, within their traditions, and with the aid 
of their traditionally formed insights, a truth or insight which does not 
compete with particular moral theories but says that the latter should be 
allowed to thrive in the situations for which (as Popper himself says) they 
are "discovered" and "even invented"16, a truth or insight for which there 
is, moreover, some non-arbitrary, that is to say, objective backing. 
Peyerabend's view of science is, I would like to suggest, that there is an 
initial, primary, tolerant truth or insight (perhaps combined in important 
ways with the moral one) which does not compete with particular 
epistemological theories except where such theories implicitly deny the 
initial truth or insight without having tested and found it wanting (in 
which case the denial should still not be absolute). It says that people 
ought to be allowed to contribute to scientific growth within their own 
traditions and with the aid of their own traditionally formed (and in-
formed) insights. In principle this does not exclude the eventual accep-
tance, by all or most traditions, of a narrow Popperian theory of science, 
in which many traditions will eliminate themselves and accept procedures 
for eliminating theories in the remaining traditions. But that must be the 
result of agreement among the traditions themselves, or at the very least 
of genuine experience of the traditions, and not of ideological pressure 
exerted from above by proponents of some especially prestigious 

118 
ALASTAIR HANNAY 
tradition. Moreover, since the result will remain in principle tentative and 
provisional, the initial, tolerant insight remains in force, a fact which, if 
the tolerance is real and founded in a genuine belief that even common 
agreement is not enough to establish the truth once and for all, will or 
should inspire the search for workable alternatives. In short, the error of 
the Popperian approach is to assume that epistemology and morals differ 
in the respect that in the case of the former but not the latter it is possible 
to locate an objective basis for a general theory which right from the start 
and once and for all eliminates whole ranges of forms and methods of 
research, as well as particular theories within the kind of research it does 
accept. What we have "right from the start" is the insight, truth, theory or 
what have you, that (in Popper's words except for the substitution of 
"epistemological" for "moral") "the fact that epistemological values or 
principles may clash does not invalidate them. Epistemological values or 
principles may be discovered, and even invented ... [be] accessible to 
some people and inaccessible to others".17 
True, applied to moral values and principles, Popper says that this does 
not involve "relativism", which for him means "the doctrine that any set 
of values can be defended", while Feyerabend does draw a relativistic 
conclusion ("democratic relativism") in the case of epistemology. But the 
disanalogy may be less than it seems. Popper must in any case accept that 
the divergent moral values or principles can Qe defended in terms of the 
situations in which they have been discovered, or for which they have 
been invented. That amount of relativism he cannot avoid. What else he is 
denying remains unclear. If he would allow that divergent moral views 
can compete with one another in some sense so long as it is not a sense 
which involves belief in some unchanging capacity for moral insight, then 
there would be a close parallel between his view on morals and 
Feyerabend's on knowledge. Or maybe Popper wants to say that although 
sets of (moral) values can indeed be defended in terms of the situations 
they are created for, this kind of defense is no argument for their validity, 
even within the situations, and that there are no arguments for validity in 
any case in respect of morals. 
Whatever may be the case here, however, the proposal remains, fIrst, 
that Feyerabend's view is a denial both of the first article of faith above, 
in that it asserts that epistemological differences cannot be resolved by a 
theory backed by objective criteria (which would require an unchanging 
capacity for epistemological insight, the belief in which can only arise by 
the ideological identification of one tradition's standards with an 

WHOLLY CRITICAL 
119 
"absolute"), and of the second article of faith, in that it asserts that in the 
interests of knowledge (and the knower) differences should not be 
eliminated; and then, second, that this combined view is the self-evidently 
correct starting-point for any investigation into scientific method, that is 
for any investigation into how we are to get to theoretical grips with 
nature. As such it is the proper point of departure for any critical 
rationalism, that is for any rationalism which is critical, amongst other 
things, of its own standards of rationality. 
5 
But "rationality" is a loaded word, as also (even more so) "rationalism", 
and to some extent even the innocuous-sounding "reason". Let us digress 
briefly to prepare the ground for an appraisal of whether the tenn 
''rationalist'' might be applied to a Dadaist, anarchist, and relativist. 
By "rational" or "rationality" in a simple sense we mostly mean no 
more (though it is quite a lot) than the universal human ability to make 
choices, amongst them prudent ones, and hit upon procedures and 
devices, some of them effective ones, as well as to construct and apply 
these, more or less satisfactorily. As such it is as neutral a label as one 
might expect to apply to something which, apart from simply being the 
case, obviously has its uses: it refers to the humanly significant 
anthropological fact that human beings can choose, contrive, construct, 
and act accordingly. So far there is no talk of rationalism. But in certain 
cirt:umstances the (almost) neutral fact can acquire a special value, for 
example where the universal organ of human reason is defended against 
the challenge or threat of a rival, a non-universal organ, be it faith, 
revelation, or whatever, something which directs courses of action from 
above with all the weight and ceremony of institution and ritual, in the 
light (or darkness) of ideas which are no longer products· of the powers of 
choice, contrivance, and construction of those upon whom they are 
imposed. Or the rival might be skepticism, that is to say a general 
depreciation of the human ability from below (or within) rather than 
above. In either case reason can now be defended, as it was by Descartes, 
as the basis of a democracy of ideas. 
But we know what became of Descartes's democracy. The principle 
that no ideas should be imposed from above which those upon whom they 
are imposed could not in principle accept on the basis of the natural light 

120 
ALASTAIR HANNAY 
of reason, acquired the fateful addition: "given the proper conduct of that 
reason". And this little phrase became as quickly an excuse for withhold-
ing democracy as the principle itself had been asserted to restore it. 
Reason became, not the unspecified species-ability to choose, contrive, 
and construct, but one or another set of specific rules or procedures for 
sorting truth from untruth, and in the field of society and politics for 
carving order (and law) out of chaos (and anarchy). Reason and 
rationality, as rules of procedure, were thus set over against unreason in 
any or all of its constant forms and manifestations (disorder, inclination, 
impulse, wishful thinking, sophistry, a general failure to "preserve 
standards"). Those on the side of reason in this narrow sense now called 
themselves rationalists, seeing themselves as custodians of intellectual 
law and order empowered (by Reason naturally) to protect civilization 
from the chaos that continually threatens to return, like a desert or a 
jungle, to deprive mankind of its hard-won habitat. They believed that 
they had the code to which ideas must conform to be given the stamp of 
intellectual approval and (if they thought about this at all) a clean bill of 
social health. Whatever does not conform must be kept out of circulation, 
be removed from the repertoire of ideas out of which "objective" 
knowledge must gradually be fashioned. Traditionally, rationalists have 
believed that there is just one objective order and that the proper use of 
reason leads you unerringly and inescapably towards it. 
If this is rationalism Feyerabend is no rationalist. But then it is unlikely 
that Popper is either. In his "Intellectual Autobiography" Popper says that 
his earlier use of "the ugly word 'rationalist' (as in 'rationalist' attitude)" 
was unnecessary, and that he could just as well have used the word 
"rational". He adds that the probable reason for using the ugly word was 
the bad one that he was "arguing in defence of 'rationalism"'.18 Perhaps 
Popper's CR is therefore not a species of rationalism in the above sense. 
There are indeed a number of reasons for not regarding it as such. In the 
first place the falsifiability thesis leaves all "knowledge" conjectural: CR 
dictates no unique procedure for establishing truth, only for arriving at 
tentative resolutions of specific problems. Second, in the course of the 
softening up of CR that culminates in Lakatos's Methodology of Scien-
tific Research Programmes, the procedures it does wish to retain can be 
made flexible and accommodating; they can adjust to a considerable 
degree of pressure from below. On the other hand, there is still a degree 
of dictation from above, and it remains characteristic of received CR, in 
whatever form, that whatever tentativeness it possesses lies not in its 

WHOLLY CRITICAL 
121 
attitude to rationality but in its attitude to the results of employing some 
definite set of standards (of growth in knowledge and of objectivity). 
Popper's own CR is decidedly less a critical approach to (amongst other 
things) the concept of rationality (as the term "critical rationalism" 
strongly suggests it is or was really intended to be), than a more or less 
dogmatic approach to the criticism of knowledge, an approach which does 
not also criticize what it counts as a properly critical approach (for all the 
modifications that have been made to CR, none has incorporated a 
procedure for criticizing critical rationalism's concept of rationalism). For 
this reason, in spite of the important ways in which CR diverges from 
traditional rationalism, it is possible to criticize it, as Feyerabend does, in 
the same terms as when of yore one appealed to reason against those who 
imposed from above their epistemologically undemocratic ideas upon 
people 
6 
But now Feyerabend, too, appeals to reason! He even esteems some forms 
of rationalism, or at least prefers them to Popper's. Thus "Mill", he says, 
"offers a form of rationalism that gives reasons [for judging the value of 
ideas] where Popperians ... have a blank stare ... a model [which] is 
better adapted to the sciences than Popper's ... and gives no prescriptions 
whatsoever for the shape research has to assume, [this being] left to the 
research process itself'.l9 And just as the appeal to reason was once made 
in the cause of the democracy of ideas, so Feyerabend appeals to reason 
by invoking the democratic principle, though not in this case by appealing 
to some abstract capacity with which all normal people are equipped but 
can exercise only if they follow the correct procedures, as if the construc-
tive aspect of reason either had nothing at all to do, or nothing to do with 
the culture or tradition in which people develop their mental skills; not by 
appealing to this but to those cultures and traditions themselves. Reason is 
in the first instance anybody's reason, a natural capacity, not a transcen-
dent set of rules; but it is not anything outside the historically variable 
cultural context to which particular reasoning creatures belong. Rules for 
the proper conduct of reason cannot therefore be prescribed outside a 
particular tradition. The divergent traditions should be allowed to flourish 
without the constraining ideology of a research-transcendent measure of 
scientific progress. "A citizen should be able to use the standards of the 

122 
ALASTAIR HANNAY 
tradition to which he belongs' -
what Feyerabend calls' democratic 
relativism".20 
But then does a critical rationalism that ends in relativism have any use 
left for the word "rationalism" in its code of epistemological ethics? If 
there is no general standard by which one can judge the research-im-
manent standards, so that any research method must stand on its own, and 
no research result is subject to any standard other than that of the method 
that is used (well or badly) to produce it, what basis is there for calling on 
the word "rationalism"? None, surely, it will be said, for rationalism just 
is the epistemological theory that some standards are better than others, 
that the human ability to choose, contrive, and construct when properly 
applied or controlled (e.g., by exposure to falsification) will lead more 
unerringly to the truth than when it is not properly applied. Therefore it 
seems that the correct conclusion for a critical rationalist to draw in such a 
case is that it is wrong to be a rationalist. In that case our own conclusion 
should be not that Feyerabend is a (perhaps the fIrst and so far only) 
critical rationalist, but that, in the light of the conclusions that he believes 
he has correctly drawn from the critical rationalist's injunction to be 
critical of his rationalism, he was (perhaps the fIrst and so far only) and 
(precisely by virtue of this fact) no longer is a critical rationalist. 
This possibility points to another. It might be thought that in advocat-
ing democratic relativism Feyerabend has simply abandoned epistemol-
ogy and gone over into politics ("People have the right to live as they see 
fIt",21 "[A] free society is a society in which all traditions should be given 
equal rights no matter what other traditions think about them",22 
"[D]emocratic relativism denies the right of traditions to impose their 
form of life on others").23 Or perhaps morality ("Mill [rightly] chooses 
his method not because it fIts a certain subject ... [but] because he 
believes that acting in accordance with it will improve the individuality of 
the man so acting, will make him a better thinker and a happier man").24 
Or is it pedagogy ("A society that contains many traditions side by side 
. .. enhances both the qUality of the traditions and the maturity of its 
citizens")?25 In any event, whatever epistemological advantages 
democratic relativism implies, Feyerabend obviously intends a large part 
of its justification to be found in certain vital personal and social benefIts 
he believes it will bring with it. 
How is this to be understood? Cynical opponents might accuse 
Feyerabend here of trying to protect his outrageously irrational and 
irresponsible epistemology (or lack of epistemology) with the ideological 

WHOLLY CRITICAL 
123 
belt of commonly accepted moral and political sentiment. Peyerabend is 
selling us the only democratic epistemology! In short an appeal to mob 
psychology. Others less cynical will see in democratic relativism a fonn 
of epistemological resignation coupled with eudaemonism: since there are 
no universal procedures for attaining (or knowingly approaching) truth, 
then why not just concentrate on becoming happy - amongst other things 
by having fun in science, now that there is no restriction there on freedom 
and fantasy. 
But clearly neither of these interpretations is correct. If one reads 
further one fmds that what Peyerabend is boldly claiming is that happi-
ness and truth go together (as once truth and beauty), that happier people 
are (as in the sentence quoted above) also better thinkers, that pluralism is 
not only good for you because it allows you better opportunities than does 
''the barren rationalism of the Popperians" to exercise your capacity to 
choose,26 it is also good for knowledge because improved choosing leads 
to - what? - to a better ability to sort good from bad theory. Thus there is 
something in democratic relativism analogous to the proper and improper 
use of reason. It is the effective and ineffective use of choice of theory. 
Peyerabend believes, with Mill, that there is "something like an instinct 
for right and wrong [and true and false] which is developed by the 
[scientist's] interaction with the historical material",27 an instinct which 
perhaps "cannot be fully articulated" and for that reason alone cannot be 
made into a set of rules. In other words, the politics, the morality, and the 
pedagogics are themselves a kind of procedure, a kind of prescription for 
the proper conduct of reason. Thus, agreeing again with Mill: 
"Proliferation, for Mill, is ... not only an expression of his liberal attitude 
... it is also an essential part of any rational inquiry concerning the nature 
of things". 28 And: "Democratic relativism ... not only supports a right, it is 
also a most useful research instrument for any tradition that accepts it". 29 
So politics, morality, and pedagogics are research tools. How do they 
work? By restoring to man his native gift of reason. To what end? Listen 
to this: "It is ... possible that the knowledge and the moral impulse that 
are needed to restore the harmony of man and nature will be available 
only to those who again try to relate knowledge to man as a whole and not 
only to that small but ever-growing tumor some are pleased to call his 
reason".3° Shades of Hamann! Shades of Lessing! Shades of any other of 
those writers now (condescendingly) referred to as precursors of the 
Romantic movement! Where once Hamann scorned the rationalism of the 

124 
ALASTAIR HANNAY 
Enlightenment and saw truth, in its most adequate fonn, in the unity of 
reason, faith, and sensual experience; where Lessing once lashed with his 
irony the modish French classicism of his time and saw in it the suppres-
sion of native Gennan genius;31 Feyerabend now scorns the "barren" 
Popperian rationalism, as well as its elitist Lakatosian residue, because 
they defend a scientific tradition which tries to dominate not just science 
but society too, a scientific tradition born in sin when, long ago, "some 
extraordinary people preferred the results of certain intellectual games to 
what they could learn from their senses and from tradition",32 and which 
continues to suppress native scientific genius by imposing its intellec-
tualist ideology "from above". 
7 
Back now to our starting-point. To Feyerabend's criticism of lonesco for 
treating his own ideas as "facts established beyond the fluctuation of 
interpretations", to Feyerabend's praise of lonesco for being, but for this 
one qualification, a critical rationalist, to Feyerabend's requirement of a 
fully critical theatre that it be free from prejudice, and to our supposition 
that Feyerabend requires the same of any activity, philosophical or 
otherwise, if it is to be genuinely critical. Isn't he guilty of exactly the 
same shortcoming? Doesn't he take the idea of a hannony between man 
and nature simply for granted, as also the idea that the human intellect 
stands in the way of, rather than theoretically consummates, this har-
mony? Doesn't he dogmatically assume these to be facts established 
beyond the fluctuation of interpretations? These questions lead to that 
other one: Can criticism be constructive without assuming something to 
be established beyond doubt? Perhaps the ideal of freedom from prejudice 
and of total criticism is unrealistic. Perhaps it shouldn't be an ideal. Isn't 
total criticism only destructive? Isn't it really a fonn of empty posturing? 
It is surely significant that Dadaists themselves tend(ed) to attach more 
significance to the mental activity of the artist (thinker) than to the objects 
(ideas) created. If there is anything creative in Dadaism, it is the construc-
tiveness with which it devises methods of destruction (as witnessed by the 
sheer inventiveness of calling destruction "criticism" and every kind of 
belief "prejudice"). 
But this picture of Dadaism is itself, I think, prejudiced. Why should 
Dadaists, besides being ingenious iconoclasts, not also be deeply serious 

WHOLLY CRITICAL 
125 
people? Let us grant that possibility. Then one might also assume that 
among the things they can be serious about are such central problems as 
"What can we know?" and "How certain is our knowledge?" Suppose 
then that some serious person, not yet a Dadaist, discovers that these 
questions are currently being asked in ways that prevent some possible 
answers to them being tested or even seriously raised? That, among the 
suppressed possibilities, is the very significant hypothesis of an Aris-
totelian harmony between man and nature, a potential harmony at least, 
one that "it is ... possible to restore [by means of the right kind of] 
knowledge and moral impulse", a harmony in the sense that man's 
"natural powers (sense perception, language, etc.) do not deceive him 
about [the world's] basic structure ... "?33 What if this serious person also 
discovers, on the one hand, that "[m]odem science contradicts [this 
claim]",34 and on the other that the standards of scientific rationality, the 
criteria that people accept for sorting good from bad science, are them-
selves the product of modem science, that they cannot without circularity 
be used to deny the Aristotelian hypothesis, but that people continue to 
use these criteria to reject not only this but also much else as myth, 
pseudo-science, and so on? He or she will want to make this influential 
and arbitrary piece of "automatic thinking" (with all its social and 
personal ramifications) "amenable to conscious criticism". But how? If 
the grip of this thinking is not only so strong that thinking people are 
undisposed to subject it to criticism, but also the only arguments they are 
disposed to be swayed by are arguments that presuppose the validity of 
the standards which our serious person wants to call in question, the 
attempt to loosen this grip (which at first need not be an attempt to 
introduce another set of standards) cannot seriously be carried out by 
argument: one cannot ingenuously argue against standards if the only 
arguments that have any effect are based on them. But then if 
"rationalists" cannot be made to loosen their own hold on this piece of 
automatic thinking, at least the hold their thinking has on others may be 
relaxed by making the rationalists into public figures of fun. If this idea 
occurs to our serious person, and he or she begins to resort to knowledge 
of the "psychological conditions under which criticism can be expected to 
become effective",35 he or she will have become to all intents and 
purposes a Dadaist. 
Whether this sketch provides a rational reconstruction of Feyerabend' s 
own intellectual birth as a Dadaist, I don't know. But it does suggest that 
Dadaism, as the cult of anti-reason, can be reconstructed rationally - that 

126 
ALASTAIR HANNAY 
is reconstructed as a rational position. And by the same token, by the very 
facts it appeals to, it indicates that science in all its contemporary and 
historical variety cannot. If there is reason here, then there is no reason 
why people who are seriously concerned with basic epistemological 
questions and become Dadaists should not regard themselves as rational 
critics of the cognitive enterprise. As for the inconsistency of introducing 
a highly contentious cosmological hypothesis, the above reconstruction 
resolves it simply by construing it as a hypothesis and not as an es-
tablished fact. 
However, the hypothesis is not just thrown in as <t piece of Dadaist 
buffoonery to loosen up our thinking. Note first that while Peyerabend 
praised the theatre of the absurd for jolting us out of our traditional ways, 
he claims that democratic relativism is a "fine thing" because it keeps us 
to our traditions.36 Is this a volte-face? No. Democratic relativism defends 
traditions not to preserve mechanical thinking but because, as "a most 
useful research instrument'?7 it develops the individual's sense of 
(theoretical and moral) right and wrong. Safeguarding people from the 
alien grip of research-transcendent standards is, in this light, just a further 
application of the principle that no thinking should be automatic. Here it 
is the process of selecting between traditions that is being brought to 
critical consciousness. So democratic relativism does introduce something 
new aft<?r all, namely the idea that some interpretations may be right. 
Where Dadaism says simply, don't assume anything is right (or wrong), 
democratic relativism says, don't assume the rightness or wrongness of 
any method of selection. 
And of course eventually a serious person who resorts to Dadaism must 
consider how, once people are freed from their belief that certain facts are 
established beyond the fluctuation of interpretations, criticism is to 
proceed constructively. If such a person were to apply to the standards for 
judging between research programmes the same principle that he has 
applied to the programmes themselves, everyone would no doubt consider 
this a very rational step. As they would the further decision to abstain 
from questions concerning the "epistemological status" of research-
immanent standards so long as the only answers seem to require appeal-
ing to abstract theories and principles for which there is not intuitional 
("grass-roots") basis in the individual scientist's experience of choice. It 
could be argued that such a person deserves more than any other the title 
"critical rationalist", in the first place for restoring to people the idea that 
their natural "reasoning" abilities (choosing, contriving, constructing) are 

WHOLLY CRITICAL 
127 
not only all the cognitive means there are, but are sufficient in them-
selves; and in the second place for restoring to the idea of "reason" its 
proper depth and breadth. 
POSTSCRIPT 
But just as Heidegger found the word "consciousness" too heavily 
burdened with Cartesian implications to be a useful tool in describing the 
facts of experience as he saw them, so a critical rationalist who earns his 
title in the way just described may find the word "reason" too closely 
associated with a shallow intellectualism to give that depth and breadth its 
due. If he does fmd that, then we should not be surprised if eventually he 
bids reason conspicuously farewell.38 In saying good-bye to reason it is of 
course more than just the word itself he is taking leave of; what is being 
left behind is the whole intellectualist approach to knowledge. Still, we 
must note that democratic relativism has in fact been offered as a piece of 
constructive epistemology. Also Feyerabend's writings are replete with 
suggestions for a broad account of cognitive experience which, however 
much in content it differs from traditional proposals about the scope and 
the right use of reason, resembles these very much in form. Formally, too, 
it requires arguments, which are after all reasons. So long as he is 
prepared to offer arguments seriously and not just as a Dadaist trick, 
Feyerabend might be said to give reason its due also in a more straightfor-
ward sense. But that hardly qualifies him as a "rationalist". So perhaps 
this word too can be dropped, and with it at least the letter of our bold 
hypothesis. What I myself have offered are some reasons for hesitating to 
say that what is thereby falsified is its spirit. If Feyerabend does not like 
to be thought a better critical rationalist than Popper, that might be 
because it would imply he still regards at least some facts as being beyond 
the fluctuation of interpretations. But how can it be otherwise when 
criticism claims to be constructive? 
The University of Oslo 
Oslo 
Norway 

128 
ALASTAIR HANNAY 
NOTES 
1 Paul K. Feyerabend, 'The Theatre as an Instrument of the Criticism of Ideologies: 
Notes on lonesco', Inquiry 10 (1967), p. 299. The enclosed quotation is from E. 
lonesco, Notes and Counter-notes, trans. Donald Watson (London: Allen and Unwin, 
1964). 
2 Feyerabend, op. cit., p. 299. 
3 Ibid., p. 298 
4 Ibid., p. 307. 
S Karl Popper, Unended Quest: An Intellectual Autobiography (Glasgow: Fon-
tana/Collins, 1976), pp. 115-116. 
6 Ibid., p. 116. 
7 Ibid., p. 116. 
8 Ibid., p. 115. 
9 Ibid., p. 99. 
10 Ibid., p. 115. 
11 cr. the following exchange in Paul Feyerabend, 'Dialogue on Method', in G. 
Radnitzky and G. Andersson (eds), The Structure and Development of Science, 
Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science 59 (Dordrecht/Boston/London: D. Reidel 
Publishing Co., 1979), pp. 92-93: A says, 'Critical rationalism ... tells you that your 
attitude towards ideas should be a critical attitude; it tells you that theories will be 
easier to criticize the more boldly they are presented. It encourages those who have 
new ideas to introduce them without precautions, in the strongest possible way ... ', on 
which B comments as follows: '... from your description one would assume that 
critical rationalists are free minds who write a vigorous and lively style, who have 
considered the limits of rationality, who oppose science in its attempt to dominate 
society, who have found new ways of presenting their views, who make maximum 
use of media, fIlm, theatre, dialogue in addition to the essay, who have discovered the 
function of emotions in discourse and ... one would assume that they are part of a 
movement that is interesting, aids people in their desire for freedom and independence 
and brings out the best in them. Yet what I do see is just another dreary bunch of 
intellectuals writing in a constipated style, repeating ad nauseam a few basic phrases 
and being mainly concerned with the development of epicycles to such intellectualist 
monsters as verisimilitude and content increase. Their pupils are either frightened or 
nasty, depending on the kind of opposition they encounter ... They do not criticize, 
that is, they do not invent ways of putting things in perspective; they reject what does 
not suit them ... '. In connection with this latter objection see, e.g., P. K. Feyerabend, 
'On the Critique of Scientific Reason', in R. S. Cohen et al. (eds), Essays in Memory 
of Imre Lakatos (Dordrecht/Boston/London: D. Reidel Publishing Co., 1976), p. 137, 
note 5: 'Critical Rationalists take great care to show that prima facie disreputable 
procedures in science, when looked at in detail, tum out to be quite acceptable ... 
They also know that there are good scientists and bad scientists and that the proce-
dures of the former are not discredited by the errors of the latter ... The attitude 
towards Marxism, or astrology, or other traditional heresies is very different. Here the 
most superficial examination and the most shoddy arguments are deemed sufficient'. 
12 Popper, op. cit., p. 115. 

WHOLLY CRITICAL 
129 
13 I have tried to clarify the mutual dialectics of these two conditions in a subsequent 
paper, 'Politics and Feyerabend's Anarchist', in M. Dascal and O. Gruengard (eds), 
Knowledge and Politics (Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press, 1989). 
14 Popper, op. cit., p. 115. 
15 Ibid., p. 116 
16 Ibid., p. 116. 
17 Ibid., p. 116. 
18 Ibid., p. 219, note 173 
19 Paul Feyerabend, 'In Defence of Aristotle: Comments on the Condition of Content 
Increase', in G. Radnitzky and G. Andersson (eds), Progress and Rationality in 
Science. Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science 58 (Dordrecht/Boston/London: 
D. Reidel Publishing Co., 1978), p. 169. 
20 Paul Feyerabend, 'Democracy, Elitism, and Scientific Method', Inquiry 28 (1980), 
p. 11, emphasis removed. Cf. Paul Feyerabend, Science in a Free Society (London: 
New Left Books, 1978) and Erknenntnis fur jreie Menschen (Frankfurt a.M.: 
Suhrkamp, 1980). 
21 Ibid., p. 15, emphasis removed. 
22 Feyerabend, 'Dialogue on Method', op. cit., p. 86. 
23 Feyerabend, 'Democracy, Elitism, and Scientific Method', op. cit., p. 14. 
24 Paul Feyerabend, 'Imre Lakatos', The British Journal/or the Philosophy o/Science 
26 (1975), p. 15. 
25 'Democracy, Elitism, and Scientific Method', op. cit., p. 15. 
26 'In Defence of Aristotle', op. cit., p. 168. 
27 'Imre Lakatos', op. cit., p. 14; cf. p. 10. 
28 'Democracy, Elitism, and Scientific Method', op. cit., p. 7; emphasis added, 
author's emphasis removed. 
29 Ibid., p. 17; emphasis added, author's emphasis removed. 
30 'In Defence of Aristotle', op. cit., p. 169. 
31 In this case the ideological basis was of a simpler nature than the kind usually 
exploited in the defence of formalism. The trend-setting Frederick II gave French 
classicism the stamp of royal approval. In France itself the classicists resorted to 
abuse, Voltaire describing Shakespeare, for instance, as a 'drunken savage'. Lessing 
defended Shakespeare against the arid perfection of writers such as Racine and 
Comeille and he himself wrote with Feyerabendian trenchancy when opposing them 
and their defenders. 
32 'Imre Lakatos', op. cit., p. 3. 
33 Ibid., p. 6. 
34 Ibid., p. 6. 
35 'The Theatre as an Instrument', op. cit., p. 298; original emphasis. 
36 'Democracy, Elitism, and Scientific Method', op. cit., p. 17. 
37 Ibid., p. 17. 
38 Apart from a few stylistic changes and the insertion of Note 13, this final paragraph 
is the only addition to the original version of this paper that appeared in German in 
1980. Feyerabend's Farewell to Reason (London: Verso) was published in 1987. 

IAN HACKING 
Speculation, Calculation and the 
Creation of Phenomena 
This is a philosophical paper about experiments in physical science. Their 
chief role is not to test theories, nor to generate data, nor to make 
observations possible. An experimenter will want to do all of those things, 
but even more important is the need to produce stable phenomena. Very 
few phenomena occur in nature in any readily discernible way, so it is 
worth saying that the one role of experiment is to "create phenomena". 
Experimental work has a life of its own, related to but not subservient 
to theory. This proposition, evident in itself, needs elaboration. Recent 
work in the history and philosophy of science has been heavily dominated 
by thinking about theory. Hence one now has to re-establish that there are 
a great many different kinds of relation between theory and experiment, 
that these relations vary in different fields, and that they change during 
the development of a single field. One must also illustrate how even in 
highly theoretical fields experiment has often anticipated theory. Here I 
undertake the more philosophical project of describing a role for experi-
ments that has been largely overlooked. 
Part 2 of the present paper explains my idea about "the creation of 
phenomena" and its connection with speculation and calculation. Part 3 
applies this terminology to several facets of experimentation. Part 1 is 
merely negative. It repeats some platitudes about observation in science-
commonplaces that Feyerabend has on occasion tended to dismiss and is 
often taken to deny. 
1. OBSERVA nONS 
1.1. On the Need/or a "New Terminology" 
Feyerabend has downplayed the distinction between "observation and 
theory", writing, in Against Method, that, 
G. Munevar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 131-157. 
@ 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
131 

132 
IAN HACKING 
this distinction is still upheld by almost all philosophers of science. But what is the 
point? Nobody will deny that the sentences of science can be classified into long and 
short sentences, or that its statements can be classified into those which are intuitively 
obvious and those which are not. Nobody will deny that such distinctions can be 
made. But nobody will put great weight on them, or will mention them, for they do 
not play any decisive role in the business of science. (p.168). 
Notice how the distinction between observation and theory is instantly 
turned into a distinction among sentences, statements (or terms). 
Feyerabend has contributed a great deal to our realization that by now the 
philosophy of meanings has become a disaster for the philosophy of 
science, so it is hardly surprising that he dismisses a distinction among 
different kinds of sentences. He says on the same page that we need a 
"new terminology" in this domain} I tend to agree. My "speculation", 
"calculation", "creation" and "phenomena" are part of a foray into new 
descriptions, albeit using old words. But I also think we ought to be a 
great deal more careful in using our old familiar terminology. We should 
certainly quit expressing a distinction between observation and theory as 
an absurd meta-linguistic distinction in terms of observational and 
theoretical statements. Since the word "observation" has itself been much 
abused, I shall, in this first and negative part of my paper, pedantically 
encourage more care with words than has been common in the philosophy 
of science. Characteristically it is the philosophy of meaning that has been 
largely responsible for the abuse of language itself. 
1.2. On Containing Theoretical Assumptions 
N.R. Hanson coined the catchphrase "theory-loaded" in his splendid 
book, Patterns of Discovery. Every observational term and sentence was 
supposed to carry a load of theory with it, so that all observation is 
informed by theory. Since Feyerabend has abandoned any interest in 
meanings that he may once have had, it is hardly surprising that he has 
had very harsh things to say, quite recently, about the "theory-loaded" 
doctrine. Yet at the time that he wrote Against Method he was still writing 
that, 
observational reports, experimental results, "factual statements", either contain 
theoretical assumptions or assert them by the manner in which they are used. (p. 31). 
I disagree with what is actually said here, but before explaining why (in 
Section 1.3) I want to cancel what remarks like this seem to suggest. One 

THE CREATION OF PHENOMENA 
133 
may get the idea that "experimental results" are what matter to an 
experiment and that they are stated by, or even are constituted by, an 
"observation report" or a "factual statement". I shall insist on the truism 
that experimenting is not stating or reporting but doing. 
Observation and experiment are not one thing nor even opposite poles 
of a continuum. Evidently many observations of note have nothing to do 
with experiments. Claude Bernard's 1865 Introduction to the study of 
experimental medicine remains the classic attempt to distinguish concepts 
of observation and experiment. Bernard tests his classifications by a lot of 
hard medical examples where observation and experiment get relentlessly 
muddled up. I do not want to pursue his kind of point but instead to use an 
example to emphasize something that is more noticeable in physical 
science than in medicine. 
The Michelson-Morley experiment has been so overworked by 
successive generations of philosophers that one hesitates to take the risk 
of inviting yet further blunders, but the example does have the merit of 
being well known. The published report of the experiment of 1887 is 12 
pages long. The observations were made in the course of a couple of 
hours on July 8, 9, 11 and 12. The results of the experiment are 
notoriously controversial. Michelson thought the chief result was partial 
confIrmation of Stokes' aether-drag explanation of astronomical aberra-
tion. At any rate the experiment lasted over a year. This included making 
and remaking the apparatus and above all acquiring the knack of knowing 
when the apparatus is working. It has been common to use the label, "the 
Michelson-Morley experiment" to denote a sequence of intermittent work 
beginning with Michelson's success of 1881 and going on to include 
Miller's work of the 1920's. One could say that the experiment lasted half 
a century while the observations that were actually reported took maybe a 
day and a half in all. Moreover the chief result of the experiment, 
although perhaps not an "experimental result", was a radical transforma-
tion in the possibilities of measurement. It was to that which Michelson 
devoted his energies after 1887, and it was for that he won a Nobel prize. 
In short: factual statements, observation reports and experimental 
results are not even the same kinds of thing. To lump them together is to 
make it impossible to notice anything about what goes on in experimental 
science. In the quotation from Feyerabend with which I Qegin this section, 
he is of course arguing against some opponent, but it is a mistake ever to 
acquiesce to the implicit assumptions of the meaning-obsessed inter-
locutor. 

134 
IAN HACKING 
1.3. On Reporting Observations 
The quotation of Section 1.2 says that observation reports, etc., always 
contain or assert theoretical assumptions. This assertion is hardly worth 
debating because it is so obviously false - unless one attaches a quite 
attenuated sense to the words, in which case the assertion is true but 
trivial. Only equivocation could prompt such an assertion. I find it odd to 
read such a thing in Feyerabend, for his "pragmatic theory of observa-
tion", stated in the paper "Problems of Empiricism", seems to me to lead 
directly away from the equivocation.2 
Most of the quibble arises over the word "theory", which is best 
reserved for some fairly specific body of speculations or propositions 
with a defmite subject matter. Thus one speaks of Boskovic's theory of 
matter of 1758 (found in Philosophiae naturalis theoria), or one talks 
about the mid-eighteenth century monadic theory of matter which in some 
way anticipates field theory. Some speculations can be cast in a few 
words. Some finalized theories can be summed up in a few equations. 
Most theories are prolix and ramble. In any case they are composed by 
definite assertions about some definite problem area. Most low-brow uses 
of the word "theory" share these features, as when one hears about 
Goodenuff's theory on the Kennedy assassinations. Unfortunately 
Feyerabend has used the word to denote all sorts of inchoate implicit or 
imputed beliefs. To condense him without malice, he wrote in effect that, 
Our habit of saying the table is brown when we view it under nonnal circumstances, 
or saying the table seems brown when viewed under other circumstances ... expresses 
our belief that some of our sensory impressions are veridical and some are not ... that 
the medium between us and the object does not distort ... that the physical entity that 
established the contact carries a true picture ... the material which the scientist has at 
his disposal, his most sublime theories and his most sophisticated techniques included, 
is structured in exactly the same way.3 
I doubt that ever in my life, until this moment, have I ever uttered the 
words, "the table is brown", or, "the table seems to be brown". I certainly 
do not have the habit of uttering the first sentence when looking at a 
brown table in a good light: Why must we philosophers perpetuate such 
manifest absurdities in order to conduct our arguments? 
Ignoring the absurdity, I of course agree that we have all sorts of 
expectations, opinions, working hypotheses and habits when we talk. 
Some of these we express. Some are contextual implications. Some can at 

THE CREATION OF PHENOMENA 
135 
best be imputed to the speaker by a sensitive student of the human mind. 
But only in a most attenuated sense of the word "theory" can these 
prejudices, habits, implications and imputations be called theoretical 
assumptions. In a stricter and more natural sense of the word, plenty of 
observations are to found reported in the history of science, observations 
which neither assert nor contain anything properly called a theoretical 
assumption. I shall give a detailed example in Section 1.6 below. But fIrst 
let me emphasize an elementary distinction. I should have thought it too 
self-evident to mention, but I have noticed that many people who have 
read a little philosophy are almost incapable of making it. This is the 
distinction between: 
(a) 
reporting an observation (or making an observation, or conducting 
an experiment, etc). because one entert:tins a theory, or has some 
expectations, in the light of which the 
·~~rvation (or experiment) 
seems interesting. 
(b) 
expressing a theoretical assumption, either explicitly or implicitly, 
in the course of reporting an observation. 
One may be pretty sure that every report of an observation singled out 
by an historian of science will be a report that was made because its 
author had some theoretical views or instructive expectations. But that is 
a far cry from saying that the report itself asserts or contains those views. 
Some reports do, and some reports don't. It is a mistake to say that they 
all do. 
1.4. On Noticing 
Although Feyerabend has denounced the "theory-loaded" doctrine, it is 
worth going back for a moment to Hanson. He pointed out several 
different things. One is a fact about language, and this dominates the 
paragraphs in Patterns of Discovery in which the word "theory-loaded" 
occurs. He reminds us that there are very subtle linguistic rules about 
even the most commonplace words, e.g., the verb "to wound" and the 
noun "wound". Only some cuts, injuries etc., in quite specifIc kinds of 
situation, count as wounds. If a surgeon describes a gash in a man's leg as 
a wound, that may imply that the man was hurt in a fIght or in battle. 
Such implications occur all the time, but they are not in general to be 
called theoretical assumptions. 
Hanson also drew attention to the fact that one may see or notice a 
phenomenon only if one has a theory that makes sense of it. His book The 

136 
IAN HACKlt'lG 
Positron is a sustained illustration of this thesis. He claims that people 
could see the tracks of positrons only when there was a theory, although 
after the theory, any undergraduate can see the selfsame tracks. This we 
might call the doctrine that noticing is theory-loaded. 
Undoubtedly people tend to notice things that are interesting, surpris-
ing, and so forth, and such expectations and interests are influenced by 
theories they may hold - not that we should play down the possibility of 
the gifted "pure" observer either. But there is a tendency to infer from 
stories like that of the positron, that anyone who reports, on looking at a 
photographic plate, "that's a positron", is thereby implying or asserting a 
lot of theory. I do not think this is so. An assistant can be trained to 
recognize those tracks without having a clue about a theory. In England it 
is still not too uncommon to find in a lab a youngish technician, with no 
formal education past 16 or 17, who is not only extraordinarily skillful 
with the apparatus, but also quickest at noting an oddity on e.g., the 
photographic plates he has prepared from the electron microscope. 
But, it may be asked, is not the substance of the theory about positrons 
among the truth conditions or truth presuppositions for the type of 
utterance that we may represent by "that's a positron"? Possibly, but I 
doubt it. The theory might be abandoned or superseded by a totally 
different theory about positrons, leaving intact what had, by then, become 
the class of "observations sentences" represented by "that's a positron". 
Of course the present theory might be wrecked in quite a different way, in 
which it turns out that so-called positron tracks are artifacts of the 
experimental device. I am not claiming that the sense of "that's a 
positron" is any more unconnected to the rest of discourse than "that's a 
cow". I claim only that its sense need not be necessarily entangled in 
some particular theory, so that every time you say "that's a positron" you 
somehow assert the theory. 
Let me conclude this point with a different example. I think that 
Caroline Herschel discovered more comets than any other person in 
history. She got eight in a single year. Several things helped her do this. 
She was indefatigable. Every moment of cloudless night she was at her 
station. She also had a clever astronomer for a brother. She used a device, 
reconstructed only in 1980 by Michael Hoskin, that enabled her, each 
night, to scan the entire sky, slice by slice, never skimping on any corner 
of the heavens. When she did find "with the naked eye" a curiosity she 
had good telescopes at hand to look more closely. But most important of 
all, she could recognize a comet just by looking. Everyone else except 

THE CREATION OF PHENOMENA 
137 
possibly Sir William Herschel had to follow the path of the suspected 
comet over many nights, before reaching any opinion on its nature. 
It might well have turned out that Herschel's theory about comets was 
radically wrong, since replaced by an account so different that some 
would call it incommensurable with hers. Yet this need not call in 
question her claim to fame. It would still be true that she discovered more 
comets than anyone else. Indeed if our new theory made comets into mere 
nothings, optical illusions on a cosmic scale, then her discovery of eight 
comets in a single year might bring more a smile of condescension than a 
gasp of admiration, but that is something else. 
1.5. Observation Is a Skill 
We may also use Caroline Herschel to rebut the idea that observation is 
just looking. Quine has sought to dispel the idea that all observations are 
theory-loaded by saying that "observations are what witnesses will agree 
about, on the spot". He proposes that we "drop the talk of observation and 
talk instead of observation sentences, the sentences that are said to report 
observations". Then he assures us that "a sentence is observational insofar 
as its truth value, on any occasion, would be agreed to by just about any 
member of the speech community witnessing the occasion". And "We can 
recognize membership in the speech community by mere fluency of 
dialogue". 
It is hard to imagine a more wrong-headed approach to observation. No 
one in Caroline Herschel's speech community would in general agree or 
disagree with her about a newly spotted comet, on the basis of one night's 
observation. Only she, and to a lesser extent Sir William, had the requisite 
skill. This does not mean that we would say she had the skill unless other 
students, using other means, did not in the end come to agree on many of 
her identifications. Her judgements attain validity only in the context of 
the rich scientific life of the period. 
In a better known but not always well understood tale, Sir William 
Herschel at first thought that Uranus was a comet. Later, and after closer 
study, he decided it did not have the character of a comet, and guessed it 
might be a new planet. This hunch was confirmed by the work of others 
using quite different techniques, and sometimes following out quite 
independent lines of investigation. I will not say that William "observed" 
this was a planet. He noticed a heavenly body, not a star, probably not a 
comet, and guessed it was a planet, and it took better mathematicians than 

138 
IAN HACKING 
he to show he was right. I mention William to point our part of the skill of 
the observer: the skill of taking note of that nagging feeling of doubt. As 
you are having your daytime sleep, you mull it over. It didn't look quite 
right, so you go back next night and have another look - sometimes with 
memorable results. 
1.6. Radiant Heat 
Only a residual theory of meaning makes philosophers insist that 
observations carry a lot of theory along with them. We see from the 
example of Quine that rejecting one bit of one theory of meaning may still 
leave a thorough-going meaning-philosopher. But once one forgets about 
meanings, one can begin to note the many different kinds of connection 
that exist between observation and theory. I certainly do not contend that 
reports of observations are free-floating like the "sense-datum" statements 
of the 1920's. Yet so varied are the possibilities that we can even fmd in 
the annals of science examples of pure sense datum statements! They are 
rare but it will be nice to conclude this part with an example that is as 
divorced from theory as any statement can possibly be. 
Sir William Herschel was 61 in 1800. That was the year in which, as 
we now put it, he discovered infra-red radiation and commenced the 
theory of radiant heat. He made about 200 experiments and published 
four major papers on the topic, of which the last is 100 pages long. All are 
to be found in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society for 
1800. He began by making what we now think of as the right proposal 
about radiant heat, but ended in a quandary, not sure where the truth 
might lie. 
He had been using colored filters to look at the sun in one of his 
telescopes. He noticed that filters of different colors transmit different 
amounts of heat: 
When I used some of them I felt a sensation of heat, though I had but little light, while 
others gave me much light with scarce any sensation of heat. 
We shall not find a better sense-datum report than this, in the whole of 
physical science. Naturally we remember it not for its sensory quality but 
because of what Sir William did next. Why did he do anything next? First 
of all he wanted filters better suited for looking at the sun. Certainly he 
also had his mind on certain speculative issues that were then coming to 
the fore. 

THE CREATION OF PHENOMENA 
139 
He used thermometers to study the heating effect of rays of light 
separated with a prism. This really set him going, for he found not only 
that orange warms more than indigo, but there is also a heating effect 
below the visible red spectrum. His fIrst guess about this phenomenon 
was roughly what we now believe. He took it that both visible and 
invisible rays are emitted from the sun. Our eyes are sensitive to only one 
part of the spectrum of radiation. We are warmed by a different overlap-
ping part. Since he believed in the Newtonian or corpuscular theory of 
light he thought in terms of rays composed of particles. Sight responds to 
corpuscles of violet through red, while the sense of heat responds to 
corpuscles of yellow through "infra-red". 
He now set out to investigate this idea by seeing whether heat and light 
rays in the visible spectrum have the same properties. So he compared 
their reflection, refraction and differential refrangibility, their tendency to 
be stopped by diaphanous bodies, and their liability to scattering from 
rough surfaces. 
Among the blocks impeding a successful outcome was, very probably, 
the corpuscular theory of light. But I would emphasize the experimental 
blocks. Although photometry had been in fair state since Lambert, there 
was no corresponding body of experimental practice for heat. There were 
procedures for fIltering out "rays" of light, but how does one do it for 
heat? Most of Herschel's experiments are more attempts to improve 
technology than well defIned projects with clear aims. They are probes of 
the phenomena. We would not fInd many of his claims to accuracy quite 
misplaced. He was measuring transmission of light to one part in a 
thousand; worse, he was claiming the same accuracy for heat. (Yet I 
would discourage the dismissive idea that he could not have had grounds 
for this accuracy; gifted experimenters time and again tum out to have 
been doing "the impossible" all along. But we cannot check up, for we 
have none of the wide range of substances he used in his experiments; as 
one historian has noticed, his brandy was almost pitch black!). 
Herschel showed that heat and light are alike in reflection, refraction 
and differential refrangibility. He become troubled by transmission. He 
had the picture of a translucent medium stopping a defInite proportion of 
the rays of a certain character, ego red. His idea about red was that the 
heat ray, which refracts with the coefficient of red light, is identical to the 
red light with the same coefficient. So if x% of the light gets through, and 
heat and light are in this part of the spectrum identical, x% of the heat 
should get through too. He asks, "Is the heat, which has the refrangibility 

140 
IAN HACKING 
of the red rays, occasioned by the light of those rays?" He finds not. A 
certain piece of glass that transmits nearly all the red light impeded 69.2% 
of the heat. Hence heat cannot be the same as light. 
Herschel abandoned his initial hypothesis and did not know what to 
think. Yet Thomas Young's Bakerian lecture of 1801 draws on Herschel's 
work with equanimity. Here one finds an example in which the un-
dulatory outlook was more at home with certain experimental results that 
the corpuscular outlook. This shows that what we make of a series of 
observations depends on our theories. It does not show that the observa-
tions themselves are much laden with theory. 
Herschel's chief block was experimental. He was unable to devise 
apparatus that gave him a good grip on the phenomena. Questions about 
the nature of radiant heat lasted long after the demise of corpus-
cularianism. Matters were mastered only after Melloni could build some 
instruments relying on extremely sensitive thermocouples. If we return to 
Herschel in 1800, the question that most vexed his contemporaries was 
whether there exist invisible rays of heat at all. He was rather viciously 
challenged by Lesley in 1801. The experimental results were denied. A 
year later they were reproduced, more or less. There were many hard and 
simple experimental difficulties. For example, a prism does not neatly end 
at red. Some ambient light is diffused and comes below red as pale white 
light. So might not the "infra-red" heat be caused by this white light? A 
new experimental idea intervened here. There is no significant invisible 
heat above purple, but might there not still be "radiation"? It was known 
that silver chloride reacts when exposed at the purple end of the spectrum. 
Ritter exposed it beyond the violet and obtained a reaction; we now say 
he discovered "ultra-violet". 
Upon reading such examples who can doubt the truism that experimen-
tal work has a life of its own? We shall never understand that life, if we 
restrict our attention to sentences and statements. It is possible, though 
improbable, that theoretical knowledge is sentential, but experimental 
knowledge is not. Do all observation statements contain or assert 
theoretical assumptions? Obviously not. I have been at pains to say so not 
because of the intrinsic interest of such a boring question, but to make 
plain that the correct description of experimental work has little to do 
with the language in which it is couched. But incidentally one turns up 
examples that refute the paradoxes of a language-obsessed philosophy. I 
now tum to the more demanding task of devising a terminology to bring 
out some facets of the relationship between theory and experiment. 

THE CREATION OF PHENOMENA 
141 
2. PHENOMENA 
2.1. Phenomena 
The word 'phenomenon' has an ancient philosophical lineage. At present 
it has numerous senses that recall different bits of the history of the word. 
Here is my attempted defmition of my usage: 
A phenomenon is noteworthy. A phenomenon is discernible. A 
phenomenon is commonly an event of a certain type that occurs regularly 
under certain circumstances. When the regularity itself is determined it 
will typically be expressed by a law-like generalization. Often it is the 
very fact of such a regularity that is called the phenomenon. 
The word has been endlessly tangled up with appearance and reality: 
rightly so, for it comes from the Greek stem that we translate as "appear". 
Hence it bears any of the connotations of "appearance". It can be used to 
mean the direct contents of sense experience, or sense-data. Some ancient 
skeptics used the word that way, nor does Aristotle preclude that usage. 
But in my use of the word, a phenomenon is a public event or fact or 
regularity. It is far removed from philosophical doctrines such as 
phenomenalism, phenomisme, or phenomenology. 
Renaissance science used the word "phenomenon" in astronomy. It 
meant the regular motions of the spheres and events like the occlusion of 
Mars. It still retained for some writers the sense of "mere appearance". 
Nicholas Jardine tells me that Kepler held it to be a defect of our system 
that we behold phenomena and not the true locations of the heavenly 
bodies. 
Sometimes talk of "saving the phenomena" was meant seriously; more 
often, I think, it was ironical. As the application of the noun 
"phenomenon" spread, in the seventeenth century, to any of the 
"phenomena of nature", (as they were then called), there arose a curious 
pun on "salve" - one spoke of solving the phenomena. A solution of the 
phenomenon was provided by a set of laws from which the phenomenon 
could be deduced. 
In eighteenth century English the word "phenomenon" was chiefly 
used according to my defmition. Berkeley so used it. The word is found 
over 40 times in Siris (for example). All have the standard meaning, 
"phenomena of nature", a phrase which occurs not infrequently in the 
book. This has nothing to do with Berkeley's so called phenomenalism. It 
is true that he did think that all phenomena are appearances, but not 

142 
IAN HACKING 
because they are sense data! In the philosophical parts of this splendid 
pot-pourri of a book - one of the closest things in the literature to Against 
Method - Berkeley attempts a re-analysis of what the natural philosophers 
do when they solve the phenomena, but his remarks derive from his 
theories of matter and causation, not because he attaches a non-standard 
sense to my word. 
The Oxford English Dictionary says that the word first came to mean, 
in English, "the direct contents of sense experience" with the appearance 
of Thomas Reid's Active Powers in 1788. That is a mistake, doubtless a 
result of the anachronistic Oxford philosophy of 1900. Reid too speaks of 
the phenomena of nature, taking as his prime example the effect of the 
magnet on a compass. He is arguing the standard "Newtonian" line that a 
solution of the phenomena provides laws but not efficient causes. It is to 
German philosophy that we owe the resurgence of the "philosophical" 
sense of the word "phenomenon" - the sense from which I dissociate 
myself. (Naturally there are other usages that I disregard, e.g., when 
something extraordinary such as a child prodigy is called a phenomenon. 
The adjectival "phenomenal" mostly means "extraordinary"). 
Very much later, in the 1870's physicists came to speak of various 
effects, such as the Compton effect, the photoelectric effect, the Zeeman 
effect, the anomalous Zeeman effect. This has become standard usage in 
all modern European scientific language. One such effect is the Hall 
effect - of a magnetic field that induces an electric potential in a conduc-
tor at right angles to both current and field. Hall himself used 
"phenomenon" to refer to the effect. In his notebook entry for November 
10,1879, he wrote: 
It seemed hardly safe, even then, to believe that a new phenomenon had been 
discovered, but now after nearly a fortnight had elapsed, and the experiment has been 
many times and under various circumstances successfully repeated ... it is perhaps not 
too early to declare that the magnet does have an effect on the electric current or at 
least on the circuit never before expressly observed or proved.4 
I have found no conscious and deliberate introduction, during the 
nineteenth century, of the word "effect" as a substitute for 
"phenomenon". Are effects phenomena of a particular class? Nancy 
Cartwright suggests to me that something was called an effect, quite 
often, when it was surprising or of interest chiefly against the backdrop of 
a particular theoretical model. Consider the fact that we have three rather 
than two lines associated with energy levels of electrons about a nucleus. 

THE CREATION OF PHENOMENA 
143 
This is an "effect" not because there is a real splitting of the second line 
(caused by electron spin), but because prior to Goudsmidt and Uhlenbeck 
one had no way of underntanding why there should be more than two 
lines. 
This remark shows that quite a lot is packed into my demand that 
phenomena should be "noteworthy". Whether or not a regularity is 
noteworthy is highly relative to our expectations. In the case of well 
elaborated physical science, it is highly relative to our well articulated 
theories. Notice, however, that some effects may continue to be notewor-
thy independent of theory. An example is the photoelectric effect, of 
which supermarket customers are vaguely aware. If Lamb's doubts about 
photons are ever substantiated, and his group provide us with a photon-
free physics, the photo-electric effect will still be there. 
2.2. Creation 
Hall did not create the Hall effect. He and his coworkers at most produced 
it in their laboratory. They discovered this effect. But to speak of 
discovering the phenomenon is to play down the fact that much ingenious 
apparatus had to be made, and that it was made to do certain things in 
certain persistent ways. Hall was looking for one thing that turned out not 
to be there; he then set out to confIrm that a similar thing was not there; 
soon he discovered it was there, and constructed equipment which would 
reliably reproduce the phenomenon in numerous different ways. 
It is stretching a point to say that Hall created his effect, but my 
exaggeration is deliberate. As philosophers we have attended to saving or 
solving the phenomena. The theoretician has been our hero. We have 
ignored that aspect of science that creates the phenomena in the fIrst 
place. 
I do not say that the experimenter may create phenomena without 
having theoretical ideas (although I would emphasize that he must also 
have experimental ideas, and a great sense of how nature can be made to 
work). It is not only our present day philosophers who. have discounted 
experiment for the benefIt of theory. Here is perhaps a stronger set of 
lines than ever penned by Popper: 
In all investigations Bacon attaches a great deal of value to experiments. But he 
understands their meaning not at all. He thinks they are a sort of mechanism which 
once put in motion will bring about a result of their own. But in science all investiga-

144 
IAN HACKING 
tion is deductive or a priori. Experiment is only an aid to thought. like a calculation: 
the thought must always and necessarily precede it if it is to have any meaning. An 
empirical mode of research, in the usual sense of the term, does not exist. An 
experiment not preceded by theory, i.e., by an idea, bears the same relation to 
scientific research as a child's rattle does to music.5 
Those are the words of Baron von Liebig (1803-73), the great ex-
perimenter who among other things gave us artificial fertilizers. I agree 
with him about mindless empiricism. I can even agree that an experiment 
not preceded by a theory - i.e., some speculation about how the world is -
is likely to be hopeless. (But also: "Charles Darwin had a theory that once 
in a while one should perform a damn fool experiment. It almost always 
fails, but when it does come off it is terrific. Darwin played the trombone 
to his tulips. The result of this particular experiment was negative".6 
There is, however, no justification for the dogma that the experiment 
means nothing unless its outcome was somehow foreseen by theory (as 
either true or false). What is characteristic of experimentation is that from 
time to time it creates phenomena that make no sense at all from the point 
of view of the theory around at the time. The activity of the experimental 
scientist with which I am most concerned is the production of phenomena 
where before there was nothing at all to think about. 
Phenomena, indeed, are very rare in pre-human nature. It is no accident 
that Renaissance phenomena are mostly celestial. It is not by chance that 
the ancient empirical science we most respect is astronomy. (I do not 
include Feyerabend among this "we"; I believe he holds that we 
rationalists have destroyed more interesting parts of ancient science). 
Why did old science begin with the stars, above all? Because only the 
skies afford some phenomena on display, with many more that can be 
obtained by careful observation and collation. Only the planets and the 
further bodies have the right combination of regularity against a back-
ground of chaos. 
It will be protested that the world is full of manifest phenomena. There 
are "the great phenomena of night and day". Pastoral facts will be recalled 
(mostly by city-dwelling philosophers who have never milked a goat in 
their lives). One will mention the lore of mothers and hunters and sailors. 
Yet those romantics who counsel that we should become wise and let our 
lives proceed in harmony with nature have in mind not that we should 
notice phenomena so much as become part of their rhythm. Outside of the 
planets and stars I can think of only about 40 phenomena out there in 
nature, just waiting to be observed. Even those who can construct a longer 

THE CREATION OF PHENOMENA 
145 
list will agree that the phenomena of physical science are mostly man-
made. This is despite the fact that most Western metaphysics takes these 
very phenomena as the keys to unlock the structure of the universe. 
2.3. Calculation 
I am not quite sure what word I want here: perhaps "analysis" would be 
better than "calculation", but I mean something that is just as often 
synthesis as analysis. Let us restrict computation to the getting of answers 
by established rules and techniques, even algorithms. By calculation I 
shall mean something more general, including much applied mathematics. 
It will involve the transformation of existing theories into forms from 
which we can make computations and begin to think about the intersec-
tion between theory and experiment. My "calculation" is one of the things 
that Kuhn means by "articulation" of theories. 
Although this paper is about experimental science, and although I say 
that experiments have a life of their own, I cannot escape the relation 
between theory and experiment. Yet I think this simple dichotomy no 
longer does us much good. There is a kind of intellectual labor, that 
certainly contributes to theory, yet which is of immense importance in 
turning speculation into a form where it can be used by the experimenter. 
It is this that I propose to call calculation. 
The sublime calculator was Laplace. His Celestial Mechanics contains 
very little new speculation. He worked endless transformations on the 
mathematical frame of Newton's system of the world. Sometimes this 
involved postulating new substances, e.g., in assigning parametric values 
to caloric in order to work out the speed of sound. Sometimes he had to 
create a new branch of mathematics. We should reflect on his idea of the 
supreme intellect, which, given a momentary time slice of the world, 
could compute the future paths of every particle. Most readers take this to 
be a version of determinism. I do not think so, not exactly. (Ernst Cassirer 
also thought not, though for different reasons).? Perhaps Laplace, not free 
of arrogance, was saying that a great enough calculator, using extant 
theory, would be able to work out every trajectory. Whereas Laplace had 
carried Newtonian science only finitely far, the supreme calculator would 
have to go infinitely far, but would be doing the same sort of thing as 
Laplace, only more so. The Newtonian theory was the system of the 
world, and one needed only more calculation, more articulation, of 
existing theory. 

146 
IAN HACKING 
2.4. Speculation 
The word "speculation" can apply to all sorts of waffling and stock-
marketing. Etymologically the word is one of the meanings of ''theory''. 
By speculation I mean the intellectual representation of something of 
interest, a playing with and a restructuring of ideas to give a typically 
qualitative understanding of what is or might be the case. Our way of 
writing mathematics can make an essentially qualitative theory look 
quantitative by having free parameters, but often (not always) our most 
interesting theories are in fact qualitative underneath the semblance of 
quantity. 
I propose to divide "theory" roughly into speculation and calculation. 
Instead of "speculation", Popper's word "conjecture" would suit many of 
my purposes. It too has the air of being tentative. But he has a patent on 
the word, and I prefer to leave it to his philosophy. In particular it is too 
tied to his evocative phrase, "conjecture and refutation". He has made 
experiment look like corroboration, testing or refutation of theory, and I 
want to get away from that anti-historical picture. Also, I suspect, not 
only does science not proceed like that, but it could not. One could try to 
make out a case that Popperian science is logically impossible, except 
when one is investigating a few lowbrow generalizations. 
There are at least as many kinds of specUlation as there are kinds of 
representation. There are for example physical models and mathematical 
structures. Late nineteenth century physicists knew that both approaches 
led to remarkable discoveries, the one more common in Britain, the other 
more common in" Germany. Duhem is well known among philosophers 
for having picked this up with his talk of different kinds of minds - one 
broad and shallow, one narrow but deep. Except when colored by 
chauvinism, such differences were accepted as collaborative. Both had 
made important contributions and there were many other ways of 
speculating too. Nor should one be misled into thinking that Newtonian 
theory followed by Laplacian calculation is the rule. It is more common, 
in the history of a branch of physical science, to fmd speculation and 
calculation having alternating spurts, often with intervening periods when 
the creation of phenomena is paramount. If there was one thing that 
brought down the Laplacian dream, it was the 1800 Voltaic cell. With 
stable electric potential a host of new kinds of phenomena were about to 
be created. 

THE CREATION OF PHENOMENA 
147 
2.5. Three Kinds of Ability 
Duhem's contrast between physical modeling and formulating mathemati-
cal structures may fit a few episodes of physical science. The distinction 
between experimentalist and theoretician is more deeply grounded in 
human psychology and has long had its ritual formulation in the different 
caste status of the two kinds of worker. I wish now to suggest that three 
kinds of ability characterize the last three hundred years of physics. I do 
not mean to imply that no one person has more than one kind of ability. 
Newton and Maxwell are of the fIrSt rank among physicists, but they were 
also great experimenters. Yet Laplace may be a not uncommon kind of 
figure, rather indifferent to both experimentation and specUlation, yet 
through his powers of calculation seen as the greatest physicist of his day. 
Certainly there have been fine experimentalists with no gift for either 
speculation or calculation. This does not mean that Michelson (say) had 
no interest in theory. It was of course a speculative question that partially 
impelled him towards his greatest achievement. His gift was, however, to 
make nature behave in such a way as to yield what he thought was an 
answer to the question about astronomical aberration. We now think that 
his theoretical motivation was, speculatively, a dead end. One result of his 
experiment was to show that one direction for speculation was not too 
likely to progress. As I have said, the more important result was mastery 
of techniques for stabilizing phenomena about the transmission of light. 
2.6. The Hypothetico-Deductive Model 
Different eras produce different philosophies of science. These commonly 
reflect not just a difference in intellectual climate but also changing 
dominant styles of research. The most remembered Greek philosophy 
thinks that all knowledge is deductive. Of course most of what I would 
call the best knowledge of the day was deductive. The new science of the 
seventeenth century fancied itself as inductive, gradually building the 
large theories on the bases of observations, analogies and lesser induc-
tions. In the nineteenth century the hypothetico-deductive model came 
into being, so that by 1863 the passage from Liebig that I have quoted in 
Section 2.2 found wide favor. Philosophical theories about theoretical 
entities were the thing, largely, I suppose, because for the first time in 
physical science one finally had essentially theoretical entities aplenty. 
More than ever before one required an account of how theoretical 

148 
IAN HACKING 
propositions, which are essentially beyond powers of observation, are 
hooked up to the experimental knowledge, then in such a vigorous state. 
The best developed hypothetico-deductive account is found in N.R. 
Campbell's Physics, the Elements, elaborated in R.B. Braithwaite's 
Scientific Explanation. These writers do not endorse the simple story 
invited by Braithwaite's own aphorism about science, "Man proposes, 
nature disposes". That is, it is not simply a matter of hypotheses being put 
up and tested against experience. For these authors, I am glad to say, do 
not want to provide a "method" for doing science. They want a model of 
knowledge. Campbell noticed that theoretical hypotheses do not directly 
link to anything that can be observed. There is no way to deduce ex-
perimental tests from the central propositions of nineteenth century 
physical theory. So he distinguished two layers of proposition. There are 
hypotheses, "statements about some collection of ideas that are charac-
teristic of the theory". Then there is a dictionary (Braithwaite calls it a 
Campbellian dictionary) of "statements of the relation between these 
ideas and some other ideas of a different nature". 
These writers end up with an ahistorical attitude to science and, to 
some extent despite their own inclinations, deploy that linguistic attitude 
to science that I so deplore. It is not a matter of kinds of proposition! Yet 
their tripartite model of hypothesis, dictionary and experiment has the 
ring of truth, a ring I cannot hear in the simple dichotomy of conjecture 
and refutation. Physical science, especially at the end of the nineteenth 
century, was engaging in three different kinds of activity. If experiment 
pursues a life of its own, and speculation achieves at best some qualitative 
understanding of phenomena, what then is the fit between the two? I 
believe that what I have called calculation makes the fairly tight 
hypothetico-deductive structure that one can find in a fairly finished 
science written up in a textbook. I do not mean to imply that there was a 
body of meanings, that might be caught in a dictionary, and which 
provided the link between speculative and experimental thought. 
Meanings are made, not born. Speculation and experiment need not 
themselves be very closely connected, but another activity of the sort I 
call calculation makes them close enough for there to be a quantitative fit 
between the two. 
I am not urging an exhaustive classification into three non-overlapping 
forms of life. I say only that the best developed of hypothetico-deductive 
models, with its three tiers, is a hazy but not altogether hopeless 
photograph of three kinds of ability that can usefully be distinguished in 

THE CREATION OF PHENOMENA 
149 
an historical study of fairly recent physical science. 
2.7. "What's so Great About Science?" 
This is one of Feyerabend's questions. I do not find it all that pressing, 
but we can see something rather grand in fairly recent physical science. 
On my account it relies essentially on three different kinds of human 
ability and interests. It is a collaboration of different kinds of people. 
Bacon used to castigate the dogmatics and the empirics. Many dogmatics 
may have had the speculative cast of mind; some empirics must have 
been experimentalists of real talent. Each side alone produced little 
knowledge, not even much love. What is characteristic of the scientific 
method? It brings these two abilities into contact by the use of a third 
human gift, the one I have called calculation. Until mathematics became 
"applied" again, it was sterile after the Greek era. Even now, despite the 
power of much pure mathematics, many of the greatest contributors of 
deep "pure" ideas - Lagrange, Hilbert, or whoever - were precisely those 
workers closest to the fundamental problems of the physical sciences of 
their time. 
The remarkable fact about recent physical science is that it creates a 
new, collective, human artefact, by giving full range to three fundamental 
human interests. By engaging in collaboration between the three, it 
enriches each in a way that would be impossible otherwise. 
Using this account one may better diagnose doubts some of us share 
about the social sciences. In those fields we are still in a world of 
dogmatics and empirics. There is no end of "experimentation" but it as 
yet elicits almost no stable phenomena. There is plenty of speculation. 
There is even plenty of mathematical psychology or mathematical 
economics, pure sciences which have nothing much to with either 
speculation or experimentation. Social scientists all dutifully read their 
Popper. Now far be it from me to offer any evaluation of this state of 
affairs. Maybe all these people are creating a new kind of human activity. 
But many of us experience a sort of nostalgia, a feeling of sadness, when 
we survey the social sciences. Perhaps this is because they lack what is so 
great about fairly recent physical science. They don't lack experiment, 
they don't lack specUlation, they don't lack calculation. They lack the 
collaboration of the three. 

150 
IAN HACKING 
3. EXPERIMENTS 
3.1. The Exploration of Theory 
Viewed from a distance much experimental work can be described 
according to many philosophical blueprints. Herschel thought his own 
investigations of radiant heat exemplified induction and reasoning by 
analogy. One could equally say he formulated a conjecture about the 
relation between visible light and felt heat; then he tested it. Such 
"inductive" 
and, 
"deductive" 
descriptions 
arise 
from 
different 
methodologies, and blueprints arising from methodology are seldom 
worth much. This is not to deny that there have been real examples of 
"conjecture and refutation" in which an experiment is designed to test a 
conjecture, refutes it, and the conjecture is then revised. But paradoxically 
enough, although Popper's ideal has been physics, conjecture and 
refutation seldpm happens in modern physics except in connection with 
incidental auxiliary hypotheses. Popper's dialectic is a better model of the 
testing of low-level generalization. This may be why Popper's methodol-
ogy is so widely admired in the social sciences. 
I have not been saying that experiment is ever independent of theory, 
but only that the connection between the two is a motley of different 
things. One important model of some kinds of connection could be called 
"exploration". Take for example the Hall effect of Section 2.2. Maxwell 
had said in his treatise that when a conductor carrying a current is under 
the influence of a magnetic field, the field acts on the conductor but not 
on the current. Rowland queried this and set his student Hall to find out 
what was meant. Hall thought that the resistance of the conductor might 
be affected by the field, or that an electric potential might be produced. 
Hall failed to get the first effect, but finally located the second. He 
obtained a potential difference across a piece of gold leaf at right angles 
to both the magnetic field and the current. Some initial explanations of 
this turned out to be defective, because different conductors exhibit the 
effect of potential difference in a direction opposite to gold. 
One could describe this work as testing Maxwell's remark but that 
would be misleading. This is more like what Kuhn calls the experimental 
articulation of theory, parallel to the articulation of theory that I have 
called calculation. One has to understand a broad theoretical idea in terms 
of the phenomena that can be produced. No aspect of the phenomenon is 
exactly foreseen by the theoretician, and some facets of it are quite 
unanticipated. Theory is subsequently further developed, not because it 

THE CREATION OF PHENOMENA 
151 
has been refuted, nor because one makes an induction, but simply because 
there is a new phenomenon to think about. Philosophers sometimes 
suppose that what theory must do is to take account of the "data" 
furnished by experiment, i.e., various numbers reported by certain 
observations. Sometimes of course that is true but more often one is 
trying to explain why nature behaves like this, why there is this 
phenomenon. The numbers that describe the phenomenon do not much 
matter in detail, at least at first. It is the fact that nature should go this way 
at all, that is of interest. Is measurement then unimportant? No! 
3.2. Precise Measurement 
A number of notable experiments have been "pure" measurements. 
Measurement has of course played a role in most work since 1800. 
Herschel spent a year of his life measuring reflections, refractions, 
degrees of transmission of light and radiant heat. Hall's detection of the 
transverse electric potential required very sensitive current measurements. 
Further work led to the Hall angle, the angle of the lines of equal electric 
potential characteristic of different conductors under the influence of a 
magnetic field. These measurements are part, it seems, of our recent 
conception of experimental activity in physics. But there is another kind 
of measurement that may be a little more problematic. Think of Caven-
dish fmding the gravitational constant G in 1798, or Fizeau's 1847 work 
on the velocity of light, or Millikan, in 1908, measuring the charge of the 
electron. What is the point of these exceptional experiments? 
The simple-minded answer is: to know the value of these constants. 
But to what end? In 1675 Roemer could estimate the velocity of light 
from observations on the eclipse of Jupiter's moons. That was important 
for he proved that the transmission of light is not instantaneous. He was 
wrong by 20%, but by the end of the century Huygens, knowing much 
better the distances in the planetary system, could know the velocity of 
light with great accuracy, By 1847 the velocity was known for any 
conceivable purpose. Indeed by this method one can obtain the velocity of 
light with all the accuracy needed for modem particle accelerators. Why 
then is Fizeau's experiment important? 
I take it as given that anyone with the slightest sense for experimental 
science will acknowledge that Fizeau's experiment is important. 
There was always the possibility that Fizeau might have got a surpris-
ing result, e.g., light travels faster at Easter than at Christmas. Certainly 

152 
IAN HACKING 
Millikan's investigations added a good deal of stability, even reality, to 
the concept of the electron. But it is a point that Kuhn would make, that 
these workers were praised just because they got exactly what was 
expected of them. Moreover in the past couple of decades there has been 
a certain amount of meta-experimentation as to what happens when you 
build the same equipment over and over again. For any given built 
apparatus we get a nice error curve, but from a set of apparati things are 
rather a mess. Sixty Fizeaus would have made us less happy about the 
velocity of light than one. 
Certainly we should not underestimate the spinoff effect of precise 
measurement. Cavendish, Fizeau and Millikan each employed a new idea, 
which went on to be used for other purposes. Moreover the new technol-
ogy invented has had other applications. Fizeau on light himself turned to 
problems of astronomical aberration, in which he was followed by 
Michelson, who made, in consequence of his own work, substantial 
changes in possible instrumentation. Yet I fmd such spinoff justifications 
feeble, to be used only for impressing committees that want to justify 
expensive frills before a skeptical tax-paying public. Is there no intrinsic 
interest in these great experiments? 
Why not give the simplest answer of all? Mankind wishes to know the 
values of the constants of nature! Those numbers, the very framework of 
our universe, are a proper object of human curiosity. Yet I can admire this 
work even though I suspect that there are no constants in nature. Let me 
attribute this philosophy to Duhem, who believed theories are representa-
tions of the world. Because of their logical form they require the insertion 
of numerical parameters. But the constants of nature are not something 
about the world, numbers created by God. They are an artefact of our 
systems of representation. Such a view diminishes the intrinsic interest in 
the numbers, but in my opinion it in no way derogates from the impor-
tance of the great experiments that have measured them. 
Do these experiments tie in with the creation of phenomena? To some 
extent they do. One can hardly say of Fizeau that he created a 
phenomenon. The velocity of light was well understood before he set to 
work. Yet he obtained a previously unmatched degree of control over 
phenomena, and I think that is one of the ingredients of his fame. It is a 
role of experimental physics to produce stable phenomena, and the great 
measurements may be viewed as a natural conclusion to this endeavor. As 
always there is no one answer to the question, Why measure a natural 
constant with a new idea and hitherto unprecedented fmesse? I have 

THE CREATION OF PHENOMENA 
153 
mentioned technological spinoff, sheer curiosity, the breathtaking 
character of a new idea, and the possibility that something weird might 
happen. But among the ftrst members of any such list I would include the 
fact that these measurements exhibit a phenomenon as having far greater 
regularity than ever before proven, and hence as taking the "creation of a 
phenomenon" one step further. 
3.3. Measure Everything 
"I often say", remarked Lord Kelvin at the start of a popular lecture, "that 
when you can measure what you are speaking about, you know something 
about it; but when you cannot measure it ... your knowledge is of a 
meager and unsatisfactory kind".8 This maxim has been repeated in all 
sorts of garbled versions, and doubtless Kelvin uttered different words on 
different occasions. Not surprisingly I like Karl Pearson's memory best, 
when he recalls "Lord Kelvin's statement that until you have measured a 
phenomenon and turned it into numbers you have a poor and vague 
apprehension 0/it".9 As I have said, the actual numbers that are crunched 
out often do not matter very much, but measurement has been an integral 
part of the creation of phenomena in physical science, at least since 1800. 
T.S. Kuhn has written quite the most perceptive essay about the 
philosophy of experiment: "The Function of Measurement in Modem 
Physical Science".l0 Beginning with the quotation from Kelvin, he 
proceeds to ask a more general version of my question of Section 3.2, 
Why measure? Kuhn usually displays a preference for the theoretical and 
conceptual aspects of science. Hence the answer that he ftrst considers is 
in terms of conjecture-and-refutation. A numerical prediction (one might 
contend) is the boldest of deductions from theory, the one that takes the 
greatest risk. Measurement is experiment's answer to numerical predic-
tion, and hence is an integral part of the scientiftc dialectic. Kuhn 
observes that in fact this relationship almost never occurs in the history of 
physical science. Indeed this paper of his remains one of his most telling 
arguments about the nature of "normal science". It is simply not true that 
people measure to test theories. (He deals in an exemplary way with all 
the obvious counterexamples to this generalization). 
Kuhn rightly contends that measurement comes to play an increasingly 
great role in nineteenth century science. I would place it as part of what I 
call "the avalanche of numbers" that is even more characteristic of human 
affairs than it is of physics. Whatever its origin, Kuhn ftnd that the 

154 
IAN HACKING 
increase in measuring furnishes a clue to the function of measurement. 
His conclusions are cautious, but he thinks that one must explain 
measurement in sociological terms: 
I believe that the nineteenth century mathematization of physical science produced 
vastly refined professional verification procedures. (p. 220). 
In a footnote he mentions ''the esoteric quantitative differences" that led 
to the selection of three problems - the photo-electric effect, black body 
radiation and specific heats. He notes the speed with which quantum 
mechanics, the solution to these problems, was adopted by ''the profes-
sion". He has recently given us an unparalleled book on the second of 
these problems. 
Kuhn's position is, in part, (i) Within the story of conjecture and 
refutation, measurement has a natural role in physical science. (ii) But in 
the history of modem physical science, measurement has not in fact 
played that role. (iii) Yet undoubtedly measurement has been essential; 
we must find a new "function" for it. (iv)"The function is a sociological 
one, of honing up problem selection and accelerating professional 
consensus. 
Kuhn calls his account "impressionistic". I certainly don't disagree 
with his claims about problem selection and consensus. I also notice that 
his three problems were precisely what I call phenomena: the photo-
electric effect, black body radiation and certain phenomena about specific 
heats. Measurement is an integral part of the production and stabilization 
of these phenomena. But although the numerical "discrepancies" may 
have been "esoteric", their numerical values did not at first matter quite so 
much as Kuhn suggests, not to within an order of magnitude or two, in 
some cases. To emphasize the actual numbers is to slip into the traditional 
story of observation reports and the rest, which I have been resisting. 
Those are the secondary paraphernalia of scientific communication. 
Kuhn led us to a philosophical puzzle at stage (iii) above. He resolved 
it in a sociological way at (iv), a way which I do not mean to downgrade. 
But I think also that (iii) is less puzzling when one acknowledges (v) that 
experimental science has a life of its own, (vi) a chief role of experiment 
is to create phenomena and (vii) measurement is an integral part of the 
production and stabilization of most of the phenomena of modem 
physical science. 

THE CREATION OF PHENOMENA 
155 
3.4. Experiments Don't Work 
There is no more familiar dictum than that experimental results must be 
repeatable. That works out as something of a tautology. Experiment is the 
creation of phenomena. Phenomena must have discernible regularities. 
Hence an experiment that is not repeatable has failed to create a 
phenomenon. 
Undergraduates and high school students know different. There is no 
more common complaint on "teaching evaluations" of courses with a 
laboratory component than this: the experiments don't work. The 
numbers have to be cooked. The reaction doesn't react, the phage doesn't 
grow. The laboratory, say the students, must be improved! 
Nor is this problem peculiar to the years of pre-apprenticeship. Here is 
another familiar story. My university has a very complex and expensive 
device X, of which there are few in the world; perhaps only ours works 
very well. It is the sort of device for which you book a year in advance, 
and are refereed by endless panels, before you are allowed to have two 
days working on X. Young hotshot A at our institution is obtaining some 
very striking results with X. Established figure B, in the same field, 
arrives for his two days and leaves frustrated. He even suggests we take a 
long hard look at A's work. Is A really getting what he claims to get? 
Now of course some laboratory courses are just awful. Sometimes old 
B has lost the knack or young A really is cheating. But as a paradoxical 
generalization one can say that most experiments don't work most of the 
time. To ignore this fact is to forget what experimentation is doing. 
To experiment is to create, produce, refine and stabilize phenomena. If 
phenomena were plentiful in nature, autumn blackberries there just for the 
picking, it would be remarkable if experiments didn't work. But 
phenomena are hard to produce in any stable way. That is why I spoke of 
creating and not merely discovering phenomena. That is a long hard task. 
Or rather there are endless different tasks. There is designing an 
experiment that might work. There is leaning how to make the experiment 
work. But perhaps the real knack is getting to know when the experiment 
is working. That is why observation plays a relatively small role in 
experimentation. Most of the time one is getting things to go and to know 
when they are going. Only then is one in a position to make observations, 
and that is a holiday. 
The pre-apprentice in the school laboratory is mostly acquiring or 
failing to acquire the ability to know when the experiment is working. All 

156 
IAN HACKING 
the thinking has been done, all the designing, all the implementation, but 
something is still missing. The ability to know when the experiment is 
working includes, of course, having sufficient sense of how this artifice 
works to know how to put it right. A laboratory course in which all the 
experiments worked would be fine technology but would teach nothing at 
all about experimentation. At the opposite end of the scale, it is not 
surprising that young hotshot A gets results and distinguished visitor B 
does not. A has had the opportunity to know the apparatus better; he has 
made part of it and suffered through its failures. That is an integral part of 
knowing how to create phenomena. 
POSTSCRIPT 
As I recall, this paper was sent off in February, 1980. It was an early 
contribution to an "experimental liberation movement", intended, like 
other liberation movements, to liberate not only experiment but also 
theory, which had so long played a hegemonic role in the philosophy and 
history of science. Much of the material was incorporated into my 
Representing and Intervening (Cambridge, 1983). The explosion of 
interest in experimental science since then has been extraordinary. Books, 
conferences, essays a-plenty, and I suspect that we have only seen the 
beginning of a substantially new direction the philosophy of science. My 
last conversation with Paul Feyerabend, 18th February 1989, makes me 
believe that he too will contribute to this growing body of thought. 
Meanwhile, at the most recent meeting of the Philosophy of Science 
Association, I attempted a retrospective view of what has happened to the 
philosophy of experimentation in the past decade. My commentator was 
Peter Galison, author of How Experiments End (Chicago 1987) and in the 
chair was Andy Pickering, author of Constructing Quarks (Edinburgh 
1984). Each is a fine representative of the new experimental philosophy. 
An extensive bibliography of this kind of work is given at the end of my 
PSA talk, "Philosophers of experiment", in PSA 1988, A. Fine and M. 
Fobes (eds)., Volume 2, Evantston, Ill., 1989. 
Institute for the History and Philosophy of science and Technology 
University of Toronto 
Toronto 
Canada 

THE CREATION OF PHENOMENA 
157 
NOTES 
1 More exactly, what he writes is that "all these discoveries cry out for a new 
tenninology that no longer separates what is intimately connected in the development 
of the individual and of science at large". Chief among these "discoveries" is this: 
"experience arises together with theoretical assumptions and not before them, and an 
experience without theory is just as incomprehensible as is (allegedly) a theory 
without experience". In the bicentenary year of Kant's fIrSt Critique I find this 
discovery a trifle jaded. My "new terminology" passes by Feyerabend's main project 
of trying to reunite individual and scientific development. This is because I think there 
is not so much connection between the two. 
2 In R. Colodny, ed., Beyond the Edge a/Certainty, New York: Prentice Hall, 1965. 
3 W.V.O. Quine, The Roots a/Reference, La Salle: Ill.: Open Court, 1973; pp. 36-39. 
4 Quoted on p. 80 of J. Zed Buchwald, ''The Hall Effect and Maxwellian 
Electrodynamics, Part I: The Discovery of a New Electric Field", Centaurus 23 
(1979),50-99. 
S Justus von Liebig, Ueber Francis Bacon von Verulam und die Methode der 
Naturforschung, Munchen: Lit.-art. Anstatt der J. S. Cotta'schen Buchbandlung, 1863, 
p.49. 
6 J. E. Littlewood, A Mathematician's Miscellany, London: Methuen, 1953, p. 43. 
7 Ernst Cassirer, Indeterminism and Modern Physics, New Haven: Yale University 
press, 1956, p. 4 
8 Sir William Thomson, "Electrical Units of Measurement", Popular Lectures and 
Addresses, London: MacMillan, Vol. I, 1889, p. 73. 
9 Karl Pearson, The History 0/ Statistics in the 17th and 18 Centuries, London: 
Griffin, 1978, p. 472. 
10 T. S. Kuhn, The Essential Tension, London and Chicago: The University of 
Chicago Press, 1977. 

JOHNKEKES 
Reason and Practice 
In this essay I shall argue for the primacy of practice over reason. In 
doing this, I shall lend support to one of Feyerabend' s triost controversial 
claims, namely, that epistemological anarchism applies to logic. The 
primacy of practice, however, has the consequence of providing an 
external and objective standard of rationality, and this, I shall show, 
refutes the Protagorean relativism Feyerabend advocates. 
The discussion of Feyerabend's position will be based on Against 
Method (AM)I and Science in a Free Society (SFS).2 He offers a diag-
nosis: "Today epistemology is sick and in need of medicine. The 
medicine is anarchism. Anarchism, I say, will heal epistemology and then 
we may return to a more enlightened and more liberal form of 
rationality". (SFS, 127). This diagnosis has been widely misunderstood. 
"Many reviewers have regarded me as ... [trying] to replace familiar rules 
and standards by more 'revolutionary' rules such as proliferation and 
counterinduction and almost everyone has ascribed to me a 
'methodology' with 'anything goes' as its one 'basic principle'. But on 
page 32 of AM I say quite explicitly that 'my intention is not to replace 
one set of general rules by another such set: my intention is, rather, to 
convince the reader that all methodologies, even the most obvious ones, 
have their limits". (SFS, 32). 
Feyerabend's main concern is with showing that his general position 
applies to science. One of the "obvious methodologies" scientists are 
supposed by rationalists to follow is logic. Defenders of this supposition 
G. Munivar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 159-178. 
@ 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
159 

160 
JOHNKEKES 
are confronted with the following question: "Now a scientist engaged in a 
certain piece of research has not yet completed all the steps that lead to 
defInite results. His future is still open. Will he follow the ... logician 
who preaches to him about the virtues of clarity, consistency, experimen-
tal support (or experimental falsifIcation), tightness of argument, 
'honesty', and so on, or will he imitate his predecessors in his own fIeld 
who advanced by breaking most of the rules the logicians now want to lay 
on him? Will he rely on abstract injunctions or on the study of concrete 
episodes?" (AM, 260). Feyerabend's recommendation is, of course, to rely 
on concrete episodes, on practice. His rationalist opponents, on the other 
hand, are charged with retarding progress by favoring abstract injunc-
tions, reason. Thus "the basic theoretical problem is the relation between 
Reason and Practice". (SFS, 7). I think that Feyerabend is right in 
identifying the problem. Where he goes wrong is in supposing the 
solution to have anarchistic implications: the implications are conserva-
tive. 
In what follows, I shall mean by logic formal logic; that is, predicate 
and propositional logic, set theory, and such newer developments as 
modal and intensional logic. One of the many aims of logic is the 
codifIcation of arguments in a formal system: a calculus. The calculus 
then can be applied to test the validity of arguments. Conformity to logic, 
the observance of the rules of valid inference, is thus supposed to provide 
one necessary condition of the justifIcation of arguments. This usage 
roughly coincides with the second sense of logic described in AM, 
252-254. 
Feyerabend claims, then, that logic is limited. There are certain 
circumstances in which "a more enlightened and more liberal form of 
rationality" requires violating the "abstract injunctions" of logic. The 
circumstances are those in which one tradition has become an orthodoxy 
and has succeeded in making its own standards the popular standards. 
This, Feyerabend claims, is just what science has succeeded in doing. 
Epistemological anarchism is called for today because "the validity, 
usefulness, adequacy o/popular standards can be tested only by research 
that violates them". (SFS, 35). Such violation is resisted by the prevailing 
form of rationality which rests on the joint authority of logic and science. 
But the violation is required by the ideals of progress, advancement of 
knowledge, and free society. These ideals prompt the overthrow of 
existing rationality for an enlightened and liberal form of rationality. 
Feyerabend's critics respond to this by pointing out that the cost of 

REASON AND PRACTICE 
161 
violating logic is failure to make sense. For logic marks the outer limits of 
what can be said sensibly. The limits of logic and the limits of language 
coincide. Logical consistency, adherence to the rules of logic, is a 
necessary condition of communication. And, these critics are quick to 
point out, Feyerabend himself adheres to logic, even as he attacks it. 
Feyerabend's response is that "the critics ascribe to me assumptions 
which I do not accept but use as part of my polemic against rationalists". 
(SFS, 190-191). That is, he uses logic as part of a reductio ad absurdum 
argument against the bad kind of rationalists: he employs their logic to 
show that their logic is lacking in justification. But one must not suppose 
that his use implies acceptance. 
Now I find this distinction between use and acceptance obscure, and, 
consequently, I find Feyerabend's response unconvincing. For every time 
he, or anyone, says anything, he uses logic, and so I do not know what 
more acceptance can come to than that. Even the silent reservation that 
Feyerabend may claim, per impossible, to make every time he uses logic 
embroils him in the use of logic, for it requires appeal to identity and 
noncontradiction in recognizing the occasions on which the reservation 
should be made. Yet, I think that Feyerabend is right and his critics wrong 
about the authority of logic. In the next two sections I shall offer some 
arguments to support his claim. 
2 
What is the source of the authority of logic? Clearly, such rules as 
identity, contradiction, and excluded middle should be followed. One 
disregards them at his peril. Well, what gives them their obvious 
authority? 
Let us begin with the suggestion that the logical-illogical distinction 
coincides with the meaningful-meaningless distinction. We should be 
logical, because if we are not, we fail to make sense: "[u]nderlying the 
familiar distinction between truth and falsehood, there is a more radical 
distinction between significance and meaninglessness. True and false 
statements are both significant, but some forms of words, with the 
vocabulary and construction of statements, are neither true nor false, but 
nonsensical- and nonsensical not for reasons of wording or grammar, but 
for logical reasons .... [L]ogic is from the start concerned with ... what 
can or cannot be significantly said".3 

162 
JOHNKEKES 
If meaningful is used in the standard dictionary sense, as the opposite 
of incoherent babble, gibberish, then this answer fails. For many illogical 
utterances are meaningful. Indeed, their identification as illogical requires 
that they be understood and hence be meaningful. 
If meaningful is used in some technical sense, then what that sense is 
must be made clear. The history of recent philosophy does not warrant 
optimism on this score. The verifiability principle, for instance, has not 
fared well in distinguishing between meaningful and meaningless 
utterances. At any rate, the difficulty with the identification of some 
technical sense of meaningfulness and logicality is that the sense must be 
made clear and coherent and the identification must be justified. I know 
of no candidate that succeeds on both counts. 
Another suggestion is that logical rules are necessarily true and there is 
no choice about accepting them. The difficulty with this is that there are 
serious doubts about the necessity of logical rules due to the supposed 
incoherence of the notion of analyticity, to the availability of deviant and 
alternative logics, and to the extension of fallibilism to logic.4 Thus 
before we accept the claim that the rules of logic are necessarily true 
principles of correct reasoning, it should be explained what makes them 
necessary and doubts about them being so should be removed. 
One explanation of their supposed necessity is that the logical-illogical 
distinction corresponds to the distinction between what can and cannot be 
thought. The historical origin of this answer is the supposition that logic is 
concerned with discovering the laws of thought. This is the controversial 
doctrine of psychologism.5 
The traditional criticism of psychologism is that fallacies demonstrate 
that the illogical not only can be but frequently is thought. The attempt to 
connect logic with human mental processes is thought to be fallacious 
because our mental processes are fickle. Some people think better than 
others, and one and the same person thinks differently at different times. 
Part of the value of logic is supposed to be that it provides objective 
standards for appraising how people think. If psychologism were correct, 
then logic would have to be revised if everybody took a drug that 
permanently changed logical thinking. 
Psychologism, however, has found some recent defenders.6 The 
occurrence of fallacies is compatible with logic being a description of the 
laws of thought if, following Kant,7 fallacies are attributed to interference 
with the proper functioning of one's faculties. And the question of how 
even a correct description of how we think can amount to a justification 

REASON AND PRACTICE 
163 
of how we think is answered by denying that there is a sharp distinction 
between questio facti and questio juris. 
But these answers are unconvincing, if viewed from the perspective of 
trying to answer the question of why logical arguments are authoritative. 
If logic describes how we think, logic cannot justify the claim that we 
ought to think that way. Logical arguments may be good, but they are not 
good because they are logical. If they are good, they are so for whatever 
reason it is good to think the way we do. 
It may be suggested that the concern of logic is not with how we think, 
but how we ought to think. The logical-illogical distinction defines the 
limits of correct usage: conformity to logic is a necessary condition of 
correct usage and failure to conform is a sufficient condition of incorrect 
usage. Logical rules express the limits within which language must 
operate. 8 
As it stands, this answer merely redescribes the situation without 
explaining it. It says nothing about why we are bound by particular 
logical rules. Clearly, if we are to speak, then some utterances must count 
as correct and others as incorrect. But why is it that many of the rules that 
define what is correctly sayable in one language are shared by many other 
languages? Logical rules seem to have a wider scope than the regimenta-
tion of correct usage in a particular language. Although, to be sure, they 
do have that role. But if they had only that role, different languages would 
have different logics, just as they have different vocabularies and 
phonemes. 
One way of meeting this difficulty is to identify logic and grammar. 
The identification rests on distinguishing between the surface structure 
and depth grammar of a language. Depth grammar is then identified with 
logic. If one is willing to make the additional assumption that depth 
grammar is connected with innate human mechanisms (physiological or 
otherwise), then the objection I raise above would be met. For the 
invariance of logical rules, conformity to depth grammar, and conse-
quently the rules of correct usage would be seen as depending on 
universally human mechanisms.9 
But does this great and fruitful idea help to answer the question I am 
considering? I think not. For even if this extremely speCUlative hypothesis 
turned out to be true, the question of why logical arguments are good is 
still unanswered. The identification of logic and depth grammar is a 
powerful impetus for psychologism (or physiologism) in logic. But, as we 
have seen, from the discovery of why we think the way we do, it does not 

164 
JOHNKEKES 
follow that it is good to think that way. If this linguistics-inspired 
approach to logic is correct, then we know what makes an argument 
logical. We do not, however, know what I want to fmd out, namely, why 
a logical argument deserves acceptance. And this question needs to be 
answered even if it turns out that we are so constructed that if our 
thinking proceeds unimpeded, then we cannot help thinking logically. 
After all, there are many things human beings do, and perhaps cannot 
help doing, but it does not follow that they ought to do them. Would it 
follow from the discovery of innate mechanisms for aggression, hostility, 
and cruelty that these deplorable traits are now to be valued? 
The next answer seems tautological, but it is not. The distinction 
between the logical and illogical is widely supposed to be the distinction 
between valid and invalid arguments. What makes validity valuable is 
that it is truth-preserving. A valid argument transmits the truth from the 
premises to the conclusion, and anybody concerned with arguments must 
recognize that as a good thing. 
The answer, however, fails because while it is true that valid arguments 
are logical, there is no reason for believing that invalid arguments are 
illogical.lO An argument can be said to be valid if it conforms to an 
established rule of inference. The difficult question is: what makes an 
argument invalid? The answer that an argument is invalid if it fails to 
conform to an established rule of inference is unsatisfactory, for it rests on 
the unprovable assumption that all rules of inference have been es-
tablished. Why should we suppose that the number of such rules is finite? 
If they are infinite, then it is impossible to establish all rules of inference. 
And even if they turn out to be finite, how could one show that the 
number of established rules coincides with the number of possible rules? 
If we change to the claim that an argument is invalid if it fails to 
conform to a rule of inference, then the difficulties just noted are avoided, 
but only to be replaced by new ones. The logical merits of arguments do 
not depend on what rules of inference happened to have been established, 
but upon what rules there are. One consequence is that we cannot, then, 
distinguish between valid and invalid arguments. For there is no 
guarantee that the rules of inference we have established do indeed 
coincide with the rules of inference as they really are. Furthermore, there 
is a fundamental difficulty even if we grant that the established rules of 
inference accurately reflect some of the existing rules. The difficulty is 
that whenever an argument fails to conform to an established rule of 
inference, there are two possibilities: one is that the argument is invalid, 

REASON AND PRACTICE 
165 
the other is that it is valid, because it conforms to a not yet established 
rule of inference. So long as not all rules of inference are established, 
these two possibilities will persist. The result is that no argument can be 
shown to be invalid. 
Let us try another suggestion. Why not say that an argument is invalid 
if it violates an established rule of inference? This differs from the 
previous two answers in that the present one involves a conflict between 
an established rule of inference and an argument, whereas the previous 
two merely noted lack of conformity. 
But what happens if an argument is found to be prelogically valid or 
vouchsafed for by scientific investigation but turns out to be invalid, 
because it conflicts with rules of inference? Let us consider an example of 
each. 
The first is made possible by the logical practice of making use of 
ordinary terms after changing their meaning. Thus logicians refme the 
ordinary uses of terms like and, if, or, by making them precise and then 
constructing the truth table on the basis of their precise meaning. 
Occasionally, this results in there being a perfectly valid ordinary 
inference which turns out to be invalid given the logically refmed 
inference. It is a valid ordinary inference to conclude from the statement 
that I ate with abandon and had to diet that first I indulged and later I paid 
for it. But the truth table would not licence this inference, since it uses the 
word and in a nontemporal sense. The ordinary inference is valid, because 
the ordinary meaning of and may include a temporal dimension; while the 
same inference is invalid if the logical sense of and is adopted, since it 
involves only a nontemporal sense of the word. Should we then say that 
the ordinary inference is invalid? Surely not. 
The second example in which valid arguments may contradict es-
tablished rules of inference comes from the possibility of conflict between 
logic and science. In quantum mechanics, the statement that a particle 
with a certain momentum either is or is not at a particular position at a 
particular time is not taken to be true. Does this mean that the relevant 
inferences in quantum mechanics are illogical? Not at all! What this has 
been taken to indicate is the need for a new logic which would be better 
suited to quantum mechanics. Feyerabend, of course, has many good 
things to say about this. 
These two examples show that the third suggestion for determining the 
invalidity of an argument also fails. For from the fact that there is a 
conflict between an argument and an established rule of inference it does 

166 
JOHNKEKES 
not follow that the argument is invalid. It may be that the conflict is a sign 
that the established rule of inference needs to be revised. If it is true that 
"[l]ogic is in principle no less open to revision than quantum mechanics 
or the theory of relativity",ll then the conflict of an argument with an 
established rule of inference cannot be sufficient to show the invalidity of 
the argument. 
There is a dilemma which must be faced by defenders of the overriding 
authority of logic. If an argument seems to be invalid, there are two 
possibilities. Either it is genuinely invalid, or it is a case calling for the 
revision of established rules of inference. Unless the second alternative is 
eliminated, the fIrst cannot be asserted. 
The consequence is that invalidity need not coincide with illogicality, 
and so the logical-illogical distinction does not coincide with the valid-
invalid distinction. Therefore, while arguments can be justifIed logically, 
they cannot be criticized logically. 
The last answer I shall consider is that logical rules are the most 
general laws of nature. Their generality consists in universal applicability. 
Thus it can be said truly of each and every thing that it is identical with 
itself, or that it cannot both have and not have one and the same charac-
teristic at any given time. The authority of logical rules is grounded upon 
the world being what it is. 
This answer, however, also fails, for the dissimilarities between rules of 
logic and laws of nature make their identiftcation implausible: the fIrst 
does not and the second does admit counterexamples. Thus one cannot 
conceive of a thing failing to be identical with itself, but he can conceive 
of a person flying unaided. 
The general point is that laws of nature are subject to empirical 
refutation, while logical rules are not, in the same sense of that term. 
"Any theory which does not allow for the radical difference between the 
status of physical truisms (such as "All rocks are heavy") and logical 
truisms (such as "All rocks are rocks") ... must be unsatisfactory. We feel 
that such a logically true proposition is true not because it describes the 
behavior of all possible facts but simply because it does not take the risk 
of being falsifIed by any fact; it does not exclude any possible fact, and it 
therefore does not assert anything whatsoever of any fact at all".12 
The difference between laws of nature and logical rules is not that the 
former are subject to revision while the latter are not. They may both be 
revised in the light of experience. The difference is due to the different 
ways in which experience may force their revision. "[S]cientifIc 

REASON AND PRACTICE 
167 
hypotheses can meet with counterexamples, the propositions of logic and 
mathematics are not invalidated by experience, but at worst found to be 
unserviceable. We do not say that Euclidean geometry has been dis-
covered to be false, but only that for certain purposes another geometry 
serves us better. If we were to give up the law of excluded middle ... it 
would not be that the proposition "p or not-p" as it is now understood, had 
been found to be invalid, but only that we had found it preferable to 
operate with different logical constants. We might retain the same signs 
but we should give them a different meaning" .13 
The objection to the identification of logical rules and natural laws is 
not that one is analytic and the other is empirical. The objection is that 
since there is an important disanalogy between them, even if they are both 
empirical, they are so in different ways. Thus to explain the authority of 
logical rules by analogy with the authority of laws of nature fails. 
The conclusion that follows is that the authority of logic does not 
derive from logic being the guarantor of meaningfulness, necessary truth, 
correct thought, validity, or the most general laws of nature. Unless 
defenders of logic offer some other explanation for the authority of logic, 
it seems that Peyerabend is right and his critics are wrong. 
3 
Yet it would be foolish to deny that logic does have authority; where, 
then, does it come from, if these traditional explanations all fail? The 
beginning of the answer is suggested by Locke's trenchant observation 
that "God has not been so sparing to men to make them barely two legged 
creatures, and left it to Aristotle to make them rational .... God has been 
more bountiful to mankind than so. He has given them a mind that can 
reason, without being instructed in the methods of syllogizing: the 
understanding is not taught to reason by those rules; it has a native faculty 
to perceive the coherence or incoherence of its ideas".14 The authority of 
logical rules does not come from logicians. They do indeed formulate the 
rules, but they do not invent and impose them: logical rules are already 
there awaiting discovery. Logic, therefore, is not a legislative enterprise. 
This however, still does not answer the question of what gives logical 
rules their authority. The answer is that "[p]rinciples of deductive 
inference are justified by their conformity with accepted deductive 
practice. Their validity depends upon accordance with particular deduc-

168 
JOHNKEKES 
tive inferences we actually make and sanction. If a rule yields inaccep-
table [sic] inferences, we drop it as invalid. Justification of general rules 
thus derives from judgments rejecting or accepting particular deductive 
inferences".15 Thus the authority oflogical rules rests upon the successful 
practice from which they have been extracted. A logical rule is implicit in 
practices we wish to perpetuate. 
"There were reasoners before Aristotle and strategists before 
Clausewitz. The application of rules of reasoning and strategy does not 
have to await the work of their codifiers. Aristotle and Clausewitz were, 
in fact, only able to extract these rules because they were already being 
applied. The crystallization of performance-rules in rule-formulae is ... 
not the condition of their being applied but a product of studies in the 
methodology of the practice in which they have already been applied" .16 
Logical rules, therefore, are crystallizations of methodological principles 
that have proved successful in the past: they presuppose successful 
practice. 
This conclusion needs to be qualified because not all logical rules are 
derived from successful practice: some are derived from other logical 
rules. Logical rules have consequences which are frequently difficult to 
discern; doing so is part of what is meant by research in logic. So I do not 
want to give the quite mistaken impression that in my view the task of 
logic is to scrutinize practices for the purpose of extracting rules from 
them. The rules have already been extracted. Logic is concerned with 
making explicit what is only implicit in them. 
Logical rules have their authority because they supply in a pure form 
some of the methods employed in some successful practices. Logical 
rules do not and are not meant to characterize the method of all successful 
practice. Their role is only to exhi! lit the method for reasoning from 
premises to conclusion. Since much reasoning is of this kind, logical rules 
have an obvious bearing on practice. If someone wishes to pass success-
fully from premises to conclusion, he is well-advised to employ and abide 
by logical rules. But this is only part of the story. 
Logical rules are extracted from successful practice. But what practice 
counts as successful? Generally speaking, a practice is successful if it 
accomplishes its goals. This involves solving whatever problems prompt 
the practice in accordance with whatever goals the agent accepts. If the 
agent is mistaken about having the problem he believes himself to have, 
or if the goals in accordance with which he aims to solve the problem are 
unjustifiable, then no matter how well-suited the practice is to the solution 

REASON AND PRACTICE 
169 
of the misidentified problem and to the pursuit of the unjustifiable goal, it 
cannot be said to be successful in any straightforward sense. 
There is no need to be dogmatic about this. We can distinguish between 
weak and strong senses of success. A practice may be weakly successful 
if it leads to the solution of a misidentified problem in accordance with an 
unjustified goal. While the strong sense of success implies a genuine 
problem and justified goals. The point I want to make concerns the strong 
sense of success. 
In that sense, the correct identification of the problems and the 
justifiability of the goals are necessary conditions of a practice being 
successful. Since logical rules are extracted from successful practice, the 
authority of logical rules depends on the correct identification of 
problems and the justification of the goals involved in the practice. And 
this means that we cannot appeal to the authority of logic in identifying 
problems and judging the justifiability of goals. There is, therefore, a kind 
of reasoning which necessarily precedes the kind of reasoning which can 
be logically justified or criticized. As Feyerabend says, "The absence of 
logic is due to the fact that we deal with phenomena outside of its 
domain". (AM, 269). 
This argument should not be taken to imply that the identification of 
problems and the justification of goals proceed independently of logical 
rules. Of course logical rules are involved, for such rules are extracted 
from successful practice and at least sometimes the identification of 
problems and the justification of goals are successful. What the argument 
implies is that logical rules cannot be appealed to in justifying the 
practice. The precedence of practice over logic is not in their temporal 
order, but in the order of justification. 
It follows from the fact that logical rules are extracted from successful 
practice that there must be practices whose justification is other than 
logical. Practice precedes logic; practical reason is prior to theoretical 
reason. "{ [I]n the 'practical use' of reason we find grounds for accepting 
those important propositions which are postulated, but which speCUlative 
reason is demonstrably powerless to establish. This seems to say that 
practical reason yields, so to speak, a bonus or dividend not procurable by 
any other means".l7 

170 
JOHNKEKES 
4 
My defence of Feyerabend's claim that logic may justifiably be violated 
is committed to two propositions: flrst, practice may overrule logic in 
particular, and thus reason in general; second, practice is primary and 
logic or reason are derivative. This position is identifled by Feyerabend as 
naturalism. He characterizes it as follows: "Reason receives both its 
content and its authority from practice. It describes the way in which 
practice works and formulates its underlying principles". (SFS, 24). 
Feyerabend, of course, rejects naturalism. He accepts the flrst proposition 
given above, but denies the second. The ground of the denial is that it is a 
mistake to suppose that there is a contrast between practice and reason. 
"What is called 'reason' and 'practice' are ... two different types of 
practice the difference being that the one clearly exhibits some simple 
and easily producible formal aspects thus making us forget the complex 
and hardly understood properties that guarantee the simplicity and 
producibility while the other drowns the formal aspects under a great 
variety of accidental properties". (SFS, 26). 
This complex, formed of the two different types of practice, is what 
Feyerabend calls a tradition. The two aspects of it are "parts of a single 
dialectical process . ... [R]eason without the guidance of practice will lead 
us astray while a practice is vastly improved by the addition of reason". 
(SFS, 25). 
Feyerabend's objection to naturalism is that "a practice may 
deteriorate; or it may be popular for the wrong reasons. ... Basing 
standards on practice and leaving it at that may for ever perpetuate the 
shortcomings of this practice". (SFS, 25). When practice is primary and 
reason secondary in a tradition, the tradition becomes a stifling or-
thodoxy, for it will have lost the capacity of self-correction that reason 
alone can provide. Naturalism is thus a conservative force, and as such, it 
is supposed by Feyerabend to be an enemy of progress, growth of 
knowledge, and the kind of freedom that leads to the proliferation of 
practices and standards. Naturalism has the merit of attacking the 
privileged position of reason, but, in Feyerabend's eyes, it forfeits its 
gains by giving practice the privileged position. 
Practice and reason exist within traditions. Feyerabend holds that 
neither can be used to judge traditions other than the one within which 
they exist. The correct view is "a relativism of precisely the kind that 
seems to have been defended by Protagoras. Protagorean relativism is 

REASON AND PRACTICE 
171 
reasonable because it pays attention to the pluralism of traditions and 
values". (SFS) 28). This view is the theoretical justification of the 
incommensurability thesis propounded in perhaps the most controversial 
part of AM, namely, in Section 17. 
The rest of this essay will be devoted to showing that Protagorean 
relativism can be avoided and naturalism can be defended. This does 
imply a kind of conservatism, but not one that suffers from the defects 
Feyerabend ascribes to it. 
5 
The key to my defence of naturalism and avoidance of Protagorean 
relativism is the idea of problem-solving. Problem-solving is a standard of 
justification external to traditions and, consequently, one by which 
traditions can be rationally evaluated. What, then, is problem-solving?18 
Theories are held against a background. The background is the tradition 
in which the theory occurs. The most important feature of the back-
ground, from my present point of view, is a problem. Many things may 
count as problems. On the simplest level, a person may want to do 
something that he regards as desirable, but the tradition does not have the 
means to do it. For instance, he might wish to cure cancer, but is in-
capable of doing so. Or the problem may arise because surprises, 
anomalies, inexplicable events occur. The problematic nature of 
anomalies stems from the traditional assumptions and expectations that 
are part of the background. For an event is anomalous only if it con-
tradicts previous standards of normalcy. Speed greater than the speed of 
light, telepathic communication, the discovery of an insect species with 
intelligence comparable to ours would be anomalous occurrences, given 
the present Western tradition. But problems may also be due to the 
discovery that the tradition contains mutually exclusive elements. 
Theories, expectations, practices may be so related that adherence to one 
amounts to a repudiation of the other. The practice of Christianity may be 
incompatible with the practice of war; the idea of mental health may 
conflict with the ideal of creativity; high living standards provided by 
efficiently organized industrial societies may greatly diminish personal 
liberty. Problems occur in many ways and the different types of problems 
form an endless list. 
Problems, however, do have a common feature: they stand in need of 

172 
10HNKEKES 
solution. The role of theories is to provide solutions. To understand a 
theory, therefore, is to understand also the problem to which the theory 
offers a solution. The problem, the theory, and the solution provided by 
the theory, jointly explain the point of holding the theory. 
Theories solve problems by offering an imaginative account of the 
nature of things in the relevant domain. What prompts the adoption of a 
theory is the recognition that if things were as depicted, then what was 
previously problematic would no longer be so. Theories aim to reconcile 
the tradition and the anomaly; or they attempt to confront the problem by 
bringing out what is implicit in the tradition; sometimes theories are 
turned critically upon their own background and result, usually in a 
revision, and occasionally in a wholesale replacement of the tradition. 
Problems can show that our understanding of the world is deficient. We 
may want to do something, but given what we think we know, we cannot 
do it; or something happens which on our existing view should not or 
could not happen; or we may have ideals and the means we have for 
achieving them actually frustrate their realization. In all such cases, we 
need an explanation to reconcile what we take to be the case with what is 
the case. Theories offer these manifold reconciliations. 
My claim is that the problem-solving feature of theories constitutes the 
foundation of a successful account of justification. The reason for this is 
that problems constitute the fundamental link between theories and the 
world. Problems occur when people, as it were, bump into reality. Since 
the point of theories is to solve problems, naturally the ultimate test of 
their adequacy is whether or not the problems are solved. A theory 
offering a possible solution is worthy of serious consideration; one 
providing a successful solution is worthy of acceptance. So my proposal 
is that problem-solving is the external standard of justification. 
All other standards are human inventions and Protagorean relativists 
have no trouble showing that other standards are internal to some 
tradition. Justification is regarded by them as an exercise in conformity to 
norms, rules, procedures, and they deny that there is a privileged set of 
requirements. Protagorean relativists may grant that it is necessary to 
conform, but they maintain that it is quite as warranted to conform to one 
class of standards as to any other. Standards of justification have no 
special place. Hence it is illegitimate to try to appraise conformity to other 
standards on rational grounds. 
The adoption of problem-solving shows a way out of this morass of 
irrationality. For it affords a way of rationally evaluating different sets of 

REASON AND PRACTICE 
173 
standards. What needs to be asked, then, is which of these alternative sets 
affords a better solution of one's problems. 
It might be argued against this account that to justify a theory by 
determining whether or not it presents a possible solution to the problem 
that prompted it is question-begging. For what counts as a problem 
depends on the theory. The existence of evil is problematic only to 
someone who believes that there is a good God. The accidental nature of 
some historical events requires explanation only if it is supposed that 
there are historical laws. There are no problems in nature: problems occur 
when facts disappoint one's expectations. Expectations, as well as what is 
to count as fact, are shaped by the theories whose rationality one is 
endeavoring to determine. Problem-solving, it may be argued, is no more 
external than anything else. 
The reply to this objection is to distinguish different problem areas and 
then show that within each of these areas human beings encounter the 
same problems regardless of what theories they hold. There are problems 
that could arise only against a specific theoretical background. The 
objection, however, rests on the mistaken assumption that all problems 
are theory-generated. 
People are confronted with problem-areas. A considerable portion of 
their activities arises out of the need to solve problems within these areas. 
One way of classifying these problem-areas is to divide them into 
problems concerning a person's response to nature or his physical 
environment, to other people and society, and to himself. 
Within each of these problem-areas there occur at least two kinds of 
problems. One of these people have merely in virtue of being human. 
Such problems are not the by-products of any particular theory. They 
occur because the species has evolved in a particular way and because the 
environment is what it is. I shall call these problems of life. If problems of 
life are not solved, the agent is damaged. The damage may be fatal, or 
merely destructive. At any rate, solving problems of life is required by 
what a person regards as his well-being. Problems of life are common to 
all members of the species, but their solutions, of course, are extremely 
varied. Because there are different and occasionally conflicting ways of 
dealing with problems of life, it is necessary to choose between alterna-
tive solutions. Making such choices requires reflection, and this yields the 
second kind of problem: problems of reflection. The fundamental problem 
of reflection is to fmd a method of choosing the most suitable of a number 
of ways of solving problems of life without actually trying out the rival 

174 
JOHNKEKES 
solutions in practice. The point of reflection is to minimize the risks 
involved in acting inappropriately. 
The fIrst problem-area, having to do with the human response to nature, 
comprises such problems of life as coping with various physiological 
needs, health, shelter and protection; the problem concerns one's physical 
security and well-being. Evolution from primitivism affords the lUXury of 
choosing between different solutions to such problems of life. The choice 
requires theoretical understanding, and science and technology are born 
out of the need to choose well. The theoretical problems of science and 
technology, then, are some of the corresponding problems of reflection. 
The second problem-area concerns one's relations with other people 
and society. The typical problems of life that occur in this connection 
have to do with one's attitude to family, sex, authority, and violence. The 
source of these problems is the inevitable conflict between the satisfaction 
of one's desires and their frustration dictated by the rules of whatever 
society a person lives in. The associated problems of reflection are the 
theoretical problems of politics, morality, and the law. 
The third problem-area has to do with people's attitudes to themselves. 
Put simply, it is about being happy; expressed more analytically, it 
concerns the pursuit of a rich and interesting internal life, self-knowledge, 
and self-acceptance. Characteristic problems of life in this area are the 
conflict between long and short range satisfactions, the attitude to one's 
death, pain, suffering, learning one's physical and psychological limita-
tions and capacities. The appropriate problems of reflection arise out of 
the need to imaginatively expand one's horizons so that new options 
could be discovered. It is in accordance with these that people shape 
themselves. And it is by comparing their own with other people's lives 
that they come to a better understanding of themselves. One important 
aspect of much art and literature is that they are likely to be helpful in this 
effort. 
The objection noted before arises out of a failure to distinguish between 
problems of life and reflection. Problems of reflection are indeed theory-
generated, but problems of life are not. Problems of reflection arise 
because problems of life have competing solutions. So while it is true that 
problems of reflection presuppose a theory, it is no less true that the 
theory is held because it is expected to provide solutions to problems of 
life. Theories presuppose problems of life. We come by problems of life 
and the necessity of solving them in virtue of being human, and not 
because we are ensnared by this or that theory. 19 

REASON AND PRACTICE 
175 
It is difficult to argue this point. The best I can do is to repeat what 
seems obvious: protecting one's physical well-being and security, the 
resolution of conflicts between one's desires and the rules of society, 
fmding a way of being happy, are universal human problems that do not 
come from theoretical commitments, but from the human condition. The 
thesis is open to objection: It needs merely to be shown that contrary to 
my claim, these problems do presuppose a theoretical background. But I 
cannot imagine what such a background could be. 
Two further points should be noted in this connection. The fIrst is that 
provided only that a person recognizes something as presenting a problem 
to him, he must recognize it also as standing in need of a solution. The 
connection between the two holds in virtue of the meaning of problem, 
not because of the supposed truth of some empirical generalization. For to 
recognize something as a problem is to recognize it as an obstacle, an 
impediment, a hindrance that prevents one from doing what he wants. At 
the same time, the solution need not be the removal of the problem. A 
person may regard his own want as needing to be unsatisfIed, because it is 
unworthy, unimportant, or unwise. Or a person may come to think that 
allowing his own problem to persist will improve his character, make him 
a better person, redeem past sins, elicit pity, inflict deserved punishment, 
or allow concentration on more important things, thus solution may come 
to doing nothing about the problem. Celibacy, fasting, and resigning 
oneself to death are solutions to the problems of sexual frustration, 
hunger, and illness. What the connection between problems and solutions 
requires is having to make a decision or formulate an attitude towards the 
problem. But the decision or the attitude need not dictate the removal of 
the problem. 
The second point is a corollary of the fIrst. The aim of problem-solving 
need not be physical survival. I am not suggesting that successful 
problem-solving is an inevitable biological imperative. There are many 
cases in which people solve their own problems in ways damaging to 
themselves. The point is that what guides problem-solving is a person's 
own judgment of what is in his interest. But, of course, a person may err 
in his judgment. For instance, someone may damage his body because he 
believes that the flesh is an unworthy receptacle of his immortal soul. His 
problem-solving is guided by this belief. If, however, there is no such 
thing as the soul, he is simply mistaken. He did try to solve his problem in 
accordance with his belief, but the belief turned out to be false. It is 
understandable why he did it, even though he was mistaken in doing it. 

176 
JOHNIKEKES 
IT these claims are allowed to stand, then in solving problems of life I 
have succeeded in presenting an external, context-independent standard of 
justification. The justification of a theory depends, in part, on its present-
ing a solution, immediately or more usually at some remove, to a problem 
of life. It is a necessary, but not sufficient, condition of the justification of 
a theory that directly or indirectly it is a contribution to the possible 
solution of a problem of life. And so, Protagorean relativism, denying the 
possibility of such a justification, is shown to be mistaken. 
6 
The argument in this essay has a critical and a constructive aspect. The 
critical aspect leads to the displacement of logic from the privileged 
position mistakenly attributed to it in contemporary epistemology. In this 
respect, I am in agreement with Feyerabend. Feyerabend, however, goes 
on to argue that nothing can occupy the privileged position. This leads 
him to Protagorean relativism. The constructive aspect of the argument is 
designed to show that the standard of solving problems of life can occupy 
the privileged position hitherto usurped by logic. This leads me to 
embrace what Feyerabend calls naturalism, and which he rejects in favor 
of Protagorean relativism. 
Naturalism is committed to the primacy of practice. The reason why it 
is to be preferred over Protagorean relativism is that there is a standard to 
which any practice must do justice, and so the slogan "Anything goes" 
can never be justifiably accepted. The standard is that rational practices 
must directly or indirectly contribute to solving problems of life. 
Problems of life occur because human nature has an unchanging 
component. It is part of the human condition that we must cope with 
problems that inevitably arise in our relations with nature, other people, 
and ourselves. How we cope with them of course, varies historically, 
culturally, psychologically. But that we must cope in one way or another 
is invariant. This invariance provides the standard with reference to which 
practices can begin to be rationally judged. Problem-solving is necessary, 
but not sufficient for this. 
The relativism and anarchism expressed by "Anything goes" are 
mistaken, because a practice that fails to solve the problem of life it was 
designed to solve is not to be followed. This judgment is not forced on the 
practitioner by some falsely imposed epistemological authority; it is a 

REASON AND PRACTICE 
177 
judgment the self-interest of the practitioner will urge him to make. 
The invariant part of human nature calls for a conservative methodol-
ogy. By this I understand the disposition to continue to employ practices 
that were successful in the past. There is little point in taking risks, if 
traditional practices yield all one wants. Of course, no practice is perfect 
and there is always room for improvement. Furthermore, practices do 
tend to turn into soul-destroying routines and orthodoxies are perpetuated 
by vested interests. If Feyerabend' s epistemological anarchism is an 
iconoclastic warning that this is threatening to happen with science, then I 
have nothing against it. Nor would conservatives have reason to repudiate 
more than his rhetoric. But I doubt that Feyerabend would be willing to 
accept thus being represented as a sheep in wolf's clothing. 
Department of Philosophy 
State University of New York 
Albany 
New York 
USA 
NOTES 
1 Paul Feyerabend, Against Method, (London: NLB, 1975). 
2 Paul Feyerabend, Science in a Free Society, (London: NLB, 1978). 
3 G. Ryle, Collected Papers, (London: Hutchinson, 1971), Vol I, 252. Ryle is 
describing Wittgenstein's views in the Tractatus. 
4 The best account of these difficulties is to be found in S. Haack's Deviant Logic and 
Philosophy of Logics, (Cambridge: University Press, 1974 and 1978). 
5 See for instance J.S. Mill's A System of Logic, (New York: Longmans, 1898), 
Introduction: "Logic, then, is the science of the operations of the understanding which 
are subservient to the estimation of evidence: both the process itself of advancing 
known truths to unknown, and all the other intellectual operations in so far as 
auxiliary to this". 
6 See W. V. Quine, "Epistemology Naturalized", in Ontological Relativity, (New 
York: Columbia, 1969); J. Piaget, Psychology and Epistemology. (Hammondsworth: 
Penguin, 1972); S. Haack, "The Relevance of Psychology to Epistemology", 
Metaphilosophy, 6(1975),161-176. 
7 "The origin of all error must be sought solely in the unobserved influence of the 
sensibility on the understanding . ... It is owing to this influence that in our judgments 
we mistake merely subjective reasons for objective, and consequently confound mere 
semblance of truth with truth itself'. I. Kant, Introduction to Logic, (New York: 
Philosophical Library, 1963),44, tr. T. Abbott. 

178 
JOHNKEKES 
8 This view is defended by M. Black, "Necessary Statements and Rules", Models and 
Metaphors, (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1962). 
9 N. Chomsky, Aspects of a Theory of Syntax, (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1965), and 
Language and Mind, (New York: Harcourt, 1970). 
10 The argument I present here is largely G. J. Massey's in "Are There Any Good 
Arguments That Bad Arguments Are Bad?" Philosophy in Context, 4(1975), 61-77. 
11 W. V. Quine, Philosophy of Logic, (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1970, 1970), 
100. 
12 K. R. Popper, Conjectures and Refutations, (New York: Harper, 1968),207-208. 
13 A. J. Ayer, The Central Questions of Philosophy, (London: Weidenfeld and 
Nicolson, 1973),203. 
14 J. Locke, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, ed. A. C. Frazer, (New 
York: Dover, 1959), Vol II, 391. 
IS N. Goodman, Fact, Fiction and Forecast, (Indianapolis: BobbsMerrill, 1953), 
63-64. 
16 G. Ryle, Collected Papers, Vol II, 233. 
17 G. J. Warnock, ''The Primacy of Practical Reason", Studies in the Philosophy of 
Thought and Action, ed. P. F. Strawson, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1968), 
224. 
18 The literature on problem-solving is meagre. J. Dewey in his Logic: The Theory of 
Inquiry attributes central importance to problem-solving, but his discussion is 
imprecise, verbose, and insufficiently argued. R. G. Collingwood's logic of questions 
and answers does not discuss problem-solving under that label, but his questions bear 
more than a superficial resemblance to what I mean by problems, cf. his An Essay on 
Metaphysics and An Autobiography. K. R. Popper and his followers explicitly talk 
about the importance of problem-solving to scientific inquiry. But they do not regard 
problem-solving as a standard of justification; cf. essays I, 2, 3, and 10 in Conjectures 
and Refutations. See also J. Agassi, ''The Nature of Scientific Problems and Their 
Roots in Metaphysics", in The Critical Approach, ed. M. Bunge, (New York: 
Macmillan, 1964) and I. Lakatos, "Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific 
Research Programmes", in Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, ed. I Lakatos and 
A. Musgrave, (Cambridge: University Press, 1970). My objections to their approach 
are in "Fallibilism and Rationality", American Philosophical Quarterly, 9(1972), 
301-309. N. Rescher's Methodological Pragmatism, (Oxford: Blackwell, 1977) is 
very close in its orientation to the view I here favor. There are two recent books 
devoted to problem-solving. L. Laudan's Progress and Its Problems, (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1977) is doing exactly what I think ought to be done in 
epistemology. The other is my own: A Justification of Rationality, (Albany: SUNY 
Press, 1976). In "A New Defence of Common Sense", American Philosophical 
Quarterly, 16(1979), 115-122, and in ''The Centrality of Problem-Solving"./nquiry, 
22(1979), I say more about the topics I now proceed to discuss. 
19 The relation between problems of life, theories, and problems of reflection is in 
some ways very much like Popper's frequently used schema of beginning with 
problems, proceeding to a tentative solution, eliminating error, and encountering new 
problems which emerged from this procedure. My main disagreement is that I believe 
that problems of life are not theory-generated, whereas Popper would deny, I think, 
that there are any such problems. See his Objective Knowledge, (Oxford: Clarendon, 
1972),119. 

GONZALO MUNEV AR 
Science in Feyerabend' s Free Society 
Paul Feyerabend's latest book, Science in a Free Society, is certain to 
intrigue some, appall others, and infuriate many. 1 In a free society, he 
claims, there should be a separation of science and state, just as there is a 
separation of church and state. This should be so because (1) science is 
only one of many traditions or ideologies, (2) a free society is one in 
which there is equality among traditions or ideologies, and (3) society's 
preferred treatment of science in education, medicine, and so on (making 
it the "fabric of democracy") violates the rights of other traditions. A 
central concern of the book is whether modern science can be shown to be 
better than alternatives such as magic or Aristotelian science. Feyerabend 
argues that it cannot. But there is much more to the book: Feyerabend 
examines the relation between reason and practice, tames the specter of 
relativism conjured up by his views, attacks modern medicine, and spends 
a good many pages debunking experts and exposing the low caliber of 
contemporary philosophy of science. Just as in his Against Method (AM), 
one can find "... arguments to make rationalists feel at home, arias in 
various keys to please the more dramatic reader, fairy tales to capture the 
Romantic, ... rhetoric for those who like a hard-hitting debate with no 
holds barred, ... personal remarks for people who rightly feel that ideas are 
made by men and that one understands them better more one knows about 
the minds that create them" (180). Feyerabend disappoints neither friend 
nor foe. 
For all of Feyerabend's clarification of his position, there is no 
guarantee that Science in a Free Society (SFS) will escape the misun-
derstandings that greeted Against Method. At the risk of adding a few 
more misunderstandings of my own, I would like to sketch and criticize 
G. Munevar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 179-198. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
179 

180 
GONZALO MUNEVAR 
what I take to be Feyerabend's main theses in his latest effort - a risk not 
lightly taken, by the way, after considering his devastating response to 
critics in "Conversations with Illiterates", the third and longest section of 
the book. I will argue in particular, that there should be no separation of 
science and state and that science is, indeed, the basis for the "fabric" of a 
free society. This is not to say that calm should return to the world of 
philosophy of science, for Feyerabend's work forces a reappraisal of the 
most cherished standard positions even if it does not succeed completely. 
I think it is not objectionable to think of science as a tradition. But 
some may fmd fault with putting science on par with other traditions. 
Science is said to be a rational enterprise; witchcraft and astrology are 
not. Thus, science is a privileged tradition if it is a tradition at all. 
Feyerabend is not impressed, however, and so he mounts an attack on two 
levels. First, he notices that people who make such claims tend to think of 
rationality in terms of rules or standards. To be rational is to live up to the 
standards, that is, to follow a methodology (a collection of rules such as 
"reject hypotheses that conflict with the facts", "avoid ad hoc moves", 
and so on). Science is supposed to be successful because it is rational, and 
rational because it has the right method. Against this position, Feyerabend 
sketches again the arguments from AM. There, he pointed out that in 
crucial episodes in the history of science - in exemplary incidents of 
scientific success or progress - (a) the most basic rules were violated, and 
(b) they had to be violated if progress was to result. Therefore, sticking to 
a methodology would have had the most disastrous consequences (from 
the rationalist's point of view - in this as in the nature of progress, 
Feyerabend accepts the rationalist account for the sake of argument only). 
So the rationalist has a most unwelcome choice: science is either progres-
sive or rational, but not both. This is not to say that all rules are to be 
abandoned, for Feyerabend points out that some procedures actually aided 
the scientists in particular circumstances. His slogan "anything goes" is 
simply the description of the situation from the rationalist point of view 
and not a new methodological proposal. It should be an embarrassment to 
the profession that many reviewers were completely unable to see the 
structure of this simple reductio. In SFS Feyerabend repeats and clarifies 
his arguments against a universal scientific reason or methodology, and 
expands his case against contextual variations of it (pp. 164-166). 
Not all methodologies are of the sort described, however. Lakatos' 
methodology, for example, does not demand the application of such 
standards but requires, instead, progressive research programs in the long 

FEYERABEND'S FREE SOCIETY 
181 
run. But even a research program that is stagnating cannot be eliminated, 
for nothing rules out its comeback (a progressive phase) if given time to 
regroup. The problem is that Lakatos' standards do not provide a measure 
of how much time is enough. Thus, Feyerabend argues, no proposal can 
ever be eliminated, and Lakatos' standards are therefore empty, mere 
verbal ornaments. 
Suppose, nevertheless, that it could be shown fIrst that science is 
rational. Would it follow then that science should be given preference 
over other traditions? No, says Feyerabend. It must be shown fIrst that 
being rational (in the required sense) is best. To show that it is not best-
in spite of the apparently overwhelming obviousness of the claim - or at 
least that it has not been shown to be, Feyerabend makes use mainly of a 
general argument and a particular test case. The general argument is that 
the distinction between reason and practice is illUSOry. The alleged 
conflict between these two is rather a clash of traditions, for reason is 
nothing more than another tradition. But traditions are neither good nor 
bad; they simply are. Thus, rationality cannot serve as an "objective" 
arbiter of traditions, for it is itself a tradition. Of course, traditions may be 
made to serve as arbiters of disputes anyway, but then the whole affair is 
relativistic, surely not the sort to gladden a rationalist's heart. In a 
particular case Feyerabend considers whether it can be shown that 
modern science is better than Aristotelian science. The answer, again, 
does not provide much comfort to the defenders of science ("Aristotle Not 
a Dead Dog"). 
An immediate consequence of Feyerabend's general argument is 
relativism. Not to worry, he says. Humanity will not be any the worse for 
it. This matter may be of the greatest importance. But I would like to 
concentrate first on Feyerabend's case for it and on the support that case 
provides for the thesis of the separation of science and state. 
To begin, Feyerabend argues that claims to objectivity assume a 
distinction between traditions (practices) and a different domain that is 
outside of all traditions but may act on them (20). Feyerabend proceeds to 
a historical analysis of this distinction. It arises, he says, because of "the 
tendency to view differences in the structures of traditions (complex and 
opaque vs. simple and clear) as differences in kind (real vs. imperfect 
realization of it)" (22). Thus, for example, "In antiquity the relation 
between the new entities of mathematics and the familiar world of 
common sense gave rise to various theories. One of them which one 
might call Platonism assumes that the new entities are real while the 

182 
GONZALO MUNEV AR 
entities of common sense are but their imperfect copies. Another theory, 
due to the Sophists, regards natural objects as real and the objects of 
mathematics (the objects of 'reason') as simple minded and unrealistic 
images of them". (21) This tendency is "reinforced by the fact that the 
critics of a practice take an observer's position with respect to it but 
remain participants of the practice that provides them with their objec-
tions". (22) That is to say, critics take their own tradition for granted and 
deride their opponent for not meeting the standards of such a tradition, 
which standards now look "objective" only because in using them the 
critics forget that they are grounded in the tradition. Thus, for example, 
" . .. in order to find an argument against Aristotle [popper] would have to 
find difficulties in Aristotle that are independent of the fact that Aristotle 
does not use the methods of modem science. No such difficulties are ever 
mentioned. Thus, the 'argument' boils down to: Aristotle is not like us-
to hell with Aristotle! Typical critical rationalism!" (63) 
Traditions, then, are neither good nor bad; they simply are. They 
become good or bad (or true or false) only when viewed from the vantage 
point of another tradition. Relativism raises its flag whenever alternative 
traditions come onto the field. And in those cases where "objectivity" is 
demanded (e.g., in value theory), the situation "can be ... rectified by 
using discoveries ... that correspond to the discovery of alternative 
geometries". (23) Thus, with dates, coordinates, statements concerning 
the value of a currency, statements of geometry (after the discovery of 
Non-Euclidean geometries), we find examples of "many statements that 
are formulated 'objectively' i.e., without reference to traditions or 
practices but ... still meant to be understood in relation to a practice". 
(23) We should treat normative pretensions such as "theories ought to be 
falsifiable and contradiction free" in a similar manner. "Continued 
insistence on the 'objectivity' of value judgements", Feyerabend says, 
"would be as illiterate as continued insistence on the 'absolute' use of the 
pair 'up-down' after discovery of the spherical shape of the earth". (23) 
Feyerabend knits the fabric of his historical case with yam from natural 
philosophy, the theater, and other fields. He most plausibly shows how 
disputes about standards of rationality turned out to be, time and again, 
nothing but clashes of different traditions or practices. But is a historical 
case sufficient? Must we conclude on its basis that reason is practice? 
Furthermore, where are those discoveries "that correspond to the 
discovery of alternative geometries?" 
The issue, as Feyerabend sees it, is whether we are to think of reason as 

FEYERABENO'S FREE SOCIETY 
183 
a disembodied guide of practice or not. Most positions on the problem of 
reason vs. practice assume that it is, though they disagree on which side 
should have priority. According to Feyerabend there are two main such 
positions: idealism and naturalism. Idealism holds that certain standards 
should be upheld come what may. Idealism is shown to be faulty because 
the practices that result from upholding the standards are unacceptable to 
the very proponents of the standards (cf. the required violation of the 
standards for "progress" to come about in science). In naturalism, "reason 
receives both its content and its authority from practice. It describes the 
way in which practice works and formulates its underlying principles". 
(24) Naturalism is not satisfactory either, even though "having chosen a 
popular and successful practice the naturalist has the advantage of 'being 
on the right side' at least for the time being. But a practice may 
deteriorate; or it may be popular for the wrong reasons ... Basing 
standards on a practice and leaving it at that may forever perpetuate the 
shortcomings of this practice". (25) ''The inadequacy of standards often 
becomes clear from the barrenness of the practice they engender, the 
shortcomings of practices often are very obvious when practices based on 
different standards flourish". (25) 
With this account, Feyerabend takes on both sides of the dispute in 
contemporary philosophy of science between the logical approach (still 
the dominant school) and the historical one (Kuhn, Polanyi, and 
Feyerabend thinks, Lakatos). A much more realistic suggestion "can be 
illustrated by the relation between a map and the adventures of the person 
using it ... Originally maps were constructed as images of and guides to 
reality and so, presumably, was reason. But maps like reason contain 
idealization .... The wanderer uses the map to find his way but he also 
corrects it as he proceeds, removing old idealizations and introducing new 
ones. Using the map no matter what will soon get him into trouble. But, it 
is better to have maps than to proceed without them. In the same way ... 
reason without the guidance of a practice will lead us astray while a 
practice is vastly improved by the addition of reason". (25) This account 
is not quite satisfactory because in it "reason and practice are still 
regarded as entities of different kinds". (26) In his own account reason 
and practice are of the same kind, we have relativism, and given the 
nature of a free society reason (as exemplified by the scientific tradition) 
is not given any preference. 
Are reason and practice of the same kind? Feyerabend' s historical case 
suffers from several defects. The first is that he often confuses the 

184 
GONZALO MUNEV AR 
distinction between formal and informal with the distinction between 
reason and unreason. (25, 65) And so when he wants to argue that 
"reason" is practice, he argues instead that a formal system is still a 
practice: "But complex and implicit reason is still reason and a practice 
with simple formal features hovering above a pervasive but unnoticed 
background of linguistic habits is still a practice". (26) It is true that in 
many instances the two distinctions have coincided, but that has not 
always been the case. Even in his example of Platonists vs. Sophists, each 
group thought that reason was on its side (even if "rational" is derived 
from "ratio" - of numbers - "reasonable" is not. And Aristotle not long 
afterward, thought it most unreasonable to expect physics to conform to 
mathematical models. Similar remarks may be made about many of 
Peyerabend's other illustrations, e.g., the modem dispute between 
formalists and ordinary language philosophers). 
Nevertheless, this is a minor objection, for it does not affect the claim 
that reason, whether expressed in formal or informal standards, is 
practice. Of greater significance seems to be a second objection. 
Peyerabend wants to show that reason is not a "disembodied guide" but a 
practice. But it seems that for anyone tradition or practice (for many of 
them at least) we could come up with many methodologies or "standards 
of rationality", and we would be very hard put to say that we had not one, 
but many, practices instead. Significant episodes in the history of science 
are alternatively described as "inductivist", or "falsificationist", or 
according to the methodology of "research programs". The point is not 
that science is not one but many practices, as Peyerabend himself says, 
but rather that for anyone practice within science there are many 
methodologies already available, let alone possible. Thus, standards of 
rationality may well be abstractions or disembodied guides of practices. 
Even if reason is not practice, Peyerabend' s case for relativism is not 
considerably weakened. Nonetheless, his emphasis is misplaced: what he 
actually needs to show is that reason is dependent upon practice. If so, 
reason cannot serve as an arbiter of traditions because it is itself depend-
ent on some traditions and not a super-standard hovering over all 
traditions. By "dependent" I mean that standards of rationality can be 
seen to be appropriate only because they are connected (in a dialectical 
fashion, perhaps) to certain traditions, with which they may have arisen. 
To see this point it will be sufficient to realize that even within science 
changes in practice may well lead to changes in standards of rationality, 
and that different practices (at least all-encompassing scientific practices 

FEYERABEND'S FREE SOCIETY 
185 
or traditions, e.g., what Kuhn calls paradigms) may have different 
standards of rationality. 
In arguing for these two last claims, Feyerabend goes beyond his 
previous case against method. What Feyerabend has attacked all along 
(since AM, that is) is the application of standards come what may, whether 
such standards are stated flat out (plain idealism) or in conditional form 
(contextual idealism). But, he is not a naive anarchist who rejects the use 
of all standards, as can be seen from his attempts to show how some 
procedures actually helped scientists. In the section "On the Cosmological 
Criticism of Standards" Feyerabend claims that "the standards we use and 
the rules we recommend make sense only in a world that has a certain 
structure. They become inapplicable, or start running idle in a domain that 
does not exhibit this structure". (34) The demand for content increase, for 
example, arose in the fIrst place ''from the wish to discover more and 
more of a nature that seemed to be inf'mitely rich in extent and quality". 
(34) The most effective way to criticize any such standard, then, is to cast 
doubt upon the cosmology within which it makes sense. But this is best 
done by developing an alternative cosmology (cf. the arguments for 
proliferation in AM). Thus, again for example, the standard of content 
increase is not untouchable: "It is in trouble the moment we discover that 
we inhibit a fInite world". (34) How could we discover such a thing? By 
developing theories that describe such a world and which "tum out to be 
better than their inf'mitist rivals". (34) 
Anyone standard, including the one of self -consistency, is up for grabs 
if we make the appropriate discoveries, i.e. if we produce a successful 
rival cosmology that has different standards. If our· most cherished 
standards seem impregnable it may only be because the level of criticism 
is very low, i.e., because the cosmology from which they derive their 
popularity is not confronted with serious alternatives. It seems to me, that 
Feyerabend's previous criticism of method by historical examination can 
be subsumed under this approach. FalsifIcationism, say, is strongly 
criticized when we see that adherence to it would· have favored the 
Aristotelians over Galileo, but that Galileo's cosmology, in spite of his 
counterinductive procedures, is deemed superior. At any rate, the moral of 
the present line of argument is that standards seem appropriate only 
because, in the last instance, some theories are thought to be successful, 
viz. the appropriateness of standards depends on their connection with 
certain practice or practices.2 Sever the connections (by showing, for 
example, that the practices do not, and could not, follow the standards) or 

186 
GONZALO ~VAR 
replace the practices by others that do not follow the standards, and 
"reason" falls by the wayside. Reason, then, is tied to specific practices or 
traditions in such a way that it cannot serve as the arbiter of traditions. 
Unless, of course, it can be shown that those specific practices are to be 
preferred to any others. But surely this can no longer be done merely by 
pointing out that those practices are in accordance with reason. 
Two important objections must be considered at this point. First, 
standards are to be replaced when the results of research favor a cosmol-
ogy opposed to that which supports the standards. "But", Feyerabend 
poses the objection, "how will the results of this research be evaluated if 
fundamental standards have been removed? ... Does not a decision to 
accept unusual theories and to reject familiar ones assume standards and 
is it not clear, therefore, that cosmological investigation cannot try to 
provide alternatives to all standards?" (37) To be more specific, "when 
and on what grounds shall we be satisfied that research containing 
inconsistencies has revealed a fatal shortcoming of the standard of non-
contradiction?" (37) Some would think that this question would pin 
Feyerabend on the ropes, but not at all. "The question makes as little 
sense", he says, "as the question what measuring instruments will help us 
to explore an as yet unspecified region of the universe. We don't know 
the region, we cannot say what will work in it". (37) As an example, he 
suggests that we consider the question how to measure the temperature of 
the sun, asked about 1820. ''The very same applies to standards". he says. 
"Standards are intellectual measuring instruments; they give us readings 
not of temperature, or of weight, but of the properties of complex sections 
of the historical process. Are we supposed to know them even before 
these sections have been presented in detail? Or is it assumed that history, 
and especially the history of ideas is more uniform that the material part 
of the universe? That man is more limited than the rest of nature?" (37) 
Furthermore, "Standards which are intellectual measuring instruments 
often have to be invented, to make sense of new historical situations just 
as measuring instruments have constantly to be invented to make sense of 
new physical situations". (29) Thus, "One may base judgements and 
actions on standards that cannot be specified in advance but are intro-
duced by the very judgements (actions) they are supposed to guide and 
one may even act without any standards, simply following some natural 
inclination". (28) 
I fmd this response appropriate, even though - as I will argue later - it 
can be turned against Feyerabend's own defense of Aristotle. It seems, 

FEYERABEND'S FREE SOCIETY 
187 
then, that science cannot be given preferred treatment by society on the 
grounds that it (and it alone) follows the dictates of reason (where 
''reason'' is defmed in terms of standards of rationality). The fIrst problem 
is that science neither adheres nor could adhere to the standards so far 
proposed by philosophers of science. The second, is that even if we found 
that science accords with reason, reason is dependent upon practice and 
thus, not a suitable arbiter of traditions. It seems to me, that the sharp 
pangs brought about by the fIrst problem may be blunted by a different 
conception of reason, but this matter can be better handled elsewhere. 
Now, the relativism so far espoused has to consider the problem of 
incommensurability (surely, if not only the cosmologies, but even the 
standards of rationality may differ from tradition to tradition). Two 
theories are incommensurable if it is impossible to establish the standard 
deductive relations between them. For incommensurability to occur "the 
situation must be rigged in such a way that the conditions of concept 
formation in one theory forbid the formation of basic concepts of the 
other". (68) This has a most unwelcome consequence for most rationalists 
in that "we certainly cannot assume that two incommensurable theories 
deal with one and the same state of affairs (to make the assumption we 
would have to assume that both at least refer to the same objective 
situation. But how can we assert that 'they both' refer to the same 
situation when 'they both' never make sense together?" (70) This is 
particularly hard to swallow for the many who still feel that realism is at 
the heart of the scientifIc enterprise. Unlike the Positivists, the realists 
believe that the world contains much more than observations; it is the task 
of science to gradually discover the things that make up the world and to 
determine their properties and mutual relations, but without changing the 
things, the properties, or the relations. Realism may be interpreted, 
Feyerabend says, "as a particular theory about the relation between man 
and the world or as a presupposition of science". (70) Those who accept 
the second alternative are dogmatists. And to show that the fIrst is 
incorrect, "all we need to do is to point out how often the world changed 
because of a change in basic theory". (70) 
But does the world change when we change theories (or paradigms, or 
traditions)? Is the matter settled by whether incommensurability is par for 
the course in theory changing? Feyerabend obviously thinks it is, but in 
doing so he does not take advantage of the resources relativism has to 
offer. He should realize that within a relativistic scheme the question 
about the world changing makes no sense, just as it makes no sense 

188 
OONZALO MUNEVAR 
(within the Special Theory of Relativity) to ask whether the mass really 
changes when we change frames of reference.3 
This finishes my presentation of Feyerabend's epistemological position 
in SFS. An obvious consequence, he thinks, is that the basic structure of a 
free society is a protective structure which ensures that "all traditions are 
given equal rights, equal access to education and other positions of 
power". (30) For "if traditions have advantages only from the point of 
view of other traditions, then choosing one tradition as a basis of a free 
society is an arbitrary act that can be justified only by resort to power". 
(30) Thus, epistemological relativism leads to political relativism, the 
view that all traditions have equal rights. 
This view is to be contrasted with the view of today's liberal intellec-
tuals who permit only "equality of access to one particular tradition - the 
scientific, rationalistic tradition of the White Man". (76) This rationalism 
(science) is made the basis for society, while other views may be heard 
but not permitted "a role in the planning and the completion of fundamen-
tal institutions such as law, education, economics", (144) to say nothing 
of medicine (175-176). ''The excellence of science is assumed, it is not 
argued for ... everything else is Pagan nonsense". (73) This assumption 
of the inherent superiority of the New Church "has moved beyond science 
and has become an article of faith for almost everyone". (74) "We accept 
scientific laws and facts, we teach them in our schools, we make them the 
basis of important political decisions, but without having examined them 
and without having subjected them to a vote". (74) And when citizens 
object to the scientists' "working out their private fantasies" (134) at the 
taxpayers' expense and without public supervision, the matter is 
presented as if "a peaceful crowd of quiet and self-paid researchers is to 
be rudely disturbed by an unscientific Gestapo". (212) 
Since there is no separation of science and state, science experts are 
given the power to mold society according to their wishes and conse-
quently "the very same enterprise that once gave man the ideas and the 
strength to free himself from the fears and the prejudices of a tyrannical 
religion now turns him into a slave of its interests". (75) In medicine, "the 
power of the medical profession over every stage of our lives already 
exceeds the power once wielded by the Church". (74) And in education, 
"physics, astronomy, history must be learned; they cannot be replaced by 
magic, astrology, or by a study of legends". (74) But in a truly free 
society, citizens have a say in running the institutions to which they 
contribute. Experts may be listened to, but their advice need not be 

FEYERABEND'S FREE SOCIETY 
189 
heeded. After all, "a democracy is an assembly of mature people and not a 
collection of sheep guided by a small clique of know-it-alls". (87) 
Maturity is only learned by active participation in making decisions; 
''participation of laymen in fundamental decisions is, therefore, required 
even if it should lower the success rate of the decisions". (87) And since 
"the only way of arriving at a useful judgement of what is supposed to be 
the truth, or the correct procedure is to become acquainted with the widest 
possible range of alternatives", (86) ... no tradition should be closed to 
the citizen, who may then "if he falls ill ... be treated in accordance with 
his wishes, by faith healers, if he believes in the art of faith healing, by 
scientific doctors, if he has greater confidence in science". (86) Further-
more, if the taxpayers want their state universities to teach Voodoo, folk 
medicine, astrology, rain dance ceremonies, "then this is what the 
universities will have to teach". (87) 
To those who think that laymen would not have the knowledge 
necessary to make the required decisions, Feyerabend points out that 
laymen and dilettantes can and often do discover mistakes in the most 
cherished views of the experts, and that, moreover, expert opinion is often 
prejudiced, untrustworthy, and in need of outside control. (86-89) 
Interesting as his arguments are, the rationalist may still reply that in spite 
of its faults (after all, they do not claim certainty for science; they know it 
is a self-correcting enterprise) science is a more worthy traditiori than 
magic, astrology and the like. But how can this position be maintained in 
the face of the epistemological case within Feyerabend's reach? It cannot 
be shown that any of the standards of rationality are compatible with what 
rationalists call the success of science. And even then, reason is depend-
ent upon specific traditions and cannot serve as an arbiter of traditions. 
Having argued that the excellence of science cannot be established on 
methodological grounds, Feyerabend apparently only needs to argue that 
such excellence cannot be inferred from the results science produces 
either. Once these two points are established, the rest are details on the 
way to replace scientific or philosophical expertise by citizen initiatives 
and committees of laymen. 
I believe, however, that Feyerabend is wrong: the excellence of science 
can be shown on both counts. 
It seems to me that a society has good grounds for "favoring" an 
ideology over others if there is a communal enterprise for which some 
ideology or other is required ("ideology" in Feyerabend' s sense of 
"tradition", "practice", and so on). This would no more violate the rights 

190 
GONZALO MUNEV AR 
of other traditions than the practice of awarding contracts to carry out 
certain tasks violates the rights of the individual citizens not chosen. We 
may grant Peyerabend the point that no one ideology is inherently 
"superior" (or "liberating") without having to conclude that they all are 
equally well fitted for any task at any given time. Some of them are 
obviously at a disadvantage (and not just because the dispute has been 
"rigged" in science's favor), otherwise there would be no need for 
Peyerabend to argue that they may still make a comeback, as atomism and 
other views did. Thus, the protective structure of a free society may have 
to ensure that such views are not stamped out by insthutional means, but 
without having to ensure that they be taught on an equal footing with 
science. Still, why should science be afforded such preference? We shall 
see presently. 
According to Peyerabend, the excellence of science on methodological 
grounds is mistakenly assumed. There are no good arguments to show 
that Aristotle is inferior to modern science, for example. That Aristotelian 
science does not follow the standard of content increase, as Critical 
Rationalists are prone to claim, only shows that Aristotle is different, not 
that he is worse. The difference between these two ideologies, or between 
Aristotle and whatever is found to actually do justice to modem science,4 
can be traced to an underlying difference of cosmologies. "Aristotle's 
cosmos is finite, both qualitatively and quantitatively ... it is viewed by 
an observer who can grasp its basic structure if left in his normal state, 
and whose capabilities are fixed and also finite. The observer may use 
mathematics and other conceptual and physical artifices - but these have 
no ontological implications". (63) On the other hand, "the cosmos of 
modern science is an infinite world, mathematically structured, com-
prehended by the mind though not always by the senses .... There is no 
stable equilibrium between man and the world though there are periods of 
stasis when the observer can settle ... in a temporary home". (63) Each of 
the two standards fits a different world; in order to decide between them 
we must frrst decide what kind of world we live in. 
Now, this view - that the appropriateness of standards depends on the 
status of the cosmologies associated with them - should receive historical 
support. Are there any cases in which procedures were vindicated, and 
perhaps even emerged, because they best fit the "exigencies of research?" 
(This is not to say that such procedures have been shown to hold come 
what may, for the exigencies of research are bound to change, as 
Peyerabend suggests). There are such cases. Peyerabend himself claims to 

FEYERABEND'S FREE SOCIETY 
191 
have discussed several. Of particular importance is the realization that 
"the idea that information concerning the external world travels undis-
turbed via the senses into the mind leads to the standard that all 
knowledge must be checked by observation: theories that agree with 
observation are preferable to theories that do not". (35) This standard is a 
cornerstone of Aristotelian methodology, and the corresponding idea part 
and parcel of Aristotle's cosmos as described above. But this standard, 
Feyerabend says, "is in need of replacement the moment we discover that 
sensory information is distorted in many ways. We make the discovery 
when developing theories that conflict with observation and finding that 
they are excellent in many other respects (in Chapter 5 to 11 of AM I 
show how Galileo made the discovery)". (36, my emphasis) This point 
applies not only to some naive versions of empiricism, but also to the 
sophisticated Aristotelian empiricism in which "error beclouds and 
distorts particular perceptions while leaving the general features of 
perceptual knowledge untouched. However great the error, these general 
features can always be restored and it is from them that we receive 
information about the world we inhabit". (60) In contrast, modem 
science, grounded on Galileo' s discovery, "postulated just such global 
distortions". (60) 
To summarize: if Feyerabend is correct, standards can be successfully 
criticized by making certain appropriate cosmological discoveries. But 
Feyerabend also claims that Galileo made just such discoveries in favor of 
modem science and against a cornerstone of Aristotelian science. 
Therefore if Feyerabend is correct, the excellence of modem science over 
Aristotle has been established on methodological grounds. 
Next let us consider Feyerabend's argument against the excellence of 
science on the basis of its results. The rationalist argument is acceptable 
"only if it can be shown (a) that no other view has ever produced anything 
comparable and (b) that the results of science are autonomous, they do not 
owe anything to non-scientific agencies". (100) According to Feyerabend 
neither assumption survives close scrutiny. Regarding the first assump-
tion, he claims that non-Western traditions did not get a fair fight: they 
were simply suppressed by the Western colonizers. (102) In cases where 
the oppression has been removed, non-scientific ideologies have shown 
that they can become powerful rivals of science. For example, when the 
Party restored free competition between science and traditional Chinese 
medicine, it was discovered that "traditional medicine has methods of 
diagnosis and therapy that are superior to those of Western scientific 

192 
GONZALO MUNEV AR 
medicine. Similar discoveries were made by those who compared tribal 
medicines with science". (103) But apart from this one rather special case, 
what support has Feyerabend for his contention that ancient and 
'primitive' alternatives "are often more adequate and have better results 
than their Western competitors and describe phenomena not accessible to 
an 'objective' laboratory approach?" (104) 
Fire. ''The inventors of myth invented fire and the means of keeping 
it". They also invented the rotation of crops, domesticated animals, bred 
new types of plants, and "crossed the oceans in vessels that were more 
seaworthy than modem vessels of comparable size and demonstrated a 
knowledge of navigation and the properties of materials that conflicts 
with scientific ideas but is, on trial, found to be correct". (104) This is the 
bulk of the evidence.s Now, the issue is not whether ancient man was 
stupid. Of course he was just as smart as we are, after all he was our 
genetic equal.6 And apparently he had plenty of time to think. So it is not 
surprising that he was able to do lots of worthwhile things. But should we 
conclude with Feyerabend that "if science is praised because of its 
achievements, then myth must be praised a hundred times more fervently 
because its achievements were incomparably greater?" (104) 
Now, which phenomena have been described here that are "not 
accessible" to science? I fmd none. But perhaps the results of myth are 
incomparably greater? (Though comparably would do). I think that 
Feyerabend is confusing two levels of evaluation. I am sure that many 
people have wondered about the genius needed to invent fIre or breed 
plants, or to do for the fIrst time any of the other things in the list, 
practically out of the blue. Considering the situation at the time, those 
achievements may be indeed more extraordinary than many in our day, 
given what we already know and the means that are available to us. 
Greatness often depends on time, place and circumstance. It would be 
preposterous to compare Galileo to the average graduate student of 
physics and astronomy today. Galileo is one of the greatest giants in our 
intellectual history; no one would make similar claims about the other. 
But when we compare results the matter is altogether different. The 
graduate student has at his command a host of intellectual and technologi-
cal tools that would permit him to do, on the whole, far more and with 
more precision than Galileo could. Modem physics and astronomy have 
been immensely refIned since Galileo's day. On one level of evaluation, 
Galileo is a giant, the other a midget. But when it comes to results the 
student's science is more excellent by far. Similarly, modern man can 

FEYERABEND'S FREE SOCIElY 
193 
have fire in thousands of ways not available to the ancients, and can do 
with it millions of things unimaginable to the "primitives". As for vessels, 
one can not help but picture an ancient seaman's reaction to speed boats, 
lUxury liners, aircraft carriers and atomic submarines, to say nothing of 
our travels through the ocean of air. It is remarkable that they could 
navigate so well in those days. But today we can do better, not only on 
and under water, but as far away as Jupiter and Saturn. And when it 
comes to manipulating the living world, Feyerabend seems to forget all 
about the awesome powers that molecular genetics, to name only one 
field, has begun to unleash in recent years. I could go on, but I think it is 
clear by now that the comparative excellence of the results of myth that 
Feyerabend found stems from his confusing two levels of evaluation. We 
may be standing on the shoulders of giants, but then even midgets can 
reach higher and see farther than the giants could. 
Even here I am granting too much. The results of modem science have 
been obtained in a very short time, whereas for all we know it took the 
myth makers thousands of years and much blundering. More can be said 
about the depth and breadth of the results of science in other respects, but 
it is time to move on to the autonomy assumption. "There is not a single 
important scientific idea that was not stolen from elsewhere", says 
Feyerabend. (105) Copernicus, for example, got his ideas from ancient 
authorities. Feyerabend exaggerates - from which ancient myth did 
Watson and Crick steal the idea for the structure of DNA? - but we may 
grant him that many important scientific ideas had their origins elsewhere. 
So what? The fact that Galileo was very instrumental in bringing about 
modem science does not change the balance of excellence of results 
discussed above. Feyerabend' s case is much weaker in the many instances 
where we could at most speak of inspiration. 
When Feyerabend challenges science in its own turf his comparisons 
fail. But in other places he favors the view that the excellence of results is 
in the eye of the beholder. I suppose that may be fair enough. Through 
navel contemplation some people feel at one with the universe. By 
disciplined malnutrition, or by the use of peculiar mushrooms or the 
sniffing of natural glues, some others may have even "traveled the 
celestial spheres to God himself whom they viewed in all his splendor 
receiving strength for continuing their lives and enlightenment for 
themselves and their fellow men". (31) Feyerabend and his mystics are 
much more impressed by such travels than by moonshots, the double 
helix, and non-equilibrium thermodynamics. To each his own. But why 

194 
GONZALO MUNEV AR 
then, he wants to know, should a free society make science its basic 
ideology? 
Apart from the reasons already given, there are two major points still to 
be considered. First, scientific ideologies either provide instruments that 
help us deal with the world in certain ways, or they may perhaps be 
conceived as being such instruments themselves. If those ways of life are 
agreeable to a society, if the communal enterprises to which they lead are 
likely to confront every citizen, it seems that the society may be not only 
entitled but even 'obliged to inform its future citizens about them, i.e. to 
give its citizens knowledge of the relevant scientific ideologies. For 
example, if for all a society knows, its survival depends on a certain 
agricultural technology, it is extremely reasonable for that society to 
educate its children on the basis of that technology. As it happens, our 
modern societies depend on many diverse applications of science. We 
find ourselves in the midst of cars, airplanes, electric appliances and 
power plants; we heat and cool our houses and harvest and process our 
foods with technological means. This may not be the best way to live. But 
it is the way we live, and our future citizens need a minimum of informa-
tion about the sort of world that will confront them. For a society that 
inhabits a region full of lakes and streams, knowledge of swimming and 
fishing may be important for survival. In our societies, some elementary 
acquaintance with the principles of electricity and dynamics may be 
necessary to ensure the preservation of life and limb. And better than a 
passing acquaintance is often needed to manage more than mere survival. 
So future citizens have to learn about science. 
Of course, a free society can only educate its future citizens as to such 
instruments, but it should not force them to lead their lives accordingly. 
And if the citizenry decides to concentrate on navel contemplation from 
now on, science may be useless to it, and so there would be no point in 
giving science a fundamental role in education. But as long as our world 
decides to live by the fruits of science, the state would be remiss unless it 
makes the scientific tradition a cornerstone of education.7 
Feyerabend was correct in pointing out that to suppose that the very 
character of a free society is inextricably bound with the ideology of 
science is to assume the inherent superior value of science. He was also 
correct in claiming that the rationalists had no good arguments for such 
assumption. But his own arguments against the excellence of science 
failed, making possible a case for the prominent position of science on 
grounds of methodology and of results. That prominence is not inherent, 

FEYERABENO'S FREE SOCIETY 
195 
however, but relative to the exigencies of research in our historical period 
and to the wants of modem societies (even if both standards and wants 
arose together with modem science). Just as a society, by choosing the 
contractor that best fits its present needs, does not trample on the rights of 
all other bidders, society is also entitled to favor the scientific ideology 
that offers the most desireable way of life. But none of the foregoing goes 
to show that a free society ought to choose the way of science. 
Nevertheless it seems to me that even this last hurdle can be overcome. 
"What is so great about science?" asks Feyerabend, "And what is so great 
about knowledge?" Let us tum the tables on him, and ask: "What is so 
great about a free society?" It takes more than majority rule for a society 
to be free; it takes a commitment to allow others an opportunity to express 
unusual points of view and to pursue life styles of their own choosing. 
But why should the majority permit this? After all, it may fmd those other 
opinions heretical and those other life styles an affront to the sensitivities 
of the many decent people who have the power. 
That the majority should is best explained by J.S. Mill, whose argu-
ments, according to Feyerabend, cannot be improved. (86) In On Liberty, 
Mill argues that man's knowledge is not infallible, and that as a conse-
quence no opinion should be denied a hearing by the majority of citizens, 
for "if the opinion is right, they are deprived of the opportunity of 
exchanging error for truth; if wrong, they lose, what is almost as great a 
benefit, the clearer perception and livelier impression of truth produced 
by its collision with error". (OL 21)8 In actual practice, though, no view is 
completely right or wrong, and so progress "for the most part only 
substitutes one partial and incomplete truth for another; improvement 
consisting chiefly in this, that the new fragment of truth is more wanted, 
more adapted to the needs of the time than that which it replaces". (OL 
56) (cf. the dependence of standards on the exigencies of research). A free 
society is justified, then, because "the only unfailing and permanent 
source of improvement is liberty, since by it there are as many possible 
independent centers of improvement as there are individuals". (OL 86) 
Thus the pursuit of knowledge is a most crucial element in the justifica-
tion that Mill offers for a free society; that pursuit, moreover, requires 
proliferation. It is clear also that when it comes to knowledge - of the 
nature of the world and of man's place in it - cosmological knowledge is 
of the greatest importance. This cosmological knowledge will not be any 
one particular ontology but rather an enterprise that lives by proliferation 
and changes ontologies and standards so as to best suit the needs of the 

196 
GONZALO MUNEV AR 
time. But what is this enterprise if not science as described by Feyerabend 
(or at least science as Feyerabend would ask for in his letter to Santa 
Claus)? "Science is essentially an anarchistic enterprise", said Feyerabend 
in AM (p.17), and thereby shocked many. But he was actually extending 
Mill's lessons to the epistemology of science.9 In the fIrst part of SFS 
these lessons are further strengthened by Feyerabend's case for epis-
temological relativism. Therefore, science properly understood, is closely 
interwoven with the fabric of a free society and to a large extent justiftes 
it. 
For this, and for the other reasons discussed above, Feyerabend' s thesis 
of the separation of science and (free) state does not succeed. 
Two other matters are still in want of further comment, however. Even 
if the prominence of science can be justifted, that prominence is limited 
and should not result in the obliteration of other views by institutional 
means. In education, for example, Feyerabend makes us realize that too 
much emphasis is placed on the acquisition of information and not 
enough on the preparation to do the independent and mature thinking 
essential to the full members of a free society. To challenge established 
points of view and to develop and consider alternatives should be far 
more prevalent than it is now. But certain things students ought to be 
acquainted with, and so the study of physics, astronomy, and history 
should not be replaced by that of magic, astrology, and legends. 
Feyerabend's arguments for proliferation show that other points of view 
should be not only permitted but encouraged. They do not show, 
however, that those alternative points of view should be given as 
fundamental a role as that of the scientiftc ideology so far best adapted to 
our historical circumstance.10 
If education is a matter in which Feyerabend goes too far, medicine is 
one in which Feyerabend has excelled in the art of diatribe and rationalist 
baiting. The lessons that Feyerabend draws for science from his examina-
tion of "scientiftc" medicine are blunted considerably because it is not 
clear just how "scientiftc" that medicine is. Cancer research, for example, 
would fit neither Kuhn's nor Lakatos' criteria for mature science. 
Medicine is actually a mismatch of things: some applications of modern 
biology, some dressing up of the practices of the medieval hypothecaries, 
and not a clear vision anywhere. So it is not surprising that contemporary 
medicine is good at some things and terrible at others. With the advent of 
molecular genetics and other powerful theoretical tools in biology, it is to 
be hoped that "scientiftc" medicine will truly become applied biological 

FEYERABENO'S FREE SOCIETY 
197 
science. To integrate the discipline this way, all kinds of sources will have 
to be tapped. Nothing short of arrogance can then justify the purge of 
alternative ways of healing. It is not surprising that ancient or "primitive" 
medicines are better in some areas than "scientific" medicine. But to 
acknowledge this point is not to give support for specific claims. Here, 
Feyerabend is most disappointing. How does he know, for example, that 
women with breast cancer are better off going to acupuncturists, faith 
healers, and herbalists? Because he advised some of them and followed 
the fate of others. (206) I think that Feyerabend has made such a big deal 
of the shortcomings of medicine that he owes his beleaguered rationalists 
better than anecdotal accounts of this sort. I I Who knows? A better 
account may be a public service. 
This is not to say that he has not already provided a service by 
unmasking bad arguments, unwarranted assumptions, and intellectual 
complacency. As usual, he has gone too far. But philosophy of science 
can well afford bold thinkers who are prepared to defend implausible 
ideas against all comers. 
The Evergreen State College 
Olympia 
Washington 
USA 
NOTES 
1 NLB (London: 1978), page numbers will be given in parentheses. 
2 Feyerabend argues that the meaning of standards also depends on such connections. 
3 For a more detailed account of relativism and the required "discoveries" see ch. 2 of 
my Radical Knowledge (to which Feyerabend also refers his readers). 
4 The following, then, should not be taken as a defense of the condition of content 
increase, which is besieged by many other problems (cf. AM, ch. 15). 
S Other items in Feyerabend's list are very questionable. For example, the myth 
makers "developed an art that can compare with the best creations of Western man." 
Even if true, how is this relevant to the issue? "The best ecological philosophy is 
found in the Stone Age." The best? How? As for his remarks on medicine, see mine 
onp.26. 
6 Although some of Piaget's researches indicate that "primitives" do not reach some 
of the higher intellectual stages available to all humans. See his Psychology and 
Epistemology, The Viking Press (New York: 1972), pp. 61-62. 
7 And if the society wants to maintain and improve its technology on a grand scale, it 

198 
GONZALO MUNEV AR 
will have to provide adequate support for scientific research in general, since there is 
no telling in advance where exactly technological opportunities will be born. This 
reason is implicit in many appeals for funding of scientific programs, not the notion 
that science is inherently superior. It does not help to claim, as Feyerabend does, that 
we will find plenty of "willing slaves" to pick up the scientific slack. A society not 
committed to supporting science does not offer many of its citizens the opportunity to 
become scientists. 
8 This and the following page references are to the Bobbs-Merrill edition (New York: 
1956). 
9 Feyerabend no longer urges everyone to "think, feel, live through a competition of 
alternatives." (144) "I do not show that proliferation should be used, 1 only show that 
the rationalist cannot exclude it." (145) And this point is made via "an argument that 
derives proliferation from the monist's own ideology." (145) Of course, one can hold 
that proliferation is essential not only for progress in science but for the fabric of a 
free society, without being a "mealymouthed whishywashy nobody who understands 
anything and forgives everything." (148) One may have very strong and dogmatic 
beliefs and one may also feel contempt for others views, while only being required "to 
let them have their say and not to stop them by institutional means." 
\0 Most people, as Mill would recognize, think of education only in terms of 
information, and would be outraged if Voodoo became part of the curriculum of 
universities. As an example, Feyerabend may consider the peasants' hostile reaction 
to changes in the educational system of his native Austria in the earlier part of the 
century. Wittgenstein, who served as school teacher in the movement to enable the 
peasants to become independent and mature thinkers, was a victim of the reaction. 
Similarly, most political intervention is likely to suppress proliferation and not to 
encourage it. 
11 Feyerabend does give some references. He mentions I. lllich's Medical Nemesis 
and Coulter's Divided Legacy. 

MARGHERITA VON BRENTANO 
Letter to an Anti-Liberal Liberal * 
"When the Inquisitor Remigius looked back, he remembered that in his youth, 
following solely his emotions and acting against the law, he had saved the children of 
witches from being burned at the stake. 'Now these children are damned to eternal 
agony in hell', so he reproached himself, 'because of my short-sighted sentiments'. 
Have we ever asked ourselves if the step to strictly secular civilization might have 
similar consequences?" 
(paul Feyerabend, Erkenntnis fur jreie M enschen, p. 138) 
Dear Paul Feyerabend: 
This quote, and many other passages and statements in your last book are, 
and obviously meant to be, provocative. Your book provokes me to more 
than particular objections. It makes me eager to discover why, in your 
way of reasoning, from highly reasonable and pragmatic propositions 
occasionally rather absurd conclusions emerge. Conclusions such as your 
suggestion that we adopt the pangs of conscience expressed by an aging 
prosecutor of witches, feeling remorse not at having burned witches at the 
stake, but at not having burned children as well. I said absurd, not 
inhumane, for I do not insinuate that you advocate reinstating the burning 
of women and children. I rather assume that you take no offence to 
witches and the belief in witches. 
And that is exactly where a problem arises. I have nothing at all against 
witches. But what about the belief in witches? It was the believers in 
witches who also burned them; their belief inclined them to burning 
witches. 
The persecution of witches, intimately related to the fear and hatred of 
womanhood and nature, was deeply rooted in Christianity. Many of those 
G. Munevar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 199-212. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
199 

200 
MARGHERITA VON BRENTANO 
accused of being witches only admitted to the accusation under torture; 
others not even then - they burned nevertheless. The victims most likely 
judged the matter differently from the aging man whose reflections you 
comment on so benevolently - and at the height of witch-persecution a 
considerable portion of the female population of Europe became victims. 
Beliefs and opinions of this type are not just what you call traditions, 
peaceful convictions of cultural groups, open to a mutual exchange of 
ideas with others; they rather display a nasty tendency to missionary zeal, 
quickly proceeding to bloody actions. Their victims are usually not 
fellow-believers, but the "others", the objects violent beliefs need. And 
here I have some difficulty in reconciling two of your demands: the 
demand that all traditions, including those "appearing rather bestial to 
others", should be tolerated and given equal rights, and the other demand 
that the objects of decisions should decide ("Betroffenenentscheidung"). 
Since they can no longer be consulted, we should let the witches rest in 
peace; their case, as you say, may not be relevant to the issues facing us 
today. Instead let us consider anti-Semites. First because the smell of 
burned corpses still lingers in the air; secondly because anti-Semitism is 
still among us, even if not actually burning Jews but disguised as 
harmless opinion; and lastly because you mention it yourself. 
Anti-Semitism is not a mere private opinion but a tenacious tradition, 
so according to you also admissable; and not an obsolete one, which one 
could confront you with for the mere sake of being rationalistic or 
disputatious. The problem is certainly not that rationalists, or liberals or 
Jews (for the anti-Semites one and the same) dislike anti-Semites and 
threaten their tradition, but that the anti-Semites dislike Jews, traditionalis-
tic or not, and threaten their lives. Traditions like the belief in witches and 
anti-Semitism not only appear bestial to others, they are deadly for others. 
But I will also set aside the topic of anti-Semites; maybe I will come 
back to it later. 
Instead I will point out what I liked about your book, provocations 
included, and why it inspired me to write to you and not about you. Your 
book is a very personal one; it does not hide behind a guise of objectivity. 
You are thoroughly right in emphasizing that it is not arguments, but 
experience and arguments in the context of experience which lead human 
beings to adopt or adapt certain positions. And you relate very impres-
sively the experiences which motivated the ideas and proposals presented 
in your book. 
One aspect of these experiences is your background in the positivistic-

LETTER TO AN ANTI-LIBERAL LIBERAL 
201 
analytical philosophy of science, "a rather narrow-minded, pseudo-
scientific tradition" (those are your words). I, having started exploring 
philosophy with the works of Aristotle, Leibniz and Kant, and having 
approached the problem of historicity, or the dialectics of reason in 
readings and discussions with Heidegger, Adorno, and Bloch, am not 
inclined to contradict you. 
Then there is your experience with scientists, intellectuals, "official 
thinkers", "ratio fascists", as you label them. I guess many of those 
working in our field can share your feelings. Nevertheless I am reminded 
of a remark in Adorno's Minima Moralia. Because an intellectual mostly 
meets and works with intellectuals, he tends to regard them as viler than 
other people. For them he is a rival, for the mechanic repairing his car he 
is a client, towards whom one behaves nicely. "Intellectual" is not of 
necessity a term of abuse, and fortunately you are a fascinating member 
of the species yourself. 
Particular to the situation in the United States are the experiences you 
gained as a professor instructing Native Americans, Blacks, and other 
members of oppressed traditions. This is surely a very real way to see 
what we in European universities discuss in a more abstract way: that our 
occidental-universal way of thinking is a tradition among others, and an 
arrogant one. We have only the "urban Indians" and they are very 
German. The children of the resident Turks are at present of school-age. 
Yet, as a woman working in an extremely male-dominated field, as 
philosophy is, I experience in quite concrete terms what you call the 
"separatistic, analytical, egotistic tendencies of occidental thinking", and 
sometimes feel like a member of an ethnic minority. 
And finally you mention a different type of experience which an 
increasing number of people and groups in our stage of civilization are 
sharing: "The way in which social problems, the problems of exploiting 
and wasting resources, ecological problems, the problems of poverty, of 
old people, of prisoners, of the mentally disturbed, are treated in our 
society and are solved ... ", more precisely are not solved: 
Your book is a vehement plea on behalf of laymen and mature, 
emancipated citizens, in the name of all those who are hindered in their 
attempts to determine what their own welfare is and settle their own 
affairs accordingly. It clearly opposes all oppressive forms of guardian-
ship, expertocracy, the monopoly of bureaucrats in decision-making and 
their treating of suffering as an object of administration. 
Your book is also a plea on behalf of oppressed traditions and cultures, 

202 
MARGHERITA VON BRENTANO 
for autonomy, decentralization and the right to be different. It bids 
defiance to the veiled dogmatism of white, liberal, occidental society 
which, taking its standards as universal, awards equal rights only at the 
price of assimilation. 
I notice that you do not mention imperialism - or have I overlooked it? 
No, it is not by accident that the word is missing. You blame our civiliza-
tion's claim to power on rationalism, reason, science, monotheism, etc. 
That is of course also true. But if we chose to call all that "imperialism" 
instead of "dogmatism", we would be thinking of other means of power: 
weapons and capital. "They speak of the Bible and think of cotton". I 
have the impression that you, dear intellectual Paul Feyerabend, place too 
much trust in talk about the Bible (or reason, or science). Other traditions 
have been destroyed not by reason or the Bible, but by physical extermina-
tion and economical exploitation. The Bible and science have served as 
whores to that enterprise so we must indeed ask what made them so well 
suited for such services. But we should not forget what they were used 
for: political and economic power. 
You have rather closely connected these novel political appeals and 
distinctions with various critical distinctions concerning science which 
are familiar to readers of your earlier work. You even seem to deduce 
your political options from these distinctions. Among them I find three 
stages or levels, each with a positive and negative side. 
On the first level, you distinguish philosophy or the theory of science 
from science, and argue that it offers little of value to the actual concrete, 
pluralistic scientific research. 
On the next level you confront rationalism, defined as "the idea that 
there are universal standards for thinking and acting", with common 
sense, opportunism and pragmatism. 
Finally, you subsume the negative side under the broader concept of 
reason (or philosophy, or the claim to truth) and the positive side under 
practice, history and tradition. 
You then divide all this by drawing a vertical line through all levels. 
On the left-hand side we find everything that you identify with Western, 
white, liberal, in short our own tradition. The right side contains every-
thing you attribute to the other, oppressed traditions. 
The concept of "tradition" appears with two distinct meanings: a) as 
denoting "traditional" societies vis-a-vis European society characterized 
by ever-increasing rationalism, and b) as a neutral term for societies in 
general. 

LEITER TO AN ANTI-LIBERAL LIBERAL 
203 
Of course using both meanings of the term as one makes sense 
polemically by reminding us that our pretended universal civilization 
represents only a particular form_ 
Yet it suppresses an important aspect of the problem. What Max Weber 
called the "process of rationalization" is not simply the ideological 
pretension of megalomanic rationalists, but a very real process becoming 
really universal. The fact that oppressed people adopted Western science 
and technology was not the result of being forced to do so; on the 
contrary, until not so long ago they were hindered from doing so. But 
oppressed people probably realized that imperialism can hardly be fought 
with rain dances and voodoo: it had to be fought with its own weapons. In 
a situation of conflict and competition, rational methods in science, 
economy, administration proved more efficient than traditional methods -
which does not mean that they are a better way of life. Max Weber 
explicitly denies that they are; he says that to the really important 
questions: "What should we do?", "How should be live?", rationality does 
not give a better answer, it gives no answer at all, whereas traditional 
societies had answers. His critique of the process of rationalization is 
almost as harsh as yours, except that he judged it as inevitable and saw no 
way to stop it. The critique of rationalism is itself part of our tradition; 
one could quote earlier witnesses from Rousseau to Nietzsche. In our time 
the chorus of critics is getting louder, your voice being one of the most 
colorful and spirited. We have opportunity to see that this process of 
rationalization was not only destructive to others but is proving self-
destructive as well. 
But I am not sure that the alternatives are to be found just in 
traditionalism. All the pairs of opposing concepts you describe belong to 
our own tradition, and delineate not so much totally different and 
irreconcilable but rather complementary aspects of that complex tradition. 
If instead of drawing a vertical line between your opposing concepts one 
looks at your levels horizontally, one can recognize historical stages of 
interpretation of the relationship between theoretical and practical reason. 
In the case of the theory of science versus practice and research, an actual 
discussion; in rationalism versus common sense, the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries. And fmally in the general-formula theory versus 
practice one can recognize the classical description of human capacities 
which continue through our history. And then we have not pairs of 
opposition from which to choose the better side, but concrete history, our 
own occidental history which started by defming man (women were not 

204 
MARGHERITA VON BRENTANO 
worth being defined anyway) as "animal rationale" and continued more 
and more to tear apart the capacity of reasoning from the natural, sensual, 
feeling, living creatures we are. 
That it is possible, as you do, to use one side of the division to describe 
our own, and the other side to characterize the other ''traditional'' 
traditions, has to do with the preponderance of rationality in our tradition. 
Rationality is almost super-human; everything else, including the fact that 
we are part of nature and natural, is seen as irrational, almost sub-human. 
And this we ascribe to the other traditions. 
They appear more natural, picturesque, but not quite as human as we 
are. They appear "irrational". But are they? By just changing values and 
pleading for irrationalism one stays within our standards instead of 
challenging them, as you intend to do. If the dichotomy as a whole is 
questionable, both sides are affected. 
Let me have a second look at your distinctions. First the distinction 
between the theory of science and actual research. Are the formalism of 
the former, and the pluralism, even anarchism of the latter really antitheti-
cal? Or are they not rather two sides of the same coin? The theory of 
science is formal because actual research is pluralistic and with respect to 
aims, contents and actual choice of methods only post Jestum describable. 
And the theory of science cannot provide statements about contents, aims 
and innovative developments of practical research because our idea of 
science is instrumental. The aims are fed in by those doing research (or 
mostly their employers) and are not in themselves scientifically decidable. 
Even if science is declared to be an aim in itself, this distinction is upheld. 
This concept of science may be too narrow, but it is common to 
theoreticians and to practical researchers alike. 
In your second pair, viz. rationalism (as the idea that there are universal 
standards for thinking and acting) versus common sense, pragmatism and 
opportunism, one can recognize the programs of rationalism and em-
piricism of the seventeenth century. These may be seen as complementary 
twins, stemming from the same assumption that true statements are either 
analytical or empirical,tertium non datur. (Kant saw and criticized that 
common assumption). 
You yourself place modem science in the context of a new way of life 
("Modem Science arose from global objections to former ways of 
life.") ... - in a new era one can neutrally term the modem era; in terms 
of social history, the civil society; and in economical terms, the rise of 
capitalism - an era which is characterized by increasing rationality. 

LE1TER TO AN ANTI-LIBERAL LIBERAL 
205 
But within this process of rationalization, rationality on the one hand, 
and common sense and pragmatism on the other, are not alternative but 
correlative aspects. You continue the sentence quoted above "... and 
rationalism itself ... arose from global objections to common sense" and 
you point to Xenophanes versus Homer as an example. I am not sure if 
that is historically tenable. Xenophanes' concept of deity is comparable to 
modern rationalism only in a very vague sense. Homer's world of gods 
and men can even less plausibly be seen in terms of common sense, 
which is not only a modern word, but a modern idea emerging as a 
necessary complement to modern rationalism. 
Both belong together. The programmatical document of modern 
rationalism. Descartes' Discours de fa Methode begins with the statement 
that "Ie bon sens" is the most widely distributed thing in the world, 
everyone claiming to possess it as a whole. "Cogitatio" as the faculty of 
rational thinking and "Ie bon sens" which has been translated into English 
as "common sense" are both undivided faculties common to all human 
beings. Although these faculties are distinguished with respect to their 
different functions, namely in theoretical or practical reasoning, they are 
nevertheless functions of one and the same "ratio"; congruent and 
complementary functions able to guarantee universality and the intersub-
jectivity of reason. 
The relation of rationality and pragmatism or opportunism may also be 
seen not just as opposition but also as correlation. 
In the same Discours we find Descartes' justification of a "morale par 
provision", which is nothing other than a justification of a pragmatic and 
opportunistic attitude towards existing religion, politics and culture, and 
which is anything but provisional. With regard to our everyday life, 
Descartes points to the relative and traditional character of moral codes. 
As they have concrete content, formal ratio cannot give us any type of 
criteria to choose between them, and so it is quite reasonable to conform 
to those existing in the place and time in which one lives. 
You designate the clarification of the relationship of reason and 
practice as a new and central theme of your book. In an important passage 
you remark that reason and praxis are not "two different kinds of entities, 
but parts of a single dialectical process". You go on to describe reason as 
a reflection of reality in terms of a tradition, and praxis as a complex and 
implicit form of reason. This seems to me to be a productive approach to 
grasping the intrinsic interaction of both as a historical process. But you 
do not follow that approach (at least in the German book I am comment-

206 
MARGHERITA VON BRENTANO 
ing on; in the English version I read later, you do), but rather you treat 
reason and praxis as two different things. So when you call them "just 
two different traditions", you go on to play one against the other. 
Thirdly, entire "realms", obviously of reality itself, make a sudden and 
surprising appearance in your book. You write: "Not only traditions, but 
also the physical 'and social world contain realms with simple and clear 
laws (Astronomy, Mathematics) and realms in which general laws are 
either hidden under contingency (Physics) or do not exist at all 
(medicine)" .... You add that the realms of the fust type are best under-
stood by abstract traditions (in your terms: reason), realms of the other 
two types with the aid of historical traditions (= praxis). Suddenly we are 
confronted with physical and social worlds. Traditions obviously do not 
occupy a particular realm within such regional ontology, but belong to the 
social world. Then rationality and opportunism or pragmatism are 
distinguished in quite another way from elsewhere in your book. They are 
not attitudes, one of Western civilization, the other of other traditions, but 
both adequate methods for dealing with law-governed or lawless realms 
of reality. And choice between them is not a choice between Western and 
other traditions, but prescribed by reality itself. 
Further, this would hold true for all traditions. In other words, a 
researcher in astronomy or mathematics should use strictly rationalistic 
methods, whatever tradition he belongs to: in medicine the method should 
be trial-and-error (which assuming there are no discernible regularities or 
laws here, as you do, would be quite reasonable); rain-dances would be 
appropriate methods for meteorology, the weather behaving irrationally as 
everyone agrees it does; and voodoo for directing human behavior (or 
whatever else voodoo is used for). 
But perhaps you meant to say something quite different: that reason 
and rationality as we define them have thus far been able only to com-
prehend some particular realms, and those in a one-sided manner, 
excluding other approaches (you mention astrology as an example). 
Perhaps you meant to stress that other areas and approaches also entail 
regularities which we cannot grasp with our limited form of reason: that 
we should try out different approaches to such realms and not a priori 
exclude methods that seem strange to us. That means that reason may be 
in fact broader and richer than modem rationalism would have it. Even 
forms of practice which seem foreign and therefore irrational to us, may 
contain reason. 
Now it is of little value simply to point out contradictions and inconsis-

LETIER TO AN ANTI-LffiERAL LIBERAL 
207 
tent formulations, in particular with respect to an author who so vehe-
mently attacks the rigid demand that everyone be consistent and free of 
contradictions. It is doubtless more fruitful to consider your motives, 
which I share, and the target of your attack: the global murderous and 
suicidal imperialism of Euro-American society. Why is it so difficult to 
find a basis for diagnosis, criticism and positive alternatives to this 
society? 
You designate rationalism as the root of this evil and you regard its 
claim that reason, science and established norms be universally valid as 
the nucleus of its oppressive character. Now this is certainly true, if one 
keeps in mind that modern rationalism proclaimed a narrow, purely 
instrumental form of reason, which is indeed primarily an instrument of 
power, of using and dominating everything else, nature outside and inside 
ourselves, and other cultures seen as nature. 
But even if parts of your book seem to question this equating of 
modern rationalism with reason itself, on the whole your interpretation of 
reason and possible alternatives is modelled on the modem dichotomy of 
instrumental rationality and irrationality. So when you recommend 
irrationalism, pragmatism, opportunism as alternatives to rationalism, you 
stay in a field measured and defined by modem rationalism itself. But 
from its narrow and rigid idea of reason, practice, history, and traditions 
appear as irrational. 
And when you go on to confront Western civilization as a whole with 
other traditions and present them as alternatives, you describe them in the 
categories of Western civilization, as irrational. 
But the relative freedom, anarchy, of practical life in Western civiliza-
tion, and the irrationalism of other traditions as seen from our point of 
view, is a weak opponent to the mainstream of rationalism, to the process 
of rationalism, because it is only its complement. The fact that practice 
not only appears to be irrational, but is irrational, is intimately related to a 
concept of reason as formal, neutral, instrumental with respect to content 
and meaning. It is just this formal and instrumental character of 
rationality, reducing matter, nature, and the content of reality to material 
subjects of formalized regularity that explains the victory of rationalism 
in our own and over other traditions. The dichotomy of instrumental 
rationality and anarchy of content is not a deficiency, but the core of 
Western domination. 
This fact was most clearly seen and described as inevitable by Max 
Weber, though with an overtone of resignation. He diagnosed rationality 

208 
MARGHERITANON BRENTANO 
as the form of capitalist economy, of modem law, of bureaucratic 
administration, of civil government, of science and technology as neutral 
instruments for whatever aims. 
The irrationality of contents, values, opinions, decisions, private beliefs 
and ways of life, in short of practice, corresponds exacdy to this formal 
rationality. So the rational form of capitalism and the anarchism of 
commodity-production go hand in hand right down to rationally planned 
waste. The rational form of law agrees with legal positivism. Bureaucratic 
administration and government requires as a supplement what Weber 
called the "charismatic leader". Decisions, the execution of power in 
rational society is certainly not wielded by the "rationalists", 
"intellectuals", or "scientists" you so colorfully abuse, but by rather 
pragmatic and opportunistic politicians; and the "objective necessities" 
they claim to follow are certainly not scientific rules but economic 
pressure. 
The recourse to irrationalism and the anarchy of praxis is probably not 
even an effective tool to criticize, much less to change our society. Even 
less is it a tool to help oppressed groups in and traditions outside Western 
society to gain their due rights and autonomy. 
This is where the real weakness of your suggestions lies. By characteriz-
ing oppressed people - from the American Indians and Blacks to the 
aged, the stick and the poor - as irrational and demanding freedom and 
equal rights for them in the name of irrationality (secured, as you stress, 
by a politically neutral police force, which, given rampant irrational 
freedom, indeed does seem necessary), you demand what is already the 
case. This freedom they already have, whether we call it folklore or the 
freedom of children and fools, or, as you call it, "freedom of the souls" -
and if they want more, the police is quickly at hand. 
Feyerabend's methodological maxims are relativism - as a sort of 
pluralism without a common criterion - and skepticism - which you 
explain as combining the status of participant and observer vis-a-vis one's 
own position. But both are companions of rationalism and lie at the core 
of modem liberalism which you combat. They are evidence of the 
privatization of beliefs and contents, which parallels the formalization and 
monopolization of political and bureaucratic power. 
Let us look at the examples you give. "One can seriously act on the 
stage and yet know that this is not real life". The theory of roles is more 
explicit on that: Participation in the process of modem life follows the 
model presented by the theater. One acquires occupational of social roles, 

LEITER TO AN ANTI-LIBERAL LIBERAL 
209 
but one is expected to be flexible enough to change to another role when 
need demands. 
Or: "... one can seriously be a Christian, fully realizing that the 
Christian religion is one among others, and not even the best one". Of 
course one can; that is what many Christians today do - to what extent 
they do so seriously is another question. But we should add that with such 
an attitude expected of us in the modem age, not only religion but all 
other unconditional beliefs and convictions are enclosed in liberal 
parentheses. Religion and every conviction described by Paul Tillich as 
the ''ultimate concern" then loses all that once constituted their religious 
("binding") character. What is left is a private opinion plus a bit of ritual 
and group membership. That this does not work in the long run is shown 
by the rise of fundamentalism in and outside our civilization. 
Your examples are solidly liberal in spite of your vehement attacks on 
liberalism. 
The maxim which traverses your entire book reads: "There are only 
traditions and they are all of equal value". This statement is in itself a 
value-judgement and a liberal one at that. The crux is that traditional 
societies would not agree to such a statement (ask Khomeini!) It is a 
maxim which imperialism has always made use of, not in the question of 
power but in the cultural field. The Romans were experts in this: After 
having been conquered, the other traditions were allowed to display their 
gods in the Pantheon. 
Imperialism, not the crude variety which conquers and partly destroys a 
population, but the refined, peaceful version which later integrates the 
survivors, with their tradition, culture and folklore, harmonizes well with 
cultural relativism. Their original autonomy destroyed, Blacks are 
allowed to remain Blacks, Indians to remain Indians, and please preserve 
their colorful culture so that we can rejoice in the richness and pluralistic 
tolerance of universal culture. 
The description of other societies as traditional is the product of our 
view and stamps the seal of powerlessness on culture. "Traditional" 
societies are usually not relativistic. The crux of the matter is that we call 
those cultures traditional that cling to their beliefs and rules as true and 
binding. 
. 
The description of such cultures as irrational, infantile and noble is 
really a favorite old topic of the Enlightenment and I find you repeating it. 
''The savage warrior who heals his wounded enemy instead of killing 
him, does not know why he acts in such away, and, when asked, gives 

210 
MARGHERITA VON BRENTANO 
wrong and often ridiculous answers". Who is not reminded here of the 
"noble savage" of the Eighteenth Century, contrasted as a model of pure 
nature to Europe's decadence. The Indian, or whoever modelled for the 
role, would most unlikely have described himself as savage. If he healed 
his enemy instead of killing him, he probably knew why he did so and 
would have been able to provide reasonable explanations. 
One of the chief issues of your book is the critique of liberalism and the 
proposal of alternatives. At the risk of boring you, I have compiled a list 
of your chief suggestions in order to better understand you and the 
problem. 
"Men have the right to live as they wish to, even if their way of life 
appears bestial to others". 
"A free society is a society in which all traditions have equal rights and 
equal access to the centers of education and power". 
"A free society is not founded on a basic concept of knowledge (for 
instance science), nor on a basic moral philosophy, but on a defensive 
framework, namely a police force: not the souls, but the bodies of its 
members are restricted in their freedom". 
"This foundation does not provide the contents of community life, but a 
shelter from disturbances; it works as an iron gate, not as a belief'. 
"In this society, a free exchange (of ideas, commodities, and actions) 
should be guaranteed, not controlled". 
''The central power, or defensive framework, should and may be 
'opportunistic' (as it cannot refer to any common belief) and this in order 
to support the weaker traditions against the stronger ones". (I am tempted 
to add: It must at least refer to humanitarian ethics, because pure oppor-
tunists usually side with the stronger party). 
These are the theses and suggestions of a vehement critic of liberalism. 
But as hard as I try, I can recognize in them nothing other than the 
maxims of good old classical liberalism. The freedom of the souls, the 
freedom of beliefs at the price of their being banished to privacy, and 
their neutralization by a sovereign was the program of Thomas Hobbes in 
answer to religious civil war. His sovereign is not bound to any law, to 
any content of social life, and he is indeed allowed to be opportunistic. 
His absolute power is justified by his only duty of protecting lives (in 
your version: bodies). In other words: he has to make sure that bestial 
ways of life only appear so and do not actually threaten the lives or bodies 
of others. 

LETIER TO AN ANTI-LIBERAL LIBERAL 
211 
Kant expressed it more briefly: "Reason as much as you like, but 
obey". 
The demand of free access to the centers of power for all, and for an 
uninhibited exchange of ideas and commodities, is the classical repertoire 
from Locke to Mill; except that both of them state explicitly what the 
condition of free exchange is, and what should be protected: property. He 
who owns nothing, has nothing to exchange. 
"Property" only appears once in your book, named as the 
"commodities" quoted above. "Capitalism" receives no mention at all, 
though it is the economic foundation of liberalism. 
Some of your theses remind me more of neo-liberal concepts than of 
classical ones, as. when you stress that equal rights and access concerns 
groups, traditions, and not individuals. I recognize the ideas of political 
pluralism. We tend to forget that so-called pluralism in science, much 
discussed in the nineteen-sixties, was a diluted descendant of the theory 
of political pluralism worked out at the turn of the century as an adapta-
tion of older liberal ideas to the conditions of mass-society. No longer 
individuals, but groups are entitled to equal rights and represented in 
legislative and controlling assemblies vis-a.-vis the executive power. 
The much discussed question of the criteria for accepting new groups is 
not mentioned in your book. Your reference to citizens' initiatives 
("Btirgerinitiativen") is not helpful. When they come forward publicly, it 
is essentially up to the (opportunist) police to decide whether they are 
accepted or not by either protecting or beating them. 
That groups, whether new or accepted, represent interests and can run 
into conflicts, is a further problem. Whom does the "protective structure" 
police protect when conflicts become acute? 
But of course my reference to these small and well-known problems of 
liberalism is not very fair. How could even such a radically liberal critic 
of liberalism, as you are, hope to solve them when all liberal societies to 
date could not. 
The real problem lies deeper. When taken at face-value, there is very 
little to object to in liberal models. They are just too nice to be real. And 
the fact that they have always remained models, declarations and 
constitutional laws, which, once put into practice not only looked a bit 
different, but had other than the desired effects, is not the fault of the 
liberal program as such. It is rather due to the fact that liberalism tends to 
forget that until today it has been the political superstructure of capitalist 
economy. One does not have to be a Marxist to see that; it was quite 

212 
MARGHEruTAVONBRENTANO 
obvious to the great theoreticians of liberalism from Adam Smith to Max 
Weber. 
I did not make it back to the witches again, but the text is already 
longer than planned. Perhaps we can discuss that topic on another 
occasion. 
Your fervent reader, Margherita Brentano 
Free University 
Berlin 
Germany 

WERNER DIEDERICH 
Obituary on the "Anarchist" Paul Feyerabend 
Some years ago anarchism enjoyed a Renaissance in an area where 
nobody would have guessed it could: in the philosophy of science. This 
surprising event was essentially the work of just one person, a certain 
Paul K. Feyerabend, author of Against Method: A Sketch of an Anarchis-
tic Epistemology. From thereon there was hardly anything heard anymore 
from this Feyerabend within philosophy of science. He is said to have 
become a dadaist. Others think he devoted himself to magic. Finally there 
are some who regard him as identical with an author bearing the same 
name who has recently offered us Science in a Free Society, a political 
theory which, at a fIrst glance, doesn't seem to have much to do with 
anarchism. Since the author of this work insists on his identity with the 
author of the "Sketch of an Anarchistic Epistemology", I dare to include 
him into this, my obituary on that lost anarchist. Indeed, I presume the 
alleged identity myself, because the development of the fIrst PKF into the 
second PKF, even if it should be only fictitious, seems to deserve a closer 
look. Perhaps, who knows, this metamorphosis was fInally brought about 
by some black magic?! 
The anarchist Paul Feyerabend - I refer to PKF1, the author of Against 
Method - was driven by his love for science and an unending passion for 
freedom. This twofold engagement made him sanguinely fIght for a 
libertarian science and against all constraints he saw imposed on science 
by contemporary philosophy of science. He never got tired of recalling 
the driving forces of modern natural science in its heroic early days, nor 
G. Munevar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 213-224. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
213 

214 
WERNER DIEDERICH 
of denouncing the nonsense of trying to cast this spirit into rules. 
All this is well known, well documented, and does not need a renewed 
appraisal here. Peyerabend himself seemed to have regarded the topic 
"philosophy of science" as exhausted and was willing to say goodbye 
forever to the respective audience; as he said in the preface to the German 
edition of Against Method, "Instead of adding to the tumor of philosophy 
of science further abstract considerations, I should have left it to its fate: 
let live and die. That, in fact, will be my slogan for the future". 1 
Evidently, however, it has not been that easy for Peyerabend to leave 
philosophy of science behind: still in 1977, in the well reputed The British 
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, he surprised us with a thoroughgo-
ing and, by the way, rather interesting discussion2• We could further fmd 
in anarchistic journals contributions of his, which probably entered his 
Science in a Free Society, an essay only partly devoted to philosophy of 
science, partly also to social criticism and politics. Herein Peyerabend 
sketches the main lines of a "free society", in which science, and Western 
rationality in general, has no place anymore. If Peyerabend before had 
defended science against philosophy of science, he now criticizes mainly 
science itself because it would be a main obstacle on the road towards a 
free society. 
It is to this transition of Peyerabend' s from criticism of philosophy of 
science to social criticism, via his criticism of science, that I address 
myself in the following pages, in a short exposition with critical com-
ments. To say it in advance metaphorically: I shall accompany 
Peyerabend a good distance, but then depart from him by walking straight 
ahead while he follows some side roads. 
On this road I want to take with me the following questions: What 
makes a philosopher like Paul Peyerabend not only criticize, but also 
question science in toto, for which he had shown so much concern 
before? Does he doubt that science possesses any self regulatory strength? 
May we hope nevertheless to gain something from Peyerabend' s criticism 
of science, for science itself and for its role in society? 
One further preliminary remark seems to be appropriate. Peyerabend is 
not exactly what you would imagine an academic philosopher to be. In 
the philosophers' community he plays the role of an enfant terrible. He 
likes to provoke, which sometimes is helpful, often amusing, but some-
times also just not to the point. A lot of colleagues withdrew from this 
game, regrettably, because this game is still good for loosening tensions 
and for getting some things started. 

OBITUARY ON THE "ANARCHIST" PAUL FEYERABEND 
215 
I am going to trace three lines of Feyerabend' s development: in Section 
2 his criticism of philosophy of science, in Section 3 his criticism of 
science itself, and in Section 4 his social criticism, prompting some 
critical remarks and perspectives in Section 5. In the end it is the perspec-
tive of a concrete social utopia, comprising a critical attitude towards 
science, from which it seems profitable to examine Feyerabend - even 
though his "anything goes" has too much the flavour of Macht doch, was 
Ihr wollt! and Jedem Tierchen sein Pliisirchen. 
2 
With Kuhn, Toulmin, Hanson, and others, Feyerabend belongs to that 
group of philosophers of science who, since the late fifties, have con-
fronted, and thereby questioned, the philosophy of science with material 
from the history of science. More specifically, Feyerabend had detected 
early the theory-Iadenness of observation concepts, had claimed the 
incommensurability of theories separated by a major break (roughly at the 
same time as Kuhn, though in a quite different way), and had fmally 
proposed and made historically plausible a principle of proliferation, 
according to which new theoretical accounts, even if they contradict some 
facts and established theories, should not only be permitted, but en-
couraged. These points are just mentioned here as some examples of the 
more direct contributions by Feyerabend to the philosophy of science. 
More important for my present context is the general criticism that 
Feyerabend later directed against normative methodologies such as 
Lakatos's "methodology of scientific research programmes". In my eyes 
Lakatos is Feyerabend's strongest opponent within Critical Rationalism. 
Overall, Lakatos's methodology is far more liberal than Popper's, 
allowing, for instance, ad hoc-hypotheses to some extent. Feyerabend 
claims to have shown that Lakatos's standards put no effective constraints 
on the research process, that his rules are therefore vacuous, and that he 
adheres to an epistemological anarchism, though in disguise, while 
Feyerabend does so openly. That is, for Lakatos "anything goes", too; and 
thus the difference between Lakatos and Feyerabend would be only 
rhetorical. 
There is no room here to go into any details of Feyerabend's so-called 
epistemological anarchism. One main result seems to be that all proposed 
methodological standards are violated during the research process, even 

216 
WERNER DIEDERICH 
in an approved way. But Feyerabend does not put forward any positive 
account of what he regards as decisive for good science. By just propagat-
ing the "rule" anything goes, i.e. opportunism, his historically substan-
tiated criticism ends up in nothing but an ~bstract negation of philosophy 
of science and a personal backing off. 
Feyerabend has concentrated his attack on a certain type of philosophy 
of science: on the nonnative philosophy of science of "critical 
rationalism", i.e. the Popperian school. This special philosophy of science 
he is all too well acquainted with. He knows how to criticize it brilliantly, 
especially by putting forward historical counterexamples, e.g., the theory 
of relativity, which Popper and his followers used to count in their favor. 
But is Feyerabend interested in science only as a way to criticize the 
critical rationalists? How long may one be pleased by the dadaist's 
''favorite occupation: to tease rationalists"? If Feyerabend is really 
concerned with science and its creative capacities, then to regard criticism 
of the Popperian school as a major task is to overestimate its importance. 
(Even after taking into account the unhealthy effects of the Popperian 
school on the social sciences, at least in German speaking countries). 
Feyerabend has not proposed anything like a positive philosophy of 
science of his own. What he regards as good science can only be guessed 
from his historical case studies and his critique of Popper, Lakatos, etc. 
More telling seems to be his criticism of (contemporary) science itself, 
which is the topic of the following section. 
3 
Science, says Feyerabend, has changed very much during the last few 
decades: until well into the 20th century science had been a philosophi-
cally inspired enterprise, enlightening, and progressive. But since then it 
has deteriorated into big business. Closely affiliated with the state, 
science affects our whole life and dogmatically suppresses alternatives, 
e.g., traditional Chinese medicine and the tribal medicine of ethnic 
minorities, as well as astrology, myths, and religion. 
Feyerabend's diagnosis that the critical capacities of science are 
deteriorating may certainly be approved: everywhere the dominance of 
experts is extended. Although they still fight each other in matters of 
detail (and conflicting interests), they do not question our type of science 
anymore. There is usually only one type of science taught in schools and 

OBITUARY ON THE "ANARCHIST" PAUL FEYERABEND 
217 
universities, practiced in health care, applied in court and psychiatry. 
Science permeates all our public life and is entangled with administration 
in such a way that it functions as a kind of state religion, the "latest, most 
aggressive and most dogmatic of all religious institutions".3 
If it thus seems impossible that science is able to regulate and 
regenerate itself, it would be appropriate for an anarchist to propagate the 
deletion of this institution in order to create out of the remnants anew, 
libertarian science. But Feyerabend does not do so. He proposes instead a 
reformist, liberal notion: science should be a private matter like religion. 
Science and state should be separated as church and state are. 
As correct as Feyerabend' s analysis of the entanglement of science and 
state may be, as idealistic as it is to suppose that the dominance of science 
could be broken by a separation of state and science, being mainly 
concerned with the ideological function of science, Feyerabend almost 
totally neglects its fundamental role in the production of the material basis 
of our lives. If he is convinced that we might live better without science 
and that it should be up to everybody whether he or she uses science or 
not, then Feyerabend should ask also for a separation of science from the 
economy, i.e. from the total social-political realm. (Such a separation 
would, of course, bring about serious consequences which I am going to 
address at the end of this paper). The paradigm of separation of church 
and state is misleading in essential respects: science has not only, and not 
even mainly, ideological functions; it is not a religion which you would 
conceive of as a private matter for its adherents. 
More to the point than Feyerabend' s slogan of a separation of science 
and state are his concerns with how you could provide room for the 
development of alternative scientific and non-scientific forms of 
knowledge and practice, such as astrology and traditional Chinese 
medicine (Feyerabend's favorite examples). Feyerabend asks for an 
institutionalized equality of chances for various traditions. I imagine, for 
instance, that Western physicians generally might acknowledge that 
traditional Chinese medicine shows important successes, but also that 
they would claim that the "tenable" results of, e.g., acupuncture could be 
explained physiologically and (therefore) reproduced within the Western 
framework. Also, some astrophysicists might be prepared to employ their 
means to examine alleged astrological influences, and if such influences 
could indeed be verified, to integrate them into their science. But 
physicians and astrophysicists would certainly not accept that the same 
rights and privileges they enjoy would be granted to acupuncturists and 

218 
WERNER DIEDERICH 
astrologers. Peyerabend speaks of the dogmatism of Western science and 
advises institutional equality for the alternative forms of knowledge and 
practice. Perhaps he is right in being skeptical of the possibility that 
Western science might correct itself by impulses from outside, and in 
thinking that it therefore encapsulates itself dogmatically. Maybe Western 
scientists behave that way because the successes of other traditions cannot 
be completely reproduced in our tradition, because our basic attitudes 
towards nature, and the corresponding methodological constraints, just do 
not allow certain experiences and techniques. The incorporation of parts 
of other traditions would then be possible only by way of distortion and 
"colonialism". And Peyerabend would be right in asking for a support of 
other traditions in their own right or at least for a full toleration of them, 
not only as appendices of our (in their eyes) alien culture. 
4 
How that could be achieved and how a free society could be set up at all 
are the topics of Peyerabend's political philosophy, which I will address 
now. 
More specifically, I'll first ask how far Peyerabend's 
"epistemological anarchism" reaches into the political realm. 
At fIrst sight this epistemological anarchism seems to have little in 
common with political anarchism. An opposition to inflexible patterns 
and rules and a plea for individual freedom, humanity and spontaneity 
seem to exhaust the common core of epistemological and political 
anarchism. Peyerabend explicitly detaches himself from political 
anarchism; he is mainly opposed to physical power as a means of political 
struggle and to a belief in the alleged enlightening capacities of science -
probably mainly referring to classical 19th century anarchists like 
Kropotkin. Also, many political anarchists would not have been 
"epistemological anarchists" at all. 
Regrettably, Peyerabend does not reflect on the role that the belief in 
the liberating capacities of science has had for the older form of anar-
chism. Furthermore he leaves open what an epistemological anarchist 
who would also like to be a political anarchist could substitute for 
science. 
Science does not take place in a realm independent from society, as 
Feyerabend well knows. Insofar as epistemological anarchism merely 
wants to get rid of methodological constraints on science, it falls short of 

OBITUARY ON THE "ANARCHIST' PAUL FEYERABEND 
219 
what Feyerabend intends. His essay Against Method, he says, is "written 
while convinced that anarchism, if perhaps not the most attractive 
political philosophy, certainly is an excellent medicine for epistemology 
and philosophy of science".4 
Now, is Feyerabend's epistemological anarchism also an "excellent 
medicine" for political anarchism? Feyerabend suggests that he thinks it 
is when later on he asks what anarchism could still make out of a science 
which is "ugly in its appearances and unreliable in its results" and 
therefore could no more be an ally for anarchism, and answers that the 
anarchist should use science only in an opportunistic or dadaistic way. 
This answer would correspond to other theses of anarchism and would 
free it from remaining inflexibilities. Of course, by giving this advice 
Feyerabend does not brand himself as a political anarchist.5 
However, Feyerabend's careful confinement to an epistemological 
anarchism results in a gap in his criticism of science which could be filled 
by some political anarchism along the lines of his approach. I refer to the 
gap between his diagnosis - the unhealthiness of modern science - and 
his proposed therapy - a separation of science and state. If it is the 
common system state-science which threatens freedom, it would be of 
greater consequence to ask for the abandonment of both rather than just 
for their separation, i.e. to propose a political anarchism (which could, of 
course, include epistemological anarchism). 
In his book Science in a Free Society, however, Feyerabend sketches a 
totally different political philosophy. To begin with, he relativizes modern 
science in a far more radical way than before: Science is just one tradition 
among others, scientific as well as non-scientific ones (cultures, 
Lebensformen), all of which have equal rights. Feyerabend proposes 
measures to make this relativization practical: each tradition should be 
able to develop according to its own standards, independent from those of 
other traditions. The proposed free society is conceived of as a society of 
autonomous traditions, not autonomous individuals. Freedom of in-
dividuals is valued in our tradition and should of course be valued in our 
tradition also for the future; but we should not superimpose this value of 
ours on other traditions. For we would then turn our tradition into a 
supertradition framing other traditions; but there should not be any 
supertraditions. The interrelations of traditions should be stabilized 
merely by some "police", which "does not constrain the minds, but only 
the bodies".6 It is not quite clear whether Feyerabend wants to eliminate 
the state completely and replace it by the "Traditionenverband" (traditions 

220 
WERNER DIEDERICH 
plus ''police''), because he also speaks of "centers of power" which should 
be equally accessible to all traditions. 
The realization of the free society could be only practical, by participa-
tion 
in 
"Biirgerinitiativen", 
not 
by 
way 
of rational 
agree-
ment".'Biirgerinitiativen' instead of epistemology" is Feyerabend's 
slogan for a realization of his political ideas.7 
Before one starts to criticize these (only vaguely summarized) political 
conceptions, one should emphasize that Feyerabend - no more on the 
level of competing forms of knowledge and science - tries to account for 
the fact that alternative practices, ethnic minorities, marginal cultural 
groups, etc. de facto cannot develop autonomously in our Western 
democracies, contrary to our ideological claims. The same is true for third 
world countries which are dependent on the world-market and Western 
civilization in a way which hardly allows any self-governed political-
cultural development. 
What usually is granted to groups and peoples of other traditions by the 
dominant Western civilization, are reservations and partial markets which 
may just allow surviving and maintaining of alternative ways of life, but 
not the practice of autonomous forms of life and sub-societies with truly 
equal rights. That would need genuine ecological niches, "ecological" 
taken in a broad sense, including social relations. 
The notion of a police supervising all the traditions deserves, of course, 
some criticism - if this proposal may at all be taken as more than a 
spiteful provocation. Policemen/women are humans themselves and as 
such members of some tradition; one cannot expect them not to see 
themselves as members of a supertradition. A similar objection may be 
raised against the allowance (also a mere provocation?) of "inhuman" 
traditions like "Kindesaussetzung" and torture.8 A "free society" as 
conceived of by Feyerabend appears as nothing desirable to me. 
Furthermore, Feyerabend' s model for the association of traditions is 
underdetermined in important ways. What kinds of powers should there 
exist besides or above the traditions? Could a system of councils ("Rate") 
adequately realize an equal access to the centers of power by all tradi-
tions? Anyhow, for the purpose of central representation, how are 
traditions to be individualized? Who writes the catalogue of the traditions 
to be represented? Should it matter, when apportioning representation, 
how big a tradition is (how many members it has)? Should a person who 
starts out to answer all these questions not belong to a supertradition and 
thereby presuppose a consensus of all traditions? The need to put these 

OBITUARY ON THE "ANARCHIST" PAUL FEYERABEND 
221 
questions forward results from Feyerabend' s rather immature concep-
tions. 
Likewise shortsighted is Feyerabend' s proposal about the means to 
obtain a free society - by participation in civil initiatives. Feyerabend 
here seems to follow basic democratic - anarchistic? - conceptions of 
political activity. These, however, suggest means other than his unattrac-
tive police-led association of traditions. Anyhow, they seem more in line 
with some nonviolent forms of political anarchism. Why not better rely 
on the forces inherent in the various traditions themselves? Why not let a 
free association of cultures determine the interplay of civil movements? 
By prescribing the structure of the net of traditions Feyerabend still (or 
again) puts forward too many rules (and thereby testifies to the extent to 
which Popper's power reaches even those who have turned away from 
him); a whiff of anarchism - confidence in spontaneity and self-regula-
tion - would be of greater consequence. 
5 
Finally I would like to pursue some lines of criticism further. I emphasize 
that I hereby do no more than speculate - stimulated and challenged by 
Feyerabend. 
Traditions should be strengthened from within by participation. 
Principally, it should be possible to change traditions, i.e. no one should 
be forced to adhere to a tradition forever. That implies a claim for 
freedom also of the individual. Perhaps only in this way things fall into 
place: individuals freely associate into communities with definite, though 
changeable forms of life, and may switch from one tradition to another. 
Wherever on earth, within or outside Western civilization, there is 
already, or we can fight for, some space to achieve such freedom, we 
should encourage and help the growth of anarchy (i.e., absence of 
domination, not chaos) with all our energy. It must be doubted, however, 
that this space is big or enlargeable enough to establish a free society 
(anarchy) on a large scale, or even a significant scale. Perhaps there is no 
more in sight than the private happiness of individuals or the collective 
happiness of small groups. Is it irresponsible to stay with that? Is it more 
responsible to pursue big political programmes, found parties, and 
schedule resurrections? 
The political scenery is even less pleasant if one takes into account the 

222 
WERNER DIEDERICH 
present ecological crisis. We are not starting at point Alpha of human 
history but more probably are almost reaching point Omega. A stone-age 
anarchism is no longer possible. But an anarchism backed by the material 
basis reached so far (essentially formed by natural science) is conceiv-
able. For the first time in human history the development of our material 
resources makes life without scarcity truly possible - as the American 
anarchist Murray Bookchin suggests.9 Thus, if our resources were 
(approximately) evenly distributed and used, the main cause for hierar-
chies - the struggle for scarce resources - would vanish. Incidentally the 
"Ausbeuter- und Tierbandigerstandpunkt" (Bloch) versus nature should 
be abandoned. Natural science should maintain Nature; Ecology (in a 
broad sense) should become the science of a free society. The envisaged 
"ecological anarchism", while incidentally possible and necessary in our 
historical situation, is not very likely to be realized. But why not, to say it 
with Luther, plant an apple tree on Doom's Day Eve - or rather, with 
Wolf Biermann, a birch in Gorleben? 
POSTSCRIPT ON FEYERABEND: A FURTHER PLEA FOR ANARCHY 
There is no point in updating an "obituary". However, some second 
thoughts on anarchy and its role for epistemology in a free society may be 
in order. 
My main argument, or rather suggestion, has been that anarchism is not 
only an "excellent remedy" for epistemology, as Feyerabend points out, 
but also for Feyerabend' s political ideas concerning the roles of science 
and other traditions in a free society. I have criticized these ideas (in other 
words) as naively authoritarian and only half-way anarchistic. A full-
blown political anarchism would have been more in line with 
Feyerabend's stretching out from epistemology into the political realm. In 
addition, I would say, his vision of a free society needs support from 
some materialist political philosophy. In what follows I want to trace 
these lines of argument somewhat further. 
Let me first recall that Feyerabend is quite right in criticizing the 
exaggerated trust in science to be found in some 19th century anarchists. 
We find such respectful trust in science e.g., in Proudhon and Bakunin, to 
name just two of them. Historically speaking, however, such an attitude 
seems quite understandable, especially since science then (still) was 
considerably enlightening vis-a.-vis e.g., religious dogmatism. And one 

OBITUARY ON THE "ANARCHIST" PAUL FEYERABEND 
223 
should keep in mind that it was primarily a hope for social science - built 
after natural science, but nevertheless concerned with historical evolution 
- which was addressed by these thinkers. (I shall return to this point 
later). 
But if anarchism was to be freed by Feyerabend from scientific 
dogmatism, so Feyerabend's envisaged "free society" is to be freed by 
anarchism from its authoritarian traits. The anarchistic message here is: 
There is no need for a political superstructure, especially police forces, in 
order to protect various "traditions" against each other. The idea is 
simple (although probably not easy to realize): individuals join groups, 
groups join groups of groups, etc., in general: people join "traditions", 
always on a voluntary basis. Every individual, group etc. may drop out of 
the higher structure any time. Also, of course, people may adhere to 
several groups/traditions at the same time. If there should be any need for 
a group to defend itself against other groups it could do so. Of course, 
there is no guarantee that no group will be overrun by another group. But 
to call for a police in order to prevent this would be to give up liber-
tarianism from the start. What anarchism thus suggests is that a free 
society should be built up from the bottom - by "association", that is - not 
within a pre-regulated frame. (The free society is not like free speech 
tolerated on the Berkeley campus). 
The anarchistic insistence on small, fairly self-consistent units is also a 
good measure against various ecological problems; see Murray Bookchin, 
cited in the previous article. 
On the other hand, in my eyes, political anarchism faces some severe 
shortcomings with respect to the material conditions of our lives. As I 
have pointed out in my article, our culture deeply depends on our material 
reproduction. It was in this respect that some earlier anarchists called for 
or relied on science. Thus Bakunin, for instance, was quite aware that his 
political ideas have to be complemented by political economy as 
developed by Karl Marx, whom he deeply admired for that reason. Or 
compare the anarchist Johann Most who "translated" Marx's Capital 
(Vol. 1) into understandable German (approved by Marx and Engels) for 
the same reason. Thus, on a scientific basis, there was not so much 
difference between anarchism and marxism. One does not have to buy 
Marx's tendency to hierarchical 
organizations 
(partly 
due 
to 
idiosyncrasies of his personality, as it seems) at the same time, let alone 
later marxists' "dictatorship of the proletariat". 
What is true for political anarchism is true for Feyerabend' s epis-

224 
WERNER DIEDERICH 
temological anarchism as well. You can't effectively change science 
without incidentally changing the material basis of society. Just to call for 
a separation of state and science won't do. 
Feyerabend's contempt for Marxian dogmatism is quite understan-
dable. Marxism in toto surely is not an attractive political philosophy, 
especially if you take the reality of the so-called socialist countries as 
outcome of this philosophy. But, as we realize, these days in Eastern 
Europe there seems to be a fair chance for the emergence of a more 
democratic kind of socialism. Libertarianism (or anarchism), idealistic as 
it may seem, is at least as good a corrective for a materialistic social 
philosophy as it is for Feyerabend 's political ideas. 
FakultiitfUr Geschichtswissensch. und Philosophie (Abt. Philosophie) 
Universitiit Bielefeld 
Bielefeld 
Germany 
NOTES 
1 Wider den Methodenzwang (WM), Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp 1976, p. 26f. 
2 "Changing Patterns of Reconstruction", BJPS 28 (1977), 351-382. 
3 translated from WM, p. 392. 
4 translated from WM, p. 28. 
S Cf. WM, p. 260ff.; also Erkenntnis fUr jreie Menschen (EfM), Frankfurt/M.: 
Suhrkamp 1979, esp. for his rejection of violence. 
6 translated from EjM, p. 7. 
7 translated from EjM, p. 23f. 
8 cf. EjM, p. 135. 
9 Murray Bookchin, Post Scarcity Anarchism, Montreal 1971. 
• Many thanks to Gonzalo Munevar who corrected my English. 

NOREn' A KOERTGE 
Ideology, Science and a Free Society* 
I. INTRODUCfION 
At the outbreak of World War II, Robert Merton articulated four basic 
nonns for science. l According to the ftrst nonn, the doctrine he called 
universalism, the ascribed characteristics of investigators, such as their 
race, nationality, sex, religion or class, should never enter into the 
evaluation of scientiftc research. Few scientists or philosophers, then or 
now, would disagree. Who does not deplore the Nazi diatribes against 
"Jewish physics" or Stalinist objections to Linus Pauling's resonance 
model of the benzene molecule on the grounds that it was "bourgeois"? 
And have not philosophers long since pointed out the weaknesses of ad 
hominem arguments, and the dangers of confusing the context of dis-
covery with that of justiftcation? 
Yet many of these same intellectuals are very leery of assessments of 
the safety of nuclear power plants made by AEC scientists and do not 
trust the cancer studies funded by the tobacco or saccharin industries. And 
perhaps no one is so dazzled by enlightenment sun rays reflected from the 
ivory tower as to believe it a mere coincidence that the testimony of 
scientiftc experts in law courts almost always supports the adversary who 
is paying them. In such situations, our highminded philosophical ideals 
mislead us. We are better guided by old folk sayings: "He who pays the 
Piper calls the tune" and "The wish is father to the thought". 
Few philosophers of science suffer much cognitive dissonance over this 
clash between nonns and practice. The orthodox response by the defen-
ders of scientiftc rationalism would go as follows: Scientists are also 
G. Munevar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 225-241. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
225 

226 
NOREITA KOERTGE 
human beings _. and qua humans they can be bought, swayed and 
deluded. But not qua scientists. True scientists, by defmition, follow the 
scientific method, and the whole point of that method is to make science 
independent of the whims, desires, and other personal characteristics of 
the people who produce it. If ideology creeps into real life science it is 
because of a lapse on the part of individual scientists, not a failing of the 
method itself. 
Furthermore, the argument might continue, all of the examples cited 
above are really cases of applied science. In using science for decision 
making, objective appraisals of the degree of risk involved must be 
supplemented with value judgments as to the amount of risk which is 
tolerable. Once this distinction is clearly made, scientists working for 
Ralph Nader's citizens' protection movement and those employed by the 
auto companies should be able to agree on the former, even though it 
would not be surprising if their respective evaluations were different. In 
principle (and if we are scrupulous, also in practice) the content of science 
is independent of the personalities and politics of its practitioners. 
No one has provided as systematic and hard-hitting a critique of 
scientific rationalism as Paul Feyerabend. In Against Method and earlier 
essays he argued that scientists do not and should not follow the pious 
cliches found in philosophers' rule books. Instead, methods are devised in 
order to cope with concrete complex problems and then discarded as new 
situations arise. 
So not only is the content of science fallible, but its famous method is 
nothing but a potpourri of tactics used by scrappy, inventive, opportunis-
tic people intent on winning intellectual battles any way they can. There is 
nothing to write down on stone tablets once and for all. Science has no 
special epistemological authority; moreover it even lacks a systematic 
theology! In Science in a Free Society Feyerabend goes on to argue that 
since scientific rationalism is only one intellectual tradition among many, 
it should not be given pride of place within a democracy. Just as there is 
no established religion, so should there be no state-endorsed philosophy 
of science. 
In other places I have voiced disagreements with Feyerabend's 
description of science, arguing that it is possible to characterize universal 
principles of scientific method which have more content than Bridgman's 
injunction to "use your head and do your damndest" or Feyerabend's 
"anything goes". In this paper, however, I wish to endorse his remarks 
about science and democracy. I will argue that even if we reject 

IDEOLOGY, SCIENCE AND A FREE SOCIETY 
227 
Feyerabend's epistemological anarchism and adopt a more traditional 
methodology (I will concentrate on Popperian falsificationism, but similar 
arguments can be made for subjective or objective Bayesianism) we are 
nevertheless stuck with his political conclusions. 
In particular, I will show how Popperian methodology can lead to 
ideology-impregnated science. This result immediately implies that the 
traditional division of labor in technology assessment according to which 
scientific experts provide the facts and lay people put in the values is no 
longer viable. 
Three caveats before I begin: 
1) 
All the arguments below assume that scientists could, if they 
wished, succeed in being perfect Popperians. The argument does 
not hinge on a claim that Popperian methodology is utopian. 
2) 
I do not wish to imply that Popper himself is in favor of the 
conclusions I draw from his philosophy. On the contrary, I think he 
would be appalled! 
3) 
By attempting to derive some of Feyerabend's results from 
Popperianism I am in no sense devaluing his achievements. 
Feyerabend not only discovered and dramatized these conclusions 
but also provided quite different reasons for believing them. 
II. THE PROPER ROLE OF IDEOLOGY IN POPPERIAN SCIENCE 
The term ideology generally has negative connotations. Mannheim speaks 
of "more or less conscious disguises of the real nature of a situation, the 
true recognition of which would not be in accord with [the speaker's] 
interests";2 and Bergman defines an ideological statement as "a value 
judgment disguised as, or mistaken for, a statement of fact".3 
I wish to use the term in a more neutral way (as does Mannheim later in 
his essay) to stand for the pre-scientific beliefs, ideas, theories which an 
investigator has about the nature of human beings. For me, an ideology is 
simply a metaphysics for social science - a psychological-sociological 
world picture. It mayor may not be correct and it mayor may not 
reinforce the holder's interests. Although my use of the term is a little 
unusual I think it is fair to retain it, for we shall soon see that ideology in 
my sense is often involved when people speak of "unmasking the 
ideological assumptions" of their political opponents. 
To trace the proper place of ideology in Popperian science then, all we 

228 
NORETIA KOERTGE 
need to do is look at the methodological roles which Popper assigns to 
metaphysics and to background knowledge (for our pre-scientific 
expectations and hunches will surely be related to our own personal life 
experiences and general views about the nature of social phenomena). 
Popper, opposing the positivists, was adamant about the importance of 
metaphysical ideas such as atomism for physics. However, he has never 
explicitly made the parallel argument for the influence of ideology on 
social science. One reason for this may be that Popper never really 
anticipated the discovery of strong, interesting theories in social science. 
He gives the impression that near-tautologies like the Rationality 
Principle or trivialities, such as the generalization that soldiers cannot 
march without food, will be sufficient to provide explanations in both 
social science and history. Perhaps he felt that such explanatory principles 
would be noncontroversial and relatively independent of metaphysics. 
Another possible reason for Popper's de-emphasis of the role of 
metaphysics in social science is that he himself was engaged in a critique 
of historicism, an approach which he felt was dangerously mistaken. In 
combating one brand of ideology it is hardly a good strategy to stress the 
heuristic role which ideological views can play. Thus, he tended to speak 
of methodological individualism instead of metaphysical individualism. 
(In Objective Knowledge, Popper's own ontological views are clarified, of 
course). 
I now turn to a systematic exposition of the role of world views and 
informal background knowledge in Popperian methodology with 
illustrations drawn from controversial areas within contemporary social 
science. 
A. Ideology and the Choice of Problem 
Popper has long argued that science begins with problems. Clearly, 
ideology can act as an external influence on the choice of scientific 
problems. A scientific follower of Anita Bryant may ask, "What causes 
homosexuality (and how can it be prevented)?" A gay liberationist may 
well be more interested in the question, "What causes homophobia (and 
how can it be prevented)?" 
But on Popper's methodological theory we would also expect ideology 
to have an internal influence on the way scientific problems are posed. A 
sociologist of science brought up in a traditional patriarchal society may 
fmd the occasional highly successful female theoretician an anomaly, a 

IDEOLOGY, SCIENCE AND A FREE SOCIETY 
229 
violation of his expectations, and ask, "How did Emmy Noether or 
Madame Lee manage to do such good theoretical work?" (I once heard it 
argued that it was no accident that there are comparatively many women 
in x-ray crystallography because the skills required there are similar to the 
patience and manual dexterity found in needlework!) 
However, the feminist sociologist will find other phenomena surprising 
and in need of explanation: "Since women are born equal, why are they 
everywhere in inferior jobs? Why aren't there more women scientists?" 
Scientific problems arise when our expectations are violated, when 
what we consider to be regUlarities call for a deeper explanation, when 
two previously disparate fields look as if they could be unified, or when a 
good scientific theory clashes with our familiar metaphysical framework. 
In each instance the scientist's background experience and preferred 
world view enters into his or her assessment of what is problematic and 
deserving of investigation. 
B. Ideology and the Invention of Explanatory Hypotheses 
No one has been more vigorous than Popper in criticizing the positivist 
view that scientific theories are somehow induced or abstracted from 
observation.... Popper has also argued against the "myth of the 
framework" (and again I agree with him), emphasizing that we can break 
out of the conceptual scheme which is most familiar to us. Yet it seems 
likely that the first conjectures we will test, the hypotheses which will 
spring most readily to mind, will reflect our own intellectual back-
grounds. 
Thus, it is no surprise that psychoanalysts see homosexuals as narcissis-
tic injustice collectors, psychologists (according to their training) 
postulate peer alienation, unusual histories of sexual reinforcement, or 
crossed gender identities, physiologists look for hormone imbalances, 
sociobiologists hypothesize that kin selection or balanced heterozygote 
fitness is at work. And as for gay lay people - some feel their sexual 
orientation is the result of a free, rational choice while others are con-
vinced they were born that way. (The disputes on this issue between so-
called "political lesbians" and "old time dykes" are particularly intense). 
The reader may be becoming restless - "Of course", you are saying, 
"anything goes as far as the logic of discovery is concerned - ideology, 
prejudices, provincialism, last night's dreams - all of these may influence 
the hypotheses we propose, but in the end it is Nature which disposes. If 

230 
NORETI A KOERTGE 
our ideologically based hunches are wrong, severe testing will quickly 
weed them out". Let us see. 
c. Ideology and Severe Testing 
The primary critical tool in science according to Popper is falsificationist 
testing. Here we turn against our pet conjectures and deliberately set out 
to explore their possible weaknesses. However, contrary to the naive 
inductivist who thinks that what counts as a variety of instances is directly 
observable, Popper has stressed that it is only with background 
knowledge, a theory about what counts as relevant variety and improbable 
occurrences, that we can extensively and severely test our conjectures. In 
short, ideology and the idiosyncrasies of our experience to date can enter 
into the design of tests. 
For example, until recently many psychologists, following the then 
popular liberal line, took it for granted that there were no significant 
cognitive or emotional differences between female and male neonates. 
Thus when testing hypotheses about child development they often did not 
even record the ~ex of the subject and many studies of infant primates 
were based entirely on female subjects since they are easier to raise in 
captivity.4 And although Kohlberg carefully tested his theory of moral 
development an a variety of cultures (e.g., Turkey, Taiwan, Yucatan), at 
first he neglected to check on the effects of gender differences.5 
The general point is this: Since it is impossible to control for every-
thing, in designing experiments scientists must make judgments about 
which factors are likely to be relevant. Sometimes there are background 
scientific theories about what is likely to be important. Thus, we have 
rather good reasons to believe that the race of an atomic physicist is 
irrelevant to the outcome of a cyclotron experiment. Other times scientists 
must simply guess about which variables will be influential. In these 
cases, ideology may be very important. Who is more likely to guess that 
the race of an I.Q. tester can influence the outcome of an "objective" test, 
a WASP or a Black who has personally experienced animosity from white 
authority figures? 
D. Ideology and Observation Statements 
It is now well-documented that an observer's emotional and cognitive 
state can have an enormous influence on observation reports. To cite just 

IDEOLOGY, SCIENCE AND A FREE SOCIETY 
231 
two examples of practical importance: it is common knowledge amongst 
police officers that perpetrators of violent crimes are generally perceived 
by the victim as being taller and stronger than they actually are. And 
recent studies by forensic scientists indicate that the race of an eye-
witness is relevant to an estimate of his or her reliability. In general, 
Whites are unskilled at identifying Blacks and neither extensive contact 
with Blacks nor freedom from overt prejudice improves their accuracy.6 
However, unlike Feyerabend I am not going to emphasize this par-
ticular intrusion of ideology for two reasons: First of all, I think it is the 
place where science is least vulnerable to our individual biases -
methodological improvements such as the use of placebos, double-blind 
tests, instrumentation, etc. are all attempts to make the empirical "base" 
of science as intersubjective as possible. (It is worth noting that many of 
the favorite philosophical examples of observer bias, such as the experi-
ments with color-reversed playing cards, are cases where the observer 
must make hasty judgments and cannot recheck his or her fmdings. This 
is hardly the typical situation in science). 
Secondly, on Popper's account, an observation report cannot be used to 
test a conjecture unless it is a "basic" statement, i.e., non-controversial to 
all parties concerned. Thus, if political scientists cannot agree on a more 
neutral description to replace the tendentious conflicting labels of "native 
uprising" vs. "war of liberation", to that extent they are not doing science. 
However, this is not to deny that even agreed on "basic" statements are 
fallible and it is certainly often the case that when faulty observations are 
made, the error is in accordance with the observer's prejudices or 
expectations. (A striking example is provided by Gould's discussion of 
nineteenth century data on the relative sizes of African and Caucasian 
skulls).? 
E. Ideology and the Duhemian Problem 
As Duhem stressed, in the case of a prediction failure it is often not easy 
to decide which to reject, the conjecture we are interested in or some 
auxiliary hypothesis. Ideally, the auxiliary hypotheses would be non-
controversial and highly supported by independent tests. However, as is 
strikingly illustrated by the varied responses to Galileo's failure to 
observe stellar parallax, often there is room for scientists of good will to 
make different judgments as to what is refuted. And whenever the facts 
do not point overwhelmingly in one direction we expect to find ideology, 

232 
NORETIA KOERTGE 
more or less vague hunches, and the vagaries of personal experience 
playing an important role. 
Thus in the face of persistent differences between races on IQ tests, 
environmentalists search for culture-bias in the tests, variations in early 
opportunities for learning, differential motivation to do well in testing 
situations, etc .. I am not claiming that it is wrong for them to do so. My 
only point is that environmentalists are not privy to different data than is 
Jensen. Rather they are betting on different solutions to the Duhemian 
problem. As long as their objections to a straightforward interpretation of 
the difference in IQ scores are testable, they are behaving as perfectly 
good Popperians. 
F. Ideology and the Modification of Refuted Hypotheses 
As Lakatos and his students have documented so beautifully for the 
natural sciences, the new conjectures with which we replace refuted 
hypotheses often stem from the same metaphysical research program. 
The situation is completely parallel in the social sciences. Are there 
wide cultural variations in human aggressive behavior? Nevermind if you 
are an evolutionist - it is the tendency towards aggression which is 
universal and innate - the behavioral manner in which it is expressed or 
managed depends on culture. Is there also conclusive evidence that the 
behavior is learned? Nevermind, the ability to learn it is inherited. Again, 
neither Popper nor I have objections to such replacements as long as there 
is no loss in testable content. I merely note that their ideological flavor 
remains unchanged. 
To sum up. The falsificationist machine de guerre is successful in 
eliminating predictive errors - if we are sincere Popperians, we must 
modify systems of refuted premises. But it is not always successful in 
eliminating ideological bias. If we are convinced that masturbation or 
marijuana is bad for people, we can generate an endless string of testable 
conjectures as to possible ill effects. Of course, our first n hypotheses may 
be refuted but there is always the n +1 th to discuss. So although masturba-
tion doesn't cause pimples, infertility, brain debilitation, or nervousness, 
it may contribute to homosexual preferences.8 Marijuana may not lead to 
madness or heroin addiction, but perhaps it decreases our ability to 
remember nonsense syllables.9 As Popper himself emphasized from the 
time he fIrst proposed his Demarcation Criterion, metaphysical positions 
can be criticized, but they cannot be refuted. 

IDEOLOGY, SCIENCE AND A FREE SOCIETY 
233 
G. Dialectical Addendum 
I have gone through the various elements of the classical Popperian 
falsificationist methodology, presenting at each juncture both the 
theoretical possibilities for ideological influence and actual examples of 
such influence drawn from scientific practice. However, I would not like 
to leave the impression that Popperian methodology offers no guards 
whatsoever against the intrusion of prejudice or extra-empirical elements 
into science. Quite the contrary. 
By recommending that scientists deal with explanatory problems, one 
immediately assigns a very low priority to questions such as "Do Jews 
have long noses?" not by invoking moral considerations (which we may 
also wish to do), but simply by pointing out that such studies are of no 
theoretical or explanatory import. 
By requiring that scientific conjectures be highly testable one forces 
people to make their prejudices precise enough that they are open to 
refutation. It is not scientifically respectable, according to Popper, to 
conjecture that Blacks are inferior or homosexuals sick in some vague, 
general sense. Again, the stricture is a methodological, not a moral one. 
One is permitted to make precise conjectures about specific inferiorities 
or infirmities; but testable hypotheses, no matter how prejudicial, become 
subject to empirical refutation. 
Empirical refutation would become a farce, however, if observations 
were laden with the very theory under test and I have suggested above 
that with some effort we can arrive at basic statements which are at least 
non-controversial to opponents at the time. (A consensus does not 
guarantee their truth, of course). Similarly, although what counts as 
severe testing is theory-dependent, opponents can object to controversial 
background assumptions. Above I stressed that sometimes there are a 
plurality of legitimate responses to a Duhemian problem situation. 
However, this is not always the case.10 
To balance the examples of ideological· influence cited above I would 
now like to cite just three cases (which have randomly come to my 
attention while writing this paper) where scientists who started their 
research with a high ideological commitment to one thesis were even-
tually led through empirical investigation to change their minds. 
(a) 
L. S. Heamshaw, biographer of Sir Cyril Burt, began his book as an 
attempt to redeem the reputation of his predecessor at University 
College, who had been accused of fabricating parts of his twin 

234 
NORElTA KOERTGE 
studies. It was on this basis that he obtained access to Burt's papers 
and it was with great embarrassment that he later had to tell the 
relatives that he had changed his mind. I I 
(b) 
Herbert Terrace, teacher of Nim Chimsky, began his research with a 
finn conviction that primates could learn syntax, slowly became 
aware of serious methodological flaws in previous experiments on 
animal languages, and now has completely reversed his stand.I2 
(c) 
Ernest Sternglass, critic of nuclear power, began his career working 
for the Westinghouse nuclear division convinced that the energy 
behind the most horrible weapon ever unleashed by science could 
also revolutionize our peaceful existence. Slowly, reluctantly, his 
studies on the biological effects of low-levels of radiation "swung 
[him] around by 180°" as he reports.n 
Although metaphysical stances cannot be empirically falsified, they can 
gradually come to be perceived as scientifically infertile -
the 
phenomenon described by Lakatos as a degenerating research program 
with an exhausted positive heuristic. 
Thus, Popperian methodology should not be viewed as a vindication of 
the radical relativist, according to whom science is merely an ideological 
charade. But neither does it provide much consolation for the pious 
positivist who thinks that science, if properly done, should be not only 
highly probable but also completely divorced from our intellectual 
starting points. 
But perhaps other methodological approaches can do a better job of 
screening out ideology. Let us briefly survey the chief contenders. 
III. ARE OTHER METHODOLOGIES BETTER AT ELIMINATING IDEOLOGY? 
What do other methodological approaches imply about the proper role of 
ideology? Subjective Bayesians cheerfully admit that our hunches and 
pre-scientific experience figure in the prior probabilities which we assign 
various hypotheses. Objective Bayesians, such as Wesley Salmon, would 
try to base prior probabilities on empirical factors such as the historical 
success of hypotheses of a given type (e.g., non-teleological), but also 
admit that the previous personal successes of the individual who created 
or favors the conjecture may be consideredP4 Given this wide a picture of 
what may be relevant to an "objectivist" prior appraisal, I hardly think 
they provide more stringent controls than does Popper. 

IDEOLOGY, SCIENCE AND A FREE SOCIETY 
235 
Naive inductivists, of course, would like to bar all extraempirical 
elements. But their rules either do not succeed in doing so (their call for 
variety of instances, for example, makes no sense without a background 
theory about which differences are relevant to the problem at hand) or are 
so restrictive that trying to follow them would stultify science (the rule 
against ''feigning hypotheses", even if one could follow it, would paralyze 
scientific inquiry). 
A sophisticated inductivist might advocate a stance similar to that of 
Mannheim, who recommends that all systems of thought (including that 
of the sociologist of knowledge!) be evaluated in relation to their 
historical context. The position I have in mind (although perhaps no one 
has expressed it in quite this way) would go as follows: We can never be 
free of presuppositions - here Popper is right and the positivists were 
wrong. But we can be aware of our assumptions and bracket them. So 
although we can't remove ideology from science, we can label it as such. 
No one, I suppose, can really object to epistemological analysis and 
attempts at self-awareness. Popper, however, in his criticisms of what he 
calls "socio-therapy" casts serious doubts on the efficacy of such 
methods: 
" ... not only does self-analysis not help us to overcome the unconscious detennination 
of our views, it often leads to even more subtle self-deception". "Is it not common 
experience that those who are most convinced of having got rid of their prejudices are 
most prejudiced?" ''There is no possible short-cut to rid us of our ideologies". IS 
Popper pins his .hopes for scientific objectivity, not on sincere soul 
searching, but on scientific institutions and traditions which foster inter-
personal criticism. 
Although Popper clearly realized that opponents were in a better 
psychological position to discover weaknesses in a position, I believe it 
was Feyerabend who first gave explicit methodological arguments for 
theoretical pluralism.16 (These were later incorporated into Lakatos' 
theory of competing scientific research program). On Feyerabend's view 
the only effective criticism of an ideological approach is emmanent - it 
can only come from the greater empirical and explanatory success of a 
competing worldview. 
The result is a free-enterprise model of science. Each ideological 
research program has its own axe to grind - the proponents of each will 
be as convinced of the superiority of their own brand of research as any 
sincere car salesperson. So let the lay consumer of scientific information 

236 
NORETIA KOERTGE 
beware! Yet as long as cosmological cartels are not permitted to develop, 
consumers will in the long run benefit from ruthless ideological competi-
tion. Not only are they "free to choose", to use Milton Friedman's famous 
slogan, but in addition an open marketplace for ideas both encourages 
innovative hypothesis building and also provides the mechanism whereby 
only the fittest will survive. 
Both Feyerabend and Lakatos play down the significance and effective-
ness of Popperian falsifications and for this and a variety of other reasons 
I fmd neither of their accounts of methodology totally acceptable. 
However, I think they are right to stress the importance of metaphysical 
competition. 
Thus I suggest we supplement the Popperian methodology of criticism 
through empirical testing (and analysis of internal consistency) with an 
additional critical device, viz., competition with explanations arising out 
of alternative metaphysical or ideological frameworks. 
For example, if I wish to evaluate Symons' recent sociobiological 
hypothesis about the origins of sex differences 17 I will subject it to three 
distinct types of appraisal: 
(i) 
Is Symons' account internally consistent (especially the plethora of 
auxiliary assumptions about the circumstances obtaining in hunting-
gathering environments)? 
(ii) 
How testable is his account and how well has it been tested? (What 
precisely is the relevance of the data about promiscuity amongst 
male homosexuals? Which parts of the theory are not tested by the 
hormone studies?) 
(iii) Are there radically different hypotheses which purport to explain 
the same phenomena and how plausible are they? (This would 
necessitate excursions into quite different research programs such 
as Marvin Harris' anthropological account according to which male 
supremacy is due to warfare which in turn is a cultural response to 
reproductive and ecological pressures.IS The more difficult it is to 
subject a theory to direct falsificationist testing (either because the 
theory is inherently imprecise or the experiments are difficult to 
carry out), the more important it is to compare the theory in 
question to radical alternatives. 
I have only sketched the main features of this "Popper-Plus" methodology 
which combines falsificationist testing with pluralistic competition. 
However, this account is already detailed enough to suggest some reforms 
in our scientific institutions. 

IDEOLOGY, SCIENCE AND A FREE SOCIETY 
IV. SOCIAL AND POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THE 
POPPER-PLUS VIEW OF SCIENCE 
237 
Suppose we grant that science, especially social science, inevitably grows 
in an ideological medium. How should this fact affect the way we do and 
use science? 
First of all, we will want to make sure that our scientific institutions do 
not restrict ideological competition. In practical terms this means 
removing barriers to entry into science so that women and members of 
various minorities can participate more easily. It means revamping or 
augmenting funding procedures so that heterodox approaches can at least 
get seed money. It means liberalizing or providing alternative avenues for 
publication. 
But in addition to opening the way for a greater variety of hypotheses, 
we will also want to help the consumer who needs science for some 
practical or political problem to make rational choices between competing 
intellectual products. This means that in cases where personal characteris-
tics of investigators (such as their race, politics, sex, research background) 
may be relevant to an appraisal of their research, this information should 
be provided in the published version of results (just as one would want to 
know if a study of lung cancer had been done by scientists working for 
Lucky Strike!) 
There is also a need for a sort of scientific equivalent to Consumer's 
Reports - a financially independent and relatively disinterested group 
which will do critical surveys and summaries of the state of the art in 
controversial fields. Such groups may be hard to fmd, since often times 
those who are expert enough to understand the research reports easily are 
also partisans.19 
Most important, perhaps, is that scientists and non-scientists alike adopt 
a more sophisticated view of the scientific process. For example, on 
traditional accounts of technology assessment, lay people should have 
input on questions of value and the ends to be sought, but questions of 
fact and the best methods for achieving those ends are to be left to the 
scientific expert. If my analysis is correct, however, the reports of 
scientific experts, may be to a certain extent influenced by the values of 
the scientists. In such cases, a neat division of labor along fact/value lines 
is no longer possible. 
I would not, however, like to leave the impression that my conclusions 
lend support to the other philosophical extreme, according to which the 

238 
NORETIA KOERTGE 
fact/value distinction is meaningless, and scientists are like hired guns or 
soothsayers who will say anything to make their clients happy. There are 
several reasons why my account is not compatible with rampant 
relativism. 
(1) 
First, by retaining empirical falsification as an effective tool for 
criticizing individual theories (although it cannot eliminate research 
programs), we continue to be able to demarcate science from blatant 
forms of pseudo science which have no concern about whether their 
so-called "facts" satisfy Popper's requirements for basic statements 
and which make no sustained attempt either to make their theories 
falsifiable or to falsify them. 
(2) 
Secondly, although I provide no way of eliminating ideology from 
the scientific process, I do give various ways of controlling its 
deleterious effects. When one is lucky enough to come up with a 
result which survives both severe factual testing and active criticism 
from alternative ideological perspectives, then one has reason to 
believe the result may be near to the truth. 
(3) 
There is a third, more subtle way in which the scientific tradition 
minimizes the influence of ideology and this is through the high 
values it places on criticism and novelty. 
For example, Marvin Harris argues that feminist suspicions that male 
anthropologists and archaeologists have neglected matriarchal elements in 
primitive societies fail to take into account the anthropologist's love for 
the exotic. "Far from being inclined to overlook the existence of institu-
tions that moderate male power and authority, most ethnographers can 
envisage nothing more rewarding than to be able to write journal articles 
about 'uxorilocal postmarital residence' or a nice case of 'matrilineal 
decent with polyandry"'. (Cannibals and Kings, p. 58). 
Not everyone agrees with Harris about this effect of the reward system 
in anthropology20 and other fields of social science, such as rat psychol-
ogy, are undoubtedly more conservative, but my guess would be that 
when a science does place a premium on novel ideas, even firmly 
entrenched ideologies lose their power. Scientists, like most everyone 
else, would rather be successful than politically correct! 
v. CONCLUSION 
I have argued that if we accept Popper's theory of method (or a Bayesian 

IDEOLOGY, SCIENCE AND A FREE SOCIETY 
239 
approach, for that matter), we must admit that ideology can play an 
important and multi-faceted role in science. As a consequence, the 
institutions for pure science should be designed to facilitate both ideologi-
cal pluralism (so that a wide variety of scientific hypotheses will be 
proffered and tested) and ideological competition (in order that internal 
empirical criticism be supplemented by criticism from alternative 
frameworks). 
Another consequence is that the institutions for the communication of 
science to lay people and government should take pains to inform those 
who would apply scientific results not only about the extent to which a 
given scientific theory has been empirically tested (today even this is 
often neglected), but also about the extent to which the theory has been 
subjected to competition from radically different metaphysical research 
programs. 
My account shares a good deal of the flavor of (and was inspired by) 
Feyerabend's views. However, I think we may differ on the following 
points: 
(1) 
I follow Popper in assuming there are "basic" statements, which 
admittedly presume some theory, but are either neutral to the 
theories under test or else are acceptable to all partisans in a 
scientific conflict. Of course, as Feyerabend has dramatically 
shown, it is sometimes difficult to arrive at such noncontroversial 
starting points, but I would maintain that they can be found, and 
until they are found, the subject under discussion is really in a pre-
scientific state. 
(2) 
Just as there can be (tentative) convergence on data, so eventually 
there can be convergence on explanatory theories. Furthermore, if 
such convergence comes after intense inter-ideological competition 
I think it is not just a sign of intellectual conservatism or lack of 
imagination (as Feyerabend seems to believe), but may indicate that 
we are approaching a correct understanding of the world. 
(3) 
For these reasons, I think scientific results can sometimes be 
authoritative. Despite this, I nevertheless recommend that such 
results not automatically be taken as authoritative by the lay public 
for two reasons: 
(a) 
Some convergence is often slow in coming, especially in 
important and controversial matters. 
(b) 
Not only must epistemic justice be done, it must also be seen 
to be done. 

240 
NORETIA KOERTGE 
Like Feyerabend, I recommend that the fmal word in policy matters 
rest with the laity, but not because I believe there is no such thing as 
expert opinion. Rather it is because in a democracy the final decision on 
all matters must ultimately rest with the people. 
Department of History and Philosophy of Science 
Indiana University 
Bloomington 
Indiana 
USA 
NOTES 
... My essay was submitted to the editor some time ago and so many of the "recent" 
examples are now over ten years old. This in itself poses no serious problem, although 
younger readers may not remember Anita Bryant or Three-Mile Island! However 
there are deeper reasons why I would not write the same article today. In the present 
academic climate there is no need to call for the proliferation of rival ideological 
research programs. What now seems to be lacking is the willingness to try to resolve 
the contradictions between alternative accounts using empirical methods and rational 
debate. 
1 See his "Science and the Social Order" (1938) and "Science and Democratic Social 
Structure" (1942) in R. K. Merton, Social Theory and Social Structure. Glencoe: The 
Free Press, revised edition, 1957. 
2 K. Mannheim, Ideology and Utopia (1929) (trans. by L. Wirth and E. Shils). 
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1966, p. 49. 
3 G. Bergman, "Ideology" (1951) in M. Brodbeck, ed., Readings in the Philosophy of 
the Social Sciences. New York: Macmillan, 1968, p. 129. 
4 See R. C. Friedman, et al. (eds). Sex Differences in Behavior. New York: John 
Wiley, 1974. 
S For a discussion and critique of Koblberg's attempts to accommodate the divergent 
responses of little girls into his theory, see C. Gilligan, "In a Different Voice: 
Women's Conceptions of Self and Morality", Harvard Educational Review 47 (1977), 
pp.481-517. 
6 D. E. Bazelon, "Eyewitless News: A Review of E. F. Loftus, Eyewitness Testimony 
and A. D. Yarmey, The Psychology of Eyewitness Testimony." Psychology Today, 
March, 1980, p. 102. 
7 S. J. Gould, "Morton's Ranking of Races by Cranial Capacity", Science 200 (5 
May, 1978),pp.503-509. 
8 This hypothesis is discussed by M. Ruse "Are There Gay Genes?" The Journal of 
Homosexuality 6/4 (1981), pp. 5-34. 
9 E. F. Loftus, "Alcohol, Marijuana, and Memory", Psychology Today, March, 1980, 
p.42ff. 

IDEOLOGY, SCIENCE "'NO A FREE SOCIETY 
241 
10 See my discussion of falsification by a striking instance in N. Koertge, ''Theory 
Change in Science" in G. Pearce and Maynard (eds)., Conceptual Change. Dordrecht-
Holland: Reidel, 1973, pp. 167-98 and the Mendeleev case study in ''Towards a New 
Theory of Scientific Inquiry" in G. Radnitzky and G. Andersson (eds)., Progress and 
Rationality in Science. Dordrecht-Holland: Reidel, 1978, pp. 253-78. 
11 See the "Preface" to L. S. Hearnshaw, Cyril Burt, Psychologist. Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press, 1979. 
12 Reported by J. L Marx, "Ape-Language Controversy Flares Up", Science 207 (21 
March,1980),1330-33. 
13 See E. Sternglass, Secret Fallout: Low-Level Radiation from Hiroshima to Three-
Mile Island, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1981. 
14 See the discussion of "Pragmatic Criteria" in W. C. Salmon, The Foundations of 
Scientific Iriference. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1966, pp. 125-26, and 
W. C. Salmon, "Bayes Theorem and the History of Science" in R. H. Stuewer (ed)., 
Historical and Philosophical Perspectives of Science. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press, 1970. 
15 These quotations all come from K. R. Popper, The Open Society, Vol 2. London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1962, p. 223. 
16 See especially P. K. Feyerabend, "Problems of Empiricism" in R. G. Colodny 
(ed)., Beyond the Edge of Certainty. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1965. 
17 D. Symons, The Evolution of Human Sexuality. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 1979. 
18 M. Harris. Cannibals and Kings: The Origins of Culture. New York: Random 
House, 1977. 
19 W. E. Stumpf, "'Peer' Review", Science 207 (22 February, 1980), pp. 822-23. 
20 For a useful analysis of the concept of male bias and a survey of such allegations, 
see K. Milton, "Male Bias in Anthropology", Man (N.S). 14, 1979, pp. 40-54. 

ALAN MUSGRA VB 
The Myth of Astronomical Instrumentalism 
The central thesis of Paul Peyerabend's paper "Realism and Instrumen-
talism" is that as well as general philosophical arguments for and against 
instrumentalism, there are specific scientific arguments in favor of the 
instrumentalist view. These scientific arguments have the following 
general form: a new theory realistically interpreted clashes with 
"observation and well-confirmed physical laws"; therefore, the new 
theory must be interpreted as a mere instrument. Peyerabend's examples 
of theories to which such arguments have been applied are Copernican 
astronomy in the 16th century and Quantum mechanics in the 20th 
century. Peyerabend urges us not to overlook such scientific arguments, 
for they are "very forceful" ones, "much stronger" than general 
philosophical arguments.1 
This thesis is odd. Instrumentalism as both Peyerabend and I under-
stand it is a view about scientific theories in general. He formulates it 
thus: 
According to instrumentalism even a theory that is wholly correct does not describe 
anything but serves as an instrument for the prediction of the facts that constitute its 
empirical content. 2 
Now the so-called scientific arguments for instrumentalism are very far 
from being forceful and strong arguments for this general position. On the 
contrary, they are patently invalid and almost contradictory. The most 
such an argument could establish is that some particular theory must be 
interpreted merely as an instrument - and to infer from ''This particular 
theory is merely an instrument of prediction" the conclusion "All theories 
G. Munivar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 243-280. 
@ 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
243 

244 
ALAN MUSGRAVE 
are merely instruments of prediction" is patently invalid. It is even worse. 
Scientific arguments, as Peyerabend presents them, assume that existing 
theories are true descriptions of the world. It was because Aristotle's 
physics (with its consequence that the earth did not move) was interpreted 
realistically and accepted as true that Copernican astronomy had to be 
interpreted as a mere instrument. And it was because some classical laws 
were accepted as true descriptions that Quantum theory had to be 
interpreted as an instrument. Instrumentalism in general cannot be the 
conclusion of Peyerabend's scientific arguments, since its negation is 
assumed in the premise. 
Clearly, Peyerabend's scientific arguments are not arguments for 
instrumentalism in general, but only for the instrumentalist interpretation 
of some particular theory. They are, we might say, arguments for local as 
opposed to global instrumentalism. I do not think that he would disagree 
with this, for he himself says: 
At this point it is very important to emphasize that the argument [against a realist 
interpretation of Copernicus] does not at all depend on a general philosophical 
position considering [sic] the nature of our knowledge. No such sweeping assumption 
is implied or presupposed. The argument is concerned with a specific theory, viz., the 
heliocentric hypothesis.3 
Still, local instrumentalism is a very different position from global 
instrumentalism. Local instrumentalism is quite compatible with an 
overall realist view of science. A realist disappointed to find that some 
theory cannot be a true description of reality is quite likely to concede that 
it has merely instrumental value. Disappointed realists are not instrumen-
talists, though if we fail to distinguish global from local instrumentalism, 
we may wrongly think that they are. 
Another obvious distinction is important in this area. Realists think that 
scientific theories are true or false descriptions of reality. Some realists 
also think that we can know for sure which theories are true and which 
false (call this dogmatic realism), while other realists deny this (call them 
critical realists). A critical realist is quite likely to concede the conjec-
tural or hypothetical character of some scientific theory. But this is not to 
take an instrumentalist view of that theory: a hypothesis is still a true or 
false description of reality, rather than a mere "mathematical hypothesis" 
or symbolic device for "saving the appearances". Critical realists are not 
instrumentalists, though if we fail to distinguish critical from dogmatic 
realism, we may wrongly think that they are. 

THE MYTH OF AS1RONOMlCAL INS1RUMENTALISM 
245 
Have such cases of mistaken identity ever been perpetrated? I think that 
they have, and on a massive scale. They are largely responsible for the 
orthodox, and I think mistaken, doctrine that an instrumentalist view of 
astronomical theory developed long before the Copernican era. This 
doctrine was fIrst stated fully in Duhem's marvelous little book To Save 
the Phenomena. And one of Duhem's chief arguments was of precisely 
the same form as Feyerabend's. Feyerabend claims that an instrumentalist 
view of Copernican astronomy was developed to dissolve the clash 
between it and Aristotelian physics. Duhem claims that an instrumentalist 
view of Ptolemaic astronomy was developed to dissolve the clash 
between it and Aristotelian physics. But Duhem claims more. He claims 
that the instrumentalist view was extended to cover all astronomical 
hypotheses. And he claims that "astronomical instrumentalism" can be 
traced back through all the great Hellenistic astronomers, Ptolemy, 
Apollonius, Hipparchus, Eudoxus, until we arrive at Plato's Academy. 
Thus Duhem gives the instrumentalist view a long and distinguished 
pedigree. 
Duhem also makes no secret of the fact that he thinks the instrumen-
talist view correct. For him the early astronomers were the fust to 
appreciate the true status of scientmc theory. Naturally, their rather 
advanced point of view shocked less sophisticated realist thinkers, 
notably the Aristotelians. The ensuing debate between realists and 
instrumentalists raged up to and including the time of Copernicus, Kepler 
and Galileo. The instrumentalists were the enlightened and progressive 
party, who furthered the cause of astronomical theory. The realists 
indulged in naive and misguided criticisms of developments in 
astronomy, and advocated a return to outmoded Aristotelian astronomical 
systems which appealed to their physical (or rather, metaphysical) 
prejudices. Instrumentalist astronomy became divorced from realist 
physics, and the couple were not re-married until the Scientiflc Revolu-
tion. Some see that re-marriage as an extension of the realist view of 
physics into astronomy. But Duhem sees it as an extension of the 
instrumentalist view of astronomy into physics, notwithstanding the 
admittedly realist views of the marriage-brokers (Copernicus, Kepler, 
Brahe, and Galileo). According to Duhem, the real lesson of the ScientifIc 
Revolution of the 17th century was that all the sciences should aim 
merely to "save the appearances" using "mathematical hypotheses". 
Subsequent historians, many of them skeptical about Duhem' s 
philosophical claims, have almost unanimously endorsed his historical 

246 
ALAN MUSGRAVE 
ones. It became the orthodox view among historians that there was an 
instrumentalist tradition concerning Hellenistic astronomy, and a divorce 
between instrumentalist astronomy and realist physics. The orthodoxy has 
not gone completely unchallenged: indeed, some significant chinks have 
recently appeared in its armor. The time is ripe for a complete re-assess-
ment of the orthodox position. 
That is too great a task for a single paper. So I propose to confme 
myself to the great astronomers of antiquity, and to argue that Plato, 
Eudoxus, Apollonius, Hipparchus, and Ptolemy were not instrumentalists, 
contrary to what most historians claim. It could still be that "astronomical 
instrumentalism" developed, not among astronomers themselves, but 
among what we might call the later philosophers of astronomy. At the end 
of my paper I will briefly, and I fear dogmatically, dispute this also. 
1. PLATO'S PROBLEM AND THE "DOGMA OF CIRCULARITY" 
Duhem traces the instrumentalist tradition in astronomy back to Plato's 
Academy. According to Simplicius: 
Plato lays down the principle that the heavenly bodies' motion is circular, uniform and 
constantly regular. Thereupon he sets the mathematicians the following problem: what 
circular motions, uniform and perfectly regular, are to be admitted as hypotheses so 
that it might be possible to save the appearances presented by the planets?4 
Duhem fmds here the characteristic ingredients of an instrumentalist 
view: the sole task of astronomical theory is to "save the appearances", 
and this is to be accomplished using geometric fictions (uniform circular 
motions) which correspond to nothing in reality. 
There are several problems about this interpretation. Is it plausible to 
attribute this formulation of the astronomer's problem to Plato? Why the 
insistence on uniform circular motions? And is it plausible to see them as 
mere geometric fictions, and hence as marking the transition to an 
instrumentalist view of astronomy? These questions are not unconnected 
with each other, as we will see. 
If Plato was advocating an instrumentalist view of astronomy, then it 
would have been a momentous break with Greek tradition. His predeces-
sors, the Presocratic astronomers, were more interested in astronomical 
explanation than astronomical prediction. In this they contrasted sharply 
with the Babylonians, who collected precise astronomical data, discerned 

THE MYTH OF AS1RONOMICAL INS1RUMENTALISM 
247 
in them cycles for eclipses, conjunctions, etc., and formulated algebraic 
rules for making predictions. But this is as far as their astronomical theory 
went, and they do not seem to have investigated the "Why?" as opposed 
to the "How?" of heavenly motions. (Duhem should have sought his 
instrumentalists in Babylon, where he would have had some success). The 
Presocratics were very different. They were more interested in qualitative 
explanation of how eclipses occurred than in providing rules for predict-
ing them. All the speculative astronomical systems they produced (Plato's 
included) were refuted by data known to the Babylonians. Indeed, the 
Greeks have often been criticized for not collecting more data before 
speculating. But I agree with Hanson when he answers: 
They would not have understood this criticism. There was already more than enough 
observational data before them, it all required explanation. To find some general 
intelligibility within the world of their experience was their problem; this required 
reflection, not more data; the man entangled in taffy doesn't need more taffy.5 
So, pre-Platonic Greek astronomy was thoroughly realist and explanatory. 
And it can also teach us, I believe, something about the real meaning of 
the so-called "dogma of circularity". Circles first appeared in Greek 
astronomy as a by-product of what Kuhn calls the "two-sphere system". 
The theory that the stars are fixed in a rotating sphere with the spherical 
earth stationary at its center gives a marvelous explanation of stellar 
motions: the fact that each star moves along an arc of a circle each night; 
the fact that their relative positions do not change so that these arcs are all 
concentric to a fixed point or pole; the fact that stars near this pole do not 
rise or set, while those further away do. The theory also predicts, 
correctly, that as we travel north stars which rise and set will become 
circumpolar. The stellar sphere seems to have been real enough to early 
Greek astronomers, and the circular motions of the 'fixed stars' merely a 
by-product of it: a body fixed on the surface of a uniformly rotating 
sphere will move in a circle at uniform speed. 
The two-sphere system cannot, of course, explain the motions of the 
sun, moon, and planets: since these change their position relative to the 
fixed stars, they cannot be fixed in the stellar sphere. Pythagoras is 
reported to have extended the idea of spheres to them, and to have said 
that they are "fixed in spheres of their own and moved by their motion".8 
For Anaximander the planetary spheres became rotating wheels filled 
with fire, and the sun, moon and planets merely holes in the wheels 
through which the fire shines out. And the spheres or wheels persisted, as 

248 
ALAN MUSGRA VB 
we will see, in Plato, Eudoxus, Aristotle, Ptolemy, even in Copernicus.7 
Now from a purely kinematic or geometrical point of view, these 
planetary spheres are redundant - one may as well dispense with them 
and talk only of combined circular motions.8 But from a physical point of 
view there is a great difference between a body moving freely in a circle 
and a body which moves in a circle because it is attached to a rotating 
sphere. At least, we now know that there is a great physical difference 
between the two - but perhaps the Greeks had an inkling of it too. 
Popper has conjectured that the Greek commitment to spheres or 
wheels may have been based upon their "instinctive" grasp of what we 
should call the conservation of angular momentum. He suggests that their 
experience with well-greased wheels may have been decisive in giving 
them this grasp. And he concludes: 
... the ancient theory of the circular rotation of the heavens (which derives from this 
experience) was ultimately replaced by the earth's conservation of its angular 
momentum; an indication that the cycles were neither as naive nor as mysterious as 
they are still often thought to be.9 
It is a nice idea. Perhaps the Greeks realized "instinctively" that a sphere 
or wheel set spinning on its axis will continue to rotate at uniform speed 
unless or until something slows it down. Perhaps they saw that this might 
provide a physical explanation of why the stars and planets move as they 
do: they are fixed to invisible rotating spheres which never slow down 
because they are made of a frictionless substance. Perhaps the so-called 
"dogma of circularity" was really a dogma of sphericity which stemmed 
from this appealing piece of celestial physics. And perhaps it continued to 
grip generation after generation of astronomers because to renounce it 
would be to leave oneself without a celestial physics. 
Norwood Hanson has pointed out that the commitment to the "principle 
of circularity" is difficult to explain if those committed took an instrumen-
talist view of their task: 
Why did Hellenistic astronomers ... insist on the principle of circularity, however? '" 
If prediction was the major criterion of success in astronomical theory, why not 
employ non-circular curves initially and drop this philosophical facade of circles and 
circularity? ... The answer: the ancient nature-philosopher's need for total explanation 
(and cosmological speculation) was not wholly dead in the "predictors" ... 
Astronomers ... felt that if a physically true picture of the universe was to be had, it 
would consist in some modification of the nested-sphere cosmos imagined by 
Aristotle.... Hence, at least one physical principle had to be common both to 

THE MYTH OF ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTALISM 
249 
cosmology and astronomy. Ultimately All Celestial Motions are Circular in Na-
ture .... 10 
Hanson does not explain why adherence to the "principle of circularity" is 
adherence to a physical principle. This we can do by emphasizing the 
inertially rotating spheres which give rise to the circular motions. Nor 
does Hanson see that his puzzlement is partly of his own making. The 
thesis of his book is precisely the Duhemian thesis of the divorce between 
natural philosophers interested in cosmological explanation (principally 
Aristotle and his followers) and professional astronomers interested in 
astronomical prediction (who include Eudoxus, Apollonius, Hipparchus, 
and Ptolemy). It is indeed difficult to see why instrumentalists should be 
so wedded to one particular "geometric device", albeit the simplest one. 
Hence Hanson's puzzlement, and his half-hearted concession that the 
need for explanation "was not wholly dead in the 'predictors'''. Once we 
see that Hanson's instrumentalist "predictors" were no such thing, the 
puzzle will evaporate and Hanson's ad hoc solution to it will become 
redundant. 
So far I have argued that there is nothing in pre-Platonic Greek 
astronomy to suggest an instrumentalist view of astronomy. On the 
contrary, the early astronomical speculations were intended as realistic 
explanations. And I have suggested that the so-called "dogma of cir-
cularity" stemmed at least initially from speculation about real celestial 
spheres whose inertial rotations provided a celestial physics as well as a 
celestial kinematics. Let me now return to Plato, and to his formulation of 
the problem of the planets. 
It has sometimes been doubted whether Plato can have formulated the 
problem of the planets in the way that Simplicius reports. The evidence 
that he did so is very indirect: Simplicius is actually quoting Sosigenes, 
who in turn is quoting Eudemus. Furthermore, Geminus attributes the 
problem to the Pythagoreans rather than to Plato: 
It is the fundamental assumption of all astronomy that the sun, the moon, and the five 
planets move in circular orbits at uniform speed in a sense contrary to that of the 
universe. For the Pythagoreans, who were the first to apply themselves to investiga-
tion of this kind, assumed the movements of the sun, the moon, and the five planets to 
be circular and uniform. They would not admit, with reference to things divine and 
eternal, any disorder such as would make them move at one time more swiftly, and at 
one time more slowly, and at another time stand still, as the five planets do at their so-
called stationary points. For such irregularity of motion would not even be expected of 
a decent and orderly man in his journeys. With men, of course, the necessities of life 

250 
ALAN MUSGRA VB 
are often causes of swiftness or slowness; but with the imperishable stars it is not 
possible to adduce any cause of swiftness or slowness. Accordingly, they proposed the 
problem, how the p'henomena could be accounted for by means of circular and 
uniform movements. I I 
Finally, it seems implausible to suppose that Plato should care at all about 
"saving the appearances", when elsewhere he exhorts us to put aside the 
world of appearance and contemplate the world of fonns instead. 
Yet, if we take into account Plato's own contribution to astronomical 
theory (which no doubt owed much to the Pythagoreans), it becomes 
quite likely that he did pose the problem in the way Simplicius reports. 
Plato outlines two astronomical theories both in highly allegorical terms. 
Neither saves all the known appearances, though the second is an 
improvement upon the first. The first theory involves eight concentric 
spheres, the outermost rotating daily from'East to West and carrying the 
stars, the others rotating from West to East at varying rates and carrying 
the sun, moon, and five planets (while sharing the daily motion of the 
outermost sphere). This' gives a qualitative explanation of the West-East 
motion of the sun, moon, and planets through the fixed stars in varying 
times.I2 But because all the spheres have the same "axle", it cannot 
explain the obliquity of the ecliptic. Plato then improves the theory by 
setting the axes of the seven planetary spheres at an angle to that of the 
stellar sphere. This explains the obliquity of the ecliptic, and hence the 
seasons. 13 
But Plato's revised theory cannot explain the "wanderings" of the 
planets, which Plato, says are "hard to calculate and of wondrous com-
plexity". He draws attention to the problem: 
But the choric dances of these same stars and their crossings one of another, and the 
relative reversals and progressions of their orbits, and which of the gods meet in their 
conjunctions, and how many are in opposition, and behind which and at what times 
they severally pass before one another and are hidden from our view, and again re-
appearing send upon men unable to calculate alarming portents of things which shall 
come to pass hereafter - to describe all this without an inspection of models of these 
movements would be labor in vain. Wherefore, let this account suffice us .... 14 
So Plato admits that his own theory cannot fully solve the problem of the 
planets. It is quite likely that he bequeathed the problem to his successors, 
as Simplicius reported. 
But how are we to reconcile a Plato concerned to save astronomical 
appearances with the anti-empiricist Plato of philosophical legend? What 

THE MYTH OF ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTALISM 
251 
are we to make of the Plato who exhorts us to "dispense with the starry 
heavens, if we propose to obtain a real knowledge of astronomy"? Well, 
perhaps the anti-empiricist sermons of Socrates should be interpreted 
differently. What Socrates tells Glaucon is that: 
Yonder broideries in the heavens, inasmuch as they are broidered on visible ground, 
are properly considered to be more beautiful and perfect than anything else that is 
visible; yet they are far inferior to those which are true, far inferior to the movements 
wherewith essential speed and essential slowness, in true number and in all true 
forms, move in relation to one another and cause that which is essentially in them to 
move: the true objects which are apprehended by reason and intelligence, not by sight 
... we shall pursue astronomy, as we do geometry, by means of problems, and we 
shall dispense with the starry heavens, if we propose to obtain a real knowledge of 
astronomy ... .15 
Perhaps what Plato is telling us in this difficult passage is that the visible 
celestial objects and their visible motions ar~ not the true celestial objects 
or the true motions. Perhaps the true objects are the invisible spheres, and 
the true motions the revolutions of those spheres which cause the visible 
objects to move in apparently irregular ways. And perhaps Plato realized 
that no amount of mere astronomical observation can tell us about these 
real objects or their real motions. Instead they must be apprehended by 
reason, by studying problems of the form "What combination of rotating 
spheres will yield the phenomena?" This interpretation, conjectural 
though it admittedly is, has the advantage of rendering Plato's astronomi-
cal theorizing consistent with his view on the proper way to pursue 
astronomy. 16 
Let me return to Simplicius's statement that "Plato lays down the 
principle that the heavenly bodies" motion is circular, uniform and 
constantly regular". Assuming this report is to be accepted, it is important 
to realize that by "the heavenly bodies" Plato cannot have meant the sun, 
moon and planets. For in Plato's own theory the sun, moon, and planets 
do not move in circles at all - they move in closed spirals taking various 
times to go from the bottom of the spiral to the top (the sun takes six 
months and travels each loop of the spiral in a day). The same applies to 
all subsequent astronomical theories which conformed to the "dogma of 
circularity": in none of these theories did the sun, moon, and planets 
travel in circles at uniform speed. In what sense then, do these theories 
conform to the "dogma of circularity"? Plato must have meant by 
"heavenly bodies" not the sun, moon and planets but rather the spheres 

252 
ALAN MUSGRA VB 
which carried them. And he must have meant by "unifonn circular 
motions" the uniform rotation of these spheres on their axes. Plato's 
"dogma of circularity" must actually have been a dogma of sphericity. 
Where we have only a single sphere associated with a visible celestial 
object (as with the stars) the difference between the two is not so 
apparent: the unifonn rotation of the sphere produces a unifonn circular 
motion of the object fixed to it. But once the motion of the visible object 
is regarded as the resultant of two or more spherical rotations (as it was in 
Plato's theory and inall subsequent Hellenistic theories), then the motion 
of the visible object ceases to be unifonn and circular. Now the "dogma 
of circularity" is strictly speaking renounced, and only the dogma of 
sphericity remains. And it remained for so long, I have guessed, because 
it provided astronomers with a ready-made celestial physics. So Plato's 
problem could be more explicitly rendered: "What spherical rotations, 
unifonn and perfectly regular, are to be admitted as hypotheses so that it 
might be possible to save the appearances presented by the visible objects 
fixed to those spheres?" Was Plato the originator of the instrumentalist 
tradition in astronomy, as Duhem suggests? It will now be apparent, I 
hope, that there is not a scrap of evidence to suggest that he was, and 
several scraps which suggest that he was not. 
2. EUOOXUS 
The views of Plato's immediate successor, Eudoxus, yield much to 
support the interpretations of the previous section. Eudoxus managed to 
give qualitative explanations of some of the major anomalies of planetary 
motion (speed variations, motion above and below the ecliptic, and 
retrogressions) while sticking to the "dogma of sphericity". Like Plato, he 
operated with nested spheres where inner ones shared the motion of outer 
ones while having proper rotations of their own. Each planet was assigned 
four spheres: one with the same motion as that of the stellar sphere to 
explain daily motion; a second whose equator lay in the plane of the 
ecliptic to explain periodic motion through the ecliptic; and two more to 
explain retrogressions and variations above and below the ecliptic. The 
planet was said to be fixed on the equator of the innennost sphere. The 
theory was clearly an improvement on Plato's, in that it could explain in 
principle phenomena which Plato's could not. And it was further 
improved by Callippus, who added further spheres to deal with some of 

THE MYTH OF ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTALISM 
253 
the remaining anomalies. 
In assessing Eudoxus' s theory, we should fIrst remember that Eudoxus 
was "a personal acquaintance of Plato's, so that his solution can 
legitimately be accepted as an indication of how Plato wanted theoretical 
astronomy to proceed".17 Eudoxus tried to explain the major anomalies of 
planetary motion using spheres. If this indicates "how Plato wanted 
theoretical astronomy to proceed", then it supports my previous conten-
tions that Plato's "dogma of circulariti' was actually a "dogma of 
sphericity" and that Plato was interested in explaining celestial 
phenomena. 
But another interpretation is certainly possible. It could be that 
Eudoxus viewed his spheres merely as geometrical devices, and not as a 
real description of the structure of the heavens. In this case, his ingenious 
constructions would not really explain the phenomena, but would merely 
be devices for predicting them. It could be, in short, that the instrumen-
talist tradition in astronomy began, if not with Plato, then with his 
immediate successor. 
This is Duhem's view of the matter. He says that "Eudoxus ... and 
Callippus ... had followed the method of the astronomer, exactly as 
defIned by Plato" - and for Duhem this method was the instrumentalist 
method. IS And later he places Eudoxus and Callippus on the "right" side 
of the (alleged) division between instrumentalist astronomy and realist 
physics: 
On the one side there was astronomy - geometers like Eudoxus and Callippus formed 
mathematical theories by means of which the celestial motions could be described and 
predicted .... On the other side there was physics proper, or to speak in modern terms, 
celestial cosmology - thinkers like Plato and Aristotle meditated on the nature of the 
stars and the cause of their movements. 19 
Subsequent historians have almost unanimously endorsed this view of 
Duhem's. For example: 
It does not appear that Eudoxus speculated upon the causes of these rotational motions 
or the way in which they were transmitted from one sphere to the other; nor did he 
inquire about the material of which they were made, their sizes and mutual dis-
tances .... It would appear that he did not give his spheres any substance or mechani-
cal connection;the whole system was a purely geometrical hypothesis, or set of 
theoretical constructions calculated to represent the apparent paths of the planets and 
enable them to be computed.20 

254 
ALAN MUSGRAVE 
But as Eudoxus made no attempt to connect the movements of the various groups 
of spheres with each other, it seems probable that he only regarded them as geometri-
cal constructions suitable for computing the apparent paths of the planets.21 
Eudoxus and Callippus seem to view the spheres, not as material bodies, but as 
purely theoretical aids to understanding the motions geometrically. Furthermore, each 
set of concentric spheres ... is separate from the other sets.22 
The theories of Eudoxus and Callippus were purely mathematical constructions. 
Neither astronomer said anything about the mechanics of the heavenly movements, 
about the nature of the concentric spheres or about how movement was transmitted 
from one to the other.23 
Aristotle adopted the system of Eudoxus with some modifications in detail. But 
instead of being satisfied with the purely mathematical combinations of Eudoxus he 
gave the system a realist interpretation. In his view the various heavenly bodies were 
carried around by a machinery of solid, though hollow, corporeal spheres.24 
... The spheres of Eudoxos were mathematical spheres, not material ones, and 
represented a mathematical description of the celestial motions, not a physical model. 
Eudoxos' system fulfilled the requirements of Plato ... 25 
The geometrical model of Eudoxus (as well as its later improvement by Callippus) 
was originally conceived as a mathematical model only and was not intended to 
duplicate the actual physical system of the universe. The only purpose was to provide 
a mathematical technique for predicting future positions of the seven moving celestial 
bodies. Eudoxus did not visualize the universe as actually being made up of the many 
concentric spheres of some physical substance since, presumably, he would have to 
conjecture as to such matters as the physical material of the spheres, how they were 
interconnected, and how the celestial bodies were actually attached to them, and this 
he did not do. In fact, he did not even speculate as to the sizes of the spheres and their 
relative distances of separation. Rather, he attempted to predict the motions of the 
heavenly bodies on the assumption that their movements were the same, mathemati-
cally, as the geometrical model he proposed.26 
It should be clear that the scheme [Eudoxus's] was a purely mathematical 
model .... Aristotle, needing a "physical" explanation, tried to make the system into 
one of real substantial spheres .... It made no sense mechanically: it was, in fact, 
preposterous; but it was not what Eudoxus had meant .... Eudoxus instead makes no 
physical suppositions but tries a purely abstract model, and sees how far it will take 
him.27 
Eudoxus ... invented his spheres solely as geometrical pictures which provided a 
neat solution of the problem posed by Plato. There was apparently no intention of 
turning this purely geometrical model, which was conceived of as a mathematical 
device, into a picture of physical reality. 28 

THE MYTH OF ASlRONOMICAL INSlRUMENTALISM 
255 
Eudoxos's scheme is not systematic at all, ... save only in that he employs but this 
one computational device [nested spheres] for all celestial problems .... This 
constitutes neither a cosmological system, nor even an astronomical system .... The 
entire scheme is fundamentally just a calculating device for Eudoxos .. , Eudoxos did 
not seek the physical cause of these rotations. Nor does he seem to have thought that 
such sphere-nests really existed in three-dimensional space; a fortiori he is not 
concerned with what material such spheres might be made of, and how far from each 
other they are situated. Moreover, Eudoxos never relates the motions of one set of 
spheres ... with those of any other system .... No; Eudoxos's sphere-clusters are 
geometrical formulae only - mere computational devices.29 
As we can see, historians are almost unanimous in following Duhem's 
interpretation (I will consider in a moment the two known to me who 
dissent). This unanimity is surprising in view of the paucity of the 
evidence. Eudoxus's own work On the Speeds (a/the Planets) is lost, and 
his system must be reconstructed from descriptions given by Aristotle and 
Sirnplicius neither of whom say that for Eudoxus the spheres were mere 
"geometric fictions".30 So there is neither direct nor second-hand 
evidence for this interpretation. It is, in fact, highly conjectural. 
Moreover, as Gomperz pointed out long ago, it is a very implausible 
conjecture: 
Some of the most eminent specialists of our day [say that for] Eudoxus and Callippus 
the planetary spheres were not what they were for Aristotle, material, if transparent, 
bodies. They used them solely as an aid to imagination .... Their doctrine was purely 
geometrical till Aristotle interpreted it as a physical hypothesis, or, in other words, 
grossly misunderstood it. 
We should be glad to bow to a decision proceeding from high contemporary 
authority; but we are unable to overcome certain weighty objections which present 
themselves. Admitted, what indeed is not easy to admit, that the Stagirite was capable 
of so gross a misunderstanding; admitted, that the man who in these discussions so 
frequently appeals to the judgement of the specialists ... took in truth so little pains to 
discover their true meaning; - even these far-reaching admissions by no means settle 
the question. The men whose theories he so completely misunderstood were his 
contemporaries, companions, and fellow-students ... and yet we are able to suppose 
that not one of them was both willing and able to set him right. Again, there is one of 
his immediate pupils, Eudemus, whose knowledge of these subjects was almost 
unequalled .... He, too, we are asked to believe, never ventured on a word of 
remonstrance against Aristotle's misconception, or, if he did, failed to make the 
slightest impression .... Sosigenes ... did not refer by as much as a syllable to any 
misunderstandings on Aristotle's part .... We come to the last and most important 
consideration. Not long after Aristotle's time the doctrine of concentric spheres was 
radically modified by Apollonius '" and Hipparchus .... But the planetary spheres 
survived, still conceived as actual physical objects ... Claudius Ptolemaeus ... treats 
the doctrine of the celestial spheres with great thoroughness. He enters into long 

256 
ALAN MUSGRAVE 
discussions of their nature, their relative positions, their mode of attachment. But he 
lets fall not the slenderest hint that the planetary spheres had ever been understood in 
a different and purely ideal sense.31 
In view of the lack of textual evidence for, and implausibility of, the 
orthodox view we must examine carefully the arguments in favor of it. 
There is only one argument, drawn from the fact that Eudoxus and 
Callippus did not explain how the various groups of spheres were 
connected or speculate about the substance of which they were made. 
Aristotle tried to fill precisely these gaps, from which we can infer 
(rightly, I think) that Eudoxus and Callippus had not filled them. 
But it does not at all follow from this fact that for Eudoxus and 
Callippus the spheres were unreal. As Larry Wright points out, Eudoxus 
may have thought the spheres real without saying anything about their 
substance: 
Eudoxus's not giving substance to his spheres is quite similar to Newton's refusal to 
talk about anything actual pulling the planets out of their "natural" rectilinear paths. In 
Newton's own words he had "not been able to discover the cause of those properties 
of gravity ... it is enough that gravity does really exist and act according to the laws 
which we have explained". The analogous statement for Eudoxus might be: "I have 
not been able to discover the substance of the spheres, it is enough that they do really 
exist and act according to the model I have explained". 32 
Wright's other argument against the instrumentalist interpretation of 
Eudoxus is: 
... that much of his system is gratuitous and incomprehensible when it is viewed as a 
merely predicting computer, but becomes intelligible, even ingenious, when viewed as 
an attempt to do explanatory, physical astronomy.33 
Wright points out that Eudoxus's system was very far from accurate and 
very far from simple, where accuracy and simplicity are the two chief 
instrumentalist desiderata. And he adds that a mathematical genius like 
Eudoxus could easily have found alternative "mathematical hypotheses" 
of greater accuracy or simplicity. He could have experimented with 
eccentric spheres or non-uniform rotations, as later astronomers were to 
do. He could, purely as a geometrical device, have assigned a daily 
rotation to the earth, thus dispensing with eight of his spheres. He could 
have dispensed with all the spheres and talked only of the resultant 
geometrical paths (the "spherical lemniscate" in the case of the two inner 
spheres for each planet), tinkering with the velocity of the planet on this 

THE MYTH OF ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTALISM 
257 
path or with the shape of the path to improve accuracy. Finally, he could 
have dispensed with geometrical devices altogether in favor of functions 
of co-ordinate positions akin to the "zig-zag functions" of the 
Babylonians. Eudoxus did none of these things, being fIrmly committed 
to the uniform rotations of spheres centered on a stationary earth. As 
Wright says, "By tying himself to uniform motion, Eudoxus made even 
the most minor path alteration possible only at the expense of enormous 
complexity".34 But this was a price he was prepared to pay in the interests 
of giving "an explanation of what was taking place in the heavens".35 
Wright views Eudoxus's system as a piece of celestial physics. But he 
does not spell out what the physical principle underlying it actually was. 
We can extend and strengthen his case if we suppose that Eudoxus, like 
Plato, operated with a physical principle of the "inertial" rotation of any 
(frictionless) sphere. For this principle demands that we operate with 
celestial spheres rotating uniformly. We need say nothing of the 
"substance" of the spheres, except that they rotate in a frictionless 
medium. We need say nothing of the interconnections of the various 
sphere-systems, for inertially rotating nested spheres need no mechanical 
connection. Finally, we need say nothing about the causes of their 
rotations, for the continuance of an inertial rotation has no cause and 
requires no explanation. As we have seen, Eudoxus's silence on these 
points is often taken to prove his instrumentalism. But it is equally 
consistent with his adoption of a realist physical principle. 
3. ARISTOTLE 
Eudoxus's immediate successor, Aristotle, certainly did not adopt an 
instrumentalist view of astronomical theory, nor did he ascribe such a 
view to Eudoxus. Aristotle's modifIcation of Eudoxus's system was 
introduced, not to make it a better "saver of the phenomena", but to make 
it more physically coherent and reasonable. For Eudoxus the sphere-
system for each of the sun, moon and planets operated independently of 
the others. We have suggested that Eudoxus, armed with the idea of 
inertial spherical rotation, did not need to connect the various systems. 
But the fact remains that in his system it just happens to be the case that 
eight of the spheres (the stellar sphere, and the outermost sphere of each 
of the systems for the sun, moon, and planets) have the same daily 
rotation. Aristotle tries to explain this fact mechanically by adding 

258 
ALAN MUSGRAVE 
"counteracting spheres" to all but the innennost system: these somehow 
cancel out the motions of inner spheres of each system, thereby restoring 
the daily rotation to the outennost sphere of the next system. In this way 
he unifies the Eudoxian system: 
But if all the spheres in combination are to account for the phenomena, there must be 
for each of the other planets other spheres, one less in number than those already 
mentioned, which counteract these and restore to the same position the frrst sphere of 
the star which in each case is next in order below. In this way only can the combina-
tion offorces produce the motion of the planets".36 
Aristotle's system has precisely the same observational consequences as 
Eudoxus' s. 37 His modification was not introduced to improve the 
accuracy of the system, but to enhance its physical reasonableness. 
All historians, Duhem included, are well aware that Aristotle and his 
followers did not adopt an instrumentalist view of astronomical 
hypotheses. Aristotle insisted that astronomical hypotheses should not 
merely "save appearances", but should also be true descriptions of the 
nature of the heavens. He therefore laid down certain basic physical (or 
perhaps metaphysical) principles, to which any system of astronomical 
hypotheses had to confonn. For Duhem, this makes him the villain of the 
piece because he wants astronomy to be subservient to his celestial 
physics. Since these Aristotelian principles play an important role in 
subsequent debates, I will list them here: 
(1) 
Finitude: the universe is bounded by the stellar sphere, which 
carries the fixed stars. 
(2) 
Geocentrism: the earth is spherical, lies at the center of the universe, 
and is immobile. 
(3) 
Sphericity: the sun, moon, and planets are carried by invisible 
celestial spheres composed of the frictionless "quintessence". 
(4) 
Concentrism: all the heavenly spheres are concentric, so that all are 
centered on the earth like the stellar sphere. 
(5) 
Uniformity: the natural motion of all heavenly spheres is unifonn 
rotation. 
(6) 
Plenitude: the universe contains no empty space, and is just big 
enough to accommodate all the heavenly spheres. 
This way of dividing up the Aristotelian principles, together with their 
names, is not to be found in Aristotle; the reason for this particular 

THE MYTH OF ASlRONOMICAL INSlRUMENTALISM 
259 
division will become apparent as we proceed. 
Now Eudoxus's system, the modified system of Callippus, and the 
further modified system of Aristotle, all satisfy principles (1)-(6). 
Unfortunately, none of them saved all of the appearances which were 
known at the time. The retrogressions and variations in latitude that they 
yielded were far too regular. None could explain the known variation in 
the length of the seasons. But the most obvious difficulty was the 
variation in the brightness of the planets (and of the apparent size of the 
moon), which showed that they were not always the same distance from 
the earth as the principle of concentrism demanded. Sosigenes writes: 
Nevertheless the theories of Eudoxus and his followers fail to save the phenomena, 
and not only those that were noticed at a later date, but even those which were before 
known and actually accepted by the authors themselves ... I refer to the fact that the 
planets appear at times to be near to us and at times to have receded .... The moon 
also ... is clearly not always at the same distance from us.... But indeed this 
inequality in the distances of each star at different times cannot be said to have been 
unknown to the authors of the concentric theory themselves. For Polemarchus of 
Cyzicus appears to be aware of it .... Aristotle, too, shows that he is conscious of it 
when, in the Physical Problems, he discusses objections arisini from the fact that even 
the sizes of the planets do not appear to be the same always".3 
The objection from varying planetary distances, which later theories 
could deal with, eventually led to the overthrow of the hypothesis of 
concentric spheres. 
It is worth dwelling on this objection, for it reveals an important 
difference between the Eudoxian system interpreted realistically and the 
same system interpreted instrumentally. If we assume that the spheres are 
real, then the theory (together with some uncontroversial additional 
assumptions) yields the prediction that the apparent brightness of the 
planets should not vary since they really are always at the same distance 
from the earth. The observed variations refute this prediction, and with it 
the hypothesis of concentric spheres (assuming, of course, that the blame 
cannot be pinned on the additional assumptions).39 But if we assume that 
the spheres are a mere geometrical device, that the planets only move as if 
they were fixed on Eudoxian spheres, then no such prediction follows.40 
True, the system thus interpreted will not entail brightness variations: 
these will remain an appearance which cannot be saved. But the statement 
''Theory T fails to save appearance A" is ambiguous: it might mean that T 
fails to imply A (without implying not-A); and it might mean that T 
implies not-A (and so is contradicted by A). The former interpretation is 

260 
ALAN MUSGRAVE 
weaker than the latter: in the former case A merely represents a 'limit of 
applicability' of the theory, whereas in the latter case A represents a 
refutation of the theory. The objection from brightness-variation is a 
much stronger objection to Eudoxian systems of concentric spheres 
interpreted realistically (for it refutes them), than it is to those systems 
interpreted instrumentally (for it merely shows a limit of their ap-
plicability). 
Historically the objection was taken very seriously. It was taken to 
show the complete inadequacy of any system of concentric spheres, and 
not merely to show that such systems could not be applied to phenomena 
of apparent sizes. And this suggests that subsequent astronomers adopted 
a realistic interpretation of the celestial spheres. 
4. PTOLEMY 
The failure of any system of concentric spheres to "save the appearance" 
of varying brightness led subsequent astronomers to propose new 
hypotheses, all of which departed in varying degrees from Aristotelian 
principles. These new developments culminated in the Ptolemaic system, 
in which some of the new ideas were accepted, some were rejected, and 
some were introduced for the first time. I will briefly summarize the main 
developments, before asking whether an instrumentalist tradition began 
during this period. 
Aristotle's contemporary Herakleides suggested that the limited 
elongations and periods of Mercury and Venus could be explained if they 
revolved about the sun, which in tum revolved around the earth. This 
could also explain (qualitatively) their retrogressions, and the fact that 
they are nearer and hence brighter when they retrogress. Apollonius 
extended the idea to the superior planets: since these do not share the 
annual period of the sun, they cannot revolve around the sun; instead they 
revolve around points, which in tum revolve around the earth in varying 
periods. Thus the idea of the (major) epicycle was born. Apollonius and 
Ptolemy applied the idea to Mercury and Venus also, saying that they too 
moved on epicycles whose centers moved around the earth. In doing so, 
they lost the Herakleidean explanation of their limited elongations and 
their sharing of the sun's period: these had to be explained separately by 
saying that the deferents of Mercury and Venus share the sun's annual 
period, and that the centers of their epicycles remain colinear with the 

THE MYTH OF AS1RONOMICAL INS1RUMENTALISM 
261 
sun's center. Major epicycles violated Aristotle's principle of con-
centrism, since the epicyclic spheres (or circles) were not earth-centered. 
Aristotle's principle had to be watered down to: 
(4*) Concentrism*: all the major (non-epicyclic) spheres are concentric. 
Herakleides is also credited with the idea that the daily motions of all the 
heavenly bodies might be explained as a sort of optical illusion produced 
by the earth's daily rotation on its axis. Aristarchus accepted the idea, and 
added that the earth and the other planets revolve about the sun. 
Notoriously, heliocentric astronomy found little favor among the Greeks, 
and does not seem to have been much developed. Equally notoriously, it 
was rejected on realist grounds: it clashed with Aristotle's principle of 
geocentrism, and made nonsense of his terrestrial physics. Historians with 
instrumentalist sympathies have made much of this, as we will see.41 
Hipparchus saw that the epicycle-idea CQuid be extended to explain the 
inequality of the seasons. He placed the sun on a minor epicycle rotating 
once a year from East to West while the deferent rotates once a year from 
West to East. And he saw that the orbit produced by this system was 
actually a circle whose center was displaced from or eccentric to that of 
the earth by an amount equal to the radius of the minor epicycle. Thus 
two systems of hypotheses, the minor epicycle and the eccentric deferent, 
saved the phenomena equally well. Hipparchus preferred the former, 
because it "better conformed to the nature of things".42 Ptolemy preferred 
the latter, because it "is more simple and assumes only a single movement 
and not two".43 Hipparchus retained the modified principle of con-
centrism (concentrism*), Ptolemy did not. Duhem makes much of this, as 
we will see. 
Ptolemy's fmal device was his own invention: the notorious equant. In 
order to account for residual speed variations of the superior planets, 
Ptolemy assumed that the rotation of their deferents is uniform not with 
respect to their centers but with respect to an equant point displaced from 
the center. The device was used in conjunction with a major epicycle (to 
explain retrogressions) and an eccentric deferent (actually the earth and 
the equant point were equidistant from the center but on opposite sides of 
it). The introduction of the equant marks a momentous break with 
tradition, since it renounces the principle of uniformity which had 
dominated astronomy since the Pythagoreans and Plato. We will have 
more to say about it later. 

262 
ALAN MUSGRAVE 
As is well-known, by using combinations of these devices, Ptolemy 
was able to give a remarkably accurate representation of the motions of 
the sun, moon, and planets. The fit was never quite perfect, and further 
adjustments had to be made: the most accurate of the "Ptolemaic systems" 
involved over 80 circular motions. But the details of Ptolemaic systems 
will only concern us insofar as they bear upon the question: was Ptolemy 
a realist or an instrumentalist?44 
Duhem has no doubt about the answer: 
How, exactly, are we to understand the relation between these hypotheses [of 
Ptolemy] and the principles of physics? Or, to put it differently, what restrictive 
conditions can physics still impose on the hypotheses of astronomy? This is a question 
over which Ptolemy, more geometer and astronomer than philosopher, does not 
linger .... The astronomer, intent on fmding hypotheses that will do the job of saving 
the apparent movements of the stars, has no guide except the rule of maximum 
simplicity .... Certainly, Ptolemy means ... that the many motions he compounds in 
the Syntaxis to determine the trajectory of a planet have no physical reality .... The 
various revolutions - in concentric or eccentric circles or in epicycles - which we put 
together to obtain the paths of the planets are contrivances assembled with a view to 
saving the phenomena by means of the simplest hypotheses we can fmd. We must be 
very much on our guard against the idea that these mechanical constructions have the 
least reality up in the sky ... the planets trace out their more or less complicated 
trajectory, without any rigid spheres to guide them on their course.45 
And Duhem has not lacked supporters in this interpretation, as the 
following passages show: 
This observation of Ptolemy (or Hipparchus) [of the equivalence of eccentric and 
minor epicycle] represents an interesting point of view of which we get occasional 
glimpses in antiquity: that it is the job of the astronomer (and the mathematical 
scientist in general) to present the most economical mathematical system that will 
account for the phenomena, without regard necessarily for the real nature of the 
system46 
Ptolemy ..... saved the phenomena" better than anyone had ever done before; but 
unfortunately his hypotheses were in flat contradiction with the principles of 
Aristotelian physics. The men who accepted Aristotelian physics were confronted 
with a dilemma. Several ancient thinkers resolved the difficulty by resorting to a 
nonrealistic interpretation of astronomical hypotheses. Ptolemy himself had already 
proposed such an interpretation in the Syntaxis (Almagest). We are not to suppose that 
there is really any physical system of spheres in the heavens. Astronomy is simply a 
mathematical device for calculating the apparent motions. It makes no claim that the 
motions it supposes in its hypotheses are the "real" motions. Among alternative 
systems that equally enable us to "save the phenomena", that is to be preferred which 

THE MYTH OF AS1RONOMICAL INS1RUMENTALISM 
263 
is the simplest. That is the only test to be imposed. Confonnity with physical fact is 
not necessary.47 
... it is only fair to Ptolemy, that great scientist, to remark that he probably 
understood quite well that his answer [to Plato's problem) was only a mathematical 
construction without claim to be an absolutely true representation of the motions of 
the heavenly bodies.48 
Ptolemy continually seeks to chart and predict "the appearances" - the points of 
light on the celestial globe. The Almagest abandons any attempt to explain the 
machinery behind these appearances. Apollonius, Hipparchus, and Claudius Ptolemy 
... decide in favor of inventing abstract mathematic devices. They view the provision 
of an explanation of celestial motions as beyond human powers .... 49 
The great astronomers of the ancient world ... - Eudoxus, Apollonius, Hipparchos, 
Claudius Ptolemy - could predict where planets and stars would appear at future 
dates. But each explicitly rules out the possibility of explaining the physics behind the 
apparent motions of the cosmos .... Indeed, the history of planetary theory could be 
viewed as conceptual struggle between two opposed forces, the urge to explain and 
the urge to predict.... Ptolemy sacrificed a philosophically coherent and unified 
picture of the heavens in favor of an accurate instrument of forecast ... 
Ptolemy stressed that he could never hope to explain the wanderings of the planets. 
His inspiration was only to fmd a geometrical calculus through which he might 
forecast when next a given planet would halt in its eastward motion, "back-up" a few 
degrees, and then continue forward again. Understanding beyond this exceeded 
Ptolemy's objectives. The Almagest was but a computational machine; it had some 
success in saying when celestial events might occur, but did not even undertake to ask 
why they occurred. 50 
Aristarchus is the last prominent philosopher or astronomer of the Greek world who 
seriously attempted to find the physically true system of the world. After him we fmd 
various ingenious mathematical theories ... whose authors by degrees came to look on 
these combinations of circular motion as a mere means of computing the position of 
each planet at any moment, without insisting on the actual physical truth of the 
system. Three names stand out ... Apollonius (B.C. 230), Hipparchus (B.C. 130), and 
Ptolemy (A.D. 140) .... 
Hipparchus merely considered the motions of the planets from the mathematical 
point of view without troubling himself about the physical truth of his combinations 
of circles .... To the Greek mind, the theory [of Ptolemy] must have had a grave 
defect: the principle of rigorously uniform motion had been violated, ... by introduc-
ing a point outside the center of the deferent, with regard to which the angular motion 
was uniform .... This was perfectly indefensible from a physical point of view but 
was of course mathematically quite admissible .... The fact (which cannot possibly 
have escaped Hipparchus and Ptolemy) that their lunar theory demanded excessive 
variations of the moon's distance, and thereby of its apparent diameter, which never 
happened in reality, shows that they did not look on their work as a real system of the 

264 
ALAN MUSGRA VB 
world, but merely as an aid to computation.51 
Ptolemy ... was content to "save appearances" and did not speculate about the 
underlying fabric of the heavens. He did not even care ... whether the mathematical 
constructions he used for astronomical purposes were consistent with one another .... 
Whenever two constructions yields equivalent mathematical results, there was, in 
Ptolemy's view, no astronomical difference between them ... we are at liberty to 
account for the one anomaly in terms of "eccentrics" and the other in terms of 
"epicycles" - whichever way round we please. So far as Ptolemy is concerned, the 
question of the physical reality or unreality of these motions is beside the point ... 
From the physicist's point of view, the equant was a very unsatisfactory device. 
Mathematically it might do a job, but there was something intrinsically unreasonable 
about it ... Ptolemy ... thought physics irrelevant to astronomy, and confmed himself 
to mathematics.52 
On the one hand was the subject of descriptive and physical cosmology, 
predominantly Aristotelian .... On the other hand was the highly complex mathemati-
cal theory concerned with the phenomenological determination and prediction of the 
irregularities of planetary motions .... We shall call this mathematical theory 
"Ptolemaic Theory", ... There are many widespread misconceptions about this 
Ptolemaic Theory ... First, there never was such a thing ... as a Ptolemaic System. 
The complex mathematical theory is arranged so as to deal with each planet separately 
and individually. There is no single mathematical connection between these several 
models, only a general similarity in the methods used for each.53 
... the system of the Almagest, mathematically brilliant as it was, had fatal - not 
merely serious - defects: it did not calculate (or even provide a basis for calculating) 
the actual distances of any of the heavenly bodies except the sun and moon; it treated 
each member of the solar system separately from all the others, without attempting to 
give an integrated picture; and above all it provided no foundation on which a Newton 
could construct a unified description of the universe in physical terms, for it was 
purely geometrical in character.54 
There is no doubt that a strong case can be made for the view that 
Ptolemy was an instrumentalist concerning astronomical theory. First, 
there is the sheer complexity of the geometrical devices: can they really 
have been intended as a realistic description of the physics of the 
heavens? Second, there is his appeal to 'simplicity' to decide between 
observationally-equivalent devices (of which Duhem makes much). 
Third, there is the absence (in the Almagest) of any speculation about the 
reality of the devices or about how they worked mechanically. Fourth, 
there is the fact that (in the Almagest) the theories for the sun, moon and 
planets were worked out quite independently of one another. Fifth, there 
is the fact that the theory of the moon realistically interpreted yielded an 

THE MYTH OF ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTAUSM 
265 
obviously false prediction about the variation in its apparent size; that 
Ptolemy ignored the defect means, surely, that he did not intend the 
theory to be interpreted realistically. Sixth, there is the introduction of the 
equant, an absurd device from a realist point of view, but perfectly 
acceptable from an instrumentalist point of view. 
And yet the instrumentalist interpretation is wrong. This can be shown, 
above all, by considering another work of Ptolemy's, the Planetary 
Hypotheses, in which he tackled exactly those problems which an 
instrumentalist ought to have ignored. 55 It is interesting that Duhem never 
discusses this other work of Ptolemy's in his To Save the Phenomena. 
Elsewhere he does give an account of it. But instead of revising his 
instrumentalist interpretation of Ptolemy's Almagest, he fathers the 
inconsistency upon Ptolemy himself: 
One could conceive the hypotheses of astronomy as simple mathematical fictions 
which the geometer combines in order to render the celestial movements accessible to 
his calculations. Or one could view them as the description of Concrete bodies, of 
movements actually realized.... On the subject of astronomical hypotheses, the 
author of the Almagest ... adopted the first of these two opinions. On the contrary, 
however, ... the author of the Hypotheses [0/ the Planets] ... desired that the 
hypotheses imagined ... should correspond to the true movements of really existing 
solid or fluid bodies.56 
Duhem is well aware, of course, that the 'two authors' here are one and 
the same personl 
Several other historians have followed Duhem in ascribing inconsistent 
views to Ptolemy: 
Here [in the Almagest] we see Ptolemy resigned to an attitude which could be called 
that of a relativist or rather a positivist: we must do our best to give the simplest 
description possible of complex phenomena which in any case are outside the region 
where the usual notions of understanding or explanation are applicable. But this was 
not Ptolemy's entire view of the matter. In a later book, Planetary Hypotheses, he 
abandons the purely descriptive attitude and propounds some ideas about the possible 
physical structure and causes governing the planetary system .... Two souls dwell 
together in the breast of many a scientist ... 57 
It took no fewer than thirty-nine wheels within wheels to account for the motions, 
some of the wheels very abstract indeed, like Ptolemy's "equant circle" which 
regularized speeds not at all regular on the deferents: but after all, if it was a 
mathematical model, those were permissible devices. 
But was it a mathematical model after all? Centuries of use made it familiar, and it 
began to be felt as something real ... Ptolemy, in his Hypotheses on the Planets, 

266 
ALAN MUSGRAVE 
wonders what kind of crystalline substance the skies might be, what kind of axles they 
need in their turning ... Geocentrism had become for him a reality.58 
In this work [the Almagest] the author takes the purely formal standpoint that it is 
his task to represent the motions of the heavenly bodies by mathematical means, and 
he is so consistent in this that he even ignores the limitations in the nature of the 
permissible means which had been postulated on religious grounds by Plato and on 
physical grounds by Aristotle. Indeed, the circulus aequans is merely a very 
transparent concealment of his rejection of the axiom of the uniformity of all celestial 
motions, consecrated by these two authorities .. . 
But Ptolemy is a bundle of contradictions ... in a later work on planetary motion 
(the Hypotheses Planetarum) his standpoint in relation to the physical reality of the 
astronomical hypotheses was quite different from the one he had taken in the 
Almagest.59 
Now it is possible that both interpretations are correct, and that Ptolemy 
was "a bundle of contradictions". Perhaps there were two Ptolemys, the 
instrumentalist author of the Almagest, and the realist author of the 
Planetary Hypotheses. 
But there is another possibility: perhaps the author of the Almagest was 
not an instrumentalist after all, so that the 'bundle of contradictions' 
exists only in the minds of his recent readers. Some historians have 
reached this conclusion, albeit tentatively: 
The epicyclic system was purely mathematical; it said nothing about any mechanical 
spheres (though it did not in any way exclude their use), nor about any mechanical 
model ... Ptolemy retained Aristotle's sublunary and the distinction between celestial 
and terrestrial physics; indeed, there is good evidence that he believed in the existence 
of crystalline spheres for each planet, though in the Almagest, which is purely 
mathematical, he does not say so.60 
Because of the abstract character of the Almagest, Ptolemy has often been called a 
theoretician .... However, in his Planetary Hypotheses written sometime after the 
Almagest, Ptolemy subscribed to a physical universe composed of spheres. Each 
sphere, he though, is a spherical shell containing several ethereal bodies representing 
the deferent and the epicycle, with some additional bodies to keep the latter in the 
correct place.61 
But there is really no need to be so tentative. Ptolemy's Almagest is not 
"purely mathematical" or "abstract". On the contrary, there is ample 
evidence from the Almagest alone that it was not the work of an in-
strumentalist. 
The Almagest begins with a list of five basic assumptions: 

THE MYTH OF AS1RONOMICAL INS1RUMENTALISM 
267 
(1) that the heaven is spherical in fonn and rotates as a sphere; (2) that the earth, too, 
viewed as a complete whole, is spherical in fonn; (3) that it is situated in the middle of 
the whole heaven,like a center; (4) that by reason of its size and its distance from the 
sphere of the ftxed stars the earth bears to this ~here the relation of a point; (5) that 
the earth does not participate in any locomotion. 
We have here an endorsement of some of Aristotle's physical principles: 
Ptolemy's (1), (2), (3) and (5) amount to Aristotle's principles ofJinitude 
and geocentrism (Ptolemy's (4) explains the absence of stellar parallax as 
we move about on the surface of the earth). It is clear from Ptolemy's 
subsequent discussion of his assumptions that they are proposed as true 
descriptions of the structure of the heavens. Ptolemy defends the truth of 
these assumptions on astronomical and physical grounds, in a very 
Aristotelian fashion. The stellar sphere, at any rate, is meant to be real: 
First of all we must premise, as regards the name ["ftxed stars"], that, since the stars 
themselves always appear to keep the same ftgures and the same distances from each 
other, we may fairly call them "ftxed", but, on the other hand, seeing that their whole 
sphere on which they are carried round as if they had grown upon it, appears itself to 
have an ordered movement of its own in the direct order of the signs, that is, towards 
the east, it would not be right to describe the sphere itself also as "ftxed".63 
Nor is there any doubt of Ptolemy's initial commitment to Aristotle's 
principle of regularity: 
... it is ... the aim of the mathematician to show forth all the appearances of the 
heavens as products of regular and circular motions ... [and to] separate out the 
particular regular motions from the anomaly which seems to result from the 
hypothesis of circles, and show forth their apparent movements as a combination and 
union of all together ... 
[It is] necessary to assume in general that the motions of the planets in the direction 
contrary to the movement of the heavens are all regular and circular by nature, like the 
movement of the universe in the other direction. Their apparent irregularities result 
from the positions and arrangements of the circles on their spheres through which they 
produce these movements ... 64 
Here, notice, the various circular motions of the planets are said to be 
brought about by the rotations of spheres. (Of course, Ptolemy's endorse-
ments of the principle of regularity make his introduction of the equant 
even more mysterious). 
And finally, there is no doubt of Ptolemy's commitment to the 
Aristotelian thesis that the earth really is immobile. After arguing the 
point in Aristotelian fashion, Ptolemy considers the alternative hypothesis 

268 
ALAN MUSGRA VB 
of the earth's daily rotation: 
Certain thinkers, though they have nothing to oppose to the above arguments, have 
concocted a scheme which they consider more acceptable, and they think that no 
evidence can be brought against them if they suggest for the sake of argument that the 
heaven is motionless, but that the earth rotates about one and the same axis from the 
west to east, completing one revolution approximately every day .... These persons 
forget, however, that, while, so far as appearances in the stellar world are concerned, 
there might, perhaps, be no objection to this theory in the simpler form, yet, to judge 
by the conditions affecting ourselves and those in the air about us, such a hypothesis 
must be seen to be quite ridiculous. 
Ptolemy does not object to the hypothesis on instrumentalist grounds: he 
admits that it might "save the appearances", and he never even broaches 
the question of its "simplicity". Instead, his objections are thoroughly 
realistic Aristotelian ones: if the earth rotated on its axis "clouds and any 
of the things that fly or can be thrown could never be seen travelling 
towards the east, because the earth would always be anticipating them all 
and forestalling their motion towards the east".65 Here, then, was one 
"hypothesis" that Ptolemy was not prepared to consider. Obviously, he is 
quite willing to subordinate astronomical hypotheses to two of Aristotle's 
physical principles. 
Perhaps Ptolemy was already schizophrenic when he wrote the 
Almagest: a realist about the "two-sphere system" of the earth and the 
stellar sphere, but an instrumentalist when it came to the problem of the 
planets. Ptolemy's Planetary Hypotheses shows this to be mistaken. 
There he tries to describe a physical mechanism for epicyclic motion: the 
epicycle is a sphere to which the planet is fixed, which rotates like a ball-
bearing between the inner and outer surfaces of two further concentric 
spheres which are typically eccentric to the earth.66 Ptolemy makes it 
clear that each of these spheres has its own proper rotation, and is not 
moved by anything external to itself: his analogy is with birds, which are 
also self-moving: 
There is no cogent reason whatsoever to assume that the motions of ... birds occur 
through their mutual contact. On the contrary, one has to postulate that they do not 
touch one another in order that they should not be a mutual hindrance to each other. 
Similarly, we have to suppose that among the celestial bodies each planet possesses 
for itself a vital force and moves itself and imparts motion to the bodies united with it 
by nature.67 
Ptolemy had already made it clear, in the Almagest, that these various 

THE MYTH OF ASlRONOMICAL INSlRUMENTALISM 
269 
rotating spheres will not interfere with one another (since all are com-
posed of Aristotle's frictionless quintessence) and that there is no 
difficulty about an epicyclic sphere rotating in one direction while being 
carried in another: 
Let no one judge the real difficulties of the hypotheses in tenns of the constructions 
we have devised. It is not fitting to compare things human with things divine .... For 
is there anything that differs more from changeless beings than beings that are 
constantly changing? Or is there anything that differs more from beings which are 
interfered with by the entire universe than the beings which do not interfere with 
themselves? 
So long as we attend to these models, which we have put together, we fmd the 
composition and succession of the various motions awkward. To set them up in such a 
way that each motion can be freely accomplished hardly seems feasible. But when we 
study what happens in the sky, we are not at all disturbed by such a mixture of 
motions. In the region where these movements occur there is no essence naturally 
endowed with the power to oppose such movements. What is found there yields with 
indifference to the natural movement of every planet and allows it to pass even though 
the several movements occur in different directions. So all the stars can pass and all 
can be perceived through the fluids which are there homogeneously spread out 68 
So the rotations of the various spheres are natural or intrinsic to them, and 
they occur in a region where nothing can disturb or interfere with them. It 
follows, Ptolemy thinks, that any apparatus of "counteracting spheres" 
such as Aristotle's is physically unnecessary: 
And senseless, too, are the counteracting spheres, not to mention the enonnous 
increase in numbers which they bring about. For they occupy much space in the aether 
and are not necessary for the explanation of the planetary motions.69 
Finally, Ptolemy points out that for his physical model of epicyclic 
motion complete spheres are not really necessary: the system will work if 
we have instead merely slices of spheres. This is what he actually 
proposes: 
It is not proper to suppose that there are in nature superfluous things which do not 
make sense, namely, complete spheres for motions for which a small part of these 
spheres would suffice.70 
Let us dwell on these appeals to parsimony or simplicity for a moment. 
Ptolemy preferred the eccentric to the observationally-equivalent (minor) 
epicycle because it was "simpler", it involved only one motion and not 
two. Duhem and his followers see this as indicating Ptolemy's instrumen-

270 
ALAN MUSGRAVE 
talism. But the appeal to "simplicity" need not be indicative of instrumen-
talism. If one has a metaphysical belief in the simplicity of nature, then 
simplicity indicates truth and an appeal to it is indicative of realism. And 
this, as we can see, was precisely the case with Ptolemy. Thus one of the 
chief arguments for his instrumentalism evaporates. 
The rest of the Planetary Hypotheses fmds Ptolemy studying the 
arrangement, distances, and sizes of the heavenly bodies. He knows the 
absolute distances to the moon and the sun.?} He cannot measure the 
distances to the planets or the stars, since they show no parallax. The rule 
for ordering the planets (the longer the period, the further from the earth) 
is ambiguous concerning Mercury and Venus, which in geocentric 
astronomy have an (average) period of one year like the sun. And the 
theory of the Almagest gives him only the relative sizes of major 
epicycles and deferents. 
Ptolemy solves the problem by invoking the Aristotelian principle of 
plenitude and by taking a realist view of the epicycles. Ptolemy observes 
that there is an empty space between the moon and the sun, which might 
just be filled by the epicycle systems of Mercury and Venus: 
Mercury and Venus must be located not above the sun, but between the sun and the 
moon, lest this space, which is so vast in accordance with appearance and also with 
our conclusions about the distances, remain empty as though nature had forgotten and 
neglected it, and hence made no use of it. Yet it is capable of encompassing the 
distances of both the above-mentioned planets, which are nearer than the others to the 
earth, so that this space is exactly filled by the two planets alone.72 
Ptolemy's idea is that the greatest distance to the moon is the same as the 
least distance to Mercury; we add the diameter of Mercury's major 
epicycle to obtain its greatest distance; and this in turn is the least distance 
to Venus. The calculations give a least distance to the sun of 1079 earth 
radii, which quite independent calculations set at 1160 earth radii. The 
discrepancy is only 5%. Ptolemy suggests that the distance to the moon 
might have been slightly underestimated, pointing out that a very small 
error here could account for the discrepancy. 73 Obviously, the same idea 
can be extended to the outer planets, to yield eventually an estimate of the 
distance to the stellar sphere and thus of the size of the universe. This is 
precisely what Ptolemy does in the recently discovered portion of his 
Planetary Hypotheses.74 He also proceeds to calculate, from the distances 
and apparent sizes, the absolute sizes of the various planets and stars. The 
methodological interest of all this is, of course, that it shows "that the 

THE MYTH OF AS1RONOMICAL INS1RUMENTALISM 
271 
Ptolemaic System is indeed the creation of Ptolemy" (as Goldstein puts 
it).7S The idea that Ptolemy treated the motions of the sun, moon and 
planets separately, and was not interested in combining the various 
theories into a unified system, is seen to be mistaken. It remains true that 
the Almagest contains nothing about the absolute distances and sizes of 
the planets: but in the absence of measurable parallaxes, what else could 
Ptolemy do? It is also worth stressing that it is essential, for Ptolemy's 
calculations to go through, that we assume that the epicycles of the 
various planets are real things in the heavens: mere 'geometric fictions' 
would not have yielded him his ratios of minimum and maximum 
distances. 
If we review the case for Ptolemy's instrumentalism which I sum-
marized above (on page 264), we can see that most of it has been 
answered. Despite the complexity of the devices, Ptolemy did interpret 
them realistically. His appeal to simplicity was a reflection of a metaphysi-
cal belief in the simplicity of nature. And what is missing from the 
Almagest (an account of the mechanics of epicyclic motion and how the 
planetary systems are related) is provided in the Planetary Hypotheses. 
Two arguments remain: the blatant falsity of Ptolemy's theory of the 
moon. when realistically interpreted; and the fact that his introduction of 
the equant is hard to reconcile with his realism. 
I do not know what to say in answer to the first point, except that the 
proposal of a false theory does not make one an instrumentalist. (Nor, I 
might add, does the retention of a false theory merely as an 'appearance-
saver' while one searches for a better theory). 
The introduction of the equant poses a real problem for anyone wishing 
to maintain that Ptolemy was a realist. Its introduction is something of a 
mystery. The effect of the equant is basically the same as that of the 
eccentric deferent: it yields speed variations around the deferent as seen 
from the earth. So if speed variations were the only problem, it would 
seem that Ptolemy had only to increase the eccentricity of the deferents. 
Unfortunately, however, observed variations in apparent sizes of planets 
limit the extent to which the earth can be displaced from the centers of 
their deferents: make the earth too eccentric, and planets will come too 
close to it during retrogressions. Ptolemy's equant solves the problem by 
increasing the speed variation from earth without decreasing the minimum 
earth-planet distance. Notice that if this is the explanation of Ptolemy's 
introducing the equant, then it was necessitated by taking a realist view of 
the eccentrics and epicycles.16 Yet it was a desperate solution for a realist 

272 
ALAN MUSGRAVE 
to propose. The principle of unifonnity was now abandoned: the "deferent 
sphere" (or the concentric slices of spheres bounding the epicycle sphere) 
no longer rotates at unifonn speed with respect to its center. The basic 
physical principle of Greek astronomy is gone, and with it the physical 
explanation of planetary motions. 
Incidentally, it is no wonder that Ptolemy's Arab followers, who were 
realists, sought to dispense with the equant. Several of them did succeed 
in this.?7 Theirs was, of course, the same problem which inspired 
Copernicus's revival of heliocentrism. 
5. ASlRONOMICAL INSlRUMENT ALISM OR ASlRONOMICAL SKEPTICISM 
So far I have criticized the Duhemian orthodoxy that the great 
astronomers of Greece - Plato, Eudoxus, Callippus, Apollonius, Hippar-
chus, and Ptolemy - adopted an instrumentalist view of their science. But 
the possibility remains that an instrumentalist tradition concerning 
astronomy developed subsequently. As we have seen, the problem facing 
astronomers was that astronomical systems which confonned to all of 
Aristotle's physical principles could not "save the appearances", while 
systems which best "saved appearances" violated some of Aristotle's 
physical principles. The problem was, in short, the clash between 
Aristotelian physics and Ptolemaic (not to mention heliocentric) 
astronomy. Now one possible solution (or rather dissolution) of this 
problem is to adopt an instrumentalist view of astronomy.?8 The question 
now before us is whether the problem was dissolved in this way and by 
whom. 
Duhem certainly thinks that it was, and enlists a pretty mixed bunch of 
thinkers to the instrumentalist camp, including Proclus, Simplicius, 
Maimonides, Aquinas, and Nicolas of Cusa before the time of Coper-
nicus, and Osiander, Ursus, and Cardinal Bellarmine afterwards. Duhem's 
claims have been endorsed, wholly or partly, by many other scholars.?9 
It would be a large undertaking to give a detailed account of the views 
of all those recruited to the instrumentalist camp by Duhem and his 
followers. And it would certainly be an undertaking beyond my historical 
competence. Fortunately, however, the undertaking is not really neces-
sary. For two papers have recently appeared which cast serious doubt on 
the view that astronomical instrumentalism developed after Ptolemy and 
before Copernicus. In his "Saving the Appearances" Lloyd shows that the 

THE MYTH OF ASlRONOMICAL INSlRUMENTALISM 
273 
two most important sources for astronomical instrumentalism, and for the 
alleged divorce between instrumentalist astronomy and realist physics, 
have been grossly mis-interpreted. The sources in question are Proclus 
and Simplicius, and Lloyd shows that both of these thinkers were realists. 
And in his ''The Forgoing of Modem Realism: Clavius and Kepler 
Against the Sceptics" Jardine shows that the methodological disputes 
which did occur were disputes between dogmatic realists and skeptical 
realists, not between realists and instrumentalists. Jardine also points out 
that we can hardly attribute instrumentalism to those (like Peucer, 
Reinhold, and Pretorious) who denied or were non-committal about the 
truth of Copernican astronomy while insisting on the usefulness of some 
of Copernicus's hypotheses. If the arguments and interpretations of these 
two papers are correct (and I for one think they are), then the instrumen-
talist tradition in Hellenistic astronomy turns out to be nothing but a 
historical myth. There were no fully-fledged instrumentalists concerning 
astronomical theory at all. They were disappointed realists who admitted 
the instrumental value of theories they thought false (local instrumen-
talists). There were critical realists who claimed that astronomical 
theories were hypotheses which could not be established as true. But 
neither of these is correctly identified as an instrumentalist. And if there 
were no instrumentalists, there cannot have been a great debate between 
instrumentalists and realists. There was a methodological debate, 
however, between dogmatic and critical realists. And there was a 
substantive debate, again among realists, concerning the clash between 
Ptolemaic astronomy and Aristotelian physics. This problem, like the later 
problem of the clash between Copernican astronomy and Aristotelian 
physics, was a fruitful problem. Astronomical instrumentalism, if it had 
been adopted, would have dissolved these fruitful problems. And hence, 
contrary to Duhem, it would have been a far from progressive doctrine. 
Who, then, are the real instrumentalists, those who are instrumentalists 
on principle? Well, there is Bishop Berkeley, whose immaterialist 
metaphysics gave God a secure place in the scheme of things but 
necessitated a demotion of the aspirations of natural science There is 
Mach, who retained the idealist metaphysics without the theological 
underpinnings (thereby rendering it, it could be argued, a much weaker 
metaphysics). And there is Duhem himself, who made no secret of the 
fact that his was the "Physics of a Believer" and who was forced to spice 
his instrumentalism with a whiff of realism to do justice to the practice of 
the physicists he so admired. This is not a long and distinguished 

274 
ALAN MUSGRAVE 
pedigree, but a pathetically short one. The fact is that science is a realist 
enterprise, and that most scientists would not think it worth a candle if it 
were not. 
University of Otago 
Dunedin 
New Zealand 
NOTES 
1 'Realism and Instrumentalism', p. 296. 
2 'Realism and Instrumentalism', p. 280. 
3 'Realism and Instrumentalism', p. 289. 
4 Simplicius, Commentary on Aristotle's De Caelo, II, 12, 292bl0 (as translated by 
Duhem, To Save the Phenomena, p. 5). 
5 Constellations and Conjectures, pp. 50-51. 
6 Theon of Smyrna attributes this theory to Pythagoras, and Chalcidius says it was 
known to Pythagoras that the planets "are fixed in their own spheres and so carried 
around": see Heath, Aristarchus, p. 270. 
7 Many historians say that Copernicus remained agnostic about the reality of the 
heavenly spheres; a few historians even say that he dispensed with them. But the title 
of his book was, after all, On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, and not, for 
example, On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Bodies. Furthermore, Copernicus's 
statement of the 'Principle of Regularity' refers unambiguously to the rotation of a 
sphere in the same place, rather than to motion in a circle: "We now note that the 
motion of heavenly bodies is circular. Rotation is natural to a sphere and by that very 
act is its shape expressed. For here we deal with the simplest kind of body, wherein 
neither beginning nor end may be discerned nor, if it rotate ever in the same place, 
may the one be distinguished from the other". (De Revolutionibus, I, 4). Finally, it is 
hard to understand why Copernicus attributed his 'third motion' to the earth (the 
annual conical rotation of the axis) unless he thought that the earth was carried round 
the sun by a rotating sphere (see Koyre, The Astronomical Revolution, pp. 88-9, 
footnote 58). 
8 The sphere makes an observable difference only in the case of the moon, which if it 
is fixed upon a rotating sphere will always show the same face towards us - which it 
does. For this scrap of evidence for the reality of the lunar sphere, see Aristotle, De 
Caelo, 290a26 (also Burnet, Greek Philosophy, pp. 226-7). 
9 Popper, Objective Knowledge, p. 176. 
10 Constellations and Conjectures, pp. 117-9. 
11 Geminus,lsagogue, I, 19-21 (translated by Heath, Aristarchus, p. 269). 
12 This is the theory of the RepUblic, 616c-617b. 
13 This is the theory of the Timaeus, 38c-4Od. For an excellent account of the theory, 
see Vlastos, Plato's Universe. 

THE MYTH OF ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTALISM 
275 
14 Timaeus, 39d and 4Oc-d Here Plato refers to conjunctions and oppositions, stations 
and retrogressions, occultations and eclipses. He cannot explain many of these 
phenomena (nor can his theory explain the known inequality in the length of the 
seasons). 
IS Republic, 529c-53Oc. 
16 It is tempting to go further, and to try to identify the celestial spheres with the 
forms (an interpretation which might be extended to Plato's geometrical atomism). 
But I doubt whether this is consistent with all of the Platonic texts. 
17 Peterson and PiliI, Early Physics and Astronomy, p. 69. 
18 Duhem, To Save the Phenomena, p. 7. 
19 Duhem, To Save the Phenomena, p. 114. 
20 Heath, Aristarchus, pp. 195-6. Elsewhere Heath says: ''The spheres which move 
each planet Eudoxus made quite separate from those which move the others ... The 
hypothesis was purely mathematical; Eudoxus did not trouble himself about the 
material of the spheres or their mechanical connection". (Greek Mathematics, vol. I, 
p.331). 
21 Dreyer, History of Astronomy, p. 91. 
22 Cohen and Drabkin, Source Book in Greek Science, p. 102. Earlier (p. 91, footnote 
2) Cohen and Drabkin say: "When the Greek astronomers attempted to resolve the 
observed motions of the heavenly bodies into component motions of various spheres, 
some considered the spheres as purely geometrical constructs or devices for the 
representation of the observed motion, whereas others attributed physical reality to the 
whole mechanism. Among the former was Eudoxus, among the latter Aristotle" .... 
23 Lloyd, Early Greek Science, p. 92. 
24 Blake, 'Theory of Hypothesis among Renaissance Astronomers' , p. 22. 
2S Hall and Hall, A Brief History of Science, p. 38. 
26 Coleman, Early Theories of the Universe, pp. 30-31. 
27 Santillana, Origins of Scientific Thought, pp. 244-5. 
28 Sambursky, The Physical World of the Greeks, p. 60. Elsewhere we are told: 
"Plato's disciples were confronted with a geometrical problem, and the solutions 
offered by Eudoxus and Callippus were obviously restricted to this purely geometrical 
aspect in a merely descriptive way. Aristotle, the realist, aimed at a more ambitious 
goal ... ". ('Conceptual Developments and Modes of Explanation in later Greek 
Scientific Thought', p. 65). 
29 Hanson, Constellations and Conjectures, pp. 49 and 57-8. In a footnote Hanson 
remarks: "An argument to the contrary exists, but I cannot linger over it here" (p. 49). 
30 Aristotle's account is in the Metaphysics, 1073bI7-1074aI4. Simplicius's account 
(actually he is quoting Sosigenes, who in turn is quoting Eudemus's lost History of 
Astronomy) is in the Commentary on Aristotle's De Caelo. Neither account, it is worth 
emphasizing, contains any explicit statement that Aristotle differed from Eudoxus and 
Callippus on the reality of the spheres. 
31 Gomperz, The Greek Thinkers, vol. IV, pp. 230-232. I will argue later that 
Gomperz's account of Ptolemy is correct, and the orthodox view that he took an 
instrumentalist view of astronomy incorrect. Gomperz goes on to "concede to the 
distinguished specialists whom we here fmd ourselves obliged to contradict" 
(principally Schiaparelli) that "some shifting of accent" may have occurred between 
Eudoxus and Aristotle, in that Aristotle may have been more convinced than Eudoxus 

276 
ALAN MUSGRA VB 
that the theory of spheres was true. Perhaps. But to say "I am not sure that the theory 
is true - perhaps it is not, and the spheres don't really exist" is not to say "I do not 
intend my theory to be a true description of the heavens at all". Fallibilist or critical 
realism is not the same as instrumentalism, though they are systematically conflated. 
32 Wright, 'The Astronomy of Eudoxus: Geometry or Physics?', p. 171 (the last 
sentence quoted occurs as a footnote). 
33 Wright, op.cit, p. 166. 
34 Wright, op.cit, p. 169. 
3S Wright, op.cit, p. 168. 
36 Aristotle, Metaphysics, 1074a12. 
37 Wright claims too much for Aristotle when he says that his system "had conse-
quences that the model as used by Eudoxus did not; e.g. how the motion of Jupiter 
would appear from Saturn" (op.cit., p. 171). 
38 Sosigenes as quoted by Simplicius, Commentary on Aristotle's De Caelo, ed. 
Heiberg, pp. 504-5 (translated Heath, Aristarchus, pp. 221-3). Sosigenes argues for 
the variation in the moon's distance by citing the difference between annular and total 
eclipses. Polemarchus was a friend of Eudoxus and teacher of Callippus. Aristotle's 
Physical Problems is lost, but one of the problems is said to have been "Are the 
heavenly spheres really concentric?" 
39 The additional assumptions here are that the apparent brightness of a planet viewed 
on a clear night depends solely on its distance from the observer, that planets shine by 
reflected light, that they do not swell or shrink in size, etc. 
40 Or so we are told by the instrumentalists themselves, who say that Eudoxus's 
system cannot have been intended to be interpreted realistically because then it would 
obviously be contradicted by observed brightness-variation. By the logic of all this is 
murky indeed. How can an instrumentalist interpretation remove a logical inconsis-
tency which is supposed to hold (in the only clear sense of 'interpretation' known to 
me) in all interpretations? As for the 'philosophy of as-if which is usually invoked to 
answer this question, I do not think that it will really do. There is much to be said for 
the view that "It is as if A were a B" has all the logical consequences of "A is a B" 
except "A is a B" itself. But if this view is correct, the 'interpretation' of Eudoxus's 
theory as an 'as-if statement cannot prevent it from entailing brightness-variation. 
The difficulty will recur. We are told that Ptolemy's theory of the moon (and by 
extension all of his theories!) cannot have been intended to be interpreted realistically 
because then it would obviously be contradicted by the failure of the moon's apparent 
size to vary. Once again, the instrumentalist 'interpretation' of a theory is supposed to 
alter the set of its local consequences. I have decided to ignore these difficulties in the 
text, and to grant the instrumentalists their peculiar and unexplained logic. 
41 Petersen and Pihl say that for Aristarchus heliocentrism was "merely a mathemati-
cal hypothesis" and not a description of the "real physical structure of the universe" 
(Early Physics and Astronomy p. 64). Their sole ground for this interpretation is 
Archimedes's report (on which we rely) that Aristarchus proposed hypotheses. But a 
hypothesis need not be a 'mathematical hypothesis', a mere geometric contrivance: it 
can be a hypothesis about "the real physical structure of the universe". Most historians 
say that it was a pity that heliocentrism was not proposed and evaluated as a mere 
'mathematical hypothesis', for then it would not have been so speedily rejected. 
42 Or so Adrastus (as quoted by Theon) tell us: "It is clear ... that, of the two 

THE MYTH OF ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTALISM 
277 
hypotheses, each of which is a consequence of the other, the epicyclic appears to 
be ... better confonned to the nature of things. For the epicycle is a great circle of a 
rigid sphere, namely, that circle which the planet traces out as it moves on the sphere, 
whereas the eccentric is altogether different from the circle which confonns to nature, 
and is traced out only "accidentally". Hipparchus, convinced that this is how the 
phenomena are brought about, adopted the epicyclic hypothesis as his own and says 
that it is likely that all the heavenly bodies are unifonnly placed with respect to the 
center of the world ... ". (Theon, Astronomia, chap. 34; cited by Duhem, To Save the 
Phenomena, p. 9). Curiously, Duhem prefaces his quotation of this passage with: "If 
we are to believe Adrastus, Hipparchus, more competent in astronomy than in 
physics, was incapable of making a decision" between the two hypotheses! 
43 Almagest, 3.4; cited by Duhem, To Save the Phenomena, p. 18 (in this citation 
'epicyclic' should reach 'eccentric'). 
44 I will not bore the reader with the repeated claim of historians that Apollonius and 
Hipparchus were instrumentalists. Such claims are based upon no evidence what-
soever, since we know of the innovations of these great thinkers only because of later 
reports (principally Ptolemy's). There is a scrap of evidence that Hipparchus was a 
realist, which is blatantly set aside by Duhem (see above, footnote 42). But the 
instrumentalist interpretation of these astronomers is really only as strong (or as weak) 
as the instrumentalist interpretation of Ptolemy, who employed so many of their ideas. 
The latter interpretation I will combat, since we have some evidence on the matter. 
For the rest, I will merely remark that it is quite incredible how historians, once they 
have an instrumentalist bee in their bonnet, will make confident assertions for which 
there is no historical evidence at all. 
45 Duhem, To Save the Phenomena, pp. 16-18. 
46 Clagett, Greek Science in Antiquity, p. 94. 
47 Blake, 'Theory of Hypothesis among Renaissance Astronomers', p. 23. Blake then 
follows Duhem in claiming that Proclus, Simplicius, Philoponous, Maimonides and 
Aquinas had the same view. 
48 Farrington, Science in Antiquity, p. 204. 
49 Hanson, Patterns of Discovery, pp. 178, footnote 2, and 201- 2, footnote 1. 
50 Hanson, The Concept of the Positron, pp. 26 and 34. Notice here how a conjectural 
interpretation, repeated often enough, has turned in to a fact. One wonders, for 
example, where Eudoxus, Apollonius and Hipparchos can be found to 'explicitly rule 
out' the possibility of celestial physics. 
51 Dreyer, History of Astronomy, pp. 149, 165, 196, and 201. The last sentence quoted 
refers to the fact that Ptolemy's lunar theory demands that the moon will appear 
almost twice as big at perigee as at apogee. 
52 Toulmin and Goodfield, The Fabric of the Heavens, pp. 136, 139, and 140. 
53 Price, 'Contra-Copernicus', p. 199. Later (p. 217, footnote 6) Price follows 
Neugebauer in complaining that those who Oike Copernicus) objected to Ptolemy's 
equant were guilty of mixing up "the cosmological section of astronomy with its 
mathematical methodology". 
54 G.E.M. de Ste. Croix, 'Commentary', p. 86. 
55 Ptolemy's Planetary Hypotheses exists in Greek (Book I) and Arabic (Books I and 
m. But Heiberg's translation of the Arabic version lacks a crucial passage at the end 
of Book I, which has been published and translated by Goldstein in his 'The Arabic 

278 
ALAN MUSGRAVE 
Version of Ptolemy's Planetary Hypotheses'. Goldstein, who can offer no explanation 
of the omission, says it is ironic because "the omitted passage contains what is really 
of outstanding historical interest: that the Ptolemaic System is indeed the creation of 
Ptolemy" (op.cit., p. 3). 
56 La Systeme du Mqnde, vol. II, pp. 130-131 (as translated by Grant, Source Book in 
Medieval Science, p. 516). 
57 Sambursky, 'Conceptual Developments and Modes of Explanation in later Greek 
Scientific Thought', pp. 66-7. 
58 Santillana, Origins of Scientific Thought, p. 252. As we will see shortly, 
geocentrism did not become a reality for Ptolemy - there is ample evidence from the 
Almagest that he thought geocentrism true from the start. 
59 Dijksterhuis, Mechanization of the World Picture, p. 66. 
60 Hall and Hall, A Brief History of Science, pp. 41-2. 
61 Petersen and Pihl, Early Physics and Astronomy, p. 100. 
62 Almagest, I, 2; cf. Source Book in Greek Science, p. 122. 
63 Almagest, VII, 1; cf. Source Book in Greek Science, p. 115. 
64 Almagest, III, 1 and 3. 
6S Almagest, 1,17; cf. Source Book in Greek Science, pp. 126-7. 
66 Planetary Hypotheses, Book I. The idea stems from Dercyllides and Adrastus, 
whose view Duhem says Ptolemy rejects (To Save the Phenomena, pp. 14-17). 
Actually, as we will see, Ptolemy's physical model involved not whole spheres, but 
slices of them. And it is worth noting that given this model, the so-called 'deferent 
circle' (the path traced out by the center of the epicycle) is a mere 'geometric device' 
which corresponds to nothing in reality. 
67 Planetary Hypotheses, Book II, 7. What possesses the 'vital force' are, of course, 
the spheres, which impart motion to the planets united to them. 
68 Almagest, 13,2. The translation is Duhem's (To Save the Phenomena, pp. 17-18). 
Duhem says "Certainly, Ptolemy means to indicate in this passage that the many 
motions he compounds in the Syntaxis to determine the trajectory of a planet have no 
physical reality; only the resultant motion is actually produced in the heavens" 
(op.cit., p. 17). Ptolemy means to indicate no such thing. He merely says that our 
inability to model epicyclic motion in metal or wood is only to be expected in view of 
the different substances involved. 
69 Planetary Hypotheses, Book II, 6. 
70 Planetary Hypotheses, Book II, 6. 
71 The values are obtained essentially by Aristarchus's method: Ptolemy says that the 
greatest distance to the moon is 64 earth radii, and the least distance to the sun is 1160 
earth radii. (The value for the latter is, of course, much too small, and stems ultimately 
from a small error in measuring the angular separation of sun and moon. This error 
affects all subsequent calculations). 
72 Planetary Hypotheses, Book II. Ptolemy had already adopted this arrangement in 
the Almagest because it uses "the sun as a natural dividing line between those planets 
which can be any angular distance from the sun and those which cannot but always 
move near it" (Almagest, IX, 1). The argument is not convincing because the moon is 
also below the sun, but is found in opposition to it (as Copernicus pointed out, De 
Revolutionibus, I, 10). 
73 Planetary Hypotheses, Book I, Part 2, Section 3; cf. Goldstein, 'The Arabic 

THE MYTH OF AS1RONOMICAL INS1RUMENTALISM 
279 
Version of Ptolemy's Planetary Hypotheses', p. 6. Proclus was quite impressed with 
the agreement between the two calculations: "Clearly the spheres of Mercury and 
Venus must be placed between the moon and the sun. For the moon's greatest 
distance coincides with the least distance of Mercury; Mercury's greatest distance 
with the least distance of Venus; and the greatest distance of the latter with the sun's 
least distance, almost exactly. For there must be no empty space". (Commentary on 
Plato's Timaeus, cited by Rosen, 'A Full Universe', p. 215). 
74 Before Goldstein's discovery it had been assumed that this extension of Ptolemy's 
idea was carried out only by his Arab followers, despite many statements attributing it 
to Ptolemy. Yet even before Goldstein's discovery, the available portions of the 
Planetary Hypotheses should have made historians skeptical of the idea that Ptolemy 
was an instrumentalist. 
75 Goldstein, op.cit., p. 3. 
76 I should emphasize that this explanation of the introduction of the equant is 
hypothetical. Most historians mention the equant and the abandonment of uniform 
motion that it entails, but say nothing about why it was introduced except 'the 
appearances demanded it' . 
77 See E. S. Kennedy, 'Late Medieval Planetary Theory', or for a brief account, 
Petersen and Pihl, Early Physics and Astronomy, pp. 271-7. 
78 This is not the same as adopting a 'local instrumentalism' concerning Ptolemaic 
astronomy, and conceding that at the moment it is, though false, the best saver of 
appearances that we have. Disappointed realists will still hope to replace Ptolemaic 
astronomy with a saver of appearances which is also true - instrumentalists will have 
no such ambition. This is why I call the adoption of instrumentalism a dissolution 
rather than a solution of the problem: the clash is not overcome by modifying one or 
both of the theories which clash; rather, the clash is dissolved merely by reinterpreting 
one half of it in instrumentalist fashion. 
79 Blake, for example, endorses them wholly, and simply copies out Duhem's list of 
prominent instrumentalists without giving most of Duhem's (alleged) evidence: see 
his 'Theory of Hypothesis among Renaissance Astronomers', pp. 23-5. 
BffiLIOGRAPHY 
Blake, R.M. 'Theory of Hypothesis among Renaissance Astronomers', in E.H. 
Madden (ed), Theories of Scientific Method: The Renaissance through the 
Nineteenth Century (Seattle & London, 1960), pp. 22-49. 
Burnet, J. Greek Philosophy: Thales to Plato (London, 1914). 
Clagett, M. Greek Science in Antiquity (New York, 1955). 
Cohen, M.R. & Drabkin, I.E. (eds) A Source Book in Greek Science (Cambridge, 
Mass., 1948). 
Coleman, J.A. Early Theories of the Universe (New York, 1967). 
Dijksterhuis, E.J. The Mechanization of the World Picture, translated by C. Dikshoorn 
(London, 1961). 
Duhem, P. To Save the Phenomena: An Essay on the Idea of Physical Theory from 
Plato to Galileo, translated by E. Doland & C. Maschler, with an introductory 

280 
ALAN MUSGRAVE 
essay by S.L. Jaki (Chicago & London, 1969). 
Dreyer, J.L.E. A History of Astronomy from Thales to Kepler (New York, 1953, 
second edition). 
Farrington, B. Science in Antiquity (London, 1936). 
Feyerabend, P. K. 'Realism and Instrumentalism: Comments on the logic of Factual 
Support', in M. Bunge (ed), The Critical Approach to Science and Philosophy 
(New York, 1964), pp. 28(}-308. 
Goldstein, B. 'The Arabic Version of Ptolemy's Planetary Hypotheses', Transactions 
of the American Philosophical Society, 57, 1967, No.4, pp. 3-12. 
Gomperz, T. Greek Thinkers: A History of Ancient Philosophy, translated by G.G. 
Berry in four volumes (London, 1912). 
Grant, E. (ed) A Source Book in Medieval Science (Cambridge, Mass., 1974). 
Hall, A.R. & Hall, M.B.A Brie/History of Science (New York, 1964). 
Hanson, N.R. The Concept of the Positron (London, 1963). 
Hanson, N.R. Patterns of Discovery (London, 1958). 
Hanson, N.R. Constellations and Conjectures (Dordrecht, 1973). 
Heath, T. L. Aristarchus of Sam os: The Ancient Copernicus (Oxford, 1913). 
Heath, T. L. A History of Greek Mathematics, two volumes (Oxford, 1921). 
Jardine, N. 'The Forging of Modem Realism: Clavius and Kepler against the 
sceptics', Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 10, 1979, No.2, pp. 
141-73. 
Kennedy, E.S. 'Late Medieval Planetary Theory', Isis, 57, 1966, pp. 365-78. 
Koyre, A. The Astronomical Revolution: Copernicus-Kepler-Borelli, translated by 
R.E.W. Maddison (paris, London & New York, 1973). 
Lloyd, G.E.R. Early Greek Science: Thales to Aristotle (London, 1970). 
Lloyd, G.E.R. 'Saving the Appearances', Classical Quarterly, 28, 1978, No.1, pp. 
202-22. 
Pedersen, O. & Pihl, M. Early Physics and Astronomy: A Historical Introduction 
(London & New York, 1974). 
Popper, K.R. Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach (Oxford, 1972). 
Price, D.J. 'Contra-Copernicus: A Critical Re-estimation of the Mathematical 
Planetary Theory of Ptolemy, and Kepler', in M. Clagett (ed), Critical Problems in 
the History of Science (Wisconsin, 1959), pp. 197-218. 
Rosen, E. 'A Full Universe', Scientific Monthly, 1946, pp. 213-7. 
Sambursky, S. 'Conceptual Developments and Modes of Explanation in later Greek 
Scientific Thought', A.C. Crombie (ed), Scientific Change (London, 1963), pp. 
61-78. 
Sambursky, S. The Physical World of the Greeks (London, 1965). 
Santillana, G. The Origins of Scientific Thought from Anaximander to Proc/us (New 
York, 1961). 
Ste Croix, G.E.M. 'Commentary', in A.C. Crombie (ed), Scientific Change (London, 
1963) pp. 79-87. 
Touimin, S. & Goodfield, 1. The Fabric of the Heavens (London, 1961). 
Vlastos, G. Plato's Universe (Oxford, 1975). 
Wright, L. 'The Astronomy of Eudoxus: Geometry or Physics?', Studies in History 
and Philosophy of Science, 4, 1973/4, pp. 165-72. 

GUNNAR ANDERSSON 
Feyerabend on Falsifications, 
Galileo, and Lady Reason 
Feyerabend maintains that in our world a falsificationist methodology 
meets insurmountable obstacles. Every hypothesis in science encounters 
empirical deviations big enough to falsify it. Therefore a falsificationist 
methodology would destroy science without giving us any substitute. 1 
According to Feyerabend scientists do not mind empirical refutations in 
actual research. Either falsifications are not noticed or are immunized by 
ad hoc hypotheses. Feyerabend thinks that it is good that scientists 
proceed in this way: if every falsification were taken seriously, there 
would be no scientific development, and we would stand before a scrap-
heap of falsified theories. 
Feyerabend uses case studies from the history of science in order to 
support his thesis that a falsificationist methodology is unrealistic. In 
Against Method he analyses Galileo's defence of the Copernican system 
and argues that Galileo repeatedly violated a falsificationist methodology 
and did not pay any notice to generally accepted observations that 
contradicted the Copernican system. The Copernican assumption that the 
earth moves raised serious dynamical problems which Galileo could 
avoid only by introducing ad hoc hypotheses. If Galileo had not 
proceeded in this way, the Copernican Revolution would not have taken 
place and a great step forward in the development of science would not 
have occurred. 
This alleged difference between scientific reality and the castles in the 
air built by philosophy of science has led Feyerabend to ask the rhetorical 
question whether philosophy of science is an unknown kind of insanity. A 
characteristic feature of mental disorder is that the insane person 
withdraws more and more from reality. Feyerabend fmds the same 
G. Munevar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 281-295. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
281 

282 
GUNNAR ANDERSSON 
symptom among philosophers of science.2 
In this paper I will investigate Feyerabend' s interesting arguments 
against a falsificationist methodology. They pose serious problems, but I 
will try to show how they can be solved without giving up a rational 
methodology. According to Feyerabend "once, long ago, Lady Reason 
was a beautiful, strong, helpful though somewhat overbearing Goddess of 
research. By now her lovers ... have turned her into a garrulous but 
toothless old woman".3 I cannot agree and will try to show that Lady 
Reason is as beautiful and young as ever, perhaps demanding, but not 
overbearing, and smiling at her lovers in the most charming way. 
1. DIDGALILEO NOT PAY ATTENTIONTOFALSIFICATIONS7 
1.1. Feyerabend's Account 
The most simple way to test the Ptolemaic and Copernican astronomical 
theories was to control whether the predicted positions of the planets 
agreed with observations. In this respect there were no important 
differences between the two theories. Both could predict the positions of 
the planets quite well. Thomas Kuhn's statement that at the time of the 
Copernican revolution the Ptolemaic theory was in a crisis and ridden 
with anomalies is not in agreement with the historical records. On the 
contrary, Copernicus maintains that the Ptolemaic theory was consistent 
with numerical data.4 
But there were other difficulties not discussed by Copernicus, but 
mentioned by Andreas Osiander in his anonymous foreword to the main 
work of Copernicus. Ptolemy and Copernicus both assume that the 
distance between the earth and the planets varies. (In Ptolemy's 
geocentric theory the variations were caused by the epicycles of the 
planets). These variations in distance should appear as variations in the 
apparent size and brightness of the planets. You can observe that the 
apparent size and brightness of the planets vary, but in the case of Venus 
the variations are not as large as those predicted by both theories. Andreas 
Osiander used these deviations in order to support an instrumentalist 
interpretation of the Copernican theory: although both theories allowed 
good predictions of the positions of the planets, they could not be strictly 
true, because they did not allow correct predictions of the apparent size 
and brightness of Venus. For this reason Osiander argued that the 

FALSIFICATIONS. GALlLEO. AND LADY REASON 
283 
Copernican system could not be literally true, but was only an instrument 
for the prediction of the positions of the planets.s According to 
Feyerabend this shows that Osiander argued as a true falsificationist: he 
took refutations seriously. 
According to Feyerabend Galileo also argued as a true falsificationist, 
at least in the beginning of his career. In his early essay, The Assayer, 
Galileo discusses the same difficulty as Osiander. Galileo concludes that 
both systems (the Ptolemaic and the Copernican) are surely false.6 Thus 
in this essay Galileo takes refutations as seriously as the most ardent 
falsificationist could wish. 
Why did Galileo later deviate from the path of virtue and fal-
sificationism in order to become a true epistemological anarchist who did 
not care about falsifications? The reason was the astonishing observations 
Galileo made when he directed his new telescope against the sky. In 
contradistinction to the observation with the unaided eye the observations 
with the telescope showed that the variations in apparent size and 
brightness of the planets are in agreement with the Copernican theory. 
According to Feyerabend this agreement proved the truth of the Coper-
nican theory and the veracity of the telescope for Galileo.7 
Every falsificationist would agree with pleasure that this agreement 
does not prove neither the truth of the Copernican theory nor the veracity 
of the telescope. For falsificationists, who do not believe in induction, 
such proofs are in principle impossible. 
According to Feyerabend the Copernican theory and the veracity of the 
telescope were problematic in Galileo' s days, but these highly 
problematic hypotheses supported each other mutually and saved the 
tottering Copernican building from breaking down. 
The veracity of the telescope was indeed problematic in the beginning. 
It was a new and in the beginning rather primitive instrument. Nobody, 
not even Galileo, could explain how it functioned. People were not 
trained in using the new instrument. Therefore it is not astonishing that 
the public opinion first thought that the moons of Jupiter must be situated 
somewhere in the lenses of the telescope, if they really could be seen in 
the instrument.8 The conclusion immediately suggests itself that not only 
the moons of Jupiter but also the other phenomena supporting the 
Copernican theory were artifacts and delusions situated in the glass of the 
telescope and not in the sky. Feyerabend maintains that Galileo could 
convince people of the veracity of the telescope only by suggestion, 
propaganda, and psychological tricks: "Copernicanism and other 

284 
GUNNAR ANDERSSON 
'rational' views exist today only because reason was overruled at some 
time in their past".9 It is however unclear why it should be "rational" to 
believe in the veracity of observations with the unaided eye in any case. 
1.2. The Fa/sificationist View 
It is a common misunderstanding to think that according to fal-
sificationism general hypotheses are fallible, but test statements (basic 
statements) must be certain and infallible. This inconsequent fallibilism 
(with fallible general hypotheses and infallible singular test statements) is 
the basis of the myth of the "naive falsificationist", a straw man severely 
criticized by Kuhn, Lakatos, and Feyerabend. But if we will not retire 
from reality, as Feyerabend in his criticism of philosophy of science 
suggests, then we must admit that falsificationism rests on a consequent 
fallibilism according to which not only general hypotheses but also test 
statements are fallible. lO Which are the consequences of this view for the 
cases discussed by Feyerabend? 
To begin with, Feyerabend's discussion of the observations with the 
telescope shows the fallibility of test statements. A good empiricist would 
think that nothing is more certain than what you can observe with your 
own eyes. But the observations of the size and brightness of the planets 
show that also apparent certain and unproblematic test statements are 
fallible and can be criticized. The view that test statements are fallible is 
basic for critical rationalism. Only a naive or dogmatic falsificationist 
could believe that test statements are certain. 
Which fallible test statement can hypothetically be asserted? 
Feyerabend does not think that a critical discussion of this question is 
possible. He thinks that asserting a test statement is an existential leap 
across an abyss to an anarchistic belief, and that this assertion depends on 
theoretical and cosmological presuppositions. 
Which theoretical presuppositions could have brought Galileo to accept 
the observations with the telescope? It does not follow from the Coper-
nican theory that observations with the telescope are reliable. And Galileo 
did not understand how the telescope functioned, as Feyerabend stresses. 
Thus there is no direct connection between theoretical presuppositions 
and the veracity of the telescope. 
For Feyerabend the connection between the Copernican theory and the 
hypothesis of the reliability of the telescope was indirect. He maintains 
that Galileo accepted the observations with the telescope, because they 

FALSIFICATIONS, GALILEO, AND LADY REASON 
285 
agreed with the Copernican theory. This psychological conjecture might 
be true. Such an agreement is of course no sufficient corroboration of the 
reliability of the telescope. 
Could the reliability of the telescope be tested? The instrument was 
tested on earth. These tests were independent of the Copernican theory 
and showed that the telescope was reliable on earth: "The terrestrial 
success of the telescope was, therefore, assured. Its application to the 
stars, however, was an entirely different matter") 1 
The first astronomical observations with the telescope were more 
problematic. In the beginning there was no agreement on these observa-
tions. Some people saw the moons of Jupiter in the telescope, others not. 
Furthermore, there was no explanation how the telescope functioned. The 
necessary optical auxiliary hypotheses were not yet put forward. This was 
an additional problem. 
How to judge such an unclear problem situation? It was still an open 
problem whether the observations with the telescope are reliable. Further 
research was necessary. Further observations with the telescope of, for 
example, the moons of Jupiter were necessary in order to reach agree-
ment. And optical auxiliary hypotheses had to be put forward, tested, and 
discussed. From the point of view of a consequent fallibilism it is not to 
be expected that agreement can be reached always and immediately. 
Kepler was one of the few scientists who immediately took Galileo's 
observations with the telescope seriously and who thought that it was 
necessary to explain how the telescope functioned. Already in 1611 he 
succeeded in explaining how Galileo's telescope functioned and even 
succeeded in proposing how to build a new and better telescope, the so-
called astronomical telescope. With the development of geometrical 
optics the reliability of the telescope soon was generally accepted.12 
Of course the reactions of the eye and the brain at telescopic observa-
tions were not explained by Kepler's optical theory. For ultimate 
explanations of these reactions we will have to wait a very long time! If 
we do not try to find absolutely true test statements, we do not have to 
fmd such explanations, but can hypothetically maintain that some test 
statements are true. 
When we test a theory we maintain some test statements hypotheti-
cally. Such test statements remain fallible and can be criticized by further 
observations, but these circumstances should not prevent us from 
asserting them. As critical rationalists we do not seek absolute truth or 
ultimate justifications. Just this insight into the hypothetical character of 

286 
GUNNAR ANDERSSON 
science is necessary in order to understand its historical development. 
Was the Copernican theory falsified by the observations of the size and 
brightness of Venus by the unaided eye? Most scientists regarded these 
observations as open problems, not as falsifications. For falsifications, 
optical auxiliary hypotheses were necessary, but they were not available 
at Galileo's time. Nobody knew anything about the absolute brightness of 
Venus. Without such an auxiliary hypotheses the observations of the 
relative brightness of Venus cannot be used in order to test the Coper-
nican theory. (In the same way the failure to observe any parallax of the 
stars did not falsify the Copernican theory, because nuthing was known 
about the distances to the stars). Probably Andreas Osiander wrote his 
foreword to De Revolutionibus for tactical reasons in order to protect the 
Copernican theory from charges of being heretical. 
In case somebody regarded the Copernican theory as falsified by the 
observations of the size and brightness of Venus with the unaided eye, the 
situation was quite different after Galileo' s observations with the 
telescope. The observations with the telescope contradicted the observa-
tions with the unaided eye. In this situation the earlier observations 
without telescope became problematic. Hence you cannot say that Galileo 
did not pay any attention to falsifications. You should rather say that 
Galileo showed that earlier prima Jacie falsifications were problematic. 
The observations of the size of the planets with the unaided eye were 
contradictory and hence problematic also for this reason. Galileo showed 
that the apparent size of bright stars were different in the night and at 
twilight. Galileo explained the larger size in the night as an optical 
illusion (irradiation) caused by the dark background. If the dark back-
ground is cut away, then there is no irradiation, and even in the night 
Venus looks hardly larger than a star of the last magnitude, as it does at 
twilight.13 Galileo's hypothesis about the cause of irradiation is intersub-
jectively testable and still accepted. 
A consequent fallibilist readily admits that Galileo now and then made 
mistakes when he used the telescope. It is not particularly interesting to 
speculate about what exactly Galileo might have seen in his telescope. 
Such speculations are difficult to test. It is more interesting to investigate 
the historical context of Galileo' s observations and the test hypotheses 
they led to. 
Galileo put forward the intersubjectively testable hypotheses that there 
are mountains on the moon and that Venus shows phases like the moon. 
The first test hypothesis (and the corresponding test statements) falsify 

FALSIFICATIONS, GALILEO, AND LADY REASON 
287 
Aristotle's assumption that the moon is perfectly spherical; the special 
character of the phases of Venus falsifies the Ptolemaic theory. These test 
statements and hypotheses were not generally accepted immediately. 
Their accuracy could be increased. But you have to consider what degree 
of accuracy was interesting in the historical problem situation. 
In order to falsify Aristotle's view that the moon is perfectly spherical, 
it is sufficient to point out that there are mountains on the moon. Exactly 
how big they are or where they are situated is uninteresting. 
It is similar with the phases of Venus. In order to falsify the Ptolemaic 
theory it is sufficient to show that Venus near superior conjunction is 
almost "full", as predicted by Copernicus. According to the Ptolemaic 
theory Venus should only show a crescent at that time. 14 In order to carry 
through this crucial experiment no high degree of accuracy is needed. 
Galileo's observations of the phases of Venus is crucial between the 
Ptolemaic and the Copernican theory. It was intersubjectively testable that 
Venus near superior conjunction shows more than a crescent in the 
telescope. The astronomers opposing the Copernican theory thought that 
the most promising way to solve this problem was to try to fmd an 
explanation of the phases of Venus without giving up the hypothesis that 
the earth does not move. For these aims the Tychonic system suggested 
itself.15 Feyerabend has reacted to these ideas by saying that if test 
statements are fallible, then you have to show how a critical discussion of 
them is possible. Otherwise you have no "fruitful point of view that 
guides scientists", but only "empty talk that can be reconciled with any 
procedure.... The verbiage remains critical -
but its content has 
evaporated". 16 
It is quite correct that fallibilism alone is not enough. You have to show 
how a critical discussion of test statements is possible. The process is the 
following one. From problematic test statements you derive un-
problematic ones with the help of auxiliary hypotheses. As to the tower 
experiment, it was totally unproblematic that a freely falling stone falls 
vertically down to the base of the tower. Nobody "saw" the earth move in 
that experiment, only the vertically falling stone. The test statements, 
were not problematic but the dynamical auxiliary hypotheses were. The 
same is true for the observations with the telescope. The central problem 
did not concern the test statements about what can be seen in the tele-
scope. After the imperfections of Galileo' s first telescope were removed, 
consensus was soon arrived at even among Galileo' s opponents about the 
moons of Jupiter and the phases of Venus. The problem was not so much 

288 
GUNNAR ANDERSSON 
what could have been seen through a telescope, but whether those 
observations were reliable. The assumption that the telescope is a reliable 
instrument is an auxiliary hypothesis which can be discussed like other 
hypotheses. There are no special methodological problems here, no 
incommensurability, only competing auxiliary hypotheses. It is important 
that the discussion of problematic test statements forces scientists to drag 
"hidden assumptions" into the open. As Copi says: 
Because they are hidden, there is no chance to examine such assumptions critically 
and to decide intelligently whether they are true or false. Progress is often achieved by 
formulating explicitly an assumption which had previously been hidden and then 
scrutinizing and rejecting it.I7 
The problem with the critical discussion of test statements is not that the 
procedure is unknown, but rather that it is seldom explicit. Only under the 
impression of the myth of the framework you can think that here are 
unsolved or deep methodological problems. Feyerabend thinks that either 
you have to accept a positivist view according to which test statements 
are secure or you have to accept the anarchistic view of test statements 
and the thesis of incommensurability. But this is not true. There is a third 
possibility! 18 
2. DID GALILEO PROTECI'THE COPERNICAN THEORY 
WITH AD HOC HYPOTHESES? 
2.1 F eyerabend' s Description 
In order to explain the movements of the stars, Copernicus assumed that 
the earth moves. Against the hypothesis of the diurnal motion of the earth 
already Ptolemy brought forward arguments which for centuries were 
regarded as persuasive, e.g,: if the earth rotates around its axis, then a 
stone thrown vertically against the sky will not fall down at the place 
where it was thrown, because the earth has moved during the movement 
of the stone.I9 Feyerabend discusses a similar argument: a stone falling 
from a tower will fall down vertically. It will not hit the earth to the west 
from the base of the tower, as you would expect as a consequence of the 
hypothesis of the motion of the earth and of Aristotelian physics. 
It looks as if the tower experiment falsifies the Copernican theory. 
According to Feyerabend Galileo saved the hypothesis of the motion of 

FALSIFICATIONS, GALll..EO, AND LADY REASON 
289 
the earth and the Copernican theory by introducing ad hoc the hypothesis 
of the circular inertia. Feyerabend's conclusion: "Therefore, Galileo did 
use ad hoc hypotheses. It was good that he used them".20 It is, however, 
"customary to assume that good scientists refuse to employ ad hoc 
hypotheses". This customary attitude is expressed, for example, in the 
writings of critical rationalists.21 
Feyerabend sums up: 
Wherever we look, whatever examples we consider, we see that the principles of 
critical rationalism (take falsifications seriously; ... avoid ad hoc hypotheses, ... ) ... 
give an inadequate account of the past development of science and are liable to hinder 
science in the future .... These "deviations" .. these "errors" are preconditions oj 
progress. They permit us to survive in the complex and difficult world which we 
inhabit, they permit us to remain free and happy agents.22 
2.2. The Falsijicationist Perspective: 
Was Galileo's Dynamics ad hoc? 
Why was the tower experiment regarded as a refutation of the hypothesis 
of the diurnal motion of the earth? According to the Aristotelian physics 
every movement depends on a moving force. Because a stone falling 
freely from a tower is not subject to a moving force, it follows from 
Aristotelian physics that it must hit the earth to the west, if the earth 
rotates eastward. It is important however, to realize that the tower 
experiment falsifies the hypothesis of the rotation of the earth only if the 
Aristotelian physics is presupposed. The idea that the earth moves was 
prohibited, because it violates basic assumptions in the Aristotelian 
physics.23 
It is not the case that the tower experiment falsifies the Copernican 
theory; it falsifies a theoretical system consisting of the Copernican 
theory and the Aristotelian physics. This falsification only shows that the 
Aristotelian physics or the Copernican theory is false. It falsifies the 
Copernican theory only if the Aristotelian physics is regarded as un-
problematic. 
Galileo and even Copernicus regarded the Aristotelian theory of motion 
as problematic. According to Kuhn: 
By the end of the fourteenth century impetus dynamics ... had replaced Aristotelian 
dynamics in the work of the principal medieval scientists. The tradition endured: it 
was taught at Padua around the time Copernicus studied there; Galileo learned it from 

290 
GUNNAR ANDERSSON 
his master Bonamico at Pisa. Both of them used it, explicitly or implicitly, as did their 
contemporaries and successors. On a number of occasions and in a variety of ways the 
impetus theory played an essential role in the Copernican revolution.24 
Galileo's inertial dynamics develops from impetus dynamics, not from 
Aristotelian dynamics.2S 
Already in the beginning those developing the impetus theory saw its 
astronomical relevance. In a critical commentary on Aristotle's On the 
Heavens written during the fourteenth century, Nicole Oresme argues that 
with the impetus theory it is impossible empirically to refute the 
hypothesis of the motion of the earth.26 If for example a stone falls freely 
from a tower and the earth rotates eastwards, the stone gets an inner force 
(or impetus) moving it eastwards. For this reason a stone falls vertically to 
the base of the tower whether the earth rotates or not. The tower experi-
ment is a crucial experiment for the Copernican theory only if the 
Aristotelian physics is assumed. With the impetus theory or with 
Galileo's later inertial theory it is no longer crucial.27 
The impetus theory and later Galileo's inertial dynamics both in-
validate falsifications of the hypothesis that the earth moves. Is for this 
reason Galileo's introduction of a new dynamics an example of an 
introduction of an ad hoc hypothesis saving a falsified theory? 
If we regard Galileo's problem situation historically, then the Coper-
nican theory was not falsified at all by the tower experiment. Hence there 
was no need to introduce new dynamical theories in order to save the 
heliocentric theory. Galileo initially argued from the point of view of the 
impetus theory. With this theory the tower experiment was in agreement 
with the assumption of the diurnal motion of the earth. Whatever reasons 
Galileo might have had to introduce his new dynamics, the need to save 
the Copernican theory from falsification was not one of them. In Galileo's 
time only persons not quite a jour with the actual scientific discussion 
thought that the tower experiment was an argument against the Coper-
nican theory. One of these conservative persons was Tycho Brahe on his 
northern island who repeated the old Ptolemaic arguments which 
depended on the Aristotelian dynamics.28 But Copernicus and Galileo did 
not accept the Aristotelian dynamics and had a different problem 
situation. Hence, from a purely historical point of view Galileo did not 
have to introduce any ad hoc hypotheses in order to save the Copernican 
theory, because there was no need for such protection. On the other hand, 
this did not prevent Galileo from refuting the old Ptolemaic arguments 
with great energy. This is not an example of anarchistic propaganda or 

FALSIFICATIONS, GALILEO, AND LADY REASON 
291 
persuasion, as Feyerabend thinks, but only an example of the fact that 
with new dynamical ideas (as auxiliary hypotheses) the tower experiment 
does not refute the hypothesis of the diurnal motion of the earth. 
It is an interesting methodological problem to discuss the introduction 
of Galileo's new dynamical ideas as if counterfactually, as the 
philosophers call it, there had been no impetus theory. Would the Galilean 
dynamics then had been ad hoc? Would it show that any falsification can 
be avoided by the introduction of new auxiliary hypotheses? Popper 
regards it as a "conventionalist objection" to falsificationism that any 
falsification can be avoided by the introduction of suitable ad hoc 
hypotheses.29 In order to prevent such "conventionalist strategies" Popper 
introduces a number of methodological rules. As regards ad hoc 
hypotheses Popper proposes "the rule that only those are acceptable 
whose introduction does not diminish the degree of falsifiability or 
testability of the system in question, but, on the contrary, increases it". 30 
Popper's rule against ad hoc hypotheses is superfluous in a fal-
sificationist methodology, because no falsification can be prevented by 
the introduction of an auxiliary hypotheses. If the hypothesis H is 
falsified, then the introduction of the auxiliary hypothesis AH does not 
help. If H is falsified, then the theoretical system H & AH is also falsified. 
But what are we to say if a part of a theoretical system is changed, if 
one auxiliary hypothesis is exchanged for another, if for example the 
Aristotelian dynamics is exchanged for the Galilean? If such an exchange 
is the result of a falsification, is it then an example of an ad hoc modifica-
tion in order to avoid falsification? I think that in a falsificationist 
methodology there is no need for introducing methodological rules 
against special types of theoretical modifications. In such a methodology 
it is enough that a falsification leads to a modification of the theoretical 
system. This shows that the falsification is taken as seriously as any 
falsificationist can demand. In order to tell how falsified theories should 
be modified, if they should be totally rejected or only slightly modified, 
we would need a method of discovery. It is one of the basic insights of 
falsificationism that there is no such method. Of course it is good if the 
modification increases the empirical content of the system. But it is not 
necessary. From a fallibilist point of view we are always interested in 
many competing theories. If one theory should have less empirical 
content than another, this is no sufficient reason for introducing 
methodological rules or prohibitions against it. 31 
The expression ad hoc hypothesis is emotionally charged, but its 

292 
GUNNAR ANDERSSON 
meaning is unclear.32 Etymologically, an ad hoc hypothesis is an 
hypothesis which was introduced in order to explain some test results 
after these results were observed. In this sense all hypotheses are ad hoc, 
because all scientific hypotheses are introduced in order to explain some 
observations afterwards. For this reason it is uninteresting to investigate 
when a hypothesis was introduced. 
Also the question why a hypothesis was introduced does not carry us 
further. It is hard to know anything about the psychological motivation of 
Galileo or other scientists. Whether Galileo wanted to support the 
Copernican theory or whether he wanted to refute Aristotle or whatever 
he wanted -
for a methodological evaluation of his theories these 
questions are irrelevant. 
Popper's definition of an ad hoc hypothesis in The Logic of Scientific 
Discovery as a hypothesis which reduces the empirical content of a 
theoretical system is uninteresting, since no hypotheses are ad hoc 
according to this defmition. For logical reasons it is impossible to reduce 
the empirical content of a theoretical system merely by introducing an 
auxiliary hypothesis.33 
Later, Popper has defined an ad hoc hypothesis as an hypothesis which 
is not independently testable: "apart from explaining all the explicanda 
which the new theory was designed to explain, it must have new and 
testable consequences (preferably consequences of a new kind).34 But 
there are many theories which were not independently testable when they 
were introduced. Not even the Copernican theory was independently 
testable in this sense. (Galileo observed the phases of Venus much later). 
From the point of view of a critical falsificationism, there is no reason to 
prohibit such theories. Even if a new theory does not lead to new 
predictions immediately, it is interesting enough that it can explain known 
phenomena in a new way.35 
It is unclear which hypotheses would be ad hoc under an interesting 
definition, if one could be found. But I doubt very much that the Galilean 
dynamics would be ad hoc according to it. 
3. SUMMARY 
According to a critical falsificationism, Galileo did not pass over 
falsifications or protect the Copernican theory by introducing new 
dynamical ideas ad hoc. I am uncertain if this turns "Galileo into a regular 

FALSIFICATIONS, GALILEO, AND LADY REASON 
293 
guy, methodologywise".36 I think, however, that Feyerabend's interesting 
case study in no way refutes a critical falsificationism. 
As to Galileo's observations with the telescope, you rather get the 
impression that the main target of Feyerabend's criticism is the good 
empiricist who believes in secure test statements. From the point of view 
of a consequent fallibilism there is no reason to believe in them. There is 
no disagreement on this point between Feyerabend and falsificationism. 
It follows from the fact that test statements are fallible that they must 
be further tested and discussed. Problem situations are still open when the 
discussion of test statements or auxiliary hypotheses is not yet finished. It 
is also possible for earlier falsifications to be withdrawn, if test statements 
or auxiliary hypotheses which earlier were generally accepted are now 
criticized. These are the methodological consequences of the fact that 
observations are theory-loaded and fallible. 
As to ad hoc hypotheses, it is unclear which hypotheses are ad hoc and 
why they should be prohibited. From the point of view of a critical 
falsificationism, there is no need to prohibit modifications of theoretical 
systems as ad hoc. If a falsification has the consequence that a theoretical 
system is modified, then this very modification shows that the falsifica-
tion is taken seriously, that an attempt is made to learn from it and to 
introduce a better theory. This is all you can demand from the point of 
view of falsificationism. Demands of increase of the empirical content or 
independent testability are too severe and might prohibit interesting new 
developments.37 
Is this "anarchism in disguise"? No. In this conception you do not need 
to go back to propaganda, conversions, psychological tricks, or epis-
temological anarchism in order to understand the development of science. 
A critical discussion of test statements and auxiliary hypotheses is 
possible. This is what we can learn from Galileo's defence of the 
Copernican system. Therefore I would like to end this paper with a 
friendly invitation to all epistemological anarchists to come back to the 
lovely Lady Reason from anarchistic Babylon with its confusion of 
tongues, incommensurable language games, and doubtful courtesans.38 
The history of science should not prevent them from coming home! 
Dep. of Philosophy 
Umea University 
Umea 
Sweden 

294 
GUNNAR ANDERSSON 
NOTES 
1 Paul K. Feyerabend, Der wissenschaftstheoretische Realismus unci die Autoritiit der 
Wissenchaften (Braunschweig: Vieweg, 1978),227. 
2 Ibid., 310. 
3 Paul K. Feyerabend, "More clothes from the emperor's bargain basement: A review 
of Laudan's Progress and its Problems", reprinted as chapter 11 in: Philosophical 
Papers, vol. 2, Problems of Empiricism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1981),246. 
4 Nicholas Copernicus, Commentariolus, in Three Copernican Treatises, ed. Edward 
Rosen, 3d ed., rev. (New York: Octagon Books, 1971),57. 
S Paul K. Feyerabend, Against Method (London: NLB, 1975), Appendix, 109-11. 
6 Ibid., 102. 
7 Ibid., 142. 
8 E. J. Dijksterhuis, Die Mechanisierung des Weltbildes (Berlin: Springer, 1956), 
425-26. 
9 Feyerabend,Against Method, 155. 
10 Hans Albert, Traktat iiber kritische Vernunft, 3d ed. (Tiibingen: Mohr, 1973), §5. 
11 Feyerabend, Against Method, 155. 
12 Dijksterhuis, Mechanisierung des Weltbildes, 425-26. 
13 Alexander Koyre, From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe, (Baltimore: 
John Hopkins University Press, 1957), 91. There Koyre also discusses other similar 
contradictions. 
14 Thomas S. Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution: Planetary Astronomy in the 
Development of Western Thought (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1957),223. 
15 Ibid., 202-3. 
16 Paul K. Peyerabend, Farewell to Reason (London: Verso, 1987),287. 
17 Irving M. Copi, Introduction to Logic, 4th ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1972),511. 
18 Cf. Gunnar Andersson, Kritik unci Wissenschaftsgeschichte: Kuhns, Lakatos' und 
Feyerabends Kritik des Kritischen Rationalismus (Tiibingen: Mohr, 1988), ch. 6. 
19 Dijksterhuis, Mechanisierung des Weltbildes, 72. 
20 Peyerabend, Against Method, 98. 
21 Ibid., 93. 
22 Ibid., 179. 
23 Dijksterhuis, Mechanisierung des Weltbildes, 71 
24 Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution, 120. 
2S Dudley Shapere, Galileo: A Philosophical Study (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1974), ch.~. 
26 Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution, 115-17. 
27 Cf. Dijksterhuis, Mechanisierung des Weltbildes, 198-208 and 24~7. 
28 Ibid., 334-35. 
29 Karl R. Popper, The Logic of Scientific Discovery (London: Hutchinson, 1959), 
§19. 
30 Ibid., §20. 
31 Cf. Andersson, Kritik und Wissenschaftsgeschichte, 134-44. 
32 Copi, Introduction to Logic, 452-53. 

FALSIFICATIONS. GALILEO. AND LADY REASON 
295 
33 Andersson. Kritik und Wissenscha[tsgeschichte. 140. 
34 Karl R. Popper. Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge, 
2d ed. (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1965),241. 
35 Ibid .• 14~. 
36 Feyerabend. Against Method. 112. 
37 Andersson, Kritik und Wissenscha[tsgeschichte, 190-91. 
38 Cf. Paul K. Feyerabend, "Consolations for the specialist". in Criticism and the 
Growth of Knowledge, ed. Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave (London: Cambridge 
University Press, 1970).229. on epistemological anarchism as an attractive courtesan. 
The philosophical basis of this mistress is a pragmatic theory of truth according to 
which that is true which satisfies in the widest sense of the word. Cf. "a plea for 
hedonism", ibid., 209-10. As Sancta Claus this courtesan is the product of wishful 
thinking. Cf. Bertrand Russell. History Western Philosophy and its Connection with 
Political and Social Circumstances from the Earliest Times to the Present Day. 2d ed. 
(London: George Allen & Unwin. 1961.). 772: "I have always found that the 
hypothesis of Sancta Claus 'works satisfactorily in the widest sense of the word'''. 

FREDERICK SUPPE 
The Observational Origins of 
Feyerabend's Anarchistic Epistemologyl 
To many Paul Feyerabend is the enfant terrible of philosophy of science: 
although his early writings were only moderately outrageous, his career 
has played itself out as the sad story of a brilliant mind run amok - he 
ultimately succumbing at the hands of his own intellectual anarchism. 
There seems to me no question that Feyerabend's philosophical style 
has been to cultivate the outrageous. Beyond that, I think the above 
portrait constitutes a very unfair caricature. In opposition I would urge 
that there has been a remarkably stable core to his basic epistemological 
views and that, other than a growing disaffection for Popper's views 
which is tied intimately to the realization that to reject induction requires 
rejecting falsification, most of his more anarchistic later views are largely 
the consistent playing out of implications of positions found in his early 
works. The most central of these early positions are (1) his rejection of 
induction on Humean grounds, (2) his extreme position on meaning 
invariance/incommensurability (in place by 1965), and (3) his 1958 "An 
Attempt at a Realistic Interpretation of Experience". 
Since the first two of these early sources have been much discussed in 
the literature but the third one largely has been ignored, I will focus my 
attention here on it. My goals are to (a) detail the theory of observation 
and knowledge contained therein, (b) explore what sorts of relativisms 
this view commits him to, (c) make some observations about the article's 
relations to earlier mainstream philosophical views that suggest this core 
position is more reactionary than outrageous, and (d) critically analyze 
and evaluate the position. 
In discussing the relativistic commitments of his position, I will 
distinguish the following three types of relativism: First, there is 
G. Munevar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 297-311. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
297 

298 
FREDERICK SUPPE 
epistemological relativism, which is concerned with the extent to which 
differences in background beliefs, conceptual apparatus, experience, etc., 
lead to differences in what can be known. Second, one can inquire into the 
extent to which differences in background beliefs, conceptual apparatus, 
experiences, etc., affect what is regarded, claimed, or (rationally) 
accepted as being known (regardless of whether it is in fact known or 
only claimed to be known); this might be termed epistemic-avowal 
relativism. These two types of epistemic relativism usually are not 
distinguished - reflecting the common practice of identifying knowledge 
with reasonable or justified knowledge claims - but for the purpose of my 
discussion these types of epistemic relativism need to be distinguished. 
Third, there is metaphysical relativism, which is concerned with the 
extent to which the particulars and kinds of particulars that exist depend 
upon the background beliefs, conceptual apparatus, etc., of knowers. The 
extent of metaphysical relativism allowed tends to be conditioned on the 
extent of the first two sorts of epistemic relativism claimed. 
"An Attempt at the Realistic Interpretation of Experience" serves as 
both Feyerabend's early vehicle for attacking positivistic treatments of 
observation and for developing his own views on observation. We are 
concerned only with the latter here. According to him, science does 
distinguish, roughly, theory and observation, and thus, an observation 
language is one which is acceptable as a means for describing the results 
of observations and experiments. Observation languages are characterized 
relative to a class C of observers: An atomic sentence (not statement) a 
belongs to the observation language A of a class C of observers if and 
only if (1) there exists a situation S such that any member of C, when 
presented with S and a, quickly will run through a series of states and 
operations which terminates in the acceptance of rejection of a; (2) if a is 
accepted (or rejected) by any member of C when confronted with S, it 
will be accepted (or rejected) by virtually every C; (3) the acceptance or 
rejection of a must be causally dependent upon S. The class of such a is a 
class of observation sentences for c.2 Thus, observation sentences are 
those where there are phenomena which cause members of C to assent to 
or reject the sentence with a consensus among the C. But, according to 
Feyerabend, such assent or dissent is to uninterpreted sentences, and such 
assent or dissent leaves open the question of the interpretation of the 
sentence and is compatible with different members of C assigning 
different interpretations to the sentence;3 such interpretations endow the 
sentences with ontological consequences. That is, the interpretation of a 

FEYERABEND'S ANARCHISTIC EPISTEMOLOGY 
299 
language postulates the existence of particulars which the interpreted 
sentences "fit" or describe.4 
How do we determine which interpretation is appropriate for the 
sentences of the observation language? Feyerabend's view is that 
experience can play no decisive role in such a determination: "No set of 
observations is ever sufficient for us to infer (logically) anyone of those 
interpretations (problem of induction)".5 Intuitively a correct interpreta-
tion would be one where the accepted interpreted sentences correctly 
describe the phenomena which caused their acceptance. Although 
Feyerabend is rather unclear as to what these phenomena are (sensations 
or objects which are experienced), it is clear that correctness of interpreta-
tion here is being construed as some sort of correspondence notion where 
a correct interpretation will be one where all and only the true interpreted 
sentences are accepted - where truth is construed in terms of correspon-
dence with (or "fitting") the phenomena.6 
But, according to Feyerabend, there is no way experience can show that 
such a correspondence obtains, hence no way experience can reveal that 
an interpretation is correct or that the accepted interpreted sentences are 
true. Essentially, his arguments are that experience could not supply the 
interpretation because doing so would require that the experience contain 
the entertainment and acceptance of the sentence, the phenomenon, and 
the "fitting relationship" but the "fitting" would itself be the "fitting" of 
his assertion that the first sentence fit the first phenomenon, and so to be 
accepted would require that this fitting assertion fit the (second) fitting 
phenomenon - which would require a third fitting phenomenon, and so on 
into an infinite regress.1 Thus, there is no way the experience of 
phenomena can reveal the correctness of an interpretation of an observa-
tion language. Furthermore, if the interpretation is supplied prior to the 
experience of a phenomenon, there is no way the experience of the 
phenomenon can reveal or display the truth of the interpreted sentence 
assented to as a result of experiencing the phenomenon. 
It follows, then, that there is no way sensory experience can be used to 
determine the truth or falsity of interpreted observation sentences, 
although the experience of the phenomena determines the acceptance or 
rejection of such interpreted sentences.8 Since it cannot be supplied by 
experience, "the interpretation of an observation-language is determined 
by the theories which we use to explain what we observe, and it changes 
as soon as those theories change".9 Thus, "the terms of a theory and the 
terms of an observation-language used for the tests of that theory give rise 

300 
FREDERICK SUPPE 
to exactly the same logical (ontological) problems. There is no special 
'problem of theoretical entities"')O That is, one can no more be sure of 
the existence of the entities described by observation-language statements 
than one can about the existence of theoretical entities. To put the point a 
way Feyerabend never does, but which is highly revealing of his position, 
experience is incapable of playing any significant role in ascertaining the 
truth of either theoretical or observational assertions. 
A number of observations about this view need to be made. First, the 
view is highly reminiscent of Berkeley's views on material objects. But, 
whereas after using similar considerations to argue that experience is 
insufficient to guarantee the existence of external physical objects 
described by language, Berkeley goes on to maintain it is illegitimate to 
postulate their existence; Feyerabend is willing to continue assuming their 
existence but denies they can play any significant role in epistemology. 
This is why Feyerabend is a Pickwickian realist while Berkeley is an 
idealist. 
Second, it now is clear that Feyerabend is a realist only in the ontologi-
cal sense that he is willing to grant the existence of physical objects. But 
he denies any epistemological realism in which the way physical objects 
are plays any significant role in knowledge (other than possibly causing 
the assent or rejection of observation language sentences, and whether it 
does can only be a matter of conjecture on his view). His position seems 
to be that since experience cannot determine whether an interpreted 
sentence correctly describes or "fits" physical objects, such a correspon-
dence notion of truth can play no role in epistemology. This is reflected in 
his practice of referring to the accepted observation reports as know-
ledge; 11 thus, he is rejecting what usually is a central ingredient to a 
realistic epistemology. 
Third, as with Berkeley, the sorts of arguments he offers in defense of 
his position lend support to the contention that truth via correspondence 
can play no significant role in an account of knowledge only if one 
accepts the K-K Thesis (' S knows that P' entails'S knows that he knows 
that P'). For if this thesis is accepted, then from the fact that experience 
cannot show that such a correspondence holds and the vaguely plausible 
assumption (tacit in his discussion) that such a correspondence could not 
be known except if displayed in experience, it would follow that one 
cannot know that P is true; hence, one cannot know that he knows that P; 
hence, via the K-K Thesis, one cannot know that P. But we do have 
empirical knowledge, so we must reject the idea that language "fitting" 

FEYERABEND'S ANARCHISTIC EPISTEMOLOGY 
301 
the physical world plays any role in knowledge. But such an argument 
(and I can think of no other compatible with what he says that will serve 
his purposes) depends essentially on the K-K Thesis; for if it is denied, 
the requirement of truth by correspondence is totally compatible with 
Feyerabend's other claims: one can experientially know that P, where P 
''fitting'' or corresponding to the physical world is a condition of 
knowledge, but one cannot know that one knows that p}2 We will see 
later that the fact that correspondence plays no role in his epistemology is 
a key source of the extreme epistemic relativism characteristic of his 
position; and if, as I am willing to concede here, he is correct that 
experience cannot display the truth of observation reports, then his tacit 
acceptance of the K-K Thesis is a crucial source of his extreme epistemic 
relativism. 
Fourth, the comparison of Feyerabend and Berkeley can be pushed a 
very long way. For in his treatment of observation, Feyerabend essentially 
is presenting Berkeley's view (as modified by his espousal of metaphysi-
cal realism), except that he, in effect, is maintaining that Berkeley's 
arguments that correspondences between ideas (interpreted sentences) and 
physical objects can play no role in epistemology also apply to sensory 
phenomena as well: correspondence between ideas (interpreted sentences) 
and sensory experience is just as problematic, hence, has no legitimate 
place in an epistemology of perception. Thus, no a posteriori knowledge 
is incorrigible, not even knowledge of experience. 13 
Fifth, there are important similarities and differences between 
Feyerabend's views and those of physicalistic logical positivism. The 
latter postulated a neutral observation language, interpreted realistically as 
making assertions about the "external world", although such assertions 
were non-problematic in that a consensus could be reached among 
proponents of competing theories; such consensus neither made such 
observation-language assertions incorrigible nor certain in the sense 
required by 18th Century British Empiricism, nor did acceptance 
guarantee that the accepted assertions correspond with the 'external 
world' (though realistically-inclined physicalists such as Carnap tacitly 
assumed they did so correspond). Further, all persons speaking the neutral 
observation language supply the same interpretations to its sentences. 
Similarly, Feyerabend accepts the idea that observation languages 
characteristically enjoy intersubjective agreement as to which sentences 
are to be accepted or rejected, but that such agreement is restricted to 
limited groups; so different "social" groups will accept different bodies of 

302 
FREDERICK SUPPE 
sentences, and within a group the members need not to give the same 
interpretation to the accepted and rejected sentences. Thus, both a neutral 
uninterpreted observation language and a neutral interpreted observation 
language are impossible. And, although the interpretation of the accepted 
sentences has ontological commitments, different members of the same or 
different groups will be making different ontological commitments, and 
there is no guarantee the commitments correspond to the actual world. 
Since Feyerabend accords the accepted (interpreted) sentences the status 
of knowledge, his position commits him to an extensive epistemological 
relativism; and since such differential knowledge clearly yields differen-
tial knowledge claims, he also is committed to an epistemic-avowal 
relativism. However, this does not commit him to a metaphysical 
relativism unless he also is committed to the view that to know that ell, ell 
must be true in a correspondence sense - a view he has not committed 
himself to and which he apparently would deny. Although this leaves us 
with a very unclear, completely unspecified, idea what he understands 
knowledge to be, it does not commit him to anything like the subjective 
idealism he has been accused of by some of his critics,14 including 
myself. In short, Feyerabend's views on observation amount to an 
extreme skeptical extension of 18th Century empiricism coupled with an 
epistemically gratuitous espousal of metaphysical realism. 
We have seen that, according to Feyerabend, observation is theory-
laden in the sense that the theories we use to explain what we observe 
determine the interpretation of observation sentences. How does such 
interpretation occur? Interpretation is the specification or determination of 
meaning, and so we must turn to Feyerabend's views on meaning. We 
explore the issue chronologically. Initially his view was that: 
the meaning of every term we use depends upon the theoretical context in which it 
occurs. Words do not 'mean' something in isolation; they obtain their meanings by 
being part of a theoretical system. Hence, if we consider two contexts with basic 
principles that either contradict each other or lead to inconsistent consequences in 
certain domains, it is to be expected that some terms of the first context will not occur 
in the second with exactly the same meaning.1S 
But this understates his view; for by "theory" he means global theories, 
and "to express it more radically, each theory will possess its own 
experience, and there will be no overlap between these experiences. 
Clearly a crucial experience now is impossible ... because there is no 
universally accepted statement capable of expressing whatever emerges 

FEYERABEND'S ANARCHISTIC EPISTEMOLOGY 
303 
from observation".l6 Such theories are incommensurable in the sense that 
the meanings of their descriptive terms depend upon mutually inconsis-
tent principles.17 Thus, Feyerabend is committed to the view that any 
change in a (global) theory changes all the meanings of its terms, hence, 
alters the interpretation of the observation language. But as Achinstein 
has noted, this makes science analytic: Every statement of a theory is 
constitutive of the meanings of the terms of the theory and of the 
observation language.1S 
Such a consequence of his meanings doctrines is prima facie incom-
patible with Feyerabend's views on the growth of scientific knowledge. 
Following Hume and Popper, he denies that induction is capable of 
providing general knowledge or of establishing the truth of theories or 
generalizations; 19 this denial is a reflection of the fact, noted above, that 
theories are logically prior to the interpretation of the observational 
evidence which induction could exploit. Differently put, if induction were 
capable of establishing the truth of theories on the basis of experience, 
then (since the theory provides the interpretation of observation-language 
reports) experience would be capable of establishing the correctness of 
interpretations of observation-language statements - something we have 
seen he denies. This view together with his meaning and observation 
doctrines seems to lead to the view that theories are self -certifying and 
thus, that any global theory is as acceptable as any other. That is, 
Feyerabend's views appear to commit him to the view that there is no 
objective way to decide on the baS,is of experience between competing 
theories. Thus, rather than dogmatically asserting a single theory, science 
oUght to encourage the proliferation of theories, which theories will be 
pitted against experience and against each other in the attempt to ''falsify 
them". Out of such competition some theories will survive, but such 
survival does nothing to establish their truth; hence, it is essential that 
science continue to proliferate theories, developing new alternatives, in 
the effort to falsify those theories which have withstood the trials of 
experience and test.20 But such a doctrine seems incompatible with his 
meaning and observation doctrines. E.g., Achinstein charges that since 
theories provide the interpretation of the observation language, and are 
analytically true, any observation report which could possibly falsify the 
theory will be analytically false; thus, he concludes that experiential 
falsification of (global) theories is impossible in Feyerabend's view.21 
This charge is unwarranted. For Feyerabend's theory of observation 
does allow the possibility that an observer may be caused by experience 

304 
FREDERlCK SUPPE 
to reject an observation sentence which is a logical consequence of the 
theory, where the interpretation of the sentence provided by that theory 
makes the rejected statement analytically true. Thus, Peyerabend's view 
does allow for conflict between theory and observation, hence, for the 
observational test of theories; but such conflicts must take the form of 
rejecting analytically-true assertions on the basis of experience under 
circumstances where one might know the rejected assertion is a logical 
consequence of the theory. Anyone who did this while accepting 
Peyerabend's meaning doctrines (and their consequences) would have to 
be rejecting on the basis of experience a proposition which he knew to be 
analytically true. Experiential falsification thus, is possible on 
Peyerabend's view but involves fundamentally irrational behavior. 
Peyerabend's proliferation and falsification views also require the 
testing of competing theories against each other as a means of assessing 
their comparative merits - e.g., by fmding experiential circumstances 
where the predictions of one theory are upheld by experience whereas the 
predictions of another are denied by the same experience. Several 
commentators have charged that Peyerabend' s meaning doctrines 
preclude this possibility; for it is charged that this would require assessing 
the competing predictions of the theory against the same observation 
report, but that observation report would have to assign the same 
meanings to its constituent terms as do the two theories; and this is 
impossible since, via the meaning doctrines, two different (global) 
theories must assign different meanings to each term they have in 
common.22 Peyerabend has protested (rightly, I believe) that this 
objection is misguided, that the sort of comparability his view requires 
does not require that the predictions of a theory be compared against an 
observation statement that is neutral with respect to the two theories.23 
Por, on his view of observation, it is possible that advocates of different 
theories may possess the same observation language (the same stock of 
uninterpreted sentences) and give or withhold assent to the same 
observation sentences on the basis of the same experiences. And this is 
wholly compatible with these observers subscribing to different theories 
which provide different interpretations to the observation sentences. Thus, 
suppose that Sl and S2 subscribe to incommensurable theories Tl and T2 
respectively. Suppose that Tl entails the observation sentence 0 and T2 
entails not-O. Sl and S2 now can have the same experience which causes 
them both to accept the sentence O. And they can do this despite the fact 
that in rejecting not-O as interpreted by T2, S2 is not affirming what 0 

FEYERABEND'S ANARCHISTIC EPISTEMOLOGY 
305 
asserts as interpreted by T}. Thus, S} and S2 can both agree that ex-
perience requires ,the acceptance of 0, hence, that T} is preferable to T2, 
since T} (but not T2), entails sentence 0 which experience causes both S} 
and S2 to accept; and they can do so without having to attach the same 
meanings to the tenns in O. Thus, it is not surprising to fmd Feyerabend 
[1965] defending his comparability views as follows: 
T and T' are still incommensurable. Yet, it is possible, to a high degree of approxima-
tion, to establish an isomorphism between certain selected semantical properties of 
some (not all) descriptive statements T' and some (not all) descriptive statements of T 
(let the corresponding classes be C and C', respectively [sic]) ... Considering that 
meanings are dependent on structure and not on the particular ways in which the 
structure is realized, we may say that, within the restrictions given, C and C' have a 
common core of meaning. We may even identify C and C'. (As C *" T and C' *" T' , 
this does not affect the relation between T and T') .... But the very method of rigging 
indicates that the demand is superfluous: when making a comparative evaluation of 
classical physics and of general relativity we do not compare meanings; we inves-
tigate the conditions under which a structural similarity can be obtained. If these 
conditions are contrary to fact, then the theory that does not contain them supersedes 
the theory whose structure can be mimicked only if the conditions hold (it is now 
quite irrelevant in what theory and, therefore, in what terms the conditions are 
formed) ... the fact that argument proceeded even through the most fundamental 
upheavals, that it was undisputed and that it led to results shows that meanings cannot 
be that essential. (Pp. 182-183 in Grandy [1973] reprinting). 
Such a defense of comparability is allowed by Feyerabend's original 
positions on observation, meaning, and incommensurability only because 
his position allows the irrational rejection of propositions known to be 
analytically true discussed above. Thus, the comparability of competing 
theories allowed by his view is equally irrational. 
In granting Feyerabend the above interpretation of the foregoing 
passage in response to objections against his "comparability" doctrines, I 
have been most charitable - and in the estimation of some who have read 
drafts of this paper, excessively charitable. For essential to the defense 
just offered of Feyerabend's position is granting him the supposition that 
every observer "has a built-in syntactic machinery that imitates (but does 
not describe) certain features of our experience".24 This concession is 
weighty since to suppose that no interpretation is involved in the syntactic 
decomposition into morphemes, let alone sentences, is to concede very 
much indeed. In effect it is to grant to Feyerabend that, although there is 
no neutral "interpreted" observation language, there is a common 
syntactical language which can be presupposed in the comparison of 

306 
FREDERICK SUPPE 
theories. Although such a supposition is weaker than that of the 
positivist's "neutral observation language''; it is not that much weaker. As 
Shapere ([1966], pp. 59-62) argues (albeit not as clearly as he could 
have), this not only concedes to the positivist most of what Feyerabend 
wants to take back, but also is incompatible with his general doctrines on 
incommensurability. Thus, my defense of Feyerabend here, at best, is an 
exegetical one which, although circumventing some specific criticisms 
based on exegetical mistakes, does nothing to vindicate Feyerabend's 
overall program. 
Something more needs to be said about the long passage quoted above. 
I have interpreted this passage as involving no retreat from Feyerabend's 
early extreme meaning doctrines. Other commentators, e.g., Achinstein 
and Shapere, interpret this and other passages as involving a change in his 
views on meaning - so as to allow that different theories can have some 
meanings in common where such commonality of meaning is determined 
by isomorphism conditions. So interpreted, Feyerabend's view is liable to 
the objection that, given the principles of a theory, there will be a number 
of ways to collect items discussed by principles into classes; thus, a wide 
variety of isomorphism conditions is possible. Hence, Feyerabend's 
isomorphism conditions do not enable us to determine sameness or 
difference of meanings between theories since they do not enable us to 
distinguish trivial cases where meanings are constant from interesting 
ones where they are not.25 The middle portion of the quote does lend 
some credence to this interpretation of Feyerabend,26 and if the interpreta-
tion is correct, the objections are weighty indeed. However, I have 
suggested above that to defend his comparability doctrines, Feyerabend 
need not retreat from his early extreme meaning doctrines. And that 
realization suggests that, in the passage just quoted, Feyerabend may not 
be committing himself to a change in his meaning doctrines; for what he 
concedes about the possibility of common meanings in the middle of the 
passage he tends to take back towards the end. His point seems to be that 
sameness or difference of meaning is irrelevant to the comparability of 
theories - as it is on the defense of his comparability claims I have 
offered above. Thus, I am inclined to interpret the quoted passage, and 
other similar passages elsewhere, as not involving any significant retreat 
from, or attenuation of, his original extreme meaning doctrines. Whatever 
the correct interpretation, I think it should be clear that his general view is 
somewhat more plausible if he does not retreat from his original posi-
tion.27 

FEYERABEND'S ANARCHISTIC EPISTEMOLOGY 
307 
Feyerabend's views lead to the following extreme epistemic-avowal 
relativism; and since he tacitly equates knowledge with knowledge 
claims, this epistemic-avowal relativism also is an epistemological 
relativism: knowledge claims are in the fonn of statements - interpreted 
sentences. Although experience can cause perceivers to accept or reject 
statements, experience cannot supply the interpretations of sentences 
contained in such statements; rather such interpretations must be supplied 
by logically-prior theories which completely detennine the meanings, 
hence, the interpretations of observation sentences. Thus, possessors of 
different theories cannot give expression to the same observational facts; 
and there is no way that experience can evidence the truth of observation 
statements since experience cannot indicate the appropriate interpretation 
of the accepted and rejected sentences of an observation language. 
Induction is denied, and so experience cannot provide evidence which 
supports or evidences the truth of general assertions such as scientific 
theories. In short, empirical truth can plan no significant role in epistemol-
ogy; and experience is utterly irrelevant to the assessment of the truth of 
empirical assertions. Only in a Pickwickian sense is a posteriori 
knowledge possible at all. 
For Feyerabend, then, epistemology reduces to belief in theories and 
observations which never can be supported by experience. But such 
acceptance should not be uncritical since there can be conflicts between 
the observation sentences entailed by a theory and the observation 
sentences experience can cause you to accept. And under at least some 
circumstances, such conflicts should result in the rejection of a theory 
(one's system of beliefs) in favor of some alternative. Through such a 
process of proliferation and rejection of theories it is possible that one 
eventually may obtain a theory which entails all and only those observa-
tion sentences which one accepts on the basis of experience. 
But even if such a theory were obtained, nothing would follow as to 
whether the theory correctly described reality; nothing could be con-
cluded about the factual truth either of the theory or the accepted 
observation sentences as interpreted by the theory.28 For, it is entirely 
possible that different persons will be caused to accept and reject different 
classes of observation sentences on the basis of their experiences; and so 
nothing follows as to the truth of theories from their complete agreement 
with the accepted observation sentences. In short, the most that is possible 
on Feyerabend' s views is that from the process of "pitting" theories 
against observational experience one ultimately may come to accept a 

308 
FREDERICK SUPPE 
theory which is in perfect coherence with the observation sentences one 
accepts on the basis of experience. But such alternative coherent systems 
of belief legitimately can be called knowledge, so an open-ended variety 
of knowledge is possible wherein different people can know theories 
which could not be true of one and the same world. Such is the extreme 
epistemic relativism that results from Feyerabend's position. Finally, it 
should be noted that this extreme relativism is a rather straight-forward 
corollary to his theory of observation, and that his defense of that theory 
depended essentially on his tacit acceptance of the K-K thesis. 
Although Feyerabend subsequently has modified and extended his 
views about how science ought to proceed in the proliferation of theories, 
and tried to show how it is "reasonable" for proponents of a theory to 
persist in the acceptance of a theory in the face of falsifying or incom-
patible experience, adopting a position which he says is a reinterpretation 
of Lenin's political views,29 these changes and extensions seem to 
involve only one significant retreat from the doctrines on observation, 
meaning, etc., considered above: whereas his earlier views followed 
Popper in stressing the falsification of theories on the basis of conflicts 
between a theory's predictions and accepted observation reports, 
Feyerabend now denies that the acceptance of observation reports enjoys 
such a privileged place; rather, when theory and an accepted observation 
report are in conflict one may either reject the theory, reject the accepted 
observation report, or resort to ad hoc hypotheses which erase the 
conflict. All are equally legitimate prima facie. Although those changes in 
view do result in significant revisions in Feyerabend's methodological 
views (propelling him towards dialectical materialism) they do not 
involve any significant revisions in the basic epistemological doctrines 
discussed above. 
I think there is no question that Feyerabend' s basic epistemological 
position is highly unacceptable. But the issue concerning us here is, How 
outrageous is it? In my discussion above I stressed the extent to which his 
position enjoys continuity with Berkeley's views and is conditioned by 
modest disagreement with logical positivism's views on observation. 
Elsewhere (Suppe 1989, Chapter 10) I have argued that Feyerabend's 
view is the natural last step in playing out 18th century Empiricism's 
retreat toward post-Humean skepticism - that Feyerabend is the ultimate 
reductio ad absurdum of Lockean empiricism. Moreover, given this final 
skeptical retreat, Feyerabend's later anarchistic views are an increasingly 
consistent and faithful spelling out of the implications of these early 

FEYERABEND'S ANARCHISTIC EPISTEMOLOGY 
309 
epistemological views of his which still constitute the core of his position. 
In short, while Feyerabend's philosophical style is outrageous, his 
views ultimately are reactionary. 
The University of Maryland 
Maryland 
USA 
BffiLiOGRAPHY 
Achinstein, P. (1968) Concepts of Science. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University 
Press. 
Feyerabend, P. (1958) "An Attempt at a Realistic Interpretation of Experience". 
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, n.s. 58: 143-170. 
-
(1962) "Explanation, Reduction, and Empiricism". pp. 28-97 in H. Feigl and G. 
Maxwell (cds). Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. m. Min-
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
-
(1962a) ''Problems of Microphysics". pp. 189-203 in R. Colodny (ed)., Frontiers 
of Science and Philosophy. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. 
-
(1965) "On the Meaning of Scientific Terms". Journal of Philosophy, 62: 
266-274. Reprinted on pp. 163-183 of Grandy [1973]. 
-
(1965a) "Problems of Empiricism". pp. 145-260 in R. Colodny (ed)., Beyond the 
Edge of Certainty. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall. 
-
(1965b) "Reply to Criticism", pp. 223-261 in R. Cohen and M. Wartofsky (cds)., 
Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. II. Dordrecht: D. Reidel. 
-
(1970) "Against Method: Outline of an Anarchistic Theory of Knowledge". pp. 
17-130 in M. Radner and S. Winokur (eds)., Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy 
of Science, Vol. IV. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
-
(1970a) ''Problems of Empiricism, Part II". In R. Colodny (ed)., Nature and 
Function of Scientific Theories. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. 
-
(1975) Against Method. London: New Left Books. 
Grandy, R. (ed)., (1973) Theories and Observation in Science. Englewood Cliffs: 
Prentice Hall. 
Scheffler, I. (1967) Science and Subjectivity. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill. 
Shapere, D. (1966) "Meaning and Scientific Change". pp. 41-85 in R. Colodny (ed)., 
Mind and Cosmos: Explorations in the Philosophy of Science. Pittsburgh: 
University of Pittsburgh Press. 
Suppe, F. (1977) The Structure of Scientific Theories, 2nd ed. Urbana: University of 
Dlinois Press. 
-
(1989) The Semantic Conception of Theories and Scientific Realism. Urbana: 
University of Dlinois Press. 

310 
FREDERICK SUPPE 
NOTES 
1 This article draws heavily from Chapter 10 of my 1989 and incorporates much of 
section II of that chapter. These portions are used by permission of the University of 
Dlinois Press. See that work for the full arguments supporting claims made here. 
2 Feyerabend [1958], pp, 144-145. 
. 
3 Ibid., pp. 145-146. 
4 Ibid., pp. 148-149 et passim. 
S Ibid., p. 150; italics added. But notice that Feyerabend, in commenting later on his 
"pragmatic theory of observation" presented in the article under consideration, tends 
to identify the acceptance and rejection of observation sentences with "human 
experience;" cf. Feyerabend [1965a]. For a discussion of this tension in Feyerabend's 
views, cf. Shapere [1966], pp. 59-61. 
6 Cf. Feyerabend [1958], esp. Section 4. 
7 Ibid, p. 155. 
8 Ibid., Section 5, et passim. It should be noted that Feyerabend does not explicitly 
discuss truth, though the views on the determination of truth for observation sentences 
attributed to him clearly are tacit in his discussion. It is important that these tacit 
views be made explicit. 
9 Ibid., p. 163; italicized in the original. 
10 Ibid., p. 164; italics his. 
11 Cf., e.g., pp. 21-29,47, and p. 99 note 21 of his [1970]. 
12 For further development of this possibility, see Chapters 12 and 13 of my [1989]. 
Additional arguments against the K-K Thesis are found on pp. 717-727 of my [1977] 
and in Chapter 10 of my [1989]. 
13 Feyerabend [1958], p. 169. 
14 Cf., e.g., Scheffler [1966], p. 19; although he does not specifically level this charge 
against Feyerabend there, it is clear Scheffler is making a general charge against 
"subjectivist" views of science and that he does count Feyerabend as being among the 
"subjectivists." 
If Feyerabend were to accept the common thesis that knowledge is justified true 
belief, where truth is interpreted in terms of some correspondence, a metaphysical 
relativism would result where proponents of different theories are concerned with 
different worlds inhabited by different particulars. Such a metaphysical relativism 
would be compatible with his espousal of ontological realism, the result being a view 
not unlike Husserl's where the world is not created out of "whole conceptual cloth," 
but the "essences" of particulars, or their kinds, would be conceptually organized. 
IS Feyerabend [1965a], p. 180; italics added. 
16 Ibid., p. 214. The interpretation which follows of the foregoing, and related 
passages, is the most standard one and is supported by the general thrust of 
Feyerabend's discussion. There is, however, contravening text. Cf. Shapere [1966], 
pp. 53-57, for a sensitive discussion of the exegetical problems; in other parts of 
Shapere's essay he criticizes the various plausible exegetical positions. 
17 Feyerabend [1975a], p. 227, n. 19. 
18 Cf. Achinstein [1968], p. 96. 
19 Cf. p. 63 of his [1962]. 

FEYERABEND'S ANARCHIS'TIC EPISTEMOLOGY 
311 
20 Cf. pp. 29-30 of his [1962]. Later he abandons this falsification view, maintaining 
that one should continue to proliferate and use "falsified" theories as well as those 
which have withstood empirical test. Cf. p. 43 et passim of his [1970]. 
21 Achinstein [1968], pp. 96-97. 
22 Cf. Achinstein [1968], pp. 96-97. Such counterarguments require interpreting 
(contra Feyerabend) the observation reports as statements rather than uninterpreted 
sentences. On pp. 57-58 Shapere [1966] raises criticisms which presuppose this 
interpretation; however, on pp. 59-62 of the same work, Shapere considers dle 
"uninterpreted sentence" construal of observation reports and presents devastating 
criticisms against it Thus, the criticisms raised here primarily focus on Achinstein's 
discussion, not Shapere's. 
23 Cf. his [1965] and [1965b]. 
24 Feyerabend [1965a], pp. 214-215. 
2S Achinstein [1068], pp. 94-95; Shapere [1966], pp. 62-65. 
26 And, as Shapere ([1966], pp. 53-57) indicates, there is other textual evidence that 
supports this reading, although it does not cohere with the dominant themes in the 
Feyerabend corpus. 
rt This is not to suggest, however, that his "original position" meaning doctrines are 
that plausible; for quite decisive objections are raised against that position by Shapere 
[1966], pp. 59-62 et passim. 
28 However, if one adopts a Husserlian-sort of idealism (cf. note 14 above), which is 
compatible with, but not required by, Feyerabend's views, this will not be so; but the 
relativistic conclusions which follow below would not be affected. 
29 Cf. his [1970a] and especially his [1970] and [1975]. 

ANTHONY N. PEROVICH, JR. 
Incommensurability, Its Varieties 
and Its Ontological Consequences 
Professor Feyerabend's views on the incommensurability of theories are 
perhaps more widely criticized than understood; the source of the 
difficulty in understanding him lies, at least in part, in the variety of ways 
in which he has presented those views. Consequently, in the subsequent 
discussion I direct my attention to an examination of his various accounts 
of incommensurability rather than to a consideration of alleged instances 
of it, attempting to disentangle the major strands and to determine 
whether these indicate differences of doctrine. I shall argue that 
Feyerabend's writing in fact contains two distinct accounts of incommen-
surability. Whatever his mode of presentation, however, two elements 
have been fundamental to his position from the outset: terms in incommen-
surable theories are neither synonymous nor co-referential. Yet the 
relation between these two elements is not at all clear, and I do not 
believe it can be made clear until we have examined the different ways in 
which incommensurability is explained. Once that is done we see what 
relations between meaning and reference Feyerabend's views plausibly 
suggest, and this understanding allows us to eliminate what I take to be 
misconceptions regarding the ontological consequences of incommen-
surability. The doctrine of incommensurability has such consequences, 
but they are not of the sort condemned by critics and recently defended by 
Feyerabend himself. 
Incommensurability is frequently regarded as fundamentally a thesis 
about the meaning of (scientific) terms, though it is at least sometimes 
recognized that the claim noted above, that there can be no co-referential 
terms in incommensurable theories, is involved as well. For example, 
Hilary Putnam has recently offered the following reconstruction of 
G. Munivar (ed.). Beyond Reason. 313-328. 
e 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
313 

314 
ANTHONY N. PEROVICH, JR. 
Feyerabend's view:1 a scientific term is synonymous with a description 
based on certain laws taken to be necessary truths regarding the referent 
of that term. Thus, if nothing satisfies the description, the term fails to 
refer, and since a change in the description amounts to a change in 
meaning, the term cannot have the same sense in theories where the 
corresponding descriptions differ. "In general, Feyerabend concludes, 
such a term can have neither a shared referent nor a shared sense in 
different theories (the 'incommensurability of theories')".2 This is a result 
that Putnam finds unacceptable, and his response, of course, is to deny 
that scientific terms are synonymous with descriptions. 
According to this account, the fact that a term is regarded as failing to 
refer is a consequence of a particular doctrine about meaning, that terms 
are synonymous with descriptions. There is some evidence in 
Feyerabend's writing that changes of meaning ground the claim of a 
failure of reference. He states, for example, that laws which must be 
referred to in order to explain the meanings of the main descriptive terms 
(such as 'force') which appear in what he calls the "inertial law" of the 
impetus theory are inconsistent with Newton's theory, so that from the 
Newtonian point of view a concept such as that of force in the impetus 
theory must have "zero denotation".3 This discussion seems to fit 
Putnam's account, according to which a change in certain laws amounts 
to a change in the meaning of associated terms, while this change of 
meaning results in the charge of a failure of reference for the term as 
understood in the initial theory. 
However, there are clear indications that Feyerabend does not base the 
conclusion that a term fails to refer on a change of meaning, but rather 
holds that the meanings of our terms change because we recognize that 
they do not refer. Thus, he writes, 
After all, we very often discover that entities we thought existed did, in fact, not exist. 
Realizing this, we must eliminate and replace the terms designating these entities 
from our factual descriptions (which, at least in the sciences, are supposed to be about 
existing things, processes, relations, etc)., and this may, of course, lead to a violation 
of the demand of meaning invariance.4 
Here Feyerabend suggests that a change of meaning is the consequence, 
not the source, of recognition that a term fails to refer. These two 
characteristics, change of meaning and failure of reference, are both 
aspects of incommensurability, and we must understand this latter if we 
are to determine the proper relation between the former. Therefore, I tum 

INCOMMENSURABILITY 
315 
now to a consideration of Feyerabend' s views on this doctrine. 
Feyerabend speaks of incommensurability in three different ways, 
which I shall distinguish as theoretic, linguistic, and ontological (though 
this third in fact concerns more than ontology). Of course, these three 
could simply represent the same doctrine expressed in varying idioms, but 
we shall fmd, I think, that the last-named is importantly different from the 
fast two. 
Both the theoretic and linguistic accounts are based on a contextual 
theory of meaning. According to the theoretic version, basic principles of 
the theory "contribute" to the content of cQncepts contained in it,5 so that 
concepts "contain" theoretical elements and "imply" theoretical assump-
tions.6 Thus, a change in the theoretical context will "profoundly 
influence" meaning 7 by "conferring" different meanings on the same 
word.s 
After all, the meaning of every tenn we use depends upon the theoretical context in 
which it occurs. Words do not "mean" something in isolation; they obtain their 
meanings by being part of a theoretical system. Hence, if we consider two contexts 
with basic principles that either contradict each other or lead to inconsistent conse-
quences in certain domains, it is to be expected that some tenns of the fIrst context 
will not occur in the second with exactly the same meaning.9 
I do not intend to evaluate the contextual theory of meaning here, and in 
fact I shall uncritically adopt Feyerabend's description of principles 
"contributing" to the meaning of a term. However, in view of remarks I 
shall make below regarding the relation between this theory of meaning 
and the doctrine of incommensurability, it is important to distinguish 
different types of contribution. I shall call the contribution that a principle 
makes to the meaning of a term "distinctive" if it serves to distinguish the 
meaning of that term from that of others appearing in the same theory. 
For example, Putnam suggests that on the Feyerabendian view the Bohr-
Rutherford description of an electron, based on laws including those 
regarding its charge, mass, and effects, gives the meaning of "electron" 
for that theory; 10 such laws then make a "distinctive" contribution to the 
meaning of "electron", for they distinguish it from the meaning of other 
terms, say, "nucleus". Clearly, terms differently located in the same 
theoretical context will have different meanings; this point, while 
obvious, has some important and rather surprising consequences in 
conjunction with Feyerabend's ontological version of incommen-
surability, and I shall discuss these consequences below. 

316 
ANTHONY N. PEROVICH, JR. 
The theoretic account of incommensurability rests directly on this 
theory of meaning: a change in the theoretical context changes the 
meaning of the terms appearing in that context, and if the change is 
"fundamental", II then the meanings of all the descriptive terms of the 
theory will be different, the new theory resulting from the altered context 
being incommensurable with the old. Thus, "two theories will be called 
incommensurable when the meanings of their main descriptive terms 
depend on mutually inconsistent principles". 12 
The thesis of incommensurability is sometimes stated in linguistic 
rather than theoretic terms, and indeed not only the languages of highly 
developed theories, but also natural languages, may be incommensurable 
according to Feyerabend.13 Languages are constituted by sets of rules,14 
and the grammatical rules governing the use of a term contribute to the 
meaning of that term.ls A change of these rules (at least of what 
Feyerabend calls "fundamental rules"16) changes the meaning of the 
terms governed by them, and the resulting language will be incommen-
surable with the first.17 Thus, we find a second account of incommen-
surability, similar to the first but based on "grammatical" changes rather 
than differences of theoretical context. 
It is difficult to tell whether Feyerabend wants both to identify 
"theories" with "languages", and also to identify "theoretical postulates 
and assumptions" with "grammatical rules". Such an identification is 
suggested by passages that speak of "the rules (assumptions, postulates) 
constituting a language (a 'theory' in our terminology)".18 If we make 
this identification then the two accounts I have distinguished reduce to a 
single account expressed in different idioms. On the other hand, 
Feyerabend sometimes distinguishes theories from the languages that 
express them,19 and this might suggest that we are dealing with alterna-
tive accounts of incommensurability, particularly in conjunction with 
statements that seem to distinguish the contribution to meaning made by 
"theoretical postulates" from that made by "grammatical rules": "the 
meaning of a term depends on the grammatical rules applied to it as well 
as on the theoretical assumptions in which it occurs essentially. The 
totality of these rules and assumptions forms a theory, or a point of 
view".20 I shall not attempt to reconcile these various remarks, though 
perhaps appropriate distinctions among the senses of the terms involved 
would succeed. I shall suppose in what follows that if Feyerabend 
distinguishes at all between languages and theories he views the distinc-
tion as inconsequential; and despite the passage just quoted there are 

INCOMMENSURABILITY 
317 
others that might suggest that Feyerabend views the connection between 
theoretical postulates and grammatical rules as particularly close: "the 
meaning of the 'primitive' notions depends on the [theory's] postulates 
(and associated grammatical rules) ... ".21 Moreover, he frequently seems 
to suggest that what distinguishes rules from theoretical postulates is that 
the former are merely implicit.22 In any event it seems unlikely that we 
are here dealing with two versions of incommensurability, one based on 
changes in the theoretical context (assumptions, postulates) and another 
on changes in the linguistic context (grammatical rules), understood as 
importantly different frameworks. The most reasonable interpretation of 
Feyerabend's views seems to me to be that both "theoretic" and 
"linguistic" incommensurability express what is at least fundamentally 
the same doctrine, although they express it in different ways. 
The third way of speaking about incommensurability I called 
"ontological". Feyerabend has from his early writings emphasized that a 
transition from one theory to another incommensurable with it involves "a 
complete replacement of the ontology" of the former by that of the lat-
ter.23 This insistence on a complete replacement of ontology has puzzled 
some critics,24 and as we saw at the outset, Feyerabend seems to waver in 
his views as to whether changes of ontology result from, or bring about, 
changes of meaning. In Against Method he attempts to describe, if only 
vaguely, the situations which bring about such "complete replacements"; 
in so doing he explains incommensurability in a third manner. 
We have a point of view (theory, framework, cosmos, mode of representation) whose 
elements (concepts, "facts", pictures) are built up in accordance with certain 
principles of construction. The principles involve something like "closure": there are 
things which cannot be said, or "discovered", without violating the principles (which 
does not mean contradicting them). Say the things, make the discovery, and the 
principles are suspended. Now take those constructive principles that underlie every 
element of the cosmos (of the theory), every fact (every concept). Let us call such 
principles universal principles of the theory in question. Suspending universal 
principles means suspending all facts and concepts. Finally, let us call a discovery, or 
a statement, or an attitude incommensurable with the cosmos (the theory, the 
framework) if it susPends some of its universal principles.25 
Examples of these principles and of this sort of incommensurability are 
offered by Feyerabend in Chapter 17 of Against Method. 
It may appear that we are dealing here with what is simply a further 
version of the very same account of incommensurability which we have 
just been examining: rather than speaking of a language or theory, we 

318 
ANTHONY N. PEROVICH, JR. 
now speak primarily of a "cosmos", rather than mentioning "theoretical 
assumptions and postulates" and "grammatical rules", Feyerabend instead 
refers to "universal principles", and, fmally rather than discovering the 
source of incommensurability in a change in these assumptions or 
postulates or rules, it is now found in the suspension of principles. So far 
it may appear that the account is unchanged, and only the idiom is altered. 
The similarity is heightened by the fact that Feyerabend states that 
universal principles underlie concepts as well as facts and goes on to 
identify "principles" with "grammatical habits".26 Theoretic, linguistic, 
and ontological change seem to be no more than d:fferent facets of a 
single phenomenon: "Copernicanism clashes with some obvious facts, it 
is inconsistent with plausible, and apparently well-established, principles, 
and it does not fit in with the 'grammar' of a commonly spoken 
idiom" P Nevertheless, the identity of the present account with those 
preceding it cannot be maintained; this becomes immediately apparent 
when we relate the present view to the contextual theory of meaning, 
which played such a significant role in the earlier versions. 
One obvious consequence of the ontological account serves to distin-
guish it from the earlier theoretic-linguistic one and runs perhaps 
surprisingly counter to some prevailing interpretations of Feyerabend. 
Because, according to the passage above, universal principles underlie 
every element (fact, concept) of a cosmos (theory), they can contribute 
nothing to anyone element that they do not contribute to every other; that 
is to say, they can make no distinctive contribution to any element within 
the theory, though their contribution may of course distinguish these 
elements from those of another, incommensurable theory. Consequently, 
only insofar as a principle makes no distinctive contribution to the 
meaning of a particular term can a change in (or a "suspension" of) that 
principle result in ontological incommensurability. Just as Kant's 
principles determine the general features of all objects of experience, so 
do Feyerabend's (and presumably we are intended to associate the two, as 
both the categories and "universal principles" determine "the concept of 
an object"28); but then, just as the same category of substance, for 
example, is employed in constituting both a house an a housefly, so 
universal principles would seem to contribute to all elements equally and 
thus to none distinctively. 
This ontological account quite clearly differs in principle from the 
theoretic-linguistic one described above. Two theories might have the 
same universal principles, while yet for every main descriptive term there 

INCOMMENSURABILITY 
319 
might be theoretical postulates in which, in one theory, the tenn occurs 
"essentially", but which do not appear in the other, being instead replaced 
by alternatives. For surely many different theoretical postulates, which 
contribute to the meanings of terms in the theories in which they appear, 
may be compatible with one and the same set of universal principles; this 
must be the case if, with Feyerabend, we are to treat thinkers as different 
as Heraclitus and Parmenides as adherents of the same, "new" cosmology 
which replaced the older one shared by their archaic Greek predeces-
sors.29 Granting this it seems obvious that we might have cases of two 
theories which do not "suspend" one another's universal principles but 
which are nevertheless such that the meanings of their main descriptive 
terms differ inasmuch as they depend on "mutually inconsistent prin-
ciples" or theoretical postulates. In such a case, the two theories would be 
incommensurable in the theoretic-linguistic sense, but not in the ontologi-
cal sense. Assuming that one wants to claim that universal principles 
contribute (though not distinctively) to the meanings of the terms of a 
theory, the latter sort of incommensurability will of course entail the 
fonner as well, but the converse does not hold. Thus, the result here is 
that the contextual theory of meaning, which figured so prominently in 
our earlier version as well as in criticisms of Feyerabend;30 insofar as it is 
an account of how terms acquire their distinctive meaning, simply does 
not come into play in this third version of incommensurability. 
This third, ontological account is thus importantly distinct from the 
others (though not incompatible with them), at least as I have described 
them here and as those others are generally understood. But it might be 
suggested that our theoretic-linguistic account is unfaithful to 
Feyerabend's intentions, that he intended all along that the only sort of 
changes in context that would produce incommensurability are those in 
assumptions, postulates, or rules which can be construed as universal 
principles. His insistence that "theory" be understood in a wide sense,31 
and that incommensurability requires comprehensive theories;32 his 
repeated emphasis on "categories",33 "basic laws",34 "basic rules",35 and 
"basic principles",36 and "fundamental rules, principles, and laws",3? all 
suggest that the earlier discussions of incommensurability are not being 
modified in Feyerabend's ontological account. I do believe that this third 
account does make explicit views present in Feyerabend' s earlier 
writings; but the suggestion made here is rather different, that those 
discussions giving rise to what I have called theoretic-linguistic incom-
mensurability may be interpreted in terms of the ontological version. If 

320 
ANTHONY N. PEROVICH. JR. 
this is correct, then again we have a single account of incommen-
surability, but one which, as noted above, makes it not at all dependent on 
the contextual theory of meaning in the way ordinarily thought. For if this 
interpretation is correct, no changes in laws or rules (however much such 
changes of context alter the meaning of terms) will produce incommen-
surability so long as universal principles remain unaffected. 
Such a reading would have the advantage of taking the sting out of an 
objection like that by Putnam indicated at the outset of the paper. He finds 
the lack of shared sense and reference of a term appearing in different 
theories unacceptable, and traces these consequences to the doctrine that 
terms are synonymous with descriptions. For nothing in any account of 
incommensurability would then require that terms be synonymous with 
descriptions. Even if one decides that fundamental rules and laws 
contribute to the meaning of terms, no term for a particular sort of entity 
will be synonymous with a description based on such a rule because, 
insofar as we may view that rule as a universal principle, it makes an 
identical contribution to the meaning of every referring expression in the 
theory. The plausibility of Putnam's criticism derives from changes in 
descriptions which are to be understood as defming a particular term, as 
"distinctively" contributing to its meaning ("if the theoretical description 
of an electron is different in two theories, then the term 'electron' has a 
different sense ... "38). The response, were this interpretation correct, 
would be obvious: differences in the theoretical description of a particular 
item do not necessarily indicate differences in universal principles 
(postulates, assumptions, laws), and without this latter sort of difference 
incommensurability of theories will not arise. 
There is thus an attractiveness to the interpretation of Feyerabend just 
suggested, as well as some evidence for it. His reference to "fundamental 
principles" and the like has already been noted, and some of his remarks 
might be taken to suggest that his recent use of "universal principle" in 
the ontological account of incommensurability is no different from his use 
of "principle" in his earlier accounts.39 However, there is considerable 
difficulty in viewing theoretic-linguistic and ontological incommen-
surability as different versions of the very same doctrine, and the attempt 
to view them as one is, I suggest, a major source of confusion affecting 
attempts to understand and evaluate Feyerabend' s position. The difficulty, 
as we shall see, rests on points made in our earlier discussion, which show 
that we cannot, for example, identify "fundamental laws or rules", 
changes of which were formerly held to produce incommensurability,40 

INCOMMENSURABILITY 
321 
with "universal principles". It is not merely because the difference 
between universal principles and others is absolute and the distinction 
sharp (universal principles underlie all facts and concepts of the theory), 
whereas the difference between fundamental rules and others is relative 
and the distinction vague (one rule is more fundamental than another if it 
is presupposed by more rules than the other); we cannot identify them 
because fundamental principles have a connection with meaning that 
universal principles do not. 
In response to the challenge to distinguish changes of belief from 
changes of meaning (or, better, to distinguish those changes of belief 
which produce a change of meaning from those which do not), 
Feyerabend traces changes of meaning to changes of fundamental laws: 
changes which leave fundamental laws urialtered do not affect meaning 
but only belief. 
Changes of fundamental laws, on the other hand, do affect meaning, 
and as noted, produce incommensurability. Since theoretical terms would 
seem to derive all their meaning from the theoretical laws and grammati-
cal rules of the theory in which they appear,41 all their meaning must be 
based on fundamental laws and rules (as no other laws or rules affect 
meaning). But if fundamental laws and rules were identical with universal 
principles, and if the latter, as I have pointed out above, contribute 
nothing to the meaning of one term to distinguish it from that of any other 
in the theory, then every term in a theory would have the same meaning, 
and this is absurd: the two cannot be identified. For example, the meaning 
of terms, according to Feyerabend, may depend on "the current views 
concerning the process of cognition, on the medium in which the tests are 
taking place (the terrestrial atmosphere, for example), on the motion and 
properties of the observation post (the earth, for example), and on many 
other supplementary assumptions".42 Changes in these assumptions 
would affect meaning rather than beliefs, but these assumptions do not 
seem likely candidates for universal principles, involved in the construc-
tion of every concept and fact of a cosmology. 43 Feyerabend establishes a 
connection with meaning for his "fundamental principles and rules" 
which his "universal principles" cannot have. Since the two are not 
identical there is no guarantee that differences of the former will involve 
differences of the latter; indeed, since every change of meaning must be 
traced to a change of fundamental rules, there is every reason to believe 
that many changes of fundamental rules will leave universal principles 
intact. Consequently, incommensurability based on differences in the 

322 
ANTHONY N. PEROVICH, JR. 
meanings of tenns brought about by changes of the fundamental rules, 
that is to say, theoretic-linguistic incommensurability, must be distin-
guished from incommensurability of the ontological sort. 
Due to the limited role universal principles play in detennining the 
meanings of tenns and their crucial role in Peyerabend' s latest version of 
incommensurability, I should think he would insist on a three-fold 
distinction among changes of belief, rather than the dichotomy which 
merely differentiates between those changes that involve changes of 
meaning and those that do not, that is, a three-fold distinction among (1) 
mere changes of belief, which leave the meaning of tenns and universal 
principles unaffected, (2) changes of belief that alter the meaning of tenns 
but not universal principles, and (3) changes that affect both the meaning 
of tenns and universal principles. Peyerabend's ontological account limits 
itself to changes of the third sort. While many of his earlier statements 
suggest that account as well, Peyerabend, as well as some of his critics, 
often blur (2) and (3) and treat incommensurability as the consequence of 
either. This latter version is the theoretic-linguistic account, and, whatever 
its merits or drawbacks, it must be recognized as distinct from the 
ontological. With this distinction in view, it is easier to assess 
Peyerabend's views regarding the consequences of incommensurability. 
In the light of these two types of incommensurability, then, let us look 
at Feyerabend' s recent argument against realism. As I remarked at the 
outset, the doctrine of incommensurability has always involved the claim 
that tenns in different theories cannot refer to the same thing. Feyerabend 
has recently argued that acceptance of incommensurability requires the 
rejection of realism, the view that 
the world contains much more than observations. There are organisms, fields, 
continents, elementary particles, murders, devils and so on. Science ... gradually 
discovers these things, determines their properties and their mutual relations. It makes 
the discoveries without changing the objects, properties, relations discovered.44 
To show that this is false, "all we need to do is to point out how often the 
world changed because of a change in basic theory" .45 He then offers the 
following argument: 
For we certainly cannot assume that two incommensurable theories deal with one and 
the same objective state of affairs (to make the assumption we would have to assume 
that both at least refer to the same objective situation. But how can we assert that 
"they both" refer to the same situation when "they both" never make sense together? 
Besides, statements about what does and what does not refer can be checked only if 

INCOMMENSURABILITY 
323 
the things referred to are described properly, but then our problem arises again with 
renewed force). Hence, unless we want to assume that they deal with nothing at all we 
must admit that they deal with different worlds and that the change (from one world to 
another) has been brought about by a switch from one theory to another.46 
According to the theoretic-linguistic version of incommensurability, the 
theoretical and grammatical context of a theory determines the meaning 
of the terms appearing in that theory. Two theories are incommensurable 
when the assumptions, postulates, and rules constituting the theories 
differ to such an extent as to make the presence of synonyms in the two 
impossible. Presumably, the reason the two theories do not make sense 
together is that no term means the same thing in one theory as in the 
other. As yet, nothing has been said about the reference of terms in these 
theories, but Peyerabend thinks certain consequences obvious, and this 
can only be (on this version of incommensurability) because he thinks 
there is an obvious connection between change of meaning and change of 
reference, perhaps along the lines of Putnam's remark about a description 
taken as synonymous with a term: "if we decide that nothing fits that 
exact description, then we must say there was 'no such thing"'.47 There 
seems to be nothing to recommend such a move, however; once the 
meaning of a term is distinguished from its reference, there seems to be 
no obvious way, as the criticism of Scheffier,48 Shapere,49 and Putnam50 
has made clear, to show that changes in meaning or in theoretical context 
alone are sufficient to produce a failure of reference. At any rate, I fmd it 
very difficult to imagine what sort of principle would both be plausible 
and justify any claims of change of reference on the basis of this version 
of incommensurability alone. 
The ontological account of incommensurability, on the other hand, has 
obvious consequences concerning reference, though not, I think, concern-
ing realism. According to this view, theories are incommensurable when 
they employ different "universal principles", and this must be why (on 
this account) the theories do not make sense together; for, in 
Feyerabend's terminology, adoption of one set of such principles results 
in the "suspension" of alternatives. This account of incommensurability 
quite clearly does have consequences for the reference of terms, since 
universal principles are, says Feyerabend, the rules in accordance with 
which individual objects are "constituted" or "built up". (Of course, we 
might be curious to know the details of this process of construction, and 
how such principles figure in scientific change). However, these conse-
quences to not seem to dIscredit realism, for the objects so constructed are 

324 
ANTHONY N. PEROVICH, JR. 
not the "things in themselves" of the realist, but rather the "phenomenal 
objects" posited by the theory. "Remember", Feyerabend recently 
remarked, "we are now talking about phenomena, not about 'reality"'.51 
From the ontological version of incommensurability we can indeed draw 
conclusions about what the terms of a theory refer to, but only insofar as 
the object of reference is viewed as a posited object and not as part of 
some "objective state of affairs". But no consequences regarding realism 
and the reference of our terms to the entities of the realist follow from this 
account of incommensurability. That two theories are incommensurable 
establishes that their universal principles, and hence their "phenomena", 
are different. But the fact that terms in different theories do not ultimately 
succeed in referring to the same objects ("reality") no more follows from 
their immediately referring to different objects ("phenomena") than, to 
develop the Kantian parallel, it follows from the fact that a being, having 
forms of intuition different from ours, is aware of different phenomena, 
that they are not the same things in themselves which appear to him and 
to us. What incommensurability shows is not the need for the rejection of 
the idea of reference to a reality independent of theory, but the need for a 
theory of reference capable of capturing the difference I have intuitively 
marked by speaking of "ultimate" and "immediate" reference. 52 
Neither of the accounts of incommensurability discoverable in 
Feyerabend can, I think, force us to reject realism and abandon the claim 
that terms in incommensurable theories may yet have a common 
reference. This however, is hardly a disastrous result for Feyerabend, 
since he holds that our only access to the world is via our theoretical 
posits: "The world is not directly given to us, we have to catch it through 
the medium of traditions". 53 This necessary intermediary of "phenomena" 
gives ample room for any characteristics considered symptomatic of 
incommensurability (the feeling of absurdity provoked by the change, the 
inability to fmd exact equivalents in the concepts of the two theories, 
replacement of (posited) ontology, etc.) to unfold. 
The ontological version of incommensurability is much the more 
satisfying of the two accounts present in Feyerabend, and worth the 
further articulation it calls for. Because this sort of incommensurability 
requires what Feyerabend calls the "suspension" of universal principles, 
and because such principles can make no distinctive contribution to the 
meaning of the terms of the theory in which they appear, this account is 
fundamentally independent of the contextual theory of meaning. For this 
reason, as we have seen, criticism like Putnam's, which traces incommen-

INCOMMENSURABILITY 
325 
surability to such a doctrine (to the view that tenns are synonymous with 
descriptions based on the theoretical context in which the tenn appears), 
can be countered by the reply that this version does not depend on tenns 
being synonymous with any description; not any change of laws in which 
the tenn appears ."essentially" results in incommensurability, but only a 
change which affects universal principles. Similarly, although this 
account does not require us to give up realism, it does have ontological 
consequences, consequences concerning theoretical posits (which provide 
in this picture our only access to reality). Again, criticism like Putnam's 
leaves this type of incommensurability unaffected, for the fact that 
nothing fits the description of a thing will not show, even from the 
standpoint of the modified theory, that "no such thing" existed; universal 
principles must be undermined before this account recognizes a replace-
ment of ontology. Finally, ontological incommensurability provides some 
insight into the relation between change of meaning and replacement of 
ontology, the point at which our discussion began. While passages can be 
cited to suggest that each of these rests on the other, it is perhaps mis-
guided to speak of a dependence at all: insofar as changes of meaning 
leave the universal principles untouched, there is no reason to think 
changes of meaning bring about replacements of ontology; but insofar as 
the universal principles are affected, we may reasonably view such 
developments as occasioning a change both of meaning and ontology. As 
they are principles underlying every concept and object in the theory, we 
can hardly view such developments otherwise. 54 
Hope College 
Holland 
Michigan 
USA 
NOTES 
1 Hilary Putnam, Meaning and the Moral Sciences (London, Henley and Boston: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1978) p. 23. 
2 Putnam, Meaning and the Moral Sciences, p. 23 
3 Paul Feyerabend, "Explanation, Reduction, And Empiricism", in Scientific 
Explanation, Space, and Time, ed. with a Preface by Herbert Feigl and Grover 
Maxwell, Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 3 (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1962), p. 74. 

326 
ANTHONY N. PEROVICH, JR. 
4 Paul Feyerabend, "Problems of Empiricism' in Beyond the Edge of Certainty: 
&says in Contemporary Science and Philosophy, ed. with an Introduction by Robert 
G. Colodny, with a Preface by Adolf GrUnbaum, University of Pittsburgh Series in the 
Philosophy of Science, vol. 2 (Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 
1965), p. 170; final italics mine. 
S Paul Feyerabend, "Reply to Criticism", in Boston Studies in the Philosophy of 
Science, ed. with a Preface by Robert S. Cohen and Marx W. Wartofsky, Proceedings 
of the Boston Colloquium for the Philosophy of Science, vol. 2 (New York: 
Humanities Press, 1965), p. 234. 
6 Feyerabend, "Problems of Empiricism", p. 162. 
7 Feyerabend, "Problems of Empiricism", p. 170. 
8 Feyerabend, "Explanation, Reduction, and Empiricism", p. 57. 
9 Feyerabend, "Problems of Empiricism", p. 180. 
10 Putnam, Meaning and the Moral Sciences, pp. 23-4. 
11 See Feyerabend, "Reply to Criticism", p. 231. 
12 Feyerabend, "Problems of Empiricism", p. 227, n. 19. 
13 Paul Feyerabend, Against Method: Outline of an Anarchistic Theory of Knowledge 
(London: NLB, 1975), p. 251; cf. Feyerabend, "Explanation, Reduction, and Em-
piricism", pp. 76, 84. 
14 Feyerabend, "Reply to Criticism", p. 259, n. 27. 
IS Feyerabend, "Problems of Empiricism", p. 184. 
16 Feyerabend, "Reply to Criticism", p. 259, n. 27. 
17 See Feyerabend, "Reply to Criticism", pp. 231 and 259, n. 27. 
18 Feyerabend, ''Reply to Criticism", p. 259, n. 27. This identification seems very 
odd; for example, the negation of a proposition of a language is a proposition of that 
language, while the negation of a theoretical postulate of a theory is not a postulate of 
that theory. 
19 Feyerabend, "Explanation, Reduction, and Empiricism", p. 56; Against Method, p. 
256. 
20 Feyerabend, "Problems of Empiricism", p. 184. 
21 Feyerabend, Against Method, p. 278; my italics. 
22 Feyerabend, "Problems of Empiricism", pp. 150, 184-5; Paul Feyerabend, 
"Realism and Instrumentalism: Comments on the Logic of Factual Support", in The 
Critical Approach to Science and Philosophy, ed. by Mario Bunge (New York: Free 
Press of Glencoe, 1964), p. 304. 
23 See, for example, Feyerabend, "Explanation, Reduction, and Empiricism", pp. 29, 
59. 
. 
24 See, for example, Dudley Shapere, "Meaning and Scientific Change", in Mind and 
Cosmos, ed. with an introduction by Robert G. Colodny, with a Preface by Adolf 
GrUnbaum, University of Pittsburgh Series in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 3 
(Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1966), p. 65. 
2S Feyerabend, Against Method, p. 269. 
26 Feyerabend, Against Method, p. 270. 
27 Feyerabend,Against Method, p. 163. 
28 Cf. Feyerabend, Against Method, p. 264; I assume throughout that good sense can 
be made of Feyerabend's claims that particular theories do embody a "concept of an 
object" and that this is connected with certain universal "principles of construction", 

INCOMMENSURABILITY 
327 
though I make no attempt to justify this assumption. For the purposes of this 
discussion I am prepared to let Feyerabend's account in Chapter 17 of Against Method 
suffice. 
19 Feyerabend, Against Method, p. 261. Cf. Paul Feyerabend, "Against Method: 
Outline of an Anarchistic Theory of Knowledge", in Analyses of Theories and 
Methods of Physics and Psychology, with a Preface by Michael Radner and Stephen 
Winokur, Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy· of Science, vol. 4 (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1970), p. 32: "Science, common sense, and even the 
refmed common-sense of critical rationalism use certain fIXed categories ('subject'; 
'object'; 'reality'), in addition to the many changing views they contain". 
30 Cf. Putnam's contention that for Feyerabend certain of the laws in which a term 
appears serve to define the referent of that term. 
31 Feyerabend, "Problems of Empiricism", p. 219, n.3. 
32 Feyerabend, "Against Method", p. 82; cf. Against Method, p. 284: ''the problem of 
incommensurability arises only when we analyze the change of comprehensive 
cosmological points of view". 
33 See Feyerabend, "Against Method,". p. 29; "Reply to Criticism", p. 241. 
34 Feyerabend, "Explanation, Reduction, and Empiricism", p. 84. 
3S Feyerabend, "Reply to Criticism", p. 234. 
36 Feyerabend, "Reply to Criticism", p. 234; "Against Method", p. 29. 
37 Feyerabend, "Reply to Criticism", pp. 234, 259 n. 27. 
38 Putnam, Meaning and the Moral Sciences, p. 23. 
39 See Feyerabend, Against Method, p. 270, n. 127; the reference is to "Problems of 
Empiricism", p. 227, n. 19. 
40 See Feyerabend, "Reply to Criticism", pp. 231, 259, n. 27. 
41 Feyerabend, Against Method, p. 278. 
42 Paul Feyerabend, "Problems of Empiricism, Part Ir', in The Nature and Function 
of Scientific Theories: Essays in Contemporary Science and Philosophy, ed. by Robert 
G. Colodny, with a Preface by Adolf Grilnbaum and an Introduction by Robert G. 
Colodny, University of Pittsburgh Series in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 4 
(Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1970), pp. 292-3. 
43 Feyerabend, of course, must distinguish universal principles (which are 
"constructive") from principles which merely apply to everything countenanced by 
the theory. 
44 Paul Feyerabend, Science in a Free Society (London: NLB, 1978), p. 69. 
45 Feyerabend, Science in a Free Society, p. 70. 
46 Feyerabend, Science in a Free Society, p. 70. 
47 Putnam, Meaning and the Moral Sciences, p. 23. 
48 Israel Schemer, Science and Subjectivity (Indianapolis: The Bobbs-Merrill Co., 
Inc., 1967), p. 62. 
49 Cf. Dudley Shapere, "Notes Toward a Post-Positivistic Interpretation of Science", 
in The Legacy of Logical Positivism: Studies in the Philosophy of Science, ed. with a 
Preface by Peter Achinstein and Stephen F. Barker (Baltimore: The lohns Hopkins 
Press, 1969), pp. 156-7. 
so Hilary Putnam, Philosophical Papers, vol. 2: Mind, Language, and Reality 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975), p. 281. 
51 Paul Feyerabend, "Dialogue on Method", in The Structure and Development of 

328 
ANTHONY N. PEROVICH, JR. 
Science, ed. by Gerard Radnitzky and Gunnar Andersson, Boston Studies in the 
Philosophy of Science, vol. 59 (Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel Publishing Company, 
1979), p. 117. 
52 A -claim of replacement of ontology is more persuasive in this second version than 
in the fIrst, even when we restrict ourselves, in Peyerabend's terms, to ''phenomena'' 
rather than "reality". With a shared "concept of an object" opposed theorists, even 
from their own particular theoretical points of view, may construe their differences as 
differences of belief about the same object, or changes in the meanings of our terms 
which nevertheless preserve reference to the same object. This option is not available 
once the concept of an object has changed, for phenomena based on different concepts 
of an object are simply different phenomena. 
53 Peyerabend, Science in a Free Society, p. 34. ''Traditions'' are apparently even 
more inclusive than "theories". This passage seems hardly consistent with 
Peyerabend's rejection of realism. 
54 My thanks to Julius Sensat for helpful comments. 

JOHN WORRALL 
Feyerabend and the Facts1 
Paul Feyerabend likes to portray most of his predecessors as holding the 
view that the development of science has been essentially continuous. On 
this view, a branch of physical science may undergo a few "false starts", 
but once it has become really scientific (as astronomy did with, perhaps, 
Kepler and Galileo, or as optics did with, perhaps, Young and Fresnel) 
then any further changes in basic theory have been essentially cumulative. 
The new theory will standardly "penetrate to a deeper level" than the old 
but wi11leave the old "essentially" intact at its own level. Admittedly, at 
the common level the new and old theory's consequences may strictly 
speaking contradict one another but this is never more than a question of 
slight correction or "modification". This view is sometimes called the 
"layer cake" account of the development of science. 
It is more difficult than Feyerabend seems to think to fmd philosophers 
who espouse this "layer cake" view in anything like the fully fledged 
form which he gives it.2 But some philosophers have come close. This, 
for example, is how William Whewell described the development of 
astronomy: 
What Newton thus used and referred to as/acts, were the laws which his predecessors 
had established. What Kepler ... had put forth as "theories" were now established 
truths, fit to be used in the construction of other theories. It is in this manner that one 
theory is built upon another; - that we rise from particulars to generals, and from one 
generalization to another; - that we have, in short, successive steps of induction. As 
Newton's laws assumed Kepler's, Kepler's laws assumed as facts the results of the 
planetary theory of Ptolemy; and thus the theories of each generation in the scientific 
world are (when thoroughly verified and established) the facts of the next generation. 
Newton's theory is the circle of generalization which includes all the others; - the 
G. Munivar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 329-353. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
329 

330 
JOHN WORRALL 
highest point of the inductive ascent; - the catastrophe of the philosophic drama to 
which Plato has prologized; - the point to which men's minds had been journeying for 
two thousand years.3 
Feyerabend opposes to this his own discontinuity view of the develop-
ment of science. On Feyerabend's view, not only are successive theories 
in any field generally inconsistent with one another, some (perhaps most) 
shifts from one theory to the next have involved radical changes in basic 
metaphysical outlook. These changes cannot be dismissed, as some 
empiricists would dismiss them, as mere changes in window-dressing, 
since they have carried with them significant changes in the sorts of 
problems which scientists regard as important and in the sorts of ex-
planatory solutions they tend to seek. 
So far, of course, Feyerabend's discontinuity thesis is likely to win 
wide acceptance - not least from Popper, who has been arguing this thesis 
since the 1930s. Indeed - as the quote from Whewell suggests - the fully 
fledged continuity view could hardly survive the Einsteinian revolution. If 
scientists continue to talk of relativity (and quantum) theory as 
"extending" or "building on" their classical predecessors, or of Newton's 
theory as a "special case" of Einstein's, it is because they are thinking -
usually implicitly -
about continuity simply at the empirical level. 
Newton's theory postulates, amongst other things, an absolute and infinite 
space, an absolute time scale and velocity-independent inertial mass. 
Einstein's theory simply contradicts these claims. But, despite these 
radical discontinuities at the basic theoretical level, the newer theory of 
course explains the empirical success of its predecessor. It does so by 
entailing that its predecessor's lower level consequences, if not strictly 
accurate, are, in almost all practical experiments and observations, 
empirically indistinguishable from the truth. (In particular the new theory 
entails that this is true of those "old" experiments and observations 
previously taken to support the older theory). This, then, yields a weaker 
version of the continuity view that accepts that there have been radical 
discontinuities in science at the highly theoretical levels, but insists that 
these discontinuities do not extend to the "observational" or 
"instrumental" level. On this compromise view, there are no radical 
changes at the lowest observational levels in science (at the level of 
"crude facts" - see below). Moreover, while some switches of theory may 
have involved isolated losses of explanatory content (for example, 
Descartes' vortex theory seems to have explained why all the planets 
move around the sun in the same direction but Newton's theory does not 

FEYERABEND AND THE FACfS 
331 
explain this), successive theories have, at least in broad terms, explained 
more and more of the unchanging observational facts.4 
Feyerabend has challenged even this weaker continuity view. 5 
According to some of his claims, the discontinuities in science extend 
right down to the empirical level. Indeed there are no neutral observable 
facts; all "facts" are dependent on accepted theories and are subject to 
change as science develops. This, he implies, rules out the old idea that 
rival theories can be ranked in terms of how well they stand up to the 
neutral arbitration of the fixed, empirical facts, since there are no such 
facts. And the rejection of this idea takes Feyerabend a long way down 
the road towards old fashioned skeptical-relativism or "epistemological 
anarchism" (= skepticism plus a licence for intellectual tomfoolery). 
Feyerabend (and others) have exposed some real difficulties of detail 
which beset straightforward accounts of the idea that scientific develop-
ment has been continuous in even the weaker (empirical) sense. However, 
I have little doubt that this idea is fundamentally correct, and no doubt 
that Feyerabend has exaggerated the difficulties which it faces. The 
purpose of the present paper is to argue the latter claim. I shall argue that 
Feyerabend's shocking-sounding theses about the ''theory-dependence'' or 
''theory-impregnation'' of facts turn out, on closer analysis, to consist of a 
"hard core" of good sense (good sense clearly articulated already by 
Poincare and Duhem) surrounded by a "protective belt" of confusing 
rhetoric. 
I shall first try to set out the "good sense" and then examine 
Feyerabend's two main arguments for the inevitable theory-dependence 
of facts to see whether they really take us beyond it. 
I. 'SCIENTIFlC' AND 'CRUDE FACfS': POINCARE AND DUHEM 
The term "fact" is a dangerously loose one, and has been responsible for a 
good deal of confusion. In discussing science, facts are generally 
contrasted with theories. The facts are the material against which the 
theories are tested. But, as is well known, in testing his latest theories, a 
scientist will generally take for granted all sorts of other theories, 
particularly when these have long been accepted. He will then standardly 
describe the "facts" against which he tests his latest theories in terms 
which presuppose these (usually "lower level") accepted theories. It is 
natural, for example, to talk of Newton's theory of gravity being tested in 

332 
JOHN WORRALL 
the eighteenth century against the "facts" about planetary positions. But 
the experimental astronomer might well regard herself as testing 
theoretical claims about planetary positions against the "facts" about 
when certain characteristic spots of light are sighted on the axes of 
suitably inclined telescopes. The "data" about planetary positions used in 
testing Newton's theory is certainly far from "crude"; it is arrived at via a 
calculation which transforms the "crude" data about the inclination of 
telescopes and the like into "data" about planetary positions. This 
calculation is informed by various assumptions - for example optical 
assumptions about the amount of atmospheric refraction; assumptions that 
are ultimately th~ories - well confmned theories perhaps but theories 
nonetheless. Similarly we might talk of comparing theories about the 
constitution of matter with the "facts" about the behavior of certain 
particles in bubble chambers. But these "facts" are clearly highly 
interpreted ones - interpreted in the light of various theories (both about 
particles and about bubble chambers) in which we have come to have 
some confidence. 
Present day philosophers of science tend to portray their predecessors 
as naively assuming that there is an obvious and natural distinction 
between theoretical and (observable) factual claims. But Carnap is usually 
taken as the chief representative of the "older" approach and he quite 
explicitly stated (in his "Testability and Meaning") that "[t]here is no 
sharp line between observable and non-observable predicates". And, in 
his Philosophical Foundations of Physics (p. 226) he pointed out that 
scientists tend to stretch the notion of an "observable" a good deal further 
than do strict empiricist philosophers: 
Magnitudes that can be established by relatively simple procedures - length with a 
ruler, time with a clock, or frequency of light waves with a spectrometer - are called 
observables [by scientists]. The philosopher might object that the intensity of an 
electric current [say] is not really observed .... Only a pointer position was ob-
served .... There is no question here of who is using the term "observable" in a right 
or proper way. There is a continuum which starts with direct sensory observations and 
proceeds to enormously complex, indirect methods of observation. Obviously no 
sharp line can be drawn across this continuum; it is a matter of degree ... 
This theoretical/observational continuum had indeed been quite clearly 
mapped by the tum of the century - by the French conventionalists, 
notably Poincare and Duhem. Poincare, for example, introduced a 
distinction between "crude" and "scientific facts"6: a statement like "the 

FEYERABEND AND THE FACTS 
333 
current in this wire was 10 amps" is, if it is factual at all, a statement of 
"scientific fact" since it is informed by certain (no doubt well-accepted) 
scientific theories, while a statement like "the needle in this meter pointed 
to (or close to) the mark '10'" is a one of "crude fact". Similarly a 
statement about the wavelength of a certain kind of light expresses a 
scientific fact, while the corresponding crude fact would be about 
distances between the centers of two areas of maximum illumination in a 
certain pattern of light and dark stripes or the angle of deviation of a 
certain narrow beam of light. Duhem made a similar distinction between 
"practical" and "theoretical facts". 7 
It has long been recognized, then, that what scientists generally take as 
"facts" are dependent on theoretical assumptions. The sorts of "scientific" 
or "theoretical facts" that Poincare and Duhem chiefly had in mind 
involve what are usually called "auxiliary" or "instrumental" theories: the 
theory of the galvanometer, or the astronomical and optical theories 
underpinning the use of the telescope to determine planetary positions. 
Still "more theoretical" theoretical facts are possible however. Indeed 
once a scientist becomes confident about his high level theories then he 
will confidently describe all particular situations in terms of those 
theories. In its widest sense (facts as opposed to fictions or perhaps to 
values) the term "fact" seems to cover anything that actually is the case -
anything which is described by a true, synthetic, descriptive statement. 
This means that any synthetic, descriptive statement which we take to be 
true expresses what we take to be a fact; and at any stage in the develop-
ment of science many quite high level theories will confidently be 
regarded as true. In this wide sense it presently seems to be a fact that 
space is curved in the presence of matter, that neutrinos exist, etc, etc. It 
would certainly not be stretching the notion of a "fact" too far to say, for 
example, that 19th Century scientists regarded it as a fact that the planet 
Mars moves in a way determined by the gravitational interaction between 
it and all the other bodies in the universe. Scientists even talk of seeing 
certain events occur - events that are then described in ways that are 
highly dependent on high level, though well-accepted, theories. A modem 
scientist might say, for example, "Here [pointing to some bubble chamber 
photograph] we see a high-energy pion enter bottom left and collide with 
a proton to produce a lambda hyperon and a kaon - of course the latter 
'strange particles' being electrically neutral leave no tracks, but we can 
see that they have indeed been produced via their decay products further 
up the photograph". (I don't of course question the legitimacy of such 

334 
JOHN WORRALL 
talk. I do claim that it is obviously shorthand for a much more compli-
cated statement involving crude facts (about lines on the photo) and a 
whole lot of theory - high level theories about the structure of matter and 
lower level instrumental theories about how bubble chambers work. 
These theories are not normally articulated but can be when necessary). 
It is no news that scientific or theoretical facts in either this extended 
sense, or the more restricted sense implicit in Duhem' s and Poincare's 
treatments, are dependent on theory. And nor is it any news that such 
facts may be challenged and overthrown in the development of science. 
This simply means that the theories on which these facts relied were once 
accepted but were subsequently challenged and replaced. A well known 
example is the clash between Newton's theory of gravitation and some of 
Flamsteed's facts (clearly "theoretical facts") about planetary positions. 
The outcome was that Newton told Flamsteed how to "recalculate" these 
facts so that they were brought back into line with his theory. This simply 
means that Newton suggested a revision of one of the theoretical assump-
tions (specifically about the amount of atmospheric refraction) on which 
the original theoretical facts were based. 
If Feyerabend is to teach us anything new here, he must surely do more 
than argue the truism that theoretical facts are dependent on theory. 
Unfortunately, as we shall see, his main arguments all depend on taking 
"facts" at a very high theoretical level. 
But isn't it Feyerabend's point that all facts, no matter how "low level" 
or "crude", are really theoretical facts? Are we not, in making any 
assertion about the world, no matter how "empirical", really making 
certain assumptions, so that even the crudest of crude facts are assump-
tion or theory-impregnated? 
At any rate, if our factual statements remain objective - about the 
"external world" rather than our own present sensations - then the answer 
to these questions is obviously "yes": even in reporting that the end of a 
certain pointer coincided roughly with the mark "10" on some scale we 
are assuming that the pointer really exists, that we are not constantly 
hallucinating, that a malicious demon is not misleading us, and so on. But 
this admitted (though rather dull) fact should not blind us to a more 
important issue. 
This is the question of whether in all cases of disagreement in science 
we can, by taking the empirical facts concerned at a sufficiently crude 
level, get all parties to agree on the facts and hence restrict their disagree-
ments to acknowledged theories. 

FEYERABEND AND THE FACTS 
335 
This will mean that the different theories can be compared by seeing 
how well they stand up to the agreed facts. This does indeed always seem 
to be possible. 
Let's return, for example, to the Newton-Flamsteed case, and take the 
facts provided by Flamsteed at a "cruder" level: instead of taking 
Flamsteed as supplying (theoretical) factual statements like "planet p was 
at position (x, y, z) at time t", let's take him as supplying (crude) factual 
statements like "a certain characteristic spot of light" (specifiable in terms 
of its visual characteristics for a normal observer) was visible on the axis 
of a certain "telescope" when its angle of inclination was c!> ± e and when 
a certain "clock" read T ± 0'.8 There is, of course, no suggestion that 
Flamsteed and his assistants "misobserved" at this cruder level. Certainly 
Newton did not dispute these facts. The problem now is simply "the 
Duhem problem": Newton's theory (of gravity plus mechanics) has no 
logical consequences at this "crude" level. That theory, after all, is about 
the motion of massive bodies under the action of forces and not about 
spots of light viewed in telescopes. The smallest unit that has logical 
consequences at this "crude factual" level is not the theory itself but a 
theoretical system incorporating the theory but also including the various 
astronomical, optical, and instrumental theories that underlie the original 
"scientific factual" statements about planetary positions. This will mean, 
as Duhem forcefully pointed out, that any empirical refutation will have a 
large target - the refutation will be of a large theoretical system rather 
than of an "isolated" "individual" theory. 
All the famous episodes from the history of science that are regarded as 
challenging "older" empiricist accounts can, I believe, be analyzed quite 
straightforwardly in this Duhemian way.9 There is no need to talk of 
seriously corrigible observation statements, no need therefore to talk of, 
or even to concede the possibility of, "fact correction" and therefore of 
"overturning" a refutation; instead there is always an unchallenged 
refutation of a theory leading to the development of a new theory. It's just 
that the theories concerned are rather larger items than we are used to 
thinking of in this regard, being better characterized as theoretical systems 
consisting of a "central" theory (which may itself naturally decompose 
into "core" and "more specific" elements) together with a (finite!) set of 
auxiliary and instrumental theories. 
So, returning to the example: the full theoretical system - including 
Newton's theory but also the various astronomical, optical and instrumen-
tal auxiliaries - clashed with Flamsteed's crude facts about telescopic 

336 
JOHN WORRALL 
inclinations. The latter were accepted on all sides. Hence the full theoreti-
cal system was unambiguously refuted and could certainly not "stage a 
comeback". The outcome of this clash, however, was the switch to a new 
theoretical system which differed from the old only in a "peripheral" 
assumption (about the refractive index of. the atmosphere). Because the 
central theory in the old and new theoretical systems is the same, the 
temptation arises to speak of Newton's theory "surviving a refutation". 
But this temptation can (and should) be avoided. Duhem's main message 
is precisely that Newton's theory on its own was never refuted because it 
is not refutable at all by these crude facts. On the other hand the chunk of 
science that was empirically refuted by the crude facts - the larger 
theoretical system incorporating Newton's theory -
neither did (nor 
could) "stage a comeback". 
All cases of ''fact correction" in the history of science can, I believe, be 
dealt with in this way. Indeed, if there weren't always some level at which 
the facts were agreed then the empirical character of science would surely 
be entirely lost. 10 
Of course scientists often disagree over theories and hence they may 
disagree over the "theoretical facts" - especially if we take these in the 
wider sense and allow them to be informed by quite high-level theories. 
For example, the Copernicans were confident that it is a fact that the earth 
is continually revolving both about its own axis and around the sun, while 
the Aristotelians were confident that it is a fact that the earth is stationary. 
We should not even expect agreement at this level.ll But this disagree-
ment does not preclude the two parties' finding more "practical" or 
"cruder facts" on which they would be happy to agree, and against which 
their different theories may be compared. 
If it turns out that Feyerabend's arguments merely sustain the thesis 
that scientists standardly regard statements that are clearly informed by 
theoretical and corrigible assumptions as factual (because they take those 
theoretical assumptions for granted, at any rate pro tern), then we surely 
have every right to feel disappointed. What the Feyerabend propaganda 
machine seems to promise is some startling new thesis which goes 
beyond, or still better challenges, the old methodological lessons I have 
just outlined, all of which could certainly have been learned from 
Poincare and Duhem. Let's tum then to Feyerabend's main arguments. 
We shall not, I fear, escape disappointment. 

FEYERABEND AND THE FACfS 
II. FEYERABEND'S 'OBSERVATIONAL IDEOLOGIES': GALILEO AND THE 
TOWER ARGUMENT 
337 
According to Feyerabend, the "evidence" or "facts" at any stage in the 
development of science will be 'constituted by older ideologies' 
(p. 55).12 It would therefore, 
be extremely imprudent to let the evidence judge our theories directly and without 
further ado. A straightforward and unqualified judgement of theories by 'facts' is 
bound to eliminate ideas simply because they do not fit into the framework of some 
older cosmology. (p. 67) 
We cannot assert any factual statement without presupposing the current 
"observational ideology". This means that the competition between theory 
and empirical facts is biased in favor of the status quo and so, in order to 
make progress, we must try to criticize this "ideology". Such criticism is 
extremely difficult to produce since the "ideology" operates as a presup-
position; drastic measures must be taken: 
the first step in our criticism of customary concepts and customary reactions is to step 
outside the circle ... and either invent a new conceptual system ... that clashes with 
the most carefully established observational results and confounds the most plausible 
theoretical principles, or to import such a system from outside science, from religion, 
from mythology, or the ramblings of madmen (p. 68). 
So far, Feyerabend's dramatic-sounding claims. His argument for them 
consists almost entirely of an analysis of a particular historical example: 
Galileo and the "tower argument". 
Assume that, as the Copernican hypothesis asserts, the earth is really 
rotating towards the east. Many opponents of the heliocentric view argued 
that it follows from this assumption that if a stone is dropped from the top 
of a tall tower, the earth should have travelled some yards towards the 
east while the stone is falling and hence the stone should land some yards 
to the west of the base of the tower. Hence the well known result of this 
experiment - that the stone arrives (pretty well) at the base of the tower -
refutes Copernicus' theory. 
According to Feyerabend, Galileo could "defuse" this argument only 
by inventing a new "observational ideology" which radically altered the 
"facts" of the case so that they now supported rather than refuted 
Copernicus. This means that 

338 
JOHN WORRALL 
•.. the experience on which Galileo wants to base the Copernican view is nothing but 
the result of his fertile imagination .. .it has been invented. (p. 81) 
What does this striking claim really amount to? The answer is: to no more 
than a confusing description of a standard piece of scientific practice that 
is much more straightforwardly and revealingly analyzed using Duhem's 
account of theory-testing and Poincare's scientific/crude fact distinction. 
If we take the facts in this episode at a sufficiently high theoretical 
level then nothing is easier than to present Galileo and his opponents as 
disagreeing over them. Aristotelians can be taken as stating that the result 
of the tower experiment is that the "real" motion of the stone is straight, 
while, in these terms, Galileo would assert that the "real" motion is 
curved. Since these "facts", when unpacked, seem to involve the idea of 
absolute space, it will come as no surprise that they are theory-dependent. 
But equally, nothing is easier than to produce statements of sufficiently 
"crude facts" on which both pro- and anti-Copernicans were agreed. 
Everyone agreed that the stone arrives (pretty well) at the base of the 
tower, i.e. everyone agreed that the statement "the stone landed some 
yards to the west of the base of the tower" is false. It is impossible to see 
how anyone's ideology could affect this, as, indeed, Feyerabend himself 
seems quietly to admit. ("The correctness of the observation is not in 
question" (p. 71». 
The anti-Copernicans just made a logical error, however, if they 
claimed that the above false factual statement follows directly from the 
theory of diurnal rotation. For, as Galileo is in effect pointing out, an 
auxiliary is needed for this inference: an auxiliary which implies that the 
stone, once released, "ceases to share" in the motion of the tower. Galileo 
simply pointed out in effect that experiments like this one refuted, not 
Copernicus' theory itself, but only a wider theoretical system; he 
proposed that the prime candidate for replacement is the above mentioned 
auxiliary rather than Copernicus' theory; and he went on to replace that 
auxiliary with a new one involving a principle of (circular) inertia. This 
principle, as Feyerabend puts it, denies that all "real" motion (that is, 
motion with respect to absolute space) is "operative" (that is, has effects 
that we can observe ).13 The replacement produces a new theoretical 
system which can be assessed in terms of how well it accords with the 
crude, unquestioned facts. 
All of this exemplifies exactly Duhem's analysis of theory-testing. And 
this way of presenting Galileo's intellectual strategy shows clearly that it 

FEYERABEND AND THE FAcrs 
339 
constitutes no sort of argument for the view that "anything goes", for the 
view that, even in episodes which the rationalist applauds, facts and logic 
have frequently been overturned. No one did (nor, so far as I can see, 
could sensibly) challenge the crude facts here; and it is proper deductive 
logic that governs the whole analysis - and in particular points to the 
deductive gap between the basic Copernican claim and the (crude) result 
of the tower experiment. To talk of Galileo "inventing experience" is 
absurdly obscurantist: aside from occasionally enjoyable though consis-
tently confusing rhetoric, Feyerabend on this point seems to add nothing 
to Duhem. 
m. FEYERABEND AND EMPIRICAL CONTENT: BROWNIAN MOTION AND THE 
SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS 
Feyerabend has, several times, argued a further claim about "theory 
impregnation" of facts: 
Not only is the description of every single fact dependent on some theory ... but there 
also exist facts that cannot be unearthed except with the help of alternatives to the 
theory to be tested and that become unavailable as soon as such alternatives are 
excluded. 14 
It follows from this that a theory's empirical content will depend on what 
rival theories exist - the invention of a new rival will generally increase, 
while the suppression of a rival will generally decrease, the empirical 
content of a given theory. 
Again this sounds like a radical challenge to orthodox methodological 
views. And again Feyerabend's main argument consists of the considera-
tion of a particular historical example (though also, in this case, of a 
"generalization" of the example). The example concerns Brownian 
motion and its relevance to the second law of thermodynamics. 
Feyerabend states: 
It is now known that the Brownian particle is a perpetual motion machine of the 
second kind and that its existence refutes the phenomenological second law. (p. 39) 
He then claims that had it not been for the development (particularly by 
Einstein) of the new statistical-kinetic theory neither the relevance of the 
Brownian motion to the second law, nor the "fact" that the motion refutes 

340 
JOHN WORRALL 
that law, would ever have been spotted. 
On the relevance point Feyerabend is factually wrong. He claims that 
without Einstein's development of the kinetic theory, it is at least highly 
likely "that the Brownian particle would have been regarded as an oddity" 
unconnected with the phenomenological theory (ibid.). In fact, a whole 
string of physicists (including Exner, Gouy and Poincare) acknowledged, 
before Einstein's work, that the Brownian motion constituted an impor-
tant difficulty for the phenomenological theory. But is Feyerabend right 
on the methodological point about refutation? Is he right that the "fact" of 
Brownian motion was capable of refuting the phenomenological theory 
only once the statistical-kinetic theory had been developed? 
Feyerabend is, I assume, not merely making the (surely uncontrover-
sial) heuristic claim that a new theory may suggest new tests of an old 
theory (that is, highlight hitherto unconsidered empirical consequences of 
the old theory as ones that it would be especially interesting to test) and 
that these may turn out to refute the theory. This, of course, has happened 
quite often and has been well-documented. Nor is he, I presume, making 
the still less controversial claim that historically the phenomenological 
theory of heat came to be rejected only once there was something better 
(viz. the statistical-kinetic theory) to put in its place. Feyerabend is, I take 
it, making the seemingly much stronger logical claim: that the actual 
empirical content of a theory depends on what rival theories exist - that 
the articulation of some new rival extends the class of empirically 
decidable statements which, if true, would refute the theory. On closer 
analysis, however, this challenging-sounding thesis again fizzles out 
disappointingly. The thesis can be defended, but only by interpreting it in 
such a way that it becomes mundane. 
Feyerabend argues (p. 40) that "a direct 'refutation' of the second law 
which would consider only the phenomenological theory and the 'facts' 
of the Brownian motion is impossible". Such a demonstration of inconsis-
tency would have required a demonstration that the Brownian particle is a 
perpetual motion machine of the second kind, and this, in turn, 
would have required: (a) measurement of the exact motion of the particle in order to 
ascertain the change in its kinetic energy plus the energy spent on overcoming the 
resistance of the fluid; and (b) it would have required precise measurements of 
temperature and heat transfer in the surrounding medium .. , Such measurements are 
beyond experimental possibilities. (p. 40) 
Feyerabend's requirement (a) seems to be concerned with testing for a 

FEYERABEND AND THE FACTS 
341 
perpetual motion machine of the first, not the second kind. But the full 
details of the case are not important. The main point is Feyerabend's 
explicit admission that the "measurements" involved here not only were, 
but are, "beyond experimental possibilities". That is, Feyerabend admits 
that the ''fact'' about the Brownian particle which refutes the second law -
the ''fact'' that it is a perpetual motion machine of the second kind - could 
not and cannot be established experimentally either before or after the 
development of the kinetic theory. In what sense, then, can he claim that 
the development of the kinetic theory increased the empirical content of 
phenomenological thermodynamics? 
The kinetic theory does entail that a small particle on the surface of a 
fluid constituting a closed system in thermodynamic equilibrium is 
constantly being bombarded by the molecules of the fluid. The particle 
may move under this bombardment and thus work may be done (against 
the resistance of the fluid) without a further source of heat at a different 
temperature being involved. Subject to various auxiliary conditions being 
met, this is what the kinetic theory says is "in fact" going on in various 
experimental situations and such a description is inconsistent with the 
phenomenological second law. But only in a stretched, indeed over-
stretched, sense can this be said to be an experimental refutation. And 
only in this same overstretched sense can the new kinetic theory be said to 
have extended the empirical content of the phenomenological theory. 
The "fact" concerned - that the Brownian particle is a perpetual motion 
machine of the second kind - is clearly a very "scientific" one. If we 
allow any "fact" no matter how "high level", no matter how "theory 
impregnated", to count as part of a given theory's empirical content then, 
it is of course trivially true that empirical content will depend on what 
rivals exist. The photon theory of light entails that whenever I see a beam 
of light my eyes are "in fact" being bombarded by a stream of photons. 
This "fact" contradicts the classical wave theory but was "unavailable" 
until the new theory was articulated. Hence the "empirical content" of the 
old wave theory was extended by the introduction of the photon theoryl 
Similarly, since the general theory of relativity implies that when an 
astronomer follows the path of a planet he is "in fact" seeing a massive 
body move along a geodesic in space-time and since this contradicts the 
Newtonian account, it could presumably in this sense be said that the 
articulation of the general theory of relativity increased the empirical 
content (and led to a new experimental refutation) of Newton's theoryl 
Once it is accepted that new deep level theories standardly contradict 

342 
JOHN WORRALL 
their predecessors, it is not at all surprising that a new theory's fully 
interpreted account of some particular event should contradict the 
corresponding account of that same event given by the old theory. Of 
course these accounts are empirical in some sense - they are open to 
revision in the light of evidence, but they are certainly not anything like 
directly checkable on the basis of experience. It does seem at any rate 
most of the time that Feyerabend is talking of the "empirical content" of a 
theory in something like Popper's sense, and whatever the specific 
unclarities of his account, Popper clearly took a theory's "empirical 
content" to consist of "basic statements" which are undoubtedly spatia-
temporally singular and which - at any rate originally - were meant to 
involve no high level theory. I need hardly say that the singularity 
requirement alone excludes statements about perpetual motion machines 
from any theory's empirical content thus construed. 
If the empirical content of a theory is restricted to statements at a lower 
or "cruder" factual level, then nothing Feyerabend says suggests that a 
new theory can extend a given rival's empirical content. Indeed he more 
or less explicitly admits, as we saw, that when "empirical content" is 
understood in this more restricted way, his claim no longer applies. On 
the other hand, if any consequence of a scientific theory is counted as 
empirical (even any singular consequence) then Feyerabend' s dramatic 
sounding thesis becomes true but trivial. 
Is there a way of understanding Feyerabend' s claim that makes it both 
true and interesting? Ronald Laymon has argued that there is.IS In order 
to prepare the ground for Laymon's analysis, we should first see that the 
whole historical episode concerning Brownian motion Gust like its 
Galilean counterpart) can be told quite simply and revealingly in 
Duhemian terms - without any bewildering talk about inventing ex-
perience, consulting the ramblings of madmen, new rivals extending the 
empirical contents of given theories and the rest. 
Suppose we insist that the "facts" of the case are to be (relatively) 
crude ones about whether or not certain small particles do or do not move 
noticeably in an irregular fashion, or about whether or not a set of small 
particles suspended in a certain medium adopts a given spatial distribu-
tion in certain specifiable circumstances. It is a logical fact that the 
phenomenological theory on its own has no consequences which are 
testable at this level. That theory on its own does imply, however, that a 
particle on the surface of a fluid will not undergo accelerated motion, 
provided it is not subject to an external disturbance (accepted scientific 

FEYERABEND AND TIlE FACTS 
343 
theories supply various disturbances that might be operative) and 
provided the liquid on whose surface the particle rests is in thermal 
equilibrium. In order to obtain a theoretical system which is testable at 
this relatively crude factual level, then, some further assumptions must be 
added to the basic phenomenological theory T. These extra assumptions 
ought to be well-supported but they will nonetheless clearly be conjec-
tural and corrigible. 
These extra assumptions sanction the inference from the fact that some 
particular physical system is known to satisfy certain (crudely) observable 
conditions to the (conjectural) conclusion that the system also satisfies the 
(not directly ascertainable) conditions of being closed against external 
disturbance and in thermal eqUilibrium. Different auxiliary assumptions A 
of this kind, specifying different observable circumstances under which a 
system could be taken to be closed and in thermal equilibrium, were 
produced over time. The original auxiliaries were such that the whole 
system T & A was inconsistent with "crude facts" about Brownian motion 
- Le. the system predicted no noticeable movement of the particles. 
The natural first move, however, was to try to mend this inconsistency 
by modifying A rather than T Le., by conjecturing that hitherto un-
suspected perturbations or sources of disequilibrium were present in what 
were originally thought to be closed systems in thermal equilibrium. A 
particularly popular modifying assumption was that the light needed to 
view the phenomenon was causing local movements away from thermal 
equilibrium, which in turn explained the motion of the Brownian particle 
consistently with the phenomenological theory. Any such move leads to a 
different theoretical system T & A' which may make certain new "crude" 
predictions. This particular modification predicts, for example, that if, in 
the same experimental set-ups as before, the light used to view the motion 
is greatly reduced then so is the extent of the motion. This factual 
prediction again turned out to be false, however. 
In Lakatosian terms, the phenomenological program, at least in this 
regard, made no progress. Eventually an entirely new central theory T 
(the statistical-kinetic theory) was proposed as a replacement for the 
phenomenological theory. T' together with some extra auxiliaries and the 
old auxiliaries about which systems were (at least approximately) closed 
and in thermal equilibrium made startling new predictions. In particular, 
Einstein showed that a set of particles suspended in a certain medium 
would have a certain precise spatial distribution. This "crude" prediction 
could be checked and was found to hold. 

344 
JOHN WORRALL 
In other words, the most important methodological role played by 
(relatively crude) empirical results was not to refute any particular system 
but to verify a prediction of the new theoretical system built round the 
new "central" theory. This brings the episode precisely into line with the 
general methodological views of Duhem (and of Lakatos). 
Laymon suggests, in effect, that the above Duhemian analysis points to 
a reasonable way in which we might speak of the development of the 
kinetic theory having produced an extra empirical refutation of the 
phenomenological theory - one which, just as Feyerabend claims, would 
not have been "available", or would have been "hidden", without that new 
theory. 
In the attempt to produce a theoretical system based on the 
phenomenological theory that was consistent with the observations of 
Brownian motion, various replacements had been suggested for the "old" 
auxiliary, A, characterizing those systems that are (to all practical intents 
and purposes) closed and in thermal equilibrium. These suggested 
replacements had failed (that is, the systems amended so as to include 
them had either not been independently testable or had failed independent 
tests). Nonetheless, the original auxiliary, A, could not be regarded as 
fIrmly accepted. The new theoretical system based on the statistical-
kinetic theory but also incorporating the "old" auxiliary A had, however, 
then scored impressive predictive success. This confIrmed that new 
system and in particular, says Laymon, confIrmed A. This in tum 'refutes' 
(or at any rate "fIrms up" the refutation of) the phenomenological theory 
T. The conjunction T & A had all along been refuted by 0 (the observa-
tions of the Brownian particle); the predictive success (in Perrin's 
experiment) of the conjunction T & A gave us extra reason to think A 
true and therefore extra reason to think that it was T rather than A that was 
refuted by o. 
This may have been what Feyerabend had in mind, if only obscurely. 
But it certainly does not account for all of Feyerabend's explicit claims. 
For example, far from the facts about Brownian motion being "irrelevant" 
to the phenomenological theory ahead of the development of the 
statistical-kinetic theory (as Feyerabend claims), the analysis makes it 
patent what relevance Exner, Gouy and others saw here: after all there 
was some reason to think A might be true in advance of the development 
of T' (proposed alternatives to A having failed when conjoined with n 
even if there was still more reason to think A true after the development 
of T'. Indeed, this is, on the present analysis, hardly a case of a "hidden 

FEYERABEND AND THE FACTS 
345 
refuting fact", but rather a fact that was well-known to threaten the 
phenomenological theory, though it was also known that the threat might 
be averted if some successful replacement could be found for the 
auxiliary A. 
But laying aside the question of how accurate or generous Laymon's 
analysis is as a gloss on Feyerabend, the main point is that it fails to 
improve on the Duhemian analysis previously given - indeed it seems to 
me to constitute a (small but) defmite step backwards compared to that 
analysis. Even if Laymon is right that this is Feyerabend' s message, that 
message is at best a rather confusing reformulation of the old message 
that should already have been received from Duhem. 
The clearest way to express Duhem's point about theory-testing is that 
only theoretical systems, and not "single" scientific theories, are empiri-
cally refutable - because only such systems have directly checkable 
empirical consequences. Why then strive so hard to talk of particular 
components of such theoretical systems themselves being "refuted"? The 
important role played by observation in this case (as, I believe, in general) 
was the verification of an independent prediction of the new theoretical 
system. The conjunction of the auxiliary A and the phenomenological 
theory was all along refuted; 16 either conjunct separately was all along 
irrefutable. The question all along (the "Duhem question") was which of 
the two conjuncts to replace in the light of the observations. (It might of 
course have been both). Several attempts to replace the auxiliary while 
retaining the phenomenological theory had failed to gain any independent 
support (excess confIrmation); replacing the phenomenological theory 
and retaining the auxiliary did lead to a new prediction which was 
experimentally confIrmed. This gave good (and new) grounds for the 
replacement (not refutation) of the phenomenological theory. Of course it 
is hardly surprising that the question of whether or not a given theory gets 
replaced by another depends on what rival theories exist! 
Alongside his analysis of the Brownian motion example, Feyerabend 
produces a "generalization" of the example. Does it reveal any further 
way in which his thesis might be interpreted so as to make it both true and 
interesting? 
Feyerabend writes: 
We may generalize this example as follows: assume that a theory T has a consequence 
C and that the actual state of affairs in the world is correctly described by C'. where C 

346 
JOHN WORRALL 
and C' are experimentally indistinguishable. Assume furthennore that C', but not C, 
triggers, or causes a macroscopic process M that can be observed very easily .... In 
this case there exist observations, viz. the observations of M, which are sufficient for 
refuting T, although there is no possibility whatever to fmd this out on the basis of 
observations alone. What is needed in order to discover the limitations of T implied by 
the existence of M is another theory r, which implies C', which connects C' with M, 
can be independently confmned, and promises to be a satisfactory substitute for T 
where this theory can still be said to be correct. Such a theory will have to be 
inconsistent with T, and it will have to be introduced not because T has been in need 
of revision, but in order to discover whether T is in need of revision. 17 
There are certain rather obvious difficulties with this - in particular 
various confusions of states of affairs with descriptions of them. Let me 
begin then by trying to elucidate Feyerabend's message as best I can. IS 
We are presented with a theory T which has the statement C as a 
logical consequence. Although C is not directly empirical testable, we are 
eventually going to discover that it is false: the "actual state of affairs" 
being described by C', inconsistent with C. There is, as yet, no question 
of an experimental refutation of T, however, since C and C' are 
"experimentally indistinguishable". Feyerabend clearly intends that this 
be altered by the invention of the new theory T'. The articulation of T' is, 
somehow or other, to lead to a "new" experimental refutation of the old 
theory T. The new T', in Feyerabend's story, certainly entails (the true) C' 
and also "connects" C' with some "macroscopic process M that can be 
observed very easily". Since we are aiming at a refutation of T we are 
presumably going to need a sentence describing the process M - let P be 
such a sentence. 
Now, according to Feyerabend, C' "triggers" M. I suppose this means 
that the state of affairs described by C' causes (via the operation of 
natural laws) the process M. According to Feyerabend the new theory T' 
"connects" C' with M. I interpret this as meaning that T' entails the 
conditional sentence C' -? P. (P, remember, is a description of M). It 
follows, since T' entails C', that T' entails P. And this in tum means that 
T' receives (via the empirically true P) an empirical confrrmation not 
shared by the older theory T. 
We have then an "excess verification" of T', but where is Feyerabend' s 
promised new refutation of the old theory T! So far none has cropped up, 
though Feyerabend clearly intends that one should have. I presume then 
that when he says that C (which is, remember a consequence of T) does 
not "trigger" M, he intends us to assume that C does "trigger" (or rather 
that it would, if it really held, "trigger") some different "easily observable 

FEYERABEND AND THE FACfS 
347 
macroscopic process", N say (where N might be simply the non-occur-
rence of M). If we let Q be a description of N, then, since M rather than N 
is the case, Q is empirically false (and, of course, logically inconsistent 
with the empirically true P). 
If C ''triggers'' N, then, on the same interpretation as before, this is 
described by the conditional sentence C ~ Q. Now while it may be true 
that C ''triggers'' N, our access to such infonnation is, of course, ex-
clusively through theories. Some (presumably accepted) theory, some 
putative law of nature, must imply the conditional C ~ Q. 
Which precise theory might have C ~ Q as a consequence? Only two 
theories appear (at any rate explicitly) in Feyerabend's story. The old 
theory T was not refutable by M before T appeared on the scene and so T 
cannot entail Q. (Q remember states that N is the case and hence is a false 
description of the real observable state of affairs M). But this means that it 
cannot be T which entails C ~ Q. (This is because T definitely entails C 
and so, if it entailed C ~ Q, it would also entail Q, and hence be refuted 
by M - all without any assistance from T). 
The only other theory explicitly mentioned by Feyerabend is the new 
theory T. Is it T that entails C ~ Q? This might at first glance seem to 
capture Feyerabend's intentions. If T' does indeed entail C ~ Q, then, 
given that T entails C, we have that T entails T ~ Q. Since Q is empiri-
cally false it seems that the introduction of T' has indeed allowed us to 
derive a new testable (and actually false) consequence from T. This can 
quicldy be seen to be mistaken, however. In Feyerabend's story T and T' 
are inconsistent (they entail the mutually inconsistent C and C' respec-
tively). This means that T' entails the. conditional T ~ R, for any 
statement R. So if this were what Feyerabend had in mind, he would be 
committed to the absurd position that the articulation of any theory 
inconsistent with a given one immediately increases the given theory's 
empirical content to encompass every expressible empirical statement. 
If we take Feyerabend's "generalization" of his Brownian motion 
example at anything like face value, then it threatens to melt away 
entirely. But perhaps he meant something rather different from what he 
actually says. Again Laymon's conjecture seems plausible. Feyerabend is 
implicitly assuming that the theory which reveals that C "triggers" N is 
some auxiliary assumption A, quite separate from either TorT. This 
would mean that, since T entails C and A entails C ~ Q, then the 
conjunction T & A would, unlike T alone, have the extra (and empirically 
false) consequence Q. A may initially be somewhat uncertain, and so if 

348 
JOHN WORRALL 
the conjunction of that very same A and a new central theory T' makes 
some startling new and correct prediction, then we may come to have 
extra faith in A. It seems fair then to say that, in these circumstances, this 
reason for extra faith in A is at the same time an (admittedly indirect) 
reason for extra faith in the falsity of T. 
I have already indicated that this seems to me an exceptionally 
generous gloss on Feyerabend's words. For example he does say in 
describing his "generalization" of the Brownian motion example that, in 
the type of case he is delineating, the new theory is needed in order to 
"discover the limitations of [the old theory] implied by" the old observa-
tions. This seems clearly to imply that, in advance of the articulation of 
the new theory T, there was no reason at all for adherents of T to feel 
threatened by the observations. But Laymon's gloss certainly does not 
capture this implication: the process may have lent extra support to A but 
A will certainly n9t have been plucked out of the blue; it will have already 
seemed at any rate a very plausible assumption with some empirical 
support. Hence T will already have seemed threatened by the "old" 
observations. 
The main point, however, as before, is that, even if this is what 
Feyerabend intended, it represents no more than a rather confusing 
redescription of Duhemian point. Duhem pointed out what we normally 
take to be a single scientific theory T will indeed have no empirical 
consequences unless conjoined with auxiliaries. But conjoining T with an 
auxiliary does not increase the empirical content of T (increase it from the 
empty set if Duhem is right): rather, there are here two separate theories 
T and T & A both of which have fixed and unchanging empirical contents, 
the stronger second generally having higher empirical content than the 
weaker first. If only T & A and not T alone can be refuted, why talk at all 
of T being refuted? Why talk of the refutation of T being "firmed up" by 
the success of T? This is certainly unnecessary and almost certainly 
confusing: the episode can be described perfectly well and the reason for 
the replacement of T by T explained without talking about any refuta-
tions of T, and a fortiori without talking about any extra refutations of T. 
In sum, then, it does seem to me that Feyerabend's claims about 
''theory-impregnation'' amount at best merely to confusing ways of 
putting old methodological points. If we take Feyerabend at his word and 
thus as claiming that the empirical content of a given, fixed theory is 
dependent on what rivals to it have been articulated, then his thesis is 
either trivial (if we take an extended notion of what counts as 

FEYERABEND AND THE FACTS 
349 
"empirical") or false (if we take empirical consequences at the "crude" 
level). If we try to save Feyerabend from this dichotomy by interpreting 
him Laymon-fashion, then, although the interpretation constitutes an 
important methodological point, it is one that was better developed 
already by Duhem and which it is confusing to express in terms of a given 
theory's sprouting extra empirical consequences.19 
IV. FEYERABEND AND 'KUHN LOSS' 
I believe that Feyerabend makes many of his most startling-sounding 
methodological points in Against Method (and not just those explicitly 
discussed above) by operating at the level of highly theoretical "facts". 
For instance, the famous claim that content is always lost during 
scientific revolutions (an important premise in his argument for 
"incommensurability") is sustained by examples like the following. 
Content about the specific gravity of phlogiston was lost during the 
Chemical Revolution; content about the characteristics of witches was 
lost during the switch to more modern theories of mental illness; content 
about the ether was lost during the relativity revolution.20 
But of course there are losses of content at these highly theoretical 
levels. Of course the "facts as currently accepted theories allege them to 
be" change as currently accepted theories change; of course the 
"theoretical facts" change as the auxiliary and observational theories 
which underpin them change. The crucial fact for the rationality of 
science, however, is that we arrive at unchallenged and unchanging facts 
if we go "low" enough. The experimental results can - it seems - be 
described in agreed terms neutral between high level rival theories, 
between, for example, the phlogiston and oxygen theories in a way that 
then permits rational adjudication between the two high-level theories in 
terms of how well they stand up to the neutral facts. No one ever thought 
that statements about the specific gravity of phlogiston were likely to play 
this neutral role. But statements about the combined weights of the 
products of certain reactions (reactions described differently by the two 
theories of course) might play this role. What experimental results of this 
kind could be accounted for by Priestley's phlogiston theory but not by 
Lavoisier's oxygen theory? Feyerabend never says. Indeed, although his 
radical "epistemological anarchist" claims certainly require a denial of the 
thesis that if we go low enough we arrive at facts which are, if not theory 

350 
JOHN WORRALL 
free, at any rate neutral between the rival theories at issue, none of his 
arguments and none of his examples supplies a shred of evidence for that 
denial. 
I have no doubt that there are genuine cases of "Kuhn" or "Feyerabend 
loss" even when we restrict "lost" content to the crude factual level. But 
such losses as do occur are altogether more minor and transient and 
altogether less threatening than Feyerabend in particular would like them 
to appear. The scientists involved regard the "loss" as a real problem to be 
solved as quickly as possible; the "explanation" that is lost in jettisoning 
the old theory is seldom truly satisfactory; and - of s~cial importance -
in all the cases I am aware of ,failing to make the switch to the new theory 
would have led to "losses" of codified content several orders of mag-
nitude higher than the loss actually sustained in making the switch. Given 
these circumstances, even if we insist that empirical content be low level 
before it possibly counts as "lost", the phenomenon hardly constitutes a 
major problem for the idea that the switch from the old theory to the new 
is a switch from a good to a still better theory. And certainly the sort of 
"lost content" cited by Feyerabend is just no problem at all for this idea: 
having repudiated the whole idea of phlogiston or witches or the ether, the 
proponents of the new theories in Feyerabend' s examples would not even 
seek to restore this lost content. It obviously cannot be a problem to "lose" 
content that is premised on theoretical assumptions that the later theory 
implies are unambiguously false. Feyerabend' s examples do not support 
"incommensurability" in any interesting sense.21 
Feyerabend seems in a variety of ways to have bamboozled 
philosophers into quite erroneously believing that he is making startling 
new challenges to more orthodox wisdom. 
Department of Philosophy 
London School of Economics 
London 
UK 
NOTES 
1 This paper was written in 1979 and published in German translation in 1981. In 
view of the very tight deadlines for the present publication I have been unable either 
to rethink the arguments or to take the subsequent literature into account. Instead I 

FEYERABEND AND THE FACTS 
351 
have done no more than attempt to sharpen the presentation of the arguments as they 
stood in 1979. 
I thank Peter Urbach and John Watkins for some incisive critical comments on a 
draft of the original paper. A series of extremely useful discussions with Elie Zahar 
helped to clarify my mind about some of the issues raised. 
2 Indeed some of Feyerabend's own formulations - especially when he is discussing 
the "consistency requirement" - rule out the possibility of the new theory's even 
modifying the old. Surely philosophers have always been aware that new theories 
standardly at least modify their predecessors: though admittedly some of them may 
have "idealized away" these modifications in the attempt to develop a precise logic of 
science. 
3 William Whewell, History of the Inductive Sciences, Part II, pp. 138-139. Notice 
even here, however, an equivocation: Whewell talks of Kepler's laws assuming 'the 
results' of Ptolemy's theory and not of course the theory itself (which clearly 
contradicts Kepler's basic Copernican heliostaticism); is Whewell then claiming 
anything more than . continuity at the level of accepted empirical and observational 
results? 
4 This compromise view is stated very clearly, for example, by John Watkins: 
'Typically [the new theory] S2 will more or less flatly repudiate the ontology of [the 
old] SI ... [while at] the empirical level there will be near continuity between the 
predictive implications of the old theory SI and the new S2" (p. 396 of his "The Unity 
of Popper's Thought: in P.A. Schlipp (ed): The Philosophy of Karl Popper, Vol. I). 
Peter Urbach reminded me of the Descartes-Newton example of "Kuhn loss". 
5 Or, at least, he has often seemed to. See below, pp. 337-39. 
6 See his The Value of Science, Dover PB, especially Part III, Chapter X. 
1 See Duhem's The Aim and Structure of Physical Theory, Atheneum, especially Part 
II, ChapterIV. 
. 
8 The terms in scare quotes are to be understood purely nominalistically. As Duhem 
again pointed out, even to describe some construction of metal and wires as a 
'galvanometer' or some metal and glass arrangement as a 'telescope' is normally 
taken to involve certain theories. But by understanding 'telescope' as simply picking 
out 'that bit of machinery over there' or 'clock' as 'that thing over there with a dial 
and "hands"', the factual statement can be stripped of even these low-level instrumen-
tal theories (though these are so firmly entrenched that one would scarcely ever 
bother). 
. 
9 In fact, Duhem himself was not as clear as he might have been here: creating the 
impression that there are two independent reasons why it is impossible to test a 
scientific theory "in isolation" - (a) the need for auxiliaries and (b) the theory-
impregnation of the 'facts'. (Indeed some of Duhem's less well considered remarks 
seem to endorse the sort of 'holism' that many philosophers take from Quine, 
although his arguments clearly establish only a much more modest view - 'largism' as 
I have called it elsewhere. Not the view that 'the whole of our knowledge is involved 
in any test' - whatever that might mean - but the claim that the smallest unit which 
has genuinely (Le. crude) empirical consequences is a good deal larger than one might 
initially think and certainly larger than the 'single' 'isolated' theory). 
10 This position is closely analogous to the one developed by Popper, notably in his 
The Logic of Scientific Discovery. Popper's position is, however, rather obscured by a 

352 
JOHN WORRALL 
reluctance to admit that the facts become intuitively more secure, 'less corrigible' as 
we go 'lower down'. This reluctance is part and parcel of Popper's "anti-foun-
dationalist" insistence that we can always further test any basic statement. But I have 
never been able to see exactly how this could be done (assuming of course, that the 
'basic statement' has already been intersubjectively checked and accepted). How, for 
example, could the statement 'The needle seemed to me to point to around "10" on the 
scale' possibly be 'further tested'? In those cases (of statements of theoretical fact) 
where it does seem superficially to make sense to talk of 'further testing' a basic 
statement, this is always better described as testing some hitherto accepted auxiliary 
theory. In our example although one might talk loosely of Flamsteed's (planetary 
position) data being 'further tested', the situation is much more clearly described, as 
above, as one where an underlying theoretical assumption, in terms of which the 
(theoretical) data had hitherto been expressed, came to be questioned. 
11 This is why some of Hanson's arguments in his Patterns 0/ Discovery (particularly 
about Kepler's and Tycho's disagreements over the 'facts' of a sunrise) seem so 
trivial. 
12 This, and all other page references without further details, are to Feyerabend's 
book Against Method, New Left Books, 1975. 
13 Feyerabend claims that Galileo here denied an idea that was almost universally 
held before him. I could detect no trace of a serious argument for Feyerabend's claim, 
however, which seems to face a range of well-known counterexamples. 
Nor could I see any reason for Feyerabend's dismissal as a 'propaganda exercise' 
of Galileo's surely perfectly reasonable (and hardly novel) point that a principle of 
relativity, or non-observability of shared motions, had long been accepted with respect 
to some experimental situations - e.g. aboard smoothly sailing ships. Of course 
Galileo's circular inertia principle - although it solves this particular experimental 
problem - proved unacceptable: that is, the Copernican system incorporating it met 
further experimental refutations and the circular inertia principle was eventually 
replaced. But the fact that Galileo's solution of this problem was unsuccessful (or only 
partially successful) again hardly constitutes grounds for claiming that he broke the 
rationalist's rules of science. Both the reason for Galileo's manoeuvre and for its 
limited success can be straightforwardly explained on a Duhemian analysis. 
14 See p. 175 of his paper 'Problems of Empiricism' in R. Colodny (ed): Beyond the 
Edge o/Certainty, University of Pittsburgh Press, 1965. And Against Method, p. 39. 
15 Laymon, "Feyerabend, Brownian Motion and the Hiddenness of Refuting Facts', 
Philosophy o/Science, 44 (1977), 225-247. 
16 I am deliberately simplifying here of course: no doubt a full analysis of the 
deductive structure of this test would reveal further components of the theoretical 
system beyond simply T and A. 
17 'Problems of empiricism', p. 197. As Colin Howson pointed out to me, 
Feyerabend's story is superficially incoherent: how can 'there exist observations 
sufficient for refuting T', but at the same time, 'no possibility whatever to fmd this out 
on the basis of T and of the observations alone'? If observation of M is sufficient to 
refute T, then surely T must entail some statement falsified by M. I endeavour to 
resolve this mystery below. 
18 In my attempted clarification of Feyerabend's claims, in order to avoid an excess of 
quotation marks, I have not gone to the lengths of pedantically differentiating between 

FEYERABEND AND THE FACTS 
353 
uses and mentions of sentences. 1 trust however that this will cause no confusion, 
whereas 1 think that some ofPeyerabend's formulations are confusing. 
19 The above constitutes an elaboration of an argument which 1 sketched in a review 
of Against Method (the review appeared in Erkenntnis, 13 (1978), 279-295). Paul 
Peyerabend's reply ('Life at the LSE?) appeared as Chapter 5 of Part III of his Science 
in a Free Society, NLB, 1978. As far as 1 can tell, he there partly gives in and partly 
accuses me of reverting to positivism. No doubt my use of the scientific/crude fact 
distinction will also be branded positivist - but this hardly constitutes an argument 
against it. (The title of the section of Peyerabend's book in which his reply appears is 
'Conversations with Illiterates': no doubt then it was deliberate policy, sparked by 
Paul's celebrated sense of humor, consistently to misspell my name, and to brand at 
least two of my claims as 'disingenious'). 
20 The phenomenon (or alleged phenomenon) of "losing" codified empirical content 
by rejecting one theory in favor of a "revolutionary" new one is often called, of 
course, 'Kuhn loss'. Kuhn's own cases (in for example his The Essential Tension, 
Chicago, 1979) are rather better than Peyerabend's - though, in all honesty, not much. 
One example that Kuhn cites more than once is the following: the phlogiston theory 
could, but Lavoisier's oxygen theory could not, explain why metals are "more 
similar" to one another than are metallic calxes. This seems to me an extremely 
strange "empirical fact" - indeed an extremely strange fact. The notion of 'similarity' 
is of course multiply ambiguous: one wonders in what precise sense the metals are 
supposed to be "more similar" to one another than the calxes. (I need hardly say that 
this 'fact', if it be one at all, does not count as a crude fact in my or Poincare's sense). 
The alleged explanation by the phlogiston theory of this strange fact seems, if 
anything, stranger still. The "explanation" according to Kuhn is that all the metals 
contain phlogiston. If this is an explanation, then the claim that coal and petrol and the 
Koh-i-Nor diamond all share the common ingredient of carbon should predict that 
they are all "similar" to one another. Well, they certainly are similar to one another in 
that they all contain carbon! 
21 Peyerabend's apparent admission (Against Method, p. 279) that theories which are 
incommensurable in his sense (whatever that sense may be) may nonetheless be 
commensurable 'instrumentally' seems to condemn him once again of having 
confused everyone into believing that he is arguing a really challenging unorthodox 
view when he is actually arguing a thesis that could hardly be denied. (Of course 
insisting on the importance of the 'instrumental' (Le. low level empirical) com-
parability of theories does not commit one to an overall instrumentalist view of 
theories). 

JEROME R. RA VETZ 
Ideological Commitments 
in the Philosophy of Science 
1. IN1RODUCTION 
To outward appearances the academic discipline of "the philosophy of 
science" has in recent times been an austere and abstract study. Its 
concerns have been with one major problem, to the near exclusion of all 
others. The truth-claims of completed scientific knowledge have been 
considered to be the only area of really worthwhile philosophical enquiry. 
The process of discovery, or the ethical problems of research or of 
applications, have traditionally been relegated to the status of non-
problems or at best peripheral ones. Even now, as these other sorts of 
problems gain in interest among philosophers, the absence of a coherent 
framework of ideas for constructive study inhibits their development; 
while epistemology, the theory of scientific knowledge, still dominates 
teaching because it at least provides materials that can be taught. 1 
Furthermore, the sort of science considered worthy of study is very 
special. So special, in fact, that it might not even exist. For the main 
tradition in the philosophy of science, including its variants and critics, 
has been devoted to considerations of matured "exact" sciences, which 
combine quantitative experiments and mathematical laws to give the most 
assured knowledge to which humankind can attain. Other sorts of 
disciplines are deemed "immature"; and their main assigned task is to find 
ways to approach or achieve the proper state. The obvious paradigm case 
for a genuine science is physics, whose solidity is attested by its triumphs 
both in theory and in application. It has been noticed that the theoretical 
end of physics has been in a state of continuous conceptual turmoil and 
G. Munivar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 355-377. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
355 

356 
JEROME R. RA VETZ 
revolution for nearly all of this century, and so its own credentials as a 
steady, perfected matured science are not beyond criticism. Imre Lakatos 
recognized this in a revealing footnote in one of his later papers, where he 
remarked: 
This (when a tradition degenerates) seems to be the case in modem particle physics, 
or according to some philosophers and physicists even in the Copenhagen School of 
quantum physics.2 
However, practitioners and defenders of this philosophical tradition can 
argue that even if this philosophy-of-science describes no actual science it 
tells what any genuine science must be like. Its claims to special and 
unique status as a philosophical enquiry are not therefore dependent on 
whether its objects of study are precisely reflected in the imperfect world 
of human experience. 
Such a conception of itself is quite legitimate for an academic dis-
cipline, particularly a philosophical enquiry. We do not ask geometers to 
go about measuring the earth, so we should allow philosophers-of-science 
a corresponding freedom to develop their own autonomous discipline. It 
is unfortunate that some people so misinterpret the field as to try to glean 
insight from it about the status and methods of confessedly immature 
descriptive sciences;3 but that cannot be the responsibility of the 
philosophers. The philosophical task of showing how assured human 
knowledge can in principle be obtained in some sorts of natural science, is 
one that takes priority over merely practical concerns. 
If all the foregoing argument for purity seems as reasonable as I have 
tried to make it, we are well prepared for an historical paradox. This is, 
that the founders and most of the main protagonists in the development of 
twentieth-century philosophy of science have been deeply committed to 
causes directly involving humanity; and their doctrines of the philosophy 
of science were shaped with those broader ends consciously in view. The 
reason that "science" in this tradition seems unlike ordinary practice is not 
because of its being a purified object of abstract conceptual analysis, but 
because of its being a symbol of the Good and the True in a certain 
ideologically engaged tradition of philosophical polemic. If, as I believe, 
it is time to move on beyond the insights and scholarly problems of that 
tradition, we should appreciate its sources of commitment so as to make 
an accurate and sympathetic assessment of its permanent achievements. 
Also, we will be better able to understand its particular weaknesses and 

IDEOLOGICAL COMMITMENTS 
357 
thereby to remedy them in our own studies. 
2. 1lIE VIENNA CIRCLE: PROCLAIMING 1lIE TRUE SCIENCE 
The focal point of the coherent tradition of philosophy of science was 
Vienna, of the 1920's and earlier 1930's. There flourished the "Vienna 
Circle", a grouping of philosophers and other scholars which included 
Karl Popper on its periphery. While Popper's writings, philosophical and 
autobiographical, are clear on his deep and abiding political commitment, 
the better-known English language writings of the members of the Circle 
do not overtly depict such an influence. Yet the connection was there; the 
school's founder and greatest philosopher, Moritz Schlick, was assas-
sinated in 1936. And Schlick was truly a martyr; his was a cause that 
extended back to the Enlightenment of the eighteenth century: a struggle 
against "dogma and metaphysics" (the intellectual tools of reactionary 
clerical forces) and the invocation of "science" as the unique way to truth 
and human improvement. 
A manifesto issued by the Vienna Circle itself in 1929 makes all this 
quite plain. 
The increase of metaphysical and theologizing leanings which shows itself today in 
many associations and sects, in books and journals, in talks and university lectures, 
seems to be based on the fierce social and economic struggles of the present: one 
group of combatants, holding fast to traditional social forms, cultivates traditional 
attitudes of metaphysics and theology whose content has long since been superseded; 
while the other group, especially in central Europe, faces modem times, rejects these 
views and takes its stand on the ground of empirical science. This development is 
connected with that of the modem process of production which is becoming ever 
more rigorously mechanized and leaves ever less room for metaphysical ideas. It is 
also connected with the disappointment of broad masses of people with the attitude of 
those who preach traditional metaphysical and theological doctrines. So it is that in 
many countries the masses now reject these doctrines much more consciously than 
ever before, and along with their socialist attitudes tend to lean towards a down-to-
earth-empiricist view. In previous times, materialism was the expression of this view; 
meanwhile, however, modem empiricism has shed a number of inadequacies and has 
taken a strong shape in the scientific world-conception. 
Thus, the scientific world-conception is close to the life of the present. Certainly it 
is threatened with hard struggles and hostility. Nevertheless there are many who do 
not despair but, in view of the present sociological situation, look forward with hope 
to the course of events to come. Of course not every single adherent of the scientific 
world-conception will be a fighter. Some, glad of solitude, will lead a withdrawn 

358 
JEROME R. RA VETZ 
existence on the icy slopes of logic; some may even disdain mingling with the masses 
and regret the "trivialized" fonn that these matters inevitably take on spreading. 
However, their achievements too will take a place among the historic developments. 
We witness the spirit of the scientific world-conception penetrating in growing 
measure the fonns of personal and public life, in education, upbringing, architecture, 
and the shaping of economic and social life according to rational principles. The 
scientific world-conception serves life, and life receives it.4 
In support of this interpretation we have the personal testimony of the 
Norwegian social philosopher Arne Naess. He recalled, 
The Vienna Circle was a nucleus of a movement for "rationality" and against certain 
fonns of metaphysics which at the time were closely allied with fascism and national 
socialism. It had all the missionary zeal of a movement, and it was touching but also 
somewhat alarming to watch Otto Neurath embrace aloof and aristocratic Polish 
logicians of various philosophical affiliations andproclaim, "We agree! You are one 
of us!" If Neurath sensed that one was somehow on the right side, one was identified 
as a sort of logical positivist. Protestations were of little use and disagreements were 
conceived as due only to "unhappy fonnulations" (ungliickliche Formulierungen) and 
there was always a remedy for that.5 
There is a stylistic feature of the Vienna Circle's studies which supports 
the interpretation of their being prophets in analysts' clothing. For their 
vision of science was quite deliberately abstracted from the processes of a 
personal creation and historical development; and in this regard they were 
more extreme in their demarcations than their great predecessor, Ernst 
Mach. For in his own critical studies, as of mechanics6, Mach allowed for 
the maturing of a discipline through several phases, the earlier, 
anthropomorphic ones as important and valid in their own way as those 
which were appropriate to a more perfected state. The Vienna Circle 
showed no interest in such origins or their vestiges, being concerned 
solely with the establishment of the credentials of statements in fully 
matured sciences. 
Why this aspect of the Vienna Circle's programme has not been made 
prominent, is a matter beyond my present purposes to explain fully. Let it 
suffice that with the rise of Nazism in central Europe, the surviving 
members of the school dispersed to the Anglo-American cultural area. 
There, the ideological battles were in a totally different style and on 
different issues. It was only natural for the positive content of the 
scholarly work to be emphasized and its ideological commitments 
(themselves severely shaken by the defeat of the anti-Nazi forces) left in 
discreet obscurity. 

IDEOLOGICAL COMMITMENTS 
359 
There they remained, through the lifetimes of the founders of the 
school and the careers of their pupils. But in the present period, there is a 
renewed ideological relevance to the philosophy of science, related not so 
much to struggles against the traditional Right as to attacks from the new 
Left. Hence it is relevant and illuminating to see how, beneath the dry 
formalisms of the logical-positivist writers, there was an intense commit-
ment to a political cause. 
3. POPPER: RESCUING THE GOOD IN SCIENCE 
In the case of Sir Karl Popper, one of the deepest and most influential 
philosophers of science of our time, the clues to ideological commitment 
are available in his best known work. In a classic autobiographical essay, 
he describes how he came to conceive of the criterion of falsifiability in 
the demarcation of genuine science from its spurious imitations. Even 
allowing for the inevitable rationalization in the recollection of an event 
after a lapse of nearly four decades, the story has all the intensity and 
drama of a genuine conversion experience.? Put simply, in 1919 the 
young Popper was a radical student who was inspired by four great 
thinkers who styled themselves as "scientists": Karl Marx, Sigmund 
Freud, Alfred Adler (the personality psychologist), and Albert Einstein. 
After the defeat of the Central Powers in 1918, the way seemed open for 
the forces of scientific rationalism to achieve their goals in society as well 
as in nature. But things began to go wrong: failures and complications in 
the political struggle, doubts and confusions in the intellectual debate. 
Popper began to sense that the pretensions to "scientific" status 
(meaning, of course, embodying the good and the true) of socialism and 
psychology were not correct. Yet by the accepted criteria of the time, they 
were indubitably scientific. An adherent of Marx or of Freud could 
display numerous confirmations of their theories (very close to the 
principle of "verification" that was at the heart of the Vienna-Circle 
positivism). And Adler relied on the inductive evidence of his clinical 
experience for the development of his theories. Perhaps one of the most 
fateful moments in the philosophical thought of the century occurred 
when Popper queried one of Adler's instant diagnoses, and was assured of 
the psychologist's "thousand-fold experience" of such cases. Popper 
reports that he could not help saying "And with this case, I suppose, your 
experience has become thousand-and-one-fold".8 This could be read as a 

360 
JEROME R. RA VETZ 
sarcastic little joke; but actually it sends a searchlight beam into the weak 
center of straightforward inductive reasoning. (It should be recalled that 
even when statistics are collected in an apparently inductive fashion in a 
controlled scientific experiment, the logic of the exercise, which should 
be reflected in all the techniques, is that of the testing of an hypothesis 
and not the confinnation of an inductive generalization). 
Popper makes one little remark on the background to these incidents, 
that calls out for historical investigation. This is, that he and his friends 
already knew that science is not infallibly true, and that scientists can err; 
hence a g~nuine demarcation of real science from the spurious would 
have to be independent of truth. Now, where these young radicals could 
have learned this lesson is an intriguing and perhaps quite important 
question; I recommend it. 
Popper's story is given added point by his example of astrology, as 
being no worse, methodologically, than the sciences which he had come 
to suspect. Now, this was not an example of an ancient and discredited 
pseudo-science chosen for its rhetorical effect. For with the collapse of 
traditional authority in Central Europe after the defeat of 1918, all sorts of 
fringe activities flourished wildly. Astrology was prominent among them, 
and supported self-appointed Professors, Institutes and learned journals. 
To such radical intellectuals as Popper, it could well have been the most 
vicious of the aberrations, because of its pretensions to the status of an 
empirical science. Hence to show that by the criteria of the Vienna Circle, 
the superstition of astrology could not be excluded, was to indicate the 
intellectual bankruptcy of the school. 
Another implicit criticism in Popper's account concerns the dogmatism 
of the would-be sciences of man and society; and this would strike 
another blow at positivism's claims to be defeating the traditional 
enemies of reason. He describes how the practitioners of such fields, as 
the followers of Freud and Marx, use the doctrines in a particularly 
insidious fashion to protect themselves from criticism. The Marxist 
critical of the Party is deemed "petty-bourgeois"; the patient skeptical of 
Freud's interpretations is diagnosed as "deeply neurotic" and so on. Thus 
immunized against criticism, and fortified by their "confmnations", these 
essentially speculative, non-scientific studies could become really 
pernicious dogmatic pseudo-sciences. We notice that this defensive 
device is the same as that of traditional theology, which includes 
doctrines whereby all dissent is proved to be heresy. (I am grateful to Dr. 

IDEOLOGICAL COMMITMENTS 
361 
R. Sinsheimer, then at the University of California, Santa Cruz, for this 
observation). 
Thus, as I reconstruct Popper's problem-situation from his text, he had 
already given up Truth, and then found that the positivistic criteria admit 
both superstition and dogma. How to find an example by which real 
science can be demarcated from the suspect fields of Marxism and 
psychology, as well as the more patent pseudo-sciences? Einstein's bold 
theory of general relativity and, more, his dramatic challenge to the 
astronomers to test it in the eclipse of 1919, provided that experience. For 
Einstein had argued mathematically that Sir Isaac Newton had been 
wrong, on a fundamental point of his system of the world. And now he 
was calmly inviting the scientist to test his claim, to determine whether he 
was greater than Newton - or himself only the author of a misconceived 
theory. That was real science - not fake confirmations, but bold conjec-
tures ruthlessly put to the test. Popper concluded that what made a theory 
scientific was not that it was verifiable, but that it was falsifiable. But the 
heart of his insight was that what made a man a real scientist and not a 
fraud, was the moral quality of daring to be shown to be wrong. 
This is a very deep insight into the essentials of our science and indeed 
of our modem European civilization. If there is any doubt as to Popper's 
political commitment in its genesis and development, that can be removed 
by acquaintance with his influential works in political philosophy, as The 
Open Society and Its Enemies and The Poverty of Historicism. The 
achievement had its own cost, reflected in Popper's use of the 
"falsifiability" principle in the philosophy of science. For Popper was not 
content to leave it as an essentially ethical principle of genuine scientific 
behavior; he needed to adapt it to function as a principle of epistemology 
and of method.9 Severe problems were then encountered, for it turned out 
to be exceedingly difficult to demonstrate how knowledge could increase 
as a result of applying tests designed to falsify hypotheses: if such a test 
was successful, we gained only the knowledge that some particular 
statement is false; while if it was unsuccessful, we learned only that the 
statement was not yet proved false. As a principle of method, the 
projection of bold, very general hypotheses is not even a good caricature 
of the way scientists work. And, as an historic joke of the sort frequently 
associated with Einstein, the astronomical observations he suggested 
would not have been admitted by himself as a refutation of his theory 
even if they had gone against it. 10 
The contemporary student derives from Popper's work a sense of 

362 
JEROME R. RA VETZ 
urgency and commitment, unlike in the c~se of the technical writings of 
the Vienna-Circle philosophers. It is not made clear what the urgency is 
precisely about, since the scheme of "science" portrayed there is ob-
viously unlike the practice of either the ordinary or the great scientists. 
But with the help of the autobiographical essay and the political writings, 
we can appreciate the kinship of Popper to the Vienna Circle, both 
participating in the tradition of Central European rationalism, in which 
"science" was not so much a particular social activity as a Cause. 
However, we should recall the strong difference between them. Whereas 
the Vienna Circle proclaimed the good news of Science in a thoroughly 
traditional Enlightenment way, Popper jettisoned the True of science in 
order to rescue the Good. Post-Popperian philosophy of science may be 
seen as a test of whether even this desperate measure would suffice for 
the ideological defense of Science in the later, troubled years of the 
twentieth century. 
In the history of ideas, time does not run at all smoothly. The matured 
program of the Vienna Circle was developed after the revolution in 
"atomic" physics was well under way, and also after the insolubility of 
the "foundations crisis" of mathematics had been proved by the most 
rigorous of mathematical arguments. Hence its confidence in the security 
and intelligibility of matured exact natural science was betrayed by events 
even before it became the basis of a program. With Popper, time played 
other tricks: his insights of 1919 waited some fIfteen years before 
appearing fully in print; and by the early 1930's the German language 
market for politically-liberal philosophy of science was drying up rapidly. 
So he spent long years in New Zealand preparing his political philosophy, 
on whose basis he came to London. Only in the later 1950's, nearly forty 
years after the initial enlightening experience, did his philosophy of 
science begin to affect English language academic opinion. I I It is a true 
mark of its quality that it was still fresh and stimulating; the long reign of 
the Vienna Circle philosophers and their associates and students was at 
last being challenged. Popper also had the pleasure of seeing a school 
develop around himself. But, inevitably, there soon appeared a threaten-
ing and in some respects sinister rival philosophy: that of Thomas S. 
Kuhn. The response to this engaged him, and even more his brilliant 
protege Imre Lakatos, through the 1960's. 

IDEOLOGICAL COMMITMENTS 
363 
4. KUHN: KICKING OPEN PANDORA'S BOX 
Kuhn appeared on the philosophical scene in 1962; he was already 
recognized as a brilliant historian of the mathematical and physical 
sciences. His book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions12 was an 
instant success. Although some philosophers of science felt that his ideas 
were incomplete in their novelty, originality and clarity of expression, 
there was no denying the popularity of the book or its lasting influence. 
The enormous influence of Kuhn's work is due not merely to the depth of 
his insights. More, he seems to be describing science the way it really is, 
and doing so with a mastery that comes only from matured historical 
knowledge and reflective personal experience. His scientists are neither 
the impeccable truth-gatherers of the positivist tradition, nor the heroic 
conjecturalists of Popper, nor yet the paradox-generators of Lakatos. They 
are, normally, just ordinary people, concerned only to solve research 
puzzles within an unquestioned framework of concepts and methods. 
Kuhn's own experience of science was in postwar America, where 
ideological struggles were very muted and science was well on the way to 
becoming a big business. His account, reaching its audience when a 
rapidly expanded world of science and science education had lost most of 
its earlier sense of adventure and commitment, reads like the plain 
unvarnished truth. Because of this close relation to anew, disenchanted 
common sense of science, its ideological significance is more difficult to 
discern and also more devastating. 
According to Kuhn, scientific progress alternates between "normal" 
and ''revolutionary'' phases, in which (respectively) scientists make 
piecemeal advances, or choose between rival grand systems. By this 
account, it appears that normal science is boring, and revolutionary 
science incomprehensible. He offers no methods or criteria for helping 
scientists decide in a revolutionary situation. Hence the genuine 
"progress" of science (so vital for its traditional ideological message) 
becomes impossible to account for, and hence to guarantee, in both 
"revolutionary" and "normal" science alike. Indeed, Kuhn eventually 
reflected on the way that ultimate purposes are implicit in our idea of 
scientific "progress", and wondered whether we couldn't dispense with it 
in the evolution of human knowledge just as we have done in the 
evolution of species.I3 With disarming candor, he describes normal 
scientific work as "the strenuous and devoted effort to force Nature into 
the conceptual boxes provided by professional education".14 

364 
JEROME R. RA VETZ 
Having casually dropped the True, he equally lightheartedly dismissed 
the Good of science. In his general account of the argument of his book 
he describes the response of established scientists to the crisis that 
precedes a revolution in such unflattering terms as the following: 
Normal science, for example, often suppresses fundamental novelties because they are 
necessarily subversive of its basic commitments ... when ... the profession can no 
longer evade anomalies that subvert the existing tradition of scientific practice - then 
begin at last the extraordinary investigations that lead the profession at last to a new 
set of commitments, a new basis for the practice of science. IS 
Popper did well to entitle his own criticism of Kuhn as "Normal Science 
and its Dangers".l6 
The most striking evidence as to what was not worrying Kuhn comes 
from an exchange of the mid-sixties, when the mischievous Paul 
Feyerabend observed that Kuhn's idea of "normal science" as "puzzle-
solving within paradigms" provided no means of distinguishing between 
scientific research and other activities, even including organized crime.I7 
The point of this remark was that the association of science with any sort 
of ethical consideration (either in goals or in methods) was completely 
obliterated on Kuhn's model. Kuhn's response was simply to remark that 
he never claimed his model to apply exclusively to science.IS And there 
the matter rested. 
Kuhn's work is an illuminating example of the way in which a doctrine 
can have ideological consequences in near independence of the concerns 
and commitments of the author. It could be and was used for a denial of 
an objective, universal basis of scientific knowledge, for several purposes. 
On the one hand, it seemed to offer a behavioristic criterion for the 
genuineness of a scientific field: one where debate on fundamentals is 
suppressed, and all work proceeds as puzzle-solving within a dogmatic 
framework. For insecure scientists in fields of human behavior, this 
offered a justification of arbitrarily imposed departmental conformity. But 
rebellious researchers and revolutionary students could utilize the 
relativity of "paradigms" to struggle for a substitution of their favored 
dogma against the officially sanctioned one. Both sorts of move are 
destructive of the open dialogue which is the essence of Western liberal 
democracy, of which "science" had for generations been taken by its 
advocates as the great exemplar. Hence for those with any sensitivity to 
ideology, Kuhn's doctrines were a menace. All his colleagues distin-
guished Kuhn's doctrine from Kuhn himself; personally he is rather 

IDEOLOGICAL COMMITMENTS 
365 
liberal in his politics, rather conservative in his philosophy of science, and 
not at all interested in ideology. Amidst all that central-European 
intensity, he stands out as the American who just described it all the way 
it seemed to him, and then was amazed at the fuss made about it. Or is 
he? It is hard to imagine such an impact being made on the inherited 
image of science by some sort of accident. Is there more to Kuhn's 
message than meets the casual reader's eye? 
Of course there is, and it shows in the repeated irony, sometimes quite 
savage, that appears in odd words and phrases in the text. When he 
remarks that a scientific training is more narrow and rigid than any except 
orthodox theology, or that the official disciplinary histories of science are 
like those of 198419, we need not assume that the analogies are uninten-
tional. A more coherent set of clues are provided at the very beginning of 
the book, where he compares existing histories to tourist brochures or 
language texts, by which we have been "misled in fundamental ways".20 
These are, briefly, in the assumption that scientific progress is linear and 
cumulative; and that incorrect scientific theories are patently absurd. 
Kuhn seems to have believed such things right through his education, 
until he helped teach a course for non-scientists which involved reviewing 
old theories like Aristotelian mechanics, phlogistic chemistry and caloric 
theory of heat. To his "complete surprise, that exposure to out-of-date 
scientific theory and practice radically undermined" his basic concep-
tions. 
In a later autobiographical commentary21 Kuhn actually described how 
it happened: "My moment of enlightenment [sic] began in 1947, when I 
was asked to interrupt my current physics project for a time in order to 
prepare a set of lectures on the origins of seventeenth century 
mechanics ... ". Kuhn's ftrst reading of Aristotle's agreed with the 
consensus view; but perhaps with a keener historian's insight than he then 
realized, he asked, "but was it conceivable that his errors had been so 
blatant?" Thus we have the problem; and then the epiphany: "One 
memorable (and very hot) summer day those perplexities suddenly 
vanished. I all at once perceived the connected rudiments of an alternate 
way of reading the texts with which I had been struggling ... ". 
Thus we have a record of Kuhn's moment of enlightenment, analogous 
to Popper's of 1919 if not so dramatically retailed. But why should this 
produce the anger reflected in the irony? It seems most likely to me that at 
some stage Kuhn realized that he had been the victim of a deception; and 
we can identify the source of the deception in a root contradiction in the 

366 
JEROME R. RA VETZ 
old, received ideology of science. This had two elements: that science is 
always true, and also always progressive. To explain those cases where 
progress seemed to have occurred at the price of exposing error, the old-
time historian's technique was simple: to show that no real scientist could 
have believed that stuff. Kuhn discovered, by seeing the reasonableness 
of the discarded and discredited scientific theories, that the history he had 
trustingly imbibed was to some significant extent a pack of lies. Hence his 
anger, and also hence his extreme reaction, leading to the rhetorical 
flourishes about the "arbitrariness" of what is believed in science at any 
time. The True of science had been betrayed in its falsified history; and so 
the Good is also compromised. All this is a speculative reconstruction on 
my part; but it at least explains the stylistic features of Kuhn's text and 
also the intensity that made it so readable and so significant for the 
ideology of science. 
5. LAKATOS: THE DIALECTICAL DEFENSE OF REASON AND FREEDOM 
It was as ideology that Imre Lakatos read Kuhn's philosophy; and from 
its first appearance he devoted his main efforts to combatting both its 
philosophical errors and its political implications. This challenge provided 
a renewed practical focus for Lakatos' work; otherwise he might have 
been too exclusively concerned with the technical debates between the 
Popper school and its old and new opponents. Because of his tragically 
early death Lakatos achieved only a modest bulk of publications; and his 
various papers are either difficult or controversial or both. But by his 
intensity, brilliance and wit, he kept alive the spirit of Popperian-com-
mitted philosophy. Through it all, he was quite clear about his own 
ideological engagements. Indeed, much of the stimulus and support for 
this present essay of mine was derived from him. 
From his student days onwards, Lakatos had been, successively: a 
member of the anti-Nazi underground; a Communist Party activist; a 
bureaucrat in the Hungarian State cultural apparatus; a minor victim of 
the Stalinist purges of the early 1950's; a candidate for a treason-trial, 
whose name happened not to be reached; a non-rehabilitated (therefore 
document-less) ex-prisoner in pre-liberalized Hungary; a rehabilitated 
person, student and member of the Petofi circle during the Hungarian 
"spring" of 1955 and 1956; a refugee after the Russian intervention of 
1956; a research student at Cambridge, England, completing a thesis on 

IDEOLOGICAL COMMITMENTS 
367 
the philosophy of mathematics; eventually a member of the Popper group 
at the London School of Economics; and fmally an embattled opponent of 
the "new left" student revolutionaries who concentrated on the L.S.B. in 
1968. 
As Lakatos made it clear in his published writing22 the issue was plain: 
the defense of reason against its enemies, which (as Popper saw before 
him) could come equally well from the "Left" as from the old Right. But, 
working so much later than Popper and endowed with, greater political 
and philosophical subtlety, he could appreciate those defects in Popper's 
system which required remedying. This apologetic work, undertaken 
directly as a response to the challenge of Kuhn, occupied the last years of 
his life and was of doubtful success. His earliest work, undertaken before 
he came under the direct influence of Popper, is more original and 
probably more significant. Its ideological commitments are not so open, 
but are thereby all the more worthwhile to explore. 
Proofs and Refutations23 is an essay in the philosophy of mathematics, 
in my opinion the fIrst really new move in that fIeld in the twentieth 
century. Previously philosophers and mathematicians had attempted to 
resolve the ''foundations crisis" in terms of mathematics being a fIxed and 
rigid intellectual structure, consisting of clear concepts linked by 
unambiguous rules of inference. The various foundational programs were 
devoted to exposing that structure in such a way as to eliminate the 
paradoxes and anomalies that had been discovered there. Lakatos saw a 
very different problem: as a preliminary to any genuine philosophy of 
mathematics, we must explore the dialectic of development both of 
mathematical concepts and of criteria of rigorous proof. For these are 
both historically conditioned, and any philosophy that ignores this fact 
perpetuates the bad tradition of dogmatism in mathematical thinking. His 
method was as radical an innovation as his doctrine: he expounded his 
philosophy through a classroom discussion of terrifyingly clever school 
boys, dissecting their hapless teacher's proof of a classic result in 
topology, the "Euler Polyhedron Theorem". 
The roots of Lakatos' philosophy of mathematics are clear: the strong 
Hungarian tradition of problem-solving mathematics, raised an art and 
philosophy by G. Polya24; and a playful Hegelian style of dialectic, 
derived from a Marxism purifIed of its political content. His commitment 
was not so clear at the time of first publication of Proofs and Refutations; 
but it may be inferred from his life's work. One may imagine that the 
demonstration of the falsity of rigid and dogmatic thinking in mathe-

368 
JEROME R. RA VETZ 
matics, the most abstract of all sciences, could be applied a fortiori to the 
"science of society" under which Marxist Socialism was supposed to be 
constructed. 
It could be that Lakatos' philosophy of mathematics was among the 
more significant intellectual achievements of the "Petofi Circle" of the 
Hungarian Spring of 1955-1956. There is even a conjecture that his 
criticism of "proof' was born as a survival strategy under conditions of 
interrogation in Stalinist Hungary.2S We recall the game played in 
Koestler's Darkness at Noon, where Rubashov had to admit guilt on any 
crime which he might logically have committed. In that game it mattered 
not that the accusations were, in the non-political factual sense, false. We 
may imagine that for a more experienced interrogatee, the prime task was 
to prevent the interrogator convincing him that "confession" was a 
personal duty that could be rigorously derived from the objective needs of 
Party and Revolution. Denying the cogency of even a mathematical proof 
could then provide an escape hatch from the rigors of Stalinist political 
logic. 
The affinity in spirit and commitment between Popper and Lakatos is 
plain. They came together not long after Lakatos settled in England, and 
they then jointly met the challenge of the ideological consequences of 
Kuhn's apparently non-ideological analysis of science in his Structure .... 
The great monument of their endeavour is the report26 on a symposium 
held in 1965, in which Kuhn and all the other leading philosophers of 
science participated. Lakatos' own published contribution was under 
revision for some years afterwards, and so it stands as a fully matured 
expression of his views. He recognized that the versions of methodology 
that can be read out of Popper's writings are all too naive to stand 
scrutiny; there could be no "instant rationality" in scientific choice. His 
task was to construct an "heuristic" that would allow both for the 
complexity of the cognitive problems (where testing of theories could be 
neither immediate nor decisive) and for the human qualities of scientists 
(rightly unwilling to throwaway years of work at the sight of the first 
unresolved problem) while yet preserving the ethical and political 
commitments of Popper. His philosophical keenness led him into further 
problems (conveniently overlooked by most of his contemporaries) 
including the relations between the history and the philosophy of science, 
and also the location of the ultimate warrant for correctness of philosophi-
cal accounts of science (he put it in the successful practice, as distinct 
from the theorizing, of the elite scientists). The resulting edifice of ideas, 

IDEOLOGICAL COMMITMENTS 
369 
further enriched by Lakatos' delight in polemic and paradox, was 
impressive but unwieldy. It was also very vulnerable to criticism in 
respect both of its historical reconstructions and its philosophical 
generalizations. And Lakatos, like Popper, failed. to . face up to the 
political consequences of his philosophical critique: if the dominant self-
consciousness of science, as enforced by its elites, has indeed been false, 
reactionary and dogmatic (this is clear from his account of mathematics), 
what do we conclude about science as a social institution? Can it really be 
the embodiment of that rationality and intellectual integrity which we 
know to be at the core of a liberal, democratic "open" society? Thus the 
Good of Science is no easier to defend, once it has become problematic, 
than the True. 
Lakatos did not engage in his philosophical exercises for their own 
sake. While he was elaborating on his synthesis of Popperian idealism 
and Kuhnian pragmatics, he was also engaged in a political struggle with 
antagonists he considered as vicious and as dangerous as the Stalinist 
thought-police of Hungary. The rebellious students of the London School 
of Economics in 1968 were, in retrospect, a small and ineffective 
minority. But during their flourishing, they disrupted a distinguished 
educational institution, and announced their intention to capture it and 
much else beside. Even the English academic staff at the L.S.E. were 
caught up in violent struggles, ideological, institutional and personal. For 
Lakatos, it was the Red Fascists on the march again, and he reacted, as if 
back in Budapest. This struggle convinced him that his version of 
Popperian liberal philosophy of science was central to the defense of 
civilization, and so gave his work a compelling intensity. But it took a 
heavy toll of his energies, and left him exhausted and ill. 
It is conceivable to me that Lakatos eventually recognized that the great 
flexibility he had built into his model of rational scientific behavior, for 
the sake of realism, had effectively undermined his political commitment 
and career. The crucial point is of time-scale; as he said, "to give a stem 
'refutable interpretation' to a fledgling version of a program is a dan-
gerous methodological cruelty .... [it] may take decades of theoretical 
work to arrive at the first novel facts and still more time to arrive at 
interestingly testable versions ... ".27 Decades of protection from critical 
judgement, even for an abstract scientific theory? How long then, for a 
new social system? By this criterion, the Soviet intervention of 1956 was 
quite possibly "historically necessary" to protect the fledgling socialism 
of Hungary, scarcely a single decade away from war and Fascism. Thus 

370 
JEROME R. RA VETZ 
Lakatos' lifelong exile was perhaps the result of a methodological error in 
the overly stem assessment of a fledgling version of a social-development 
program. 
Only an intimate biography could tell whether Lakatos was aware of 
this latent contradiction. But since his methodological reflections were 
always guided by his political commitments, the practical implications of 
his strong denial of "instant rationality" could not be hidden forever. 
What we do know is that one of the few comradely friends he retained 
from his earlier days in England exposed other crucial contradictions in 
his intellectual system, and effectively made himself rather than Lakatos 
the authority to be followed. This was Paul Feyerabend, in whose book 
Against Method, dedicated to Lakatos, the ideological aspects of the 
modem philosophy of science are taken to the ultimate in paradox and 
confusion. 
6. PAUL FEYERABEND AND THE END OF CLASSICAL 
VIENNESE PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE 
Feyerabend is certainly the most confusing and paradoxical figure in the 
philosophy of science of that period. It is not at all easy to decide whether 
he is a court jester, Zen master, or Fascist. The first, because he still 
operates within the community of philosophy of science, engaging 
successfully in highly technical debates on problems within the dominant 
style. In this respect, he is more one of the club than even Lakatos ever 
was, to say nothing of Kuhn, whose real commitment is to interpretative 
history rather than exemplified philosophy. Conventional philosophers of 
science cannot dismiss him, for he is capable of publishing a fully expert 
and illuminating - or wounding - study of problems or persons at any 
time. Yet in what seems to be another incarnation, he has written wild and 
destructive criticisms of the whole program of philosophy of science, that 
is explaining and justifying the methods whereby (idealized) scientists 
gain new knowledge. Some might hope to contain his influence by not 
taking the critical diatribes too seriously, and treating him as a court 
jester, who says impossible things as useful reminders of the human 
frailties to which even philosophers are subject. 
Careful consideration of his arguments shows that they are not so easily 
reduced to jokes. If philosophy of science has any pretensions to help us 
understand the activity of science, then his studies of the behavior of great 

IDEOLOGICAL COMMITMENTS 
371 
scientists are troubling indeed. For he shows by example that for any 
explicit rule of method enunciated by philosophers of science, there is an 
important occasion on which it was broken by some great scientist. In his 
Against Methocfl8 he goes far towards demonstrating that Galileo was a 
precursor of Feyerabend, treating all the rules, including that of simple 
accuracy (or honesty) in recording observations, with fine anarchistic 
playfulness. The epoch-making description of the surface of the moon 
that Galileo saw through his telescope, reported in the Starry Messenger, 
gives prominent and important reference to a feature (a large round crater 
on the line bisecting the lunar disc )29 which can be made at all plausible 
only by the most skillful selection of modem lunar photographs30• And 
Galileo's struggle for the Copernican system can be considered 
"scientific" only because he happened to be right; otherwise he broke 
every rule of the game. 
Now, this is the sort of thing that can easily "blow the mind" of a 
student for whom (like so many) the authority of Science is as absolute as 
theology ever was in the Middle Ages. After such an experience of shock 
and disillusion, the student may be ready to awaken to the truth that there 
is no truth to awaken to. In his role of awakener, Feyerabend may be 
considered as a Zen master. But the analogy is very imperfect: a tradi-
tional Zen master operated in an "I-thou" relation, so that the searcher 
would be genuinely enlightened and not destroyed. Providing an 
anonymous reading public with an exhibition of a batch of sacred images 
being sprayed by a philosophical machine gun is a very different activity 
indeed. 
For this reason, and another as well, Feyerabend may come under 
suspicion of being in effect (though certainly not in intention) a 
Fascist.31 For what he offers to replace the old ideal of philosophy of 
science is confused and unconstructive. It is along the lines of allowing 
everyone to "do his own thing" freed from the constraints of convention 
or of social or logical propriety. Those who recall the connections of Nazi 
"German-Folk" ideology and religion with earlier currents of "Romantic" 
and anti-mechanical philosophies are justifiably troubled by Feyerabend 
even more than by the other "counter-culture" prophets. Feyerabend's 
prescriptions may be all very well after the anarchist Utopia has been 
achieved; but in the short run it may mean destroying the intellectual 
barriers to the vi~tory of arbitrary will and brute force in intellectual and 
hence social matters. 
Feyerabend could reply to such an accusation with the rejoinder that for 

372 
JEROME R. RA VETZ 
most of the world's peoples, aside from the mainly-white, mainly-male, 
mainly-middle-class beneficiaries of high culture, that is precisely the 
unspeakable state of affairs already; and that this is both concealed and 
sanctioned by our dominant ideas of Science and Method. In his defense, 
in Science in a Free Society, he describes the experiences in California 
which led to his conversion. Adopting a playful Feyerabendian style for 
the rational reconstruction of Feyerabend, we may take two episodes from 
the book, and combine them to imagine an "epiphany of the yellow 
pencils" for his illumination.32 These latter were the topic (along with 
black ravens) of the paradox which formed a principal concern of 
philosophers of science during the otherwise turbulent decade of the 
sixties. So we may imagine Feyerabend at Berkeley during all the 
campaigns, teaching classical philosophy of science including the paradox 
named above, when he became aware of his surroundings. These were 
first, a class of California 'sixties types, including ethnic minority people 
whom he was expected to prepare for "the wonderful chance to par-
ticipate in the white man's manias". Exemplifying these was (I imagine) 
the tear-gas that drifted into the classroom as the police broke up yet 
another student demonstration. Furthermore, having been abandoned by 
the best of the orthodox medical science that the University of California 
could provide, he was in the process of being saved by several unor-
thodox practitioners. This quintessentially 'sixties combination completed 
the process of his disillusion with the official representatives of rationality 
and freedom that had been growing for many years; and so he rejected the 
yellow pencils in favor of a radical democracy in all culture, including 
science. Thus enlightened, he turned on all scientific orthodoxies with the 
fierce delight displayed in Against Method. 
Feyerabend is best understood in the context of the "counter-culture" 
which flourished most abundantly in California. His criticisms make 
sense when related to those of Ivan lllich and the other prophets of a new 
age. His political case against scientific medicine is supported· by the 
chronicle of oppression and mutilation of subject peoples (including the 
whole female sex) at the hands of the certified experts.33 Indeed, the only 
conclusive answer to his critique is the classic of a departing reactionary: 
"Apres moi, Ie deluge" - so that all but the most fanatical revolutionaries 
realize in retrospect the benefits of a rule of law that had at least been 
consistent, however harsh and unjust. There is a practical answer, of 
course, and that is to let time elapse and see what has happened to the 
message of the sixties, and to the world which then for a moment seemed 

IDEOLOGICAL COMMITMENTS 
373 
nearly in an apocalyptic state. 
In Feyerabend's polemics, the ideological motivation for the 
philosophy of science finally became fully explicit. This was because he 
was accusing the dominant Viennese tradition of complicity in the 
betrayal of the ideals for which it had historically claimed to stand. Their 
idea of rationality had showed itself a tool of class and cultural im-
perialists; he would then demonstrate the incapacity of such a rationality 
as an instrument of learning about the world. Though in the last resort 
Feyerabend argued from within the philosophical tradition to which the 
Viennese adhered, his work was devastating to that tradition. After him 
came a variety of social-science approaches to scientific knowledge, all of 
which argued that scientific knowledge is a social construct, of a lesser or 
greater degree of arbitrariness. Although there remained a few apologists 
trying to rescue something of "objectivity", with Feyerabend came the 
end of classical Viennese philosophy of science. 
If that tradition had been truly "positive" like the science it proclaimed, 
and had tough and resilient roots in a real understanding of its practice, it 
would not, I believe, have been so vulnerable to the assault of its critics. 
But, as I have shown here, the image of "science" that was invoked in that 
program was itself the product of an ideology, however unselfconsciously 
applied: that science is uniquely the bearer of the True and hence also of 
the Good, in opposition to religion and other forms of knowing. When 
that image lost its plausibility, through changes in the ideological and 
institutional context of science, the technical articulations made by 
previous philosophers of science were discovered to be hollow and brittle. 
Two profound but simplistic thinkers, one, Popper, an eccentric Viennese 
ex-radical, and the other, Kuhn, an unsubtle American conservative, 
achieved the insights that demolished the foundations of the old scientis-
tic faith; and then in spite of Lakatos' heroic efforts to construct a 
dialectical defense of reason and freedom, the whole edifice was brought 
down by Feyerabend's "Dada" critique. 
7. CONCLUSION: WHERE DO WE GO FROM HERE? 
I do not wish to say that any philosophical system is only a tissue of 
rationalizations of an ideology that enjoys some temporary plausibility. 
Although philosophy is very different in degree from the more "positive" 
sciences that enjoy a more direct foundation in controlled experience, it 

374 
JEROME R. RA VETZ 
too leaves behind a residue of achievement, in understanding rather more 
than in detailed knowledge, as each great movement or school passes 
through its cycle of growth and decay. But when all the signs point to a 
philosophical cycle nearing its end, it is time to see whether the world 
which was its passionate concern is still that which presents us with the 
problems that challenge and enrich us. 
The ideology of the previous phase of philosophy of science was 
derived from a centuries-long battle with "religion". This lay not so much 
in the realm of individual faith, as in that of pretensions to exclusive 
knowledge, and of claims to political power partly on that basis. Now, in 
the later twentieth century, that old battle is over: the Christian Churches 
are in an excited and turbulent state that may indeed herald a great rebirth, 
but which certainly does not promise either the renewed obedience of the 
faithful or the deference of the secular powers. Instead, at least some of 
the clerical evils that motivated the endeavors of Enlightenment have now 
been inherited by the apparatus of anti-religious State power. And from 
Science itself have come new evils, inconceivable once magic was 
discredited until the advent of the atomic bomb. So that those who still try 
to identify Science with the humane, civilized values now fmd themselves 
in a confused night battle, where friend and foe are ever more difficult to 
distinguish. 
My own retrospective assessment of the tradition would hinge on a 
distinction of three modes of discourse: heuristic, epistemology and 
ideology. The logical-positivists ignored heuristic and so were vulnerable 
when it was introduced. Popper invoked it but in a very caricatured 
version. Kuhn might be said never to have grasped the distinction 
between an insightful heuristic and rigorous epistemology. Feyerabend 
uses heuristic to destroy epistemology. Of all these philosophers, Lakatos 
best appreciated the difference, but was lacking in a sufficiently sensitive 
touch to keep their relations harmonious. 
The old epistemological problems of science are, therefore, no longer 
fruitful for our understanding of that great creation of the human intellect. 
As they have become isolated from their roots in committed experience, 
they can provide no effective defense against the suicidal application of 
reason in Feyerabend's arguments. I suggest that they be given a rest, and 
that new critical insights be applied to the analysis of science, not in a 
spirit of angry demystification, but as a complement to progress already 
being made in the history and the sociology of science. There, studies of 
the actual conditions and constraints on scientific work are providing a 

IDEOLOGICAL COMMITMENTS 
375 
picture, which is rapidly being enriched, of how science can have both 
successes and failures, and virtues and vices, without being the subject of 
one simplistic verdict on the degree of its adherence to the Good and the 
True. 
The speculative and analytical styles of enquiry appropriate to 
philosophy could find an immediate rich harvest in the many areas of 
ethics that impinge on scientific and science-based work. For epistemol-
ogy, there are the peculiarly challenging and urgent problems of "trans-
science", where the questions may look like ordinary experimental topics, 
but where the technical answers lie beyond the limits of feasibility. The 
philosophy of the mathematical sciences could be rejuvenated by deeper 
analysis of their inexactness in practice, as distinct from their perfection 
in an ideologically-loaded theory. 
The criteria for demarcation of science from pseudo-science, essen-
tially untouched from Descartes until Popper, could do with more 
scrutiny. For example, there are the policy-relevant disciplines dependent 
on mathematical models where the uncertainties in the inputs must be 
suppressed lest the outputs become indeterminate. Such "GIGO-sciences" 
(for "Garbage In, Garbage Out") have a role in statecraft analogous to that 
of classical astrology. Must we admit them as scientific in spite of their 
vacuity, merely because their underlying metaphysics follows Descartes 
and Hobbes? 
Even the field of ontology, long since relegated to the most obscure 
comer of metaphysics, takes on a new relevance. When both visibly 
prodigious phenomena and inward states of enhanced consciousness are, 
continuously since the sixties, on the agenda of debate, the concepts of 
reality decreed in the early Seventeenth Century may no longer be taken 
as unproblematical. These are only a few problems shaped in terms with 
which I am familiar; as philosophers enlarge their image of "science" 
from an idealized physics, to medicine,technology, and the field of 
"regulatory science", the problems are profuse in their challenge. 
I would not be so naive as to call for an end to ideology in the 
philosophy of science. The new problems will have their own ideological 
motivations too; that is necessary and healthy. But we .can look forward to 
the closing of a chapter in the philosophy of science in which the 
persistent rule of a particular ideology was, it its later stages, all the more 
damaging because it was unrecognized. That is why I have done this 
survey in the interests of an enriched understanding of our past, so that we 
may better shape our future. 

376 
JEROME R. RA VE1Z 
"Ideological commitments in the philosophy of 
science", is adapted from an essay that was fIrst 
given as a lecture to the Department of Sociology 
at Leeds University in 1979, then, as revised, 
published (in German translation) in: Duerr, H.P. 
(ed). Versuchungen (essays on the work of Paul 
Feyerabend), 
(Frankfurt, 
SUhrkamp 
Verlag, 
1981), and further revised and republished in 
Radical Philosophy No. 25, 1984. This present 
draft has been published in The Merger of 
Knowledge with Power. (London and New York, 
Mansell, 1989). 
Research Methods Consultancy 
13 Temple Gardens 
London NWll OLP 
UK 
NOTES 
1 See, for an example of a recent textbook, A. Chalmers, What Is This Thing Called 
Science? (Open University Press; 1978). 
2 I. Lakatos, "History of Science and its Rational Reconstructions", in The Methodol-
ogy of Scientific Research Programmes (Cambridge; 1978), p. 137. 
3 D. Harvey, Explanation in Geography (London, Arnold; 1969) is a good example of 
such an attempt; the author subsequently turned to politically radical interpretations of 
urban geography. 
4 Vienna Circle, The Scientific Conception of the World (1929) (pamphlet) (Reidel; 
1973) also in M. Neurath and R.S. Cohen (Eels). Otto Neurath: Empiricism and 
Sociology (Reidel; 1973). 
S A. Naess, The Pluralist and Possibilist Aspect of the Scientific Enterprise, (London, 
Allen & Unwin; 1972), p. 135. 
6 E. Mach, The Science of Mechanics (1883, many translations and editions). 
7 K. Popper, "Conjectures and Refutations", in Conjectures and Refutations, The 
Growth of Scientific Knowledge (London, Routledge; 1963) p. 36. 
8 Ibid. p. 35. 
9 K.R. Popper, "Back to the Presocratics" in Conjectures and Refutations is a very 
attractive attempt to show how Popperian method and ethics were responsible for "the 
Greek miracle" in natural philosophy. 
10 G. Holton, "Mach, Einstein, and the Search for Reality", in Thematic Origins of 
Modern Thought (Harvard, 1973), p. 236. 
11 K.R. Popper, The Logic of Scientific Discovery (London; Hutchinson, 1959). 
12 T.S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, (Chicago, 1962). 
13 Ibid., p. 170. 

IDEOLOGICAL COMMITMENTS 
377 
14 Ibid., p. 5. 
IS Ibid., pp. 5-6. 
16 K. Popper, "Normal Science and its Dangers" in I. Lakatos and"A. Musgrave (eds). 
Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge (Cambridge, 1970). 
17 P. Feyerabend, "Consolations for the Specialist" in Lakatos & Musgrave op. cit., 
pp. 200-201. 
18 T.S. Kuhn, "Reflections on my Critics" in Lakatos & Musgrave, op. cit. p. 245. 
19 Kuhn, op. cit. (ref. 12) pp. 166, 167. 
20 Ibid. p. 1. 
21 T.S. Kuhn, The Essential Tension. (University of Chicago Press, 1977), Preface p. 
xi. 
22 I. Lakatos, "Introduction. Science and Pseudoscience", in Methodology of 
Scientific Research Programmes (op. cit.) ... 
23 I. Lakatos, Proofs & Refutations. The Logic of Mathematical Discovery 
(Cambridge, 1976). 
24 G. Polya, Mathematics and Plausible Reasoning (2 vols). (Oxford and Princeton, 
1954). 
2S J.G. Goodfield, personal communication. 
26 Lakatos and Musgrave, op. cit. 
27 I. Lakatos, op. cit. (ref. 2), p. 151. 
28 P. Feyerabend, Against Method, (London, New Left Books, 1975). 
29 Galileo, The Starry Messenger, (1610), second drawing of the moon, with crater 
compared to Bohemia; see S. Drake, The Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo (New 
York, Doubleday Anchor, 1957), p. 35. 
30 S. Drake, Galileo at Work, His Scientific Biography (University of Chicago Press, 
1978), p. 145. 
31 See E. Gellner, "Beyond Truth and Falsehood" British Journal for the Philosophy 
of Science 26 (1975) pp. 331-345. Feyerabend's reply, "Logic, Literacy and Professor 
Gellner", ibid. 27 (1976) pp. 382-391, where he denies being a Fascist by claiming 
court-jester and Zen-master status. The reply is reprinted with modifications in 
Science in a Free Society (London, New Left Books, 1978), pp. 141-153. 
32 Ibid., pp. 118, 137. 
33 Ibid., p. 175. For partial confirmation of one of his accusations see Science vol. 204 
(22 June 1979), pp. 284-285: ''There is no scientific evidence that a radical mastec-
tomy gives any better results than a modified one for early breast cancers, according 
to the consensus meeting held on 5 June at the National Institutes of Health." 

JOSEPH AGASSI 
As You Like It 
PRELUDE 
This is a continuation, hopefully a conclusion, of a debate with Professor 
Paul Feyerabend that began with my review of his Against Method. I say 
hopefully a conclusion because, alas! I have to concede to him. 
In my review I urged him to repudiate his assumed role, because he 
was mistaken in thinking himself to be a flippant light-hearted clown. The 
mistake was mine. First, it turns out, he has type-cast himself so well that 
it would be harder to change than it was for Hedy Lamarr. Secondly, 
though neither flippant nor light-hearted, as I shall explain later, he still is 
the clown in the silent movie tradition of acrobatic clowns who delight 
the kids, the tradition culminating with Laurel and Hardy, especially 
Hardy. Feyerabend says things he knows will not fool his readers, who 
know he is no fool: he is an iconoclast of the clowning sort, a pluralist 
who, therefore, has his heart in the right (left) place, who relentlessly 
harasses the best rationalists in town by pointing to their worst weakness. 
The best rationalists are the Popperians, and their worst weakness is the 
obsession with demarcation, a concealed moralism, the demarcation of 
the good guys from the bad. And he either poses as a bad guy in order to 
make a point or he is a daredevil- who knows. 
All this is far from being to my taste. Yet, I do concede: even the most 
lenient philosophers of the rationalist school preach standards that are 
much too high, and in the name of an Almighty Science which they 
appropriate for themselves and in whose name they oppress the vivacious 
young. Unfortunately, however, the excessive reaction of Feyerabend, 
G. Munevar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 379-387. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
379 

380 
JOSEPH AGASSI 
like the reaction of all those who flip out or recommend that we flip out, 
is merely a palliative, a momentary escape, from which sooner or later 
one comes back to normal. The slogan "Anything goes", that is now 
Feyerabend's trademark, means that the present-day moralists who 
advocate high standards in the name of rationalism are right and so we 
better give up rationalism altogether. In his reply to Helmut Spinner he 
says that he refuses to cut off his nose only because the Fuhrer of the 
Third Reich had a nose, yet he cuts off his reason because the moralists 
claim a monopoly over it and denounces science because the moralists 
claim a monopoly over it. But I say the moralists are in error and to let 
them keep their monopoly over rationality and science should not be 
Feyerabend's general policy. 
FIRST ACT 
Helmut Spinner has ascribed to me the idiotic view that there is agree-
ment between the public views of Feyerabend and the Fuhrer of the Third 
Reich. He, Spinner, ftrst opposed this idiotic view, and then, incredibly, 
endorsed it. Obviously, there can be hardly a greater disparity between 
two views: the one is a fanatic monism, the other is a sloppy pluralism; 
the one says, nothing goes except on my say-so, the other says, anything 
goes. How, then, can anyone ever arrive at such a strange idea as the 
comparison of these two? Perhaps Feyerabend himself permits this 
comparison, since he permits any idea, any suggestion whatsoever: if 
anything goes, perhaps comparing his views and the Fuhrer's goes too. 
But I am not discussing here the license Feyerabend kindly offers his 
disciples, nor his reasons for rejecting some of them, including Spinner. 
How should non-Feyerabendians respond to such a comparison? Perhaps 
they will be ready to accept it on the ground that all ideas they consign to 
the dust-bin are equal. I am afraid this readiness is rather too cavalier: 
there are considerations other than intellectual to take into account now 
and then. Whenever an idea becomes a social or political pollutant, not to 
sayan intellectual pollutant, we are obliged to consider it seriously, even 
if we would prefer not to have to. It is always a tribute to criticize, at the 
very least the tribute to an author who, as a sufficiently signiftcant 
pollutant, manages to impose his work on our attention. This tribute I am 
paying Feyerabend again. 
Nevertheless, I have not said as yet why I think it an error to equate all 

AS YOU LIKE IT 
381 
utterly unacceptable views, or utterly worthless ones, etc. The reason is 
that different pollutants have to be neutralized differently. I do not expect 
present-day pollutants to demand so much effort to eradicate as the ones 
which spread so rapidly in the twenties and thirties. But one never knows; 
we may have to analyze them in detail and try to understand why they 
find markets: what urges and needs do consumers expect them to satisfy 
and how can we find better substitutes for them that might oust them and 
how can prospective consumers learn to compare them and improve their 
tastes, etc. We have here a complex of uninteresting and unpleasant 
practical problems, political as well as educational, that we may be forced 
to study in sheer self defense. 
Can we at all say that the Fuhrer of the Third Reich has satisfied some 
urges and needs? Certainly. Most of them were emotional needs and I will 
try to avoid these. Can one speak of some intellectual problems, intellec-
tual needs, some worthwhile arguments that the Fuhrer has supplied? I do 
not think so: when we descend to the level where his arguments start to 
look good we find there as many competitors (to them) as one may wish. 
I am well aware of the fact that the old chauvinist arguments in favor of 
hate still have some currency - in Germany as well as in Israel. Yet, I 
think those who are still using arguments to incite hatred - Leftists or 
Rightists - they know very well that they are using weak arguments and 
they use them nevertheless; the way Professor Feyerabend uses some of 
his arguments, incidentally. And people who use poor arguments knowing 
that they are poor are often successful in the task that they undertake -
which makes them use poor arguments knowingly. Being successful they 
deem themselves very clever instead of seeing this as proof that the tasks 
they undertake are not worthy. And this makes their folly quite disastrous, 
since they are unaware of their folly, being so successful, until it is too 
late. But clearly, whatever the task they undertake, the people they 
convince by poor arguments are either poor thinkers or people who like to 
trade poor arguments despite their ability to do better. They do so either 
because they feel that what they gain by poor arguments is worthier than 
their intellects, or because they are tired of their own intellects anyway. In 
either case, they are anti-intellectuals, irrational, obscurantists. And there 
is, no doubt, a constant demand for obscurantism by all those who feel 
burdened by the intellectual and moral standards of their environments. 
Obscurantism is a quality of all sorts of writers. The most important 
difference between different obscurantists seems to me to be the dif-
ference between the pacific and the sadistic, for example, between the old 

382 
JOSEPH AGASSI 
Tolstoy and Georges Sorel. And the most important question about a 
pollutant we try to neutralize is, is he for or against violence? Is he a 
sadist or a pacifist? The way to discover such matters may be simple and 
obvious, but not always so, since the sadistic polluter may choose to 
appear as a pacifist. For example, the militarism of Israeli clericalists of 
the new style is what makes them of the sadistic variety, despite the 
pacifist wording of traditional Judaism which is seemingly still accepted 
by them. 
I do not think we can study the appeal of a given brand of obscurantism 
without knowing whether it is pacific or sadistic. 
INTERLUDE 
My review of Professor Feyerabend's Against Method contrasts un-
favorably with Ernest Gellner's review of the same work. I assumed it to 
be pacific, but Gellner knew better. Oh, the passage in that book where 
Feyerabend preaches violence as a means of overcoming one's scruples 
and discovering one's strength had not escaped me, but I wanted to 
believe him when he said he was a kind of pacifist who would not hurt a 
fly. Addressing him as pacific I argued - mistakenly, as I know now -
against his obscurantism with the classic argument against all obscuran-
tism and in favor of reason: it is reason that enables us to distinguish 
between good and evil, as already ancient mythology has put it. As I put 
it, one cannot accept his slogan, anything goes, because it may mean 
anything including Nazism, and Nazism should not be permitted, since it 
leads to Dachau and Auschwitz. But I was in error: Feyerabend's 
obscurantism is not of the pacific kind. And so he could easily dismiss my 
criticism, as he has done in a later publication, saying, anything goes, 
including the most beastly Nazi. He even gave an argument to support his 
claim: he had wished to write a play describing a revolting Nazi who, in 
the second act or so becomes more and more appealing, to end up as 
revolting as in the start. There are such plays written, I hasten to add, at 
least one of them quite impressive. If such a poor argument suffices to 
convince one to take Nazis seriously, then it might also suffice to 
convince one to take Feyerabend seriously. I, therefore, would like to try 
out a sketch of such a play to advocate the taking seriously: a stronger 
argument I no longer have at my disposal, I regret to confess. 

AS YOU LIKE IT 
383 
SECONDACI' 
Young Paul Feyerabend, an Austrian citizen under the Anschluss, 
volunteered for the German army and served there as an officer. He tried 
to ignore the ideological and political aspects of the war, World War n, 
that is, not to mention the moral problems it raised for him whether as a 
soldier or as a soldier of one side rather than the other. Instead, he tried to 
busy himself with reading philosophy. He was wounded at the very end of 
the war and spent much time in the hospital. After leaving the hospital 
and after trying a few things, he fmally ended up studying philosophy, but 
still trying to avoid politics and all that. Rather, he tried to concentrate on 
the tougher and more technical side of philosophy. Nevertheless, 
somehow he got converted to Trotskyism, from which he was never freed 
though he managed to put it aside and, while a disciple of Popper, even 
expounded rather anti-Trotskyite views. The centers of his concern were 
the tough questions of philosophy, especially the philosophy of science, 
in particular questions relating to quantum theory. He, thus, came to meet 
both Niels Bohr and Karl Popper. He became a student and a disciple of 
Popper. (Oh, I know that he is in the habit of denying this claim of mine. 
One of us is obviously a liar, and it must be myself, since, as Feyerabend 
says, I extol science because the capitalists pay me and flatter me for 
doing so. Nice). He became a passionate defender of science and of 
rationality as he understood them, preaching logic, quantum mechanics, 
and, above all, the philosophy of Karl Popper. 
I met Feyerabend ftrst in January, 1953. It was in the London School of 
Economics and Political Science, in the celebrated seminar of Professor 
Karl Popper. We were both young, noisy, gregarious, and argumentative, 
in that seminar and out; yet, we did not talk with each other. Young 
Israelis at that time usually avoided the company of Germans, and hardly 
knew the difference between Germans and Austrians. The reason is 
simple: we did not want to befriend ex-Nazis or Nazis or ex-Concentra-
tion camp personnel, and we did not want to examine the credentials of 
people who might have been in such positions. It was best and easiest 
simply to avoid the problem. When it was unavoidable and we found 
ourselves talking with young Germans, the discussion invariably came to 
the painful topic. One young German we met in the London School of 
Economics was Ralf Dahrendorf, who already then was, what he is so 
very well known now for, namely a liberal social thinker. With him too 
the discussion centered around Nazism and it was not very easy either. 

384 
JOSEPH AGASSI 
But he understood, I think. With Feyerabend the same conversation was 
postponed by a few years, which was a sad mistake on my part. 
The way it came about is this. Popper was conducting with each of us 
discussions about metaphysics and physics; indeed he later acknowledged 
to both of us simultaneously, that our joint enthusiasm was very helpful to 
his return to the topic he had left because of the unenthusiastic response 
of his colleagues. I need not explain how flattered we were by the interest 
our idol showed in our cogitations. And the flattery was marked from the 
start. Anyway, Popper wanted to meet us together in private, and so he 
did many a time. But before that, he had to bring us together: without 
being told, he noticed my attitude toward Feyerabend and he understood. 
He told me that Feyerabend had regretted his earlier behavior, and even 
with tears. And he simply instructed me to befriend Feyerabend, which I 
did with no hesitation. 
I learned about my mistake a year or two later, yet remained on 
friendly, and even in a way, close terms with him, chiefly because we 
were engaged in advanced philosophical debates. But by then, he had 
admitted to me that he had hardly any moral sense. When I pressed, he 
admitted that were they - they! - to return to the extermination of the 
Jews he would stand up and shout, "that is too much!", but he could not 
say what is so special about this. I let it go: he did little about moral and 
political philosophy, anyway, and the little he did was of very little 
significance, since it was, to repeat, a rehash of Popper. 
THIRD ACT 
Things changed after the student revolution, so-called. From that time on, 
and increasingly so, Feyerabend preached his odd slogan (I do not know 
if I quite fmd it comprehensible), anything goes. It sounded like a joke in 
poor taste to hear that he recommended to African students and to 
students of African descent - as the rumor went - to practice magic and 
eschew science. It was clear to me at once that the move was political, not 
intellectual, and I could see its allure, but also its dangers: in order to 
become equal the discriminated Americans had to fight against discrimina-
tion, not to retreat to tribal customs and culture that were hardly useful to 
them in their difficult situation. It was hard enough for them without 
seeking lost pride in fake and lost roots. Moreover, what should one say 
about magic that is cannibalistic? But sooner or later Feyerabend came 
out in print, and the rumors were now facts. What the rumors did was to 

AS YOU LIKE IT 
385 
prepare the ground; what they omitted was supplemented. The increased 
volume of Feyerabend's new philosophy illustrates this. 
The early phase of Feyerabend' s researches showed him as eager to 
find the toughest problems, the strongest arguments, the answers that 
were as near final as possible. The later phase is the opposite. If the 
strongest cannot be defended well enough to bring conviction and 
satisfaction, at least the weakest can be defended by some arguments that 
are not that bad, and with time we can learn to live with ever poorer 
arguments, provided we supplement them from time to time with really 
brilliant ideas to show that we say these silly things not out of stupidity. 
And it worked. Example: we defend Aristotle's physics which is reputed 
to be not really good; yet there are some very intriguing arguments in its 
favor. A worse example: we defend magic and superstition and pseudo-
science. They interest the learned occultists, the anthropologists, and so 
on. Some systems of superstition are quite sophisticated; others may, at 
times even do, include some interesting item overlooked by the best of 
modern western science and medicine. Hence, they should be studied. 
Hence, they are serious contenders for the status of knowledge. Hence, 
they are not inferior to the best of science. Hence, science is wrong to 
condemn them. Hence, science is inferior. (Do not expect Professor 
Feyerabend to correct my criticism of all this; he prefers not to, since he 
does not accept my method of arguing in preference to his. He is against 
method). The worst example possible: he defends Nazism too, and merely 
because it may be interesting and intrigue the best of us. Hence, it too, is a 
contender, etc. The Nazi, too, can have a human quality now and then. 
And so we can take the beast as just one other animal in our zoo and shed 
no tear, especially no tear about our past: no one is perfect, not the Fuhrer 
who hated the Jews, but also not the Jews who now, except for Hannah 
Arendt, make such a fuss about matters as if they were perfect. Violence, 
Feyerabend thinks, also has its good side, so that should count for 
something too. The popularity that Feyerabend has in the Federal German 
Republic (I have no information as to how well he fares in the German 
People's Republic) would sound to me dangerous were it not pathetic. 
EPILOGUE 
Professor Feyerabend, we remember, has argued against my criticism of 
his views. He says, anything goes; 1 say, not anything, not brutality, for 
example, not Auschwitz. He retorts, a well written play may make us 

386 
JOSEPH AGASSI 
sympathize for a fleeting moment even with a Nazi brute. I concede; 
afortiori, then, a play may make us sympathize for a fleeting moment also 
with Feyerabend. If a fleeting moment of sympathy suffices as a defense 
then, indeed, anything goes. But it does not. It does not justify brutality, 
and consequently it does not justify preachers of the Gospel of Hate. For, 
it is a sad fact that Feyerabend is just another recruit to the army of its 
preachers. The question they often raise and discuss is, whom should we 
hate and under what conditions? And the main consensus between those 
who preach the Gospel of Hate is that it is the Gospel of Unreason: do 
hate Reason! And Feyerabend identifies Reason and Popper, and says, 
hate Popper! 
Beware of the Gospel of Hate. Beware of the question, whom should 
we hate? In Israel Nazism is taken very seriously, and as an object of 
legitimate hate, of course. Some Israelis argue against the preachers of 
hate on the terms these preachers like; they say, the Nazis are now too 
weak to be taken seriously. There is a smashing argument against this: in 
the early thirties many Jews thought so, and they were mistaken and paid 
with their lives for this mistake. What this amounts to of course is, better 
be on the safe side: better hate even when in doubt; or at the very least, 
sometimes hate is very important in the battle for survival. I have also met 
the gospel of hate in the universities, in the heyday of the student 
revolution, so-called: the New Left preachers preached the gospel of hate. 
They justified hate by arguments from oppression: white men oppressed 
black men, imperialists oppress the colonies, American oppresses the 
world, etc. All evil deeds, it was tacitly assumed, justify hate, especially 
hate of the big evil doers. The New Left still preaches all this, especially 
in Germany, and the New Right too, espeCially in Israel; not to mention 
the new Islam in Iran. 
I am a follower of Baruch Spinoza: I hold that hate is never justified, 
never to be recommended. The wise man, said Spinoza, does not hate his 
enemy, does not hate the confused multitudes, but rather sympathizes 
with them and regrets their shortcomings. All this, he said, is a simple 
matter of wisdom and of self-interest: hate is an expensive sentiment, 
giving in to it is self-destructive. 
Exeunt Omnes, CURTAIN 
Department of Philosophie 
University of Tel Aviv 
Tel Aviv 
Israel 

AS YOU LIKE IT 
387 
NOTE 
This paper was written while I was a Senior Fellow of the Alexander von Humboldt 
Stiffung; it was published in Gennan in H.P. Duerr's volume (cf. Preface), and in 
English in my The Gentle Art of Philosophical Polemics, Open Court, 1988. 

VINE DELORIA 
Perceptions and Maturity: 
Reflections on Feyerabend's Point o/View 
Among the fallacies that Alfred North Whitehead identified within the 
Western philosophical tradition was the belief that the principles of 
philosophy were "clear, obvious, and irrefonnable".l Feyerabend's 
exploration of method speaks directly to this point but it also deals with 
the barriers which cultures raise against foreign critical ideas in order to 
protect their central integrity. Can any philosophy transcend its cultural 
barriers and speak to the larger question of how we perceive and interact 
with the world around us? What is the potential for a philosophy to help 
us make sense of our lives? The West has certainly not solved that 
problem, it has only used its tremendous political and economic power to 
moot the question. 
Science and technology reign today as the practical gods of the modem 
age; they give us power to disrupt nature but little real insight into how it 
functions. We tend to dismiss what we cannot understand by the use of 
code words - "Instinct" for example, covers a multitude of ignorance. 
Only when we look outside western culture, or when someone outside 
looks in, do we discover the glaring inconsistencies and begin to measure 
the actual changes that science and technology have wrought in our lives. 
In 1820 George Sibley, the Indian Agent for the Osages, a tribe in the 
Missouri region of the country, tried to convince Big Soldier, one of the 
more influential chiefs, of the benefits of the white man's way. After 
enthusiastically describing the wonders of the white man's civilization, 
Sibley waited expectantly for the old man's response and Big Soldier did 
not disappoint him: 
I see and admire your manner of living, your good warm houses; your extensive fields 
G. Munivar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 389-401. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
389 

390 
VINE DELORIA 
of com, your gardens, your cows, oxen, workhouses, wagons, and a thousand 
machines, that I know not the use of. I see that you are able to clothe yourselves, even 
from weeds and grass. In short, you can do almost what you choose. You whites 
possess the power of subduing almost every animal to your use. You are surrounded 
by slaves. Everything about you is in chains, and you are slaves yourselves. I fear if I 
should exchange my pursuits for yours, I, too, should become a slave.2 
If we subdue nature, we become slaves of the technology by which the 
task is accomplished and surrender not simply our freedom but also the 
lUXury of reflection about our experiences which a natural relationship 
with the world had given us. 
Western civilization seems clear, orderly, obvious and without 
possibility of reform primarily because it defines the world in certain rigid 
categories. The product of this clarity, however, is a certain kind of 
insanity which can survive only by renewed efforts to refme the defini-
tions and which, ultimately, becomes totally self-destructive. Whitehead 
also noted that "a system will be the product of intelligence. But when the 
adequate routine is established, intelligence vanishes, and the system is 
maintained by a coordination of conditioned responses".3 That condition 
is certainly prevalent in modem politics and economics and can be found 
in many fields of scientific endeavor. Western civilization seems to have 
a multitude of "common sense" propositions and since common sense is 
such a rarity, what we actually mean by this statement is that we have a 
certain set of propositions which we have agreed not to question. Further, 
we have arrived at these propositions through a refining process whereby 
we throwaway the "anomalies" - the facts which do not fit into our 
definitional schemata. Feyerabend's major contribution to modem 
philosophy is to insist that these premises and principles which we accept 
be demythologized and then revised to present increasingly broader 
understandings of what we are actually doing. 
Feyerabend's work is critically important for non-Western and post-
western peoples because he stands within the Western tradition yet has 
mastered many of its social and political barriers so that he can speak 
meaningfully and critically to its less intelligent proponents. He is a threat 
to the routine operation of philosophy, science, and the process of 
accumulating human knowledge because he asks penetrating and 
embarrassing questions in fields which most people feel have been laid to 
rest. Feyerabend is one of the few voices which sees that the body of 
human knowledge is not merely an instance of adding insights of non-
Western peoples to the already constructed edifice of Western knowledge 

PERCEPTIONS AND MATURITY 
391 
but that the full content of human knowledge must be a discontinuous 
arrangement of smaller bodies of knowledge derived from the many 
human traditions represented in planetary history. 
It is exceedingly difficult, at the present time to break through the 
mind-set of the West and engage in dialogue and conversation with 
Western thinkers. The reception which the non-Western thinker receives 
is frequently one of paternalism, more often a chiding ridicule that a 
native would presume to enter the lists of educated people, and oc-
casionally a deep jealousy and resentment when the non-Westerner 
appears to have something important to say to the Western scheme of 
things. Some years ago I wrote a book which sought to take dissident and 
discredited Western thinkers and show that their ideas, synthesized 
properly, could produce a pattern suggesting a consistent alternative 
explanation of what we know about the world. This pattern, moreover, 
suggested that perception could be a fundamental epistemological 
principle and it could produce a knowledge capable of providing a context 
for human maturity and personality formation. 
Unfortunately I had the word "metaphysics" in the title of the book and 
I was told by the publicity department of Harper and Row, my publishers 
at the time, that nothing would be done to give the book publicity 
"because no one will buy a book on metaphysics written by an Indian". 
Other minority writers have told me of their similar experiences. Thus, 
the potential for engaging in serious philosophical debate between and 
among the diverse cultures of the world is exceedingly remote and it is 
only people such as Feyerabend, people willing to look at the anomalies 
and inconsistencies of Western philosophy, who are keeping the door 
open for any future possible discussions. 
Of course there are many ways to pierce the Western intellectual 
curtain. I could rephrase these same ideas, pass them off in the format of 
ancient teachings of American Indians, and have Harper's publicity 
department declare that they were being revealed for the first time. Harper 
and Row, incidentally, is not averse to publishing any amount of nonsense 
as long as it is packaged properly. But in adopting that format, I would 
then be attracting hundreds of hippies, disgruntled ex-Christians, and the 
usual scattering of affluent white youths whose most philosophical 
moments occurred while backpacking the continental divide under the 
influence of the herbs of the cannabis genus. The ensuing attention would 
not be philosophical dialogue even though it might qualify/condemn me 
to appear in the pages of People magazine. It is not difficult to manipulate 

392 
VINE DELORIA 
the emotions of Western peoples because their routine lives make them 
vulnerable to such tactics. It is exceedingly difficult to converse with 
them because they guard their minds and beliefs rigorously. Thus, it is 
people such as Paul Feyerabend who will prove critical in opening 
enough breaches in the walls of Western intellectual chauvinism so that 
some exchange of ideas can occur. 
Being more political than philosophical in nature, I have my own 
agenda for Feyerabend's future writing which originates in the manner in 
which I discovered his writing and saw its potential. It fits perfectly with 
my own agenda for raising issues of an ultra-cultural nature, issues which, 
with the present ecological breakdown of the planet, have become more 
pressing with the passage of the years. So my own emotional and 
intellectual responses to Paul Feyerabend's work bear mentioning. My 
first encounter was with Science in a Free Society. A fellow admirer of 
Immanuel Velikovsky finished reading the book and called me to 
recommend it, pointing out that it spoke directly to the problem of 
allowing dissident and alternative philosophies to flourish. Finishing that 
work, I set out to master Against Method and became an enthusiastic 
Feyerabend student. My enthusiasm for Feyerabend disturbed some staid 
academic friends who told me with a certain undertone of chastisement 
that Thomas S. Kuhn's The Structure of Scientific Revolutions was much 
more respectable, Feyerabend having some rough edges which many 
academics didn't like. 
My rule of thumb in these cases is to rush to embrace the heretic since 
the rank and file of academia is usually a generation behind the original 
thinkers within its peer group. Anyone who can raise the eyebrows of 
academics and invoke that "tut-tut" casual disapproval usually is a serious 
thinker with a great deal to say. In comparing the two men, I find 
Feyerabend a much more daring and fundamental thinker than Kuhn. Not 
only does he reach conclusions similar to those I reached in The 
Metaphysics of Modern Existence, that perceptions are the primary mode 
of receiving information, and that maturity is the ultimate goal of human 
existence, but I also feel that Feyerabend wrestles with the angels in areas 
where Kuhn fears to tread. A comparison of the two thinkers will indicate 
that Feyerabend, in advocating anarchism, is in fact asking us to show 
some intellectual courage. I fmd this missing in Kahn and in most of the 
other writers trying to deal with the same or similar problems. 
Both Feyerabend and Kuhn agree that the best advances in science and 
philosophy are made by the outsider, a conclusion not difficult to reach 

PERCEPTIONS AND MATURITY 
393 
but exceedingly difficult to accept emotionally. Even the best minds 
trained in the mythology of western science, where the use of numbers, 
sincerity, and a tenured position in the university equal science, miss the 
nuances when they compare the two thinkers. Kuhn phrases his analysis 
as follows: "Almost always the men who achieve these fundamental 
inventions of a new paradigm have been either very young or very new to 
the field whose paradigm they change".4 Feyerabend suggests that 
"Science is advanced by outsiders, or by scientists with an unusual 
background".5 
There is a considerable difference here. Kuhn's agent of change is 
presumed to be approved by the establishment, his creators of the new 
paradigm presupposes the uniform march of orthodox science with a few 
exciting changes in perspective. Feyerabend frankly admits that outsiders 
count. And they certainly do. Albert Einstein was a mere patent clerk, 
Michael Ventrls was an architect when he deciphered Linear B, Henrich 
Schliemann was a funny little German merchant who believed in the 
mythology of ancient Greece. Without the outsider it is difficult to 
imagine what science and philosophy would have been able to ac-
complish. While Kuhn seems to be talking about scientific history, the 
message he conveys is not precise and not useful. Basically it reinforces 
the old mythology that we are, after all, the priests of a noble tradition and 
occasionally, by golly, we are shook up by a few youngsters as well we 
should be. 
Feyerabend raises the whole question of what the scientific endeavor 
really is. And it is the off-beat character who does not pander to his 
colleagues and has his own perspective of the world which is not always 
consonant with the respectable people of his time. He is canonized only 
after his death in many instances and quickly becomes a paradigm figure 
with virtually no rough edges. It becomes difficult for us to remember that 
Newton and Kepler were basically astrologers whose by-products were 
very successful. Alfred North Whitehead pointed out that: 
The great thinkers of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were singularly detached 
from universities. Erasmus wanted printers, and Bacon, Harvey, Descartes, Galileo, 
Leibniz, wanted governmental patronage or protection, more than university 
colleagues.6 
If Kuhn recognizes this dimension of scientific history, he disguises it so 
completely that he endorses the very situation which he has promised to 
criticize and explain. 

394 
VINE DELORIA 
This failure of nerve appears so consistently in Kuhn's work that I 
suspect his purpose is not discussion of scientific methodology but baby 
sitting a generation of minds that need to be reassured that Faustus and 
Strangelove was not really lurking in their unconscious. We see the 
radical difference in the two men again when we examine how they 
believe ideas originate. Feyerabend takes a radical and honest approach: 
''The fIrst step in our criticism of customary concepts and customary 
reactions is to step outside the circle and either to invent a new conceptual 
system, for example a new theory, that clashes with the most carefully 
established observational results and confounds the most plausible 
theoretical principles, or to import such a system from outside science, 
from religion, from mythology, from the ideas of incompetents, or the 
ramblings of madmen".7 For Feyerabend, ideas should be judged by the 
potential for making a contribution to understanding, not on their origin, 
former use, or relationship to accepted symbols of contemporary 
authority. Or, as Alfred North Whitehead observed, "If you have had your 
attention directed to the novelties in thought in your own lifetime, you 
will have observed that almost all really new ideas have a certain aspect 
of foolishness when they are fIrst produced".8 
Kuhn seems unable to deal with the question of origin of ideas. He 
approaches the problem from the perspective of the traditional scientist: 
"Scientists ... often speak of the 'scales falling from the eyes' or of the 
'lightning flash' that 'inundates' a previously obscure puzzle, enabling its 
components to be seen in a new way that for the fIrst time permits its 
solution".9 This condition is a psychological process to be sure and the 
comparison with Feyerabend is not precise. But Kuhn leads us down a 
particular road and then tells us that he has not misled us. "No ordinary 
sense of the term 'interpretation' fits these flashes of intuition through 
which a new paradigm is born. Though such intuitions depend upon the 
experience, both anomalous and congruent, gained with the old paradigm, 
they are not logically or piece-meal linked to particular items of that 
experience as an interpretation would be".10 So ideas come in an 
intuitional flash - no one can quarrel with that description and indeed 
stories about the intuitional grasping of new concepts abound in science. 
What does Kuhn do with his insight? He promptly recants and panders 
to the old boy network by closing the doors of intuition. "Some readers 
have felt that I was trying to make science rest on unanalyzable individual 
intuitions rather than on logic and law", he says. "But that interpretation 
goes astray in two essential respects. First, if I am talking at all about 

PERCEPTIONS AND MATURITY 
395 
intuitions, they are not individual. Rather they are the tested and shared 
possessions of the members of a successful group, and the novice 
acquires them through training as a part of his preparation for group-
membership".ll 
WHAT? 
I delight in these little surrenders because the scenarios which they invoke 
in the mind are too precious to let escape. GROUP INTUITIONS? 
INTUITIONS ACQUIRED IN A NOVICE'S TRAINING? How now? 
And where? In the oral examination for the Ph.D.? In writing up the 
proposal to NSF for a research grant? In attending faculty meetings as 
junior visiting professor? At professional meetings? If science and 
philosophy advanced via group intuitions for which a person could be 
trained, why haven't we solved all of our remaining problems? I was 
under the impression that Descartes was alone that winter evening, that 
Newton was not in an auditorium but a garden when the apple hit his 
head, and that Einstein was busy with his office files as he was thinking 
out the implications of his theory. The scenario which Kuhn invokes is 
most prominently found in the Acts of the Apostles where the Holy Spirit 
appears to the disciples in the upper room at Whitsuntide. THAT is group 
intuition. 
The approach of the two men to the question of Western supremacy is 
important to note because it is intimately tied to each man's epistemology 
and-to their willingness to consider data from non-Western sources. Kuhn 
feels that Western information gathering is unquestionably superior. 
"Every civilization of which we have records has possessed a technology, 
an art, a religion, a political system, laws and so on" Kuhn admits. "But 
only the civilizations that descended from Hellenic Greece have pos-
sessed more than the most rudimentary science",l2 In this statement Kuhn 
joins Werner Heisenberg, Teilhard deChardin and numerous other 
modem thinkers in echoing a cold war mentality and recommending 
cultural chauvinism akin to religious fanaticism_ But note that the 
criterion is only science as if science alone determined the substance of 
human life and experience. 
Feyerabend is certainly no doctrinaire worshipper of Western science. 
Indeed he delights in pointing out the many advances made by our 
ancestors, of all cultural traditions, in the domestication of plants and 

396 
VINE DELORIA 
animals, the creation of language, knowledge of the larger cosmic context 
and other major innovations which were fundamental to and underlying 
all our more recent scientific accomplishments. ''True'', he remarks, 
"there were no collective excursions to the moon, but single individuals, 
disregarding great dangers to their soul and their sanity, rose from sphere 
to sphere to sphere until they finally faced God himself in all His 
Splendor while others changed into animals and back into humans 
again".13 Here we fmd the proper mooring for intuition which Kuhn so 
proudly spread over academic/scientific practitioners. 
The inventors of myth, Feyerabend reminds us, started culture, 
scientists merely changed it. One might add that the inventors of myth 
became bards, minstrels, and gods while the scientists have produced 
such memorable characters as Faustus, Frankenstein, and in our day, Dr. 
Strangelove and Edward Teller all of whom have made the villagers very 
nervous. But there is a deeper level of discussion to be found here. Our 
ancestors observed nature and perceived sets of relationships in the world. 
They used obscure correspondences to relate phenomena which appeared 
to be entirely separate and thereby derived a reasonably predictive 
knowledge about how the world works. Anomalies interested them and 
triggered their intuitional abilities. Western science has established 
wholly artificial experimental settings where we can force nature to 
respond in certain ways and we measure those ways. What doesn't fit the 
pre-conceived results in our experiments, we often discard as the 
anomalous and believe that we have captured an ultimate knowledge 
about the world. 
Kuhn and Feyerabend both deal with the discarded anomalies of 
experience and experiment which science allocates to the rubbish heap of 
data. But again, they take somewhat different approaches to the subject. 
"No part of the aim of normal science is to call forth new sorts of 
phenomena", Kuhn observes, "indeed those that will not fit the box are 
often not seen at all".14 Anomalies, for Kuhn, are often simply oversights 
and if one adopts this interpretation, then an important part of the 
scientific perspective is lost. Feyerabend agrees that 'whatever fails to fit 
into the established category system or is said to be incompatible with this 
system is either viewed as something quite horrifying or, more frequently, 
it is simply declared to be non-existent".15 Science often makes little 
mistakes for Kuhn, but Feyerabend admits that if something varies 
substantially from our expectations, we promptly banish it so that we will 
not have to try to understand it. This practice is hardly what the lay person 

PERCEPTIONS AND MATURITY 
397 
would expect from scientists who spend a good deal of their time 
reassuring us that they are in total control of the situation and that they 
KNOW what reality is. 
So what is it exactly that Western scientists do that is all that great? 
They gather data from what appear to be similar entities and cir-
cumstances and after much mediation, and today many computer 
sequences, they announce the discovery of "laws" which, with some 
notable exceptions of which we never hear, describe the universe. 
Sometimes these anomalies become the basis for further research and 
when this procedure is followed, we have a fruitful situation. But some 
anomalies are directly contrary to established doctrine and THESE hard 
facts are often just swept under the rug. That their measuring instruments 
continue to negate their laws as their tools become more sophisticated 
seems not to bother scientists nor does the fact that they are imposing 
certain restricted patterns on the natural world thereby limiting its 
potential for response seem to worry them. Scientists are not asking 
complete questions of nature and they may not even be asking relevant 
questions. 
The idea of forcing nature to tell us its secrets has an alternative in 
other cultural traditions of observing nature and adjusting to its larger 
rhythms. Feyerabend understands this aspect of considering the alterna-
tive approach to knowledge. Thus, his methodology is open to receive 
additional data and to incorporate non-Western insights into the structure 
of human knowledge. Kuhn would no doubt reject alternatives, fIrst 
because they are not in line with scientifIc method and second because 
they originate from suspect sources which may be tinged with emotion 
and mysticism. How many people give alternative explanations the 
respect so that they can learn from them? Very few. And it is a rare 
thinker who looks ~arefully enough to understand the nuances of the 
alternative. An example of American Indian knowledge may help us 
illustrate this point. 
Many centuries ago the Senecas had a revelation. Three sisters 
appeared and informed them that they wished to establish a relationship 
with the people, the "two-leggeds". In return for the performance of 
certain ceremonies which helped the sisters thrive, they would become 
plants and feed the people. Thus, it was that the sisters' beans, corn and 
squash came to the Iroquois. These sisters had to be planted together and 
harvested together and the Senecas complied with their wishes. The lands 
of the Senecas were never exhausted because these plants, in addition to 

398 
VINE DELORIA 
sharing a spiritual relationship as sisters, were also a sophisticated natural 
nitrogen cycle which kept the lands fertile and productive. The white men 
came and planted only corn and wheat and very shortly exhausted the 
soil. After exhausting scientific experiments, the white man's scientists 
"discovered" the nitrogen cycle and produced tons of chemical fertilizer 
to replace the natural nitrogen. But recently we have discovered that there 
are unpleasant by-products of commercial fertilizer which may have an 
even worse effect on us than they do on the soil. Feyerabend's methodol-
ogy can incorporate this story and learn something from it. Other 
methodologies cannot begin to deal with it. 
For every scientific "discovery", then, there may exist one or more 
alternative ways of understanding natural processes. But we cannot know 
what these alternatives are unless and until we begin to observe nature 
and listen to its rhythms and reject the idea of artificially forcing nature to 
tell us about herself. But science carelessly rejects alternative sources of 
information in favor of the clear idea, an absurd abstraction if ever there 
was one. Since they lack a spiritual, social, or political dimension, it is 
difficult to understand why Western peoples believe they are so clever. 
Any damn fool can treat a living thing as if it were a machine and 
establish conditions under which it is required to perform certain 
functions - all that is required is a sufficient application of brute force. 
The result of brute force is slavery and while Big Soldier the Osage chief 
could see this dimension at once, George Sibley and his like have never 
been able to see the consequences of their beliefs about the world. 
Reductionism is about the least efficient way to garner knowledge. 
Feyerabend shows every indication that he is moving toward a major 
breakthrough in his thinking. He presently borders himself between 
epistemology and metaphysics and sometimes seems to cross that 
boundary a bit in order to probe possibilities. I am unable to discover how 
Feyerabend has linked perceptions and maturity, but since every thinker 
does not detail the steps by which he has arrived at conclusions, I must 
withhold judgment until I understand how that linkage occurs. My fear is 
that he flashes from insight to insight and does not always go back over 
the ground he has covered so that others can follow more easily. 
Maturity, in the American Indian context, is the ultimate goal of all 
human existence. Here we have a good many similarities with 
Feyerabend's conception of mature understanding. "Maturity", he writes, 
"is more important than special knowledge and it must be pursued even if 
the pursuit should interfere with the delicate and refined charades of 

PERCEPTIONS AND MATURITY 
399 
scientists. After all, we have to decide how special fonns of knowledge 
are to be applied, how far they may be trusted, what their relation is to the 
totality of human existence, and therefore, to other fonns of know-
ledge".I6 Maturity, in the American Indian context, is the ability to reflect 
on the ordinary things of life and discover both their real meaning and the 
proper way to understand them when they appear in our lives. This idea 
sounds as abstract as anything uttered by Western scientists but it not 
abstract in the Indian context. 
Maturity is a reflective situation that suggests a lifetime of experiences 
which, through an increasing ability to reflect on experience, has 
produced a personal hierarchy of relationships. This hierarchy has three 
major components which, because of the intense personal nature of 
experience, are appropriately related to the experiences of the individual 
and, on the tribal level, the group. Some components are weighted heavily 
because of the intensity of their content, others because of their inherent 
rationality and capability in explaining everyday occurrences, and others 
are simply a matter of personal preference, originating in any number of 
ways although greatly influenced by the particular environment, social 
and natural, of the person who has reached maturity. Thus, it is possible 
to hold sophisticated views about technology while verifying them by 
reference to personal emotional experiences using them to predict future 
behavior. Here we have two additional dimensions which modem 
scientific method rejects or overlooks: the intensity of the experience and 
the perspective of the observer/participant. With Relativity and Quantum 
theory modem science is beginning to introduce the participant/observer 
but it is still not capable of integrating the intensity of the experience 
because it assumes that intensity is subjective and, therefore, not capable 
of being measured and controlled. 
Within the life history of maturity one can be said to travel from 
infonnation to knowledge to wisdom. Organisms gather infonnation and 
as the cumulative amount begins to achieve a critical mass, patterns of 
interpretation and explanation begin to appear - even thoughts seem to 
fonn themselves into societies at a certain level of complexity. Here it is 
that Western science prematurely derives its scientific "laws" and 
assumes that the products of its own mind are inherent in the structure of 
the universe. But American Indians allow the process to continue, 
recognizing that a premature analysis will produce anomalies and give 
incomplete understanding. When we reach a very old age, or have the 
capability to reflect and meditate on our experiences, or even more often 

400 
VINE DELORIA 
have the goal revealed to us in visions, we begin to understand how the 
intensity of experience, particularity of individuality, and rationality of 
the cycles of natUre all relate to each other. This state is maturity and 
seems to produce wisdom. 
My uneasiness with Feyerabend's suggestion of pursuing maturity is 
that I don't believe that it can be deliberately accomplished. Unless a 
whole vision is received in a religious experience, and these visions are 
not always concerned with holiness because they can frequently reveal 
ordinary patterns of behavior, unsuspected relationships and correspon-
dences, and rational principles, then it becomes a matter of receiving 
maturity as the result of having possessed both knowledge and informa-
tion for a sufficient length of time to allow them to arrange themselves so 
they can serve us. One of the fallacies of Western civilization is the belief 
that the ingestion of tremendous amounts of material coupled with the 
mastery of relatively abstract propositions creates maturity and wisdom. 
If we merely glance around at Western society we see that millions of 
people have performed these tricks but very few have anything approach-
ing wisdom or maturity. Because Western society concentrates so heavily 
on information and theory, its product is youth, not maturity; and 
thousands of plastic surgeons in America testify to the fact that we have 
not yet crossed the emotional barriers that bar us from understanding and 
experiencing maturity. 
What we are discussing when we look at Feyerabend's philosophy is 
the re-emergence in western philosophy of a rare form of honesty. Having 
demonstrated that scientific discovery is a process of propaganda, faith, 
clever phrasing, and sleight of hand in order to get others to see from a 
new perspective, I hope that Feyerabend now moves into the examination 
of what some of the rejected parts of experience really mean. Does their 
cumulative effect suggest an alternative method for gathering knowledge? 
I believe so. It may even have sufficient content to suggest a vision of 
reality that we have not glimpsed before. 
An old chief of the Crow Tribe from Montana was once asked to 
describe the difference between his tribe and the whites who lived nearby. 
Pausing slightly and drawing his conclusions, he remarked that the white 
man has ideas, the Indian has visions. The true anarchism is the chaos of 
ideas which must compete against each other without having a context in 
which relationships can be established between them. Feyerabend does 
not like this kind of anarchism; he wishes to break the strangle hold of 
doctrine and preconceived results which presently characterize Western 

PERCEPTIONS AND MATURITY 
401 
science. He sees a greater vision of human knowledge which incorporates 
the many insights of human cultures and provides a context for our better 
understanding of the planet and its history. This vision is badly needed 
and, I believe, Feyerabend will eventually move from epistemology to 
metaphysics and offer it to us. 
Center for Ethnicity and Race 
University of Colorado 
Colorado 
USA 
I Adventures of Ideas, p. 224. 
NOTES 
2 A Report to the Secretary of War on Indian Affairs, Jedidiah Morse, 1822, p. 207. 
3 Adventures of Ideas, p. 96. 
4 The Structure of Scientific Revolution, Thomas S. Kuhn, p. 90. 
5 Science in a Free Society, p. 88. 
6 Adventures of Ideas, p. 66. 
7 Against Method, p. 68. 
B Science and the Modern World, pp. 48-49. 
9 The Structure of Scientific Revolution, pp. 122-123. 
10 Ibid. 
II Ibid. p. 191. 
12 Ibid. pp. 167-168. 
13 Against Method, PP. 306--307. 
14 The Structure of Scientific Revolution, p. 24. 
15 Against Method, p. 298. 
16 Science in a Free Society, p. 87. 

ARNENAESS 
Paul Feyerabend - a Green Hero? 
1. MILD AND GREEN? 
It is not without a certain feeling of guilt that some of us admit to always 
finding great pleasure in reading Feyerabend, including his many 
digressions and footnotes. Speaking of footnotes, who else has managed 
to place a footnote on his title page, which refers to yet other footnotes? 
(See the title page of Against Method. Outline of an Anarchistic Theory of 
Knowledge). 
The feeling of guilt occurs when reading the serious criticism of 
Feyerabend's manners, his "offensive and wounding comments", his 
limited "respect for truth", and his relentless attacks on the reading 
abilities of his colleagues. 
Feyerabend sees himself as mild and considerate. But in the very 
footnote in which he defends his innocence he says that he wants "to 
remove the ideological and financial exploitation of common citizens by a 
small gang of power-and money-hungry intellectuals"} The reader may 
easily interpret this as an even harsher attack upon his colleagues than 
that concerning their lamentable literacy. Without going into further 
analysis of a personal nature, my conclusion is that the mildness of 
Feyerabend is genuine and that even his monumental stylistic arrogance is 
non-violent. 
This unexpected conclusion makes me wonder to what extent the 
arrogant style of renaissance scientists was combined with smiling 
mockery. Luigi Ferrari expresses his pleasure in the belief that his 
writings against Tartaglia have broken the back of the latter and made 
G. Munivar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 403-416. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
403 

404 
ARNENAESS 
him scarcely able to move his tail, etc. Perhaps scientists at that time 
enjoyed themselves immensely, not only talking to each other in this way, 
but making scathing personal criticisms as widely known as possible by 
means of the new invention, the printing press. 
At any rate Feyerabend's exuberance has elicited many rhetorical 
jewels. Ernest Gellner's "Beyond Truth and Falsity" is a case in point. 
Perhaps we shall witness the rise of a tradition of scientific rhetoric in the 
near future. There are illustrious precedents. Pascal expressed rhetorically 
the theorem that "the arc length of an arch of the generalized cycloid" is 
equal to "the semicircumference of the ellipse".2 
But those of us whose rhetorical talents are rather modest should, I 
think, stick to our old pedantic ways. That at least is what I shall do in the 
following. 
What I would like to do is to suggest a qualified positive answer to the 
questions, "May we, who are proponents of green philosophy and politics, 
count Feyerabend as one of our heroes?" and "Does he support the idea of 
a green policy of science?". 
. 
The use of the term "green" in the above sentences certainly needs 
some clarification. It refers to general views and attitudes in the main part 
inspired by the international environmental ecological movement. Some 
well-known authors: Gregory Bateson, Kenneth Boulding, Rachel 
Carson, William O. Douglas, Rene Dubos, Jaques Ellul, Tehan Galtung, 
Clarence Glacken, Edward Goldsmith, Ivan lilich, SigmundKvaloy, AIdo 
Leopold, Ian McHarg, Joseph Meeker, E.J. Mishan, John Rodman, 
Roderick Nash, Theodore Roszak, Marshall Sahlins, E.P. Schumacher, 
Paul Shepard, Lynn White.3 
These authors do not agree, and they have different styles. But there are 
important overlappings which manifest themselves in similar political and 
general cultural postures in some of their publications. A case of Wit-
tgensteinian family resemblance. 
2. TRADITIONS AND RATIONALITY 
From a rather narrow point of view green policies are characterized only 
in terms of pollution, resources and population control. As far as I know 
Feyerabend has at least not published anything contrary to green policies 
in these fields. Pointing to his new car (his first) he remarked, "I have 

PAUL FEYERABEND - A GREEN HERO? 
40S 
joined the eco-criminalsl". I leave it to the readers to find the most 
plausible interpretation. 
The philosophical central green issues concern human ecology which 
today covers much of social and cultural anthropology. The term 
"tradition" belongs to the central ones. Feyerabend says something about 
the function of rationality in relation to traditions which deserves further 
development. 
There are therefore at least two different ways of collectively deciding an issue which I 
shall call a guided and open exchange respectively. 
In the first case some or all participants adopt a well specified tradition and accept 
only those responses that correspond to its standards. If one party ·has not yet become 
a participant of the chosen tradition he will be badgered, persuaded, "educated" until 
he does - and then the exchange begins. A rational debate is a special case of a 
guided exchange. If the participants are rationalists then all is well and the debate can 
start right away. If only some participants are rationalist and they have power (an 
important consideration!) then they will not take their collaborators seriously until 
they have also become rationalists: a society based on rationality is not entirely free; 
one has to play the game of the intellectuals. 
An open exchange, on the other hand, is guided by a pragmatic philosophy. The 
tradition adopted by the parties is unspecified in the beginning and develops as the 
exchange goes along. The participants get immersed into each other's ways of 
thinking, feeling, perceiving to such an extent that their ideas, perceptions, world 
views may be entirely changed - they become different people participating in a new 
and different tradition. An open exchange respects the partner whether he is an 
individual or an entire culture, while a rational exchange promises respect only within 
the framework of a rational debate. 
The outcome of seemingly friendly interactions between non-industrial 
and industrial traditions or cultures is largely determined by the superior 
power of the latter. The kind of rational debate and decision making 
characteristic of the powerful prevail. The Lapps of northern Scandinavia 
could not be expected to be able to fight effectively for their "rights" 
when invited to play the decision making game of the powerful op-
ponents. The same holds good in the hopeless fight of the Buddhist 
Sherpas to maintain their cultural integrity in a land ruled by Hindu 
bureaucracy. In both cases the decision-making processes of the weaker 
side are different from those of the stronger. If more or less forced to 
adopt the ways of the stronger, the weaker side is doomed to be 
dominated by the strong. Today there is scarcely any intention to 
dominate or exploit the Lapps, or to weaken what remains of their culture, 
but the interaction or exchange is a "guided" one in Feyerabend's 

406 
ARNENAESS 
tenninology, and the stronger party wins. That is: it wins in the short run, 
but loses in the long run, according to green philosophy: the absence of 
contact with a genuinely different culture makes the winner poorer. 
The tenninology of Feyerabend does not seem to me very wise, 
however: The decision making process in non-industrial traditions may 
not be less rational than in our traditions, if the term "rational" is taken in 
a wide sense adapted to general cultural anthropology. When the Sherpas 
say that Tseringma (Gauri Shankar) is a mountain, a princess, and a kind 
of mother, of course all at the same time, this is only irrational when 
integrated in a rather superficial way with our thinking and in our 
language. Rationality in a wider sense does not imply that one has to 
''play the game of the intellectuals". In short, I think it unwise to restrict 
the term "rational" and even "rationalism" in such a way that industrial 
societies acquire a monopoly. 
This tenninological remark does not oppose the view that when two 
(widely different) cultures or traditions interact, the resulting changes 
cannot be adequately understood as a rational interchange even in a wide 
sense. 
3. MAXIMUM DIVERSITY 
One of the fundamental key terms of green philosophy and politics is 
"diversity". Diversity of life forms, diversity of functions, environments, 
niches, traditions, practices, is basic to change, and particularly to 
evolution of new life forms and cultures. 
Respect and tolerance of diversity on a more and more crowded planet 
therefore get to be politically increasingly urgent. The view is gaining 
credence, that the "cultural" diversity seemingly manifest in great 
industrial cities is only a superficial variation. Basic attitudes are increas-
ingly standardized, in part due to the centralization of technologies and 
communication. 
Cognitive diversity is an integral part of cultural diversity. If, therefore, 
education is increasingly stereotyped through the adoption of world-wide 
criteria of learning, the path toward monoculture is made smoother. That 
is, the contemporary stereotyped institutions of learning undermine the 
possibility of escape from cultural stagnation on this planet. 
These are pessimistic, but rather common, views. Nevertheless in order 
to change the schools and universities, political changes are necessary 

PAUL FEYERABEND - A GREEN HERO? 
407 
which today seem unlikely. The chances of change increase somewhat, if 
more and more teachers boldly introduce changes based on an epis-
temological pluralism (Feyerabend: anarchism, my term: possibilism4) 
which cannot easily be refuted, if at all. Great impact cannot be expected, 
but the work in favor of a deep change must itself be of a diverse kind. 
Education is one field of struggle. 
4. MINIMUM INTERFERENCE 
One cubic foot of good soil contains hundreds of species of organisms, 
each represented through hundreds, millions or even billions of 
specimens. They interact with non-organic ingredients in a more complex 
way than can be grasped in detail. But details, or specialized complex 
functions, are often decisive for the function of the whole as "good soil". 
Field ecologists hired to effect this or that change in a natural environ-
ment, or asked about which short-range and long-range effect an inter-
ference will show, often are brought to the limits of desperation: neither 
technical experts nor politicians seem to appreciate the basic ignorance of 
today and tomorrow about practically any concrete processes in nature. I 
say "concrete" because abstract knowledge of "laws" may increase 
exponentially without much influence on our ignorance in matters of field 
ecology. Therefore docta ignorantia is a new key term of green 
philosophy. 
Field ecologists, when asked about a new plan to interfere in nature, 
tend to answer "rather not interfere" because of ignorance of effects, not 
because of proclaimed insight into negative effects. 
What holds good about interference in nature holds also about non-
industrial cultures. Many of the benevolent interferences in these cultures, 
offering them help in the form of food, dams or books, have had 
deplorable effects. Often non-interference seems to be the most respon-
sible policy. The theme is complicated and the state of affairs rather 
depressing, cultures dying at an alarming rate. 
A principle of minimal interference applies to subcultures within 
industrial societies. Paul Feyerabend says provoking things about this: 
The possibilities of Mill's liberalism can be seen from the fact that it provides room 
for any human desire, and for any human vice. There are no general principles apart 
from the principle of minimal interference with the lives of individuals, or groups of 

408 
ARNENAESS 
individuals who have decided to pursue a common aim. For example, there is no 
attempt to make the sanctity of human life a principle that would be binding for all. 
Those among us who can realize themselves only by killing their fellow human beings 
and who feel fully alive only when in mortal dimger are permitted to form a sub-
society of their own where human targets are selected for the hunt ... (SFS, p. 132) 
In any crowded society a subculture with a lot of killings going on 
interferes too heavily with outsiders. In the Valhalla of the Vikings, those 
who did not relish fighting and killing stayed home having a good time. 
They were never intentionally or accidentally molested by the enthusiastic 
fighters. In the evenings they got as much beer as the heroes. 
Unfortunately there are today geographical limitations which make the 
practical application of very broad tolerance of cultural diversity difficult. 
The Valhalla-model is inapplicable. 
In green politics the protection of animal societies, not only protection 
of individual humans against undue interference, is a key issue. The 
matter is complex, however , and the maxim of "maximizing life 
potentials" clearly sometimes makes it a justifiable policy of humans to 
interfere in the animal world, protecting one animal society against 
another. I do not see why we should not gently assist golden trout (Salmo 
aguabonita) if it is threatened with complete extinction through weakness 
in its competition with the brown trout. 
Since Descartes and Bacon, fortified by the labor theory of value, 
interference has become somewhat of a criterion of efficiency. What 
proceeds naturally tends to be classed as valueless or indifferent. It is 
characteristic of green policies to minimize interference, and we find the 
same point expressed by Feyerabend: 
As far as science is concerned, I am as fit as a fiddle. Not being restricted by an 
undying loyalty to science I started looking for other kinds of healers and I found 
there are lots of them. Herbalists. Faith healers. Acupuncturists. Masseurs. Hypnotists. 
All quacks, according to the established medical opinion. The first thing that caught 
my attention was their method of diagnosis. No painful interference with the 
organism. Many of these people had developed efficient methods of diagnosing from 
pulse, color of eye, of tongue, from gait, and so on. (Later on, when reading the Nei 
Ching which develops the philosophy behind acupuncture, I found that in China this 
was intentional: the human body must be treated with respect which means one has to 
fmd methods of diagnosis that do not violate its dignity). (FSF, p. 137) 
The use of the term "dignity" is instructive. Green politics is concerned 
about dignity as much as about material standard of living. Dignity is 
essential to life quality. And it is extended to animals. Animal factories 

PAUL FEYERABEND - A GREEN HERO? 
409 
interfere with the dignity of pigs. 
On the whole, the green philosophy of nature is inspired by an 
appreciation of life fonns that is broader than the usual. One would agree 
with Paul: "As far as I am concerned, a world in which a louse can live 
happily is a better world, a more mature world than a world in which a 
louse must be wiped out". (SFS, p. 133). 
BE BIGBER S 
TTAIHBD BY ANYBODY 
BE MoaE ITS INCREASE 
DEPENDS UPON THE IN-
CREASE OF THE 
C 
ARYOR£ 
DEPENDS 
BEIIIGS! 
CLASS 
EGALITARI-
SOCI!:TY 
AIIISMz ALL 
NEGATES 
HAVE EQUAL 
EQUAL 
RIGHTS OF 
RIGRTS TO S 
51 
S 
-
Self Realization 
C 
-
Co_plete 
P 
-
Potential 
SP -
SELF REALIZATION 
POTENTIALS 
Diagram 
COHPLEIITY 
MAXIMIZES 
DIVERSITY 

410 
ARNENAESS 
5. FUNDAMENTAL PHILOSOPHIES. ECOSOPHY T. 
In general, I think a basic norm of "live and let live" is characteristic of 
green philosophy. In terms of traditional western philosophy it cor-
responds to a norm of "maximum fulfilment of life potentials". This norm 
implies norms of diversity, complexity (of structure and function) and of 
maximum symbiosis, that is, arrangement of life forms and life styles 
with minimum negative interference with each other. An interaction 
counts as negative if it decreases the potentialities of life fulfillment of the 
participants. 
Being fond of neat systematization, I have worked out several versions 
of a particular kind of green philosophy and politics which I call 
"ecosophy T". 5 One version of its key slogans is formulated in the 
following diagram, with lines of derivation pointing downward from the 
top of the normative pyramid. Only the 'highest' norms and hypotheses 
are given in the diagram. Serious normative argumentation presupposes 
that the formulations are made more precise in different directions. 
The system ecosophy T is in Paul's terminology a Gedankenelaborat6 
and should not be forced upon anybody, including green philosophers 
with different philosophical tastes or convictions. Because philosophies as 
I see them concern fundamentals, no philosopher can refute any other. 
Basically there is room for several, and efforts even to describe the 
differences may founder because of specific presuppositions necessary in 
descriptions (rational incomparability of fundamental systems). To be 
rational, if it is something desirable, seems to require the realization of an 
essential philosophical pluralism that cannot be rationally verified. 
What does Feyerabend write on this matter? 
Philosophical relativism is the doctrine that all traditions, theories, ideas are equally 
true or equally false or, in an even more radical formulation, that any distribution of 
truth values over traditions is acceptable. This form of relativism is nowhere defended 
in the present book. It is not asserted, for example, that Aristotle is as good as 
Einstein, it is asserted and argued that "Aristotle is true" is a judgement that presup-
poses a certain tradition, it is a relational judgement that may change when the 
underlying tradition is changed. (FSF, p. 83) 
This is completely compatible with ecosophy T. His "political relativism" 
is compatible, but I fmd the term "relativism" misleading. The more 
authentic our search for truth the more firm is our membership of a 
particular philosophy or kind of "practice" or kind of "tradition". In so far 

PAUL FEYERABEND -A GREEN HERO? 
411 
as there is any meaning or validity attached to announcements of the kind 
"x is aright", it is not relative, but relational, that is, basically related to a 
philosophy or practice. This relationalism, rather than relativity, is 
implied in Feyerabend's own unqualified, non-relativist affmnation of 
equal rights: 
Political relativism affmns that all traditions have equal rights: the mere fact that 
some people have arranged their lives in accordance with a certain tradition suffices to 
provide this tradition with all the basic rights of the society in which it occurs. (FSF, 
p.82) 
. 
As an example of something which is not a philosophy in the above 
sense, "anarchism" in the terminology of Feyerabend, may be mentioned. 
" ... Even here I don't defend anarchism as an 'eternal philosophy' but as 
a 'medicine' that may have to be withdrawn when conditions change". 
(Against Method, p. 22) But on the basis of which nonns and hypotheses 
will it be withdrawn? Their fonnulation will reveal deeper issues and take 
us a step in the direction of articulation of a philosophy. But I do not see 
why anybody like Feyerabend who is inspired by Kierkegaard' s 
Concluding Unscientific Postscript should fonnulate any systematic 
philosophy. Kierkegaard did not, and we are thankful that he didn't. 
6. THE WEB OF COMMUNITIES AND ITS ADMINISTRATION 
It is common in green politics to conceive local communities as the basic 
political unit. In big urban areas the tenn "local" has to be taken in a 
rather wide sense so that moving groups with a common lifestyle and 
high degree of cohesion are included. 
Every more comprehensive units of people are conceived as basically 
administrational, even if tenned societies or nations. There are many 
reasons for this stress on small units. In political theory, its history is 
joined with that of the distinction between Gemeinschaft (community) 
and Gesellschaft (society) - between fairly autonomous groups with 
genuine personal bonds, strong sense of belonging, and locally manage-
able technology, and the vast structures of states and nations. 
Feyerabend announces that a "free society is a society in which all 
traditions are given equal rights, equal access to education and other 
positions of power". (FSF, p. 30) 
Let us take an example. In arctic Norway there is among the Lapps a 

412 
ARNENAESS 
nomadic tradition, very different from those of the now sedate Germanic 
tribes of other parts of Norway. The latter think it is important to have a 
lot of big roads and they love making extensive dams in order to increase 
the production of electricity. This "progress" is incompatible with the life-
styles of reindeer and their owners. Those Lapps who deeply want to 
maintain and further develop their culture cannot in any genuine way live 
together with urbanized people. What is needed for coexistence is a 
common administration, the state structure called Norway. I think the use 
of the term "society" in Feyerabend's utterances about "free society" 
might be a little misleading. Norway as an administration for two cultures 
is not a society. If deeply different traditions are to be defended, this 
requires of us that we do not take the bigger units of humanity too 
seriously as societies. They are, rather, administrational structures. 
Some will feel that this goes against world solidarity. But one green 
policy towards "developing nations" is that of "mutual aid" (Kropotkin) 
from community to community. Communities within industrial states (not 
"societies") try, for instance, to cooperate with communities in Africa and 
other places without too much interference from higher administrational 
levels. 
What Feyerabend primarily has in mind is probably the varieties of 
traditions, or life styles, of groups within a state or federation. Here I 
suppose that differences in ways of living (technologies, language, 
willingness to pay taxes) are in some aspects rather limited. Feyerabend 
mentions equal access to education. This suggests a similarity in apprecia-
tion of (formal?) education. Some traditions, such as those of the 
culturally conscious Lapps, goes contrary to this. They might ask for the 
right not to be "educated". They prefer communities without formal 
education (schools, etc.), but of course where a lot of teaching goes on, 
the older teaching the younger. Hopefully, in the future (at least before 
the year 30(0) it will be practicable to maintain and develop deeply 
different traditions even within fairly small areas. This evidently implies 
that the interchange between the traditions, the dealings between mem-
bers of deeply different groups, functions without undue interference 
from those who monopolize scientific or expert ''reason''. " . . . the 
exchange between traditions is an open exchange, not a rational change". 
(FSF, p. 85) But there must be a kind of top level administration, I am 
inclined to think, in order to avoid exploitation by groups which resemble 
certain well known ones in our own century. 
How does Feyerabend propose to solve these problems? Strange 

PAUL FEYERABEND - A GREEN HERO? 
413 
question. Did Kierkegaard propose to solve anything? 
Self-determination is a key word in green philosophy, and it includes 
finding out things for oneself and by oneself: cognitive self-determina-
tion. Feyerabend has said things about expertise which fit in very well 
here and he asks to let "people" solve problems. (Unter dem Pflaster, 
p. 138). A scientist or technician placed in the so-called center may have 
the solution of a problem, but mostly problem-solving is part of greater 
units or gestalts of action. The expert may help by offering fragments, but 
this often spoils the development of the greater wholes of action and 
living. Ivan Illich has said things worth considering in this area. Main 
point: science undermines the capacity of people to think for themselves. 
7. THERE ARE NO SCIENTIFIC WORLD VIEWS 
Freedom is regained, old traditions are rediscovered, both among the minorities in 
Western countries and among large populations in non-Western continents. But 
science still reigns Sllpreme. It reigns supreme because its practitioners are unable to 
understand, and unwilling to condone, different ideologies because they have the 
power to enforce their wishes, and because they use this power just as their ancestors 
used their power to force Christianity on the people they encountered during their 
conquests. Thus, while an American can now choose the religion he likes, he is still 
not permitted to demand that his children learn magic rather than science at school. 
(AM,p.299) 
Some pedantic comments: 
Science means basically something different from what it means to 
Feyerabend when one has lived with science as a "naturalist". The "soft" 
sciences, like geography of plants and taxonomy of butterflies, invite us 
to join a practice and style of life very different from that of a particle 
physicist at Geneve or a mathematician at Princeton. The "soft" scientist 
need not "play the game of intellectuals". 
The discoverer of the 'pecking order law', Schjelderup-Ebbe, the only 
world famous Norwegian psychologist and ethologist, was early in life 
inordinately fond of watching the sexual and general social behavior of 
hens. He could of course have avoided discovering or inventing the law, 
but it did not require anything like intellectual games or games of 
intellectuals. In debate his arguments were often of a kind that made the 
occasion more charming than brainy. Sample: "But what you say only 
shows that you do not really know the hen Marie". His insect poems are 

414 
ARNENAESS 
less well known than his law, but closer to his heart. Nobody would 
insinuate that he ever considered joining a so-called scientific world view. 
As a researcher, why bother? Philosophy and religion offer world views. 
For the naturalist, there is no reason to reject magic if one is raised with 
it. Most kinds of genuine research do not interfere violently with tradi-
tions in non-industrial cultures. In some of them, western medicine is 
adopted in a way that does not imply rejection of myths. 
Superficially, "hard" science and a so-called "scientific world view" 
dominates the minds, but careful scrutiny often reveals non-conformity. 
Earlier people doing research on extinct animals l\.!re struck by the 
beauty of those organisms and their immense diversity of forms. They 
tended to be conceived of as divine creatures. But it was at that time 
difficult to make enough money to continue such research indefmitely. 
Then carne the discovery of the close connection between certain genera 
of fossil forms and the presence of oil. Suddenly there was plenty of 
money around. The "soft" researchers continued approximately as before, 
sometimes doing a little bit of "hard" science, but only enough to placate 
the boss. Their minds were unruffled, not dominated by (hard) science. 
In short, I think children could learn both magic and science. There is 
no necessary conflict. It all depends upon how things are introduced. Or 
more generally: research can be explained and exemplified without 
interfering with basic beliefs of non-industrial cultures. This holds good 
even of theoretical physics. A physicist who today is an adherent of 
beliefs that are generally classed as "mythological", and who is firmly 
convinced of the superiority of "mythological" thinking, translates the 
crucial parts of the language of contemporary physics into his own 
language. It is not easy, one of them told me, but it works. 
Because of the considerable freedom in choice of theoretical con-
structs, and also because of the intimate link between the scientific 
vocabulary and empirical procedures (i.e., actions, practices), to force 
science on people is rather different from forcing a definite dogmatic 
religious world view upon people. 
What is happening today in schools and universities may be understood 
in part as a forceful adaptation of science to suit the basic goals of 
centralized industrial societies. Science may thus function as an ideology, 
but not eternally and out of any historical or other kind of necessity. 
In short, I would like to modify one of the formulations of Feyerabend; 
whereas an American can now choose the religion he likes, he is unfor-
tunately not permitted to choose the kind of science he likes. If he likes 

PAUL FEYERABEND - A GREEN HERO? 
415 
science along the lines of green science and teaching policy, his offspring 
should be treated as children naturalists, enjoying "back-yard" zoology 
and other marvelous experiences. 
8. CONCLUSION 
Both regarding rationality and its special expression, science, I differ at 
least in terminology from Feyerabend. But some eminent green 
philosophers, Ivan Illich among others, favor a view closely similar to 
Feyerabend's. 
Feyerabend has not, as far as I know, taken on certain central green 
issues such as self-reliance and decentralization. They have important 
implications in policy of science. Where he does take up central issues, 
they belong, broadly speaking, within the sphere of green philosophy and 
politics. 
Hero worship or advocacy of the dichotomy hero/non-hero is not 
characteristic of green philosophy. It suggests a kind of competition and 
subservience that limits self-realization. If Feyerabend rejects the thought 
of being a green hero, or fmds it contradictory, it is a good sign. 
The ultimate conclusion might be thus formulated: Feyerabend writes 
as if he maintains many views which are characteristic of green 
philosophy and politics, and applies them to science, education and 
rationality in an original way. 
University of Oslo 
Oslo 
Norway 
NOTES 
1 Science in a Free Society ("SFS"), p. 131. 
2 C. B. Boyer, A History of Mathematics, N.Y. 1968, p. 400. 
3 For recent literature see Warwick Fox, Toward a Transpersonal Ecology, Boston 
and London: Sharubala, 1990. 
4 Feyerabend's characterization of Imre Lakatos as "fellow anarchist" caused some 
indignation and protest. But his views were basically rather close to those labeled 
"anarchist" by Feyerabend (and perhaps by nobody else). As an argument in favor of 
this interpretation I shall quote his conclusion in reference to the pluralist and 

416 
ARNENAESS 
possibilist views in my work referred to above: "I did not previously realize how far 
our philosophical views coincided and it was a great pleasure for me that we are close 
allies". (Letter of 4, November 1968). The possibilist approach 1 take to be a little 
more "anarchist" in Feyerabend's terminology than his own. 
S "Notes in the Methodology of Normative Systems", Methodology and Science, 10, 
1977, p. 64-79. 
6 Unter dem PfJaster liegt der Strand, 5, p. 135. 

HERBERT HORZ 
Ecology as a Challenge to Philosophy 
In the 19th century ecology comprised the connections between or-
ganisms and the outer world surrounding them. Meanwhile our under-
standing of it has widened. At present we understand by ecology the man-
nature ratio as a whole. With that understanding, ecology has received 
philosophical dimensions. These concern the responsibility of men for a 
humane shaping of nature, the understanding of nature in the dispute 
between humanism and antihumanism, the preservation of the natural 
conditions of human existence, and the protection of nature. In those of 
his publications I know, P. Feyerabend is interested in this field of 
problems. 
THE NEW PHILOSOPHICAL QUALITY OF ECOLOGY 
Man has rediscovered his love for nature. One can obtain this impression 
from the extensive literature about ecology. The man-nature ratio even 
moves towards the center of philosophical disputes. Wasteful exploitation 
of nature, the development of techniques hostile to nature, the pollution of 
the environment, the waste of energy and raw materials, the dying of 
forests are criticized. Manifestoes with demands are put up. They range 
from the protection of the landscape via the use of alternative tech-
nologies on a small scale to the planning of new ecological cycles. In 
these matters "ecology" is a word that provokes political disputes, 
ideological discussions, criticism of sociaJ. and scientific programmes 
hostile to nature, and emotional outbursts against measures apparently or 
truly hostile to nature. The pith of the controversy is the dispute about the 
G. Munevar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 417-431. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
417 

418 
HERBERT HORZ 
dialectic of efficiency and humanity. Some dispute the humane value of 
the effective planning of nature, others demand exploitations of nature 
without taking into consideration the consequences. It is the following 
that becomes more and more clear in the consciousness of the masses: 
Ecological policy has different social determinants, it is the expression of 
economic and political interests. The reasons for the political and 
ideological controversy about ecology must be analyzed philosophically. 
Two tendencies are noticeable in the debates about the environment as 
a philosophical problem. The fIrst one analyzes the environment into 
specifIc components, i.e., into various kinds of biotic and abiotic factors: 
relations and symbiosis of organisms, water, air and mainland, forest and 
desert, soil fertility and emissions. The danger of splintering can arise 
from that analysis, if the account of the essential environmental relations 
does not lend itself to ecological synthesis, to the recognition of regional 
and global systems in the ecological laws it proposes, and in making this 
knowledge a basis for expert decisions. 
The second tendency consists of the politicization of the environmental 
debate, which in the· extreme leads to criticism of any interference with 
nature, to hostility towards science, and to the opposition of effIciency 
and humanity in the scientifIc and technical revolution. Thus it is not the 
imperialist production of profIt and the heritage of colonialism, nor the 
wasteful exploitation of nature, but scientifIc and technical progress that 
is perceived as the reason for the destruction of the environment. This 
tendency can be countered only with objectivity. The premises that lead 
to the ideological differences present in the divergent environmental 
policies of socialism and capitalism are determined by specifIc ecological 
research and its synthesis. In principle the socialist strategy of shaping a 
humane environment is opposed by the profIt policy of imperialism 
orientated toward the wasteful exploitation of nature. In addition to that, 
the developing countries need procedures, at favorable costs, for the 
solution of their environmental problems, and which are suited to their 
natural and cultural circumstances. The constructive solution to the 
problems in the man-nature ratio arisen from the present conditions is to 
be found in the humane solution to global problems, in the gaining of 
personal freedom brought about by peaceful social progress. 
Environmental problems have always occupied man. They penetrated 
his consciousness above all when possibilities of solution were outlined. 
Since the beginning of the 14th century one has spoken of air pollution as 
a social problem. But one has also lamented the pollution of the soil, as 

ECOLOGY AS A CHAlLENGE TO PHILOSOPHY 
419 
well as the higher death rate in the town. Scientific and technical innova-
tions were criticized with the argument that irreparable damages to the 
environment would be caused. In the 16th century G. Agricola had to 
fight the argument that digging for ore would lead to the destruction of 
forests, fields and animals, the poisoning of the rivers and the killing of 
the fish.1 
The dispute about the environmental role of the sciences reached a 
climax in France in the 18th century. In 1750 the academy of Dijon 
distinguished the paper of 1.-1. Rousseau dealing with the question: "Has 
the revival of sciences and arts contributed to the improvement of 
customs?"2 He argued that the sciences are a waste of time, hinder the 
good, promote lUXUry, and enlarge the inequality of the people. The 
criticism of the humane importance of sciences referred to the negative 
effects of scientific and technical progress. The politically progressive 
demand to create conditions for the equality of the people was connected 
with a criticism of the sciences that brought caustic commentaries. Thus 
Voltaire wrote to Rousseau in 1755: "I have received your new book 
against mankind : .. Never has one used so much intellect for the effort to 
make us animals again; one really gets fancy walking on all fours when 
reading your book".3 It is interesting that the encyclopedists defending the 
role of the sciences against ignorance referred to the positive effects of 
the sciences, but did not see how Rousseau's social criticism led radically 
to the idea of the equality of the people. It is remarkable that, as Romain 
Rolland writes, "Voltaire and his great accomplices Diderot, d' Alembert, 
Holbach, Helvetius - eager for the destruction of the old society ... -
have embodied the negative part of the new spirit ... They were masters 
of the free, critical, and mocking reason. Rousseau, he alone, represents 
the constructive part, the confession for a new belief; he is the announcer 
of the republic. It is him the French revolution refers to".4 
Criticism of science, though being the foundation of criticism of 
society, receded behind the revolutionary ideas. It is not the scientific and 
technical progress that brings along the decline of customs, the depravity 
of values, the antihumane use of its results. It is the social conditions on 
which man lives, on which he shapes himself, and which promote or 
hinder the humane use of scientific knowledge. Criticism of environmen-
tal damages therefore issue at the same time a challenge to search for the 
causes in social powers whose economic and political aims contain 
environmental destruction. 
At present the relation of man towards nature shows qualitatively new 

420 
HERBERT H6RZ 
dimensions. Actually in earlier times plague and smallpox, insufficient 
hygienic measures, urbanization, mining, cutting down forests, and 
monoculture decimated the population and caused environmental 
damages that saddled future generations with many problems. An 
environmental syndrome has emerged. It ranges from a possible global 
war of extermination with mass destruction weapons, to problems of 
energy, raw materials, nutrition and health, to the more comprehensive 
development of mankind by means of new technologies and a humane 
shaping of the natural environment. It is characterized by its global extent, 
its potential for destruction, its long term damages and its complexity. 
Given its global extent, i.e., the dangers for the whole of mankind, global 
and local issues become closely connected. Regional damages may have 
global effects and global dangers are not neutralized by local solutions. 
The potential for destruction developed by scientific and technical 
progress has to be opposed by the human potential of science and 
technology that has not been tappe.j so far. In the face of our respon-
sibility to future generations, long-term damages - insofar as they are 
predictable - have to be diminished. The complexity of the contributing 
factors - characteristic of a syndrome - demands interdisciplinary work, 
system analysis and synthesis of the analyzed essential components. 
From a philosophical point of view one can distinguish three levels of 
discussion: 
First: There is a political-ideological, emotionally loaded criticism of 
environmental pollution, of imperialist conceptions of the value of the 
profitable exploitation of nature. It is the question of ecological conscious-
ness, including the consciousness of problems about the relations of man 
towards nature, about possible long-term damages and necessary 
solutions. To be able to discuss at this level constructive solutions of 
ecological problems is as necessary as to try to clarify obscurities in 
ideological disputes about the man-nature ratio. The pith of the political-
ideological and philosophical dispute is the humane solution of global 
problems in which environmental problems are framed. That, again, 
amounts to the gaining of personal freedom by peaceful social progress. 
Second: Ecology requires a kind of complex approach to reality. In this 
process man becomes the constituting part of the development of theories. 
Technicism turns out to be a counter-tendency to this kind of ecological 
thinking, for it promotes technical developments independent from their 

ECOLOGY AS A CHALLENGE TO PHILOSOPHY 
421 
effects on the relations between man and nature. With the help of the 
statistical and mathematical analysis of the sciences it is possible to 
squeeze man out of the development of theories. Therefore this tendency 
toward the mathematization of the sciences must be made to connect 
dialectically with the tendency toward the humanization of the sciences. 
The development of efficient means serves humanity, then, when it is 
directed at the increase in the material and cultural standard of living of 
the people as well as in the gain of personal freedom.5 
Third: Ecological research deals with the structure of symbiotic relations 
between single organisms and environment. It examines the relationship 
between man and nature, psyche and techniques. The research about 
certain living spaces and periods must be carried out by means of 
different ecological disciplines. The scientific analysis is the basis for 
fruitful synthesis even though it is influenced by ideological evidence. 
EFFECTIVE SHAPING OF NATURE AND HUMANITY 
The man-nature ratio is beset with problems that humanists pose to 
scientists and politicians, but also to the interests of the bourgeois 
ideology of justification. One of the most significant conclusions already 
in the report to President Carter of the USA, "Global 200Q", already tells 
us that things will get worse in a more populated, less stable world in the 
year 2000.6 Given the above, all trends of the scientific and technical 
revolution are considered as tendencies of development leading to crises 
under imperialist conditions. 
Already in the second report to the Club of Rome such "world crises" 
as the population explosion, the environmental threat, the shortages of 
food and raw material, and the energy crisis were spoken about. The 
reasons for crises were not seen in the social utilization of scientific 
knowledge and of new technologies in concrete social orders, but in the 
permanently expanding gap between man and nature. "For the man being 
alienated from his natural environment his capacity is inexhaustible in 
every regard, and thus mankind of today - fully logically - is situated 
amidst an uncontrolled phase of growth in which mankind - not unlike 
cancer cells - develops the earth destroying itself and the environment 
bearing it".1 
Actually the protection of the natural environment is demanded; but 

422 
HERBERT HORZ 
since the real social causes of crises in capitalism are not analyzed, 
illusions arise about the possible short-tenn abolition of ecological 
damages. Also political movements may be directed wrongly. Instead of 
fighting against the ecological and political causes of the wasteful 
exploitation of nature people fight against the scientific and technical 
revolution instead. Critics of the social effects of the scientific and 
technical revolution within the capitalist system conclude, if they don't 
analyze the social conditions for crises, that efficiency and humanity are 
opposites. 
One also discusses the way of scientific research. Qualitative evalua-
tion shall take the place of quantitative measuring. There are obscurities 
in the role that values play. Nature cannot be a social value for itself. 
Social values deal with relations concerning the usefulness, morality, or 
beauty of man's states of affairs. In the relationship between man and 
nature, it must always be considered not only the useful shaping of nature 
but also the morality of our behavior towards the natural environment, 
towards nature in its beauty. This is the sense of the demand for a total 
ecological mode of thinking. But this need not be opposed to a scientific 
perception. It is often the case that there is an opposition of mathematiza-
tion and humanization in the sciences. Analyzing, measuring, calculating 
statistical averages and perceiving world events mechanistically mean 
mathematization. Thus F. Capra demands that we abandon the over-
emphasis on the scientific method and on rational analytical thinking, as 
they are deeply anti-ecological. He is of the opinion that "Ecological 
consciousness will only emerge, if we combine our rational knowledge 
with the intuition for the non-linear character of our environment. Such an 
intuitive wisdom is characteristic of traditional cultures not handed down 
to posterity by records, especially for American Indian cultures, in which 
a strongly developed environmental consciousness determined all the 
life".8 The possible shaping of a new man-nature ratio in a humane way is 
certainly not to be reached by nostalgia. Only the scientific and technical 
revolution offers new possibilities to solve environmental problems 
connected with it. Modern means of efficiency as computer-controlled 
and industrial robots, bio- and infonnation technologies must be used to 
expand humanity. The problem does not lie in the first instance in these 
means of efficiency, but in the social detenninants that stipulate different 
objectives in the utilization of the results of the scientific and technical 
revolution and in the perception of nature. 
Ecological problem consciousness is not new. Already F. Engels 

ECOLOGY AS A CHALLENGE TO PHILOSOPHY 
423 
pointed out that man does not only use the outer nature like an animal, but 
rules it by making it subservient to his purposes. He emphasized, 
however, that we flatter ourselves with our small victories over nature, 
but that nature takes its revenge for every one of those victories.9 The fact 
is that natural science is not only knowledge of nature in the sense of 
understanding the objective relations and laws of nature, but that it must 
also take into consideration the effects of ruling over nature, and that it 
must be concerned with the ecological cycles. F. Engels refers to the 
effects of ruling over nature that had led to the desolation of whole 
regions, to drought, famine and the development of diseases. He intro-
duces the understanding of the closer and farther after-effects of our 
interference with nature into the traditional motion of nature and the 
knowledge of the laws of nature. He considers it as part of the prerequi-
sites to make man an integral part of nature again. He claims that we do 
not become lords of nature in the way that one conquers a land of 
peasants, but that we belong to nature with our flesh and blood, we stand 
in the midst of it, our only dominion over it coming from our use of other 
creatures according to our knowledge of the laws that apply to them. 
When humanity is demanded, nature cannot be conceived only as our 
natural environment, technically at our disposal. It applies to natural 
science, too, when natural science takes into consideration the effects of 
our shaping nature and helps to avoid damage. The complex question 
about nature must be answered keeping in mind the social utilization of 
scientific knowledge and the human shaping of scientific and technical 
progress: Is that what is scientifically possible and technical-technologi-
cally realizable also economically doable, socially desirable and imple-
mentable, and humanely justifiable? Man recognizes the natural bases of 
his existence and uses the knowledge to improve his health and thus his 
life. The conception of nature applies to the humane solution of problems 
that arise during the controlled, artificial development of nature. 
Thus K. Marx already referred to the dialectic of efficiency and 
humanity. He demanded that the people "regulate their metabolism with 
nature rationally, bring it under their common control instead of being 
dominated by it as a blind power; carry it out with the lowest impact on 
conditions of being worthy and adequate to their human nature" .11 
What is required is the rational regulation of our metabolism with 
nature under a humane objective. The means to increased efficiency 
created by man may contribute to an increase in the material and cultural 
living standard of the people, when they succeed, as Marx formulated, in 

424 
HERBERT HORZ 
bringing the metabolism with nature under the common control of the 
people. 
It is the kind of social rule over man and nature that leads via the socio-
economic determinants to contrary humane or anti-humane utilization of 
the new means of efficiency. If the results of the scientific and technical 
revolution are used to gain maximum profit leading to unemployment, 
more intensive exploitation, short-time work, reduction of social achieve-
ments and wasteful exploitation of nature, then they will appear opposite 
to humanity. Therefore, it is significant for the philosophical dispute to 
prove that by combining the advantages of socialism with the results of 
the scientific and technical revolution humanity will be expanded by the 
gain of personal freedom and by the humane shaping of the natural 
environment. 
DIMENSIONS OF THE PROBLEMS 
The revolutionary development of the productive forces demands raw 
materials and energies to manufacture yroducts, to maintain and increase 
the standard of living already achieved, and to shape a humane environ-
ment in new dimensions. The natural resources must be used rationally to 
fulf"ill the prerequisites for the revolutionary development of the produc-
tive forces. Otherwise ruling over nature can cause ecological damages. 
This point applies to the maintenance of the soil fertility, the cleanliness 
of the water and the air, the effects of the chemical industries. The 
abolition of ecological damages require expenditures for scientific 
research and for the development of environmental technologies at 
favorable costs. 
The inexhaustibility of nature must not be equated with the inexhaus-
tibility of the natural resources, raw materials, energy on the concrete 
conditions of the scientific and technical progress. But the inexhaustibility 
of matter at the same time is a challenge to science and technology to 
open new resources at a given time in a given country with an given level 
of scientific and technical progress. The development at favorable cost of 
processes friendly to the environment makes the economical use of 
materials not only an economic but an ecological necessity. Science must 
occupy itself with the better utilization of raw materials, their recycling, 
with the use of existing sources of energy, and with opening new forms of 
energy. The maintenance of natural resources for the further development 

ECOLOGY AS A CHALLENGE TO PHILOSOPHY 
425 
of the productive forces is an essential problem in shaping a humane 
environment. 
The development of the productive forces takes place differently in 
capitalism and socialism. Profit maximization in capitalism leads to the 
wasteful exploitation of nature. Nevertheless this principle can be 
distorted by the fact that the development of environmental technologies 
is a profitable business itself. In addition to that imperialism has to 
maintain the natural resources in the interest of further profit production. 
Besides, democratic protest movements force capitalism to pay more 
attention to the protection and the shaping of the environment. Socialism 
on the other hand, despite its policy aimed at the humane shaping of a 
natural environment, is forced to consider the economic possibilities for 
the shaping of a humane nature and to remove existing ecological 
damages in the form of step-by-step programs. Therefore it would be 
misleading to pit present deficiencies versus humane strategies in the 
ecological policy within the philosophical dispute. 
The difficulties in the philosophical discussion arise in most cases by 
the fact that the historical and political dimension of the developing man-
nature ratio is not acknowledged. The historical dimension consists of the 
succeeding dialectical negation of the negation in the man-nature ratio 
towards a new man-nature union. When man as a social being developed 
out of nature he was at the mercy of the powers of nature at first and only 
slowly came to rule over nature by understanding the laws of nature. 
Within the struggle with nature he developed his abilities and skills to 
shape nature. The subordination of man to nature was negated by a kind 
of rule of man over nature which reached a climax with the industrial 
revolution, whereas the development of productive forces was promoted 
by the wasteful exploitation of nature. Man became the enemy of nature. 
In capitalism originated romantic illusions about the relation of man 
towards nature due to a growing self-consciousness and to a better and 
better domination of nature. They were an ideological reflex of the 
contradictory attitude of man towards nature: for man exploited nature 
recklessly while admiring its beauty. Socialism is offering the possibility 
to conceive of an effective domination of nature in the service of 
humanity in which the protection and shaping of nature become one. 
Under non-antagonistic social relations, man along with the scientific and 
technical revolution becomes more and more the creative shaper and 
controller of his way of production and life. 
Biotechnologies change man from an imitator of nature to its construc-

426 
HERBERT HORZ 
tor in the framework of biotic laws of development. The type of science 
of the scientific and technical revolution offers an explanation of the 
relations and laws of nature, society and consciousness consistent in 
itself. It contains a pressure for technology for all sciences. With this the 
basic functions of the sciences develop as productive forces for effective 
production of material goods, as a cultural force to create knowledge of 
the natural and social environment of man and of his own behavior, and 
as a human force to expand freedom by ~xpert decisions and the cor-
responding action. The formation of the new man-nature union is not 
based on the subordination of man to nature, but on a better understanding 
of the relations and legalities of nature, and on the humane shaping of the 
scientific and technical progress. Domination of nature does not mean 
conquest of nature. This is a lengthy and complicated process in which 
new powers for a humane shaping of the natural environment arise~ 
The political dimension of the man-nature ratio appears in the criticism 
of the economic and political foundation of attitudes hostile to nature and 
thus inhumane. When profit production leads to the wasteful exploitation 
of nature, then the demand for shaping a humane natural environment 
must contain criticisms of imperialist policy. The demands of political 
movements for the protection of nature and democracy show the 
coherence between the historical and political dimensions. 
The criticisms of the undemocratic changes of established imperialist 
social and scientific programs is at the same time critical of their anti-
ecological contents. The coherence of historical and political dimensions 
becomes evidence that humane ecological policy makes allies of those 
who are developing socialism in its ecological powers and criticizing 
imperialism in its endeavors hostile to ecology. 
Ideological obscurities about problem dimensions prevent important 
alliances. If the historical dimension is not understood, the scientific and 
technical revolution comes to be seen as the reason for environmental 
pollution, then critics of a policy hostile to ecology will come to the 
conclusion that humanistic demands and imperialist monopolies with 
their options for the scientific and technical revolution are opponents of 
the ecological movement. In the interest of ideological clarity and a 
responsible policy of alliance it is important to elaborate the historical and 
political dimension of the ecological problem. 

ECOLOGY AS A CHAlLENGE TO PHll.OSOPHY 
427 
ECOLOGY AS A GLOBAL PROBLEM 
Those problems, the solutions of which influence human development 
decisively, are understood as global problems. There are problems 
belonging to this category which pertain to the man-nature ratio along 
with the scientific and technical revolution, they are called ecological 
problems. They involve the natural foundations of human existence, raw 
materials, energy, health and nutrition. As mentioned above, the humane 
solution of global problems requires that we achieve personal freedom 
through peaceful social progress. The man-nature ratio is connected with 
all of this humane approach and the solutions it generates. This concerns 
the global problem number one of our time: maintaining and safeguarding 
peace; Military research and the development of military technologies 
fmally led to the waste of military resources. For humane reasons their 
application should not take place. In addition to that, without the military 
threat, material and intellectual powers can be utilized for shaping the 
environment. A global war with mass destruction weapons would not 
only condemn humankind to lifelong infrrmity, nearly exterminating it, 
but would also destroy the natural conditions for the existence of people 
on a large scale. The problems connected with social progress and the 
gain of personal freedom demand and effective interaction of man with 
his natural environment so as to achieve an increase in humanity by an 
increase in efficiency. 
Therefore, ecology becomes a global problem because the formation of 
a new man-nature union in accordance with its historical dimension 
demands such social conditions so as to enable and require the humane 
shaping of the natural environment. Given this point, ecological policy is 
part of the systemic struggle between imperialism and socialism. It is 
necessary to fight Anti-humane solutions such as the neo-colonial 
appropriation of natural resources, the suppression of the sovereignty of 
people to decide about their own mineral resources, the-exploitation and 
oppression directed against social progress, the destruction of the natural 
environment by means of a global war of extermination, and the deforma-
tion of the person as a natural being. The extent to which the natural 
conditions of human existence are affected demands coordinated action 
on the basis of international law in order to maintain them. The pollution 
of air and water, the effects of nuclear explosions on the natural environ-
ment, space research, and the utilization of the seas do not respect 
frontiers. Thus ecology penetrates all economic, political, and ideological 

428 
HERBERT HORZ 
disputes. It is part of the peaceful competition between social systems 
with different social orders. Ecology requires the humane shaping of the 
scientific and technical progress and the fight against anti-humane effects 
of the man-nature ratio. 
The development of the relationship between man and nature depends 
on the development of the forces of production. Marx remarked that 
industry constitutes our true historical relation to nature and therefore 
between natural science and man.12 There exist scientific and technologi-
cal possibilities to enable processes for the humane shaping of the natural 
environment at favorable costs. Although the scientific and technical 
revolution is just beginning to serve as the material and technical base of 
the development of a new humanistic society, the principal new quality in 
the relationship between man and technology and the development of the 
forces of production must be elaborated. Marx speaks of the inequality of 
individuals, of physical and intellectual superiority of one over the other. 
Marx had explained that the right to measure unequal individuals with the 
same measure could never rank higher than the economic shaping caused 
by the cultural development of society.13 That also applies to socialism. 
There should not arise illusions about the quick implementation of the 
scientific and technical revolution, the removal of traditional tech-
nologies, and the possibilities of a humanity doing without efficiency or 
opposed to its own interests. 
But there are also no theoretical reasons to interpret the new relation-
ship between man and nature caused by the scientific and technical 
revolution as if satisfying the increasing material and cultural needs of the 
people cannot be the aim of dominating nature. It appears problematic, 
according to C.D. Darlington, that a high consumption, a high standard of 
living, the great triumph of the industrial revolution and the capitalist 
world could damage our present environment and waste and wash out that 
future heritage.14 Shaping nature must also serve to increase the material 
and cultural standard of living of the people. Nature is certainly not only a 
natural resource but a cultural value, too, deserving of respect. 
We need to check whether our understanding of nature corresponds to 
the present conditions of the development of the forces of production, the 
economic requirements and the social and cultural needs. For Marx nature 
is totality in the sense of natural historical processes, in the sense of 
substance and existence of objective laws, as well as in the sense of a 
principle of development. Capitalist exploitation of nature confmed the 
term "nature" to that aspect of nature that could be influenced by man. 

ECOLOGY AS A CHALLENGE TO PHILOSOPHY 
429 
Nature was not conceived in its inexhaustible width, not in its beautiful 
appearance. Under this conception it became apparent that nature is an 
inexhaustible object of exploitation. There are spatial-temporal limits for 
the use of natural resources. The utilization of the existing sources of 
energy and raw materials depends on scientific and technical progress. It 
is interesting to note the increase in our day of the discussions on humane 
points of view concerning the rational regulation of our metabolism with 
nature. In capitalist countries there are large movements against unjus-
tified experiments with animals. This forces socialism to determine anew 
its humane points of view towards all democratic movements that protest 
against the wasteful exploitation of nature. Certainly, can romanticism not 
be an ideological way out of the problem arising from the domination of 
the scientific and technical revolution? But humanity must consider as an 
aim, criterium of evaluation of strategy and demands, the practical and 
theoretical domination of the natural and social environment, as well as of 
one's own attitude, by means of the most highly developed forces of 
production to gain of personal freedom. 
Marxism is not seldom reproached for the underestimation of the 
natural conditions of the social existence of man. F. Capra reproaches the 
Marxists for not recognizing the ecological problem earlier, for it had 
provided material for a further damaging criticism of capitalism and for 
strengthening the vitality of the Marxist method. If Marxists had coped 
honestly with ecological questions, Capra continues, then they would had 
come to the conclusion that socialist societies would not look better, for 
their environmental damages were only smaller because of their smaller 
consumption (which they were trying to increase).15 With this the global 
problem in its historical dimension is subordinated historically to 
insufficiencies in the solution. It would be certainly wrong to conceal the 
ecological problems of socialism. They are known to the expert anyway. 
It would be totally wrong to suppose that an anti-ecological policy lasting 
for centuries could be corrected within decades. Also the development of 
anti-humane technologies can only be attenuated by a complicated 
process in which a humane shaping of new technologies and labor 
contents promotes the person. There is no reason to be ashamed of the 
shortcomings or to exaggerate present successes unjustifiably. 
The Marxists are reproached for having neglected the "ecological 
Marx" for such a long time, because the difficult theoretical ideas -
according to Capra - can only be repeated with great effort by most social 
activists, since they would rather take more simple-minded stands in the 

430 
HERBERT HORZ 
controversy. He also points out that ecological knowledge is subtle and 
difficult to use as a motivation for social activism, since the respect for 
other species, say whales, trees, or insects threatened by extinction, does 
not supply sufficient revolutionary vigor to alter human institutions.16 
Similar reproaches by socio-biologists also exist. These criticisms 
produce a picture of Marxism as an expression of political pragmatism, as 
of insufficient theoretical profundity, and as lacking any strategy for the 
man-nature ratio. Opposed to it there is a limited understanding of policy 
that does not connect the solution to the questions of the day with 
consciousness of the future. Indeed, pragmatism is hostile to strategy. It 
does not arrange the daily tasks so as to solve them in the context of the 
aim to use the increase of efficiency to expand humanity. The best 
response to anti-Marxist conceptions would consist of the constructive 
solution to the problems in the man-nature ratio caused by the present 
conditions in socialism. 
Marxism-Leninism includes ecology, which it arranges in a social 
theory that outlines programmatically the social conditions for a new 
man-nature union; and by doing so it provides a scientifically based 
direction for ecological action on the present conditions. Philosophy 
fulfills its task as a philosophy of peace, humanity, and responsibility 
when it does not disguise conflicts, when it shows global problems, and 
when it deduces humane solutions from the analysis of the situation. 
The implosion of the real socialism in Eastern Europe is the end of a 
specific social experiment, but not the end of humanistic values and 
ideals. Socialism is the hope of freedom, social equality and ecological 
behaviour. 
Berlin 
Germany 
NOTES 
1 Cf. Bayed, C.: "Materialien zur Geschichte der Umweltproblematik" in: 
Technologie und Politik, Das Magazin zur Wachsturnskrise, Band 16, Hamburg 1980, 
p.184. 
2 Cf. Rousseau, J.-J.: "Friihe Schriften", Leipzig 1965, p. 46. 
3 Wendorff: "Zeit und Kultur", Wiesbaden 1980, p. 284. 
4 Rousseau, 1. -J.: "Der Gesellschaftsvertrag", introduced by Romain Rolland, 
Rudolstadt 1953, p. 5. 

ECOLOGY AS A CHALLENGE TO PHILOSOPHY 
431 
S Cf. H6rz, H./Seidel, D.: "Humanitlit und Effektivitlit -
Zwei Seiten der 
wissenschaftlich-technischen Revolution?", Berlin 1984. 
6 "Global 2000. Der Bericht an den Prlisidenten", Frankfurt (Main) 1980, p. 25. 
7 Mesarovic, M.Pestel, E.: "Menschheit am Wendepunkt", Stuttgart 1974, p. 21. 
8 Capra, F.: "Wendezeit. Bausteine fiir ein neues Weltbild"., Bern, MUnchen, Wien 
1983, p. 39. 
9 Engels, Friedrich: "Dialektik der Natur" in: MEW, Band 20, p. 453. 
10 Ibid., p. 453. 
11 Marx, Karl: "Das Kapital" 13. Bd., in: MEW Bd. 25, p. 828. 
12 Cf. Marx, Karl: "Okonomisch-philosophische Manuskripte aus dem Jahre 1844", 
in: MEW, Erglinzungsband, Erster Teil, p. 543. 
13 Cf. Marx, Karl: "Kritik des Gothaer Programms" in: MEW, Bd. 19, p. 21. 
14 Cf. Darlington, D. C.: "Die Wiederentdeckung der Ungleichheit", Frankfurt (Main) 
1980,p.359. 
IS Cf. Capra, F.: "Wendezeit", loco cit., p. 226 foil. 
16 Cf. Ibid., p. 227. 

HERBERTSCHNADELBACH 
Against Feyerabend 
"Despise but reason or science or both - the 
highest of all mankind's gifts - and you have 
surrendered to the devil and to perdition are 
doomed". (Free adaptation of Hegel's free 
adaptation of Goethe)l 
" ... the propaganda which is termed 'argumentation"'2 - A debate with a 
Dadaist is not without its dangers, for if you take him or her seriously, 
you are the very least in danger of making a laughing stock out of 
yourself. ''The Dadaist's favorite pastime is confounding rationalists by 
inventing compelling reasons for irrational theories".3 One might be 
inclined to dismiss Feyerabend as a philosophical clown - "it is jokes, 
entertainment, and illusion that are liberating, and not 'truth"'4 - were it 
not for the fact that he is not amusing enough to fit the role. If you 
criticize him in such a way as to annoy him, then you know what to 
expect: namely to be classified as a "someone who reads only on 
Sundays", an "illiterate", or a "propagandist".5 (I myself prefer to be 
classified as a "Sunday reader", for 1 like reading on Sundays and refuse, 
furthermore, to read everything that Feyerabend has written since Against 
Method). Incidentally, since when is the term "propagandist" used as a 
reproach? "Argument is propaganda for one observer, the essence of 
human discourse for another".6 (Yes, of course I'm quoting out of 
context!) After all, Feyerabend himself engages in propaganda - he calls 
for "citizens initiatives instead of a theory of knowledge", for example -
although on occasion he himself is prepared to argue a case, and with 
particular virtuosity when it comes to ensuring the immunity of his own 
G. Munevar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 433448. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
433 

434 
HERBERTSCHNAoELBACH 
posltlOn. If intellectuals raise objections to the notion of "citizens 
initiatives instead of epistemology" then this is "very understandable -
since the proposition threatens their very existence".7 And whosoever 
finds relativism morally questionable only wishes to put the moralist 
under pressure.8 How fmely crafted the playful excuse that "I dido't 
really mean it like that!" as is given, for example, about the statement that 
"anything goes". This was not meant the way it was said, namely as a 
principle, but rather as "a somewhat joking portrayal of the situation of 
the rationalist who wishes to have universal principles but who has to 
increasingly empty them of all contents when faced by the material 1 
offer. 'Anything goes' is all that remains".9 Whoever chooses to adopt a 
different interpretation, as did Hans Kling among others, has only himself 
to blame: if only he had read things more carefully. to The method of 
implicitly suspecting that every possible opponent is a "well-dressed 
contemporary"ll or a "law-and-order" fetishist12 is, however, less a 
laughing matter. This is not "propaganda which is termed argumentation", 
but argumentation as counter-propaganda -
not well-founded, but 
definitely effective. Should we now also engage in propaganda and 
attempt to strip the "Feyerabend" phenomenon bare and deflate the 
fascination he exerts? This would itself not be possible without resorting 
at least minimally to argumentation. Perhaps we can agree at the outset 
then that an argument can be good or bad, and propaganda effective or 
ineffective, and subsequently restrict ourselves to argumentation. 
" ... that reason is not a standard for our thoughts 
and action, but itself a particular form of thinking 
and acting, on the same level as other forms of 
thought and action".13 
For over a decade now Feyerabend has been trying to shock people whom 
he seems to be painfully fixated on, yet of whom it is not quite clear 
whether they actually exist or not: the rationalists, the ratiomanics,14 and 
the ratiofascists.1s Admittedly, it has to be left to the observer whether 
s/he actually feels injured or not. As a rule, the response will probably be 
"how refreshing!" and s/he will be happy that once again it is the others 
who are the target. Feyerabend is not against reason; far from it; it is only 
a matter of pruning reason down to the appropriate size. And it is 
circumstances which determine what is appropriate: "There may, of 

AGAINST FEYERABEND 
435 
course, come a time when it will be necessary to give reason a temporary 
advantage and when it will be wise to defend its rules to the exclusion of 
everything else. I do not think that we are living in such a time today".16 
Against this it would be simplest to exclaim "Objection: I think we arel" 
and the discussion would already be over .... But we had wanted the 
focus to be on argumentation. Let us thus investigate more closely that 
with which Feyerabend believes he can maintain a tactical relationship, 
namely "reason", "rationality". For him, rationalism is "the idea that there 
are general rules and standards for conducting our affairs")7 Rationality 
is, for the rationalist, "agreement with certain general rules and stan-
dards",18 and the rationalist desires "that people always act rationally (in 
this sense, H.S.)".19 It may well be that someone has defmed "reason" to 
be something like this - and that person should thus also be compelled to 
regard programmed computers, trained bats, indeed even washing 
machines, as rational. Is it reasonable to defme rationality in such a 
manner? Did Karl Popper, the "propagandist"20 and an "established"21 
philosopher, defme it thus? Feyerabend continually confuses the rational 
and the obsessive-compulsive, and yet he nevertheless believes he must 
"instruct"22 the rationalists. Instead of immediately setting out to combat 
all the compulsions in the world - I would gladly join ranks in such an 
undertaking - it would be better if we were first to ask ourselves what it is 
that distinguishes a rational person from his/her obsessive-compulsive 
counterpart. To my mind, the rational person not only obeys simple 
universal rules and standards, but also has them at his/her disposal:23 s/he 
controls them and not vice versa. The use of these rules and standards 
must also be reasonable, and it is obvious that this implies not merely 
following rules, for this would just involve a meta-compulsion. 
Philosophers have always been aware of this. One needs think only of the 
manner in which Aristotle describes logistikon or phr6nesis. After all, 
why does Kant introduce judgment into the argument. He states that 
"deficiency in judgment is just what is ordinarily called stupidity, and for 
such a failing there is no remedy".24 What Feyerabend attacks as the 
"reason" of the rationalists is simply stupidity and "even the Gods battle 
against it in vain". Even the critical rationalists cannot simply be accused 
of stupidity if they in principle think that their principle of criticism can 
be criticized;25 if things look different in· practice and they really have 
founded a "barren, dogmatic church"26 then it was at least not the fault of 
the principle involved. 
If Feyerabend were prepared to differentiate between rule and rule 

436 
HERBERTSCHNADELBACH 
usage he would be able to turn his treasure of insights about the history of 
science to better ends than that of disproving "rationalism". We should, 
furthermore, also distinguish between the explication of reason we have 
given and that which we must already believe ourselves to be capable of 
in order to provide a reasonable explication. Peyerabend admittedly says 
that "rationality ... is itself a tradition",27 but reason does not simply 
"exist" in the world, that is unless we at· the same time assume that it 
exists. By assuming the existence of reason and coming to reason, we 
thus concomitantly imply that I and others can be reasonable and wish to 
be reasonable. And it is reasonable to identify oneself with the tradition of 
"reason" by providing grounds for such a choice or, alternatively 
deciding against it, if one has grounds for so doing - the tradition of 
"rationality" is not in itself rational. The prevalence of the notion that 
reason already "exists" and one needs to do nothing more than describe it 
in order to know what is reasonable is certainly calamitous - a calamity 
for which Popper must take part of the blame. Unfortunately, Peyerabend 
merely writes the script for the satiric play28 which follows from the 
tragedy of the Popperian school - by retaining the principle involved and 
offsetting it by a presentation of the opposite: "Behold, things were so 
irrational I Some reason, your reasonl" The wish to glean what reason is 
by merely descriptive means inevitably leads to defeatism, whether one 
terms this relativism or irrationalism. However, Peyerabend is no 
irrationalist; he states, for example, that "Protagorean relativism is 
reasonable because it pays attention to the pluralism of traditions and 
values".29 Wider den Methodenzwang closes with the prognosis that ''the 
rationality of our concepts will nevertheless doubtlessly increase con-
siderably". Whoever can justifiably differentiate between "rational" and 
"irrational", indeed whoever believes himself capable of a tactical 
relationship with rules and principles which he erroneously terms 
"reason" has himself not fully forsworn reason. In addition, that person 
demonstrates that he cannot even uphold the relativism which he himself 
propagates30 - and he should not therefore expect others to do so. At the 
risk of boring the reader with the academic arguments against relativism, 
we must nevertheless ask how one can, for such a time as one says "I 
think this ... ". or "I support that ... " and provides reasons for the 
statements, relativize one's own rational approach to the status of a mere 
"tradition". Is this relativizing of one's own position itself a tradition? 
And if I demand that the tradition with which I identify myself must be 
tolerant and not imperialist, what does this have to do with relativism? 

AGAINST FBYERABEND 
437 
After all, renouncing any use of the instruments of power is not the same 
as renouncing the nonrelative validity claims - yet these are indispensable 
to our being able to speak and act. The fact that such validity claims can 
be repudiated in argument is no reason not to raise them; only by being 
raised can they be rebutted through argument in the fIrst place - whereas 
it is impossible to even talk with a consistent relativist (even a relativist of 
traditions). (To this extent, the relativism put forward by Protagoras is 
unreasonable). Whoever does not wish to expose his non-relative validity 
claims to refutation is either a case for a psychiatrist or must hold his 
peace; and whoever does not wish to raise validity claims in the fIrst place 
must at the very least hold his peace. Why then does Feyerabend present a 
line of argument if he is not simply propagating something? 
..... those who admire science and are also slaves 
of reason. They have now to make a choice. They 
can keep science; they can keep reason; they 
cannot keep both".31 
Feyerabend is a scientist in reverse, for he is interested in science as a fact 
and believes that he must therefore play science off against something 
which he holds to be rationality. "If one presupposes the existence of 
science, then Reason cannot be comprehensive and we cannot therefore 
exclude the existence of irrationality". 32 And if Feyerabend did not make 
such a presupposition then he would probably have deployed a different 
concept of science and would not have had to keep blaming "Reason" 
when in fact he wishes to blame the "philosophy of science". "Without 
'chaos', no knowledge. Without a frequent dismissal of reason, no 
progress".33 It would be nice to know at this point how one goes about 
effecting this "dismissal of reason". Does this mean dismissing one's own 
reason or that reason which "the" philosophers of science have defmed to 
be such? One has to risk making mistakes and to err - for nothing 
ventured, nothing gained. Yet, can one intend to make these mistakes 
which Feyerabend regards as the "preconditions of progress"34 and can 
one want to err? Since this is not the case, we also do not need to dismiss 
reason. Ergo, one does not need to relativize rationality in order to 
conduct a rational science. After all, offering us a choice between either 
rationality or science, either reason or freedom is in fact merely to provide 
us with the chance to select from among false altematives.35 

438 
HERBERTSCHNAoELBACH 
To Feyerabend's mind, the distinction between the context of discovery 
and the context of justification has "definitely lost" any point.36 Yet the 
context of justification is the preferred location accorded reason in science 
- only here can one find verifiable grounds, arguments, possibilities for 
doubts to be raised, and thus freedom for the individual. Just because, 
owing to their interdependence, one cannot factually separate both 
contexts from one another there is no reason to distinguish between them 
no longer. What, after all, would a science look like in which every 
developmental step had at the same time to justify itself? What would this 
have in common with a "science for a free society"? It is undoubtedly 
unreasonable and would sabotage progress in science if we demanded that 
immediate justification be forthcoming for every step taken and if, 
conversely, we avoided taking any steps if we were not certain in advance 
that they would be justified. But who on earth raises such demands? Does 
it not suffice also to demand innovation in the context of justification in 
order to justifiably be able to retain the distinction between the two 
contexts? Feyerabend is far better acquainted than I with the examples 
from the history of science in which improvements in the procedures for 
verification and proof were precisely the decisive improvement achieved. 
The same is true of the relation between progress in knowledge and 
methodology. Quite apart from the fact that "anything goes"37 by no 
means follows from the insight that all methodologies have limits, what 
we continually need is new methods and not the abolition of method. We 
need methods because only by means of them can science be the en-
terprise which it should be in a free society, namely subject to public and 
intersubjective verification. The fact that certain philosophers of science 
believe they can put an end to methodological imagination once and for 
all is no reason to denigrate the methods themselves. As a rule, such 
people denigrate methods as having nothing in common with science. We 
have all too often heard that knowledge and the legitimization thereof, 
that truth and method, are supposedly opposites - from disciples of 
Heidegger and of critical theory. Whoever means such oppositions 
literally and not in a critical, instructive spirit is no longer able to criticize 
convictions that deviate from his own, but can only denounce them: as 
"ignoring Being", as "blinded", or as an expression of a "reified con-
sciousness", etc .. 
" ... most philosophers are opportunists"38 - and I'm now likely to face 
the same fate as the Sunday reader; I shall learn that Feyerabend did not 
actually mean any of this the way he said it. And what I have asserted was 

AGAINST FEYERABEND 
439 
indeed said, more or less, in Science in a Free Society: ''The remarks do 
not mean that research should now be arbitrary and without leadership. 
There are standards of measurement, but they originate in the research 
process itself and not in abstract theories of rationality. It requires 
imaginative powers, tact, and detailed knowledge to reach an informed 
judgment of existing standards and to invent new standards ... ". And there 
I was, thinking that the difference between context of discovery and that 
of justification had been abolished! Since when, after all, is the German 
Wider den Methodenzwang ("Against the compulsion to use methods") 
the same as the English Against Method. Is Feyerabend against methods, 
or against the compulsion to use methods, which, indeed, no one is in 
favor of! The baby is forever being thrown out with the bathwater and 
then retroactively placed carefully back in the tub. It is amazing that 
someone should publish a book - namely the German edition of AM -
with the word "anarchist" in its subtitle and then add a footnote on the 
title page intended to prevent the reader from thinking that this word 
could be at all sinister. Nothing was of course meant in the principled 
fashion in which it was presented: "anarchism is a cure for rigorous 
thinkers who have gone too far with their rigor". 39 Perhaps one should 
not expect a Dadaist to be consistent, and he may also show anxiety if he 
wishes; but I believe it is a crime to underestimate the intelligence of his 
readers. 
And so one could go on. First of all, the distinction between 
"scientific" and "unscientific" is thrown overboard in keeping with the 
motto that "if one has no watertight criteria for a distinction, then the 
distinction is worthless".40 (And one can, without having studied 
epistemology, in the process be acutely aware of the fact that Daniken is a 
swindler and that Transcendental Meditation is a commercially organized 
fraud). In which case, science is something the progress of which would 
have been hampered by methods and rationality if the ra~ionalists had had 
their way".41 In other words, progress has occurred in science; yet it 
would be nice to know why this was progress in science and not in non-
science, in superstition, in mystification, etc., given that science is 
supposedly also not "sacrosanct".42 To what extent did this even con-
stitute progress and not merely some hybrid, stolid growth? Feyerabend 
admittedly says that "my thesis is that anarchism helps to achieve 
progress in anyone of the senses one cares to choose".43 Many, such as 
Lakatos, view mere activity, empty bustle, the forever moving forward in 
many cases to be regression; the thesis is therefore wrong. Feyerabend is 

440 
HERBERTSCHNADELBACH 
also wrong when he maintains that this "does not mean that I claim to 
possess special knowledge about what is good and what is bad in the 
sciences and that I want to impose this knowledge upon my readers".44 
"Anything goes" is, to his mind, good for science. Yet, in order to be able 
to justify this one has to dust off the old distinction between "scientific" 
and "unscientific" and then claim that this was not what was meant. 
Feyerabend has made much ado about having rediscovered relativism. 
This has to do with the renaissance of historicism in a scientific guise,45 
and historicism inevitably generates relativism - this was just as true a 
hundred years ago as it is today. The granddaughter of historicism is, 
however, Lebensphilosophie: "the attempt to increase liberty, to lead a 
full life and rewarding life, and the corresponding attempt to discover the 
secrets of nature and man entails, therefore, the rejection of all universal 
standards and of all rigid traditions".46 We know this all too well already: 
science has to serve life and not vice versa.47 "Life cannot be brought 
before the high court of Reason".48 And then: "And thus reason joins the 
ranks of all those other abstract ghosts, such as duty, morals, truth and 
their concrete precursors, which once served to intimidate humankind and 
to confine their free and happy development: this is dying out. .. ". 49 I am 
not shocked, because I have read this all before, put far better by 
Nietzsche. The only difference being that he did not speak so innocently 
of humankind's "free and happy development", of "the inner progress of 
science" and the "development of our culture as a whole".50 He did not 
preach such a feeble epicureanism as does Feyerabend, but rather 
proclaimed the "ascendance of nihilism" and of the power concealed 
behind it, namely the Will to power. 
There is neither "Spirit" nor reason, nor thought, nor consciousness, nor soul, nor 
will, nor truth: these are all useless fictions. Nor have we to do with a "subject and 
object" but with a particular species of animal, which only flourishes given a certain 
relative correctness, or above all regularity, of its perceptions (so that it can emphasize 
experience) ... Knowledge functions as a tool of power. It is clear that it grows with 
each increase in power .... 51 
At least Nietzsche was not an opportunist. Feyerabend, by contrast, 
when confronted with such consequences of his argument, expertly 
extricates himself from the dilemma: 
But ... should we really expose humankind unprotected to the influence of barbaric 
traditions? Should we really stand by and watch traditions being revived in which 
ritual murder is on the agenda, in which small children are abandoned, adults tortured 

AGAINST FEYERABEND 
441 
and burnt to death? Is it not our duty to protect hwnan life and hwnan dignity 
wherever it is threatened? And does this duty not forbid us to erode or even eliminate 
rational-hwnanitarian traditions? First of all, these questions once again reveal the 
abstract way of thinking of intellectuals. I am elaborating relativism in order to make 
life easier for certain well-known traditions that do not lead to the above-mentioned 
problems. The problems innate to the above question are not inherent in relativism 
with regard to these traditions (and the underlying tradition).S2 
It would be nice to know how, once one has deemed relativism permis-
sible, it can then be restricted in a non-relativist manner so that one is then 
able at the least to criticize the mutilation of children, racial discrimina-
tion, slavery and other ''traditions'', for a tradition "is neither good nor 
bad, it simply is".53 
"Science took the helm by virtue of power, not of 
its argwnents ... "54 
Such a sentence is no longer likely to surprise the reader, for if all that 
exists is traditions then the strongest of these will assert itself, and 
precisely not by dint of arguments; for how are traditions supposed to be 
able to argue with one another? How did science really take the helm? A 
theory of the scientification of our life world and the social and economic 
causes thereof is not to be found in Peyerabend' s work. Instead we 
encounter a warmed-up version of the theory of betrayal by High Priests. 
It is the scientists' fault, and society is so stupid that it acquiescently 
accepts what they say. We read of the "fat cats": "Nobel prize win-
ners",55 who have made themselves indispensable and who provide, as 
once did the clergy, legitimation for Western cultural imperialism. 
" ... science is still Queen, because scientists are incapable of understand-
ing other ideologies and are not prepared to let them have their way, 
because they have the power to push their wishes through and because 
they use this power, just as their ancestors used theirs to impose Christen-
dom on the peoples whom they came across in the course of their 
conquests".56 To take one thing at a time: much of this is historically 
inaccurate. It was precisely scientists, for example ethnologists, who first 
tried to understand foreign cultures, whereas by contrast F eyerabend's 
liberalistic "mature citizen" was still engaged in slave trading; it was the 
missionaries, and not the "mature" conquerors who first attempted to 
care for the survival of the South American Indian tribes. And, inciden-
tally, it was precisely the traditions of Christendom and rationalism 

442 
HERBERTSCHNAoELBACH 
which have hitherto enabled us also to criticize imperialism instead of 
merely somehow being opposed to it. Yet, such trifles must not be 
allowed to decide the questions at hand. What is quite grotesque is that 
Feyerabend derives the distance between science and political practice 
from a conspiracy among the scientists: 
Essentially there is hardly any difference between the process which leads to the 
proclamation of a new scientific law and that which leads to the passing of a new law 
in society .... However, whereas a democracy at least makes some efforts to explain 
the process in such a manner that everyone can understand it, scientists either conceal 
the process or offer a forged version in order to serve their sectarian interests.57 
The philosophers of science are the worst, for they achieve nothing58 and 
merely provide ammunition for the concealers and forgers: "Instead of 
enlarging the tumor of a philosophy of science by means of further 
abstract pronouncements, I would have left it to its fate: live and let die. 
That will continue to be my motto in the future".59 What was it again that 
Feyerabend teaches in Zurich? 
"A society based on 'rationality' is not entirely 
free; one has to play the game of the intellec-
tuals'>60 
It is worthwhile discussing a few subordinate questions, such as: "Is it not 
misleading to classify precisely that power which tends to destroy all 
settled traditions - namely rationality in the guise of science and technol-
ogy - as one tradition among others and then to expect these to compete 
peacefully with one another?" It has repeatedly been said that any 
nurturing of tradition conducted rationally and scientifically is both the 
destruction of tradition and the creation of a reserve. What Max Weber 
termed the process of occidental rationalization61 is by no means folklore. 
Which leads us to our next question: "Would it not be sensible and clarify 
things if we fIrst differentiated methodologically between 'the philosophy 
and history of science', 'the didactics of science' and 'the politics of 
science' instead of continually confiating the terms in the manner 
Feyerabend does?" Scientific "law-and-order" concepts can also be taught 
dadaistically - for example with a Sesame Street for students - just as the 
reverse is possible, namely to turn students into anarchists by the most 
authoritarian posturing imaginable. What happens to science in political 
terms is a different question altogether: we can admittedly expect that, if 

AGAINST FEYERABEND 
443 
allowed to, the "scientific chauvinists"62 will seize power. But does this 
lead automatically to the call for "citizens initiatives instead of epistemol-
ogy"? 
Certainly, no one is completely free in a rational society if one 
understands "freedom" to mean not having to follow justifiable rules. 
Nevertheless, would one be freer in a society composed of citizens' 
initiatives? There is surely no need here to go into the whole discussion of 
democratic rule by elected council again just because Feyerabend himself 
perceives the basis of a free society to reside in a "protective structure" 
that is itself supposedly not "based on rationalism".63 And understand this 
as you will - does Feyerabend merely mean that the structure does not 
arise via the agency of such considerations? Indeed, other than a few 
proponents of contractarian theory no one has claimed that it does. Let us 
therefore concentrate on the "protective structure". If one can give no 
universalizable reasons for why it should exist then such a "protective 
structure" protects no one's freedom. It only protects a few citizens who 
have taken some initiative without regard for other citizens. After all, 
what sort of a "mature citizen" is involved whose freedom is impaired by 
rationality? Precisely the same phantom as the ghost in whose name the 
Christian Democratic Party in West Germany demanded the introduction 
of commercial radio and television stations: with a selection of 30 
channels at hand that citizen can make a good choice. Whoever speaks 
out against such a proposal must be prepared to face the rebuke that s/he 
contests the citizen's maturity and wishes to patronize him or her -
another highly effective argument with which to immunize one's own 
position against attack. And what sort of citizens' initiatives are we 
concerned with? Those such as Feyerabend dreams up or those which are 
actually formed on the initiative of citizens: above all privileged middle-
class groupings which seek to defend their privileges according to the 
principle of sauve qui peut? Whatever the case, let us place academic 
freedom, which supposedly is nothing but an empty phrase, in the hands 
of our citizens who have seized the initiative:64 the citizens of EXXON or 
the Axel Springer Verlag, Germany's largest newspaper publisher, will 
certainly take the initiative - no "protective structure" will prevent them -
and it will then be the Dadaist whose "existence" first "gets threatened", 
whereas the universities, as they are today, tolerate all sorts of strange 
phenomena, and that is as it should be. 
Feyerabend wishes to prise open the cartel of "science", "rationalism" 
and "capitalism'>65 and believes that cursing rationalism is a particularly 

444 
HERBERTSCHNAoELBACH 
apt way to go about doing this. His approach is based on a quite laughable 
overestimation of the role of the philosophy of science, which has long 
since passed its zenith internationally speaking. And large books were not 
necessary to break the political power of science; not that they would 
achieve this end anyway. Incidentally, scientists long ago themselves 
started dismantling their own status, for it had become common 
knowledge that they can be bought and that there is no aim sufficiently 
absurd as for it to be impossible to support it with highly paid "scientific" 
opinions. And we shall have to pay the penalty for this - to the Greens 
and our new students who no longer expect anything of "science"; 
Feyerabend is diligently read, but not as a "cure for rigorous thinkers". 
What is needed instead of all this impressionistic sociology of science is a 
scientific (sit venia verbo) analysis of the factual interconnection between 
science and the power apparatus. We would then know more precisely 
who had prostituted science as well as knowing where this was not the 
case - and we could then undertake something to oppose it. Feyerabend, 
by contrast, gives the impression that it is sufficient to attack "rationality 
as such" in order to make a contribution to freedom. 
" ... he 
who 
does 
not 
like 
contemporary 
Catholicism should quit the Church and become a 
Protestant, instead of spoiling it by silly reforms 
and holding mass in the vemacular"66 
Greetings from Monsignor Lefebvre. Add to the disgusting self-abuse of 
an intellectual philosopher of science - "the philosophy of science, a 
hitherto unknown form of madness?"67 - the elitist blindness to ideology 
of an educated relativist. What might perhaps be the only chance for a 
poor peasant finally to find a meaning in a tradition into which he was 
settled is for Feyerabend but a "silly reform". In his eyes, scientists only 
solve their problems amongst other things "because they are not exactly 
stupid (which, given that today almost anyone can become a scientist, is 
actually quite doubtful)".68 And the "Association for the Freedom of 
Science" says the same thing: opening out university admission lowers 
the level of universities - in the past only the intelligent went to the 
university. In Footnote 81 of Science in a Free Society Feyerabend 
rejoices at the fact that in "the State of California ... the citizens have 
managed" to "have a one-sided portrayal of the origin of mankind 

AGAINST FEYERABEND 
445 
replaced by a pluralist version. The theory of evolution is now no longer 
presented as fact, but rather as a hypothesis". The people who achieved 
this were not "the citizens", but fundamentalists, who have transported 
Book I of Genesis from religious instruction into biology classes in order 
to be able to attack Darwin at long last. Although it is admittedly 
desirable that all scientific theories be taught as hypotheses, one can be 
sure that the history of Creation is not taught as an hypothesis, for it is not 
a hypothesis. With all due respect for Genesis, one should not try to 
present every reactionary victory as a triumph of pluralism. One needs 
only quote Footnote 46 of the same book here: 
A person with no preconceptions must simply be asked who one should rather 
despise, a proud dictator who simply kills his opponents or the sweet-talking 
rationalist who insidiously gains their confidence and destroys their souls. And he will 
ask himself further whether the so-called great men in history, whether men such as 
Plato, Christ, Kant, Marx, Luther, should not be considered among the greatest 
criminals in history, followed by a swarm of insignificant rogues (the cases of 
Aristophanes, Erasmus, Lessing, Heine and Bob Hope are different). 
There we have it: the rationalist soul destroyers are worse than Hitler, for 
he only killed the body. The intellectuals are to blame for everything - or 
at any rate certain intellectuals, and their disciples and sympathizers! 
Nowadays one calls them "armchair murderers". What is it, after all, 
which makes supermarkets69 so attractive that they can be used as models 
for the distribution of ideas? They are models for the marketing of ideas 
and one does not even have to attend the Frankfurt Book Fair but can help 
oneself in any department store. One can, of course, view the Hamburg 
University Calendar as a mail order catalogue, but there is a great 
difference between the two: there is no monopoly of suppliers, and the 
prices are fairly low; a supermarket founded by citizens' initiatives would 
probably be far more expensive. 
To sum it all up: Feyerabend would seem not even to notice whose 
cause he is promoting, or has he started to notice this? The many 
qualifying footnotes, the constant self-corrections all give cause for hope. 
"Against Method" is something the reactionaries have always said, for 
they view the context of justification to be far too democratic. It is also 
something said by the anarchic wing of the Left who once sprayed on a 
wall in Frankfurt, "Everyone is talking about science - not us". Whoever 
wishes to live his life to the full in self-realization must hold everything 
which smacks of rationality to be "law and order" and petit-bourgeois 

446 
HERBERTSCHNADELBACH 
''ratio-fascism''. We can do without apostles of irrationalism in the anti-
Enlightenment period in which we now fmd ourselves; rather, we must 
mobilize all the reason we can muster in order to defend the little bit of 
freedom which we have. Let the others talk constantly of "traditions" -
namely of those that are to be seen through the window of a jeep. We, by 
contrast, wish to nurture and care for traditions and not simply because 
they are there but because it is reasonable to do so; and in so doing we 
wish in each and every case to ask ourselves and those concerned whether 
this is rational. We wish to despise neither reason nor science, and least of 
all reason in science. However bad it may be, howev( r little it will solve 
the problems of our lives, there is nothing better to be had. 
Philosophisches Seminar 
U niversitiit Hamburg 
Germany 
Translated by Jeremy Gaines 
BffiLIOGRAPHY 
Albert, H. 1968 Traktat iiber kritische Vernuft. Tubingen, p. 34ff. 
Bennett, Jonathan Cf, 1964. Rationality, An Essay towards Analysis Routledge, 
London. 
C.f. my essays, 1974. Wissenschaftsgeschichte und Historismus. Studia Leibnitiana 
special issue 6, pp. 62-72. 
Feyerabend, 1979. Erkenntnisjur jreie Menschen. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt, p. 214. 
Freiburg & Munich, 1974. Geschichtsphilosophie nach Hegel. Die Probleme des 
Historismus. 
Cf. Feyerabend, Paul K., 1978. Das Marchen Wissenschaft. Pladoyer fiJ.r einen 
Supermarkt der ldeen in Kursbuch, 53 Berlin. 
Hubner & Meene (eds), 1973. Natur und Geschichte. Hamburg. 
Knox, T.M. (1967). Cf Hegel's Philosophy of Right, Oxford, p. 6. 
Stegmuller Cf. W. 1973. Probleme und Resulate der Wissenschaftstheorie und 
Analytischen Philosophie. Berlin, Heidelberg & New York. p. 31Of. 
Smith, Norman Kemp, 1973. Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason Macmillan, 
London & Basingstoke. p. 178. 
Vemunft und Geschichte, 1987. Uber historische Aufklarung in my Vernunft und 
Geschichte. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt. pp. 23-46. 
von Schlechta, 1960. Unzeitgemiise Betrachtung (Untimely Meditations) in Werke ed. 

AGAINST FEYERABEND 
447 
Municy p. 209. 
-
(1976). Wider den Methodenzwang, Skizze einer anarchistischen Erkenntnis-
theorie. Suhrkamp, Frankfurt. 
-
(1978). Science in a Free Society. NLBNerso, London. p. 28. 
NOTES 
1 Cf. Hegel's Philosophy of Right, tr. T.M. Knox (Oxford, 1967) p. 6 
2 Wider den Methodenzwang, Skizze einer anarchistischen Erkenntnistheorie 
(Suhrkamp, Frankfurt, 1976) p. 411. Quotations from the German edition have been 
translated for this article and are not contained in the English editions. 
3 WMp.263 
4 Feyerabend, Erkenntnisfur jreie Menschen, (Suhrkamp, Frankfurt, 1979) p. 214 
5 ibid, p. 87 
6 Science in a Free Society (NLBNerso, London, 1978) p. 28 
7 EfM,p. 8f 
8 ibid, p. 62 
9 ibid, p. 87 (The reply to Hans Kung is not included in the English version) 
10 cf. loe cit 
11 WM,p.404 
12 AM,p.9 
\3 EfM, p. 25 
14 WM,p.239 
15 EfM,p. 89 
16 AM,p.13 
17 SFS, p. 16 
18 EfM,p.14 
19 ibid, p. 22 
20 SFS, p. 114 
21 ibid, p. 115 
22 EfM, p. 91 
23 Cf. Jonathan Bennett, Rationality, An Essay towards Analysis (Routledge, London, 
1964) 
24 Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason tr. Norman Kemp Smith (Macmillan, 
London & Basingstoke, 1973) p. 178 
2S Cf. for example, H. Albert, Traktat Uber Kritische Vernunft (Tubingen, 1968) 
p.34ff. 
26 EfM, p. 133 
27 SFS, p. 27 
28 Cf. W. Stegmuller, Probleme unll Resultate der Wissenscha/tstheorie und 
Analytischen Philosophie, Vol II (Berlin, Heidelberg & New York, 1973) p. 31Of. 
29 SFS,p. 28 
30 Cf. ibid, p. 27 
31 ibid, p. 16 
32 WM,p.l64 

448 
33 loe cit 
34 Cf. WM, p. 164 
35 Cf. SFS, p. 29f. 
36 AM,p.155 
37 AM,p.14 
38 ibid, p. 159 
HERBERTSCHNAoELBACH 
39 ibid, German ed. p. 34; similar remarks in AM, p. 2ff. 
40 Cf. ibid, p. 14ff. 
41 Cf. AM, p. 164 
42 Cf. ibid p. 231 
43 AM, p. 19 
44 ibid, p. 18 
45 Cf. my essays "Wissenschafsgeschichte und Historismus", in Studia Leibnitiana 
special issue 6, pp. 62-72; Geschichtsphilosophie nach Hegel. Die Probleme des 
Historismus (Freiburg & Munich, 1974) and "Uber historische Aufldarung" in my 
Vernunft und Geschichte (Suhrkamp, Frankfurt, 1987) pp. 23-4-6 
46 ibid, p. 12 
47 Nietzsche states: "We wish to serve history only to the extent that it serves life". 
Unzeitgemase Betrachtung (Untimely Meditations) in Werke ed. von Schlechta 
(Munich, 1960) p. 209 
48 Dilthey, Gesammelte Schriften VII, p. 359 
49 WM, p. 250f 
so loe cit. 
51 Nietzsche, Nachlas, Werke, III, p. 751 
52 EtM, p. 135 
53 SFS, p. 27 
54 WM, p. 393 German only 
55 WM, p. 403, German only 
56 WM, p. 394, German only 
57 WM, p. 402, German only 
58 WM, p. 12, German only 
59 WM, p. 26 German only 
60 ADA,p. 29 
61 Cf. Max Weber, "'Science' as a profession". 
62 Cf. WM, p. 406, German only 
63 Cf. SFS, p. 30 
64 Cf. ibid, p. 10 
65 WM, p. 84, German only 
66 WM, p. 410, German only 
67 In Hubner & Menne (eds) Natur und Geschichte (Hamburg, 1973) 
68 WM, p. 402, German only 
69 Cf. Paul K. Feyerabend, "Das Marchen Wissenschaft. Pladoyer fur einen Super-
markt der ldeen", in Kursbuch, 53 (Berlin, 1978) 

DWIGHT V AN DE VATE, JR. 
A New Slant on the Tower Experiment 
The ''Tower'' experiment (hereafter ''TXP'') is the centerpiece of Galileo's 
refutation of the Aristotelians, a point rightly stressed by Paul K. 
Feyerabend in Against Method. New infonnation recently discovered by 
Prof. F. Avantissimi of the Extension Division of the University of Pisa 
and myself significantly heightens our knowledge of the TXP and its 
interpretation by Galileo, and tends moreover to reinforce the 
methodological principles so eloquently defended by Feyerabend. In this 
brief note, I wish to communicate this new infonnation. 
Galileo's shortcomings as an experimentalist have long been well 
known. 1 We know that he customarily employed assistants for the actual 
conducting of his experiments, confming himself almost entirely to the 
interpretation and publicizing of the results.2 (Indeed, from Galileo's 
correspondence and other sources, we know who many of these assistants 
were, a fact which may be significant for the TXP, as we shall see.3 To 
my knowledge, however, no one has ever suggested that Galileo himself 
did not personally conduct the TXP. After all, Galileo explicitly declares 
that he was there and conducted the experiment himself, a declaration 
supported by a wealth of autobiographical details about his feelings, the 
weather, etc .. 4 
One may well imagine my surprise, then, when I discovered - quite by 
accident - in the Vatican Library a manuscriptS containing an eyewitness 
description of the TXP, a description which unambiguously states that 
Galileo himself was not present when the experiment was perfonned. The 
manuscript is dated July 11, 1643, i.e., the day after the experiment. 
Although the author is not named, internal evidence clearly indicates that 
it is a fragment of a report by his assistant to Galileo himself. (As we shall 
G. Munevar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 449-452. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
449 

450 
DWIGHT VAN DE VA TE, JR. 
see, internal evidence points to who this assistant might have been). 
The existence of this report is, of course, surprising. The contents of the 
report are more surprising still. The report clearly implies that the 
Aristotelian thesis the TXP was intended to refute was not the stationari-
ness of the earth, but rather - as legend once maintained - Aristotle's 
thesis of De Motu Animalium that heavy bodies fall faster than light 
ones.6 Thus the author reports dropping "a large weight" and "a small 
one", and reports that they landed "with a single sound", that is, simul-
taneously'? Galileo's interpretation of this result as a verification of 
Copernicanism would appear to have been an afterthought. 8 Even more 
surprising were the physical details and measurements described in the 
report. These prompted me to ask the aid of Prof. A vantissimi in Pisa. 
For the report speaks of a pair of "indentations" (incavi) at a distance of 
5.37 meters from the base of the TowerY Prof. A vantissimi was able to 
verify for me that those indentations are still visible, 337 years after the 
experiment, in the soft basalt of the piazza, and in precisely the position 
described in the 1643 report! But that is by no means the most remarkable 
feature of this remarkable discovery. 
The angle of deviation from the vertical of the Tower at present is 
15.47 degrees. This angle is known to have increased at a mean annual 
rate of approximately 15.6 ten-thousandths of a degree. Therefore the 
angle of deviation in 1643 would have been 9.6 degrees. Allowing for the 
lesser tilt of the Tower in 1643, objects dropped directly from the top 
should have landed approximately 3.21 meters from the base, especially if 
those objects were heavy enough to have created the indentations still 
visible today. (In other words, effects of the wind or manner of release 
may safely be neglected). More remarkable, though, is a fact heavily 
stressed by the author of the report himself: This deviation from the 
vertical is in a westward direction. to 
A simple calculation suffices to demonstrate what I am sure the reader 
will have already surmised, namely that the horizontal displacement is 
precisely what would be predicted on the hypothesis of the eastward 
rotation of the earth during the period of free fall.}} 
Assuming, now, the authenticity of our manuscript - an authenticity 
surely most strongly verified by the actual existence of physical marks 
described in the manuscript - Galileo's response beautifully accords with 
Feyerabend's conjectures about his manner of working. Feyerabend 
points out that experimental science depends upon an intimate concep-
tualizing of sensations which he calls "natural interpretations"}2 and that 

A NEW SLANT ON TIiE TOWER EXPERIMENT 
451 
Galileo recognized that while some of these are necessary for the 
possibility of experiment, the progress of science may demand that others 
be reinterpreted. Thus, Feyerabend argues, Galileo refutes the Aris-
totelians' objections to the motion of the earth by tacitly - even sneakily -
substituting other natural interpretations for those involved in the 
objections.13 Regarding objections to the hypothesis that the planets move 
around the sun, on the other hand, here Feyerabend argues that Galileo 
employs a second methodological principle, what we might call "The 
Principle of Ignoring Inconvenient Observations", in this case, observa-
tions of changes in planetary brightness.14 Our manuscript indicates, 
however, that in the case of the TXP, it was necessary for Galileo to 
employ the second of these principles before he could employ the ftrst. 
An additional layer of complication is thus added to Feyerabend's 
interpretation, but a consonant, indeed a reinforcing layer. 
One problem connected with our manuscript remains to be discussed. 
Who wrote it? Who was the assistant who communicated these poten-
tially damaging results to Galileo, results which surely must have strained 
Galileo's powers of methodological reinterpretation? Here we can only 
conjecture. The essentially graceless phrasing and tormented sentence 
structure of the manuscript clearly suggest - to my mind, at least - that 
the author's native language cannot have been Italian, but was probably 
German. Among the ethnically German assistants Galileo is known to 
have employed, the most intriguing in the rather mysterious Joachim-
Casimir Schmoller, a Swabian. He is known to have fallen under the 
suspicion of the Holy Offtce, therefore he must also have been known to 
Cardinal Bellarmine.15 We also know that he was almost certainly a 
Freemason. 16 There is therefore the bizarre but undeniable possibility that 
he may have been a double agent of some sort, a phenomenon not 
unknown in renaissance Italy. Here conjecture must cease, but it may be 
said that these conjectures support a thesis urged with great decency and 
verve by Feyerabend, namely, that all theories, includiRg scientiftc ones, 
are political acts, something one can ignore only with bad faith. 
Department of Philosophy 
The University of Tennessee 
Knoxville, Tennessee 
USA 

452 
DWIGHT V AN DE VA TE, JR. 
NOTES 
I See H. T. Pledge, Science since 1500 (London, 1939), p. 61. 
2 Nicolai Hartmann, Die Philosophie des Deutschen Idealismus (Berlin, 1960), 
writes, "Diese Tendenz erweist sich als iiberaus fruchtbar, und zwar schon rein in 
sich, unabhlingig von der Metaphysik des Absoluten" (p. 397). 
3 See the list in Giorgio de Santillana, The Crime ofGalileo (Chicago, 1955), p. l4On. 
4 Galileo, Galilei, Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems (Berkeley, 
1953), Appendix XI. 
5 ISBN 0-7167-0464-1. 
6 In Aristotle's own words, ..... theoria Ac kai ou theoria Ad ...... (De Mot. An., 
1640al). 
7 See note 11. 
8 ..... ne c'erano due, i quali da chi cammina con la testa abbassata non si potevano 
ignorare ne I'uno ne l'altro ...... 
9 Jacob Burckhardt,The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy (New York, 1954), p. 
425. 
10 "Sono Caduti verso I'ovest ...... 
11 Please refer to note 7. 
12 Against Method (London, 1975), p. 73. 
13 Ibid., p. 90 
14 Ibid., pp. 101 ff. 
15 J. Fuligatti, Vita del Cardinale Bel/armino (Rome, 1624), p. 32. 
16 I. Newton, The Correspondence of Isaac Newton, Vol. III (Cambridge, 1961), p. 
446. 

GROVER MAXWELL 
Feyerabend's Materialism 
Although it will criticize some of his views, especially those on mind and 
brain, it is a purpose of this essay to praise Paul Feyerabend, not to bury 
him - not, of course, that he is in need of my praise, or of my defense; if 
there is anyone who can take care of himself, it is Paul Feyerabend' s 
influence on my own modest philosophical development has been deep 
and pervasive. It was ftrst his former mentor, Karl Popper, and later, to an 
even greater and more revolutionary extent, Paul himself who confirmed 
my then incipient suspicions that most of the foundations of currently 
fashionable philosophy and even a great deal of the methodology to 
which many scientists pay enthusiastic lip service are based on simple 
mistakes - assumptions whose absurdity becomes obvious once attention 
is directed at them. 
What is still one of the best examples of his views on such matters can 
be found in Feyerabend's "Problems of Empiricism" (1965), and most of 
my references to his published work will be to its passages. I have 
recently reread this essay with, if anything, even greater admiration. A 
great many - perhaps a majority - of the more general epistemological 
and metaphysical positions that he develops there seem to me to be 
entirely correct and of absolutely fundamental importance. For example, 
Feyerabend there makes very clear the status of what I call the "zero-th 
dogma of empiricism", which is empiricism's fundamental assumption 
that we learn from (and mostly only from) experience (observation). 
Needless to say, some dogmas may be true, but what Feyerabend 
emphasizes is that, even if this one is true, it is contingently true and 
cannot be established by "philosophical analysis" or by any kind of a 
priori means. (This is related to but by no means identical with Russell's 
G. Munivar (ed.J, Beyond Reason, 453-463. 
© 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
453 

454 
GROVER MAXWELL 
[1948] insight that, if empiricism is true, it cannot be known to be true. 
See also my "Induction and Empiricism", [Maxwell 1975]). 
This leads to the first critical point - one that will be important for 
what is to follow: any adequate theory of meaning must also be contin-
gent. This applies with full force to Feyerabend's "pragmatic theory of 
observation" and the resulting "pragmatic aspect" of the meaning of 
observation sentences; for it will always be a contingent matter as to 
whether a given kind of interpretation of an observation sentence will, in 
general, lead to results that we deem desirable. I doubt that he would 
disagree with this, but it seems to me that he too often relapses, surely 
inadvertently, into the empiricist, "analytic" practice of treating meaning, 
interpretation, etc. in an a priori manner. Moreover, I share with great 
fervor his impatience with over-dependence on "linguistic analysis" and 
over-concem with meaning that so plague current philosophizing; but, 
again, I believe that Feyerabend frequently falls into the same traps, 
especially when he is defending materialism. 
Feyerabend insists, entirely correctly, that we must depend on scientific 
theory to tell us what is and what is not observable. It is therefore a 
contingent matter as to what kind of entities are referred to by the most 
appropriate kind of "observation language". He may quite properly reply 
that, in his view, a strong pragmatic component is involved in accepting 
or rejecting any scientific theory. This may (or may not) be true; I shall 
say more about it later, but the point now is that there does not appear to 
be a stronger pragmatic component in theories of observation than there 
is in scientific theories about any other subject. Therefore, there is no 
apparent reason why what is and what is not observable is not just as 
contingent an issue as is any other matter treated by scientific theories. I 
do not believe that any such reason exists. 
Setting the stage with this small caveat about Feyerabend's position, 
what I want to do next is to accept, for the sake of argument, the bulk of 
his general epistemological and metaphysical claims and proceed to 
examine his view of the mind-body problem. (As indicated earlier, I 
accept unconditionally a great many of his general theses anyway; 
however, later in the discussion, I shall indicate some disagreement with 
one or two of them). 
To begin with, it is not at all clear to me to what, if any, extent 
Feyerabend really is (or ever was) a materialist. It is true that his 
(relatively brief) writings on the subject have been rather notorious and 
quite influential; for example, they seem to be the prime inspiration for 

FEYERABEND'S MATERIALISM 
455 
such arch-materialists as Richard Rorty (see, e.g., Rorty 1965). However, 
it seems to me that what he seeks to establish in them is that (1) 
materialism cannot be refuted by a priori (e.g., purely linguistic) argu-
ments, (2) it cannot be refuted by alleged facts supposedly known by 
observation, (3) the same holds for alleged facts supposedly known "by 
acquaintance" (this is almost but not quite a corollary of (2), and (4) if 
and when certain kinds of scientific results are obtained in the future, it 
will be quite reasonable to hold that materialism is (contingently I) true. 
Perhaps (I am not at all sure about this) he does hint here and there that he 
also believes the following: (5) there is an excellent prospect that such 
kinds of scientific results will some day come to pass. Quite obviously, a 
person who holds theses (1) through (4) but who does not hold (5) could 
easily and consistently feel almost certain that materialism is false. In 
view of Paul's inveterate Puckishness, I wouldn't put his being such a 
person past him. I shall later discuss briefly, someone who defmitely, I 
believe, belongs in such a category, Sir Karl Popper. 
Next I want to grant, temporarily, theses (1) through (4) and then to 
examine what follows. Thesis (1) I grant categorically, and I shall not 
discuss it further. It is now necessary to summarize very briefly - I hope 
not too inaccurately - Feyerabend's views about (2), (3), and (4). Some 
anti-materialists argue as follows. We know from observation what matter 
(material objects, etc.). is like, and we know from observation what mind 
(mental events, e.g., sensations, etc.). is like; so, thereby, we know that 
matter and mind are very different and, thus, entirely distinct from each 
other. We see this in much the same way that we see that fire engines and 
bowling balls are different and distinct from each other. It goes without 
saying, the anti-materialist continues, that we know by observation that 
both matter and mind (or mental events) exist just as we know by 
observation that both bowling balls and fire engines exist. Feyerabend's 
thesis (2) counters this move by contending that what we think we 
observe and what is actually there may be two entirely different things. 
His main reason is based on difference between appearances and 
actuality; he says, " ... what appears to be different does not on that 
account need to be different" (his italics, Feyerabend 1965, p. 189). For 
example, the (e.g., visual) appearance of a table may be quite different 
from the actual (material) table. His discussion of this vital matter is, 
unfortunately, very brief (in contrast to his extremely detailed arguments 
concerning meanings and other linguistic matters). I think, however, that 
it is safe to say that the basis of his claims about the appearance -

456 
GROVER MAXWELL 
actuality (he does not use this word) difference is a causal account of 
perception. (This is confmned by a footnote [Feyerabend 1965, p. 258] 
endorsing Russell's " ... dictum that we always see our own brain"). So he 
answers this objection to materialism by saying that the apparent 
difference (that seems to be observationally certified) may very well turn 
out not to be an actual difference; despite apparent differences, a 
particular ostensible mental event may tum out to be nothing but some 
particular brain event. I say "ostensible mental event" because 
Feyerabend emphasizes that the materialist is well advised not to be an 
"identity theorist"; he should rather hold that there are no such things as 
mental events in the sense of "mental" used by anti-materialists, i.e., he 
should be an eliminative materialist. Just as the actual table does not have 
the properties of the apparent table - there really is no apparent table -
neither does the actual event have the "mental" characteristics attributed 
to it by the anti-materialist. There are only material events; mental events 
do not exist. 
The anti-materialist may reply, "it is all very well to talk of the 
appearance of a table but surely not of the 'appearance of a pain' or the 
'appearance of a red round patch in the visual field'. If such talk makes 
any sense at all, then, in such cases, surely the appearance and the 
actuality are one and the same thing. Therefore, if there is an appearance 
of a mental entity, then a genuine mental entity exists". I have, of course, 
labeled as 'thesis(3)' Feyerabend's response to this objection. Briefly, his 
response begins by saying that the objection is based on the claim that 
mental processes are things with which we are directly acquainted and of 
which, therefore, our knowledge is certain (something like logical 
certainty), it is given, and, therefore it is unalterable; if anything has to 
give way, it must be knowledge claims about the material, not about the 
mental. Feyerabend's argument against this is elaborate and lengthy. 
Since I am accepting it for the time being I shall only summarize it briefly 
now, but I must criticize it later. First of all, he assumes that the certainty, 
just mentioned, is a necessary condition for the existence of "knowledge 
by acquaintance"; he then argues that such certainty can be obtained only 
at a price so high that it leaves the notion of knowledge by acquaintance 
("the given", etc.) completely bankrupt. Consider the case of being in 
pain, he says. Ordinarily our concept of pain is quite rich in content, he 
claims. For example, from knowing that I am in pain I can infer that it 
affects me only so that I do not need to fear my dog or my furniture or 
that my neighbors are also suffering (from the same pain); I can also infer 

FEYERABENO'S MATERIALISM 
457 
that it can probably be relieved by drugs, etc., etc .. But, he goes on, this 
rich content must be removed entirely if the sentence "I am in pain" is to 
express "knowledge by acquaintance" (or an instance of "the given"); for 
it is then supposed to express only the "fact" that a sensation of pain is an 
item in my experience of the moment and nothing else. In fact, he claims, 
"I am in pain" is now so poor in content that it is virtually meaningless; 
but even if it does have a modicum of meaning and content left, we would 
be well advised not to use such a poverty-stricken concept of pain. We 
should rather use a language such that our statements are very rich in 
content. We see, then, he goes on, that the alleged "fact" that we know 
genuinely mental items, such as pain, directly as "given" - directly "by 
acquaintance" - and, therefore, that genuinely mental items exist - this 
alleged "fact" is a fact only relative to conventions that generate such an 
undesirable kind of language that they should not be used. Obviously, if 
such languages are avoided, we also avoid (alleged) "facts" known by 
acquaintance, etc., and the objection from acquaintance collapses. 
We come now to what I have called Feyerabend's "thesis (4)", which is 
the thesis that certain kinds of scientific results may be obtained in the 
future that will make (eliminative) materialism the most reasonable theory 
to accept. There is not space to begin even an abbreviated account of all 
of Feyerabend's complex, ingenious, and often brilliant and important 
arguments for this thesis. Fortunately, it is probable that they are familiar, 
at least in outline, to most readers. Nevertheless, I'll attempt the crudest 
sketch of a sketch: Suppose that, as neurophysiology, (behavioral) 
psychology, etc., become more advanced and more highly developed, it 
becomes apparent that terms referring to or purporting to refer to mental 
events (sensations, feelings, thoughts, etc.) are no longer needed - that we 
can give a perfectly good account of human beings, what they do, their 
relations with each other and with the environment, etc., without using 
such terms, so that scientific discourse refers only to material entities. 
Suppose that this applies not only to all observation reports but even to 
what will replace what we now call first person reports of, e.g., sensa-
tions; instead of saying, "I am in such-and-such kind of pain", the 
organism would make the noises, "C-fibers in region so-and-so of the 
brain of this organism are firing". Perhaps, such linguistic practice would 
become universal, and even children just learning to talk would report 
what we misguidedly now call "pains" using such sentences. In such an 
event, Feyerabend asks, would not (eliminative) materialism have won 
the day? Mental entities would then share the fate of demons and witches 

458 
GROVER MAXWELL 
(which many people used to be certain that they observed directly and 
also that they were even acquainted with them). The fact that, in such a 
scientifically advanced community, mentalistic language was no longer 
used would attest to the nonexistence of mental entities in the same way 
that our current failure to use demon-and-witchcraft l~guage attests to 
the nonexistence of demons and witches. 
Let us grant, for the time being, that the argument is sound and then 
inquire as to what it has established. Note first that the conclusion is 
conditional: if science develops in the manner indicated, then materialism 
will be established (or shown to be the most rational theory, or at least an 
extremely good bet, etc.) plus the assertion that it is possible that the 
antecedent of the conditional will some day be fulfilled. This, in turn, 
leads to the further conclusion that it is possible that materialism will 
someday be established (or ... etc.). 
Although it is true that many anti-materialists have denied this 
extremely modest conclusion, and therefo~, for this and other reasons, it 
is of considerable academic interest and of great theoretical importance to 
have it established, it is nevertheless so weak vis a vis materialism that I 
do not see how any but the most nervous and irresolute materialists could 
derive much aid and comfort from it. To have this point pressed home, 
one has only to notice that Feyerabend's results can be used to show with 
equal cogency that it is possible that scientific results will someday 
establish the most rampant and extreme kind of mentalism. For it is 
possible that the neurosciences (including neuropsychology and 
psychophysiology), psychology, and also physics and chemistry, etc., will 
develop and advance in such a manner that terms referring to or purport-
ing to refer to material entities are no longer needed - we may be able to 
give a perfectly good account not only of human beings but also of 
everything in the province of physics, chemistry, etc., without using such 
terms. For example, very crudely put, items that we now call tables and 
molecules will turn out to be groups of causally inter-related mental (or 
proto-mental) events. (This by no means would have to be idealism or 
phenomenalism, etc.; the "external world" would still have robust, 
independent existence. It's just that we would have discovered that it is 
basically mental [or proto-mental] in nature. The "dematerialization of 
matter" would be complete). 
"But surely", it may be objected, "such a development of scientific 
inquiry is so unlikely that we must dismiss it as pure fantasy. Any other 
attitude about the matter would be irrational and absurd". This may be 

FEYERABEND'S MATERIALISM 
459 
true. I have not, of course, presented any arguments for, nor in any way 
tried to make plausible, a prediction that science will "advance" in such a 
fashion. But where can one find arguments that science will take the 
opposite course and eliminate all mental discourse? I said earlier that 
perhaps Peyerabend gives a hint here and there that he believes plausible 
arguments to that effect could be given, but I am not sure about even this. 
If there are any such arguments by genuine, practicing (eliminative) 
materialists, I would appreciate having my attention called to them. 
Perhaps eliminative materialists have been too busy baiting mentalists and 
defending their views against real and imagined attacks to realize that 
feasible positive arguments for their position must be offered before it can 
be taken very seriously. (Popper has made a similar point, in a much more 
colorful manner, against what he calls "promissory materialism" [in 
Popper and Eccles 1977, pp. 96-98]). 
Or perhaps this is just another manifestation of what years of attending 
department meetings has convinced me is an occupational disease of 
philosophers. A more common manifestation of this disease is as follows. 
Someone, for some unfathomable reason, happens to think of a remotely 
possible effect of some proposed course of action; there then follow hours 
of agonized debate whether this possibility should count heavily in favor 
of (or, perhaps, heavily against) taking the action - and all of this without 
anyone raising the question whether the (actual contingent) probability of 
the action's producing such an effect is appreciably greater than zero. 
Anyway, it seems to me a delightful irony even Paul (indeed, especially 
Paul) himself should appreciate that the patron saint of so many elimina-
tive materialists has provided as heavy ammunition for radical mentalism 
(e.g., monistic panpsychism) as he has for their own position. (I say 
especially Paul, for I am sure that he does not want to be anyone's patron 
saint). 
In the remainder of this paper, I shall take back, in part, my temporary 
concession of Peyerabend's thesis (3). That is, I shall argue that there is 
such a thing as knowledge by acquaintance, though it is by no means 
exactly as Peyerabend paints it. Then, using this and other considerations, 
I shall adumbrate briefly some arguments to the effect that eliminative 
materialism is very probably false and proceed to present in barest outline 
a version of the mind-brain identify theory that I have called non-
materialist physicalism. 
It is well known that the importance of knowledge by acquaintance has 
been emphasized by Russell. That he puts it to use mainly in developing a 

460 
GROVER MAXWEll.. 
theory of meaning rather than a theory of confirmation usually has not 
been noticed. This is because Russell's later technical philosophy has, 
unfortunately, been almost entirely ignored or else, it would seem, 
willfully misinterpreted. This in tum, is at least partly because it is critical 
of linguistic analysis as an exclusive mode of philosophizing and it also 
anticipates Feyerabend, myself, and others by calling attention to some of 
the fundamental defects of contemporary empiricism. 
I shall use Russell's views about acquaintance as a starting point from 
which to criticize Feyerabend's position about the matter. Feyerabend 
assumes that any advocate of knowledge by acquaintance has to assume 
that such knowledge is certain, not only psychologically certain but, as he 
puts it, "something like logically certain". However, on Russell's view, 
which I believe to be at least a good beginning, knowledge by acquain-
tance is not always even psychologically certain, and, of course, it is 
never logically certain - whatever this could mean. (E.g., when the dentist 
gives us massive shots of novocaine before he pulls aching teeth, at fIrst 
we are (psychologically) certain that we still feel the pain, presently there 
will be a brief period during which we are pretty sure that we still feel it, 
then a period during which we are not sure whether we feel it or not, etc., 
and fInally we will become psychologically certain that we no longer feel 
it). It is logically possible that there could be intelligent creatures - human 
beings even - that are so constituted that they are never absolutely certain 
psychologically about their knowledge by acquaintance. Therefore it is 
just a contingent fact, if it is a fact, as it seems to be, that we are not such 
creatures. Feyerabend then is, I think, just outright mistaken about 
knowledge by acquaintance and certainty, and this mistake leads him to 
set up a straw man and attempt its demolition, believing that in so doing 
he demolishes knowledge by acquaintance. 
I do not believe that he succeeds even in demolishing the straw man. 
To understand this, let us suppose that the statement "There is now a 
round bright red patch in the central part of my visual fIeld" has no 
important, 
useful 
or 
non-trivial 
consequences 
(except 
itself). 
Feyerabend's position about such statements leaves me completely 
dumbfounded; he holds that they have no content and are, therefore, 
meaningless - or that if they are not meaningless they ought to be; i.e., he 
holds that we would be very naughty to use a language that employed 
such statements so interpreted. 
I have not been able even to speculate very plausibly about why he 
feels this way; although two possibilities have occurred to me. The fIrst is 

FEYERABEND'S MATERIALISM 
461 
that from the fact that such a statement, by itself, yields no non-trivial 
inferences, Feyerabend infers, tacitly, and I trust unconsciously, that it 
can play no part in nontrivial inferences under any circumstances. If this 
were true, then I would agree that such statements were not very useful or 
important. But, of course, from the statement about the red patch plus the 
"lawlike" statement, "Usually when I see such a patch, then, if I extend 
my hand, I'll feel something solid", I can infer that if I extend my hand 
now I'll probably feel something solid. The other possibility is that he 
takes his phrase, 'something like logical certainty' too seriously and 
reasons that, since acquaintance statements must be something like 
logically certain, then, like actually logically certain statements, they can 
have no (contingent) content. Perhaps this would indeed demolish a straw 
man, but it would be an even more outlandish straw man than the one 
mentioned earlier; and its demise would leave knowledge by acquaintance 
entirely unscathed, for we have seen that such knowledge does not even 
require psychological, much less logical, certainty. 
Starting, then, with Russell's work on acquaintance and other relevant 
matters (see, e.g., Russell, 1948), we can develop a detailed, contingent 
theory of meaning and reference - (see, e.g., Maxwell 1970 and 1978)-
one indeed that is not only consistent with but which can be used, even, to 
help implement most of Feyerabend's important epistemological and 
metaphysical discoveries. Continuing, we can develop a theory that uses 
contemporary scientific knowledge to establish the (contingent I) falsity of 
naive realism and which incorporates what I have called, somewhat 
misleadingly I fear, structural realism. According to it, ~ost all of our 
knowledge of qualitative, intrinsic properties is knowledge by acquain-
tance. The bulk of the rest of our knowledge, which is our knowledge of 
the "external world", is knowledge about structure, where structure is the 
structure (but not the content) of the spatio-temporal-causal network. This 
network comprises the entire universe, and, the theory continues, some of 
the events in it, specifically some of the events in that portion of the 
network that we call the brain just are the events that comprise our 
experience - in all of its intrinsic, qUalitative, genuinely mentalistic 
richness. 
I propose to define a physical event as an event that is in the spatio-
temporal-causal network. I hold then, that.all events are physical events, 
and, contrary to Paul's admonition (Feyerabend 1965, pp. 185-186), that 
some physical events are (genuinely) mental events. (Obviously I am 
employing an event ontology, as opposed to a substance ontology). For a 

462 
GROVER MAXWELL 
more detailed account of the theory adumbrated in this painfully ab-
breviated sketch, see Russell, op. cit. and Maxwell 1976 and 1978. 
This is, of course, a version of the mind-brain identity theory; some 
might even call it a version of materialism, but I would object to this 
because most materialists, past and present, have had at least something 
of the eliminative materialist in them. I have, therefore, called it "non-
materialist physicalism". What's in a name? Nothing, as long as it doesn't 
mislead us. 
I have given this almost hopelessly inadequate summary of my own 
view in order to follow Feyerabend' s dictum and criticize materialism by 
advancing an alternative theory, a theory that, I believe, has been tested 
and confirmed to a great extent independently of this purpose. 
Now in addition to evidential tests, the confmnation of any theory 
always involves an estimate of its prior probability (see, e.g., Maxwell, 
1975). So I freely admit that I have done what everyone must do and have 
used my own estimates of prior probabilities in arriving at my preference 
for non-materialist physicalism over eliminative materialism. But I also 
freely admit that Feyerabend is right: it is possible science will develop in 
such a fashion that I will admit that materialism is better confmned and is 
the more preferable theory even while my estimate of its prior probability 
remains lower than that for non-materialist physicalism. However, I 
believe that the probability that this will happen, although non-zero, is too 
small to cause much of a fuss. I also admit the possibility that pigs will 
develop wings and start dropping bombs on us, but I believe that the 
probability of this is such that I am not willing to pay the Pentagon one 
penny of tax money to form an anti-pig defense squadron. 
I wish I could have found more in Feyerabend' s philosophy of mind 
with which to disagree, for I know how he loves a good fight; and I wish 
there were space to mention a couple of relatively minor matters about 
which I think there is some disagreement. Perhaps some of the other 
contributors to this volume will be better able to oblige him. 
University of Minnesota 
Minnesota 
USA 

FEYERABEND'S MATERIALISM 
463 
BffiLIOGRAPHY 
Feyerabend, Paul K., 1965, "Problems of Empiricism", in R. colodny, ed., Beyond the 
Edge of Certainty: Vol. 2 of the University of Pittsburgh Series in the Philosophy 
of Science, Englewood Cliffs (NJ): Prentice-Hall. 
Maxwell, Grover, 1970, "Structural Realism and the Meaning of Theoretical Terms", 
in M. Radner and S. Winokur, eds., Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of 
Science, Vol. IV, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Maxwell, Grover, 1975, "Induction and Empiricism: A Bayesian Frequentist 
Alternative", in G. Maxwell and Robert M. Anderson, Jr., eds. Minnesota Studies 
in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. VI, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Maxwell, Grover, 1976, "Scientific Results and the Mind-Brain Issue", in G. Globus, 
et aI., eds, Consciousness and the Brain, New York: Plenum Press. 
Maxwell, Grover, 1978, "Rigid Designators and Mind-Brain Identity", in C. Wade 
Savage, ed., Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. IX, Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press. S.36~3. 
Rorty, R., 1965, "Mind-Body Identity, Privacy, and Categories", Review of 
Metaphysics, 19, pp. 24-54. 
Russell, Bertrand, 1948, Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits, New York: Simon 
and Schuster. 

JOSEPH MARGOLIS 
Scientific Methods and Peyerabend' s 
Advocacy of Anarchism 
Paul Feyerabend has written a great deal by this time; and, judging at 
least from the spirited (to say the least) "Conversations with IDiterates" 
(that is, responses to his reviewers and discussants),1 Feyerabend rightly 
warns would-be commentators to be clear about what he's actually said 
and to expect no quarter if they are not. At the risk, therefore, of incurring 
a deserved barb (or of being simply ignored), I should like to offer a very 
brief overview of his gradually emerging position. It is this: If, as seems 
plain, the practice of science itself and of the theory of how science does 
practice has a contingent history influenced by, and influencing, other 
similarly changing practices within a common society, then there is no 
antecedent reason for supposing that any canon of inquiry or confirmation 
or the like or any theory of the underlying structure of reality can be 
expected to have captured once and for all, or progressively or approxima-
tively, the best such canon or theory; and, in the absence of any such 
assurance, (epistemological) anarchism is actually the most productive 
policy for science - or is at least a beneficial antidote for "Methodism". 
This seems to be the conceptual engine of a good deal of Feyerabend' s 
work - in particular, the relatively recent Against Method,2 Science in a 
Free Society, and "On the Critique of Scientific Reason".3 The dialectical 
thesis that makes this general position quarrelsome is apparently that, at 
any given moment or stage in the history of science, any would-be canon 
or theory cannot fail to be a normative idealization of some sort based as 
much on the inevitable ignorance of how science will prove to be 
productive in the future, and of how the apparent regularities of sectors of 
observed nature will fit with what will be taken as observed in the future, 
as it is on the putative discoveries of an accumulating science. It is, in this 
G. Munevar (ed.). Beyond Reason. 465-486. 
@ 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
465 

466 
JOSEPH MARGOLIS 
sense, that Feyerabend presents himself as the opponent of rationalism, 
idealism, realism, pragmatism, naturalism, instrumentalism, positivism, 
falsificationism, conventionalism, empiricism, Marxism, liberalism, and 
the rest. They are all, apparently, tarred with the same brush: confusing 
plausible but quite provisional idealizations of method and theory (or 
worse), generated during particular phases of the development of science, 
with the discovery of the method or theory that will unlock the further 
mysteries of nature. The damage such overweening confidence produces 
(possibly, such sin, if the theological characterization will not seem either 
frivolous or sneering) is such that only a "free society" and anarchism (or 
"dadaism", as Feyerabend seems to prefer) can hope to correct or 
minimize its evil effect. 
The question that presents itself, however, is, precisely, that of the 
nature of Feyerabend's advocacy of anarchism. One can certainly 
appreciate the charm, the risk, the humor, the nice disrespect, in fact the 
positive advantage of tolerating anarchism in science (and elsewhere) as a 
kind of somewhat domesticated adjunct to the continually tested idealized 
canons and theories that the practice of science believes it best to sustain. 
But Feyerabend is quite frank about his own radical advocacy, and it is 
not so much a question of resenting his ridicule of particular canons and 
theories (though there is plenty of evidence that this is resented) as it is a 
question of the theoretical and methodological import of his own thesis. 
And that, frankly, is difficult to resolve entirely in his favor. 
In the interest of accuracy and fair play, let me cite Feyerabend citing 
Feyerabend about his "thesis": 
Many reviewers have regarded me as an idealist in the sense [that the idealist holds it 
to be rational "to do certain things - come what may"] with the proviso that I try to 
replace familiar rules and standards by more "revolutionary" rules such as prolifera-
tion and counterinduction and almost everyone has ascribed to me a "methodology" 
with "anything goes" as its one "basic principle". But on page 32 of AM [Against 
Method] I say quite explicitly that "my intention is not to replace one set of general 
rules by another such set: my intention is, rather, to convince the reader that all 
methodologies, even the most obvious ones, have their limits" or, to express it in terms 
just explained my intention is to show that idealism, whether of the simple or of the 
context-dependent kind, is the wrong solution for the problems of scientific 
rationality. These problems are not solved by a change of standards but by taking a 
different view of rationality altogether. (p. 32) 
Feyerabend is opposed to any methodology that regards any rules and 
standards as "fmal and unchangeable"; but he is also opposed to any 

FEYERABENO'S ADVOCACY OF ANARCHISM 
467 
methodology that simply concedes "the possibility of discussion and 
change". He agrees with naive anarchism that "both absolute rules and 
context dependent rules have their limits", but opposes its inference "that 
all rules and standards are worthless and should be given up" (p. 32). He 
insists, on the contrary, that he has always emphasized how particular 
procedures have "aided" scientists or enabled them to "succeed". He 
favors a contextual account of rules, but he explicitly says that "the 
contextual rules are not to replace the absolute rules, they are to 
supplement them". The entire argument is said to depend on "a new 
relation between rules and practices" (p. 32), which is the important 
thing, more important for instance than the content of any particular rule. 
The point of his entire venture - if I may put it in a line - is that 
methodology, taken in the canonical sense, presupposes that theorizing 
about a quite contingently encountered sector of the real world (as in 
describing, explaining, predicting) is actually rationally sampling putative 
specimen portions of that world; so that, by a testably lucky hit, or 
perhaps because of an assumed harmony between the habits of mind of an 
inquirer and the "habits" or regularities of the world inquired into (a la 
Peirce), or in some such way, we may count on fashioning methods of 
some kind by the persistent application of which science progresses -
reliably and rationally. Feyerabend's view is that that is utterly impos-
sible. The somewhat theological reading of this thesis is rather difficult to 
resist: we remain in utter ignorance at every point in our apparent 
scientific enlightenment, in spite of the fact that, as with Galileo, 
discoveries are genuinely made.4 We are, then, methodologically or 
rationally ignorant, so to say, though we need not, for that reason, be 
"instinctually" or actually ineffective as well. In fact, anarchism offers the 
only "lighthearted" prospect of scientific gain in the permanent darkness 
of our existential situation: 
We don't know the region, we cannot say what will work in it. If we are really 
interested then we must either enter the region, or start making conjectures about it. 
Standards are intellectual measuring instruments; they give us readings not of 
temperature, or of weight, but of the properties of complex sections of the historical 
process. Are we supposed to know them even before these sections have been 
presented in detail? Or is it assumed that history, and especially the history of ideas is 
more uniform than the material part of the universe? That man is more limited than 
the rest of nature? (p. 37) 
This explains, for instance, why it is false "that non-contradiction is a 

468 
JOSEPH MARGOLIS 
necessary condition of research" (p. 36), why it is the case that contradic-
tion may be scientifically productive. For one thing, contradictory 
theories may be and have been scientifically fruitful. For another, there is 
no way to insure a fruitful method of science that will avoid contradiction. 
And finally, the "practical logic" of scientific inquiry enjoys "rules of 
derivation" that preclude its being the case that "contradictions produce 
everything" (p. 37, n20).5 
But here, precisely, Feyerabend's idiom is somewhat too sanguine; for, 
the alleged "practical logic" is itself really the ad hoc genius of men like 
Einstein or Bohr or Mach or Galileo or Boltzmann or Heisenberg 
(sometimes, as with Einstein, reflexively described as the work of an 
"unscrupulous opportunist") apt "to get results amidst chaos and in-
coherence"; such men simply sense their way by "remov[ing] a particular 
difficulty" without ever turning their tricks "into an organon of research" 
- which would be impossible anyway (p. 199). They cannot be expected 
to formulate - or to have formulated - an explicit and valid canon guiding 
their own work. What seems fair to say, however, is that, at least as an 
article of rational piety (or pious rationality), innovative minds like 
Einstein anticipate, in the very midst of being unable to demonstrate the 
real order of apparent chaos, that, in time, a fully coherent account of the 
"diverse and conflicting ingredients" of the scientist's initially "given" 
(historically dominant) materials will be possible (p. 199). This means 
that, at no particular time, will a complete and coherent account actually 
obtain. If I understand this correctly, Feyerabend is quite right in insisting 
that there is no algorithm for insuring a fruitful science, no canon or 
decision procedure for scientific discovery; but he also seems to admit -
the full import of which he does not quite address directly - that, at least 
retrospectively and diachronically (though always in the theological 
light), coherence constraints do apply. 
The reason for pressing these distinctions in this way is simply to 
support the view that it is not quite true that Feyerabend opposes all 
methodologies (favoring scientific anarchism instead) as it is that he 
interprets all methodologies anarchistically. This is the point of insisting 
(i) that "all methodologies, even the most obvious ones, have their 
limits", in the context (ii) in which what is meant is that, in principle, such 
limits cannot be completely formulated or corrected. Under those 
circumstances, as Feyerabend rather playfully insists (or, annoyingly -
depending on your temperament), "rational discourse" (adherence to the 
polite canons of the profession) "is only one way of presenting and 

FEYERABEND'S ADVOCACY OF ANARCHISM 
469 
examining an issue and by no means the best" (p. 184); to avoid that style 
of argument, and the habit of mind that goes with it, is by no means to 
give up reason. Hence, the autobiographical reflections on the choice of a 
dedicatory line to Imre Lakatos, in Against Method: to be a "rationalist" at 
the expense of "anarchism" is to be ultimately "irrational"; since Lakatos 
was his closest and dearest antagonist, Feyerabend suggests that he was 
an "anarchist in disguise" (p. 185). Again, the point - which Feyerabend 
obviously insists on - is simply that anarchism is not an outlandish 
methodology opposed to received methodologies: it is a higher comment 
(a comment in the theology of science, so to say) about every conceivable 
methodology. But that really means, in spite of all he appears to say to the 
contrary, that, once we've got the anarchistic message right, it's all right 
to be a rationalist (as, apparently Lakatos suspected he was). Feyerabend 
is not a rationalist in the (wicked) sense that rationalism defies the 
existential validity of anarchism; he could be a rationalist, in the sense 
that, once one resists the satanic impulse with due fear and trembling, it's 
all right to consider which provisional rules of coherence promise, 
through the real history of science, to provide the best results. Those 
"rules", whatever they are, will, of necessity, tolerate the scientist's 
tolerance of contradiction and the like in any relevantly small span of 
working time. They will tolerate it anarchistically, existentially, theologi-
cally, practically; they will not, of course, build it into the rules them-
selves. In effect, science permits us - even enables us - to be of good 
cheer. 
But in this sense, whether Lakatos was right or not in advocating his 
particular meta-methodology, there is no point in going on with the 
theological (the anarchistic) disclaimer if one wants to understand the 
achievement of science. The anarchistic truth does not clarify how science 
proceeds successfully, as the historical record confirms it does; it only 
enables us to marvel at the success of any human undertaking. The 
anarchistic position is not an option as far as the theory of science is 
(narrowly) concerned: it is an option regarding our rightly perceiving the 
finitude of man - qua scientist among the other quas. The upshot is that, 
in a fair sense, Feyerabend abandons the question of method, though he 
does not abandon the talents of science. On the contrary, he celebrates 
them. For, if he had returned to the question of method, once having 
reconciled the search for method and the avoidance of pride, he would 
have had to consider the validity of (say) Lakatos's theory of research 
programs dialectically, at the same level of discourse - without, that is, 

470 
JOSEPH MARGOLIS 
resorting to our appreciation of God's point of view. In effect, what this 
means, quite simply (also, quite extraordinarily), is that every 
methodological option that Feyerabend dismisses, exposes, ridicules is 
entitled to another inning just as long as it can be brought into line with 
the anarchistic dictum (say, even Popper's view of method). In fact, the 
usual puzzlement about inductive reasoning is probably that of understand-
ing what sort of rigor and rules are possible for inductive arguments, that 
are clearly not deductive in nature. Surely, that is itself the promising 
beginning of a methodology that Feyerabend could have favored. His 
refusal to proceed in that way is simply a testimonial to his grasp of the 
theological danger inherent in science and the theory of science. And so, 
he plays the spoiler of all methodologies. It is a Fool's game, though not a 
foolish game. 
I realize, of course, that to speak in this way is to court Feyerabend' s 
spleen or amusement or both. He is likely to say that he really means to 
do away with method. But he does say (and may be fairly construed as 
meaning it) that, if "anything goes", then method and critical reason go as 
well; and he does say that scientific success is not impossible and that 
there is a point to various kinds of rules. If he does not really mean this, 
then, if he admits effective scientific successes (Galileo's for instance), 
then, contrary to what he explicitly says, he must mean to treat anarchism 
as an outre kind of methodology. This is clearly not what he wants. On 
the other hand, there can be no doubt that he does criticize Lakatos, for 
instance, in a detailed and responsive way, with respect to the methodol-
ogy of research programs. What he shows, quite incisively, are inherent 
difficulties in Lakatos's methodology. The question remains, What is the 
bearing of these exposes on the rational pursuit of methodology itself? 
Now, on the constructive side, anarchism might be taken to capture the 
important insight that the problem of a scientific methodology is not an 
internal question (in Camap's sense) but an external one. It is not an 
empirical question but a transcendental one. This, frankly, is not an 
accurate way of posing the contrast. A transcendental question (more 
correctly characterized) is a question regarding the conceptual conditions 
under which some putatively rational practice is possible. It is a question 
that is raised within the empirical, historically shifting context in which 
the practice obtains; but it is raised in the spirit of speculating 
(reflexively) about what constraints external to our experience of that 
practice make it possible. In this sense, transcendental arguments are a 
special breed of empirical argument.6 They are arguments about neces-

FEYERABEND'S ADVOCACY OF ANARCHISM 
471 
sary conditions, but they are (reflexively recognized to be) contingent on 
the historical development of philosophical imagination. Allegedly 
necessary conditions, therefore, are inevitably relativized to some present 
stage of understanding - and are known to be. In this sense, speculating 
about the methodology of science need not breach the truth of anarchism, 
at the same time it affords determinate theories about the structure of 
method and the structure of reality. In fact, this way of viewing matters 
completely insures the pertinence of Feyerabend's favorite game of 
challenging the superiority of science.1 It (merely) does not, however, 
disallow the problems of the philosophy of science. In fact, the very 
question, "What is so great about science?" (p. 73), entails that, in some 
sense comparable to the sense in which the methodology of science may 
be fruitfully characterized, the conditions of coherent contest (I won't say 
argument or debate) between science and its competitors (Hopi cosmol-
ogy, for example) may be articulated - under the same transcendental 
constraints that anarchism represents vis-a-vis the methodology of 
science. 
There is, in Feyerabend's account, it should be said, an adjunctive basis 
for favoring anarchism, in addition to the transcendental function. It is not 
perhaps as important a matter as the other - more a question of conceptual 
prudence than of theoretical adequacy - but it should be mentioned. It is 
relevant, of course, to our understanding of the ignorance on which 
science (and its competitors) essentially depends. If we explore "the very 
nature of knowledge", Feyerabend holds, we should find that "every piece 
of knowledge contains valuable ingredients side by side with ideas that 
prevent the discovery of new things. Such ideas are not simply errors. 
They are necessary for research: progress in one direction cannot be 
achieved without blocking progress in another. But research in that 
'other' direction may reveal that the 'progress' achieved so far is but a 
chimera" (p. 89). Hence, there is an interference phenomenon inherent in 
science that both insures the ineliminability of a kind of ignorance that 
itself precludes the (theological) presumption of progress and, once 
discovered, ought (reasonably) to lead to the preference of a "free 
society". The similarity of Marxian-like versions of the sociology of 
knowledge is at least suggestive.8 That similarity has, incidentally, the 
advantage of providing a sense in which Feyerabend's notion is not really 
the equivalent (as Lakatos seems to hold)9 of a Popperian psychological 
thesis, the "catalytic" (so-called "external") theory that "proliferation of 

472 
JOSEPH MARGOUS 
rival theories may - externally - speed up internal Popperian falsifica-
tion". 
Nevertheless, the philosophical import of the political issue of a free 
society (in Peyerabend's sense) again requires a transcendental review of 
alternative practices and traditions. Even the common sense view that 
laymen can appraise the achievements of science and the adequacy of its 
alleged methods 10 presupposes some relative orderliness and coherence 
in a method of review (subject always to the conditions of finitude and the 
transcendental constraints of the anarchistic thesis). But the denial of a 
method, of a form of rationality or the like, the insistence on the 
piecemeal nature of such human review, is neither consistent with 
Peyerabend's own admission of relatively (impressively) stable dis-
coveries within the tradition of science nor required by the anarchistic 
thesis itself, nor, indeed, beyond the need for relevant articulation. Only a 
failure to grasp the nature of transcendental arguments could construe 
such an insistence as a matter of principle (somehow). And then, it would 
appear that anarchism was a rival methodology. What, otherwise, could 
we possibly make of the claim that "non-scientific ideologies, practices, 
theories, traditions can become powerful rivals and can reveal major 
shortcomings of science if only they are given a fair chance to compete" 
(p.103)1 
Probably, the principal focus of any useful appraisal of Peyerabend's 
account should rest on a comparison of his views with those of Lakatos. 
Certainly, Lakatos's papers represent one of the most detailed and most 
comprehensive surveys of the limitations of the dominant proposals 
regarding the methodology of science (in particular, inductivism, 
conventionalism, and falsificationism) joined, at the same time, with a 
sanguine countertheory of the progressive nature of scientific method (his 
own "methodology of scientific research programs"ll). A great deal of 
Peyerabend's own work both parallels the destructive aspect of Lakatos's 
and is turned, ultimately, against Lakatos's own constructive proposals. 
Here, it may well be that both Lakatos and Peyerabend overstate their 
respective claims. The central issue affecting the fortunes of both is quite 
straightforward. If it is indeed the case, as both agree, that "We don't 
know the region, we cannot say what will work in it", then the method of 
science cannot possibly be captured by any fixed, determinate rule of the 
sort favored by inductivism or Popperian falsificationism. Any would-be 
method must embody an essential respect for contingencies bearing on (i) 
our ignorance of the relationship between genuine discovery and the rest 

FEYERABEND'S ADVOCACY OF ANARCHISM 
473 
of what is unknown of the natural world, and (ii) the provisional, but no 
more than provisional, marks of promise of the strategies of inquiry that 
we favor. Lakatos's method is intended to accommodate just these 
constraints; it is radically different from the methodologies condemned, in 
making provision internally for the actual history of science. Since, on 
Feyerabend's view, to do that is, effectively, to undermine all 
methodologies, Lakatos's own apparent method is really an "anarchism in 
disguise".12 But Lakatos believes that a rational method is possible 
consistent with the constraints informing anarchism; and Feyerabend 
believes that the admission of anarchism precludes any and all such 
methods. Feyerabend, however, understands, by "method", rules and 
policies of research incompatible with the anarchistic insight; and Lakatos 
tends to present his own method in an idiom that suggests greater fixity 
than he himself thinks possible. 
Two remarks of Feyerabend' s expose the exaggeration of both sides -
and point, helpfully (though, of course, not intentionally), in the direction 
of a possible resolution of the issue of method: 
hnre Lakatos ... wants science and, indeed, the whole of intellectual life to confonn to 
certain fIxed standards. he wants it to be "rational". (p. 196) 
What [the epistemological anarchist] does deny is that he can give reasons ... 
which agree with the standards of some rationality theory. so that he is actually acting 
in accordance with standards. This is the point at issue and not what he does or does 
not do. (p. 222) 
If to subscribe to a rational method is to subscribe to "fixed standards" of 
the determinate sort instanced at least sometimes by inductivism and 
falsificationism, then, it is quite true, anarchism precludes the possibility 
of an effective rational method. But Lakatos, for one, is both opposed to 
methodologies of those sorts and convinced of the validity of the 
constraints that Feyerabend collects under the notion of anarchism; and 
yet, at the same time, he advances his own conception of the method of 
science as a rationally defensible one. Feyerabend may have detected a 
certain inflexibility and stubbornness in Lakatos's defense of his own 
view, but it does seem more than difficult to treat his proposal as 
ultimately irrational because it posits a method in the face of the anarchis-
tic thesis. As a matter of fact, even inductivism and falsificationism need 
not be - even if characteristically, in the hands of their principal advo-
cates, they actually are - irrationally defended. They may be inadequate, 
but they may involve the mistakes of fully rational theorists. For, both 

474 
JOSEPH MARGOUS 
inductivism and falsificationism may be reconciled with our ignorance of 
the relationship between valid discovery and the rest of unknown nature 
and with our risking our reliance on a strategy of inquirY that we cannot, 
in the nature of things, be sure will succeed. The rationality of a putative 
method of science, therefore, is marked, precisely, by the reasonableness 
of subscribing to certain strategies of inquiry in the face of these con-
straints. The fact that Lakatos is explicitly at pains to formulate his 
account in just that way suggests either a misunderstanding or a certain 
disingenuousnes on Feyerabend' s part. 
I admit that the issue is still rather abstractly broached - but that may 
prove an economy. It does seem, if the anarchistic constraints obtain, that 
there is no viable alternative to characterizing the method (or methods) of 
science as rational policies or programs except in terms of the kind of 
rationality that may be ascribed to partisans, whose interests require some 
choice of coherent and flexible strategy in the absence of ever discovering 
which choice is the correct one once and for all. In this sense, no rational 
theorist of scientific method (even Lakatos's and Feyerabend's mortal 
opponents) can fairly be thought to have ignored the fact that their own 
proposals were not immune to counterevidence. They may not have 
appreciated the force of certain counterconsiderations. Lakatos rejects 
them because of their faults; Feyerabend somehow believes that they 
betray their irrationality as well (and, typically but much less importantly, 
their illiteracy and incompetence). Very simply put, the point is that the 
defending reasons offered in behalf of a theory of the method of science 
are not reasons thought to identify the one and only true method but only 
a reasonable or apt or effective - or more reasonable or more apt or more 
effective - method than alternative options provide. The evidence of the 
actual historical record will show whether or not it is true that such 
commitments are justified. But how could such a modest undertaking 
possibly be irrational - that is, inherently irrational? And why should 
Feyerabend have refused his opponents such a conception of their efforts? 
We are partisans, then, partisans of particular methods of scientific 
inquiry (as we are in moral and political matters as well 13), simply 
because: (a) there is, in principle, no way to make the requisite dis-
coveries that could preclude partisan preferences; and (b) the interests that 
are served are so fundamental to human existence that we are (rationally!) 
obliged to make commitments and choices regarding them within severe 
temporal and evidential constraints. The most reasonable conception of 
methodology would seem, therefore, to be one that made the review of 

FEYERABEND'S ADVOCACY OF ANARCHISM 
475 
the actual history of science an internal part of method itself. There can 
be no question that this is precisely what Lakatos supposed he was doing 
and what (chiefly) he thought was missing from the methodologies that he 
criticizes and exposes. Now, it's quite possible, as Feyerabend claims, 
that Lakatos himself failed to see the difficulties of his own proposal. Fair 
enough. But how could that possibly entail either the irrationality of 
attempting the venture or the crypto-advocacy of Feyerabend' sown 
opposition to all method as such? 
Feyerabend himself mentions an earlier period of his own work in 
which "I still defend the primacy of method over history" - which, it 
appears, has misled a good many of his commentators concerning his 
present views.14 But he seems, then, implicitly to have concluded that the 
primacy of history somehow entails the impossibility of a rationally 
defended method ("Methodism"). Which is simply a non sequitur, once 
one distinguishes between would-be methods designed to be compatible 
with, or opposed to, the anarchistic thesis. Or, at least, there seems to be a 
non sequitur, in the absence of a proof that every would-be method must 
somehow fail to accommodate the requisite constraints. Feyerabend 
actually begins Against Method with some quotations including one he 
adjusts from Lenin: "History generally, and the history of revolutions in 
particular, is always richer in content, more varied, more many-sided, 
more lively and subtle than even the best historian and best methodologist 
can imagine" (p. 17). But then, precisely, a clever methodologist, ack-
nowledging that fact, will attempt to construct a flexible method that will 
allow the accommodation of surprises, unexpected reversals, and the like. 
Feyerabend appears to offer us only the extreme options of the scientist 
who is "a ruthless opportunist who is not tied to any particular philosophy 
and who adopts whatever procedure seems to fit the occasion" and the 
scientist who adheres to "rules which have been set up in advance and 
without regard to the ever-changing conditions of history" (p. 18). His 
attack (most reasonably construed) is against "the idea of a method that 
contains firm, unchanging, and absolutely binding principles for conduct-
ing the business of science", but the question remains whether it is 
possible to construct a method that is not unchanging in this way and that 
accommodates "the results of historical research" (p. 23). 
Consider Lakatos. Lakatos explicitly concedes that methodology in the 
seventeenth- and eighteenth-century sense of providing "scientists with a 
mechanical book of rules for solving problems ... has now been given up: 
modem methodologies or 'logics of discovery' consist merely of a set of 

476 
JOSEPH MARGOLIS 
(possibly not even tightly knit, let alone mechanical) rules for the 
appraisal of ready, articulated theories".15 His own concern is "to explain 
how the historiography of science should learn from the philosophy of 
science and vice versa" (p. 1). And his own program is designed to show 
how it is that: "(a) philosophy of science provides normative 
methodologies in terms of which the historian reconstructs 'internal 
history' and thereby provides a rational explanation of the growth of 
objective knowledge; (b) two competing methodologies can be evaluated 
with the help of (normatively interpreted) history; (c) any rational 
reconstruction of history needs to be supplemented by an empirical 
(socio-psychological) 'external history'" (p. 1). 
Now, here, it is impossible to fail to concede that, on Lakatos's view 
(though he may not care to express himself thus): (i) any provisionally 
adopted methodology is a provisionally partisan choice, open to challenge 
in terms of the record of history (which Feyerabend is convinced 
methodologists as such cannot accommodate); (ii) Lakatos's own 
methodology is a meta-methodology designed to provide for a rationally 
motivated change in partisan methods, on the basis of the evidence of 
external history; and (iii) the internal procedures for evaluating compet-
ing methodologies on the basis of the external historical evidence 
themselves reflect a partisan commitment, in the sense that the pertinent 
evidence must be interpreted in accord with some favored normative 
methodology. Feyerabend appears to be opposing such a methodology in 
opposing any fIrst-order rules formulated as binding without qualifIcation. 
It is in this spirit, for example, that he says "that there is not a single rule, 
however plausible, and however fIrmly grounded in epistemology, that is 
not violated at some time or other" (p. 23). Not only is this "a/act of the 
history of science", he claims; "it is both reasonable and absolutely 
necessary for the growth of knowledge" (p. 23). But, thus far considered, 
Lakatos's second-order methodology is designed to outflank the com-
plaint. The only possible argument that Feyerabend could muster to show 
that Lakatos's program remains rationally indefensible would simply be 
one that showed that there could be no such program, that it would have 
to be a sham, that it would be completely ad hoc (in Lenin's original 
sense). It looks very much as if Feyerabend believes he has shown just 
that, because he fails to accommodate the fact that Lakatos's methodol-
ogy has an ineliminably partisan (but not, for that reason, ad hoc) 
element. 
"According to my methodology", says Lakatos, "the great scientific 

FEYERABEND'S ADVOCACY OF ANARCHISM 
477 
achievements are research programs which can be evaluated in terms of 
progressive and degenerating problemshifts; and scientific revolutions 
consist of one research program superseding (overtaking in progress) 
another" (p. 9). Here, two considerations are essential: first, that commit-
ment, namely, reliance on what are assessed as progressive or regressive 
problemshifts, is itself a partisan commitment of a double sort - (a) 
because the inductivist, the conventionalist, and the falsificationist have 
made commitments of another sort, and (b) because the assessment is 
itself the result of a normative interpretation of the historical evidence, 
which another might have construed differently, even within the 
framework of Lakatos's program; secondly, because the partisan aspect of 
Lakatos's methodology involves a dialectical play between first-order and 
second-order commitments. What must be appreciated is both that what 
Lakatos terms a "research program" involves a partisan choice of "hard 
core" theories (not, provisionally, to be challenged) and a "positive 
heuristic" that dictates a scientist's problems and his sense of a progres-
sive problemshift (pp. 9-10), and that, even within this very framework, 
incompatible assessments of progress or "stagnation" are entirely 
possible. As Lakatos insists: "With sufficient resourcefulness and some 
luck, any theory can be defended 'progressively' for a long time, even if it 
is false" (p. 10). "A research program is said to be progressing", he 
explains, "as long as its theoretical growth anticipates its empirical 
growth, that is, as long as it keeps predicting novel facts with some 
success ('progressive problemshift'); it is stagnating if its theoretical 
growth lags behind its empirical growth, that is, as long as it gives only 
post-hoc explanations either of chance discoveries or of facts anticipated 
by, and discovered in, a rival program ('degenerating problemshift')" (p. 
11). But the appraisal of progress cannot be determined at any particular 
step, and there is no fully determinate interval within which it must be 
made (p. 12). Hence (as with Feyerabend), logical inconsistency and 
experimental anomaly cannot be expected to "defeat a research program 
in one blow": "the scores of rival sides ... must be recorded and publicly 
displayed at all times" (p. 12). 
Lakatos even remarks that "Since I specify no ... time [limit regarding 
fixing a degenerating problemshift], Feyerabend concludes that my 
standards are no more than 'verbal ornaments'" (p. 15, Note)}6 
Feyerabend actually says, noting that Lakatos judges theories only "in the 
long run", only "with hindsight", and always without specifying a "time 
limit" for determining a degenerating problemshift, that "the standards 

478 
JOSEPH MARGOLIS 
which Lakatos wants to defend are either vacuous - one does not know 
when to apply them - or they can be criticized on grounds very similar to 
those which led to them in the fIrst place"}7 But the only sense in which 
Feyerabend's dilemma could have force would require that Lakatos 
subscribe to just the sort of fIrst-order rules he expressly rejects and that 
his "standards" be "tightly knit" and "mechanical" in just the way he 
denies they are. So seen, Feyerabend simply misconstrues the point of 
Lakatos's methodological proposal and the sense, therefore, in which it is 
justifIably seen to be rationally defensible and rationally relevant in 
guiding actual scientifIc research. Lakatos need not Jeny - indeed, he 
insists - that "the history of science is always richer than its rational 
reconstruction". Nevertheless, "rational reconstruction or internal history" 
takes precedence over mere external history, because, within his own 
methodology, "the most important problems of external history are 
defIned by internal history" (p. 17). 
Here, it is diffIcult to see how Feyerabend expects to reduce Lakatos's 
methodology by the supposedly devastating opening charge of Against 
Method: Lakatos's meta-methodology trades on the very same insight. 
Obviously, the only possible charge (apart from that of some deep 
incoherence or ignorance of the history of science) is the one Feyerabend 
actually mounts, namely, that Lakatos's method is in fact not a method at 
all - it is an anarchism "in disguise". But the essential error remains 
nevertheless: F eyerabend must construe the historical evidence that is 
decisive against all would-be methodologies as merely contingent, 
external history; whereas, in fact, that construction is neither necessary 
nor consistent with Lakatos's own account. On the latter's view, "History 
without some theoretical 'bias' is impossible"; "History of science is a 
history of events which are selected and interpreted in a normative way" 
(p. 19). 
Notice, for example, the ineffectual role of Feyerabend's interesting 
claim that progress in science may, at times, be advanced by adhering to 
counterinductive rules (opposing empiricism): it may, he says, advise us 
"to introduce and elaborate hypotheses which are inconsistent with well-
established theories and/or well-established facts" (p. 29). Possibly so. 
But then, the relevant evidence for assessing progress must (for him) be 
essentially construed in terms of "external history". But if Lakatos's 
theory of history is correct, then whatever Feyerabend offers in the way of 
external history will, in principle, be capable of being absorbed within the 
internal history of a science for which a Lakatosian meta-methodology 

FEYERABEND'S ADVOCACY OF ANARCHISM 
479 
has been constructed. For similar reasons, Lakatos can resist 
Feyerabend's claim that "a scientist who wishes to maximize the 
empirical content of the views he holds and who wants to understand 
them as clearly as he possibly can ... must adopt a pluralistic methodol-
ogy" (p. 30). The tolerance of the kind of pluralism Feyerabend advocates 
is already accommodated within the scope of Lakatos's meta-methodol-
ogy. In precisely the same sense, Feyerabend's insistence on the contribu-
tion of incommensurable theories misses the essential point: (1) that the 
formulability of what is incommensurable already presupposes a concep-
tual framework not restricted to the incommensurables at issue, and (2) 
that, at the meta-methodological level, any appraisal of a would-be 
progressive or degenerative problemshift presupposes that there is no 
pertinent incommensurability affecting internal history. IS This is why 
Feyerabend misunderstands Lakatos's remark (which he cites): 
"Incommensurable theories are neither inconsistent with each other, nor 
comparable for content. But we can make them, by a dictionary, inconsis-
tent and their content comparable".19 It is neither the case that the 
"research" that would settle the contribution of incommensurable theories 
can be decided by external evidence, nor is it the case that the matter need 
be decided by "methodological fiat" (as Feyerabend thinks Lakatos is 
bound to do [po 220]). The issue arises intelligibly only within a methodol-
ogy that resolves the incommensurability in the respect mentioned, and 
that is a methodology strongly similar to Lakatos's. 
Now, the important matter is that Feyerabend has not demonstrated -
and appears to be unable, in principle, to demonstrate - that a rational 
methodology for science cannot be constructed. His mistake seems to be 
in construing all methodologies as inherently ahistorical (whatever the 
conviction of their advocates), in that they must subscribe to fixed and 
unchanging rules and that, in consequence, they are always at the mercy 
of external history (which, correctly viewed, is simply too rich and 
surprising for any such systems). It is obviously not fair to say that he 
fails to consider the prospects of a meta-methodology that tries to 
incorporate historical considerations within its appraisive procedures. Of 
course, he is occupied a great deal, if not chiefly, with Lakatos's proposal. 
Nevertheless, he seems unable or unwilling to concede, as a rational guide 
to scientific inquiry, a methodology that does not impose a time limit for 
the effectively relevant appraisal of problemshifts, that is prepared to 
appraise the validity of pursuing research in a given direction on the basis 
of retrospectively interpreting the historical evidence, and that is tolerant 

480 
JOSEPH MARGOLIS 
of extending appraisals into the long run. But that may well be because, 
although he construes science as an ideology (Chs. 16, 18), Feyerabend is 
not fully prepared to consider the problem of rational method within the 
range of activity of any partisan adherence to such an ideology. Conse-
quently, even if he is right in criticizing the details of Lakatos's proposal 
- for example, in challenging the convergence and reliability of what 
Lakatos calls a "common scientific wisdom" (p. 35), which supplies the 
scientist with the "nonnative basic judgments" or "basic value judg-
ments" of the scientific community, that themselves fonn the "hard core" 
of the internal history to which it subscribes (p. 9) - Feyerabend fails to 
assess correctly the fact that this is (in effect) advanced in the name of a 
partisan commitment and that it is more flexibly characterized than he 
acknowledges. He challenges Lakatos's reliance on "basic value judg-
ments" both because they "are not as unifonn as has been assumed" and 
because they "are only rarely made for good reasons" (p. 202). But 
Lakatos is particularly explicit about his intention to offer "a methodol-
ogy of scientific research programs of second order, or if you wish, a 
methodology of historiographical research programs" (p. 30; italics 
added). By this, he means to "insist that a good rationality theory must 
anticipate further basic value judgments unexpected in the light of its 
predecessors or that it must even lead to the revision of previously held 
basic value-judgments" (p. 30). 
There is no reason why the method should not countenance an initial 
commitment that might assign greater convergence than historical 
practice would seem to yield; and there is no reason why that initial 
commitment might not be substantially altered in the light of subsequent 
history (including, for instance, the rehabilitation of discarded theories [po 
30]). Lakatos is quite explicit about disagreeing "both with those 
philosophers of science who have taken it for granted that general 
scientific standards are immutable and reason can recognize them a 
priori, and with those who have thought that the light of reason il-
luminates only particular cases" (p. 35).20 There is no defensible sense in 
which, contrary to the way in which Feyerabend construes the matter, 
"the philosopher's statute rule" (that, a priori general and immutable rules 
demarcating good and bad science) will, since scientists may judge 
irrationally and make errors, "overrule" (p. 203) the basic value judg-
ments for the scientific community. All Lakatos says is that the applica-
tion of the rule "may occasionally be right when the scientists' judgment 
fails" (p. 35). But that, at best, is an irony of history, not a sign of 

FEYERABEND'S ADVOCACY OF ANARCHISM 
481 
Lakatos's subscription to a fixed methodology. 
Of course, it was never essential, in attempting to show the weakness 
of Feyerabend' s opposition to rational methodology, to have shown as 
well that Lakatos rightly characterized the methodology of the scientific 
community. It suffices to have shown (in the same dialectical spirit in 
which Feyerabend attempts to undermine Lakatos) that Lakatos has at 
least provided a powerful specimen interpretation of the rational nature of 
the practice of historical science. In doing so, he has accommodated 
everything defensible in Feyerabend' s complaint. What remains to quarrel 
about is whether an improved version of the methodology of scientific 
research programs can be developed, or whether an even more compelling 
interpretation of the relationship between methodology and history can be 
supplied. But within such an altered context of philosophical reflection, 
there would no longer be any need to invoke the detailed pertinence of the 
anarchistic thesis: its transcendental (and perhaps its theological) import 
would already have been conceded and absorbed. 
That is, Feyerabend' s thesis represents the most radical challenge to the 
possibility of a rational methodology. Lakatos's theory of research 
programs shows how to construe historical practice as rationally guided 
even within the constraints imposed by Feyerabend. But Lakatos's theory 
need not, for that reason, be exempt from criticism. For example, how 
important it is to the scientific status of a theory to have explained "new 
facts" may well be disputed; similarly, it may be disputed how clear a 
demarcation line is required between the "hard core" of a research 
program and more vulnerable accretions, or how resistant Lakatos's 
notion of "progressive" problemshifts is to trivialization.21 Finally, what 
relationship holds or ought to hold between the rationality of the practice 
of historical science (in the spirit in which Feyerabend and Lakatos 
dispute the matter) and idealized models of what is to count as scientific 
explanation (restoring the allegedly ahistorical conception of scientific 
reasoning) will have to be reviewed anew. For it is a matter not actually 
precluded by the anarchistic claim - despite Feyerabend' s efforts to show 
that it is. 
Department od Philosophy 
Temple University 
Philadelphia 
USA 

482 
JOSEPH MARGOLIS 
ADDENDUM (1989) 
I'm rather surprised and pleased, rereading this analysis of Feyerabend 
written in March, 1980, to see how little needs to be recast. I have left the 
paper in its original fonn, but I should like to add a few observations that 
touch on the rapid changes that have taken place in philosophy and the 
philosophy of science in the nearly ten years that have elapsed since its 
appearance. 
First of all, Lakatos was attracted to an overly sanguine expectation at 
the frrst-order level regarding the assessment of scientific research 
programs, in spite of his canny grasp of the need to construe methodology 
in a second-order ("meta-methodological") way once we construe 
methods historically and openendedly. This is related to the well-known 
problem of measuring "increasing content" in an empirically manageable 
way - effective against Popper as well as Lakatos. See Larry Laudan, 
Progress and Its Problems; Towards a Theory 0/ Scientific Growth 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977); and Adolf Grunbaum, 
"Can a Theory Answer More Questions than One of Its Rivals?" British 
Journal/or the Philosophy o/Science, xxvn (1976). What this shows is 
that Lakatos did not rightly understand his own second-order proposal 
and that that proposal disallows any purely linear, timeless, universalized 
assessment of progress. Therefore, it calls for a reinterpretation of what 
we should mean by "rationality" - scientific rationality, or method, in 
particular. 
Rationality (or method) concerns the internal assessment of changes in 
criteria applied to ongoing research that also changes, where both the 
interpretation of the "content" of research and the criteria for assessing it 
are alterable as a result of what "external" history gets to be socially 
absorbed internally. 
Feyerabend's notion of "method" - for his own purposes - is, ob-
viously, only a stalking horse. Anything like a timeless "method" of 
rationality is now out, of course. The idea that there can be no "method" 
but a timeless, closed, rule-driven one is simply self-serving. But then, 
once historicized and rendered open ended, the "method" of science must 
treat internal criteria of appraisal as heuristic, context-bound, hostage to 
the diachronic, even incommensurable, shift between internal and 
external history ~ viewed internally. It's not so much that there is no 
method as that the notion of what it is for us to have a method has now 
been radically altered. All expectations (as of positivism or unity of 

FEYERABEND'S ADVOCACY OF ANARCHISM 
483 
science) are no longer appropriate - or necessary. 
Secondly, and as a direct result, neither falsificationism nor inductivism 
can be recovered; for both, in their distinctive ways, are wedded to linear, 
one-dimensional, continuous, non-incommensurabilist, progressivist 
histories. Hence, the criticism of Lakatos's research programs is, however 
just, no license for restoring the status quo ante. No mere adjustment of 
Popperian or Hempelian strategies are tenable on the historicist thesis. 
Thirdly, there is no reason to think that scientific rationality is distinct 
in principle from the use of reason in any other sector of human inquiry 
and activity. Here, I must agree with certain of the main lines of 
Feyerabend's most recent publication. In his Farewell to Reason 
(London: Verso 1987), Feyerabend holds that, although there are 
"patterns" of success in the sciences, they "are not stable and cannot be 
universalized," the achievements in question "cannot be explained by 
general principles covering all cases," "there exist [no] universally valid 
and binding standards of knowledge and action" (pp. 9-12); he also holds 
that "the events and results that constitute the sciences have no common 
structure; there are no elements that occur in every scientific investigation 
but are missing elsewhere" (p. 281). Nevertheless, in Feyerabend's hands, 
the pursuit of "objectivity" is nothing more than the normative force of a 
culturally entrenched ideology. "I assert," Feyerabend says, "that there 
exist no 'objective' reasons for preferring science and Western 
rationalism to other traditions. Indeed, it is difficult to imagine what such 
reasons might be. Are they reasons that would convince a person, or the 
members of a culture, no matter what their customs, their beliefs or their 
social situation? Then what we know about cultures shows us that there 
are no 'objective' reasons in this sense. Are they reasons which convince 
a person who has been properly prepared? Then all cultures have 
'objective' reasons in their favor" (p. 297). Still, the real question lies not 
with this sort of cultural relativism but with the conditional search for a 
"method" (or "methods") most promising/or the salient achievements 0/ 
the central sciences. It's not enough to respect or have affection for the 
Dogon, the Azande, the Ecuadorian peasants Feyerabend wishes to 
protect. The question remains whether the salient achievements 0/ the 
sciences could be approached or bettered by whatever would be their 
alternative practice of inquiry - and why. The conditionality of the 
interests that have advanced the cause of Western science is not the same 
as the conditionality of any proposed picture of the "method" by which 
that science has accomplished what it has. The humanity of Feyerabend's 

484 
JOSEPH MARGOLIS 
concerns with more than science is hardly meant for dispute; but one 
cannot draw scientific anarchism out of Feyerabend' s political generosity. 
Finally, neither the anarchism nor anything like Lakatos's second-order 
("meta-") methodology is compatible with entrenching physicalism or 
extensionalism or any other similarly universalized program for regiment-
ing science (or human life); for the latter are hopelessly out of touch with 
the historicized, ideologized, preformative, tacit, nontotaIized and 
nontotaIizable, intransparent, praxical grounding of human inquiry. That, 
I think, is Feyerabend' s best message. He seems to have come around to 
applying it to himself - for instance, against his earlier physicalist 
solutions of the mind-body problem (cf. p. 296): This gives the lie, for 
instance, to more recent eliminationists (like Paul Churchland) who 
misunderstand that they cannot coopt both the Feyerabend of the early 
physicalist days and the Feyerabend of the more recent anarchism. They 
are not the same man. 
Feyerabend seems also to have used the new message to proper 
advantage in subverting Lakatos's universalizing tendencies, despite the 
latter's regard for history: Lakatos "denied [he says] that stepping closer 
to history forces us to relativize all standards. This may be the reaction of 
a confused rationalist who for the first time faces history in its full 
splendor but, so Lakatos said, a more thorough study of the same material 
shows that scientific processes share a structure and obey general rules. 
We can have a theory of science and, more generally, a theory of 
rationality because thought enters history in a lawful way" (p. 282). 
Lakatos, however, as we have seen, does touch on a possibility deeper 
than the one Feyerabend ascribes to him - and deeper than Feyerabend 
himself pursues. It was one, to be sure, he did not fully understand. But 
the fact remains that the "normalization" of reason (to use Foucault's 
expression) does not disallow the diachronic critique of a sense of method 
subject to all the vagaries Feyerabend turns into a heap, in spite of the fact 
that universalism and foundationalism are no longer tenable. What is 
needed is a conception of method open to the historical mystery Lakatos 
saw only darkly as well as the anarchism Feyerabend wastefully 
celebrates so exclusively. 
All the currents of recent radical philosophy that historicize human 
nature catch up the point of the contest between Feyerabend and Lakatos. 
One could, for instance, name such thinkers as Bachelard and Foucault 
and Gadamer - to give a sense at least of the variety of views that share 
(without their agreeing among themselves) the central theme that needs to 

FEYERABEND'S ADVOCACY OF ANARCHISM 
485 
be analyzed, that no one has yet satisfactorily analyzed. There is no 
question that it has not been satisfactorily captured by Kuhn or Popper or 
Feyerabend or Lakatos. But there is also no question that its analysis will 
yield (will have to be made to yield) a more open, more carefully crafted, 
de-universalized, anti-ahistorical conception of reason and method. 
Method is a historical practice informed by a reflexive critique that is 
itself historicized. It aspires to universalize, but is no less a form of 
rational direction for failing to be timeless. It knows that it can never be 
that. 
NOTES 
I Paul Feyerabend, Science in a Free Society (London: NLB, 1978), Part m. Page 
references in the text to Feyerabend are to this book, unless otherwise noted. 
2 London: NLB, 1975. 
3 In Colin Howson (ed)., Method and Appraisal in the Physical Sciences: The Critical 
Background to Modern Science, 1800-1905 (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1976). 
4 Cf. Against Method, Chs. 5-11. Feyerabend, of course, himself cites the reference 
(Science in a Free Society, p. 36). 
5 Cf. Science in a Free Society, pp. 199ff. 
6 I take this to be the sense, for instance, in which P.F. Strawson criticizes Kant, in 
The Bounds of Sense (London: Methuen, 1966). 
7 Cf. for example, Science in a Free Society, Part II. 
8 Cf. for example Jurgen Habermas, Knowledge and Human Interests, trans. Jeremy 
J. Shapiro (Boston: Beacon, 1971). 
9 Imre Lakatos, "History of Science and Its Rational Reconstructions," in Howson, 
Method and Appraisal in the Physical Sciences, p. 8. By "internal," Lakatos refers to 
those normatively interpreted aspects of the contingent history of science, in accord 
with a favored methodology informing such interpretations. 
10 Cf. for example, Science in a Free Society, pp. 97-105. 
II Imre Lakatos, Philosophical Papers, Vol. 1 (The Methodology of Scientific 
Research Programmes), eds. John Worrall and Gregory Currie (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1978). 
12 Against Method, p. 200. Further page references to Feyerabend in the text are to the 
Verso edition 1978 of this book, unless otherwise noted. 
13 See, for example, Joseph Margolis, "The Prospects of an Objective Morality," 
Social Research, XLVI (1979),744-765. 
14 Science in a Free Society, p. 160, nt7. 
IS "History of Science and Its Rational Reconstructions," p. 2. Further page 
references in the text to Lakatos are to this paper, unless otherwise indicated. 
16 P.K. Feyerabend, "Consolations for the Specialist," in Imre Lakatos and Alan 
Musgrave (eds)., Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge (Cambridge: Cambridge 

486 
JOSEPH MARGOLIS 
University Press, 1970), p. 215. 
17 Ibid. References to Lakatos are to "Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific 
Research Programmes," which appears both in Criticism and the Growth of 
Knowledge and Philosophical Papers, Vol. 1. 
18 See Against Method, Ch. 17. 
19 "Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programs," in Lakatos 
and Musgrave, op. cit., p. 179, nl. 
20 Compare Feyerabend, Against Method, p. 203, which seems not to accord this 
passage its proper weight. 
21 See, for example, Clark Glymour, Theory and Evidence (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1980), Ch. 14. 

PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
Concluding Unphilosophical Conversation 
B: [walking swiftly on a narrow trail in the woods, to himself]: Ahh, at 
last, no more lectures, sunshine, a little fresh air. What a wonderful 
day! 
FLY: zzzu:z:z.z 
B: I completely agree with you. 
SHEEP ON THE LEFr: Meeeeeh. 
B: Good morning. Would you believe that I earn my income doing 
exactly what you are doing, but in front of lots of people? SHEEP 
[looks nonplussed] 
B: That gives you pause, doesn't it? [Sits down; long silence ... 
interrupted by a noise which sounds like]: OOEIAA. 
B: What is that? 
FLY: zzz zzzz zz 
B: You heard it, too, eh? 
A: [exhausted, with a large bundle of papers and books under his arm, 
slowly approaching]: Pro ... Pro ... 
B: Relax. Come, take a seat. 
A: Sssyou. 
B: What? 
A: Thank you. 
B: Well, what are you doing up here? And with this mountain of dead 
wood? 
A: Are you Professor Feyerabend? 
B: Well, my name is Feyerabend. 
A: But are you Professor Feyerabend? 
G. Munlvar (ed.), Beyond Reason, 487-527. 
@ 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
487 

488 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
B: Not so loud! Not everybody needs to know how I make a living. 
A: What are you afraid of? 
B: Well, lots of people don't treat a guy like a nonnal human being once 
they know he is a professor, at least here in Europe. 'Educated' 
people, especially, would at once categorize me: aha, a professor, a 
professor of philosophy, therefore he knows this, and does that and 
approaches difficult matters in suchandsuch a way; and when they 
get on my nerves and I try to get rid of them, they look at each other 
and think: "Well, a typical professor - impolite and conceited". 
A: Aren't you a little paranoid? 
B: I may well be; but I tell you, I was much happier as a student, when 
nobody knew me and when I could sing, produce plays, make 
impudent remarks at discussions without being classified by position, 
rank, style and point of view. 
A: I don't see what you are complaining about. You are a philosopher, 
and naturally people take a philosopher in a different way from, say, 
a dogcatcher. 
B: But that's exactly it. I am not a philosopher and I have no wish to be 
burdened with that kind of predicament. 
A: You, not a philosopher? Don't make me laugh! Look here [opening 
the bundle], look at these papers. That's the reason why I am here! 
B 
[getting up in terror]: What reason? 
A: Well, I am supposed to deliver the contributions to your Festschrift 
and to talk with you about your philosophy. 
B: God help me! No doubt Gonzalo Munevar is behind this! 
A: You have no idea how hard he tried to get a Festschrift together and 
how many people have written about you. 
B 
[sighs] 
A: It's your own fault! [Takes a book out of his bundle]. Here, look: 
"Against Method - Outline of an anarchistic theory of knowledge" -
that is the book that made you famous. 
B: But look more closely! 
A: Where? 
B: Here, on the title page! 
A: What do you mean? 
B: After 'anarchistic'! 
A: A footnote! 
B: Yes, footnote! What does that tell you? 

CONCLUDING UNPHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSATION 
489 
A: Well, it is certainly strange; a footnote; in the title; and right after the 
word "anarchistic". [Pointing to the bundle] - I think Professor Naess 
made a remark about that. 
B: Then the title itself - "anarchistic theory of knowledge" - doesn't 
that make you think? 
A: What do you mean? 
B: What does the word "anarchism" suggest to you? 
A: Well, some kind of disorder ... 
B: ... precisely. And theory? 
A: I see what you are driving at. 
B: Now turn over a few pages, here, page seven, lines eight and nine, 
what does it say? 
A: It says: "it is a long and rather personal letter" ... - "letter" in italics. 
B: A letter, a personal communication; not a treatise, not a textbook. A 
letter written tongue in cheek. 
A: You mean the whole book is a joke? 
B: No. I am serious about lots of things in it; but summing them up in 
the form of a philosophical "position" - that was the joke. Many 
reviewers fell for it - although I left a sufficient number of clues ... 
A: Now, wait a minute! You say you have some serious points to make. 
B: Yes. 
A: But you don't have a philosophical position. 
B: No. I may have had something like a philosophical position when I 
was a student, and early in my career. At that time I thought there 
was no knowledge but scientific knowledge and all the rest was bunk. 
That is kind of a "position", isn't it? 
A: And then you became an anarchist. 
B: No. Then I read Wittgenstein. 
A: Wittgenstein? 
B: Yes. I read his Remarks on the Foundation of Mathematics and his 
Philosophical Investigations in manuscript, various versions of them, 
years before they appeared in print and I discussed the content with 
Elizabeth Anscombe who was then in Vienna, to learn German for 
her translation of Wittgenstein's works. Incidentally, I studied 
Wittgenstein's writings much more thoroughly than anything from 
the Popperian inventory, though there are still some people who 
regard me as a Popperian apostate. 
A: Aren't you? 

490 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
B: No. 
A: Then, what's your explanation of this rather widespread opinion? 
Hooker, whose paper I have here ... 
B: Hooker wrote a paper? 
A: Yes, a long and detailed paper! 
B: I am looking forward to reading it. I met Hooker many years ago; we 
had a very pleasant time together. Well, what does he say? 
A: That you were a Popperian and still retain a "Popperian rump". 
B: A Popperian rump? 
A: A Popperian rump. So, how do you explain that? 
B: Does he say what this Popperian rump consists in? 
A: You use a negative procedure, you criticize, you reject! 
B: Well, I don't want to jump on Hooker without having read him, but 
does he really mean to say that Popper invented criticism? 
A: Popper introduced falsification by negative instances .... 
B: ... you've got to be kidding! Falsification by counter examples is as 
old as the hills. The sophists practiced it to their hearts' delight; it is 
the main weapon of the skeptics from antiquity through Montaigne to 
Mates and it was ridiculed as simpleminded antilogike or wordbash-
ing by Plato: the best critique of a "naive falsificationism" as Kuhn 
and Lakatos called Popper's procedure is found in the Republic and 
the Theaetetus! Really, making Popper the inventor of fal-
sificationism! You might as well call Ronald Reagan the inventor of 
rhetoric! Furthermore .. , 
A: ... now - wait a minute! You did not let me finish! Popper intro-
duced falsification by negative instances to solve Hume's problem. 
B: Hume's problem? 
A: You know - the problem how knowledge can be acquired and 
improved in a rational way. 
B: You mean that before Popper science was irrational? 
A: No, no - but before Popper people had mistaken views about the 
nature of science. 
B: Scientists included? 
A: Scientists included. 
B: Bohr? Newton? 
A: Especially Bohr and Newton. 
B: I fmd this most surprising. Scientists have wrong views about the 
nature of science. Still, they make discoveries, initiate revolutions, 
constantly widen our ho~zon. Popper himself makes science a 

CONCLUDING UNPHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSA nON 
491 
paradigm of knowledge. Popper, on the other hand, has the right 
view. Yet all we find in him are some silly and thoroughly unin-
formed suggestions about the interpretation of quantum mechanics -
about the interpretation, mind you, not about the theory itself which 
was invented by muddledheads like Bohr, Heisenberg, Born, 
Schroedinger. What I infer from this paradox is that we must 
distinguish between the practice of science, which is complicated, not 
entirely transparent - but seems to get results and philosophical ideas 
about it which may be right, which may be wrong, but which have no 
influence whatsoever on that practice. A good philosophy in the 
abstract sense in which you and Popper understand the subject does 
not prevent a person from making a fool of himself in scientific 
matters while a bad philosophy does not ruin a good scientist. 
A: But he will waste his time ... 
B: ... and he will not waste his time when following Popper? 
A: Not to the same extent. 
B: That remains to be seen. Negative instances knock out a theory, you 
say? 
A: Corroborated negative instances. 
B: And negative instances are corroborated if they prevail despite severe 
tests? 
A: Yes. 
B: Where all the tests show the same outcome? 
A: Outside the domain of error, yes. 
B: And you think that an interesting theory giving rise to complex 
experiments will be corroborated in this clean way? Without 
aberrations, 
unexplained 
results 
elsewhere, 
incomprehensible 
difficulties? 
A: What do you mean? 
B: What I mean is that any interesting theory is surrounded by an ocean 
of anomalies whose elements give rise to further anomalies when we 
try to corroborate them. Given any theory you can point to numerous 
experimental results that conflict with it; given any partially cor-
roborated experimental result you can point to experiments that deny 
the result -
and so on. The advice that corroborated negative 
instances knock out a theory is therefore useless; there are never any 
"clean" corroborations. It is also misleading for it suggests that 
science is simpler than it actually is. A Popperian facing science 
would be floored by the complexities he encounters - he would be 
absolutely paralysed! 

492 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
A: You conflate two entirely different problems - the logical problem of 
the relation between theory and evidence and the practical problem 
of what is to count as evidence. A clean refutation, i.e. a conflict 
between a fully corroborated singular statement and the theory it is 
an instance of would logically eliminate the theory while a clean 
confmIiation leaves its status unchanged ... 
B: Empty words! In this world there are no clean refutations which 
means that in this world a solution of Hume's problem is without 
interest for scientific practice. And this is true of other philosophical 
doctrines as well. Philosophers deal with a never-never land that has 
hardly any point of contact with the actual lives of scientists, 
politicians, people like you and me. 
A: Logic applies to everybody. 
B: Logic? There is not one "logic"; there are different logical systems, 
some more realistic some less so. Besides, what consolation does a 
dying man derive from the remark that his death is not logically 
necessary? Empty words again. The result is clearly that there cannot 
be a "Popperian rump" because there never was a fully articulated 
and live Popperian body. At any rate - if there is any "rump" in my 
closet, it is a skeptical rump. And it is still very much alive! But let 
me continue - somewhere along the way I read an interesting paper 
by Michael Polanyi on the world view of the Azande. Here was a 
concrete application of Wittgenstein's advice to look and see and not 
to wander off on an abstract tangent. And then Mill, On Liberty, 
taught me that different world views do not have to lie side by side 
but can be used to improve the general climate of knowledge. Points 
of view, fonns of life, I thought, made sense and received substance 
only when embedded in a collection of other forms of life. I even 
developed a theory of test on that basis .. . 
A: ... your omnipresent Brownian particle .. . 
B: ... an idea I got from David Bohm. 
A: Still a philosophical position. 
B: Yes, you might call it that; but gradually I became suspicious about 
regulating knowledge from afar, with the help of principles and 
abstract models. The world and human lives especially, I thought, are 
much too complex for that. I did write a series of Millian papers ... 
A: ... and, finally, Against Method. After Mill came anarchism. 

CONCLUDING UNPHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSA nON 
493 
B: And there's the rub! For what I was aiming at was not a position or a 
doctrine that might become the cornerstone of some academic 
discipline, but a discipline-independent way of thinking and living. 
This was the reason why I tried to show that not even the practice of 
science could be captured by general concepts, except in a vague and 
superficial manner. Even science -
which is already full of 
stereotypes and far removed from the daily lives of human beings - is 
beyond the reach of philosophical principles and methods. We just 
talked about that. 
A: You did, I did not. But what do you mean? You are still teaching, 
aren't you? 
B: Well, I am giving lectures. 
A: And you are a professor of philosophy, aren't you? A professor of the 
philosophy of science, to be more exact. 
B: Yes, I am a civil servant of the Swiss Federal Government and of the 
state of California, with a schedule, a salary and a pension. But that 
has little to do with philosophy. 
A: And what do you do in your lectures? 
B: I tell stories. 
A: Stories? 
B: Yes, stories about all sorts of things. This semester, for example, I am 
describing various episodes from this history of the atomic theory 
including Democritus, Aristotle, Bohr, Einstein, Aspect, Dalibard and 
Roger. 
A: Aspect - who is he and who are the other guys? 
B: Three experimental physicists from Orsay, France. In Berkeley, this 
fall, I am going to tell the story of ancient philosophy. I start with a 
survey of the evidence, for example, how much of Parmenides' own 
words do we have and how reliable is the tradition? Then come the 
prevalent literary forms: the epic, lyrical poetry, lampoons, scientific 
prose (which was invented at about that time), drama, the political 
speech, the informative speech, the novel, the short story and, later, 
the dialogue with examples to illustrate their impact. These were not 
just poetic playthings - they were used to inform, to criticize, to 
make religious, military, political suggestions. Which form was best 
adapted to the intentions of the new group of bigmouths that arose in 
the sixth and fIfth centuries, the so-called "philosophers", which form 
did they use and why and, above all, what were they up to? Plato 
rejected drama, the epic, scientifIc prose and chose the dialogue. I 
discuss his reasons in detail. 

494 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
A: So you do argue in your lectures! 
B: No, no, no, no! I describe the lives of people devoted to arguments of 
a rather narrow kind and their influence on others. A life built on 
theories differs from a life built on sympathy, fear, hope, or common-
sense. I try to make the difference visible. Whenever possible I 
conjure up an image - Empedocles with his gold shoes, his purple 
robe, the crowd of boys accompanying him, the miracles he per-
formed. 
A: But what about the ideas of these philosophers? 
B: Yes, yes, their ideas. Of course, I mention what they wrote, or said, 
or are said to have said; I discuss the effect their suggestions had on 
their fellow philosophers and on the ancient public at large and, most 
importantly, I discuss the modem aftereffects of their activity in 
physics, biology, sociology, philosophy, politics, etc .. Many ideas 
which now seem to be trivial ingredients of (scientific) knowledge, 
ethics, politics arose in antiquity and were then attacked, defended 
and attacked again with excellent arguments. Those who need 
impersonal reasons for their preferences and aversions - and I am not 
one of them - can learn a lot from these ancient debates because they 
are not obscured by useless technicalities. All this I explain in the 
form of stories, stories containing proofs or proof-schemata included, 
not by "doing philosophy". 
A: Don't your stories have a point? 
B: Certainly. But many people tell stories with a point: journalists, 
playwrights, novelists, mothers, scientists - almost all fairy tales have 
a point. Now, philosophers, especially philosophers of a rationalist 
persuasion, reach their point in a very peculiar way. Their stories are 
tightly knit - they are hardly stories any longer. They use abstract 
and emotionally decontaminated concepts. And they use such 
concepts not to sharpen our vision or to enrich our existence but to 
push us into narrow and dark passages. Feelings, impressions, desires 
can enter the debate only after they have been caught like butterflies, 
killed and stretched out on some philosophical rack. Moreover, 
philosophers, rationalists especially, are interested in general 
principles, not in particulars. Considering the richness of our world 
this means that their stories will be either empty, or tyrannical; 
people must mutilate their lives to fit the stories. Read Kant on 
ethics! And Schiller's reply! 

CONCLUDING UNPHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSATION 
495 
A: I think you have a rather one-sided view of "philosophy". What about 
Nietzsche, or Kierkegaard, or Heidegger? Just a few weeks ago I read 
a book by a guy, I think his name was Nagel, that does not at all 
sound like your description of philosophy. 
B: You are right; there are exceptions. There are individuals who call 
themselves philosophers and yet dislike, even detest a standardized 
discourse. But they have chosen the wrong medium for their 
complaints and they address the wrong audience.· They are poets 
without poetic talent but not without cunning; so they created a 
separate subject in which emotional deprivation is an asset and lack 
of imagination a condition of success. Just look at the way in which 
students of philosophy are prepared for their profession! Are their 
idiosyncracies taken into account? No. Are they permitted to express 
themselves "authentically"? Rarely. Are they taught how to live with 
others, how to touch their heart? Certainly not. The old idea of 
objectivity which is but the reverse of the sterility of its inventors still 
holds sway, though dressed up in new and fashionable garments. 
Also, 20th Century philosophers relate whatever they say to a 
carefully selected set of authors - real is what happens in this group. 
Rorty, for example, has much I can agree with - but I would not 
write as he does and I certainly have no use for the authors he 
discusses. And this occurs in areas like ethics, aesthetics, anthropol-
ogy, political philosophy where one might expect some loose ends. 
The philosophy of science never had its Kierkegaard, or - thank god! 
- its Nietzsche. Even Kuhn does not permit history to speak un-
rehearsed; he wants to bundle it up with theoretical ropes. 
A: You don't have much respect for the work of philosophers! 
B: I don't see why I should! On the other hand, I did get some kind of 
education from Mill, Wittgenstein or Kierkegaard whom I read in 
1946, lying in a damp cellar, surrounded by spiders, roaches and 
rusty stoves. For the past ten years I have been studying Plato for 
whom my admiration is boundless; it took me three years to prepare a 
lecture course on Aristotle's Physics which I think is a great book ... 
A: Well, if that is not doing philosophy ... 
B: ... but listen, I don't study and discuss these authors to embellish a 
subject, or to construct an ideology, or to cultivate ideas - after all, at 
the time of Plato and Aristotle the subject "philosophy" was just 
being constituted - but to provide myself and my listeners with a 
survey of the possibilities of human existence. People are born and 

496 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
die; they fall in love, support each other, kill each other; they sing, 
dance, write symphonies, argue, preach, paint. Out of this vast canvas 
of human activities I select, because of the accidents of my educa-
tion, some elements for display without assuming that my little 
museum is more self-contained, more important, more basic, more 
profound than, say, a performance by Laurie Anderson. But - and 
now comes the element that looks like contempt: I cannot stand it 
when so-called thinkers not only presume to know things better than 
their fellow human beings -
that would be simple conceit, and 
conceit I don't fmd at all objectionable - but put them on a lower 
level of existence. Here philosophers led the way - at least in the 
West; just read Heraclitus, Parmenides, Xenophanes and, of course, 
Plato. Spinoza, gentle, modest, lovable Spinoza argues somewhat as 
follows: god spoke to the prophets in images because they were not 
sufficiently 
intelligent 
to 
understand 
His 
True 
Message. 
Philosophers, having concepts, are. They are therefore entitled to 
remove the incoherent muttering and shouting of the prophets. I find 
such an attitude ... 
A: Where does Spinoza say that? 
B: In his theological-political treatise. Well, I fmd such an attitude 
contemptible. 
A: Even if it can be supported by argument? 
B: Especially when it can be supported by argument! Who would sell 
his soul for an argument? But we really don't have to go that far. 
There were times when ideas which now look ridiculous and even 
repulsive had strong empirical and theoretical support. 
A: Can you give me an example? 
B: Certainly - the idea of an aether for the propagation of light and, 
later, of all electromagnetic processes. Or the phlogiston theory 
which brought order into many disparate facts and survived 
numerous attacks. 
-
A: I would like to know a little more about the empirical support of 
these theories ... 
B: Well, read the literature, but be careful to consult the more recent 
accounts, and keep close to the historians; some of the older writers 
tried hard to show that the overthrown ideas never made sense and 
most philosophers are content with pious hymns and a few ill chosen 
and badly reported events. Now assume that one fme day biologists 
"discover", i.e. provide reasonable support for the idea that intel-

CONCLUDING UNPHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSATION 
497 
ligence and emotion are genetically bound and that there exist 
"dangerous" races, i.e., races that are a threat for the future of 
humanity. What would you do under these circumstances? 
A: What do you mean? 
B: Would you, as an admirer of science, accept this point of view and 
cast your vote accordingly in local, statewide and federal elections -
for example, would you suggest eliminating the members of this race, 
or would you try to protect them from the effects of the new dis-
covery? 
A: Scientists would never propose such a view. 
B: But they already did! Just read Steven Gould's book The Mismeasure 
of Man or Kevles' In the Name of Eugenics and other works in the 
area. Such books will open your eyes, I tell you! 
A: But what can I do? 
B: You can do a lot! Assume you fall in love with a member of the 
dangerous race. That gives you knowledge no scientist possesses -
unless he is in love himself. And it not only gives you knowledge, it 
also gives you motivation, the wish to protect, the wish to preserve 
this vision of a human being over all others ... 
A: Love against scientific results? 
B: What else? Of course, I cannot argue the case with you for what is at 
stake is not a connection of ideas but the power of a feeling ... 
A: Peelings against arguments? 
B: Look! Arguments need clear concepts to work. Do you agree? 
A: Well, it certainly would be difficult to have a conclusive argument 
with emotionally charged words. 
B: But emotionally charged words have a function in life, don't they? 
A: Well ... 
B: Personal relations are constituted and maintained with their help. I 
ask: "Are you sad?" -
you understand me perfectly; you also 
understand the sympathy that is conveyed by the question, this 
sympathy establishes a bond - all of which would be destroyed if we 
replaced imprecise ideas, facial expressions, gestures, emotionally 
charged words with precise and antiseptic notions. Moreover, words, 
gestures, facial expressions are never separated in the way the 
logician takes as his starting point. The question "Are you sad?" is 
part of a complex phenomenon which falls apart when we isolate its 
'semantic' ingredients. So, we have a choice: do we want the 
destructive changes caused by rationalization to affect all aspects of 

498 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
our lives or do we want to retain a sizeable section of the kind of 
discourse I have just described? For me the choice is obvious. 
Rational arguments, yes, but in a special place, not at the center of 
human existence. 
A: You mean, the center should be full of emotion, but without 
knowledge? 
B: Don't be so dramatic! Knowledge as defined by rationalists -
objective, emotionally antiseptic knowledge all of whose ingredients 
can be written down in clear statements is not the only kind of 
knowledge, not even in the sciences. An experimenter has to be 
familiar with his equipment. This "tacit knowledge" as Michael 
Polanyi called it is the result of long experience; it is only rarely 
explicit and it is presupposed, not eliminated by more formal 
procedures. The knowledge one person has of another is ''tacit'' to a 
much larger extent. It shows itself in partly conscious, partly 
unconscious actions, perception is influenced by it, articulation 
changes it in subtle ways: the painted, or dramatized person is not the 
same as the person one casually meets in a restaurant. Describing one 
minute in the life of an individual can take months, and in a sense it 
never comes to an end - there simply does not exist a well defined 
and limited amount of facts that could be called "all the facts of the 
life of XY that occurred between 11 :24 and 11 :25 am on Monday, 
June 25, 1989". Read Pirandello! Rationalists want to replace these 
riches by something more manageable. We, i.e. the citizens who pay 
their wages have to watch them and we must interfere when they go 
too far. 
A: Does this mean that you might recommend controlling philosophy, 
research and the dissemination of knowledge? 
B: Only if the dissemination is liable to destroy the personal elements of 
our existence! Knowledge as defined and produced by rationalists is 
a valuable ingredient of life, but like cars, airplanes, nuclear reactors 
it has side effects which may make it necessary to regulate its use ... 
A [getting up, a look of revulsion on his face]: You really mean it! 
Control of knowledge! Thought control! 
TIlE SHEEP [runs away] 
B: Boy, you philosophers treat knowledge like the American Rifle 
Association treats guns - they must not be touched no matter how 
disastrous their effect. But look! Too many cars kill woods, con-
taminate the air, cause traffic congestions, make children nervous by 

CONCLUDING UNPHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSATION 
499 
their noise, etc., etc. Still, people love cars; they will not give them 
up easily. We therefore need laws to restrict their use. Too much 
''rational'', i.e., emotionally decontaminated discourse endangers the 
subtle connections that exist between knowledge, emotion, action, 
hope, love and fragments our lives. Are our minds to be less 
protected than our lungs? And it is not only a question of our minds! 
For Descartes animals are machines and any emotion shown towards 
them is misplaced. As far as I am concerned this is a barbaric attitude 
that puts Descartes far below even the most stupid Shawnee. Are we 
supposed to let such barbarians run our lives, manipulate our feelings 
and determine our actions? 
A: But what if Descartes is right? 
B: Who is going to decide that? Animal lovers or researchers who have 
no compunction to dissect live animals? The facts assembled by the 
two will be very different. 
A: Yes, there will be subjective opinions on one side, objective facts on 
the other. 
B: You don't seem to have read Lorenz. Besides, who says that the 
objective approach gets to the heart of the matter and that subjective 
opinions are about nothing? And how do we justify the distinction in 
the fIrst place? Especially as doubts seems to have arisen in psychol-
ogy and even in physics? 
A: The aberrations of quantum mechanics are irrelevant on the macro-
scopic level ... 
B: First, they are not as is shown by superconductivity and other 
phenomena. Secondly, even if they were, we would still have to 
admit that objectivity is not an a priori ingredient of science, but a 
research tool that may produce results, but may also fail. 
A: There are lots of results in modern biology. 
B: You mean in molecular biology! Right. Descartes' hypothesis had 
results in this narrow fIeld. Now the question is (1) , are the results 
important, (2) do they establish the hypothesis and, (3) can we accept 
the results we fInd valuable and reject the hypothesis? The answer to 
(1) is: some are, some are not; the answer to (2) - no, they don't and 
to (3) - yes, we can. For we must distinguish between the effects of a 
restricted use of the hypothesis in laboratories and the effects of its 
general acceptance. The latter are far from desirable. They imply that 
Nature is a legitimate object for study and limitless change; that it is 
like a big and old-fashioned hotel that needs exploring, cleaning and 

500 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
rebuilding. You will agree that this attitude has led to disastrous 
consequences. It would therefore be unwise to make professional 
ideologies part of general education. You, my dear geniuses, we 
should say to our specialists, are free to be as barbaric as you like in 
your research - but don't expect us to accept the attitude you seem to 
need for your discoveries. 
A: But that is parasitism! 
B: Far from it. The barbarians are being paid - are they not? They are 
being provided with expensive laboratories, are they not? They are 
allowed, even encouraged to do what they like most, are they not? 
Millions of dollars are wasted on their megalomanic plans, they get 
prizes, can appear on TV, etc., etc .. Why should we imitate them and 
look at the world in their way? We need henchmen; we train them, 
pay them, give them a pension -
yet nobody says that their 
philosophy should become a basis of civilization. 
A: But don't you think that restricting thought will lead to terrible 
consequences? 
B: Thought is already restricted in many ways - and with good reason. 
There may of course be unforeseen consequences. But what is the 
alternative? Doing nothing? Besides, what I suggest is not restricting 
thought, but certain institutional amplifications of thought. The 
defenders of Salman Rushdie - and, mind you, I am not one of them 
- don't just want him to think, they want publishers, TV stations, 
book clubs to amplify his thought and to profit from the returns. It is 
not the freedom of thought that worries me, but the freedom of 
empowered thought. For power, no matter how applied, must always 
be watched very carefully! Writers love to point out that the pen is 
mightier than the sword. Well if they are right, then it is also more 
dangerous. Just imagine the following case: a society on the verge of 
civil war; a writer writing a book that might start it. As a responsible 
niler I would order the book burned and the writer imprisoned if he 
did not give his solemn promise to wait for less dangerous times; as 
far as I am concerned human lives are much more important than 
words pretending to represent ideas. Moreover, I just told you that 
emotionally decontaminated "objective" knowledge is only one form 
of knowledge and by no means the most important. Human relations 
are created and maintained by empathy which, to please objectivists, 
might be regarded as a special operation, like the use of a micro-
scope, leading to special insights not available to other operations ... 

CONCLUDING UNPHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSATION 
501 
A [with an effort]: ... well, I don't want to get into this matter of 
thought control; but as you said yourself there are now philosophers 
who emphasize the existence of different forms of knowledge ... 
B: Yes. Kierkegaard and Polanyi are examples and I admire both of 
them. But can you say that they are as effective as sustaining and 
protecting the personal elements of knowledge as are movies, the 
theatre, poetry, or the sense of self-worth established in an individual 
by the love of his parents? Polanyi the philosopher describes 
scientific phenomena that do not fit into the objectivist pattern; he 
does not create them. That is being done by Polanyi the physical 
chemist. Similarly, philosophers can identify the special kind of 
knowledge I have in mind, they can describe it, though rather 
imperfectly, because their language is infected by objectivity, they 
can praise it, they can object to separating it from the rest - but there 
is not a single philosopher who matches an artist, a saint or a 
politician in giving profile, strength and substance to that "rest". This 
is what I meant when saying that the "good" philosophers - which do 
exist - chose the wrong metier and the wrong medium for their 
suggestions. 
A: Is that the reason why you prefer Ayn Rand to Foucault? 
B: You heard about that remark! Yes! Her Atlas Shrugged is the best 
introduction to Aristotle I know. 
A: Are you serious? 
B: Figure it out yourself! The book towers above the lifeless productions 
of our academics. There is love, murder, fornication, industrial 
espionage, mystery - all leading up to the principles of the Aris-
totelian philosophy. Of course, I don't accept her product - but at 
least there is a product, a concrete product, not just empty words. 
What we need to get ahead in these matters is not practice accom-
panied by distant reflection, what we need is a combination of 
philosophical reflection and artistic (scientific) production or, as 
philosophical reflection has the tendency to wander off on a tangent 
and as this tendency is now being supported by the urge to specialize 
- what we need is intelligent, self-reflective production in all fields -
in other words, what we need is life, which, lived wisely and well, 
will make much of professional philosophy superfluous. So, you see 
- there are excellent reasons why I have little love for professional 
philosophy. 

502 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
A: But isn't that itself a philosophical position? Hooker says so. He 
starts his essay with a chapter entitled "Locate Feyerabend within a 
theory of West em traditions". And he identifies you as an anarchist. 
B: That is OK, but not very enlightening. Given anybody, you can 
construct a conceptual grid and classify him with the concept closest 
to his (or her) manner of existence. But other grids may lead to 
different and perhaps more fitting characterizations. If your 
categories are plants and gods - period - then 1 will end up as a plant. 
If they are saints and criminals then, obviously, 1 shall end up as a 
criminal. Early anthropologists subdivided living things into 
Christians, heretics, animals and monsters and had a hell of a time 
trying to classify the American Indians. Given Hooker's grid 1 cannot 
be anything but an anarchist. However, considering the work of 
Marcello Pera 1 am pretty convinced that 1 might regain some 
"rationality" in a grid that contains the subject of rhetoric. 
A: Marcello Pera also wrote a paper. 
B: Did he - where is it? [Examines the papers while continuing to talk.] 
And why connect everything anybody says or does with "positions" 
within a special subject? Very soon one won't be able to say "I am 
tired" without being assigned a "position" on some basic physiologi-
cal issues ... [Looks anxiously at his watch, sadly at the receding sun 
and apprehensively at A's bundle] ... well, 1 guess we should get this 
thing over with ... 
A: You will now reply to the papers? 
B: 1 don't think that would make much sense. 
A: Whynot? 
B: For one thing, some of the papers were written and published over 
ten years ago. 1 already commented on them, in German and, in a 
different way, in English. You can find the comments in Volume ii of 
H.P. Duerr, Versuchungen, Frankfurt 1980/81, in Chapter 12 of 
Farewell to Reason, London 1987 and in Chapter XIV of Irrwege der 
VernunJt, Frankfurt 1989, the partly rewritten German version of 
Farewell 
A: You mean, you stand by these old replies? 
B: Only by some of them. For example, 1 think that my exchange with 
van de Vate in the Duerr collection is an important contribution to 
Galilean scholarship. Then there were simple and childish mistakes 

CONCLUDING UNPHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSATION 
503 
A: ... such as? 
B: Well, Ernest Nagel wrote that inferring arbitrariness from one or two 
historical episodes is a "non sequitur". True - but irrelevant. What I 
say is that scientific procedure - which is neither arbitrary nor 
unsystematic - becomes both when judged by popular rationalist 
standards. Margolis hits the nail on the head: my "anarchism" does 
not eliminate methodologies, but merely refonns them: instead of 
"principles", "presuppositions", "necessary conditions of being 
scientific" we have rules of thumb. 
A: Ernest Nagel contributed to your Festschrift? 
B: No - but his remark is typical. Another typical remark was made by 
C.G. Hempel. Asked about me on Austrian TV he replied that 
"anything goes" cannot constitute a useful philosophy of science. 
Obviously not; I had no intention of replacing long but familiar 
dogmas about the sciences by short and unfamiliar ones. My point 
was, rather, that one should let the sciences speak for themselves and 
that their message cannot be summarized in a theory or a 
methodological system. Noam Chomsky ascribed to me the view that 
any standpoint is as good as any other .... 
A: ... your relativism .... 
B: My so-called relativism: even in my most extravagantly relativistic 
moods I never made a statement like this one - as a matter of fact I 
explicitly rejected it. Chomsky also asserts that "everything goes" 
(his version of my "anything goes") hardly helps us doing scientific 
work. Of course it doesn't - nor do the principles proposed by 
leading philosophers of science: to do scientific work one has to 
immerse oneself into the relevant research situation; mere slogans, 
whether of a rationalistic or a more disreputable parentage are 
irrelevant and misleading, especially when supported by a coherent 
philosophical system. Martin Gardner, the pit bull of scientism made 
a fool of himself already in the title of his paper: "Anti-Science, the 
Strange Case of Paul Feyerabend" - anti-science? Remember that I 
praise Galileo's procedure and recommend its use in philosophy. But 
all this is rather boring, without any philosophical or other merit and 
I could kick myself for having wasted so much time on trivialities ... 
A: Do you mean to say that the essays here [points at the bundle] 
contain such trivial mistakes? 
B: Some of them are even worse. 

504 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
A: Whose? 
B: I am not going to tell you. 
A: And how do you explain these misunderstandings? 
B: Why should I worry about the stupidity of others? 
A: And yet you replied to them in detail, not once, but various times ... 
B: ... because I am an idiot! 
A: Can I have that in writing? 
B: What for? I am not going to deny it! I am not one of those people 
who carefully plan every comma they write and every puff of air they 
exhale so that "history", i.e., the morons of tomorrow may admire 
their perfection. So, let's get on to the next point, my assertion that 
most, no, I should say all forms of rationalism that are not mere 
embroideries conflict with scientific practice. They not only offer a 
distorted and unrealistic picture of science, they would seriously 
impede science, when used as a boundary condition of research. 
A: But Popper, to take just one example, has many scientists on his side 
- even Nobel Prize winners! Lorenz, Medawar, Eccles, praise Popper 
for his superior grasp of scientific procedure, Bondi says that 
everything he, Bondi, ever wrote about method was nothing but a 
footnote to Popper's work. Does this not mean anything? 
B: It does not. Bondi has a special axe to grind; his steady state theory 
was in trouble - yet it was at least scientific, according to Popper and 
the drowning man, quite naturally, reached for this fragile straw. As 
for the others - well, during the Nazi time many scientists objected to 
the theory of relativity; two Nobel Prize winners, Lenard and Stark, 
criticized it as a typically Jewish product. Scientists, Nobel Prize 
winners included, are excellent in narrow fields; they fallon their 
nose when stepping outside - at any rate, many of them do. So, let's 
forget about the scientists in Popper's entourage and let's look at the 
topic under discussion: the relation between scientific practice and 
"rationalism". Now I believe that what I said about this relation in 
AM is essentially correct; on the other hand the matter is now being 
explained in greater detail and with better examples by a new 
generation of historians and philosophers. Here [points at a page in 
Marcello Pera's paper] - look at what Marcello Pera writes in his 
summary: 
This paper aims at rescuing the Whig solution to the problem of scientific 
progress. For this purpose we proposed to define such expressions as ''1'2 marks 

CONCLUDING UNPHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSA nON 
505 
progress over 1'1" in terms of "The supporters of T2 scored an honest victory 
over the supporters of T1" and tried to derme the idea of an "honest victory 
without [my emphasis] an impartial arbiter". 
Pera's point is that while the idea of impartial standards of rationality 
which extend all the way into past and future may be a pious dream, 
there exist patterns of argument that did enter and affect the sciences, 
that similar patterns were examined by the old discipline of rhetoric 
and that it might be possible to expand that discipline and make it 
useful for research. With this I agree and would have agreed 20 years 
ago, when I started writing Against Method. Then there are books 
such as Peter Galison's How Experiments End. Galison draws 
attention to the way in which research in large parts of physics 
changed during the past 50 years: lonely individuals using tiny 
instruments were replaced by research teams numbering in the 
hundreds and working in research cities (CERN, Brookhaven 
National Laboratory, etc.). with equipment resembling large in-
dustrial plants. Galison also demolishes the distinction between a 
context of discovery and a context of justification and shows that a 
research-independent rationalism has no point of attack in scientific 
practice. Particularly interesting is his discovery that the process by 
which scientific disputes are settled has much in common with the 
processes that precede the conclusion of a political treaty: there are 
different parties with different information, skills, ideologies, 
different access to what all parties would be prepared to accept as 
"objective" facts; there are investigations by small teams, there are 
negotiations, by telephone, letter, computer printouts, conferences; 
one group gives a little bit here, the other a little bit there, national 
interests, financial matters enter the debate until, fmally, everyone is 
"ready to sign", though not everyone is happy. Pera's scientific 
rhetoric finds wonderful material here but so do philosophies such as 
Ian Hacking's or the ideas of Arthur Fine, Nancy Cartwright and 
others. Arthur Fine and his colleagues are against philosophical 
"reconstructions" or "interpretations" of science and they invite us 
"to take science on its own terms". 
A: But haven't you objected to interpreting science as a simple and 
coherent thing ... 
B: Yes, I have - and this makes Fine's approach even better for it shows 
that we are not dealing with a well designed building made of 
weather resistant concrete but with a badly arranged and chaotic 

506 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
assemblage of half fmished houses, rotting wooden huts surrounded 
by swamps ... 
A [reading from Against Method]: "many of the conflicts and contradic-
tions which occur in science are due to this heterogeneity of the 
material, to this 'unevenness' of the historical development, as a 
Marxist would say, and they have no immediate theoretical sig-
nificance. They have much in common with the problems which arise 
when a power station is needed right next to a Gothic cathedral ... ". 
B: Did I say that? 
A: Yes, here, on Page 146. 
B: Sounds good - but while I just asserted this unevenness, Galison 
shows it ... 
A: You have forgotten your own work! You showed unevenness in 
connection with the telescope and with the dynamics of Galileo and, 
as far as I can remember, in some detail. 
B: Did I now? Hm. That is nice to hear. I must also confess that I feel a 
little uneasy about this "taking science on its own terms". In one way 
it agrees with my own intentions. But if we "take science on its own 
terms" then why not religion? And if we take religion on its own 
terms, then what becomes of the separation of state and church? 
There are lots of problems hidden behind that phrase - but this does 
not prevent it from being a good, no, an excellent new beginning 
after the positivistic Dark Age. At any rate, the so-called 
"objectivity" of science and of scientific results now appears in a 
completely new light. Looking at these developments (and at earlier 
work, by Holton, for example and, of course, at Tom Kuhn's 
magnificent book which puts an end to all forms of positivism) I am 
ready to close shop and to tum to other matters. Things are in good 
hands. 
A: You mean, Against Method had this wonderful effect on 
philosophers, scientists, historians? 
B: Not at all! Tom Kuhn studied history while I was still enmeshed in 
abstract speCUlation, I don't think Galison ever looked at my book-
he had better things to do; Pickering relied on the positive sugges-
tions made within certain schools of the sociology of science, 
Hacking did read some of the things I wrote en passant, but while 
going his own way. No, the new history and philosophy of science -
which, incidentally, seems to be the very thing Ravetz was looking 
forward to in his essay of ten years ago - has an entirely different 

CONCLUDING UNPHn..oSOPHICAL CONVERSATION 
507 
origin! 
A: Then your book was useless and the commotion it caused ever so 
much hot air! 
B: That is quite possible. But it rattled a few brains and it may have 
accelerated the decay of some already putrid views. On the other 
hand, most scientists and philosophers are unfamiliar with the authors 
and ideas I mentioned. Even worse - representatives of the so-called 
"soft" sciences lack methodological imagination and, naturally, adore 
the simplemfuded caricatures they find in philosophy books (Arne 
Naess' comments on the "soft" sciences, therefore, seem a little too 
optimistic). So I may still have some use as a popularizer and a 
propagandist. Also, I got letters from third-world scientists who 
suffered from the tension between the traditions of their country and 
the destructive but apparently inescapable forces of science and who, 
having read my book, seem to have become a little more relaxed. But 
the forefront of research on the issue of scientific practice vs. 
philosophical rationalism I now gladly leave to the writers I men-
tioned, especially as I am much too lazy to do the hard work of 
interviewing, studying of letters in diverse collections, etc., etc., that 
is required here. 
A: And so we come to your relativism. 
B: Yes, so we come to my so-called relativism. 
A: What do you mean -
so-called? Do you deny having defended 
relativism? Do you deny that there are many relativistic passages in 
your writings? Do you really want to assert that those who were 
encouraged by your books - and you just said that there are such 
people - were mistaken and should return to the prison of Western 
rationalism? 
B: No - not at all! The trouble is that the word 'relativism', like many 
philosophical terms, is ambiguous and while I confess to be a fervent 
relativist in some senses, I certainly am not a relativist in others. 
Besides, I changed my mind. 
A: When? 
B: Since I wrote Farewell. And this is a further reason why it is 
somewhat difficult to reply to the essays here. Those authors who got 
the hang of what I was up to address the Paul Feyerabend of 1975 or 
1978 or, at the latest, of 1987. But now we have August, 1989. Lots 
of things have changed and my opinions have changed with them. 

508 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
A: In what way? 
B: For example, I criticized philosophers for reflecting from afar on 
things such as science, or commonsense, or non-Western traditions 
all of which need close involvement to be understood and are much 
too complex to be summarized in a few slogans. Yet I did precisely 
that when suggesting that all traditions be given equal rights and 
equal access to power. 
A: I noticed that in Farewell you restrict the suggestion to "societies 
based on freedom and democracy" adding ... [pulls another book out 
of his parcel and, after some searching, reads] ... adding "I do not 
favor the export of freedom into regions that are doing well without 
it". There are similar qualifications elsewhere in your book. Also you 
no longer seem to favor proliferation though I am not entirely clear 
about its new role. You mention it ... 
B: ... but I don't demand that people, scientists among them use it in 
their attempts to understand the world. Who am I to design laws for 
others? What I do say is that no idea is ever completely defeated and 
that the most downtrodden point of view can stage a triumphant 
comeback, provided it is made part of some research programme ... 
A: Even Aristotle? 
B: Especially Aristotle! Read Stent, or Prigogine or Bohm! On the other 
hand I admit that most people, and reasonably so, prefer present 
riches to future miracles. This means, of course, that the "facts", 
"laws", "principles" of science and, for that matter, of any system of 
knowledge are the results of practical decisions, or simply of living in 
a certain way - not of theoretical insight alone. 
A: And a philosopher has no say in the matter? 
B: In a democracy everybody has a say in the matter, though not 
everybody will be listened to. Many philosophers are so far removed 
from the details of scientific research or of political action that their 
advice becomes an exercise in low comedy. My suggestion to leave 
traditions alone is an excellent example. I understand now, how I fell 
into this trap. Traditions with military or economic or apparent 
spiritual power often overwhelmed weaker opponents. Most of the 
time - but not always - the consequences were disastrous. Now 
instead of analyzing and criticizing the disastrous cases and looking 
for means to prevent them in the future, i.e. instead of keeping to 
particulars I introduced the general principle: hands off traditions! 
This was not only useless, it was extremely silly for traditions, by 

CONCLUDING UNPHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSATION 
509 
their very nature, try to reach beyond their boundaries - and they 
have to, if they want to survive. 
A: There are isolated tribes! Just recently one of these tribes was 
discovered in the Brazilian jungle! 
B: True - but not all tribes, or cultures are isolated and yet I treated 
them as if they were and as if it were a good thing to preserve their 
non-existent purity. Margherita von Brentano put the finger on 
precisely these idiocies. 
A: Does this mean that from now on you will keep your peace? 
B: Are you kidding? There are still lots of things to be said! 
A: So you do agree that philosophy can make a contribution! 
B: No, no, no, no, no! I have lots of things to say, I Paul Feyerabend, 
this person who is sitting in front of you and who does not represent 
anybody but himself! 
A: But you are ... 
B: ... a philosopher? I thought we already got rid of that mistake. 
A: But why should anybody listen to you? 
B: Why should anybody listen to anybody? You seem to think that 
words have substance only when they emerge from a profession. 
Lonely individuals don't count! 
A: [resigned]: OK, OK- if you must play games! 
B: It is not a game. "Being a philosopher" either means approaching 
things as a member of a club, or it is an empty phrase that can be 
applied to any individual, even a dog. I gladly profess to be a 
philosopher in the second sense, I certainly am not one in the first. 
Besides, our topic does not require any philosophical, sociological or 
historical sophistication. Even the most casual reader of newspapers 
or watcher of TV programs knows by now that traditions are hardly 
ever well defined. They are embedded in world-wide nets of 
information, trade, PR, whether of a political, philosophical or 
religious kind. They may be scattered over different geographical 
regions, surrounded by nations, tribes, communities who threaten 
them, plead with them, have seductive advantages to offer; they often 
contain reformers who deny the past and conservatives who oppose 
innovation. The situation in China in the 18th and 19th centuries 
shows very clearly how different traditions can merge and illustrates 
the resistance created by the process. 
A: So, talking about traditions as separate entities no longer makes any 
sense ... 

510 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
B: It almost looks like that - until you notice that there are people who 
not only want to preserve, or to revive customs, ideas, languages, 
patterns of behavior that show a certain coherence, but also try to 
disentangle this coherent entity from its surroundings. Hungarians 
and Germans in Romania, Turks in Bulgaria, Moslems everywhere, 
conservative Jews, Lithuanians, Albanians, the Slavonic minority in 
Austria, native Indians in the USA are examples. Here the actors 
themselves establish traditions and defme their limits. Now I suggest 
that traditions that have been constituted in this way be regarded as 
having intrinsic value. The suggestion is not absolute - it is not a 
"principle" - and it is not the last word. It may be strengthened by 
events, it may be annihilated. The best intentions may die - but they 
should be there in the ftrst place and they should be retained as long 
as humanely possible. 
A: I agree that strangers should be approached with caution but without 
preconceived ideas as to what ftts and what does not ftt a human 
being. New encounters should be allowed to change our ideas of 
humanity. I would add, however, that one should not just follow 
events, but think them over and make decisions. 
B: When I said "events" I meant to include thought, feelings and 
decisions. I also want more than you have granted so far: the 
strangers' way of life should not just be accepted, it should be 
assumed to have intrinsic value. 
A: Aren't you rather unrealistic? Where are the people who will act in 
this rare and benevolent fashion? 
B: Right now I am mainly thinking of the politicians, scientists, 
administrators who provide "developmental aid" to foreign countries. 
They have information about the overall governmental structures, 
they know how these structures are related to local arrangements, 
what the people think about them, they have studied local practices, 
customs, beliefs and so on. Some of them realized, through a series 
of mishaps, that forcing Western ways on a population with material 
and spiritual resources of its own does not always have beneftcial 
consequences. From here it is only a small step to recognizing that 
ways of life that look strange and unscientiftc may have intrinsic 
merit. My suggestion generalizes the insight ... 
A: I thought you were against generalizations! 
B: But this one has a basis in fact, seems benevolent, and is subjected to 
the test of a life within the tradition judged to have intrinsic merit ... 

CONCLUDING UNPHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSATION 
511 
A: 
and this test may cause some of the participants to drop the 
suggestion ... 
B: ... and perhaps even to apply force in the process. And now comes 
my second suggestion: such an action ... 
A: ... you mean dropping the fIrst suggestion ... 
B: Yes. This and the application of force can be justifIed only by 
recalling all the elements of the encounter, the emotions, hopes, 
disappointments, etc., etc., in greatest possible detail. Or, using the 
general terms you seem to like so much: the only justification for 
temporarily dropping the first suggestion is historical. It makes no 
sense to me to condemn and even attack a movement, a culture, an 
idea from afar, without having tried to live with it, or without detailed 
reports from people on the spot. 
A: Do you mean to say that you are opposed to condemning the 
atrocities of the Nazi era? 
B: I am - if the condemnation is pronounced in empty space, as it were, 
on the basis of superfIcial and loaded facts and if it is demanded of 
people who have no emotional contact with the events and the 
victims. A "moral condemnation" of this kind is a meaningless curse, 
the request to repeat it an imposition, and any action undertaken on 
its basis a crime. Many so-called educators in present day Germany 
don't seem to realize this. 
A: It is an empty curse to condemn Auschwitz? 
B: If the words have no connection with personal experiences, fears, 
expectations - yes. The past cannot be conquered and should not be 
judged except by those who are willing to enter it. 
A: But that is impossible ... 
B: For a philosopher, or an "objective" historian, yes. But a poet, a 
novelist, a ftlmmaker, given suitable material can recreate the 
atmosphere; he or she can bring to life the terror, the cruelty as well 
as the fascination of the time and thus lay the ground for a genuine 
moral decision. 
A: The fascination? 
B: Yes, the fascination; why do you think so many people followed 
Hitler? Were they all morons, or devils? No moral problems arise in 
this case. Idiocy and absolute evil lie beyond the boundaries of 
human morality. No, quite apart from the fascination of evil itself 
which, I think, arises only in small groups, there must have been 
something positive to which people responded and the past cannot be 

512 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
overcome without identifying this positive element. 
A: But then fascism may return ... 
B: That is a chance that arises wherever people are being treated as free 
agents. Here, in the preparation of the choice the arts are towering 
above philosophy and why? Because the arts, rightly understood, try 
to create or recreate the emotional, ideological, religious embedding 
of individual events ... 
A: Well, that does not seem to be the case with the theatre of today ... 
B: True. Brecht was a genius and a great poet. However, he did the 
theatre a disservice by proposing a view which his imitators could 
use to tum the stage into a sociological laboratory. Sociology is bad 
enough. It excises personal elements and replaces them by abstract 
schemes that move no one. Castrating the theatre in the same way 
was a crime. No - what I want is a theatre that again draws the 
audience into the action and turns it from an objective judge into an 
engaged participant. 
A: You mean, you want people to become as confused as those who 
supported the Nazis in the ftrst place? 
B: Precisely. But not only that - I also want them to experience the fear 
of the victims ... 
A: '" that is impossible! 
B: It is impossible to make you afraid for people you love? 
A: That is easy. I am afraid every time my daughter goes on a trip. 
These are crazy times ... 
B: ... and here we can begin. Of course, the imagined fear for our 
beloved ones will never be the same as the real fear that was 
experienced by the victims of the Nazi terror. However, the shadowy 
images of the past that arise from the analogy are still much more 
substantial than the thoughts conveyed by the most sophisticated 
impersonal argument. Arguments do have power :- I admit this - but 
they affect only a small minority and they affect their brains not their 
heart unless we fmd ways to combine reason and emotion ... 
A: Now, where does all this leave your relativism? 
B: My relativism - god! Is this all you can ask? I try to understand 
extraordinary and cruel events; I try to ftnd a way of sharing this 
understanding with others and you ask me how to classify what I 
have said. A typical philosophical question. Insensitive, irrelevant, 
empty. And then you are surprised that I have little love for 
philosophy. A futile enterprise ... 

CONCLUDING UNPHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSATION 
513 
A: ... and one in which you often engaged. 
B: You are right, and I apologize for my outburst which was more 
against myself than against you. Well, to answer your question, I now 
reject a philosophical relativism that provides a defmition or a theory 
of truth and/or reality. 
A: But you defended just such a relativism in Farewell to Reason - you 
defended Protagoras! 
B: Only to show that even this rather simpleminded form reaches much 
further than its opponents claim. 
A: You think that Protagoras was simpleminded? 
B: Not at all! He was the only philosopher who made philosophical 
relativism work. I explained that in Chapter 1, Section 4 of Farewell 
to Reason. 
A: Amazing! You remember all the sections of all your books? 
B: By no means - but this one somehow stuck in my mind. Yet the 
philosophical version has serious shortcomings. In a way it is a 
chimaera, not a real thing. 
A: What do you mean? 
B: Well, let me explain it in this way. Hooker, here in his paper, tries to 
"retheorize the notion of reason". This is the expression he uses. The 
old theories of reason were too simple, new theories must replace 
them. Now reason is both an object (for example, it is an object of 
study) and an agent. The nature of the object "reason" becomes clear 
after the agent "reason" has acted. A theory of reason, if taken 
seriously, restricts the possible actions of reason - it makes them 
conform to the mirror image of one of its stages. But what if reason 
does not conform? Then, the theorist says, the theory must be 
adjusted. This seems OK - all theories are constantly being adjusted 
to new facts. In our present case, however, the adjustment occurs at 
every tum of history which means we have a theory only in words; 
what we actually have is a development, a story. Protagoras did not 
mind dissolving his philosophy into a story - as a matter of fact, he 
tells us exactly how this is to be done. But those modem philosophers 
who develop theories want to keep the two categories apart with the 
result that one of them, the category "theory", becomes empty: there 
cannot be any theory of reason. 
A: This argument cannot possibly be correct! Applying it to knowledge 
and reality you might as well say that there cannot be any theory of 
knowledge and of reality. 

514 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
B: But this is precisely what I say! 
A: Now you are being absurd! There are lots of theories of knowledge. 
Some are excellent, others admittedly not so good. And we have the 
whole of science to deal with reality. 
B: I admit that there are stories which claim to be theories of 
knowledge. But instead of describing the process of knowledge 
acquisition from the outside, as any good theory is supposed to do, 
they are part of this process, they are influenced by it in uncon-
trollable ways, and they are rather restricted in scope. As regards the 
"whole of science" I have to disappoint you. You seem to assume 
that science is a single thing that speaks with a single voice. Nothing 
could be further from the truth. There are a great number of different 
approaches with conflicting results scattered allover the place. What 
is the link that connects the theory of elasticity with high energy 
physics? There is no such link and some scientists, Professor 
Truesdell of Johns Hopkins among them deny that there might be or 
even that there should be a link. Classical physics is usually 
presented as a limiting case of quantum mechanics - which seems to 
establish a kind of unity between the two approaches. This is a 
caricature of the real situation. Also the quantum theory seems to 
deny the idea of a reality that exists independently of human thought 
and action. 
A: But how do you explain the success of the sciences? 
B: That is an excellent question - but it creates more trouble for you 
than it does for me! You want to answer the question by saying that 
there is a reality that is gradually being discovered. My argument 
above and the difficulties of the quantum theory show that the answer 
cannot be correct ... 
A: One moment - how do you apply your argument which was about 
reason to reality? 
B: Reality, like reason, is an object of research, but it is also an agent of 
research. 
A: How can reality be an agent of research? 
B: Well, what are the elements of research? People, groups of people, 
instruments - and these are all parts of the world, are they not? Or do 
you imagine that people with their ideas are hovering like gods above 
a reality of which they have no part? Every molecular biologist will 
object to such a point of view. Accept these premises, and the 
conclusion follows, as in the case of reason. Of course, we still have 

CONCLUDING UNPHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSATION 
515 
to explain the success of the sciences - but the explanation is now 
much more complex than a simple reference to a stable reality. The 
stereotype ''theory'' no longer helps us, the stereotype "story" may. 
A: By "story" you mean a historical account? 
B: Yes - though not an account in the sense of historians who only look 
for statistics and structures. 
A: You reject a scientific history? 
B: It is OK as a footnote, but it fails to deal with individual events. 
There cannot be any theory in the domain of such events. 
A: Don't you hypostatise individual events? 
B: Not at all - I look at history as an empiricist and I find that the 
empirically identifiable actions of individuals always break through 
even the most delicate theoretical scheme - unless the scheme is as 
vague and indefinite as the schemes proposed by Prigogine, Varela, 
Jantsch, Thom and others. 
A: These are highly sophisticated theories ... 
B: Certainly - but their application to history occurs always after the 
event which means that they, too tell stories, only stories surrounded 
by useless and misleading jargon. 
A: So you use one theory, empiricism, to beat another. 
B: Empiricism is not only a theory, it is also a practice and, besides, I 
am here engaged in a debate, not in a search for foundations. All this 
means, of course, that relativism is as much of a chimaera as 
absolutism, its cantankerous twin. 
A: Objectivism and relativism are "cantankerous twins"? 
B: Yes, and Hans-Peter Duerr already identified their common ancestry. 
Both assume that things such as science, or magic, or ''the world 
view of the Dogon" are well defined and keep within the boundaries 
set by the definition. Objectivists then universalize the laws that rule 
within the boundaries of the preferred subject while relativists insist 
on the restricted validity of the laws, within-the same boundaries. But 
as I tried to show in AM and also in Science in a Free Society there 
exists no definition of science that covers all possible developments 
and there is no form of life that cannot absorb radically new situa-
tions. Concepts, especially the "basic" concepts of world views are 
never completely nailed down; they are ill defined, ambiguous, they 
fluctuate between "incommensurable" interpretations and they have 
to, if (conceptual) change is to be possible. So, in a way the mistakes 
both of philosophical relativism and of objectivism go back to Plato's 

516 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
idea that concepts are stable and inherently clear and that knowledge 
leads from illusions to an insight into this clarity. 
A: I would lie if I said that I have understood you. 
B: Well, read my next book, The Conquest of Abundance where I 
explain everything in detail. At any rate - I now agree with Munevar 
that science should retain its exceptional role in the West as being 
best adapted to the situation here: the West is covered with the 
droppings of science so, naturally, it needs scientists to clean it up. 
However, I would add that there are others ways of living in this 
world. People have acted upon the world in many different ways, 
partly physically, by actually interfering with it, partly conceptually, 
by devising languages and making inferences in them. Some of the 
actions found a response, others never got off the ground. To me this 
suggests that there is a reality and that it is more yielding than is 
assumed by most objectivists. Different forms of life and knowledge 
are possible because reality permits and even encourages them and 
not because "truth" and "reality" are relative notions. 
A: May I suggest something? 
B: What? 
A: Why don't you call this new form of relativism "cosmological" 
relativism and the one you reject "semantic" relativism? 
B: Well, why don't you call them this way - you are the guy who 
believes in "positions" and corresponding big words. But to continue 
with the story - we never have an overall view of reality, not even 
approximately for this would mean that we have gone through all 
possible trials, i.e. that we know the history of the world before the 
world has come to an end. 
A: This sounds like Pseudodyonysius, or Master Eckard, or some 
similarly mystical religious view. 
B: It also sounds like good physics. 
A: You mean complementarity? 
B: Yes. 
A: Well, I guess, there are better and more precise views. 
B: More precise, perhaps; but better - no. For the interesting thing is 
that scientists, in their attempt to understand complementarity 
devised and performed experiments which both made it more precise 
and showed its inherent correctness. 
A: Can you describe these experiments? 

CONCLUDING UNPHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSATION 
517 
B: Well, many defenders of "hidden variables" conjectured that an 
experiment that was swiftly changed from, say, a particle experiment 
to a wave experiment would capture the transition and thus find 
effects incompatible with quantum mechanics. Delayed-choice 
experiments of a very delicate kind were made with photons and 
neutrons without discovering such effects. They force us to accept 
either action at a distance or complementarity. The tests in connec-
tion with Bell's inequalities show the same. 
A: But in the case of the quantum theory we have a theory that ties all 
aspects together ... 
B: Not by relating them to an underlying "reality" and a corresponding 
realistic theory! Still, we must posit such a reality if we want to retain 
the habit of projecting our basic notions. I have explained all this in a 
paper "Realism and the Historicity of Knowledge" an earlier version 
of which appeared in the Journal of Philosophy of 1989. So, you see, 
there are lots of reasons why the old debate about Against Method 
and the incipient debate about Farewell to Reason are somewhat 
beside the point. 
A: Doesn't Churchland say something new, even about that old 
background? 
B: You are right - and I am grateful you reminded me. As I read his 
paper it is in general agreement with what I say in the paper I just 
mentioned ... 
A: ... the one in the Journal of Philosophy? 
B: Yes, that one. Naturally, there are differences. Churchland proceeds 
systematically where I use examples; he goes into details while my 
account is rather sketchy; and he speaks about the brain while I speak 
about the world. Now the world and the brain really are not that 
separate - the world is a projection of the brain which is part of the 
world. One might say that Churchland and I deal with the same 
problem but he deals with it "from the inside out" while I deal with it 
"from the outside in". The "basic unrecognizability of the world as a 
whole" now ruso makes excellent sense: the totality brain-world lacks 
the resources it would need to recognize itself. Do I accept the theses 
Churchland abstracts from my earlier work? Yes, all of them (4 and 5 
contain qualifications I did not make before but now regard as 
important) with the possible exception of 2: the essence of common-
sense may be displaced by materialism (in the sense of Churchland) 
but it is not therefore worse (in an objective sense) than materialism. 

518 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
As regards the other authors in your parcel, however, I thought it best 
to express my appreciation and thanks in general terms and to present 
my views as they are today, plus-or-minus a month or so. 
A: Your philosophy. you mean. 
B: My ''philosophy'', if you must use this cursed word - although I 
expect that Professor Deloria who long ago asked me to develop a 
metaphysics of my own may now perhaps be a little happier. 
A: Professor Hooker will also be happier. 
B: Why? 
A: He write [quoting from the MS] that "reasonable people are entitled 
to ask for the positive account which is to replace that which has 
been rejected". 
B: Reasonable people? 
A: Reasonable people. 
B: Are physicists ''reasonable people"? 
A: What do you mean? 
B: Well, Hooker seems to say that while I rejected lots of assumptions 
which were dear to generations of philosophers ... 
A: ... philosophers of science. He says that first you rejected facts, then 
methods and now you reject reason .... 
B: And he wants me to replace these monsters by a monster of my own. 
But this is an absurd demand! A world without monsters is better 
than a world with them and "reasonable people" will celebrate their 
departure and hope that nothing like them will ever turn up again. 
A: You mean a world without general philosophical principles is better 
than a world with them? 
B: Definitely! Remember my above argument: there cannot be any 
theory of reason, knowledge and similar entities and why? Because 
reason is constituted by actions which cannot be foreseen unless they 
are restricted by totalitarian measures. The ''reasonable people" 
Hooker seems to have in mind are thinkers who would profit from 
the totalitarianism. Well, I am not one of them. And if you don't 
believe my abstract argument, then look at the history of science: the 
''reasonable people" who built that history constantly violated the 
precepts introduced by the ''reasonable people" who tried to give a 
theoretical account of it. 
A: Well, all these protestations really don't matter for you just gave the 
''positive account", or the "monster", in your terminology. Hooker is 
looking for ... 

CONCLUDING UNPHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSATION 
519 
B: ... involving a world which cannot be grasped by any theory ... 
A: What about modem cosmology? 
B: It leaves out the gods of Homer, it leaves out Christ ... 
A: ... illusions ... 
B: No - responses that determined the nature of entire ages - read about 
it in the paper I mentioned a few moments ago! The limited 
responses to the limited procedures of our modem materialists seem 
universal only because alternatives now lack support, especially 
financial support. 
A: You must excuse me, but at this point I am getting confused again -
are you now a relativist? Have you ceased to be a relativist? 
B: Well, in AM and then in Science in a Free Society I asserted that 
science was one form of knowledge among many. That can mean at 
least two things. One: there is a reality which encourages many 
approaches, science among them. Two: knowledge (truth) are relative 
notions. In Science in a Free Society I occasionally conflated both 
versions, in Farewell to Reason I used the frrst and rejected the 
second. This I still do and I have given my reasons. Accepting the 
first version (the one you called a cosmological relativism) has 
practical consequences. We must now study alien cultures before 
trying to impose "scientific" solutions. (This corresponds to my 
suggestion to regard all traditions as being intrinsically valuable.) 
Note, I no longer say, as I did in my pluralistic phase, that unfamiliar 
practices and views should be studied and developed, no matter what, 
or that they should at least be left unchanged. They should be studied, 
yes - but only when alternatives tum out to be barren or before 
introducing scientific procedures into an area that so far lived well 
without them. And they should be changed if the study shows grave 
disadvantages. At this point powerful intruders might decide to skip 
amenities and to enforce their own ways. Examples that seem to 
require such action are diseases whose nature cannot be explained as 
quickly as seems necessary, or ecological catastrophes (Western 
armies may one fine day try to stop the burning of tropical forests 
while terrorists may take action against dirty factories in the USA: 
the lives of our children are too precious to be left to the accidents of 
a democratic debate). My suggestions do not exclude procedures of 
this kind - they are not ''principles''. What they do exclude is any 
justification on the basis of "objective moral laws". The final 
judgement is a historical judgement - later generations, using their 

520 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
own insights, will distribute praise and blame as they see fit. All this 
agrees with the pluralistic tendencies inherent in the relevant sciences 
and with the idea of complementarity. We might even say that those 
students of "development" who advise governments to prefer 
successful local measures to conflicting fashions within Western 
science are excellent scientists and that cosmological relativism is a 
natural part of an undogmatic science. So again my writings have 
been overtaken by practical changes and again I welcome the 
development as I welcome all results of concrete research. 
A: All results? 
B: Well, all results that do not endanger important human relations. We 
talked about that before. 
A: But how will you decide the question? How can anyone decide the 
question? 
B: How? Well I personally shall decide the question according to the 
state of maturity or idiocy in which I find myself at a particular 
moment. How else? The same applies to the people around me. A 
state or a country will base the decision on the accepted laws. On 
citizens' initiatives, votes, etc., in republics and democratic countries, 
by trying to get the ear of a king or some other leader in more tightly 
ruled areas. A citizen in a country whose laws conflict with his 
personal convictions can do a variety of things. He can emigrate. He 
can stay, accept a public position and try to save what he can without 
doing too much damage. If I read my sources correctly that was what 
Gustaf Gruendgens and Wilhelm Furtwaengler did in Germany -
though there still remain lots of unanswered questions. He can try to 
change matters in a peaceful manner as the students and workers 
tried in China. He can become a terrorist (Stauffenberg who tried to 
kill Hitler was a terrorist, though unfortunately an unsuccessful one). 
Your question assumes an outside authority. "How will you decide 
the question?" means "Whom will you ask?", or "What method will 
you use?" or "To which principles will you refer?". Now there are of 
course people who do recognize outside authorities. I am not one of 
them. My only authority in such difficult matters is my very limited 
experience and my love of particular people, of my wife, of my close 
friends and my only guide the wish not to let things happen that 
might cause them grief ... 
A: ... a very subjective and self-centered attitude. 

CONCLUDING UNPHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSATION 
521 
B: It would be, if it were the end. But it is not. It is a starting point. For 
if my love for these people is strong enough it will be capable of 
including everybody and, in the last resort, every living thing. 
A: Also Hitler? 
B: Certainly also Hitler. The problem with Hitler is not how a stone, or a 
vampire could cause the death of so many people, but how a human 
being, i.e. somebody like my best friend could carry out such actions. 
Read Albert Speer, Erinnerungen and Ingmar Bergman's remark that 
he loved Hitler after a speech he witnessed as an exchange student in 
Germany. I am very suspicious of an abstract humanitarianism that 
starts from an idea and tries to press the world into it. I am also 
suspicious of the synthetic professions of horror produced by the 
proponents of such an idea. An idea of humanity that is not grounded 
in sound personal relations produces empty rhetoric combined with 
the most atrocious actions. Or as I wrote in Farewell to Reason: 
"Most of the misery in our world, wars, destruction of minds and 
bodies, endless butcheries are caused not by evil individuals but by 
people who have objectivized their personal wishes and inclinations 
and thus have made them inhuman". The actions of Moslem fun-
damentalists today and of the Christians before them show this most 
clearly. 
A: But don't you realize how much killing was done to preserve 
personal and/or tribal relations? Love of one person means hatred of 
another person that endangers her or seems to endanger her ... 
B: Immediate danger is no problem - I shall certainly kill to protect my 
friends from an immediate and real threat to their lives or their well 
being. The problem lies in imagined dangers and it shows that love to 
a particular person, though a starting point, does not suffice; it should 
be generalized, yes, but it should be generalized in a reasonable way. 
A: A marriage of love and logic? 
B: Something like that. 
A: I don't know what to say, but you sure went a long way since you 
wrote your more aggressively relativistic papers. 
B: It's no fun being a relativist when relativistic slogans can be found in 
every university toilet ... [getting up] - well, it is time to go home; 
tonight they have Anatomy of a Murder on French TV and I don't 
want to miss that one. 
A: Can't we wait a little longer - I told my assistant that I would look 
for you in this wood and that she should bring any additional papers 

522 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
she might receive. 
B: Your assistant? She? You have an assistant? 
A 
[blushing]: Yes. 
B: What'shername? 
A 
[blushing even more]: Peggy. 
B: Peggy, eh - and a married man! 
A: It's not what you think ... 
B: OK, I'll take your word for it. How long shall we have to wait? 
A: Ten minutes, a quarter of an hour ... 
B: Well, this day is ruined anyway - we might as well ruin it com-
pletely! 
A: Don't you like to talk about your work? 
B: No. 
A: Don't you want to become famous? 
B: Anything but; being famous means having a certain image nailed to 
one's face, or one's bottom or whatever, and this I truly detest. Read 
about it in the last chapter of Farewell. 
A: Well, you'll soon be rid of me. 
B 
[sitting down with a resigned face] - waiting for Peggy. We may be 
waiting forever ... 
SWEET VOICE FROM THE LEFT: You won't - I am here already! 
A 
[in ecstasy]: Peggy! 
B 
[could not care less]: Ab, Peggy. Did you bring the remaining 
papers? 
PEGGY: Only one [hands it to B]. 
B 
[reading]: "Frederick Suppe, The Observational Origins of 
Feyerabend's Anarchistic Epistemology". I have heard of the guy-
but where is Bob Cohen? Where is Uli Roeseberg? I heard a rumor 
that they would also write papers .... 
A: I guess their papers will come a little later. But I know that 
Roeseberg is going to write about Niels Bohr ... 
B: I am looking forward to it! We talked about Bohr only a few months 
ago when Vii gave a lecture here in Zurich. He knows Bohr much 
better than I do ... 
A: Did you not write a paper about Bohr? 
B: Yes - but I used only what had been published at the time. Much 
more is available now! Besides, Vii consulted unpublished material, 
letters, notes - he spent time in Copenhagen and talked to many 
people there. Well, I tell you what I shall do. I shall take a brief look 

CONCLUDING UNPHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSATION 
523 
at Suppe, and then I shall go home. 
A: So, you won't comment on Bob Cohen and Roeseberg? 
B: There is no need to. We may differ in some details here and there, we 
may state our views in different terms, but basically we have similar 
interests. 
A: Similar interests? What are you talking about? 
B: We try to move beyond professional limits into a domain which can 
be helpful to all. I am convinced that Adolf Gruenbaum, who seems 
to be the exact opposite of me, will agree on this point. 
A: Can you be more specific? 
B: He has strong social concerns. He gets almost violent when describ-
ing how people are misled and exploited. True, he believes that, apart 
from power, it needs reason to improve matters. But I think he would 
concede that being reasonable means paying attention to the actions 
and beliefs of others. We do not need to imitate these beliefs, we 
don't need to respect them absolutely, especially when they affect the 
welfare of large groups - but we should at least pay attention to them. 
We should not reject them out of hand simply because they conflict 
with some simple forms of rationalism or with a crude caricature of 
science. I think he would also agree that the attempt to enforce a 
narrow version of rationality has often led to disasters, especially in 
the area of "development". The new leaders in this field therefore 
live with the local popUlation, they try to understand their values and 
their ways of life, they consult with them and they arrange their 
projects accordingly. They are not mystics, for they examine and 
judge; they are not anarchists, for they do not believe that happiness 
emerges whatever you do; they are not relativists either, for they do 
not acquiesce in what they have found - they are rationalists who 
believe that reason is more adaptable and leaves more room than the 
leading theories of rationality of today. 
A: Do you mean to say that a physician can learn from the natives of a 
Brazilian mountain tribe? 
. 
B: Albert Schweizer learned from the local medicine men ... 
A: ... but he often overruled them ... 
B: ... after he had examined their views. I do not deny that an 
epidemiologist who diagnoses a dangerous plague and has the power 
to do what he thinks is right should use this power, even if it means 
pushing aside the local beliefs about illness. But he should be ready 
to examine the local beliefs in times of lesser urgency and, above all, 

524 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
he should be ready to change his own ideas. Modem scientific 
medicine had some excellent effects; it eliminated parasites, cured 
widespread afflictions, etc., etc. But it also killed effective in-
digenous procedures which were cheap and readily available and thus 
made poor people dependent on the vast and very clumsy machinery 
of modem medical technology. In economics the situation is even 
worse. I don't think Adolf Gruenbaum would disagree with this 
judgement when he reads the evidence and I believe he would opt for 
a theory of knowledge that makes room for it. The same with Bob 
Cohen and Roeseberg. Naive cultural evolutionism is dead -
everybody can learn from anybody. But let me now comment on 
Suppe ... where is his paper? 
PEGGY: Here it is. 
B: Well, let us see [starts reading] ... this is a very interesting critique, 
one of the very few that go back to myoid 1958 paper. It reminds me 
of a violent discussion of this paper in London, in 1958, with Ayer in 
the chair and Watkins, Agassi and others in an overflowing audience. 
"I won't be intimidated by you Popperiansl" said Ayer being entirely 
unaware of my "continuity with Berkeley" (Suppe). Now I do admit 
that continuity (though I never thought of it before) but I would like 
to add, as does Suppe, that there are some important differences. 
First, experience does not provide a basis for ascertaining the truth 
even of sense data statements. It leads to the production of a sen-
tence, it is not a reason for or against accepting it as true. (According 
to Suppe I never put the point in this way - but I did, in a long 
German essay of 1960 which I contributed to a Festschrift in honor of 
my teacher Victor Kraft). Second, all the basic theoretical terms are 
projected into the world and the corresponding entities are assumed 
to exist in it (I no longer hold this view - but it was the view of the 
1958 paper). How can these ontologies be controlled? How can we 
ascertain that one ontology is better than another? By letting 
experience produce observational reports. The observation sentences 
are produced by experience and interpreted, i.e. turned into state-
ments by the theory. The theory in tum is capable of producing 
statements of its own describing what happens during the observa-
tion. If the statements so obtained negate the statement produced by 
experience, then· we have a problem. Complex experiments such as 
the experiment leading to the discovery of the W and Z particles 
clearly show this pattern. Theoreticians predict what is going to 

CONCLUDING UNPHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSATION 
525 
happen under certain circumstances, experimentalists, following 
theory, try to produce the circumstances and interpret the resulting 
events again in terms of the theory. We have two sources of informa-
tion, one the theory, the other the experimental arrangement and both 
sets are interpreted in the same way. Third, ontological realism is 
defended by saying that it leads to a greater number of predictions 
than simple instrumentalism. I repeat that I don't hold this view any 
longer, but it still seems to make good sense, in its own limited 
domain. "It is highly unacceptable" says Suppe. Why? Because it 
makes science analytic? (I agree that I have a coherence view of 
truth). So what? Are analytic statements sacrosanct? No. They are 
often replaced by others. The only difference between their demise 
and the demise of an empirical statement is the funeral oration. "It 
has been refuted" (simpleminded falsificationism) in the case of 
empirical statements, "It turned out to be inconvenient" in the case of 
definitions. And how do we discover that definitions are incon-
venient? On empirical grounds. Besides, I accept Quine's 1953 
criticism and reject the analytic-synthetic distinction (conversely 
Quine's 1960 book "Word and Object" seems to parallel my own 
ideas in many ways. For example he has a defmition of observability 
that is almost identical with mine. He certainly did not read my 
paper, he followed Neurath - which makes the coincidence even 
more pleasurable). It may well be that the things I am writing today 
are an outgrowth of these older ideas - but I do not think so. 
My main concern is now the role of science in society, any society. 
Science is part of society. A democracy is called upon to judge any 
one of its parts. According to what criteria? According to the criteria 
of the citizens asked to render the judgement. Don't the citizens need 
a theory of knowledge to render their jUdgement? They do not. They 
listen to the experts produced by the parties of a dispute, they learn 
that experts disagree and often don't know what they are talking 
about - and that suffices. Besides, scientists themselves can do very 
well without theories of knowledge. So, why should I worry about 
this subject? 
Still, Suppe is right in pointing out that some of the ideas of 
Against Method originated before Kuhn which means that the 
popular sequence Popper-Kuhn-Lakatos-Feyerabend is historically 
misleading. These ideas arose in long discussions in the Kraft Circle 
which was a continuation of the Vienna Circle (1949 through 1951) 

526 
PAUL K. FEYERABEND 
and was founded jointly by Viktor Kraft and myself (Wittgenstein 
visited one of the meetings). My dissertation (1951) contains a 
summary, in Gennan. In 1952 I explained the ideas in English, first 
in Popper's seminar at the London School of Economics and then at 
Anscombe's flat in Oxford with Geach, von Wright and Hart present. 
Popper was not at all pleased and von Wright shook his head when I 
said that scientific discoveries are not always like the discovery of 
the American Continent (which did not change the nature of the 
things already known) but are occasionally like the discovery that 
everything had been part of a dream and that the waking world was 
radically different. In 1958 I tried to clarify matters through an 
examination of the meaning of theoretical terms. Instead of using the 
meaning of observational terms to determine the meaning of 
theoretical terms ("upward seepage of meaning" as Paul Meehl called 
the procedure during discussions at the Minnesota Center for the 
Philosophy of Science) I suggested the inverse procedure or, as I 
wrote in my paper of this year: ''The interpretation of an observation 
language is determined by the theories which we use to explain what 
we observe, and it changes as soon as those theories change" (italics 
in the original). In a word: observation statements are not merely 
theory laden (the view of Toulmin, Hanson and, later, of Kuhn) but 
fully theoretical and the distinction between observation statements 
(''protocol statements" in the terminology of the Vienna Circle) and 
theoretical statements is a pragmatic distinction, not a semantic 
distinction: there are no special "observational meanings" (this is 
very different from Berkeleyl). Thus in the same year as Hanson 
(Patterns of Discovery appeared in 1958) and four years before Kuhn 
I formulated a thesis a weaker form of which became very popular 
later on. Moreover, my thesis not only was stronger than the thesis of 
theory ladenness, it also came from a different source. For while 
Toulmin and Hanson were inspired by the Philosophical Investiga-
tions, I started from and returned to the discussion of protocol 
statements in the Vienna Circle. 
The same is true of the idea of incommensurability. This idea 
(though not the word) was present in my 1952 talk at Anscombe's 
house, it is present in my 1958 paper; in 1962, the year of Kuhn's 
great book I first used the word "incommensurability", but indepen-
dently of him, and to characterize a property I had arrived at by 
abstract considerations and not like Kuhn, by paying attention to 

CONCLUDING UNPHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSA nON 
527 
history. Also, my idea was more narrow, being about the meaning of 
terms only, and, besides, it was used in a polemical way, in counter 
arguments against logical empiricist (including Popperian) theories 
of reduction and explanation and not to state an important positive 
feature of the relation between theories (today I regard it as very 
mistaken to explain misunderstandings between cultures or special 
groups by reference to incommensurability; the situation is much 
simpler - for example: people don't read what is in front of them). 
All this is old history, however, and not very important and, 
besides, I am now getting hungry so, good bye to all of you 
[disappears in the wood] 
A: Goodbye ... 
PEGGY: Good bye ... 
THE FLY: z zzz z zzzzz 
PEACE RETURNS TO THE WOOD. 

Index 
Achinstein, P., 100,303,306,327,344, 
353,327 
Adler, 359 
Adorno, 201 
Against Method, 20,22,59,131,132, 
142,159,179,185,213,214,219, 
226,281,294,317,326,327,349, 
353,370,371,372,379,382,392, 
401,403,411,433,439,445,449, 
452,465,466,469,475,478,488, 
504--506,514,518 
Agassi, J., x, 379, 523 
Agricola, 419 
Analytical, 201,204,422 
Analytic philosophy, x 
Anarchism, xvi, xviii, 21, 41-43, 58, 60, 
66,89,90,94,97,114,159,160,176, 
177,204,213,215,218,219, 
221-224,227,293,295,297,331, 
392,400,407,411,439,465-473, 
478,481,484,488,489,502,503 
Anarchy, xii, xvi, 94, 97,120,207,208, 
221,222 
Anaximander, 247,274 
Andersson, G., xii, 281 
Anomaly, xv, xvi, 13, 171, 172,228, 
263,267 
Anscombe, E., 489,524,525 
Apollonius, 245,246, 249, 255, 260, 
262,263,271,278 
Arendt, H., 385 
Arismrchus, 260, 263, 275, 276,277,279 
Aristotle, 141,182,184,186,190,191, 
201,244,247,248,249,253,254, 
255,257-261,265-268,271, 
275-277,286,290,292,365,385, 
410,435,450,452,493,495,501, 
508 
Arestotelian, xv, 56, 67,125,167,179, 
181,185,190,191,245,258,260, 
262,263,266,267,269,271,273, 
288-291,336,338,365,449,450, 
451,501 
Articificial Intelligence, x, 2, 12, 21 
Aspect, 493 
Avantissimi, 449,450 
Ayer, A.J., 100, 178, 523 
Bacon, F., 143, 149,393,408 
Bakunin, 222 
Barker, S., 100,327 
Bateson, G., 404 
Bayes, 227,234,238,241 
Bechtel, W., 100 
Bell, 516 
Berkeley, G., xix, 26, 32,141,142,273, 
300,301,308,523,525 
Bernard, c., 133 
Biermann, W. 222 
Bjerring, A.K., 100 
Bloch, 201, 222 
Bohm, D., 100,492,508 
Bohr, N., xiv, 490, 491, 493, 521 
Bonamico, 289 
Bookchin, M., 222, 223 
Bondi, 504 
Born, 491 
Boskovic, 134 
Boulding, 404 
Brahe, T., 245, 290 
529 
G. Munivar (ed.). Beyond Reason. 529-535. 
@ 1991 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

530 
INDEX 
Braithwaite, R.B., 148 
Brecht, B. 512 
Brown, H.I., 44,45,55,56,87,90,100 
Brownian motion, 18, 19,339-345,347, 
348,352,492 
Buchwald, J.Z., 157 
Burt, C., 233, 234, 240 
Callippus, 252-256,258,271,276,277 
Capra, F., 422, 429 
Camap, R., 11,301,332,470 
Carson, R., 404 
Cartwright, N., 142,505 
Cassirer, E., 145 
Cavendish, 151 
Chalmers, 376 
Chomsky, N., 503 
Christ, J., 28,445 
Churchland, P., ix, x, 1,484,516 
Cognition, 3,14,15,17,26,28,30,32, 
33,61-65,68,321 
Cohen, M.R., 276,321,521,523 
Cohen, R.S., 101,376 
Colodny, R., 101, 157,241,326,327, 
352 
Common sense, ix, 1,2,32,71,181, 
202,203,205,241,326,327,352, 
390,508,516 
Conjecturalist, 363 
Connectionism, x, 2, 3, 21 
Conventionalist, 36,37,65,291,477 
Copernicus, N., 193,244,245,247,271, 
272,275,278,279,282,287-290, 
294,336,337,338,339 
Copernican, 336, 338, 339 
Copi, I.M., 288, 294 
Coulter, 198 
Counterinduction, 28,159,466 
Couvalis, S., 18 
Critical falsificationism, xii 
Critical rationalism, xvii 
Dada, 109,110,124-127,373 
Dadaistic epistemology, xvii 
Dahrendorf, 383 
D'Alemberg, 419 
Dalibard, 493 
Darlington, 428 
Darwin, C., 144,445 
Deloria, V., x, 398, 516 
Dematerialization, 458 
Democratic relativism, xvii 
Democritus, 493 
Descartes, R., 119,205,375,330,393, 
395,404,408,499 
Determinism, 49,145 
Diderot, 32,419 
Diederich, W., xviii, 213 
Douglas, W.O., 404 
Dubos, 404 
Duerr, 372,502,514 
Duhem, 231-233,245-247,249, 
252-254,258,261,262,264,265, 
269,271-275,277-280,331-336, 
338,339,344,345,348,349,351 
Dummett, D., 95 
Easlea, B., 101 
Eccles, 459,504 
Ecosophy, 410 
Einstein, A., xiv, 69-72, 91, 92, 330, 
339,340,343,359,361,377,393, 
394,398,410,468,493 
Ellul, 404 
Empedocles, 494 
Empiricism, xi, xvi, 41-55, 57, 60, 73, 
89,95-97,134,144,191,204,284, 
293,301,302,308,330,332,335, 
357,465,478,514,525 
Engels, F., 223, 422, 423 
Epicycles, 67,260,262,263,269,270, 
271,282 
Epicureanism, 440 
Epistemological anarchy, xii 
Epistemology, xv, xvi, xvii, xviii, xix, 2, 
21,28,44,49,51,58,59,61,63,65, 
113-115, 117, 118, 122, 127, 159, 
213,219,222,297,300,301,307, 
355,361,374,375,391,395,398, 
401,434,439,443,468 
Erasmus, 393,445 
Eudemus, 249, 255, 277 
Eudoxos, xv 
Evolutionary considerations, xiv 

INDEX 
531 
Evolutionary epistemology, 101 
Evolutionary relativism, xv 
&ner, 340, 344 
Facts, xi, xii, xvi, 14,43,50,51,63, 
110,124,127,128,188,215,227, 
229,231,238,243,318,321,331, 
333-339,341,342,455,457,477, 
478,481,498,499,508,517 
Fallibalism, xii, 83, 162 
Falsificationism, 122, 184, 185,227, 
230,232,233,236,238,282,286, 
289-293,297,303,304,308,466, 
471-473,477,486,490,524 
Farewell to Reason, 294,483,507,508, 
513,518,520,521 
Ferrari, 403 
Feyerabend, ix, x, xi, xii, xv, xviii, 1,2, 
3,14,18,20,22,28,41,43-45,50, 
55,57,58,59,60,66,73,78,89-91, 
94-97,99,100,109,110-112, 
114-118,120-129,131-135,144, 
149, 156, 157, 159, 160, 161, 165, 
167, 169, 170, 171, 176, 177, 
179-187,190-199,202,208, 
213-224,226,227,231,235,236, 
239,240,243,244,281-284, 
287-290,292,294,297-309, 
313-325,329-331,334,337, 
349-342,344-348,350-353, 
370-374,377,379-386,389-398, 
400,401,403,416,417,433-448, 
449-451,453-462,465-486,487, 
502,507,509,524 
Fine, A., 102,156,503 
Finitude, 41,42,45,258,266 
Fizeau, 151, 152 
Flamsteed, 334-336, 352 
Fobes, M., 156 
Foundationaiism, 48, 56 
Formalist, 184 
Foucault, M., 484, 501 
Frege, xiii 
Freud, 359,360 
Fresnel, 324, 329 
Gaines, 446 
Galileo, xi, 185, 191-193,231,245, 
281,283-294,317,329,337-339, 
349,352,371,377,393,449,450, 
451,467,468,470,503 
Galison, P., 156,505 
Galtung, 404 
Gardner, M., 503 
Geach, P., 524 
Geminus, 249, 275 
Gellner, G., 377,382,404 
Geocentrism, 258,261,265,266,278 
Glacken, 404 
Glaucon, 251 
Global instrumentalism, xv 
Goldsmith, 404 
Goldstein, 270, 278-280 
Gomperz, 255, 276 
Goodman, N., 29,178 
Gorman, R., 7 
Gould, SJ., 231,240,497 
Gouy, 340,344 
Grandy, 305 
Green (philosophy), xix 
Gruenbaum, 521,523 
Hacking, I., xix, 131,505,506 
Hannay, A., xvi, xvii, 109 
Hanson, N.R., 132, 135,215,247-249, 
276,278,352,525 
Harris, M., 236,238,241 
Harvey, 377,393 
Hearnshaw, L.S., 233, 240 
Hegel, G., 433, 446-448 
Heidegger, M., 127,201,438,495 
Heine, 445 
Heisenberg, W., 395,468,491 
Heliocentrism, 271,277 
Helvetius, 419 
Hempel, C., xiii, 503 
Heraclitus, 319,496 
Herakledies, 260 
Herschel, C., 136, 137 
Herschel, W., 137-140, 150, 151 
Hilbert, 69, 149 
Hinton diagram, 19 
Hipparchus, 245,246,249,255,261, 
262,263,271,277,278 

532 
INDEX 
Hobbes, T., 210,375 
Holbach, 419 
Holistic theory of meaning, xiii 
Holton, 376, 506 
Hooker, C.A., ix, xiv, xix, 41,490,502, 
513,517 
Horz, H., xix,417 
Hoskin, M., 136 
Howson, 352, 485 
Hume, D., 96,97,297,303,308,490, 
492 
Huygen,75 
Ideology, x, xviii, 110, 189, 190,413 
lllich, 198,372,404,413,415 
Incommensurable, ix, xii, xiii, xv, 3, 
16-18,95,137,171,215,287,288, 
293,297,303-306,350,479,482, 
514,525,526 
Inductivist, 51,184,230,235,477 
Instrumentalism, xv, 243-246, 257, 
269-275,276,280,326,466,524 
Internal realism, xiv, 33 
Intersubjective, 231,301,438 
Intersubjectivity, 205 
Intuition, 45, 324 
Ionesco, E., 109,110,124 
Irrationalism, 204, 207, 208, 436, 446 
Jantsch, 514 
Jardine, N., 141,272 
Jensen, 232 
Justification, xii 
Kant, I., 26,47, 162,201,204,210,318, 
435,445-447,485,494 
Kekes, J., xviii, 159 
Kelvin, Lord, 153 
Kepler, J., 3, 141,245,272,285,329, 
351,352,393 
Kierkegaard, S., 411, 413, 495,501 
Knowledge, xiii, xvii, 2, 8,12-15,21, 
28, 32, 33 35, 46-49, 56, 62, 63, 70, 
83,110,113,120,123,124,127,140, 
147,148,191,195,210,218,244, 
297,300-303,307,308,326,327, 
456,457,459-461,471,476,489, 
492,494,497-501,514,515,517, 
518,524 
Human knowledge x,61 
perceptual knowledge ix, 1, 191 
Western knowledge x 
Cosmological knowledge 195 
Koertge, N., xviii,225 
Kohlberg, 230, 240 
Kraft, V., 523, 524 
Kropotkio, 218,412 
Kuhn, T.S., xi, xiii, xv, xviii, 20, 55, 
92-94, 145, 150, 152-154, 157, 183, 
185,196,215,247,282,284,289, 
294,349-351,362-364,366-370, 
377,392-398,400,401,485,506, 
524,525 
Kung, 415,434 
Kvaloy,404 
Lagrange, 149 
Lakatos, I., xi, xii, 113, 183, 196,215, 
216,344,356,362,366-369,370, 
373,374,376,377,439,469-486, 
490,524 
Langmuir probes, 79-82 
Language, xii, 26, 27, 36, 37, 46-49, 95, 
98,135,161,163,234,293,316,326, 
327 
Laplace, 145, 147 
Laudan, xviii 
Lavoisier, 353 
Laymon, 18,342,345,347,352 
Lehky, S., 11 
Leibniz, 201, 393 
Lenard, 504 
Leopold, 404 
Lesley, 140 
Lessing, 123,445 
Liberal, 28,30,97, 112, 123, 188, 
199-202,208-211,215,217,230 
Littlewood, J.E., 157 
Lloyd, G.E.R., 272, 276 
Locke, J., 167,211 
Logical positivism, 301,308 
Lorenz, K., 499, 504 
Lovberg, R.H., 101 
Luther, M., 22,445 

INDEX 
533 
~ach,E.,34,273,358,376,468 
~annheim, 227,235,240 
~argolis, J., xvi, 465, 485 
~arx, J.L., 240 
~arx, K., 223,329,423,428,429,430, 
445 
~arxism, xix, 224, 430, 360, 361, 367 
~aterialism, xi, 453-459, 462, 516 
~ates, B., 490 
~axwell, G., ix, x, xv, 453, 454, 462 
~cHarg, 404 
~eaning, xii, xiii, xiv, 302-308, 315, 
319,324 
~edawar, P., 504 
~eeh1, P., 525 
~eeker, 404 
~elloni, 140 
~erton, R.K., 225, 240 
~eta-methodology, 469,478,479 
~ethod, 493,503,504,507,517,519 
~ethodologies, ix-x 
~ethodologists, 475 
~ill, J.S., xvi,26, 121-123, 177, 195, 
196,211,492,495 
~illikan, 151 
~inkowski space, 69 
~ishan, 404 
~onoculture, 406, 420 
~ontaigne, 492 
~ost,J., 223 
~unevar, G., vii, 179,488,514 
~usgrave, A., xv, 178,243,295,376, 
485 
Nader, R., 226 
Naess, A., xix, 403, 489, 507 
Nagel, E., 37,495,503 
Nash, 404 
Neurath, 0., 358,377,524 
Neuroscience, x 
Neural networks, 1,3,9, 12, 13, 19,21 
Neuron, 3,6,12,13,14,16,17 
Neutral observation language, 301,302, 
305,306 
Newton, I., 3,67,74,75,81,139,142, 
145-147,256,264,317,361,452, 
329,330,332,334,335,341,490 
Nietzsche, F., 203,440, 448, 495 
Nihilism, 37, 109,440 
Noether, E., 229 
Noumena, xvi 
Objectivism, 234,514,500,514 
Observability, 523 
Observation, 2,17,46,48,49,51,52, 
54,55,64,81,96,131-138,147,148, 
155,187,191,215,229-231,233, 
251,258,264,269,281,282,283, 
297-309,322,330,332,337,338, 
345,346,453,454-457,523 
Observation sentences, xii, 136 
Observer, 136,138,190,208,230,231, 
277,298,303-305,335 
Ontology, xvi, 16,25,28,29,30,31,33, 
36,76-78,313,315,317-319, 
322-325,328,375,461,523 
Operationist, xi 
Oresme, N., 290 
Paradigm, xv, xvi, 15,20,44,63,217, 
355,364,393,491 
Paradox, 30,33,34,39,491 
Parmenides, 38,319,493,496 
Particle physics, xiv, 356, 413 
Pauling, L., 221 
Peirce, C., 26, 467 
Pera, ~., 502, 504, 505 
Perception, 14,46,52,62, 64, 76, 125, 
191,301,456,498 
Perovich, A., xiv, 313 
Perrin, 344 
Perspective, 14, 18 
Peucer, 272 
Phenomenological, 263, 340-345 
Phlogiston, 496 
Philosophy of science, xvi, 201, 355, 
374,368 
Physicalism, 459,462,484 
Physicalist, 301,484 
Piaget, J., 177,197 
Pickering, A., 156,506 
Pirandello, L., 498 
Plato, xv, 245-247, 249-254, 257, 261, 
262,265,271,275,276,279,330, 

534 
INDEX 
493,495,496,514 
Platonism, 181 
Pluralism, xiv, xv, xvi, 28,29,112,171, 
202,204,208,209,211,235,236, 
239,376,379,380,407,410,415, 
416,436,444,445,479,518 
Poincare, H., xi, 331, 332, 334, 336, 340 
Polanyi, M., 183,492,501 
Polya, 367,377 
Popper, K., xi, xviii, 43,49,50,51,54, 
55,57,60,90,91,111,112,114,115, 
116,117,120,121,127,128,143, 
146,149,150, 178k 182f, 215, 216, 
221,227,228,229,230,231,232, 
233,234,236,237,238,239,248, 
275,297,303,308,330,342,351, 
352,383,384,386,435,436,453, 
455,359,470-472,482,483,485, 
489,490,491,492,504,523-525 
Positivism, 47-51,187,228,229,234, 
235,265,301,308,327,359,360, 
466,482,506 
Positivist, 288,359,361,506 
Positivistic, 200, 298, 327, 361 
Positivists, 306, 373 
Pragmatism, 36,38,202,204,207,466 
Presocratic, 246 
Presocratics, 376 
Pretorious, 272 
Priestley, 349 
Prigogine, I., 508,514 
Proliferation, ix 
Protagoras, 170,437,513 
Protagorean relativism, x, 159, 170, 171, 
176 
Proudhon, 223 
Ptolemaeus, 255 
Ptolemy, xv, 245-247, 249, 260-272, 
276-279,282,288,329 
Putnam, H., xiv 
Quantum mechanics, xiv, 68, 69,154, 
165,243,330,383,491,499,515 
Quine, V.O., 25,27,137,138,177,351, 
524 
Quantum physics, 330, 399 
Rand, A., 501 
Rationalist, xvi, xvii, 43, 50, 51, 112, 
113,120,125,149,379 
Rationalists, xvii, 160,161, 179, 187, 
189,190,194,208,216,285,289, 
379,405,434,435,439,494,498, 
522 
Ravetz, J., x, 355, 506 
Realism, xiv, xv, 26-35, 59,61,466 
Realist, xiv, 25-27, 29, 33, 36-39 
Reality, 15,25-32,35-37,40-42,70, 
71,74,141,183,205-207,244,246, 
254,262-265,275,279,281,284, 
307,324,328,465,471,513,515, 
516 
Reason, xvi, xvii, 16, 17,39,41-61,63, 
78,89,90,94-97,112,119-125,159, 
160, 169-171, 179-187, 189, 
201-203,205-207,210,223,251, 
281-283,293,386,412,433-438, 
465,470,480,483,513,514,517, 
522 
Reductionist, xiii 
Reference, xiii, xiv 
Reformist, 217 
Reichenbach, 52 
Reid, 32, 142 
Reinhold, 272 
Relationalism, 411 
Relativism, xiv, xv, xvii, 28, 114, 118, 
119,122,123,126,159,170,171, 
176,179,181-184,187,188,208, 
209,238,297,298,301,302,307, 
331,410,411,434,436,437,440, 
441,446,483,503,507,512-515, 
518 
Relativist, xiv, 112 
Relativists, 31,98,514,518,520 
Ritter, 140 
Rodman, 404 
Roemer, 151 
Roeseberg, 521,523 
Roger, 493 
Rorty, R., 455,495 
Rowland, 150 
Rubashov, 368 

INDEX 
535 
Rumelhart, D., 6 
Russell, B., 52 
Sahlins, 404 
Scepticism, 96, 119,271,331 
Sceptics, 141,272,490 
Scheffler, 323, 327 
Schiller, 494 
Schjelderup-Ebbe,413 
Schlick, 357 
Schliemann, 393 
Schlipp, 351 
Schnadelbach, H., xix, 433 
Schrecker, 100 
Schroedinger, E., 491 
Schumacher, 404 
Schweizer, A., 522 
Science in a Free Society, 159, 179,213, 
214,219,226,328,353,372,377, 
392,401,415,439,444,447,465, 
485,514,518 
Scientific method, xi, xvi 
Sejnowski, 7, 11 
Semantic, xiii, 27, 35,95,305 
Shapere, D., 294, 306, 323, 326, 327 
Shepard, 404 
Sibley, 389,398 
Simplicius, 246,249-251,255,272, 
275-278 
Skeptics, 26 
Smith, 211,446,447 
Sociobiologists, 229 
Socrates, 251 
Sorel, 382 
Sosigenes, 249, 255, 258, 276, 277 
Spinner, H., 380 
Spinoza, 386, 496 
Stark, 504 
Stent, G., 508 
Sternglass, 234,241 
Summative cell bodies, 8 
Suppe, xix, 297, 308, 521, 524, 525 
Symons, 236,241 
Synapses, 6, 8 
Tartaglia, 403 
Terrace, 234 
Theoretic import, xiii 
Theoretical assumptions, xi, 132 
Theory of meaning, xiii 
Thorn, 514 
Thomson, 157 
Tillich, 209 
Tower Argument, xi, 337 
Trigg, 102 
Truisms, xi, 166 
Truth value, xii 
Tseringma, 406 
Uhlenbeck, 143 
Uniformity, 116,258,261,265,271 
Urbach, 351 
Van Frassen, B., 51,102 
Van de Vate, xix, 449, 502 
Varda, 514 
Ventris, 393 
Verlag, 443 
Vickers, 102 
Vienna Circle, xi, 525 
Voltaire, 419 
Von Bretano, M., xviii, 199,201,509 
Von Liebig, 144, 157 
Von Wright, 524,525 
Wartofsky, M., xiv 
Watkins, J., 351,523 
Weber, M., 203,207,208,212,442,448 
Western Knowledge, 390,410 
Whewell, 329,330,351 
Whitehead, A., 389, 390, 393, 394 
Wittgenstein, L., 9, 198,489,492,495, 
524 
Worrall, J., xi, xii, 329 
Xenophanes, 205, 496 
Young, 140,329 
Zen, 370,371,377 
Zeno of Elea, 39 

Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science 
114. A. Janik: Style, Politics and the Future of Philosophy. 1989 
ISBN 0-7923-0056-4 
115. F. Amrine (ed.): Literature and Science as Modes of Expression. With an 
Introduction by S. Weininger. 1989 
ISBN 0-7923-0133-1 
116. J.R. Brown and J. Mittelstrass (eds.): An Intimate Relation. Studies in the 
History and Philosophy of Science. Presented to Robert E. Butts on His 60th 
Birthday. 1989 
ISBN 0-7923-0169-2 
117. F. D' Agostino and I.C. Jarvie (eds.): Freedom and Rationality. Essays in Honor 
of John Watkins. 1989 
ISBN 0-7923-0264-8 
118. D. Zolo: Reflexive Epistemology. The Philosophical Legacy of Otto Neurath. 
1989 
ISBN 0-7923-0320-2 
119. M. Kearn, B.S. Philips and R.S. Cohen (eds.): Georg Simmel and Contem-
porary Sociology. 1989 
ISBN 0-7923-0407-1 
120. T.H. Levere and W.R. Shea (eds.): Nature, Experiment and the Science. Essays 
on Galileo and the Nature of Science. In Honour of Stillman Drake. 1989 
ISBN 0-7923-0420-9 
121. P. Nicolacopoulos (ed.): Greek Studies in the Philosophy and History of 
Science. 1990 
ISBN 0-7923-0717-8 
122. R. Cooke and D. Costantini (eds.): Statistics in Science. The Foundations of 
Statistical Methods in Biology, Physics and Economics. 1990 
ISBN 0-7923-0797-6 
123. P. Duhem: The Origins of Statics. Translated from French by G.F. Leneaux, 
V.N. Vagliente and G.H. Wagner. With an Introduction by S.L. Jaki. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-0898-0 
124. H. Kamerlingh Onnes: Through Measurement to Knowledge. The Selected 
Papers, 1853-1926. Edited and with an Introduction by K. Gavroglu and Y. 
Goudaroulis.1991 
ISBN 0-7923-0825-5 
125. M. Capek: The New Aspects of Time: Its Continuity and Novelties. Selected 
Papers in the Philosophy of Science. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-0911-1 
126. S. Unguru (ed.): Physics, Cosmology and Astronomy, /300- 1700. Tension and 
Accomodation.1991 
ISBN 0-7923-1022-5 
127. Z. Bechler: Newton's Physics on the Conceptual Structure of the Scientific 
Revolution. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-1054-3 
128. E. Meyerson: Explanation in the Sciences. Translated from French by M-A. 
Siple and DA Siple. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-1129-9 
129. A.I. Tauber (ed.): Organism and the Origins of Self. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-1185-X 
130. F.J. Varela and J-P. Dupuy (eds.): Understanding Origins. Contemporary 
Views on the Origin of Life, Mind and Society. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-1251-1 
131. G.L. Pandit: Methodological Variance. Essays in Epistemological Ontology 
and the Methodology of Science. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-1263-5 

Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science 
132. G. Munevar (ed.): Beyond Reason. Essays on the Philosophy of Paul 
Feyerabend.1991 
ISBN 0-7923-1272-4 
133. T.E. Uebel (ed.): Rediscovering the Forgotten Vienne Circle. Austrian Studies 
on Otto Neurath and the Vienna Circle. Partly translated from German. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-1276-7 
134. W.R. Woodward and R.S. Cohen (eds.): World Views and Scientific Discipline 
Formation. Science Studies in the [former] German Democratic Republic. 
Partly translated from German by W.R. Woodward. 1991 ISBN 0-7923-1286-4 
135. P. Zambelli: The Speculum Astronomiae and Its Enigma. Astrology, Theology 
and Science at Albertus Magnus' Time. (forthcoming) 
ISBN 0-7923-1380-1 
Also 0/ interest: 
R.S. Cohen and M.W. Wartofsky (eds.): A Portrait 0/ Twenty-Five Years Boston 
Colloquia/or the Philosophy o/Science, 1960-1985.1985 
ISBN Pb 90-277-1971-3 
Previous volumes are still available. 
KLUWER ACADEMIC PUBLISHERS - DORDRECHT / BOSTON / LONDON 

