III. NEWTONIAN 
MOLECULAR 
DYNAMICS FOR 1NONEQUILIBRIUM SYSTEMS 
III.A Limitations of the Newtonian Approach 
Conservative Newtonian mechanics can be used to treat a variety of nonequilibrium prob- 
lems involving the approach to equilibrium of isolated systems or the mechanical coupling of 
systems to external energy sources. The expansion of a system into a vacuum, the equilibra- 
tion of a nonequilibrium velocity distribution, and the relaxation of initially-excited modes are 
all examples of isolated systems exhibiting interesting transient behavior. Systems treated with 
Newtonian mechanics need not be isolated. A system can be compressed by using a rigid wall, 
converting the mechanical work done by the wall into internal energy. But without formulat- 
ing a thermostat, or some method for equilibrating thermally with an externalreservoir, only 
mechanical problems can be treated with Newtonian mechanics. In particular, problems involv- 
ing steady nonequilibrium states always require the extraction of heat by an external force that 
cannot be formulated using Newtonian mechanics. For this reason many of the applications to 
nonequilibrium problems require new equations of motion. We will come to the implementation of 
thermostats and modifications of the Newtonian approach in Chapter IV. In this chapter we con- 
centrate instead on what can be done with gases, liquids, and solids obeying Newton's equations 
of motion. 
III.B Gases: Boltzmann's Equation 
Whenever the density is low enough that successive binary collisions are uncorrelated and 
the collisions can be considered to occur between particles at the same spatial location, but is 
still high enough that the dynamics is not dominated by the boundary conditions, Boltzmann's 
gas-phase equation 
df /dt = Of lOt + v Of/Or + F O flOp = (df /dt)cotziaio,~8 
can be used to describe the corresponding nonequilibrium systems. This equation is the exact 
Liouville equation until the collision term is approximated to make solutions possible. Boltzmann 
used a quadratic approximation to the collision term. We will use instead the even cruder linear 
relaxation-time approximation. Here f is the one-body probability density. For three-dimensional 
monatomic particles this probability density has to be integrated over three space and three 
velocity coordinates (momenta could equally well be used) to correspond to a (dimensionless) 
probability. Thus the units of f are either [seconds3/meters s] or [(seconds/kilograms)3/metersS]. 
Solutions of the Boltzmann equation incorporating gradients of mass, momentum, or en- 
ergy lead to numerical estimates of the diffusion, viscosity, and conductivity coefficients in terms 
of the interparticle forces. John Barker and his coworkers have carried out a careful comparison 
of the transport properties for the rare gases, from the Boltzmann equation, using a force-law 
fitted only to equilibrium properties. The agreement was very good: 

73 
In deriving the Boltzmann equation for the one-body distribution function from the many- 
body Liouville equation, it is necessary to assume that the rate at which collisions occur between 
particles with two different momenta, Pl and p2, is proportional to the numbers of such parti- 
cles at r, f(r, pl,t) and f(r, p2,t). This statistical assumption makes the righthand side of the 
Boltzmann equation irreversible, unlike the lefthand side (which describes reversible collisionless 
streaming in phase space) and unlike the Liouville equation. Th~s qualitative difference between 
the underlying reversible equations of motion and the irreversible equation for the probability 
density evolution seems paradoxical and has triggered many attempts to "understand" the source 
of the irreversibility. 
As we saw in Chapter I, Alder and Wainwright studied the approach to equilibrium of 
100 hard spheres, all moving with the same initial speed, but in different directions. After one 
collision such spheres can have any kinetic energy between zero and twice the initial energy. After 
two collisions one sphere could end up with an energy three times the mean, and so on. Figure 1 
outlines a sequence of two such transverse collisions which are maximally effective in transferring 
energy between colliding particles. 
Figure III.1 
1 hits 2 
3 hits 2 
2 exits 6) 
Alder and Wainwright verified that Boltzmann's description of the approach to equilibrium 
(through following the time dependence of ( lnf )) was in excellent agreement with their reversible 
dynamical simulation. Unless the initial conditions are specially chosen to violate it, Boltzmann's 
irreversible equation is an excellent description of gas-phase dynamics. 
We shall see that Boltzmann's equation even describes very small two- and three-body 
systems. By using periodic boundaries it is possible to simulate diffusive, viscous, and heat flows 
with such small, few-particle systems. The Boltzmann Equation can be applied to these problems 
and~ in the two-hard-sphere case, it has a particularly simple form. Both the coordinate space 
and the momentum space are shown for such a two-particle system in Figure 2. The two spheres 
must move in opposite directions, because the only reasonable value of the total momentum, a 
constant of the motion, is zero. If the Boltzmann equation description can be applied at all to 
such a simple system the solution can only correspond to the properties of an ensemble of these 
two-body systems in which the initial coordinates and the directions of motion are chosen from 
an appropriate statistical distribution. 

Figure III.2 
74 
Py 1 
2 
Px 
The usual Boltzmann equation, describing the collisions of pairs of particles, is quadratic 
in f, and therefore nonlinear and difficult to solve. For an ensemble of very simple two-sphere 
systems, in which all members of the ensemble are restricted to have the same kinetic energy, 
the Boltzmann equation reduces to a linear equation rather than a quadratic one, and becomes 
relatively easy to solve. The equation is linear because f is the same for both the two colliding 
particles in a fixed-energy system with fixed center of mass: 
f(r,p,t) = f(r,-p,t). 
Given the momentum of either colliding sphere we know the momentum of the remaining sphere. 
Further, the collision rate is independent of the momentum p, because the magnitude of p cannot 
vary in a constant-energy system. Thus an ensemble of two-body systems can be described by a 
linear Boltzmann equation. It has the form of the =relaxation-time" approximation often used in 
treating many-body flows: 
df /dt = (Of /Ot) + a(f÷)/Or + O(f~)/Op = (fo - f)/r. 
Here, fo is the equilibrium post-collision distribution function. We include the possibility 
that the sum (O÷/Or) -b (a~/ap) may not vanish. In the general case the time between collisions, 
r, depends inversely on the particle speed. It is therefore only in the special case that all particles 
have the same speed, as in the two-sphere problem, that this approximation becomes exact. 
To illustrate the usefulness of the relaxation-time Boltzmann equation let us consider again 
the problem of Alder and Wainwright, in which a velocity distribution localized to a constant- 
speed shell approaches the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. In the relaxation-time approxima- 
tion f has the form: 
f - fo = [finitiaz - fo] e -t/~. 

75 
This approximation provides a useful estimate of the time required to reach equilibrium 
(a few collision times), but as we saw, the velocities in a many-sphere system are correlated, with 
the higher speeds filling in more slowly than predicted according to the approximate two-sphere 
model. 
Bird suggested a much better, but computationally more-involved approximation, in which 
particles are selected for collisions statistically, based on a computed collision rate. In this way 
the actual particles followed, up to about a million, represent many more particles. This method 
is specially useful in solving aerodynamic "Knudsen-gas" problems. In such gases the mean free 
path is comparable to boundary dimensions. Thus the particle flow is influenced by the details 
of the boundary and Navier-Stokes continuum mechanics can be qualitatively wrong. 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
Figure III.3 

76 
Bird's method has been successfully applied to a host of flow problems involving rarefied 
gases. Very recently Meiburg carried out a molecular dynamics simulation of the flow of 40,000 
hard spheres past an inclined plate. He compared the predictions of Bird's approximation with 
his own molecular dynamics results. The results of both calculations are shown in Figure 8. The 
top flow field is Meiburg's molecular dynamics result. Each arrow represents the instantaneous 
average velocity of several dozen hard spheres, all lying within a fixed Eulerian spatial zone. The 
collisions in Meiburg's calculation are calculated without approximations. The lower flow field is 
based on Bird's idea of selecting nearby pairs of particles for collision on a statistical basis. The 
two flow fields are qualitatively different. 
Meiburg's calculation shows that the plate inserted into the gas stream generates and sheds 
vortices when the flow is averaged over zones containing a few dozen spheres each. Figure 3 shows 
that these vortices are absent in the calculation carried out using Bird's statistical collisions. The 
vortices are missing because statistical collisions do not conserve angular momentum. In a "head- 
on" statistical collision between particles located in different spatial zones, their contribution to 
the angular momentum changes sign, as indicated in the following Figure 4. The effect of these 
collisions between separated particles is to lengthen the effective mean free path, thereby enhancing 
viscous dissipation and reducing the Reynolds number, a measure of turbulence discussed in 
Section H of Chapter IV. Meiburg's work is stimulating the development of a hybrid method 
combining stochastic collisions with angular momentum conservation. It is one of many examples 
in which the results of the molecular dynamics simulation were surprising and suggestive. 
Figure III.4 
+ 
© 
+ 
PO ~ 0 
P~ ~ 0 

77 
III.C Liquids: Shockwave Simulation and Fragmentation 
A one-dimensional steady fluid-phase shockwave is one of the simplest and one of the 
most interesting nonequilibrium systems. Shockwaves are a logical phenomenon to study using 
molecular dynamics because they are atomic in scale. Within the shockwave the relationship 
between the longitudinal pressure, parallel to the direction of wave propagation, and volume is a 
linear one, as we show below. At the same time there are gradients, not just in one property, but 
simultaneously in all of them, pressure, temperature, density, energy, and entropy, for instance. 
Thus a wealth of far-from-equilibrium effects can be studied by generating shockwaves. 
In the shockwave cold material is converted into hot in a steady way, the moving shockwave 
simply separating two equilibrium fluid states, one hot and moving, the other cold and static, from 
one another. The usual textbook way of making a shockwave is to push on a fluid with a piston. 
If this is done with a series of small, successively harder, pushes then the resulting pressure wave 
has steps in it according to linear wave propagation theory. But nonlinearity typically causes 
the wave velocity to increase with compression. Then the trailing steps catch up and the wave 
steepens to become a shockwave. 
u s 
Cold 
0 
U s -Up 
----Cold 
4--- Up 
0 
----Cold 
~ 
u s 
Figure III.5 
Figure 5 shows the geometry used to produce a one-dimensional shockwave, viewed in 
three different coordinate systems. In each view the shockwave is indicated as the transition zone 
between a cold fluid and a hot fluid. Such idealized steady one-dimensional transformations can 
be closely approximated experimentally by applying a high pressure to a planar fluid or solid 
boundary. 

78 
In the top view, a piston, moving from the left at speed up compresses and heats the 
static cold material lying to the right. Consider next a coordinate system fixed on the piston. In 
this middle view the cold material, initially moving to the left at speed up stagnates against the 
fixed piston. In the final bottom view, which provides the simplest theoretical treatment of the 
problem, the shockwave disturbance is fixed in space with cold material entering from the right 
and hot material leaving to the left. 
In a steady shockwave, generated as is illustrated in Figure 5, the description of thermo- 
dynamic and hydrodynamic properties is time-independent, and therefore simplest, in the bottom 
frame, moving with the wave. The variations of the local quantities, density, pressure, energy~ 
and temperature, as shown in Figure 6, constitute the shockwave "profile". 
1.6 
1.2 
0.8 
1000 
O'3 
250 
z 
ILl 
0 
IO0 
Figure III.6 
-or/2 
0 
0/2 
o 
0 
0 
I 
I 
I 
I 
-o/2 
0 
0/2 
o 
The Figure shows very good agreement between the molecular dynamics results--full 
curves--and a numerical solution of the Navier-Stokes hydrodynamic equations--open circles at 
the shockwave center. In the bottom fixed-shockwave frame conservation of mass requires that the 
product of the density and velocity be constant. If the mass flux were not constant, throughout 
the wave, the density profile would change. The constancy of the product pu, the steady-flow 
mass flux, can be used, at the cold and hot ends of the shockwave, to relate the shock velocity u8 
and the particle velocity up, to the two densities, p0 for the cold material and Pl for the hot: 

79 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
e III.7 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
U p V"-m~ 
. 
30 
In the absence of phase transitions, and over the range of piston and shock velocities 
ordinarily observed in laboratory experiments, there is typically a nearly-linear relation between 
the two speeds, as shown in Figure 7 for the Lennard-Jones liquid phase initially at the triple 
point. The relationship linking the shock velocity u~ and the particle velocity up covers a range 
of shockwaves ranging from soundwaves, for which up vanishes, up to twofold compression. For a 
real liquid, such as argon, under the extreme condition of twofold compression, the temperature 
reached would be of the order of an electron volt. 
The flow of momentum must likewise be steady in the frame moving with the wave. There 
are two contributions to the momentum flux, the comoving flow, in the frame of the fluid, given 
by the pressure tensor element, Pzz, and the additional convective component pu 2, where u is 
measured relative to the comoving frame. Thus u is -us for the cold material and up - u8 
for the hot. Conservation of momentum requires that the total momentum flux, given by the 
longitudinal pressure Pzz plus the convective momentum flux (pu)2/p be a constant. Applying 
momentum conservation to the cold and hot end points of the shockwave gives a relation linking 
the equilibrium pressures P0 and P1 of the cold and hot materials: 
Px:~ -I- [(pu)2/p] : Po -I- [(pu)2/po] = P1 -t- [(pu)2/pl]. 

80 
Thus, in a steady ~one-dimensional" (planar) shockwave, the longitudinal component of 
the pressure tensor varies linearly with volume from the initial value Po, to the final value P1, 
as shown in Figure 8 for the same Lennard-Jones liquid shockwave. The linear pressure-volume 
relation is called the "l~ayleigh Line". 
O3 
x 
x 
1000 
800 - 
600 
400 
200 - 
Figure 
III.8 
I 
I 
Lennard-Jones 
shockwave 
line 
oniot 
• Pvv 
0 
I 
I 
~ w 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
V/N o 3 
For weak shock waves, the difference between this linear relation and the isentrope is small, 
with the entropy change AS of third order in the compression, so that shock waves, for small 
compressions up to 20%, are very nearly isoentropic. Stronger shockwaves, such as that detailed 
in Figures 6 and 8, attain states far from equilibrium at pressures and temperatures which 
cannot be achieved by other methods. The locus of pressure-volume states which can be achieved 
from a given initial state (the Lennard-Jones liquid triple point in the case shown in the Figures) 
is called the Hugoniot curve. For any final state P1, VI, with energy El, the energy change from 
the initial state Po, Vo can be found by integration. The integratio n is carried out along the 
appropriate Rayleigh line, the straight line linking the initial and final states~ with the result 
aE = E1 - E0 = (1/2) (P0 + P1) (Vo - Vl). 
This exact relation, the Rankine-Hugoniot equation, follows from the conservation of energy in 
the shockwave process. 

81 
By measuring the shock and particle velocities of these waves and using the conservation 
relations the thermodynamic properties fax from usual conditions can be measured accurately. 
Published data for aluminum have been reported at over one gigabar, hundreds of times the 
pressure at the center of the earth. These pressures are achieved using hydrogen bombs. 
We can estimate the physical extent of a one-dimensional shockwave disturbance by setting 
the generated pressure APzx equal to the product of the viscosity coefficient r/and an estimate 
of the strain rate e/w, where e is the sound speed and w is the shock width: 
AP~ 
= P1 - Po = nc/~. 
Using kinetic theory to estimate these quantities gives the results: 
~ (mkT)l/2/(T¢~); 
c ~ (kT/rn)l/~; 
P = NkT/V. 
Thus we find that the shockwidth is of order V/(N~raZ), the kinetic-theory mean free path. 
In a dilute gas, the mean free path is so long, thousands of particle diameters, that the shockwave 
can scatter light. But for fluids, the mean free path is of the order of one particle diameter. This 
suggests that the shock transition is localized in condensed matter and can accordingly be studied 
by molecular dynamics. 
- J  
0 
-1 
-2 
w 
m 
I 
-2 
\t\\ 
/Shear 
-J 
\ 
\ \ 
'\ 
J System 
I 
I 
-1 
0 
x/L 
\ 
\ 
l 
I 
1 
2 
Figure III.9 

82 
This has been done by using time-dependent periodic boundaries of the type shown as 
solid lines labelled "Shock" in Figure 9. These boundaries correspond to the compression of an 
initially quiescent system using two opposed pistons which are periodic, but moving, images of the 
system itselfl The boundaries move at a constant speed (-t- the particle velocity) so that the system 
is compressed at a constant rate. But adjacent images have different speeds so that the relative 
velocity of a particle, relative to the system image within which it lies, jumps discontinuously, by 
±vx, whenever such a particle crosses an image boundary. In the laboratory frame all particle 
velocities are continuous. The mean particle velocity within any periodic image of the system has 
a discontinuity, viewed macroscopically, between shocked material, which has felt the influence of 
the moving boundaries, and quiescent material, which has not. 
If the mean particle velocity is instead chosen initially to vary linearly with coordinate, 
without jump discontinuities, as in the dashed curve marked "Shear" in Figure 9, longitudinal 
viscous flow could be simulated. Because the distortion indicated in the Figure is longitudinal, 
both bulk and shear viscous stresses would result, in addition to the equilibrium increase in 
pressure associated with a quasi-static reversible compression. We will return to viscous flows 
in Chapter IV. But in shockwave simulation the velocity instead varies in a series of equally- 
spaced jumps. "The thermodynamic and hydrodynamic profiles describing the shockwave agree 
semiquantitatively with the predictions of Navier-Stokes continuum mechanics. This continuum 
model is based on the assumptions that Newtonian viscosity and Fourier heat conductivity are 
sufficient to describe the nonequilibrium momentum and energy flows. At the highest pressures 
studied it was found that the shockwidth was a little wider than the continuum prediction. The 
30~ discrepancy cannot be explained by the dependence of viscosity or conductivity on frequency, 
wavelength, or strainrate, and is not yet understood. 
The molecular dynamics simulations show also that the velocity distribution in the vicinity 
of the shockwave is very different from the equilibrium one. The Maxwell-Boltzmann relation 
: 3<p > 
is a poor approximation near the shock front. The discrepancy with this property of a Gaus- 
sian distribution is expressed in terms of the "kurtosis", shown for both the longitudinal and 
transverse directions in Figure 10. 
In a strong shockwave the longitudinal and transverse 
temperatures, (p2~/(mk) and (p~)/(mk), can differ by a factor of two. 
These substantial 
anisotropies should lead to correspondingly substantial deviations from simple Arrhenius kinetics 
in shockwave-induced chemical reactions. 
Because the shockwave simulations are time-consuming relative to single-phase homoge- 
neous studies, only a few shockwave simulations have been carried out. It is not presently known 
how well dense-fluid shockwaves or solid-phase shockwaves satisfy corresponding-states relation- 
ships. For fluids this could be explored by solving the Navier-Stokes equations for a variety of 
simple force laws. 

83 
04 
A 
P4 > 
c<3 
V 
O3 
I 
A 
> 
V 
A 
¢N 
LU 
¢N 
E 
10 4 
0 
-104 
O D 
~Longitudinal 
Figure III.10 
;~Transverse 
'-- 
25a 
--' 
I ~  
~ 
I 
Another nonequilibrium problem which is similarly free of boundary difficulties is the ex- 
pansion of a high-pressure fluid or solid into a vacuum. The fluid-phase problem has an application 
in one design of a fusion reactor in which liquid lithium is used to transfer the heat from the fusion 
reaction away from the fusion chamber. In this design hot jets of lithium, a few centimeters in 
radius, absorb the energy of fusion neutrons, and are thereby heated very rapidly, essentially at 
constant volume, to pressures of a kilobar or so. This high pressure then causes the jets to expand 
rapidly and fragment. It is important to know whether the energy is primarily kinetic, with large 
lumps of relatively cold lithium colliding with the walls of the reactor, or thermal and surface, 
with a quiescent froth of lithium fog harmlessly filling the reactor chamber. Either outcome is 
consistent with conservation of momentum and energy. 
A semiquantitative model, developed by Dennis Grady and elaborated by Lewis Glenn, 
describes this situation by assuming that the lithium expands in a uniform way, with the outer 
edge moving at a "jumpoff" velocity uj --= P/pc, where c is the sound velocity. The local (co- 
moving) kinetic energy density can then be calculated from the strain rate, ui/R , to give the 
available kinetic energy in a fragment of size r. This kinetic energy is of order rD+2R-2. 

84 
Setting this energy source equal to the surface energy created in the fragmentation process, 
of order r D-1 for a fragment of size r, predicts that the number of fragments varies as the cube root 
of the total mass available (in either two or three dimensions). This prediction has been confirmed 
by computer simulations using over 14,000 particles. Figure 11 shows the conformation of a two- 
dimenslonal simulation of such an expansion. The time involved in the simulation is on the order 
of a few sound traversal times, or about 100,000 time steps. 
Figure III. 11 
t x/~-/mo 2 = 33 
I 
O 
4' 
. 
I' •* 
Q 
* 
I 
100~ 
] 
III.D Solids: Breakdown of Continuum Mechanics 
Many problems in materials science involve defects which are small, either microscopic or 
mesoscopic in scale• Microscopic diffusion of atoms, both in surface layers and in the bulk, and 
the mesoscopic motion of the dislocations which are the mechanism for plastic deformation are 
examples. These problems, which cannot be dealt with using macroscopic continuum mechanics, 
present a variety of opportunities for stimulating and useful research in molecular dynamics. 

re III.12 
1 
O-e 
Before 
85 
[oo] 
0-e 
After 
There is an interesting correspondence between atomistic mechanics and a two-dimensional 
elastic continuum (equivalent to a three-dlmensional plane-straLn or plane-stress elastic solid in 
three-dimensional space). A two-dimensional triangular-lattice crystal of Hooke's-Law particles, 
in which each particle interacts only with its six nearest neighbors, obeying the equations of 
motion ib = F can be brought into exact correspondence with an isotropic elastic continuum 
when the interparticle spacing is small. It is easy to show that a "quasiharmonic" triangular-lattice 
crystal (one in which energy contributions depend only quadratically on the particle displacement 
coordinates) is elastically isotropic . This can be done by considering the two shear deformations 
of a triangle of atoms shown as the lower two deformations in Figure 12. Thus. the dynamics 
of the crystal can be described by a bulk modulus and a shear modulus. These same elastic 
quantities describe the behavior of an elastic isotropic continuum. 

86 
The analogy can be made more detailed. If a continuum is divided into equilateral trian- 
gular finite elements within which the displacement vaxies linearly, the six coefficients describing 
this linear variation can be determined uniquely from the x and y displacements of the three 
vertices of each triangle. The dynamics of the vertices can be calculated in two different ways, 
from the atomistic ttooke's-Law equations or from a finite-element approximation to continuum 
mechanics. If the time-dependence of the vertex displacements is calculated from the elastic 
equations in the linear approximation just described, the motion is identical to the motion of a 
Hooke's-Law crystal described using molecular dynamics! 
This correspondence shows that the simulation of elastic continuum problems using finite- 
element methods can produce solutions closely resembling motions seen in atomistic simulations. 
The primary difference between the macroscopic continuum problems and the microscopic atom- 
istic simulations concerns the dependence of wave velocity on wavelength. In a continuum it is 
expected that elastic acoustic waves all travel with the appropriate sound velocity, independent 
of wavelength. This simple behavior is consistent with a linear density of vibrational frequencies 
(quadratic in three dimensions). The exact lattice frequency distribution is shown in Figure 13. 
3 
v 
I 
I 
Triangular lattice 
frequencies 
O0 
t 
t 
Figure III. 13 
CO/COma x 
I 
I 
I 
L 

87 
The Figure shows that in the nearest-neighbor triangular lattice, this linear behavior 
breaks down at a frequency about one third of the maximum, corresponding to a wavelength of 
six atomic diameters. Accordingly, continuum mechanics can be expected to fail, even in elastic 
problems, at length scales of order a few atomic diameters. 
A similar atomistic-continuum correspondence to the one found in two dimensions, with 
the triangular lattice, doesn't exist in three dimensions (where the shear modulus is strongly 
direction dependent in close-packed crystals) or for incompressible fluids (for which it is hard to 
develop a corresponding atomlstic model which avoids expansion or compression of the volume 
elements). Nevertheless, this correspondence between two-dimensional atomistic and continuum 
properties is useful in a relatively wide class of problems that involves defects of various kinds: 
vacancies, dislocations, or cracks, in solids. This is because molecular dynamics is required only to 
investigate displacements within a few atomic diameters of these defects. Beyond a few diameters 
continuum elasticity can be used. 
Defects are of importance in designing structures because they concentrate stress, and 
stress causes materials to fail, either by flow or by fracture. The idea of stress concentration is 
familiar to engineers. If we consider a plate under a uniform vertical longitudinal tensile stress 
a, and then bore a small hole in it, of radius a, the maximum tensile stress near the hole will 
increase by a factor of three, to 3a. The stress concentration in the vicinity of such a hole is 
shown in Figure 14. 
3 - 
Stress concentration in a plate 
[ 
I 
J 
2 
3 
4 
r/a 
Figure III.14 

88 
From the standpoint of safety a circular hole is the best case, because it gives the least stress 
concentration. The concentration is greater for other shapes, such as ellipses or polygons. The 
solution for an elliptical hole has an interesting property as the ellipse is deformed to approximate 
a thin long crack. In that limit the stress concentration diverges. This can be seen in another 
way. If the displacements near a crack tip vary as the square root of the distance from the tip, 
as would be expected for a parabolic crack tip, then the stresses and strains (proportional to the 
symmetrized derivatives of the displacements) vary as the inverse square root, in agreement with 
the analysis based on an elliptical crack. 
Thus the structure and motion of cracks cannot be treated by straightforward continuum 
mechanics. On the other hand, molecular dynamics simulations of crack motion can be carried 
out. The fracture velocities and stress fields correspond relatively well to results obtained ex- 
perimentally for brittle materials. The energy and entropy associated with static cracks can be 
calculated easily, but dynamic simulations can lead to highly irregular size-dependent structures. 
Even for computer experiments, the interpretation of fracture is complicated by the irregular 
nature of the fracture surface. 
In both the microscopic and the macroscopic cases cracks can travel at speeds approaching 
the transverse sound velocity and can propagate into regions in which the stress is not enough 
to cause a static crack to move. An example appears in Figure 15, taken from Bill Moran's 
1983 thesis. He studied the fracture of triangular-lattice crystals by breaking several adjacent 
nearest-neighbor bonds, forming a =crack", under tensile conditions imposed at the boundaries. 
Under sufficiently great tensile stresses the stress concentration at the crack tip was sufficient 
to cause the crack to propagate into unbroken material. In the case shown tapered boundary 
conditions were used to build a linear decrease of tensile stress with distance into the material. 
Static simulations indicated that a crack at the location indicated by the arrows could propagate 
no farther into the crystal. On the other hand a moving crack exhibited "inertia", penetrating 
into a region with stress some 15% less than would be predicted by a static analysis. The dynamic 
vibrations of atoms neighboring the crack tip are responsible for this effect. 
It is interesting to run a crack-propagation calculation backwards, reducing the stress and 
watching the crack heal. This healing occurs only with difficulty, moving in a much less steady 
way than in the more natural (order-destroying) fracture process. 
1 
v wvv 
v w v v  
v v v v ~ a v v  
v
v
~
v
v
 
v v w v v v v v v v v v v  
v
v
w
v
v
v
w
v
v
~
v
 
v v w v  
' ~ : ~  
~ ~ 
~ w v  
w
~
v
,
 
~,,J 
oC~.v~ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
~
~
 
~ v~v~%%?~ 
.......... 
~ o c "  
................. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
~,v.~ v~X,~,~ 
w 
v ....... 
~,c~ ....................... 
, .... 
~ v v v ~  
v
v
v
v
v
V
w
v
v
v
w
w
w
v
v
~
v
v
v
 
v v v v v v  v
v
~
v
~
v
~
v
v
v
~
v
v
v
w
v
 
v v v ~ w v v v ~  
Figure III.15 
1 

89 
The dislocations responsible for the plastic flow of rocks and metals are, like cracks, atom- 
istic defects which can also be treated, in an approximate way, using continuum mechanics. 
Dislocations can be formed by inserting an extra half-plane of atoms into a three-dimensional 
crystal. In the two-dimensional case the additional particles form an extra row. In the case 
shown in Figure 16 three dislocations are included in the periodic unit cell. In order to see 
the dislocations clearly this Figure should be viewed obliquely. Compare this three-dislocation 
Figure to the two-dislocation Figure 21 in Chapter IV. 
1~ ..... 
TTT 
1~ 
Because the atoms near a circle of radius r centered on an isolated dislocation will encounter 
displacements of order one atomic diameter b, the corresponding strain field is of order b/r, 
more localized than the field associated with cracks. The divergent strain causes the energy 
density integral, which has an integrand proportional to stress times strain, proportional to r -2, 
to diverge logarithmically both at small and at large r. Pairs of dislocations interact with a 
logarithmic tensorial potential and can be treated by a "mesoscopic ~ dynamics intermediate 
between molecular dynamics and continuum mechanics. In such simulations the "equation of 
motion" is the relationship between the dislocation velocity and the local stress tensor. 

90 
The parameters required to apply such calculations to a particular material are many, 
primarily because in real three-dimensional materials the dislocations form loops rather than 
straight lines, and these loops move locally in a series of jumps and jogs, rather than in synchrony. 
These fracture and flow problems are difficult to treat from a realistic point of view because 
forces, impurities, and defects in real materials are complicated. Nevertheless the atomistic 
calculations do indicate that the basic physics of fracture and flow can be understood on the basis 
of simple (but atomistic) mechanical principles. The transient nature of these nonequilibrium 
problems underscores the need for simpler steady-state simulations. To carry the steady state 
simulations out requires the new methods of nonequilibrium molecular dynamics that we discuss 
in Chapter IV. We return to the subject of plastic flow in Section H of that chapter. 

91 
Bibliography for Chapter IlI 
A very strong case for the usefulness of pair potentials in describing the properties of the 
rare gases has been made by John A. Barker in "Pair and Many-Body Interactions in Dense 
Rare-Gas Systems", to appear in Physical Review Letters (1986). 
Both diffusion and viscosity in two-body periodic systems have been considered from the 
point of view of the Boltzmann equation. For references to this work see W. G. Hoover, "Nonlinear 
Conductivity and Entropy in the Two-Body Boltzmann Gas", Journal of Statistical Physics 42, 
587 (1986) as well as Section G.4 of Chapter IV of these notes. 
References to the vast literature on approximate numerical solutions of the Boltzmann 
equation as applied to aerodynamic flows can be found in K. Nanbu, "Interrelations Between 
Various Direct Simulation Methods for Solving the Boltzmann Equation", Journal of the Physical 
Society of Japan 52, 3382 (1983). See also E. Meiburg, "Direct Simulation Techniques for the 
Boltzmann Equation", Deutsche Forschungs-und-Versuchsanstalt ffir Luft-und-Raumfahrt Report 
number FB 85-13, GSttingen (1985). This outstanding work Should appear shortly in The Physics 
of Fluids. 
Considerable atomistic work has been carried out on fracture and flow problems. See, in 
addition to Bill Moran's University of California at Davis/Livermore Ph. D. Thesis, "Crack Initi- 
ation and Propagation in a Two-Dimensional Triangular Lattice" (1983), the following references, 
all taken from the Physical Review and describing work supported by the Army Research Office 
involving the efforts of W. T. Ashurst, J. A. Blink, B. L. Holian, W. G. Hoover, A. J. C. Ladd, B. 
Moran, and G. K. Stranb: "Shock-wave Structure via Nonequilibrium Molecular Dynamics and 
Navier-Stokes Continuum Mechanics", 22A, 2798 (1980); "Fragmentation of Suddenly Heated 
Liquids", 32A, 1027 (1985); "Microscopic Fracture Studies in the Two-Dimensional Triangular 
Lattice", 14B, 1465 (1976); "Plastic Flow in Close-Packed Crystals via Nonequilibrium Molecu- 
lar Dynamics", 28B, 1756 (1983). See also the references to Dale Huckaby's defect free energy 
calculations cited at the end of Chapter II. 

