V. Future Work 
A decade ago Mansoori and Canfield suggested perturbation methods which led to quanti- 
tative solutions of equilibrium problems for simple dense fluids. Now, methods are being developed 
to simplify the treatment of nonequilibrium problems. There already exist efficient trustworthy 
molecular dynamics algorithms for simulating diffusive, viscous, and conducting flows as well as 
flows coupling pairs of these phenomena. All of these schemes are consistent With the Green- 
Kubo linear response theory, and all of these schemes produce reasonable nonequilibrium flows, 
although none of them has been proven valid in the nonlinear regime. Much work remains to be 
done in articulating the "well-posed problems" needed to justify the nonequilibrium methods. 
From the standpoint of applications to materials science and engineering the slow progress 
in solving the quantum many-body problem guarantees that inverse power potentials, as well 
as combinations such as the Lennard-Jones 6-12, and exponential-six potentials, and the more 
intricate semi-theoretical models will dominate molecular dynamics simulations, for the forseeable 
future. 
In problems involving homogeneous flows, without boundaries, the nonequilibrium algo- 
rithms have reduced number-dependence in the results. But there are many important problems 
involving physical gradients, such as shock and detonation waves in which all the field variables 
cover a range of values. For such inhomogeneous systems larger and faster simulations are neces- 
sary. Because individual processors are reaching limiting speeds, improvements are being mainly 
obtained by combining many processors in parallel. Simulations with millions of particles will 
soon be a reality. Likewise, the possibility of storing and processing billions of numbers makes it 
possible to characterize distribution functions in quantum problems and nonequilibrium problems, 
areas now made difficult simply by the requirements on storage capacity. 
The flexibility in simulations will make it possible to follow the flow of relatively com- 
plicated molecules in channels, to solve problems involving friction and wear, potential energy 
surfaces with chemical reactions, and quantum mechanics. In the quantum case it is not yet clear 
how to proceed in problems for which no Hamiltonian is available. It is for this reason that the 
Nos~ Hamiltonian thermostats will prove particularly useful. When these thermostats are ap- 
plied to quantum systems even present computer capacity is sufficient to treat two- or three-body 
problems, such as those discussed in Sections D and F of Chapter IV. 
Recent developments in the theory of dynamical systems have revealed shortcomings in 
the traditional theoretical approach to statistical mechanics, which ignores the mixing effect of 
periodic boundaries as well as the Kolmogorov entropy associated with Lyapunov instability. The 
language and computational techniques borrowed from nonlinear dynamics will aid the develop- 
ment of the nonequilibrium theory. An old approach which also promises to gain from the new 
techniques is the dynamical response method developed by Gianni Iacucci, Giovanni Ciccotti, 
and Ian McDonald. 

133 
Thus we anticipate that the mysteries of entropy far from equilibrium, the problem which 
motivated Boltzmann, will soon be effectively lald to rest by quantitative simulations. The work 
that Boltzmann began is accelerating now and shows no sign of reaching limits on its ability to 
stimulate the development of the sound physical theory necessary to the analysis and control of 
physical processes far from equilibrium. 
Bibliography for Chapter V. 
For a look ahead there is no better source than the Proceedings of recent conferences. 
See "Nonlinear Fluid Behavior", the Proceedings of the Boulder, Colorado 1982 Conference, 
published in Physica llSA, 1 (1983) and the Proceedings of the Lago di Como 1985 Enrico 
Fermi International Summer School, "Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Statistical-Mechanical 
Systems", soon to be published by North-Holland Publishing Company and the Italian Physical 
Society. 

