1 
 
Natural language specification of BFO 2020 
Buffalo Developers Group 
July 27, 2020 
1. Introduction 
This clause documents the signature of BFO 2020, satisfying requirement ISO/IEC 21838-1:2020, 4.1. 
This signature shall be used in determining conformance to BFO 2020 in the sense defined in 
Clause 4. Primitive terms and primitive relational expressions in this signature are marked by the 
fact that they are provided with elucidations. 
BFO 2020 is the version of Basic Formal Ontology that has been created to conform to the 
requirements in ISO/IEC 21838-1. 
1.1 Syntax 
— ‘a’, ‘b’, ‘c’, ‘etc., for particulars 
— ‘t,’ ‘t′’, etc., for temporal regions; expressions such as ‘for all times’ should be interpreted as 
meaning ‘for all temporal regions’ 
— ‘r,’ ‘r′’, ‘s,’ ‘s′’, etc., for spatial and spatiotemporal regions 
— ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’, ‘P’, etc. for universals or types (‘type’ and ‘universal’ are treated as synonyms) 
— ‘R’, R′’, etc. for relations. 
1.2 Relations and relational expressions 
All relational expressions defined in BFO 2020 have a binary core; some have in addition a third 
relatum, which is in every case an instance of temporal region and which is marked syntactically by 
use of ‘at’. Three types of binary core are distinguished, as follows: 
— connecting a particular to a particular, expressed using bold face; 
— connecting a particular to a universal, expressed using bold face; 
— connecting a universal to a universal, expressed using italics. 
In some definitions, relational expressions are divided into separate strings for the sake of 
readability, as in: ‘spatial region r which b occupies at t’, which includes the relational expression 
‘occupies spatial region at’. 
1.3 Primitive and defined terms 
For both terms and relational expressions in BFO, there is a distinction between primitive and defined. 
‘Entity’ is an example of a primitive term. Primitive terms in a top-level ontology such as BFO are 

2 
 
terms that are so basic to our understanding of reality that there is no way of defining them in a non-
circular fashion. 
By ‘definitional content’ is meant, in the terminology of ISO/IEC 21838-1:2020, 4.1.1, a set of both 
primitive and non-primitive definitions. The former are referred to here as ‘elucidations’, the latter 
as ‘definitions’. An elucidation thus corresponds to a definition that is marked as primitive in the 
sense of ISO/IEC 21838-1:2020, 4.1.1. Both definitions and elucidations are supplemented by 
examples. 
In ISO/IEC documents, the definition (definiens) of a term is a text string or formula that can replace 
the defined term (definiendum) in its original context. As understood in the BFO context, however, a 
definiens shall in addition satisfy the conditions. 
1. 
that it is built out of terms and relational expressions that are logically more primitive than the 
definiendum, and either: 
a) that it provides a statement of individually necessary and jointly sufficient conditions for an 
entity to fall under the universal or defined class to which the definiendum refers (in the 
case where the definiendum is a term), or 
b) that it provides a statement of individually necessary and jointly sufficient conditions for a 
relation to hold (in the case where the definiendum is a relational expression). 
An elucidation, in contrast, provides a statement of necessary conditions only. 
Those parts of the document which belong to the definitional content are indicated by special 
formatting, following the patterns: 
— Definition: X =Def. Y [000-BFO] 
— Elucidation: an X is a Y (or some similar expression) [000-BFO] 
where the three digits in ‘[000-BFO]’ serve to identify the salient definition or elucidation. 
1.4 Domain and range 
All relations in the signature of BFO 2020 are binary or ternary. Domain and range are used to 
describe the types instantiated by the first and second relata of each relation, respectively. If the 
relation holds, then it follows that the first and second relata are instances of one of the types 
specified under domain and range. The third relatum, if present, is always an instance of temporal 
region. Binary versions of all ternary relations are provided for use in OWL. 
1.5 Binaryized versions of ternary relational expressions for use in BFO 2020‐OWL 
The relational expressions in A.1.3 are provided as binary counterparts of the corresponding BFO 
2020 relational expressions for use in OWL, which requires that all relations be binary. Domain and 
range are in every case the same as for the ternary counterpart. All binaryized versions have 
definitions, even where the base relation receives only an elucidation in A.1.2, because this base 
relation is used to build the corresponding definitions. 
2 BFO 2020 terms, definitions and elucidations 
2.1 entity 

3 
 
Elucidation: An entity is anything that exists or has existed or will exist [001-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
Julius Caesar, the Second World War, your body mass index, Verdi’s Requiem. 
2.2 is a 
Definition: A is a B =Def. for all x, t, if x is an instance of A at t then x is an instance of B at t [140-
BFO] 
Domain: universal 
Range: universal 
EXAMPLES 
House is a building, symphony is a musical work of art, promenade is a dance step, promise is a 
speech act, cell division is a biological process. 
2.3 instance of at 
Synonym: instantiates 
Elucidation: relation (3.2) that holds between a particular (3.5) and a universal (3.6) at a time [200-
BFO] 
Domain: particular 
Range: universal 
EXAMPLES 
John instance of human, this laptop instance of laptop; the year 2012 instance of temporal region; 
John’s birth instance of process, all at time: now. 
NOTE 
Instantiation relations for occurrents hold trivially at every time at which the occurrent exists. 
2.4 exists at 
Elucidation: exists at is a relation between a particular and some temporal region at which the 
particular exists [118-BFO] 
Domain: entity 
Range: temporal region 
EXAMPLES 
First World War exists at 1914-1916, Mexico exists at January 1, 2000. 
2.5 continuant part of at 
Elucidation: b continuant part of c at t means: b and c are continuants & b is a part of c at t [002-
BFO] 
Domain: continuant 
Range: continuant 
EXAMPLES 
Mary’s arm continuant part of Mary in the time of her life prior to her operation; the Northern 
hemisphere of the planet Earth is a continuant part of the planet Earth at all times at which the planet Earth 
exists. 
NOTE 
For A.1.2.5 (and also A.1.2.6) elucidations are provided because the informal expression ‘part’ is used 
in both definiens and definiendum. 

4 
 
2.6 has continuant part at 
Definition: b has continuant part c at t =Def. b and c are continuants & b is a continuant part of c at 
t [201-BFO] 
Domain: continuant 
Range: continuant 
EXAMPLES 
Planet Earth has continuant part Equator. 
2.7 occurrent part of 
Elucidation: b occurrent part of c means: b is a part of c & b and c are occurrents [003-BFO] 
Domain: occurrent 
Range: occurrent 
EXAMPLES 
Mary’s 5th birthday is an occurrent part of Mary’s life; the first set of the tennis match is an 
occurrent part of the tennis match. 
2.8 has occurrent part 
Definition: b has occurrent part c =Def.  c is a occurrent part of b & b and c are occurrents [202-
BFO] 
Domain: occurrent 
Range: occurrent 
EXAMPLES 
Mary’s life has occurrent part Mary’s 5th birthday. 
2.9 proper continuant part of at 
Definition: b proper continuant part of c at t =Def. b continuant part of c at t & not (c continuant 
part of b at t) [004-BFO] 
Domain: continuant 
Range: continuant 
EXAMPLES 
As for A.1.2.5. 
2.10 has proper continuant part at 
Definition: b has proper continuant part c at t =Def. c proper continuant part of b at t [203-BFO] 
Domain: continuant 
Range: continuant 
EXAMPLES 
As for A.1.2.6. 
2.11 proper occurrent part of 
Definition: b proper occurrent part of c =Def. b occurrent part of c & b and c are not identical [005-
BFO] 

5 
 
Domain: occurrent 
Range: occurrent 
EXAMPLES 
As for A.1.2.7. 
2.12 has proper occurrent part 
Definition: b has proper occurrent part c =Def. b has occurrent part c & b and c are not identical 
[154-BFO] 
Domain: continuant 
Range: continuant 
EXAMPLES 
As for A.1.2.8. 
2.13 continuant 
Elucidation: A continuant is an entity that persists, endures, or continues to exist through time while 
maintaining its identity [008-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
A human being, a tennis ball, a cave, a region of space, someone’s temperature. 
2.14 specifically depends on 
Synonym: s‐depends on 
Elucidation: b specifically depends on c means: 
b and c do not share common parts 
& b is of a nature such that at all times t it cannot exist at t unless c exists at t & b is not a boundary 
of c [012-BFO] 
Domain: specifically dependent continuant 
Range: independent continuant that is not a spatial region; specifically dependent continuant 
EXAMPLES 
A shape s-depends on the shaped object, hue, saturation and brightness of a colour sample s-
depend on each other. 
NOTE 
The analogue of s‐dependence for occurrents is has participant. 
2.15 specifically depended on by 
Synonym: s‐depended on by 
Definition: b s‐depended on by c =Def. c specifically depends on b [260-BFO] 
Domain: independent continuant that is not a spatial region; specifically dependent continuant 
Range: specifically dependent continuant 
EXAMPLES 
Coloured object s-depended on by colour. 
2.16 independent continuant 

6 
 
Definition: b is an independent continuant =Def. b is a continuant which is such that there is no c such 
that b s‐depends on c and no c such that b g‐depends on c [017-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
An atom, a molecule, an organism, a heart, a chair, the bottom right portion of a human torso, a 
leg; the interior of your mouth; a spatial region; an orchestra. 
2.17 material entity 
Elucidation: A material entity is an independent continuant that at all times at which it exists has some 
portion of matter as continuant part [019-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
A human being, the undetached arm of a human being, an aggregate of human beings. 
2.18 object 
Elucidation: an object is a material entity which manifests causal unity & is of a type instances of 
which are maximal relative to the sort of causal unity manifested [024-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
An organism, a fish tank, a planet, a laptop, a valve, a block of marble, an ice cube. 
NOTE 
A description of three primary sorts of causal unity is provided in Reference [6]. 
2.19 member part of at 
Definition: b member part of c at t =Def. b is an object 
& c is an object aggregate 
& there is at t a mutually exhaustive and pairwise disjoint partition of c into objects x1, …, xn (for some 
n ≥ 1) with b = xi (for some 1 ≤ i ≤ n) [026-BFO] 
Domain: object 
Range: object aggregate 
EXAMPLES 
Each tree in a forest is a member part of the forest; each piece in a chess set is a member part of 
the chess set; each Beatle in the collection called The Beatles is a member part of The Beatles; each human being 
is a member part of the population homo sapiens; employee of an industrial company. 
2.20 has member part at 
Definition: b has member part c at t =Def. c member part b at t [204-BFO] 
Domain: object aggregate 
Range: object 
EXAMPLES 
As for A.1.2.19. 
2.21 object aggregate 
Elucidation: an object aggregate is a material entity consisting exactly of a plurality (≥1) of objects as 
member parts which together form a unit [025-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
A symphony orchestra, the aggregate of bearings in a constant velocity axle joint, the nitrogen 
atoms in the atmosphere, a collection of cells in a blood biobank. 

7 
 
NOTE 1 ‘Exactly’ means that there are no parts of the object aggregate other than its member parts. 
NOTE 2 The unit can, at certain times, consist of exactly one object, for example, when a fire brigade loses all 
but one of its members, but it must at some time have a plurality of member parts. 
2.22 fiat object part 
Elucidation: a fiat object part b is a material entity which is such that 
for all times t, if b exists at t then 
there is some object c such that b is a proper continuant part of c at t and b is demarcated from the 
remainder of c by one or more fiat surfaces [027-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
The upper and lower lobes of the left lung, the dorsal and ventral surfaces of the body, the 
Western hemisphere of the Earth, the FMA:regional parts of an intact human body. 
2.23 immaterial entity 
Definition: a is an immaterial entity =Def. a is an independent continuant which is such that there is 
no time t when it has a material entity as continuant part at t [028-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
As for A.1.2.25 through A.1.2.28. 
2.24 continuant fiat boundary 
Elucidation: b is a continuant fiat boundary means: b is an immaterial entity that is of zero, one or two 
dimensions, which is such that there is no time t when b has a spatial region as continuant part at t, 
and whose location is determined in relation to some material entity [029-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
As for A.1.2.25 through A.1.2.27. 
2.25 fiat point 
Elucidation: a fiat point is a zero-dimensional continuant fiat boundary that consists of a single point 
[031-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
The geographic North Pole; the quadripoint where the boundaries of Colorado, Utah, New Mexico 
and Arizona meet, the point of origin of some spatial coordinate system. 
2.26 fiat line 
Elucidation: a fiat line is a one-dimensional continuant fiat boundary that is continuous [032-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
The Equator, all geopolitical boundaries, all lines of latitude and longitude, the median sulcus of 
your tongue, the line separating the outer surface of the mucosa of the lower lip from the outer surface of the 
skin of the chin. 
2.27 fiat surface 
Elucidation: a fiat surface is a two-dimensional continuant fiat boundary that is self-connected [033-
BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
The surface of the Earth, the plane separating the smoking from the non-smoking zone in a 
restaurant, the surface of the moon, the boundary between the upper and lower hemisphere of the moon, the 
surface of a tennis ball, the surface of a tabletop. 

8 
 
2.28 site 
Elucidation: b is a site means: b is a three-dimensional immaterial entity whose boundaries either (1) 
(partially or wholly) coincide with the boundaries of one or more material entities or (2) have 
locations determined in relation to some material entity [034-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 1 A hole in a portion of cheese, a rabbit hole, the Grand Canyon, the Piazza San Marco, the kangaroo-
joey-containing hole of a kangaroo pouch, your left nostril (a fiat part – the opening – of your left nasal cavity), 
the lumen of your gut, the hold of a ship, the interior of the trunk of your car, a hole in an engineered floor joist. 
EXAMPLES 2 An air traffic control region of type A is determined in terms of elevation above mean sea level of 
lower and upper boundaries. 
2.29 spatial region 
Elucidation: A spatial region is a continuant entity that is a continuant part of the spatial projection 
of a portion of spacetime at a given time [035-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
As for A.1.2.30 through A.1.2.33. 
2.30 zero‐dimensional spatial region 
Elucidation: A zero‐dimensional spatial region is one or a collection of more than one spatially disjoint 
points in space [037-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
The spatial region occupied at some time instant by the North Pole. 
2.31 one‐dimensional spatial region 
Elucidation: A one‐dimensional spatial region is a whole consisting of a line together with zero or 
more lines and/or points as parts [038-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
An edge of a cube-shaped portion of space, a line connecting two points, two parallel lines 
extended in space. 
2.32 two‐dimensional spatial region 
Elucidation: A two‐dimensional spatial region is a spatial region that is a whole consisting of a surface 
together with zero or more surfaces and/or spatial regions of lower dimension as parts [039-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
The surface of a sphere-shaped part of space, an infinitely thin plane in space. 
2.33 three‐dimensional spatial region 
Elucidation: A three‐dimensional spatial region is a whole consisting of a spatial volume together with 
zero or more spatial volumes and/or spatial regions of lower dimension as parts [040-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
A cube-shaped region of space, a sphere-shaped region of space, the region of space occupied by 
all and only the planets in the solar system at some point in time. 
2.34 occupies spatial region at 

9 
 
Elucidation: an independent continuant c that is not a spatial region occupies spatial region r at t 
means: every continuant part of c occupies some continuant part of r at t and no continuant part 
of c occupies any spatial region that is not a continuant part of r at t [041-BFO] 
Domain: independent continuant that is not a spatial region 
Range: spatial region 
EXAMPLES 
Part of Amundsen’s foot occupies the spatial region that is the South Pole at (some temporal 
instant in the temporal region) December 14, 1911. 
NOTE 
‘Occupies’ here means: exact occupation. 
2.35 located in at 
Definition: b located in c at t =Def. b and c are independent continuants and not spatial regions, and 
the spatial region which b occupies at t is a (proper or improper) continuant part of the spatial 
region which c occupies at t [045-BFO] 
Domain: independent continuant that is not a spatial region 
Range: independent continuant that is not a spatial region 
EXAMPLES 
Your arm is located in your body; this stem cell is located in this portion of bone marrow; this 
portion of cocaine is located in this portion of blood; Mary is located in Salzburg; the Empire State Building is 
located in New York. 
2.36 location of at 
Definition: b location of c at t =Def. c located in b at t [205-BFO] 
Domain: independent continuant that is not a spatial region 
Range: independent continuant that is not a spatial region 
EXAMPLES 
Manhattan location of Mary during the time of her wedding. 
2.37 specifically dependent continuant 
Definition: b is a specifically dependent continuant =Def. b is a continuant 
& there is some independent continuant c 
which is not a spatial region 
& which is such that b s‐depends on c [050-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
(with one bearer) The mass of this tomato, the pink colour of a medium rare piece of grilled filet 
mignon at its centre, the smell of this portion of mozzarella, the disposition of this fish to decay, the role of being 
a doctor, the function of this heart: to pump blood, the shape of this hole; (with multiple bearers:) John’s love 
for Mary, the ownership relation between John and this statue, the relation of authority between John and his 
subordinates. 
NOTE 
On the multiple bearers case, see A.1.2.41. 
2.38 inheres in 

10 
 
Definition: b inheres in c =Def. b is a specifically dependent continuant & c is an independent 
continuant that is not a spatial region & b s‐depends on c [051-BFO] 
Domain: specifically dependent continuant 
Range: independent continuant that is not a spatial region 
EXAMPLES 
A shape inheres in a shaped object; a mass inheres in a material entity. 
2.39 bearer of 
Definition: b bearer of c =Def. c inheres in b [053-BFO] 
Domain: independent continuant that is not a spatial region 
Range: specifically dependent continuant 
EXAMPLES 
A patch of ink is the bearer of a colour quality; an organism is the bearer of a temperature quality. 
2.40 quality 
Elucidation: a quality is a specifically dependent continuant that, in contrast to roles and dispositions, 
does not require any further process in order to be realized [055-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
The colour of a tomato, the ambient temperature of this portion of air, the length of the 
circumference of your waist, the shape of your nose, the shape of your nostril, the mass of this piece of gold. 
2.41 relational quality 
Definition: b is a relational quality =Def. b is a quality and there exists c and d such that b and c are 
not identical, & b s‐depends on c & b s‐depends on d [057-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
A marriage bond, an instance of love, an obligation between one person and another. 
2.42 realizable entity 
Elucidation: b is a realizable entity means: b is a specifically dependent continuant that inheres in 
some independent continuant which is not a spatial region and is of a type some instances of which 
are realized in processes of a correlated type [058-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
The role of being a doctor, the role of this boundary to delineate where Utah and Colorado meet, 
the function of your reproductive organs, the disposition of your blood to coagulate, the disposition of this piece 
of metal to conduct electricity. 
2.43 realizes 
Elucidation: b realizes c means: 
there is some material or immaterial entity d 
& c is a realizable entity that inheres in d 
& for all t, if b has participant d at t then c exists at t 
& the type instantiated by b is correlated with the type instantiated by c [059-BFO] 
Domain: process 

11 
 
Range: realizable entity 
EXAMPLES 
A disposition to go bald is realized in a balding process; a role of student is realized in studying 
processes; the pumping function of a heart is realized in processes of pumping. 
2.44 has realization 
Definition: b has realization c =Def. c realizes b [206-BFO] 
Domain: realizable entity 
Range: process 
EXAMPLES 
As for A.1.2.43. 
2.45 role 
Synonym: externally-grounded realizable entity 
Elucidation: b is a role means: 
b is a realizable entity 
& b exists because there is some single bearer that is in some special physical, social, or institutional 
set of circumstances in which this bearer does not have to be 
& b is not such that, if it ceases to exist, then the physical make-up of the bearer is thereby changed 
[061-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
The priest role, the student role, the role of subject in a clinical trial, the role of a stone in marking 
a property boundary, the role of a boundary to demarcate two neighbouring administrative territories, the role 
of a building in serving as a military target. 
2.46 disposition 
Synonym: internally-grounded realizable entity 
Elucidation: b is a disposition means: 
b is a realizable entity 
& b’s bearer is some material or immaterial entity 
& b is such that if it ceases to exist, then its bearer is physically changed, 
& b’s realization occurs when and because this bearer is in some special physical circumstances, 
& this realization occurs in virtue of the bearer’s physical make-up [062-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
An atom of element X has the disposition to decay to an atom of element Y; the cell wall is 
disposed to transport cellular material through endocytosis and exocytosis; certain people have a 
predisposition to colon cancer; children are innately disposed to categorize objects in certain ways. 
2.47 function 
Elucidation: A function is a disposition that exists in virtue of the bearer’s physical make-up and this 
physical make-up is something the bearer possesses because it came into being, either through 
evolution (in the case of natural biological entities) or through intentional design (in the case of 
artefacts), in order to realize processes of a certain sort [064-BFO] 

12 
 
EXAMPLES 
The function of a hammer to drive in nails, the function of a heart pacemaker to regulate the 
beating of a heart through electricity. 
2.48 has material basis at 
Elucidation: b has material basis c at t means: 
b is a disposition 
& c is a material entity 
& there is some d bearer of b 
& c continuant part of d at t 
& d bearer of b because c continuant part of d at t [071-BFO] 
Domain: disposition 
Range: material entity 
EXAMPLES 
The disposition of a portion of saliva to break down starch has material basis portion of amylase; 
the disposition of the suspension system of my car to squeak has material basis bushings in the system’s joints. 
2.49 material basis of at 
Definition: b material basis of c at t =Def. c has material basis b [214-BFO] 
Domain: independent continuant that is not a spatial region 
Range: disposition 
EXAMPLES 
The material basis of the disposition of the rocket to move is its engine and the fuel supply, 
2.50 generically dependent continuant 
Synonym: g‐dependent continuant 
Elucidation: a generically dependent continuant is an entity that exists in virtue of the fact that there 
is at least one of what may be multiple copies; it is the content or the pattern that the multiple copies 
share [074-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
The pdf file on your laptop, the pdf file that is a copy thereof on my laptop; the sequence of this 
protein molecule; the sequence that is a copy thereof in that protein molecule; the content that is shared by a 
string of dots and dashes written on a page and the transmitted Morse code signal; the content of a sentence; 
an engineering blueprint. 
2.51 generically depends on at 
Synonym: g‐depends on 
Elucidation: a g‐dependent continuant b g‐depends on an independent continuant c at t means: there 
inheres in c an s‐dependent continuant which concretizes b at t [072-BFO] 
Domain: generically dependent continuant 
Range: independent continuant that is not a spatial region 

13 
 
EXAMPLES 
The pattern shared by chess boards g-depends on any chess board; the score of a symphony g-
depends on a copy of the score,  the novel War and Peace generically depends on this copy of the novel; this pdf 
file generically depends on this server. 
2.52 is carrier of at 
Elucidation: b is carrier of c at t means: c g‐depends on b at t [262-BFO] 
Domain: independent continuant that is not a spatial region 
Range: generically dependent continuant 
EXAMPLES 
This hard drive is carrier of these data items; this copy of War and Peace is carrier of the novel 
written by Tolstoy; molecules of DNA are carriers of genetic information. 
2.53 concretizes at 
Elucidation: an s‐dependent continuant or process b concretizes a g‐dependent continuant c at t when 
c is the pattern or content which b shares with actual or potential copies [207-BFO] 
Domain: specifically dependent continuant, process 
Range: generically dependent continuant 
EXAMPLES 
The sum of patterns of ink on the pages of this copy of War and Peace concretizes the novel 
written by Tolstoy. 
2.54 is concretized by at 
Elucidation: a g‐dependent continuant c at t is concretized by an s‐dependent continuant or process 
b when b concretizes c [208-BFO] 
Domain: generically dependent continuant 
Range: specifically dependent continuant, process 
EXAMPLES 
This set of dots and dashes concretizes this Morse code message. 
2.55 occurrent 
Elucidation: An occurrent is an entity that unfolds itself in time or it is the start or end of such an entity 
or it is a temporal or spatiotemporal region [077-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
As for A.1.2.66, A.1.2.67, A.1.2.70, A.1.2.73, A.1.2.75 through A.1.2.78. 
2.56 temporal part of 
Definition: b temporal part of c =Def. b occurrent part of c 
& either 
b and c are temporal regions 
or 
b and c are spatiotemporal regions & b temporally projects onto an occurrent part of the temporal 
region that c temporally projects onto 
or 

14 
 
b and c are processes or process boundaries & b occupies a temporal region that is an occurrent 
part of the temporal region that c occupies [078-BFO] 
Domain: occurrent 
Range: occurrent 
EXAMPLES 
Your heart beating from 4pm to 5pm today is a temporal part of the process of your heart beating; 
the 4th year of your life is a temporal part of your life, as is the process boundary which separates the 3rd and 
4th years of your life; the first quarter of a game of football is a temporal part of the whole game. 
2.57 has temporal part 
Definition: b has temporal part c =Def. c temporal part of b [211-BFO] 
Domain: occurrent 
Range: occurrent 
EXAMPLES 
Your life has temporal part the first year of your life. 
2.58 proper temporal part of 
Definition: b proper temporal part of c =Def. b temporal part of c & not (b = c) [116-BFO] 
Domain: occurrent 
Range: occurrent 
EXAMPLES 
As for A.1.2.56. 
2.59 has proper temporal part 
Definition: b has proper temporal part c =Def. c proper temporal part of b [212-BFO] 
Domain: occurrent 
Range: occurrent 
EXAMPLES 
As for A.1.2.57. 
2.60 temporally projects onto 
Elucidation: temporally projects onto is a relation between a spatiotemporal region s and some 
temporal region which is the temporal extent of s [080-BFO] 
Domain: spatiotemporal region 
Range: temporal region 
EXAMPLES 
The world line of a particle temporally projects onto the temporal region extending from the 
beginning to the end of the existence of the particle. 
2.61 spatially projects onto at 
Elucidation: b spatially projects onto c at t means: b is a spatiotemporal region and c is a spatial 
region and c is the spatial extent of b at t) [081-BFO] 
Domain: spatiotemporal region 

15 
 
Range: spatial region 
EXAMPLES 
The world line of a particle spatially projects at t onto the spatial region occupied by the particle 
at t. 
2.62 occupies spatiotemporal region 
Elucidation: p occupies spatiotemporal region s is a relation between an occurrent p and the 
spatiotemporal region s which is its spatiotemporal extent [082-BFO] 
Domain: process or process boundary 
Range: spatiotemporal region 
EXAMPLES 
A particle emitted by a nuclear reactor occupies the spatiotemporal region which is its trajectory. 
2.63 occupies temporal region 
Definition: p occupies temporal region t =Def. the spatiotemporal region occupied by p temporally 
projects onto t [132-BFO] 
Domain: process or process boundary 
Range: temporal region 
EXAMPLE 
The Second World War occupies the temporal region September 1, 1939 – September 2, 1945. 
2.64 occurs in 
Definition: b occurs in c =Def. b is a process or a process boundary and c is a material entity or 
immaterial entity 
& there exists a spatiotemporal region r and b occupies spatiotemporal region r 
& for all t, if b exists at t then c exists at t 
& there exist spatial regions s and s' where 
b spatially projects onto s at t 
& c occupies spatial region s' at t 
& s is a continuant part of s' at t [143-BFO] 
Domain: process or process boundary 
Range: material entity or immaterial entity but not spatial region 
EXAMPLES 
A process of digestion occurs in the interior of an organism, a process of loading artillery rounds 
into a tank cannon occurs in the interior of the tank. 
2.65 environs 
Definition: b environs c =Def. c occurs in b [267-BFO] 
Domain: material entity or immaterial entity but not spatial region 
Range: process or process boundary 
EXAMPLES 
Mouth environs process of mastication, city environs traffic. 

16 
 
2.66 process 
Elucidation: p is a process =Def. p is an occurrent that has some temporal proper part and for some 
time t, p has some material entity as participant [083-BFO] 
EXAMPLES An act of selling, the life of an organism, a process of sleeping, a process of cell-division, 
a beating of the heart, a process of meiosis, the taxiing of an aircraft, the programming of a computer. 
2.67 history 
Elucidation: A history is a process that is the sum of the totality of processes taking place in the 
spatiotemporal region occupied by the material part of a material entity [138-BFO] 
EXAMPLE 
The life of an organism from the beginning to the end of its existence. 
2.68 history of 
Elucidation: b history of c if c is a material entity and b is a history that is the unique history of c [144-
BFO] 
Domain: history 
Range: material entity 
EXAMPLE 
This life is the history of this organism. 
2.69 has history 
Definition: b has history c =Def. c history of b [145-BFO] 
Domain: material entity 
Range: history 
EXAMPLE 
This organism has history this life. 
2.70 process boundary 
Definition: p is a process boundary =Def. p is a temporal part of a process & p has no proper 
temporal parts [084-BFO] 
EXAMPLE 
The boundary between the 2nd and 3rd year of your life. 
2.71 has participant at 
Elucidation: p has participant c at t means: b is a process, c is a continuant, and c participates in p 
some way at t [086-BFO] 
Domain: process 
Range: continuant that is not a spatial region 
EXAMPLES 
Cruise has participant ship, Second World War has participant Germany, data transformation has 
participant body of data. 
2.72 participates in at 

17 
 
Definition: b participates in p at t =Def. p has participant b at t [210-BFO] 
Domain: continuant that is not a spatial region 
Range: process 
EXAMPLES 
Field participates in soil erosion, student participates in studying. 
2.73 spatiotemporal region 
Elucidation: A spatiotemporal region is an occurrent that is an occurrent part of spacetime [095-
BFO] 
NOTE 
‘Spacetime’ here refers to the maximal instance of the universal spatiotemporal region. 
EXAMPLES 
The spatiotemporal region occupied by the development of a cancer tumour, the spatiotemporal 
region occupied by an orbiting satellite. 
2.74 temporal region 
Elucidation: A temporal region is an occurrent over which processes can unfold [100-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
As for A.1.2.75 and A.1.2.76. 
2.75 zero‐dimensional temporal region 
Elucidation: A zero‐dimensional temporal region is a temporal region that is a whole consisting of one 
or more separated temporal instants as parts [102-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
A temporal region that is occupied by a process boundary; the moment at which a finger is 
detached in an industrial accident. 
2.76 one‐dimensional temporal region 
Elucidation: A one‐dimensional temporal region is a temporal region is a whole that has a temporal 
interval and zero or more temporal intervals and temporal instants as parts [103-BFO] 
EXAMPLE 
The temporal region during which a process occurs. 
2.77 temporal interval 
Elucidation: a temporal interval is a one‐dimensional temporal region that is continuous, thus without 
gaps or breaks [155-BFO] 
EXAMPLE 
The year 2018. 
NOTE 
A one-dimensional temporal region can include as parts not only temporal intervals but also temporal 
instants separated from other parts by gaps. 
2.78 temporal instant 
Elucidation: a temporal instant is a zero‐dimensional temporal region that has no proper temporal 
part [209-BFO] 
EXAMPLE 
The millennium. 

18 
 
2.79 first instant of 
Definition: temporal instant t first instant of temporal region t´ =Def. t precedes all temporal parts 
of t' other than t [268-BFO] 
Domain: temporal instant 
Range: temporal region 
EXAMPLE 
An hour starting at midnight yesterday has first instant midnight yesterday. 
2.80 has first instant 
Definition: t has first instant t' =Def. t' first instant of t [261-BFO] 
Domain: temporal region 
Range: temporal instant 
EXAMPLE 
The first hour of a year has first instant midnight on December 31. 
2.81 last instant of 
Definition: temporal instant t last instant of temporal region t´ =Def. all temporal parts of t' other 
than t precede t [269-BFO] 
Domain: temporal instant 
Range: temporal region 
EXAMPLE 
Last midnight is the last instant of yesterday. 
2.82 has last instant 
Definition: t has last instant t´ =Def. t´ last instant of t [215-BFO] 
Domain: temporal region 
Range: temporal instant 
EXAMPLE 
The last hour of a year has last instant midnight December 31. 
2.83 precedes 
Elucidation: If o, o' are occurrents and t is the temporal extent of o and t' is the temporal extent of o' 
then o precedes o’ means: 
either last instant of o is before first instant of o’ 
or last instant of o = first instant of o’ and neither o nor o’ are temporal instants [270-BFO] 
Domain: occurrent 
Range: occurrent 
EXAMPLE 
The temporal region occupied by Mary’s birth precedes the temporal region occupied by Mary’s 
death. 

19 
 
NOTE 1 Each temporal region is its own temporal extent. The temporal extent of a spatiotemporal region is the 
temporal region it temporally projects onto. The temporal extent of a process or process boundary that 
occupies temporal region t is t. 
NOTE 2 Precedes defines a strict partial order on occurrents. 
2.84 preceded by 
Definition: b preceded by c =Def. b precedes c [213-BFO] 
Domain: occurrent 
Range: occurrent 
EXAMPLE 
The temporal region occupied by the second half of the match is preceded by the temporal region 
occupied by the first half of the match. 
3. Binary counterparts of BFO 2020 ternary relations for use in BFO 2020‐OWL 
3.1 continuant part of at some time 
Definition: b continuant part of c at some time =Def. for some time t (b exists at t and c exists at t 
and b continuant part of c at t & t is a temporal region & b and c are continuants) [221-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
Milk teeth continuant part of human at some time; surgically removed tumour continuant part of 
organism at some time. 
3.2 continuant part of at all times 
Definition: b continuant part of c at all times =Def. for all times t (b exists at t, implies b continuant 
part of c at t & t is a temporal region & b and c are continuants) [222-BFO] 
EXAMPLES 
Centre of mass of a material entity continuant part of material entity at all times; continuant fiat 
external boundary of an object continuant part of object at all times. 
3.3 has continuant part at some time 
Definition: b has continuant part c at some time =Def. for some time t (b and c are continuants & b 
is a part of c at t) [271-BFO] 
3.4 has continuant part at all times 
Definition: b has continuant part c at all times =Def. for all times t, b exists at t implies (b and c are 
continuants & b is a part of c at t) [223-BFO] 
3.5 proper continuant part of at some time 
Definition: b proper continuant part of c at some time =Def. for some time t (b continuant part of 
c at t & not (c continuant part of b at t) [224-BFO] 
3.6 proper continuant part of at all times 
Definition: b proper continuant part of c at all times =Def. for all times t, b exists at t implies (b 
continuant part of c at t & not (c proper continuant part of b at t)) [225-BFO] 
3.7 has proper continuant part at some time 

20 
 
Definition: b has proper continuant part c at some time =Def. c proper continuant part of b at 
some time [226-BFO] 
3.8 has proper continuant part at all times 
Definition: b has proper continuant part c at all times =Def. c proper continuant part of b at all 
times [227-BFO] 
3.9 member part of at some time 
Definition: b member part of c at some time =Def. for some time t (b is an object 
& there is at t a mutually exhaustive and pairwise disjoint partition of c into objects x1, …, xn (for some 
n ≥ 1) with b = xi (for some 1 ≤ i ≤ n)) [228-BFO] 
3.10 member part of at all times 
Definition: b member part of c at all times =Def. for all times t, b exists at t implies 
(b is an object & c is an object aggregate 
& there is at t a mutually exhaustive and pairwise disjoint partition of c into objects x1, …, xn (for some 
n ≥ 1) with b = xi (for some 1 ≤ i ≤ n)) [229-BFO] 
3.11 has member part at some time 
Definition: b has member part c at some time =Def. for some time t (c member part of b at t) [230-
BFO] 
3.12 has member part at all times 
Definition: b has member part c at all times =Def. for all times t, b exists at t implies (c member 
part b at t) [231-BFO] 
3.13 occupies spatial region at some time 
Definition: an independent continuant c that is not a spatial region occupies spatial region r at some 
time =Def. for some time t (every continuant part of c occupies some continuant part of r at t and 
no continuant part of c occupies any spatial region that is not a continuant part of r at t) [232-
BFO] 
3.14 occupies spatial region at all times 
Definition: an independent continuant c that is not a spatial region occupies spatial region r at all 
times =Def. for all times t, b exists at t implies (every continuant part of c occupies some continuant 
part of r at t and no continuant part of c occupies any spatial region that is not a continuant part of 
r at t) [233-BFO] 
3.15 located in at some time 
Definition: b located in c at some time =Def. for some time t (b and c are independent continuants 
and not spatial regions, and the spatial region which b occupies at t is a (proper or improper) 
continuant part of the spatial region which c occupies at t) [234-BFO] 
3.16 located in at all times 

21 
 
Definition: b located in c at all times =Def. for all times t, b exists at t implies (b and c are independent 
continuants and not spatial regions, and the spatial region which b occupies at t is a (proper or 
improper) continuant part of the spatial region which c occupies at t) [235‐BFO] 
3.17 location of at some time 
Definition: b location of c at some time =Def. for some time t (c located in b at t) [236-BFO] 
3.18 location of at all times 
Definition: b location of c at all times =Def. for all times t, b exists at t implies (c located in b at t) 
[237-BFO] 
3.19 has material basis at some time 
Definition: b has material basis c at some time =Def. 
for some time t (b is a disposition 
& c is a material entity 
& there is some d bearer of b 
& c continuant part of d at t 
& d bearer of b because c continuant part of d at t) [242-BFO] 
3.20 has material basis at all times 
Definition: b has material basis c at all times =Def. 
For all times t, b exists at t implies (b is a disposition 
& c is a material entity 
& there is some d bearer of b 
& c continuant part of d at t 
& d bearer of b because c continuant part of d at t) [243-BFO] 
3.21 material basis of at some time 
Definition: b material basis of c at some time =Def. at some time t (c has material basis b at t) 
[244-BFO] 
3.22 material basis of at all times 
Definition: b material basis of c at all times =Def. for all times t, b exists at t implies (c has material 
basis b at t) [245-BFO] 
3.23 spatially projects onto at some time 
Definition: b spatially projects onto c at some time =Def. for some time t (b is a spatiotemporal 
region and c is a spatial region and c is the spatial extent of b at t) [246-BFO] 
3.24 spatially projects onto at all times 

22 
 
Definition: b spatially projects onto c at all times =Def. for all times t, b exists at t implies (b is a 
spatiotemporal region and c is a spatial region and c is the spatial extent of b at t) [247-BFO] 
3.25 has participant at some time 
Definition: p has participant c at some time =Def. for some time t (b is a process, c is a continuant, 
and c participates in p some way at t [248-BFO] 
3.26 has participant at all times 
Definition: p has participant c at all times =Def. for all times t, b exists at t implies (b is a process, c 
is a continuant, and c participates in p some way at t) [249-BFO] 
3.27 participates in at some time 
Definition: b participates in p at some time =Def. for some time t (p has participant b at t) [250-
BFO] 
3.28 participates in at all times 
Definition: b participates in p at all times =Def. for all times t, b exists at t implies (p has 
participant b at t) [251-BFO] 
3.29 generically depends on at some time 
Synonym: g‐depends on at some time 
Definition: a g‐dependent continuant b g‐depends on an independent continuant c at some time =Def. 
for some time t (there inheres in c an s‐dependent continuant which concretizes b at t) [252-BFO] 
3.30 generically depends on at all times 
Synonym: g‐depends on all times  
Definition: a g‐dependent continuant b g‐depends on an independent continuant c at all times =Def. 
for all times t, b exists at t implies (there inheres in c an s‐dependent continuant which concretizes 
b at t) [253-BFO] 
3.31 is carrier of at some time 
Definition: b is carrier of c at some time =Def. for some time t (c g‐depends on b at t) [254-BFO] 
3.32 is carrier of at all times 
Definition: b is carrier of c at all times =Def. for all times t, b exists at t implies (c g‐depends on b 
at t) [255-BFO] 
3.33 concretizes at some time 
Definition: an s‐dependent continuant b concretizes a g‐dependent continuant c at some time =Def. 
for some time t (c is the pattern or content which b shares at t with actual or potential copies) [256-
BFO] 
3.34 concretizes at all times 

23 
 
Definition: an s‐dependent continuant b concretizes a g‐dependent continuant c at all times =Def. for 
all times t, b exists at t implies (c is the pattern or content which b shares at t with actual or potential 
copies) [257-BFO] 
3.35 is concretized by at some time 
Definition: a g‐dependent continuant c is concretized at some time by an s‐dependent continuant or 
process b =Def. for some time t, b concretizes c at t) [258-BFO] 
3.36 is concretized by at all times 
Definition: a g‐dependent continuant c is concretized by an s‐dependent continuant or process b at 
all times =Def. for all times t, b exists at t implies (b concretizes c at t) [259-BFO] 
 

